

REMINISCENCES,
ME DITATIONS
upon a Sick bed.
BY JAMES COLVIN DAILLY
Melbourne, Australia
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
ONE SHILLING.




Reminiscences, & meditations
on a Sick Bed.
By a Sufferer who has lain fully two years in bed.
With Deepest Sympathy for His Sufferings, and Approval
of His Works :
His Excellency EARL of HOPETOUN, G.C.M.G., Governor of
Victoria.
VISCOUNT AITHRIE.
BARON HOPE, of the County of Lanark in Scotland.
BARON NIDDRY, of Niddry Castle, County of Linlithgow, Lord High
Commissioner of Scotland, a Lord in Waiting to the Queen.
COUNTESS OF HOPETOUN, Daughter of Lord Ventry.
The Hon. SIR WILLIAM JOHN CLARKE, Bart.
LADY JANET CLARKE.
The Hon. SIR JAMES M‘BAIN, K.C.M.G., President of the
Legislative Council in Victoria.
The Hon. SIR MATTHEW DAVIES, the Speaker in the Legislative
Assembly.
The Clergy :
His Lordship THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
PROF.- MCDONALD, D.D., Ormond College, Moderator of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland in Victoria.
Le WELLYN BEVAN, D.D., Royal Park.
And the LEADING CLERGY of the Different Denominations.
-♦
Composed, Revised, and Edited by the Sufferer,
JAMES COLVIN DAILLY,
bate of Ayr., Scotland,
Present Address: 13 BROOKS Street, North Fitzroy,
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.


MELBOURNE:
Echo Publishing Company, Limited,
330 Flinders Lane, & 14 & 16 Best St., N. Fitz.
1890.


PREFACE.
I*>OOK 80 diversified in its character as is this
little volume will have many remarks passed
upon it. But when His dear children are tempted
t 0 ex P ress an unfavorable opinion respecting
TT its merits, let me ask them to remember the
apostolic injunction, “ Be pitiful, be courteous. ’’
My education was somewhat limited, and yet by His
grace I have been enabled to compose, revise, and compile
the book as it stands. My special object in writing has
been to comfort other sufferers like myself, by demon-
strating that the Saviour’s presence is not a mere myth,
but a true, a living reality. u Comfort one another,” says
the apostle, “ with the same comfort wherewith ye your,
selves are comforted.”
At the same time I have not lost sight of the poor per-
ishing sinner. Praise be to His holy name, He has used
the poor cripple in his sick-bed to glorify Himself in the
saving and blessing of precious souls.
Just a word to pastors of the flock. I belong to the
whole family of God, and we are one in Christ Jesus.
This is the higher plane and broader platform. It ex-
cludes none who are the Lord’s. At the same time Ido
not forget that there are various administrations, but the
same Spirit. There is the one Father, and the one Son,
our Saviour. If you can conscientiously recommend my


book to the members of your respective churches, you will
be helping to provide bread for the cripple’s wife and help-
less children. As the Lord has blessed the writer by
using his writings in leaflet form, he can do the same
when they are in book form.
The writer will be pleased to receive letters; where they
are letters of sympathy and cheer, he will be pleased to
reply. Ever affectionately yours in the Lord,
JAMES COLVIN DAILLY.
PREFACE.


An Appleal.
I MAKE a warm, a fond appeal
To those who read my sufferings—feel,
How can I crumbs of comfort give
To sufferers who in faith do live ?
By circulating this, my book,
You’ll brighten much my dull outlook ;
As Christ received us, so do ye ;
For thus “ ye did it unto Me.”
His children never beg, we read ;
Our God supplies our every need.
They that won’t work, they should not eat ;
God sends his sick one work that’s sweet.
This is addressed to those in light;
God’s dear ones in his work delight.
How good he is to bless ! Then magnify
His Son, and his own name glorify.
If the cripple He does use or raise,
By giving him a song of praise,
This surely does our hearts much cheer—
All’s found in him, the Saviour dear.
The cripple sends this out with prayer ;
All in himself he would not dare.
How loving is our Father’s care ;
Sweet Jesus does my burden bear.
I’ll tread the bonnie hills no more ;
But better far, the golden shore ;
This helps to soothe me in my pain ;
My Saviour found, how rich the gain !
5


CONTENTS.
An Appeal ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
A Sudden Conversion and a Sudden Ca 11... . .. 7
A Tale of the Moor ... ... ... ... ... 27
A Distinguished Visitor ... ... ... ... 48
A Faithful Steward ... ... ... ... ... 50
Bonnie Scotland ... ... ... ... ... 23
Countess of Hopetoun ... ... ... ... ... 24
Dedication ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
Elijah in the Spirit ... ... ... ... ... 13
Elijah in the Flesh ... ... ... ... ... 17
Hon. Jas. Balfour and Mr. D. Harper ... ... ... 42
H.R.H. Prince George of Wales ... ... ... 43
Heavenly Treasures ... ... ... ... ... 51
In Memoriam ... ... ... ... ... 40
Idolatry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Light in the Valley ... ... ... ... ... io
Mr. Andrew Carnegie ... ... ... ... ... 57
Sir James M'Bain ... ... ... ... ... 35
Satan’s Wiles ... ... ... .. ... ... 40
Steal Away ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Sir Peter Coates of Auchendrane ... ... ... 46
The Dying Child’s Request... ... ... ... 20
The Stone-Napper ... ... ... ... •••25
The Loss of the Kupunda ... ... ... ... 30
The New Commandment ... ... ... ... 34
Translations from the Psalms ... ... ... 36
The Still Small Voice ... ... ... ... •••44
The Warning Note ... ... ... ... ... 52
Weeping at the Tomb ... ... ... ... ... 38


A SUDDEN CONVERSION
AND
A SUDDEN-CALL.
VtYHERE is a knock at the door, Jeannie.” Thus spoke
an invalid cripple to his little daughter, who was
seated by his bedside. The door being opened, there en-
tered the sick-room a tall young man of inceresting
appearance, but in whose cheek a practiced eye might
have discerned evidence of lurking disease. The young
man approached the bedside and extended his hand.
The invalid begged to be excused for not taking the prof-
fered hand at once, wishing to be in a sitting posture first,
for fear of bringing on a nervous attack. After mutual
greetings had taken place between the friends, the young
man asked how long he had been in this helpless state.
u About two years,” was the reply.
“ Two years! ” exclaimed the young man in surprise
and feeling, “ how could you bear it so long ? Such
suffering is worse than death. I never could have en-
dured it.”
“ I could not have borne it any better than you in my
own strength,” said the invalid; and then looking into
his young friend’s face with a searching glance, he con-
tinued, “ Do you know what these words mean, ‘He bore
our griefs and carried our sorrows ? ’ Any one who un-
derstands that will not have much confidence in himself,
but will find grace and strength accorded to him by the One
who suffered for him, and his cares and pains and sadness
will be turned into joy and peace and gladness. In all my
weakness, no one could have had greater proofs of the
sufficiency of Christ than I have had.”
7


. Seeing the perplexed yet ear nest and sympathetic look
in the young man s face, the invalid felt a yearning desire
for the salvation of this precious soul; and lifting his heart
in silent prayer, he sped a swift message to the Father, “Is
it well with the young man ? ” Back came the imme-
diate and cheering reply, “It shall be well with the young
man. Go on and prosper.”
Just at this moment his young companion was seized
with a violent fit of coughing, which stopped further con-
versation for a time. As soon as this had passed, the
invalid opened the subject that was nearest his heart. “I
see you aie very ill,” said he; “ I am certainly more help-
less than you; but I fear your illness is as serious as mine.
You may be drawing very near eternity; what have you
to rest on ? You know what I mean.”
Thus addressed, the young man explained that for eight
years he had been a member of the Church of England,
and, until his recent indisposition, he had been one of the
leading choristers ; besides, he had had a religious training
in early days in his father’s home.
The invalid interrupted him at this stage, and remarked,
u I think we shall not be allowed to have many interviews.
Neither of us is strong. If you called at another time, I
might not be fit to talk to you, and I want to speak kindly
but plainly to you now. You say you have had a religious
training, and that you are a member of the Church of
Do you know Christ as your Saviour ?If not,
all else will not avail, and you will die in your sins. The
Bible says, ‘He that hath the Son, hath life, and he that
hath not the Son of God, hath not life/ and by your very
confession it is evident that you have not received him.
You know your state of health is critical; would it not be
folly to refuse the peace of the blessed salvation brought to
you by the Son of God at such a terrible cost—even the
cost of his own life?”
The tears stood in the young man’s eyes as he replied,
“You do not know how anxious I have been. I have
tried my best; but I know you are right, for lam not
saved.”
“ Now,” rejoined the sick man, “I am going to ask you
a very searching question, and that you may know how
8
A SUDDEN CONVERSION AND A SUDDEN CALL.


solemn it is, I may tell you that upon your answer
depends the whole question of your salvation: Do you
believe that Christ bore your sins in his own body on the
tree?”
At once the young man answered, “ I do believe it with
my whole heart.”
The invalid extended his hand to the young man.
“That confession,” said he, “enables me to call you
brother. It brings you into the Father’s presence, and
simple and sudden as the transition may seem, God's
word assures you that you are saved. Read for yourself,”
and turning to the tenth of Romans, the speaker pointed
to the ninth verse, “ If thou shalt confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God
hath raised him from the dead, t thou shalt be saved.”
“ Now,” he continued, “ Satan will try to deceive you by
saying you are no better since your confession than you
were before it. But rest in Christ and his precious work,
not in feelings.”
“I see it, I see it! ” interrupted the other. “I have been
groping in the dark, wishing to feel happy without Christ.
Praises to Him who hath called me out of darkness into
his marvellous light! ”
The young man left the sick-room rejoicing in Christ.
About four weeks afterwards, he called upon the invalid
again, and they spent two hours together in happy con-
versation upon the glorious theme of Rom. B—no con-
demnation, no separation.
Two hours later, the message was brought to the
invalid that his young friend had been called away from
earth. While seated at the table, he complained of sudden
faintness, stretched himself gently and peacefully on a
couch close at hand, and calling on the Lord whom he had
so lately learned to trust and love, he quietly fell asleep
like a little child.
That every one who reads this may turn from self, good
works, and feelings, or any other saviour, and simply rest
in Christ as the young man did T Js the heartfelt prayer of
the cripple.
9
A SUDDEN CONVERSION AND A SUDDEN CALL.


LIGHT IN THE VALLEY.
Nvy’ONE but God’s people know aught of this experience;
for they alone have the witness in themselves.
They have been through it all, alas, too often ! But it is
blessed to go down into the valley, because it brings out our
weakness and his goodness. There are many ways lead-
ing into the valley. I will just touch upon one; but
that one can lead you into deepest depths of woe so
far down into the valley that you are almost
beyond the range of the true Light, but not quite beyond
it. By its dazzling rays we soon discern the snares and
pitfalls, the precipices and glaciers. As the faithful and
experienced guide leads the tourist in safety to the summit
ofthe lofty, snow-clad Alps, so does the Light lead us by
the safe path. And it does more; it leads us entirely out
of the valley. Satan was unable to rob Job of his integ-
rity after he had lost nearly all; but there remained one
more opportunity for Satan to gain the victory. It was
a trump card, and he played it so that poor Job was
defeated, and Satan triumphed. A man will give all for
his skin; touch that and you touch the weak, the tender
and sore spot.
We read another account of a battle between Satan and
a man, in which the man conquered, and Satan had to
beat an ignominious retreat. Then he had not a poor
arm, of flesh to deal with, but the man Christ Jesus. The
perfect, peerless One had nothing in him that the devil
could touch. t
I have known a little of suffering, and by God’s grace I
am more than a conqueror through him that loved me,
and gave himself for me. Poor Job was under the law;
I am under the reign of grace, and there is an immense
difference. Four years ago I failed in my business in
Scotland. I sailed with my wife and five children for
10


Australia, with hopes bright and ambition strong ! But I
had not been six months in this bright, sunny land, when
my Heavenly Father was pleased to lay me upon a sick-
bed, where for fully two years I have lain, learning those
purifying and I trust sanctifying, lessons, which we so
much need. I had just lain down upon my bed
when my youngest child died, and shortly after my two
eldest children were taken to a hospital. Then I passed
through a period of intense pain through rheumatic paral-
ysis, having spasmodic fits at the rate of thirty per day.
On account of extreme weakness resulting from intense
suffering, sleep was entirely out of the question. Then
three times within a week I burst a blood-vessel. Lying
speechless, and helpless as a babe, my life was despaired of
by a great many doctors. But through it all, I can trace
the working of His hand. In that critical moment, a
second Luke, the beloved physician, appeared, devoting to
me his skill, and supplying medicine, often at his own ex-
pense. In addition to all this, he provided me with that
nourishment Iso much needed. What his skill has done
for me in the Lord's hands is simply wonderful, —no less
than three times pulling me out of the jaws of death. My
dear friends waiting around my bedside, hourly expected
the end; but we are never so low that God cannot raise
us. I am now recovering, and though still confined to
my room and my bed, eat and sleep well.
Why do I mention all this suffering ?—Simply to glo-
rify my Father and exalt my precious, precious Saviour.
“Lo, lam with you alway, even unto the end.” I have
proved this promise. I have found in trial and suffering
such peace and real joy as never in my palmy days, when
treading the bonnie, heathery hills of Scotland. He
giveth strength to the faint through the exceeding riches
of his grace.
I belong to the whole family of God, and we are one in
Christ Jesus. Oh, the precious link that binds us, the
sacred bond that knits us, to each other ! “A new com-
mandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.”
It is in the valley that we find out more of his great and
loving heart. It is in the valley that we feel his warm,
affectionate clasp,_its pressure telling of the strength to be
11
LIGHT IN THE VALLEY.


found in him. It is in the valley that we know something
of that acute and ready ear, ever listening to the com-
plaints of his children. Oh, what solace is to be found in
the Everlasting Arms, what safety when we are encircled
by them! Every sorrow soothed, every fear removed,
they carry us out of the valley, even to the top of Mount
Zion, there to feed in green pastures and drink of the
crystal waters. “All my springs are in Thee.” Oh, im-
measurable, exhaustless love ! Oceans cannot quench it,
floods cannot drown it!
In the valley there’s a Light,
Its rays, with radiance bright,
Dispelling clouds so dark.
The Light it cheers. But hark!
In the valley there’s a Voice—
Its sound makes me rejoice;
There’s music in its tone;
It tells of that bright home.
In the valley there’s a Hand,
Its clasp a loving band;
It drives away my cares and woes,
Defeating all my foes.
In the valley there’s an Ear
Lists to my tale so drear;
I unburden all my grief,
And thus I get relief.
In the valley there’s a Heart
Of a love that won’t depart;
What friend has love so dear,
The fainting, drooping heart to- cheer ?
In sunshine or in rain,
I hear the loved refrain
In accents sweet: “ Look unto me.’’
The valley’s left, for Christ I see.
12
LIGHT IN THE VALLEY.


ELIJAH IN THE SPIRIT.
(i Kings 18:17.)
V>ELOVED, here see a most important lesson, —one
X> teeming with warnings, showing the might of God
and also his tender loving care for his own. Oh, what
strength and power he gives them, clearly showing that
the battle is not to the swift and strong, and that he can
do without any of us, but graciously condescends to allow
us to work for him, provided we do it in his way, and not
in our own. For “it is God that worketh in us, both to
will and to do of his good pleasure.’’ Another thing that
we perceive in a striking degree is the frailty and perver-
sity of man.
I purpose to bring before you in a simple way several
distinctive works. Now pause a moment, and bear with
me, while by God’s grace I present before you this deeply
interesting and instructive scene. We see the Lord’s
prophet and his chosen people’s king meeting; but what
ameeting .! Onecan seeevenatthefirstglancethatthey are
not in harmony with each other; quite the reverse —they
are at variance. King Ahab is bitter and unjust; Elijah
meets him with righteous indignation. King Ahab
attempts to shift the responsibility of the evils that have
come on the land and people of Israel upon Elijah’s
shoulders. Elijah replies by telling the king that it is he
that has troubled Israel; and denouncing him for his sin-
ful course in turning from the God of his forefathers, the
mighty God through whom they received all their bless-
ings. The king has abused the power that has been given
him. Instead of ruling God’s people with wisdom, he
has led them to sin, even enticing them to worship Baal.
It was not in ignorance that King Ahab had pursued
such a course. No; he had Moses and the prophets and
the chronicles of the kings; and he had also Elijah, one
13


of the most noted and zealous of God’s prophet’s, to coun-
sel him, and to guide him into safe paths, if he so desired.
But no; Baal, a senseless idol of wood or stone, was
more to Ahab than the living and true God.
Perhaps you say, What a poor, silly fool King Ahab
was, to be sure; the measure of his intelligence must have
been small indeed. Stay a moment. Is there not a skel-
eton in our own cupboard that we do not perceive ? Poor
Baal is but a tool, after all, and a clumsy one at that. It
would seem to a practical mind that the wood of which
the idol was made could have been put to a better use, or
the stone might have adorned some building. It was the
power and influence of Satan that made Baal so attractive
and enticing, so that he could turn the hearts of Israel
away from the true God. Israel left the substance, and
grasped the shadow; and there is danger that we may do
the same thing. We must watch, and tread softly and
gently; for we have still the same foe to face, and varied
are the hues that he presents, taking as many colors
as the rainbow, and changing his form and color as rapidly
as the chameleon.
Just listen while I give you the character of this foe as
it is sketched in the word of God, that word which is a
lamp to our feet and a light to our path. This book is as
necessary to the Christian as is the compass that guides
his ship to the mariner. Like the builder, we apply the
rule and square, and the thing that won’t stand this test
is not worthy of consideration for a moment. Satan is a
liar from the beginning. Then “be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary the-devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour.” Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil.” But thank God, when we, through
the exceeding richness of his grace, are taken out of dark-
ness into his marvellous light, and translated into the king-
dom of his dear Son, only then are we conquerors through
Him that loved us.
Now we gaze upon a striking picture. King Ahab and
all the children of Israel are gathered together at the com-
mand of Elijah. King Ahab obeys the prophet’s order.
Obedience means service; it may be brief, like Ahab's.
14
ELIJAH IN THE SPIRIT.


Had he continued in this course, what untold misery he
would have been saved from, to the glory of God, the
good of his people, and the discomfiture of the devil. I
dwell upon this, because it is fraught with valuable in-
struction and admonition. To human sight there appears
a feeble old man long past the vigor of manhood. He
stands alone; the children of Israel with their king, and
the prophets of Baal to the number of 450 are all arrayed
against Elijah. Elijah alone denotes weakness; the king
with all his people and the prophets of Baal, denotes strength.
There is the prophet of God with all the nation against
him. It must have been a terrible strain on Elijah; but
oh ! God was with him. I would like to write this sen-
tence in letters of gold; but it will be more to the purpose
if God engraves this thought upon the reader's heart.
Behold in Elijah the central figure of this remarkable
scene. Doubtless there were many present who loved and
respected Elijah secretly; but they dared not show it.
Elijah had been to them more than a teacher or a pro-
phet; he had been to them a father, and they had looked
upon him as the embodiment of all that is noble and good.
Elijah, in the full zenith of his fame, must have been
more than attractive; but all this is changed, and Israel
desert him when he is nearing the end of his journey,
being in the sere and yellow leal. Noble, noble Elijah!
he soars above men and earthly things. And let me tell
you this, that now it is fashionable to desert God, since
the king and queen do so. It was a fashionable religion
Elijah was contending against; it must have been so, when
the king, the queen, the rulers, and all the people were drawn
to Baal. Certainly no church of to-day corresponds to it.
If it was fashionable to desert God, it would be no less
fashionable to persecute God’s servant. They had made
things unpleasant and lively for Elijah. You do not
know the amount of persecution he had to endure. Ex-
pressions like these would salute his ears: “Foolish old
man! He is behind the age. He ought to keep pace with
the times. Why can’t he see that the old thing is played
out? It was good enough for our forefathers; but we are
too advanced in thought. Let him bring something fresh
and new; then we will listen to him.” As I said before,
15
ELIJAH IN THE SPIRIT.


Elijah was above it all. Beautiful is the faith of Elijah.
I covet his place; it is the place of blessing and true
service.
I said Elijah was the central figure, and so he is; for I
would not waste a moment looking at the rest; he casts
them completely in the shade. How we admire Elijah,
as we see him confronting the foe, nobly standing for the
truth. It brings out clearly and remarkably his zeal, his
courage, and his devotion to his God. But instead of
being honored by the Lord’s people as he deserved, his
lines running in pleasant places, now he is hunted like a
wild beast of the fields, hiding in caves. It is enough to
break the heart of a giant; but what a giant could not
endure, the feeble old man not only endures, but subdues
and conquers. In the power and might of God, we can
do all things. Like the sun’s rays dispersing the clouds,
he disperses all his foes. What reward does Elijah get for
his services to God ? He is fed by the angels, like our
Saviour in the wilderness; and he ascends to heaven in a
fiery chariot without tasting death.
Walking with God, with him alone,
It’s there his truth is fully known;
Doing his will, he’s ever near
The weary, troubled soul to cheer.
Elijah made a noble stand,
Sustained by the Almighty Hand,
Withstanding Ahab face to face,
Held Baal’s prophets in disgrace.
They wept and danced in deep, despair,
Baal seeming not to care;
Has he “on a visit gone?”
Baal’s proved a god of stone.
Elijah prays: “ I love Thy name.
Thy power and might, O God, proclaim;
Prove that thou art the only God,
Maker of all. Heaven’s thine abode.”
King Ahab in his chariot flew;
Swiftly Elijah did pursue.
Through God he conquers all his'foes,
Devotedness and zeal he shows.
We see the sinfulness of man,
As we the sacred pages scan;
No trust in man, in God our boast,
An anchor sure, that can’t be lost.
16
ELIJAH IN THE SPIRIT.


ELIJAH IN THE FLESH.
(I Kings 19,)
LEFT Elijah with all his foes conquered, and
X** God’s chosen people turning their hearts to the
God of their forefathers, the God who had answered by
fire. And when all the people saw this, they fell on their
faces, and said, “ The Lord he is the God; the Lord he is
the God.” Thus a real and blessed work is done by
Elijah; for the people repent and confess their error in
worshipping idols, and this leads to communion with the
true God. Thus it appears that the prophet in the Spirit
is swifter and more powerful than the king in his chariot.
Elijah had a most trying time when facing King Ahab
and Baal’s prophets, backed by all Israel. But is he not
amply rewarded ? Oh ! the glorious privilege he had of
being the instrument in God’s hands to lead his people
back to himself!
Elijah was faithful; hence God blessed his work. I be-
lieve that if we were more occupied in studying what is
pleasing to God, if this were our heart’s desire continually,
we should reap a rich harvest to the blessing of precious
souls, and to the glory of his holy name. Much is said of
the hardness of the human heart; but human nature is
the same in every age, and is as susceptible to the influence
of the Spirit. But if we are taken up with nice points of
doctrine, hair-splitting in their nature, valuable time is
wasted, and how can we expect to reach hearts ? If my
soul is taken up with ray Lord, it will be zealous for his
work. “Ye are by faith in Christ the children of God.”
I want no more than this to give me fellowship with every
child of God in the whole world. The test is not,
“ Where do you belong ? ” but “ Are you a new creature
in Christ Jesus? ”
A little later, and we gaze at Elijah sitting under a
1 7


juniper tree; and what a marked contrast is presented to
Elijah on Carmel. Elijah led by the Spirit of God was
strong, faithful, and conquering; now, in the flesh, he is
moaning and fainting. Beloved, do not misunderstand
me. I mean not to undervalue the flesh, but to give it its
proper place. I want discernment and discrimination to
rightly divide the Word. And so as God hath given us a
form as it hath pleased him, God forbid that I should
attempt to belittle any of his works, least of all the beauty
of the human form divine. One of our greatest poets says
that “mams the noblest work of God,” and so he is. All
of God’s beautiful works are admirable; and when I meet
them in any form, I glorify God through admiring his
handiwork. Wdio has stood upon a lofty mountain,
gazing down upon hamlet and glen, hearing the music of
the birds and the lowing of the_ cattle, without feeling a
sense of quiet joy stealing over him, and of gratitude to the
Maker of it all ? Who that has sailed upon the trackless
ocean, with day after day nothing for the eye to rest upon
save the vessel and the mighty deep, or it may be a school of
flying fishes or porpoises, or an occasional whale, knowing
that there was but a single plank betwixt himself and
eternity, has not felt the sublimity of the scene ? God
speaks through his works, whether it be a tiny floweret, or
a beautiful landscape with river or mountain scenery.
These works call out, not only a love for the sublime and
grand, but also veneration for God, the Creator. If we
have an eye for the beautiful, it will have a refining and
elevating influence on our minds.
God made man upright, but he is fallen and imperfect.
Abraham when he deceived King Abimelech of Gerar,
David when he feigned madness, Peter when he denied
his Lord, Paul when he refused the Spirit’s warning,—all
these examples show the frailty of man when he trusts to
self. May our eyes ever be so fixed on the Saviour, that
we shall gain grace, and strength, and completeness from
him.
And then what a grand scene Elijah witnessed on
Horeb ! The rocks were rent and the mountain moved,
as Heaven’s artillery rattled along; and through it all, and
the vivid flashing of the lightning, he stood unmoved.
18
ELIJAH IN THE FLESH.


But when the still small voice of God fell on his ear, he
broke down, and covered his face with his mantle.
Weary, sad, and sick at heart,
Elijah prayed, “ Let me depart,
My work is done, no use to stay;
My burden’s heavier day by day.
“The unequal strife I have maintained,
All, all alone, by Thee sustained;
I’ve been jealous for thy word,
All Israel does thy name record.
“ That wicked, wicked queen
Held Baal’s priests in high esteem;
She hunts me now revengefully,
Seeking my life to take away.”
Upon his green and grassy bed,
He now reclined his aching head;
With many a weary, weary sigh,
Elijah laid him down to die.
“ He gives his loved ones sleep;”
Sad one, why mourn and weep ?
Although the clouds are dark indeed,
Thy God will meet thy every need.
Elijah rose, refreshed by rest,
No longer now the sad request;
The angel, sent His worm to feed,
Supplies Elijah’s every need.
God knows his worm desires to die;
Grace sends a full, a rich supply;
See with what loving, tender care
God gently takes away the snare.
Elijah now he does not slay,
But answers in his perfect way;
Elijah now is full of praise;
He nothing tastes for forty days.
19
ELIJAH IN THE FLESH.


THE DYING CHILD’S
REQUEST.
VryHERE was frightful, squalid poverty, with the riot-
ing crime, in the neighborhood, drink firing the
brain and heating the blood of poor creatures who scarcely
ever knew what it was to have a full meal or a comfort-
able bed. The whisky transformed what otherwise were
very gentle, kindly persons into very demons. Then was
to be heard the deep growling and bitter cursing of the
men, and the shrill, piercing shrieks of the women.
Such piteous sights were seen, as would have melted and
grieved those who had His love shed abroad in their
hearts. In one corner of a garret could be seen a strong
young man, beating his frail, aged mother. In the corner
of another might be seen a husband thrashing severely his
eighteen-year-old wife; then a mother reeling and stagger-
ing through the influence of strong drink, scarcely able to
hold her helpless babe in her arms, ever in danger of
falling and fracturing the skull of the dear little innocent.
Such piteous scenes the writer was too familiar with.
They were a regular weekly occurrence; and such a scene
was being enacted outside, while the loving Saviour was
folding to his tender breast one of his little lambs. In
the quiet chamber of death, all was peaceful and still.
The weeping parents hung over their sweet bud, whose
voice would soon be hushed in the stillness of death. A
girl about fifteen years old, just budding into maidenhood,
by her loving, gentle, and winning ways she had so
endeared herself to her parents and family that she might be
truly termed the darling of the household, her father and
mother’s pet. While all around her were bathed in tears,
she had that grace afforded her, the sweet consolation of
knowing that she was going to be with Jesus, whose name
she had so often repeated in conversation, and sung in-
hymns of praise.
20


The noisy crowd outside and the peace within, left such
an indelible impression upon the writer’s mind, that
nothing can efface it. He was a mere lad at the death of
his eldest sister, whom he saw pass away like a faded
flower, a daisy growing among thistles, remaining pure
although mixed up with all that was bad, —untainted by
the sinful influences around her. No; she was basking
in the sunshine of her Father’s love, cheered by the
Saviour’s presence. “In thy presence is fullness of joy;
and at thy right hand are pleasures forevermore.’’
When I look back at what I was delivered from through
the exceeding riches of His grace, I must acknowledge
that what I am now I owe to two devoted servants of the
Master. The one was Mrs. H. Mcjannet of Bellevue
Lodge, Ayr., and the other the Rev. Wm. Grant, of the
Free Church of Scotland, a dear, godly and gifted min-
ister, whom to know was to love; and, strange to say, he
was a cripple like myself. When I attended his pri-
vate class at his own residence, I used to pity him, because
I was all activity. I used to wonder where he got his
smile from; for his helplessness suggested to my mind a
living death. Since I have been so severely afflicted my-
self, I know the source of the kindly smile which lighted
up his handsome face. We glory in tribulation also,
whereby the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.
The seed then sown was blessed of God; and though that
loved one has rested from his labors many years, I hope to
meet him in the presence of our loving Saviour.
A wretched home in Bucko Isle,
It thus was named in Doric style,
The haunt of all the roughs in Ayr.,—
Deep sin and drink supreme reigned there.
Upon a bed of straw is lying
A young girl who is slowly dying;
Her parents watched her dying hour;
Their child was now a fading flower.
She whispers in her father’s ear,
u Promise, dear father, to stop the beer,
I’m dying; few will mourn my loss;
But oh, how sweet is Jesus’ cross!”
21
THE DYING CHILD’S REQUEST.


Softly she sang, “ Oh ! here is pain;
Yes, here we meet to part again;
But when I tread the golden shore,
Then all my trials will he o’er.”
The eyelids close, the form is still;
She is beyond all pain and ill;
Her spirit’s wafted straight to heaven—
The Lord but takes what he has given.
22
THE DYING CHILD’S REQUEST.


BONNIE SCOTLAND.
These lines were written especially to the Earl and Countess of Hopetoun, who
recently arrived from their native land, Scotland. His Excellency the Governor of
Victoria, Earl of Hopetoun, being a Scotchman, will recollect “ Sae couthy is our kith
and kin.”
Bonnie Scotland’s heathery hills !
The thought of thee my heart it thrills.
My native home, how dear thou art
With deepest yearnings of my heart.
Once more to climb your lofty Ben,
Or hide ’neath some secluded glen,
What glori®us landscapes greet the view—
Sweet meadows dressed in verdant hue.
Upon the top of Ben-y-Glow,
I will a few scenes briefly show ;
First, at its top is clearly seen,
Balmoral, home of our gracious Queen.
The charming Spittal of Glenshee,
That pass so wild, weird Killiecrankie,
See peeping gracefully afar,
The bonnie, bonnie braes ’o Mar.
To thee the poet’s lay is sung,
To thee the minstrel’s harp is strung—
My native home, how gladly I’d attain
To praising thee in poesy’s strain.
Unblest with sweet poetic rhymes,
Unsuited to these critic times,
I raise my voice in artless lay,
And praise thee in my homely way.
Upon my paralytic bed,
These scenes do soothe my aching head.
Nowin the shade, now in the light,
Begone, all gloom, I’ve scenes so bright.
23


TO HER LADYSHIP,
COUNTESS OF HOPETOUN.
Thy social sphere’s beyond compare,
Thine heart’s a jewel, costly, rare ;
Sweet gentleness, its winsome grace
Shines in thy fair and bonnie face.
Your noble Ladyship’s reply
Will raise me, soaring, to the sky,
Or drag me down deep, deep below
Despondency’s unuttered woe.
Wilt thou, then, this poor cripple cheer,
Who loves to honor and revere
Best of auld Scotia’s daughters fair,
And if offended, then me spare.
Note.—The writer begs to tender his sincere thanks to his noble patronesses for
nat.ve land-Lady Jane Houldsworth, of Rozrile, Aj-r and
’ Mcjannet, Bellevue, Ayr., sister to Sir Andrew Lusk, ex-Lord Mayor of Lon-
don, and he trusts m God, that he will raise him from the sick-bed where 'lie has lain
fully two years, and that he will yet be able to thank them person™ "
My springs are all in Thee ;
My Saviour, can it be
That I am wholly Thine,
Filled with Thy love- divine ?
2 4


THE STONE-NAPPER.
ONE day I was taking a quiet stroll, when I observed a
man searching very carefully, as if he had lost some-
thing. Whea I inquired about his supposed loss, he said
that he had not lost anything, but that he was trying to find
something. Upon my remarking that it must be something
very valuable to cause such earnest searching, he replied
with an amused smile, “No, sir; it’s only an old horse-shoe
nail.” Then he explained his reason for searching for an
apparently trifling article. He said that his hammer was
not properly shafted, and the long drought had made the
wood so hard and dry that a wooden peg or wedge would
pot remain in the hammer’s head. The result was that
his stroke lost half its power by the hammer continually
shifting; so that he was not doing proper work, not mak-
ing half his usual progress. All this the nail would remedy
by fixing the hammer head. The word sub means part
payment of a contract till the stones are measured. The
man’s earnestness in searching for a nail suggested this
thought: If we would only search in the same way
for the pearl of great price, how much blessing poor
mourning souls would gain by the search. Oh, the un-
searchable riches of Christ, where all is peace and joy and
gladness, fled is all grief and sin and sadness.
Hammer away, hammer away,
One piece of stone it flies away;
Hear the napper grumbling say,
“ My hammer shaft is all astray.”
Chip, chip, chip, the stone is cracked, not broke,
Although he gives a strong and skilful stroke;
“If I don’t quicker rise this heap,
My sub will be too small this week.”
“The shaft is drawing all the wrong way;
This I must alter, if the stone’s to fly away.”
He searched the ground for a horse-shoe nail,
The hammer set, the stones now fly like hail.
25


And now the napper begins to sing,
“My usual sub to mother I’ll bring;
My heap is growing quickly higher—
As much work done as I desire.’’
Now let this be the moral of my tale:
All went wrong for want of a nail;.
If we would see ourselves aright,
Get hold of Christ, the world’s Light.
Like the hammer, we’re drawn away;
Foolishly blind, we go astray;
Stick to His word, which God doth say,
Then will we tread the narrow way.
26
THE STONE NAPPER.


A TALE OF THE MOOR.
VrVHIS is a truly piteous and affecting tale, and it is-
alas! too true. The writer remembers reading it in
a school-book at home, in one of Chamber’s series for
school children. My readers, especially in this bright and
sunny land, will have but a faint idea of what it is to be lost on
a lonely moor, with all its attendant miseries of cold,
biting sleet, and snow. I question if being lost in the
Australian bush would cause more acute suffering ; cer-
tainly it would not be half so gloomy. I suppose ray
readers will differ very much as to this point; but I sin-
cerely trust they will have no experience in either case,
the result being the same, death.
I do not know a more beautiful sight on God’s earth,
than can be seen when crossing the moors in early
autumn. Then you see the moor in all its charms,
bright with the purple heather, the heather bell, and all
those gorgeous royal ferns. The cry of the peesweep,
or the whaup of the plover, woodcock, and grouse, which
all give a whirring sound on the wing, that is delightful
to the ear, especially that of a sportsman on the twelfth of
August. The bleating of the lambs straying from their
mothers, and the lowing of the cattle, all serve to lend a
charm to the moor, and more especially if there should be
a wonderful fall of water, as is usually the case on a
Scottish moor if there is a lofty mountain near.
But the eyes of the poor mother of whom we are
telling did not rest upon such a bright scene as this, but
upon a gloomy moor, bereft of all vegetation and life.
There was nothing but a bleak plain as far as the eye
could see, a trackless waste, with no sign of man’s handi-
work. save the stacked peats. This poor woman left her
home with her babe early in the afternoon, in spite of the
■warnings of one or two shepherds, who told her that a
27


snowstorm would be likely to overtake her before she
reached her destination, a village a few miles distant.
But the clouds having partly cleared, and knowing that
her friends would be disappointed at her absence, with
bright hopes the mother started. She bade farewell to
her friends, the shepherds, who conveyed her a mile or
two on her lonely way, never dreaming that her journey
was to have such a sad ending.
When she was half way across the moor, the snow be-
gan to fall. It was not long before the gentle fall increased
to a perfect storm. Almost blinded, she struggled on
with her babe at her breast; but there is a limit to
human endurance, and the poor struggling mother
reached that limit; she felt that she was rapidly sinking.
Sleep beginning to steal over her through cold and
fatigue, she searched out a bracken bush, and WTapped her
babe in her Highland clan tartan plaid. Then after see-
ing her babe cosily and safely housed and protected from
the biting blast, she lay down, first committing her soul
to her loving Heavenly Father, and soon fell asleep in
Jesus. The next morning when the shepherds were out
in search of some sheep, the Scotch collies, dogs that are
famed for their faithfulness and sagacity, discovered the
sleeping babe alive, and the mother dead, covered over
with a snow wreath.
The babe grew up to manhood’s years, steeped in vice
and crime. One Sunday he sought shelter from the
bitter storm. Not seeing any other place, he hastened
to a church, attracted by the singing. Getting into the
porch, he could hear every word that the minister said.
It was strange that the text which the minister gave out
was this : ‘‘ Greater love hath no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends.” Preaching with
fervor of the love of Jesus, who lay down his life for his
enemies, he then pathetically related the sad tale of a
mother laying down her life for her child. He closed his
sermon with something like the following : “ Surely that
mother’s love, surely the tears and prayers of the dying
mother, calling upon God to protect her orphan babe,
surely her prayers were answered; and if that son is alive,
28
A TALE OF THE MOOR.


he is adorning the doctrine of the Lord Jesus r and will
meet his loving mother in the mansions fair.”
Just before the minister concluded his sermon, a heart-
penetrating cry rang through the silent church, and the
prodigal came in view. As an arrow shot at a venture,
the shaft had pierced his soul, and by God’s grace the
minister was enabled to show him the way of salvation.
He confessed his sins, felt his great need of a Saviour,
and the Spirit of God brought him to a knowledge of the
truth.
The snow did drift along the moor ;
No man the coldness could endure ;
A mother fought for her babe’s life,
But fell in the unequal strife.
She wrapped her sleeping bonnie babe
In her cosey Highland plaid,
Pressed to her bosom with many a sigh
Her babe, and then lay down to die.
Dancing and flitting the snow-flakes fell ;
No more she’ll tread the heather bell ;
They found amidst the snow-clad wreath,
The mother, sleeping the sleep of death.
The babe had grown to be a man,
Swiftly in sin and vice he ran ;
And O ! I love that message to record—
The prodigal has truly found the Lord.
The prodigal, one Lord’s-day morn,
Sought shelter from the bitter storm
Within a house of prayer ; he heard
The people sing, the pastor preach God’s-word.
He spoke of the sad mournful tale ;
Just then was heard a plaintive wail :
“ I am that babe ; for me my mother died.”
“Two died for you,” the minister replied.
“If 3’ou your mother wish to meet,
Just kneel down at the mercy-seat;
Come now to Christ, he won’t cast out ;
Believe this, and no longer doubt.”
In his heart the Spirit shed abroad,
In raptures he confessed the Lord.
Now he is on his way to heaven—
Knows what his Saviour’s love has given.
29
A TALE OF THE MOOR.


THE LOSS OF THE
KUPUNDA.
XCAN mark the tracing of His loving hand, and see
with what tender care He guarded me, as the reader
will perceive by reading this account of the sad wreck of
the S.S. Kupunda. Bound for Western Australia, she
sailed from Gravesend, London, on or about the 25th
November, 1886. The writer sailed in the S.S. Elder she
on nth November, 1886, just a fortnight before the ill-
fated steamer sailed from the same place, Gravesend,
London, and bound for the same ports, Albany and Free-
mantle, Western Australia. The writer was grumbling
all the time about his too speedy dispatch, because it
gave him so little time to arrange everything for his wife
and four children and an expected fifth, which was born
at sea. If he could have managed it, he would have come
with the Kupunda; but there was a clause in the pas-
sage tickets, that he if did not go with the vessel selected for
him, he would forfeit all his money. Thinking himself
very hardly treated by the shipping firm, Trinder,
Trinder, Anderson & Co., London, he decided that the
wisest course he could take was to grin and bear it.
What poor, blind, fallible creatures we are, even at our
best! With the despised but good ship Elderslie he had
a most excellent passage to the Cape of Good Hope ; thence
pretty rough until he reached the Australian shore,
at Albany, Western Australia. Near here he landed, upon
an uninhabited island called Rabbit Island. Scarlatina
having broken out among the children three days before
he expected to land, the health officer, after inspection,
ordered them into quarantine for three weeks ; but a
second outbreak taking place just two days before they
would have been free to land, the order came by the
steam launch that they would have to remain on the
30


island for another three weeks. Loud and bitter were
the complaints of all at this unpleasant news. They were
in tents. Sometimes the wind blew a gale off the sea,
and as they were very much exposed to the force of the
gale, it was rather unpleasant. There were a great many
children, and this made the circumstance doubly trying.
But “Man proposes, and God disposes.” They were to
hear more sad news next day. A telegram came from
the firm, —the same shipping firm that had charge of the
Elderslie , —telling them that the ship following them,
the Kupunda , had gone down through a collision with
another ship near midnight ; and that out of four hundred
and fifty passengers and crew, there only remained twelve
to tell the sad tale. These twelve were picked up by a
French ship off the coast of Bahia, Morocco. Whilst
this sad calamity had overtaken so many, the passengers
of the Elderslie were preserved by God. On receipt of
the sad news, the grumbling was changed into prayer and
thanksgiving to God, for watching over them with such
loving care. There was scarcely a dry eye as they read
the account of the wreck, strong men sobbing like
children.
Nearly all were asleep in their bunks when the acci-
dent happened. Many of my readers will know what a
family bunk means. As I said, they were nearly all
asleep in their bunks ; just one or two were enticed on
deck by the charming night, peaceful and still, and the
deep, blue sea, a wide expanse as far as the eye could
reach, with scarcely a ripple on its surface. A few
were enjoying this scene, when, without a moment’s
warning, like a mighty avalanche, a large steamer crashed
right into the ship’s bows. A moment before, all were
buried in deep sleep ; perhaps building castles in the air
in their dreams. The babe nestled closely to its mother s
bosom, she encircling her innocent, helpless child in her
arms, as if to protect it against all foes. Yes, a mother’s
love, who can tell it ? In a moment they are aroused by
the terrible crash, awakened out of nature’s repose to be in
a few moments buried in eternity’s sleep, the sleep of
death.
31
THE LOSS OF THE KUPUNDA.


I will not longer dwell upon this scene so awfully
sudden in its nature, so touching, so truly pathetic. I
feel assured that many will shed a tear when reading the
account of the poor immigrants’ sudden death. They
were strangers journeying to a strange land. It was
their intention and expectation, when leaving the old
home, to make a new one ’neath bright Australian skies.
They had expected to better their condition in a land of
peace and plenty. They never expected that their
children would have to encounter the privations which
they had passed through when battling for dear life
against that grim monster, Poverty, who was ever in
view, a monster which you who have been brought up in
Australia have never known in its hideousness. People
who talk and lecture of poverty here, who have never
experienced or even witnessed the privations at home,
don’t know what they are talking about. It is a positive
insult to Australia as a country and a nation, to talk of
poverty existing here in any degree equal to that
which is experienced in the old country. I tell you can-
didly, dear readers, the thing is utterly impossible, and to
show my readers that I do know what I am talking
about, I will give you two examples of the breakfast bill
of fare which some humble, poor, but thoroughly respect-
able families have to put up with. The cases lam going
to quote are by no means exceptional or solitary in their
nature ; mark them, learn and digest. My dear readers,
judge the case in its true bearings, and you will unhesi-
tatingly come to the same conclusion that I arrived at
long ago. I will qualify this statement by saying that
there is no man living in whom the love of country is
more deeply seated. Patriotism for bonnie Scotland, I
fear, takes too firm hold upon my heart. A family of
six, including father and mother, all healthy, and able to
put out of sight a fair quantity of provisions, no matter
how rough they be ; in fact, the coarser the better, as
they will appease their hunger more quickly than the
fancy stuff. Of course I might use the phrase “ delicacies”
or “ luxuries never having had them, the expressions
would fall upon their ears as meaningless. Well, I have
32
THE LOSS OF THE KUPUNDA.


digressed. Now for the family bo<ird, with six hungry
ones seated around. Half a pound of treacle, at about
rid. per lb. ; a 41b. loaf of bread, called coarse seconds,
4 d. half a pound of dark sugar, i|d. per lb. ;an ounce
of tea, called broken leaf, at about is. 3d. per lb., or id.
per ounce. Another example is even worse, and more
general 1 Four pounds of sowns, a Scotch term for
sweepings of the miller ; one pennyworth of sour milk.
This is sometimes given to a family of ten. Is it any
wonder, then, if these poor creatures desire a change, and
that they will run the risk of their lives, with the pros-
pect of never seeing their native land again, parting from
dear friends they never expect to see more ?
The good ship clove the mighty deep ;
All on board are wrapt in sleep ;
The fondled babe on its mother’s breast,
Too soon, too soon, of life bereft!
Another ship, with a mighty blow,
Crashes right into the steamer’s bow.
Alas ! alas ! a tale of woes—
Almost all in death’s last throes.
Of four hundred and fifty souls,
O’er all but twelve the wide sea rolls.
The old home left, a new to save —
Instead of this a watery grave.
This news we got on Rabbit Isle ;
We had been grumbling in right good style.
This humbled us; we thanked the Lord
For sparing us whilst on ship-board.
A beautiful passage to the Cape,
Send home the glad news to relate ;
We had it rough, no calmness more,
Till we had reached the Australian shore.
33
THE LOSS OF THE KAPUNDA.


THE NEW COMMANDMENT.
“A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.”
Y r OVE is the pivot on which the whole social system
tfici. revolves, the foundation-stone of the entire future.
“God so loved the world,” and ‘‘God is love.” As well
expect a flower to be without scent, as well expect the rich,
ripe fruit to be without its sweetness, as to expect the Chris-
tian to be lacking in this best and sweetest grace. How
often we have heard of a hardened criminal whom severe
punishment served but to harden more, who has been
melted to tears by the sweet innocence and artlessness of
childhood, when no amount of punishment would bring a
tear from him. David could face his terrible foe, Goliath,
without a tremor; but the love of a Jonathan completely
breaks him down. Sampson could face unmoved the
Philistine’s whole host, but the soft wiles of a Delilah sub-
dues the strong man. It was heralded by the angels, when
proclaiming a Saviour to a lost world, “ Peace oh earth
good will to man.” May we be so full of this divine grace
that we shall be fashioned into the loving Saviour’s image,
so that we shall have, in however little measure, the mind
of Christ.
Love favors no condition,
Love worships no position ;
It grudges not a kindly deed,
But hates a sectional, narrow creed.
Love, pure, unselfish love,
Source of the loving God above ;
That love will deepen, strengthen,
Exhaustless love will widen, lengthen.
Love will visit all who mourn ;
Love will the Christian dress adorn ;
Love will forgive, forget the bad,
Melting to tears the heart that’s sad.
Love will give to real need ;
Love fails not, is a friend indeed ;
Of all the graces that you class,
Love tops them all, none can surpass.
34


SIR JAMES M‘BAIN IN, K.C.M.G.
President of the Legislative Cauncil of Victoria.
WIS LORDSHIP AND LADY M'BAIN have endeared
£\ themselves to the hearts of all true Christians. By
their noble and philanthropic deeds, and their consistent
walk, they practically express the Saviour’s teaching, who
said : “ It is more blessed to give than to receive.”
Noble, profuse, ascending higher,
In the distance like yon church spire,
Those charitable and noble deeds,
Supplying richly the poor’s dire needs.
These deeds, like stars that glisten in the sky.
Hold a high place with which none hope to vie ;
And by those acts which with Christ’s words comply,
Reap for their souls a full, a rich supply.
Of all that merits scathing scorn,
Of all that makes the Christian mourn,
The Lord can ne’er deceit adorn,
’Tis wickedness of Satan born.
A walk that makes the light to shine ;
A heart that’s filled with love divine ;
A life, quite blameless, shining clear,
In kinship with the Son so dear.
To such true ones I dedicate ;
Their noble deeds with joy relate.
’Tis fitting to give honor due ;
Such lives we can with gladness view.
35
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO


TRANSLATIONS PROM
THE PSALMS.
Psalm I.
O PERFECT bliss awaits the man
Who runneth not astray
Into the haunts of -wicked men,
But feeds on Christ alway.
Nor treats the word of God with scorn,
But on it meditates.
This will the Christian man adorn ;
From good ne’er separates.
He shall be like a full-grown tree
Close planted by a stream,
Yielding the most delightful fruit,
A truly glorious scene.
Prosper he shall on every hand;
The wicked, sinful go ;
They run into the deepest sin,
Into the depths of woe.
And when they stand before the throne,
To get their just reward ;
Mercy in vain they cry for now ;
God pays them no regard.
Psalm 23.
The Shepherd does his children feed
Upon the pastures green ;
He leads the lambs most tenderly
To his exhaustless stream.
His lambs most graciously restores,
When they do stray away,
Into the richest pastures green,
His name to glorify.
36


And though I walk this vale of tears,
Nor feel the deepening gloom ;
My Saviour closely clasps my hand,
Until I reach the tomb.
My Lord hath spread a full, rich feast,
In spite of all my foes ;
And basking in the Saviour’s smiles,
My cup of bliss o’erflows.
In peace and joy my soul shall reign,
Shall reign for evermore,
And with the saints in glory rest
On heaven’s blissful shore.
Psalm 100.
SING thou throughout the wide, wide world ;
Blaze forth His praises into song ;
Then let each praising soul rejoice,
Oh, let the mirth be loud and strong !
How great, how gracious is our God !
All things he made ; yes, quite alone ;
Richly he sends the blessings down.
Oh, what a perfect work he’s done!
Raise, then, to him your grateful songs
For blessings from his bounteous store ;
And in the church of God we’ll sing
Loud praise to him whom we adore.
37
TRANSLATIONS FROM THE PSALMS.


WEEPING AT THE TOMB.
John 20 : 15.
VaT’RAPPED in meditation upon this touching scene,.
we linger with Mary at the tomb, and learn of Him
who only giveth light and life, those simple lessons which
are so profitable, cheering, and refreshing to our souls..
At the beginning of the chapter, we find three persons
all starting alike and right,—they are running. That is
the right position, the true attitude to be in,—running
with patience the race. It denotes eagerness and earnest-
ness. But if we would grow, there must be something
more than running. The beloved John passes the bold
Peter, but the weak, timid, weeping Mary far out-distances
both. The grave is the limit of their love. Fading away
in the distance, buried in the grave, their worship and
service stop for the moment. They have met with a
hindrance which they are unable to overcome. Hence
the grave sees the beginning and end of their service.
Not so with Mary. The grave is but the test of her love ;
the dull and gloomy cave serves but to brighten it into a
flame, displaying its power with a beauty and brilliancy
which lends a charm and lustre to her love that even
the most prominent and loving of his disciples failed to
show. She is uttering the same plaintive cry, without
change, “ They have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him.” Beloved, pause a moment
and consider Mary’s complaint. Do we not hear many
Marys making the same complaint ? Gay adornments,
everything to delight the eye, to captivate and charm the
flesh, but little to feed the spiritually minded. Christ
is buried beneath the rubbish, as effectually hid from
view as when he lay in the grave. Hence the simple,
earnest soul's experiences are similar to Mary’s, and the
language of his heart the same, until he exclaims in dis-
38


tress, “ I know not where they have laid him.” “ Feed
the church of God.” is the exhortation. The shepherds of
the flock who are faithful and not wrapped up in fleshly
wisdom, feed the flock with the rich grain. Searching
leads to worship and ministry. Oh, for the heart so
strung and attuned that a whisper sets it right with him ;
the vil so transparent, that the music of that whisper
leads to light and communion. That one word “ Mary”
instantly changes searching, sorrowing Mary, into re-
joicing, worshipping Mary. Mary has done with the
grave now ; she has something much more precious to
occupy her attention. True, no spot was so dear to Mary
as the grave of her Lord ; but now she has that a view of
himselfi her mind is filled with the person, and the place
is soon forgotten. Beloved, is there not something here
for us also ? Do we not see dear ones occupied with
points of doctrine and truths, precious enough in them-
selves, but unsatisfying ? Be like Mary ; listen to the
whisperings of love, and be content to let all else go. The
vision of your soul will be filled with his person ; is not
that enough ? Why want aught else ? Had Mary been
occupied with Himself only, and hearing His voice, she
would not have been at the grave at all. Why ? Because
instead of searching for a dead Lord, she would have
been expecting a risen Saviour.
Wrapped in the tomb the Saviour lies ;
Late, Mary comes in mourning guise ;
“I know not where they have him laid,”
To angels, Mary, weeping said.
Hark, softly falls upon her ear—
There’s music in the sound so dear !
One word, disclosing to her sight
Him who is full of life and light.
His grave’s to her the sweetest spot,
She sees Himself : the grave’s forgot.
He fills the vision of her mind ;
Hence she has left the grave behind.
v A loving message full of power
Descends like a refreshing shower.
The brethren meet with saddened hearts ; „
Her message told new joy imparts.
39
WEEPING AT THE TOMB.


IN MEMORIAM.
HIS little one lay in its coffin in the next room, the suf-
ferer not being able to see that loving face or hear
the music of its sweet lullaby, as it called in turn “ ba-ba,”
“ ta-ta,” “ ma-ma,” and “ da-da.” He had experienced
the same thing exactly two years before, not having the
consolation of bearing his little son or little daughter to
their last resting-place, or plant a flower upon their little
graves. But all things work together for good to the
Father’s children. They are not lost; no, they are found
sleeping in Jesus.
A floweret sweet just passed to heaven ;
The Lord but takes -what he has given.
Sad mother, cease your mournful sighs;
See Jesus ; lift your weeping eyes.
Your babe reclines on Jesus’ loving breast:
Oh, what a happy place of blissful rest;
That Saviour who once said so lovingly,
“Suffer the little ones to come to me.’’
SATAN’S WILES.
I NEED Thee every hour,
Attacked by Satan’s power.
O Christ! thou canst us separate
From all the -world’s and Satan’s hate.
The tempter’s most seductive wiles
Are chased by the Saviour’s smiles.
Be faithful to thy Saviour dear ;
When thou hast Christ, then heaven’s near.
Oh, like the sunbeam’s glistening ray,
Chasing the gloomy clouds away,
Or like the dancing, shining spray,
A moment seen, then melts away.
40


STEAL AWAY.
Air : There is a Happy Land.
To Jesus steal away,
Steal, steal away.
The Spirit’s dazzling ray
Oh, with me stay.
Oh ! then rejoicing sing
Loving is our Heavenly King,
Loud let the welkin ring,
Praise, praise for aye.
Still hear his loving voice,
Steal, steal away.
Sweet music ; hearts rejoice ;
Praise, praise for aye.
Jesus Christ died for me
That e’en 1, his saint, should be
With Christ in glory free,
Blest, blest for aye.
Snapped is the devil’s chain,
Far, far away.
Freed from all sin and pain,
Far, far away.
Fled is all Satan’s wiles,
Chased by the Saviour’s smiles ;
Our Saviour’s love beguiles,—
Praise, praise for aye.
IDOLATRY.
“ Little children, keep yourselves from idols.”
Whatever, Lord, does come between,
My Saviour hid—not clearly seen—
Whatever dims my sight, or mars
And leaves behind deep cutting scars,
Pm hugfging closely to my breast
A serpent. Farewell, peace and rest.
41


DEDICATED TO THE
HON. JAS. BALFOUR, M.L.C.,
AND
MR. D. HARPER, M.L.A.,
FOR ENDEAVOURS TO INTRODUCE THE BIBLE INTO THE
STATE SCHOOLS.
A NOBLE stand they’ve truly made,
Which cannot be by man gainsaid :
Contending for “Thus saiththe Lord,”
And standing firmly for his word.
To children thus the truth is given,
To point them on their way to heaven; —
To tell them of that Elder Brother,
Whose love so freely flows forever.
And when is sown that precious seed,
Does pleasure rule ? Nay, God indeed
Waters the plant till strongly grown,
Rooted in Christ, and fully blown.
And when they’ve grown to manhood’s years,
Their lives won’t cause a mother’s tears,
But joy and peace, and all that’s good ;
The wiles of Satan they’ve withstood.
And for these soldiers who endure,
There is reserved a crown secure ;
Such blessing theirs, with latest breath,
Not fearing, calmly facing death,
Their spirits wing their flight on high,
Soaring far higher than the sky,
To that blest home, the mansions fair,
Which Christ has promised to prepare.
4 2


H.R.H. PRINCE GEORGE OF
WALES.
VVPON reading in the Evening Herald , Melbourne,
under the heading ‘‘ Pith and Point,” a short para-
graph announcing the acceptance by H.R.H. Prince
George of Wales of the title of Vice-Patron of the Sea-
man’s Mission, these lines were respectfully dedicated to
His Royal Highness.
Noblest of all; bereft of earth’s ambition ;
Vice-Patron of the Seaman’s Mission.
Oh, what a powerful influence for good!
Sweeping away transgression like a flood.
Few friends has manly Jack at sea,
Kind deeds long fill his memory ;
On deck, and in the sailor tales,
The watchword is “ Prince George of Wales.”
He, like a second shepherd king.
The sunny truths of God does bring ;
He weighs the ship with anchor sure,
Against all tides she is secure.
Mid rocks and shoals and furious gales,
Our noble commander, Prince George of Wales,
Shouts loud and clear, “ Unfurl the sails.”
A royal salute to George of Wales !
True grandson of our noble Queen,
Treading a path that’s clearly seen ;
No diadem of earth’s renown,
But heir to an immortal crown.
And we will hail our gracious Queen,
What monarch has our country seen
So noble, good ? Her life will long
Be made the theme of angel song.
43


THE STILL SMALL VOICE.
there is but one way leading to eternal
life, different are the modes which bring the soul
into the knowledge of the way, the truth, and the life.
One will tell of a terrible wrestling for peace, so prolonged
that he has to go round the entire globe, not even then
finding that peace which he is so anxious to gain. Oh,
the heart-throbbings ! Oh, the soul-sobbings of such a
one, until the sunbeams of divine love shine into his dark-
ened soul. The Saviour whispers in such tender tones,
soothing the troubled and weary one, just the one word,
Peace. \Vhat a contrast ! Just before all was dark-
ness ; now it is his marvellous light. Another will find
peace from the same source in a few minutes, gaining all
that cost another many months of anxious searching.
Why this difference ? Well, it is easily explained. The
one is continually occupied with self'and feelings, the
other is occupied altogether with Christ, and faith in his
word. The one takes hold of peace wholly and entirely ;
the other clings to everything that will hamper and
hinder.
Just in the same way two men will sit down to a meal •
the one means to deal only with the subject in hand, and
he rises from the table satisfied, when the other is not
half through with his meal. Why ? Because he is intent
on everything but the meal before him ; consequently,
when the one has done, the other has barely started.
Dear reader, if you are troubled in your soul about any-
thing, look to Christ ; he only can help you in such a
serious matter as your soul’s salvation. He is not acting
unjustly, but, as he bought you by his precious blood, he
is asking you to look to him only, and the seeking soul
he will in no wise cast out.
44


I sat down by a running stream ;
I fell asleep, strange thoughts to dream ;
Methought I heard a whispering voice
Say, “ Weary heart, canst thou rejoice ?
I thought upon the life I led ;
Strange all my peace and joy had fled.
I still could hear the whispering voice
Say, “Weary heart, canst thou rejoice ?
I tried to drive these thoughts away ;
It was no use, they still would stay,
And still I heard that gentle voice
Say, “ Weary heart, canst thou rejoice ?
I would turn o’er a leaf that’s new,
As all my sins I did review ;
In whispers still I heard that voice
Say, “ Weary heart, canst thou rejoice ? ”
Driven at last to deep despair,
I cried to God for me to spare ;
But still I heard the warning voice
Say, “ Weary heart, canst thou rejoice ? ”
Just then One clothed in majesty
Came and said, “Come ; I died for thee.”
Hushed now, the whispering, warning voice J
My Saviour found, I can rejoice.
Since I have heard his “ Come to me ; ”
Once dark and blind, but now I see ;
Good works to me no comfort brought
Until I had the Saviour sought.
On this sure Rock I mean to stand
Until I reach the golden strand,
And there, with the angelic band,
Stand waiting for the King’s command.
45
THE STILL SMALL VOICE.


SIR PETER COATES OF
AUCHENDRANE.
rr\ T r UE philanthropist, one who does much real good
to the neglected and sick. His kindly acts will
rkh reward^TVT’ h^ Wm have his
SE PpfTr d VJ hIS -! h °r P ° em . lS res P ectfull y dedicated to
T Fet ®F; y he writer lived within two miles of his resi-
fbout’hi h t re i° re w had many °PP° rtu nities of hearing
about his truly noble acts to children. Taking into con-
sideration his wealth and high position, one can anpre-
ciate more highly the scene I am about to describe. Upon
Sir Peter s invitation, a large group of Sunday-school
children are clustered around him; their white, pinched
features showing how much they have needed the pure
liof Whb hlC H thCy arG n ,° W enjoyin S at his noble man-
o,„ p Vlth artlessness and innocence they cluster around
Sir Peter, with child-hke persistence plying him whh
curious questions, taking, as a matter of course, their right
smile on his h Sn ' Peter llstens to with an amused
.mile on his handsome face, expressing true nobility • as
Hums says, “ A man’s a man for a’ that.” y ’
For all God’s blessings he gives praise ;
God prospered him in all his ways.
Honored by all his native town
For the kind deeds which he has done.
The Paisley folk he has endeared ;
How oft the poor hearts he has cheered!
More blessed to give than to receive.
He pities, and their wants relieve.
. A fortune he has made by thread ;
May all the rich his kind path tread ;
And may God grant him length of days
1 o do his will, and speak his praise.
46


Just see him, with the children round :
There’s music in their noisy sound ;
Made joyous by his invitation,
They render him a sweet ovation.
Removed far from the busy scene,
In rural glens to sweetly dream :
His home, a paragon of joy—
True happiness without alloy.
His mansion, far from Paisley toon,
Nestles secluded by the Boon ;
And there ’mid nature’s bowers he lives,
His pity offers, and his substance gives.
True nobleness, with winning grace,
Glows in his kindly, handsome face ;
Imperious pride you ne’er could find,
But gentleness, and grace refined.
47
SIR PETER COATES


A DISTINGUISHED VISITOR.
VjnfHE subject of the above came to me, to my surprise
and delight; for I had expressed a desire to see him,
never dreaming that God would grant me the high honor
of seeing this truly pious and gifted one of the Lord’s
ministers, an eminent scholar and a thorough linguist.
In spite of his truly remarkable history, having associated
with the royalty and nobility of his native land, Italy, he
stepped into my humble sick-room with such simplicity,
with such an easy grace, as at once marked the child in
Christ Jesus, an air of refinement lending a charm to the
whole. We had a sweet time together. He told me
what he had endured for righteousness’ sake. Born a
gentleman, trained in error and darkness, profoundly
learned, but ignorant as a babe of the saving truth as
found in Christ Jesus, he was reading the Bible one
day, when his eyes rested upon the passage: “ There is one
mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.”
This sentence was enough to disperse his darkness, and
the Spirit taught him the word which brought him out
of error. There was a great commotion among his
friends, with the result that he had to fly from his native
country. He has preached before vast assemblages in
London, proclaimed Christ at the London Docks, to
almost every sailor, in his own language, French, Italian,
Portuguese, Greek, and German. I pray that such a faith-
ful preacher may receive an unction from the Spirit, and
may the dew of God’s ‘blessing descend upon him to re-
fresh his own soul.
He came in with a simple, foreign look,
My cold and clammy hand he took ;
He spoke in tones so gently mild.
Asking how God was caring-foi; his child.
48


He drew his chair to my bedside,
And lovingly spoke of God, his guide :
“I once was dark and blind indeed ;
God taught me in my hour of need.
“One day the scales dropped from my eyes ;
Useless to mourn with tears and sighs,
A ransom’s paid for sins of man,
I find as I the Bible scan.
“The man Christ Jesus was the One ;
Oh, what a perfect work he’s done
To save poor sinners by his blood !
No other way. Spell-bound I stood.
“ ‘O God,’ I cried, ‘forgive and save.’
The Spirit breathed, and God forgave ;
Position, friends, —of all bereft,
Still I have joy and peace and rest.”
Like a good soldier he endures,
And many souls for Christ secures ;
Those things he built. He’s broken-down ;
On earth his cross, beyond his crown.
49
A DISTINGUISHED VISITOR.


A FAITHFUL STEWARD.
VttHE following short poem is respectfully dedicated to
Miss Jane Houldsworth, of Rozelle, near Ayr., the
author s noble patroness, from whom he has received
numerous favors. Under God, he and his wife and family
are greatly indebted to this noble lady, his best and
noblest friend, and he hopes to thank her in person.
One of his brightest anticipations, if the Lord so will, is
that he may be in a position to visit her at Rozelle. He
i emembers vividly and gratefully the many visits paid
her in the past, ever going empty and returning full.
The missioner told his tale so well
To the noble lady at Rozelle ;
For the suffering sick one she does grieve—
“ More blessed to give than to receive.”
The sufferer’s wife and children four
Had lost all hope ; this she restores,
So cheering him with sunshine bright,
He’s filled with raptures of delight.
The doctor advises a change of air ;
Impossible the cash to spare ;
But God has raised a friend in need,
The noble lady’s that friend indeed.
The passage outfit, she provides it all,
The amount runs up a bill not small ;
And then, when trouble lays him low,
She gives the needful with unceasing flow.
And now upon the deep blue sea,
They cherish her in grateful memory ;
God sent his steward to inquire ;
She richly gave his heart’s desire.
A noble mansion, nice and fair,
Nestling secluded by the Ayr.;
This is the Lady Houldsworth’s home,
The noble subject of my poem.
50


HEAVENLY TREASURES.
I LOVE those heavenly treasures mine,
Sweetened by His love divine ;
Seek them, friend, with all your Heart-
True riches that will ne’er depart.
Those treasures, rich beyond belief,
To mourning ones heartsease, relief ;
Not damaged by the moth or rust;
All else will crumble into dust.
Upon the Saviour fix your eye,
Then for earth’s laurels you’ll ne’er sigh.
You cannot serve an idol god
And be in touch with heaven’s Lord.
Behold the fowls that cleave the air ;
Their wants they never need declare ;
Nor do they ever mourn and weep—
They neither sow, nor do they reap.
He sees them from his home on high,
And does their every want supply ;
And, satisfied, they soaring rise,
Warbling His praise in yonder skies.
The fields are dressed with beauteous flowers,
Made fragrant by the freshening showers ;
Daisy and lily, and the primrose bright,
Like glittering stars in peaceful night.
King Solomon, in all his rich array,
Was poor beside the flowers’ display.
How sweet their perfume in the morning dew 1
Without a tint to mar their glorious hue.
51


THE WARNING NOTE.
'T?OR if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle ?” “ This know
also, that in the last days perilous times shall come,”
men “ having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof: from such turn away. For of this sort are they
which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women.”
Here first the apostle is warning us against feeding upon
the sugar and water stuff which will not nourish the soul,
nor ever enable a soul to grow in grace or in the knowledge
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Desire the sincere milk, that
you may gro w thereby. He speaks also of false shepherds
who are leading silly women astray, and in the mislead-
ing of others, they themselves, as a just penalty, are led
astray. Perhaps my readers may think I am unneces-
sarily harsh and bitter ; but desperate diseases require
desperate remedies. I make no apology, as no cruelty is
intended, but actual kindness, to prevent the sheep from
being scattered. This was one of the things that Christ
died for, —to gather together the children of God that
were scattered abroad. I trust I shall avoid personalities ;
but I must of necessity make the subject plain. I leave
my readers tojudge where these false shepherds are to be
found. I think I could not do better than mention two
incidents which came under my personal observation. A
lady said that when she was tempted to do anything
wrong, she looked at a portrait of a certain reverend
doctor, and his handsome expressive eyes seemed to say
from their feeling depths, “ Please don’t do it.” This
invariably enabled her to conquer the temptation.
This needs no further comment from me ; I feel I can
safely leave the conclusion with all those who have any
spiritual discernment at all. But the next case is even
worse, while this is bad enough. One of the shepherds
of this particular class called upon me. He spoke about
52


doctrine. I told him that when I desired to extend the
right of fellowship to anyone, I never asked about doc-
trine, but inquired if he was a new creature in Christ
Jesus. Upon his reply to this simple question depended
a happy fellowship. He asked me if I had any objection
to his engaging in prayer ; I told him I had not the
slightest. He then, in the presence of his dear wife and
mine, offered a beautiful prayer, making the twelfth
chapter of Hebrews its basis. I tell you, I was refreshed ;
for our Heavenly Father will refresh his simple babes,
despite the insincerity of the shepherds. I could scarcely
credit my sight, when, about a week later, my eyes rested
upon the report of an address, delivered by my visitor, ques-
tioning the divinity of the Lord Jesus, and repudiating
the atonement ; scoffing at the record of Jonah and the
whale ; denying the creation as recorded in Genesis ;
doubting the authenticity of the Pentateuch ; and, lastly,
ignoring Christ’s miracles. I cannot express the shock
I received on discovering that such hypocrisy was being
practiced ; and had that minister called again, I should
have spoken to him as plainly as I am now writing.
A word with reference to the biblical account of crea-
tion. Do the objections advanced rest upon anything
tangible ? Are they not but the puny reasonings of the
objectors’ finite minds ? I would, as a counterpoise, ask
all who doubt the creation as recorded (I would take them
to the first step of the ladder before they attempt the
second) : “ Can you, tell me anything of the beginning ?”
No, they confess that they cannot tell anything about
the period mentioned, and defy you to state the time. I
accept the Bible account of creation on the same princi-
ples. I cannot tell them how long time has elapsed since
the creation, neither can they tell me ; it may have been
ten thousand, or it may have been a million years ; it is
all mere conjecture. What we don’t know here, we shall
know hereafter. Had the Lord intended me to be a mere
chronological map, doubtless I would have been
thoroughly conversant with dates. Now, if they are
stuck the first step you take them, you can safely con-
clude that their reasoning will be faulty throughout. I
would affectionately exhort you, dear Christian readers,
53
“TtlE WARNING NOTE.


to accept the Word of God in its entirety. This is the
only course which will ensure perfect peace and joy. If
you knock the first rung from the ladder, depend upon it
there will be heart-burnings and soul-workings bye-and-
bye. Your conscience will become so deadened that you
will knock away the whole ladder, steps and all, without
the slightest compunction. If Satan leads, he leads
thoroughly.
As to these false shepherds, their history is very bad
indeed. Both sons of the manse, they have denied the
faith of their forefathers two or three times, and now they
have diverged so far that it would be difficult to find out
what their belief really is. Spurgeon speaks of the down
grade, and they have gone down it with a vengeance,
until at the present time they occupy a lower platform
than Joseph Symes. Put these ministers in one scale,
and such men as Spurgeon, JVPLaren, M'Leod, Dr. Marsh,
Can. Kingsley, Hedley Vicars, the M‘Leods, Chalmers,
Guthrie, Octavius Winslow, M‘Cheyne, and others too
numerous to mention, in the other, and I tell you it
will weigh down so quickly that, although their ideas are
lofty, they will be higher in the air than ever they ex-
pected to be. Dear Christians, be true to- the word of
God, and you will be true to yourself and to your fellow-
man. May the Lord direct your hearts, that ye be
rooted and grounded in the truth. Do not interpret the
Scriptures by the light of to-day, but by the Light of the
World, Jesus Christ. If any man come unto you and
bring not the doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed ;
for he that biddeth him God-speed is partaker of his evil
deeds. In my early manhood, about twenty years ago, I
knew what it was to be dead in trespasses and sins, ful-
filling the lusts of the flesh and of the mind ; but by the
grace of God lam what I am. My sins are all forgiven
for Christ’s sake, and since I became a child of God I have
walked in the light—sometimes, I confess, feebly indeed
—ever advancing, if not by running, at least creeping.
“ The meek will he guide in judgment; and the meek
will he teach his way.”
54
THE WARNING NOTE.


A scoffer says he can’t believe
Adam was made by God, then Eve ;
He will not hear about a hell,
Nor mansions where the righteous dwell.
God made the world in six clear days.
“ No, sir, this is an idle craze !”
The apple causing Adam’s fall
To his great mind is nonsense all.
And Moses, with his first five books,
Gets scoffed at e’er the scoffer looks ;
“My reason this rejects at will,
Divines with learning and with skill.”
Jonah was swallowed by the whale.
Ah ! this he deems an idle tale !
If Jonah had devoured the fish,
I’d trust the story as you wish.
The miracles of our dear Lord,
He deems a most untrue record ;
“The sick and blind, the devils too,
He could not by his will subdue.”
Soon this wise man in temper flew ;
The Bible was not to his view ;
He frittered, tore, then threw away
God’s word, the only truth and way.
Now this wise man has found a creed—
No comfort there in time of need !
Anchor and compass he’s let go ;
No hope for him, but endless woe !
God speaks in his own perfect way ;
But doubt his word, you’re soon astray.
Oh, can this piece of fading clay
Inform its Maker what to say ?
God hath chose small things and weak —
Those lowly ones, the truly meek,
These feast upon the fine, rich grain,
Blooming like flowerets in the rain.
Now, please tell me—l know you can—
As you the sacred page do scan :
Is this a wise or wicked man,
Reigning far less than th’ allotted span ?
55
THE WARNING NOTE.


Now Jannes and Jambres, who withstood,
They swept away by a swift flood ;
Moses beheld their acts unwise,
And heard their mocking changed to cries.
The gospel simple, pure, will tell—
Condensed into a small nutshell—
Christ bore your sins upon the tree ;
Believe this truly, then you’re free.
Cleansed from all past and present sin,
Washed by his blood, you’re clean within ;
Not only so ; the Spirit’s beams
Will slake your thirst like cooling streams.
He will thee keep, your God the Lord ;
Love in your heart will shed abroad ;
In perfect peace and joy and love,
No more to doubt, no more to rove.
Your God will guide thee all the way ;
Come, then, to Christ, no longer stray 5
Once you have found his fruit so sweet,
You nevermore will leave his feet.
I’m not a cultured, learned D.D.,
But, walking in the light, can see
That precious treasure, love divine,
And matchless grace as clear sunshine.
Hark, to the bleating of the sheep
Rent by a wolf! His lambs do weep ;
No longer hid—the hoof, the claws,
Stay ! stay the thieves! Oh make them pause !
A precipice is looming high
Greeting the view; but Christ is nigh ;
Then, led by him, the lambs are saved ;
He for his flock all danger braved.
56
THE WARNING- NOTE.


MR. ANDREW CARNEGIE.
Vy* PON reading, on his sick-bed in Australia, an ac-
count of his rich countryman’s liberality and
munificence, Mr. Andrew Carnegie, the American mill-
ionaire, a native of Dunfermline, Fifeshire, having en-
dowed a handsome library to his townsmen, subscribing
also the sum of a hundred pounds to the Gilfillan
memorial, these few lines were dedicated by the sufferer.
The Rev. George Gilfillan of Dundee was a truly gifted
and godly pastor, much esteemed and cherished by his
countrymen of every shade of religious feeling. Mr.
Carnegie is one of the very few whom wealth has not
spoiled, and he will live in the hearts of the people when
many prominent names are dead and forgotten. He is
justly termed “ a son of the people.” He is a true Com-
moner, both leal and true. May many of auld Scotia’s
sons tread in the same path, which leads to happiness
and enduring bliss, is the fervent prayer of the poor
cripple.
In Thames dominion, County Fife,
Bonnie is Dunfermline town,
Whence hailed Carnegie, who has gained
Columbian fortune and renown.
Endowed a library to the bonnie town
That truth and industry be fully known ;
x\nd to that gifted one, Gilfillan,
A hundred pounds to his memorial given.
A true Commoner at heart,
Ne’er scoffing termed—upstart ;
But by his mien, so good and kind,
Expressing a broad and liberal mind.
A purse so long, a heart that’s large ;
Faithful his stewardship to discharge ;
Relieving the poor’s suffering and pain ;
Money w r ell spent; how rich the gain !
A life of bliss beyond the sky—
An everlasting home on high —
■ Where sunlight never fading beams,
And ceaseless flow eternal streams.
57


DEDICATION.
VrfHIS little volume is most respectfully dedicated to
the Hon. Sir Matthew Davies, Speaker of the Legis-
lative Assembly, Parliament House, Melbourne. Sir
Matthew ever takes a lively interest in all Christian
enterprises and efforts. He is patron of the Young Men’s
Christian Association, that truly grand Christian organiza-
tion, so fruit-bearing to the Master.
All hail, Australia’s sons to share
The peace and joy that reigneth there ;
Telling the sinner of the Saviour’s l<jve ;
Pointing the stranger to that home above.
They whisper in the stranger’s ear
The gospel message of good cheer,
Removing all the sinful load,
Binding the sinner to his God.
The young men’s Christian institute,
With works of love and pure repute ;
We’ll some day hear in accents sweet,
Well done, before Christ’s judgment seat.
Then all yovr hands with vigor new,
To clear the debt on building due ;
Thus casting on the waters, bread,
Which Christ will bless, our living Head.
58




