

UtLIuH/l-j PAMS., I
box I
EDDYISM
LATE
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
MIZPAH




LDDYISM
LATE,
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE,
MIZPAH
MELBOURNE:
D. W. PATERSON CO. PTY. LTD., PRINTERS.
495 COLLINS STREET.


WRITTEN IN THE
INTERESTS OF THE
YOUNG


AN INVITATION
To Rechristen to EDDYISM the Heresy now known a
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE.
in doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sin-
cerity, sound speech, that cannot be condemned —Titus ii. 7, 8.
HROUGH this pamphlet I venture a slight attempt to
express myself regarding that heresy called Christian
Science, for my knowledge of it having been acquired
through an experience so painful, I feel charged, as it
were, with a mission to that end, and feeling a simple and sincere
effort in the present to be at least a step in the right direction—a
something done —better than deferred for more studied effort. In
this I content myself with brief allusion to the case that prompts my
action, the diary history of which is reserved for reasons that deprive
me of much sensational witness; but if my humble attempt can effect
consideration of even a few points, it will not be made in vain.
One—THE TREASON AGAINST CHRIST—in its name
“Christian,” which I have learned is a cunning snare—a betrayal
so great that far more fitting would be that of Judas —and in
“Science” (dear to the heart of the ignorant) a minor snare; so
that placing it on its own merits as EDDYISM should be the duty
of all Christians.
Another TREASON AGAINST THAT SACRED TRUST,
CHILDHOOD, that through it teachings are imposed on the
young, that amongst adults has largely increased lunacy. Yet, again,
that there be some check put on the indifference and tolerance with
which is viewed its encroachments, even into our Churches, where
often concession is mistaken for broadmindedness.
Jesus said: “A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.”


“By this shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another.” —St. John 13: 34, 35.
Than this no newer commandment should we require while the
world lasts.
But newer and very different we find accepted by Mrs. Eddy’s fol-
lowers, with results accordingly.
It was these feelings that prompted me writing in protest to
Dr. Radford, after reading a report of his Moorhouse lecture (in
the “Argus,” June, 1913) delivered in St. Paul’s Cathedral, Mel-
bourne; and so using that for a beginning, it is with the hope that
my pen’s weakness may be the opportunity for those more able, that
under the name Eddyism it may yet be known, or unknown, and
I hope that names of those supporting that end may fill the back
page reserved for that purpose.
“To the Rev. Dr. Radford,
“St. Paul’s College,
“University of Sydney
“16th June, 1913.
“Dear Sir, —Of Theosophy I know nothing, but of Christian
Science, through much affliction, I know all. Consequently,
when, in the report of your lecture on these two subjects, at
St. Paul’s Cathedral, you speak of ‘many beautiful ideas’ in
connection with the latter —and you not being the first clergyman
whom I have known speak thus—l just feel compelled to beg you
will bear with me in my poor attempt at expressing what appears
to me of vital importance.
“Firstly, that, as Christians, we should adopt the term
EDDYISM to the exclusion of the name Christ, which in such
a connection is but advertising and promoting anti-Christ, as
investigation must prove. Until lately I, with others, had lightly
regarded Christian Science as an amusing fad, the name of
Christ answering therewith for some strata of good. At odd
times, in London, we had looked in at their services (where one
learns nothing of the evil), saw the fashionable audience’s ap-
preciation of a new fad, etc., and went home to laugh at it, more
especially in connection with statements which we were asked to
accept seriously.
“One, that their power to raise from the dead was frustrated
only by unbelief, with other such absurdities, which, though good
then in the light of ‘something to make fun of,’ but prove to me,
by later experience, the seriousness of trifling with vital subjects.
“All of that cult I now know may, in brief, be designated as
Fanatics —Evil-disposed—or Triflers.


“My attempted conversion was made by one whose zeal
overstepped discretion; and in whose plain language my
religion was annihilated in these words: — ‘Your Churches, your
Clergy, your Doctors, family affection, love, sickness, suffering,
death, all, all you have been brought up to believe in, evil and
the power of evil, are all lies' — "lies/' I know all; but you must
go to a Scientist teacher, who will make you understand it better,’
etc., etc. Yes, a professional would have enveloped the kernel
in that mystic ‘science’ past the understanding of reasoning mind,
and thereby trapping the unwary.
“Protecting myself, and those dearer than life, from this folly
by desiring quietly to withdraw from its circle, shortly incurred
consequences from the Evil-disposed, to whom denying the
existence of evil means license accordingly. Thus, the world
over, we can trace to this heresy the chief factor now under-
mining the simple teachings of Christ, for its insidious teachings
are to be found everywhere, and in every guise, creating mischief,
and in family life causing sorrow and disruption.
“By ‘Triflers’ I mean those who, lured by this high-sounding
name, ‘Christian Science,’ and already feeling in themselves that
spiritual uplifting that often makes them as if ‘among, but not
of’ the worldly crowd, think that herein they have at last
found a haven of rest, and that any failure to grasp its over-
powering mystery lies in themselves. Consequently, they put
themselves in the hands of the science-teachers, who, though
becoming possessed of their fees, fortunately fail to do more
than mystify them.
“Even Christian Science cannot dispossess them of their
good up-bringing, and, established in faith, many times have they,
perhaps, come away from orthodox worship dissatisfied with
void when there should be fulness; gradually they cease going,
then —then, almost unwittingly, they get drawn into this thing,
which certainly is not wanting in fulness —of a kind. These are
those who survive, though many fall by the way. Then it is
we hear: ‘Oh, Christian Science must be good, for So-and-so
belongs to it, and So-and-so is goodness itself—could not think
or speak evil of anyone,’ etc., etc. Which of us do not know
those so pure and good? But so far from their having benefited,
their merit is seized as examples of the good results of Christian
Science —and, alas! innocently evil results to others through
them.
“I wish all clergymen made the opportunity to acquire my
knowledge of this matter. That they would penetrate where ‘the
truth is declared’ —i.e., that healing is effected by declaring evil
and illness illusion only—where, so to speak, Mrs. Eddy’s pic
ture represents the High Altar. Hear the thrill of adoration


which voices ‘Mrs. Eddy’! Ah, where ‘Christ’ is named with as
little emotion as chair or table!
“The ‘beautiful ideas’ credited to this heresy might more fit-
tingly be called ‘common sense,’ or, so to speak, lost heritage,
for this material age despises all not bought with a price, and
thus, through the medium of Christian Science, that which is
already ours is accepted as their discovery, whilst, as a matter of
fact, theirs is only that beyond the limits of common sense.
“We find them claiming the discovery of ‘mind over matter,’
and none rise to check the audacity. As a simple instance, my
husband —who, without ever having met a Christian Scientist —
exercised it always in his medical practice. Often I have known
him undertake long rides at the call of patients, whom he has
found in no way needing his professional service, and, questioned
for their reason, the reply would be: ‘Doctor, we were indeed
ill, but as soon as we heard you were in sight, and saw you
riding up, we felt better.’ This is not fiction, but ordinary
cases, when need of mental control over the body occasioned an
illusion which disappeared when cheered and strengthened by
the approach of one in whom complete faith was reposed. I
speak of a time before even an echo of Christian Science had
reached Australia, and of one who was true to himself and his
work.
“I exercise this power A How'many of us do —have done so, to
meet the day with due fortitude; but until Eddyists appropriated
it as their ‘find’ it was classed as reason, common sense. Now
it is one of their ‘beautiful ideas,’ and any mention of this con-
trolling force is met by the clap-trap, ‘Oh, you must be a
Christian Scientist.’ To some, such a reproach that involuntarily
they submit to the ruling.
“Secondly, TREASON AGAINST CHILDHOOD. Dear
Sir, may I humbly submit an aspect that seems to me overlooked
—i.e., that Christian Science being of recent date, it so far has
chiefly affected adults, of whom some are shown to have become
mentally affected. But what of the young, now being trained to
grasp what has had such adverse results on adults?
“I am told that the teaching cannot be too early begun. Such
was the case with those in whom I am so closely interested, and
through them I would plead on behalf of all others that that
sacred trust, those that are to live after us, may be protected from
this menace.
“One of these, a dear, wee child, cast among them, said to
me, after a few weeks in their tents, '// / have toothache, I will
say that it does not hurt. If I am hungry, I will say that I do
not mind.’ And in the former instance the little cheek burst
whilst the child, under powerful influence, was trying to main-


tain this attitude. Instructed to forget where they could not
help loving, and the most shocking theories instilled into their
minds respecting death—a death that had exposed them to this
position. A little longer, and these young minds would have
become debased and distracted, for the lovely eyes seemed to
wander wildly after ideas with which they were being stuffed —
quite beyond the grasp of adults. Cannot some effort be made
to warn parents against, some means to protect children, be
devised ?
“ Is ‘Suffer little children to come unto Me’ to mean Mrs.
Eddy? Throughout —and as the result of the trials forced upon
me through coming in contact with this heresy—l have felt that
Christians have within reach a means of destroying its chief lure
—i.e., substituting ‘Eddyism’ for its present name. Exalting, as
this would, their great high priestess—more dear to them than
Christ —should commend itself to those of this persuasion, did
they not value too much the ‘catch’ in their present name.
“Trusting that, even in a small measure, I may have succeeded
in expressing what I feel so greatly, I would suggest a move to
get subscribers to the following memorial, and to cultivate more
knowledge and less tolerance of that which, revelling in the
name, belies the teachings of Christ, Again apologising for
intruding my views on your notice —I am, Rev. Sir, yours, etc.,
“16th June, 1913. ”
SUGGESTED MEMORIAL.
“We, believing that ‘EDDYISM’ is a name better adapted to
a religion that denies the divinity of Christ, and the existence of
those ills and evils for which Christ came to suffer, etc., agree
henceforth to sever His name from the connection known as
‘Christian Science,’ and substitute that of ‘Eddyism.’ ’’
In replying —at my request —Dr. Radford returned my letter as
above, in which I found those passages underlined which I here
repeat in italics. In his accompanying letter Dr. Radford says:—
“I agree heartily that ‘Christian Science’ has no real right
to the title. . . . But I am afraid the title has made
good its footing in common parlance. . , . All that we
can do is to go on pointing out the contradiction between
Eddyism and Christianity, on vital points of 'belief, in spite of
the Christian tone of much of the language and sentiment of
particular Christian Scientists.”
31st July I wrote as follows: —
“Dear Sir, —I am grateful to you for your letter, and it is
a comfort to know that you are bringing out a book, which, I


hope and pray, may fearlessly deal with this evil, with which the
land is being riddled —regardless, too, of the ‘angry letters’ of
the petted child, who meanwhile grows a giant.
“Mine, a religion of simple faith (Church of England), I
speak only of what is being forced upon me in contradiction.
Only yesterday another clergyman was added to the list of those
who pay homage to Eddyism in preference to the written Word.
The occasion was a mother speaking in admiration of his con-
firmation lectures, in which the young people’s attention was
directed to ‘certain beautiful teachings possessed by Christian
Scientists, which our Church has let pass from it.’ Surely a
traitorous admission from an important Church dignitary, free
himself to expound the Scriptures without any such filterings.
Again, even if the Church has failed —meaning, I presume, such
as himself —the individual (in some instances) remains true to
the ever up-to-date Bible. And this concession to Eddyism is not
representative, and to the young most undesirable. Far better,
surely, to be true to the beautiful teachings of the Bible, or, with
a full knowledge of Eddyism, honestly adopt it.
“But that is precisely what converts are not doing, for accord-
ing to their new-found faith —that all is good—there is no
evil in remaining where they are comfortably placed while at
heart followers of Mrs. Eddy.
“It is, and will be, difficult to convince ordinary, careless
people that wearing the cross, religious garb, etc., can be possible
with traitorousness to our Faith, for it is pleasant to feel sure
of something in this busy world!
“But there is no compromise in their new schedule, and, con-
vinced that Mrs. Eddy’s doctrine is more than Christ’s, to take
to the full, advantage of the non-existence of evil. Strange to
say, very evil, indeed, becomes the one who questions this privi-
lege ! Other clergy I have seen go down like ninepins before the
cunning of Eddyism. Some time since an instance occurred
which greatly shocked me —a case of circumvention by corres-
pondence with certain of extremely High Church views, result-
ing in an Eddyist being authorised, by letter, to withdraw their
previous disapproval of certain young children being resident
with them, and their conviction that no harm could result thereby,
also an expression of their belief that Christian Science was
devoid of evil, and denouncing such as disapproved of it, etc,,
etc. Other instances, cruelly degrading to our Church, I with-
hold mention of. How, then, about the laity and the young?
“Dear Sir, only last Sunday, when waiting at a country station,
I saw, lying on the seat beside me, a child’s Eddy-Sunday School
book, her youth in evidence by the writing of her name within.
Opening it, on the title-page the words ‘Christian Science,’ ‘Dis-


covered by Mrs. Eddy,’ seemed to rise and strike me in the face—
so audacious seemed the assertion, in contrast to Christ’s humbly
perfect teachings, and His love for little children!
“That this woman, after varied life experiences, in hex
old-age scheme for continued interest in self, should thus
openly demand the sacrifice of those in regard to whom we find
His words: ‘Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which
believe in Me, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth
of the sea.’
“I could not but think losing the book significant of the
wisdom of childhood. Yet we ‘renounce the Devil and all his
works,’ whilst tolerating a doctrine which denies the existence of
evil —consequent disregard of truth, meaning so complete disrup-
tion that one victim’s summing is probably that of many: ‘When
untruth is complete, and exercised quite without restraint, the
position is hopeless, and useless to fight against.’ And thus this
heresy is permitted to spread right and left.
“Trusting my feebleness of expression will not wholly be
without result in the service of the young, and that Discoverer’s
work may in future be known under the name Eddyism, leading
to its extinction, —Believe me, yours, etc.,
yi
I awaited Dr. Radford’s “Ancient Heresies in Modern Dress,” in
which is included his article on Eddyism, to find his dealing more
suited to those equally learned, whilst others, finding its learned
technicalities and academic language beyond them, would still be in
need of enlightenment as to what, in brief, this thing calling itself
Christian Science, really is.
Several such, whom I set to grapple with his work, reported their
efforts the same —in plain words, they would not try to understand
it, or said they went asleep over the attempt, or threw it aside
unread.
But it is far too serious a matter to relegate to the regions of the
learned. It is in our everyday lives. Why, then, cannot we have the
results of personal experience and observation clothed in everyday
language —actual facts and results brought home so that any may
understand the evil of it, who meantime are mystified one way and
another? May this appeal be not in vain!
As a matter of fact, enlightenment need be neither dull nor difficult;
in fact, so much amusement may be obtained, that the seriousness of
it is likely to be dismissed by the healthy-minded, forgetful of what it


means to the weaker. If, indeed, contributions could be obtained to
the above end, a useful work might be set going. Meanwhile, in my
humble attempt, I am seeking from Dr. Radford’s lecture, with his
kind permission, some of that support which I fear it greatly needs.
Perhaps some who may criticise my attempt might probably fail
otherwise to give themselves any benefit from his valuable work.
From Dr. Radford’s lecture on Christian Science;—
“It was, in the first place, a movement of mental healing, and
that aspect is still so prominent that many people are scarcely
aware that Christian Science claims to cover the whole field of
life, and to deal with sin no less than suffering. . . . Ulti-
mately she (Mrs. Eddy) thought her way to the denial of the
reality not only of disease but also of all suffering, sin and evil,
and even of all material things. . . . Christian Scientists
deny that their practice is the same as what is called Faith Heal-
ing. In fact it is not. Faith-healers ‘do not doubt the reality
of the complaint, but believe that they draw upon a spiritual
and divine force which can neutralise and counteract the evil at
work in the system.
“The Christian Scientists deny the existence of the disease
altogether, and are not calling down the divine influence to
counteract the evil, but to dispel the illusion.”
Now, these quotations support my simple statement, that
Christian Science begins where the limits of common sense end —and
in defiance of Scripture from post to finish.
St, Paul (1 Cor. ix.) says: “Know ye not that they which run in
a race run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may
obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate
in all things. Now, they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but
we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so
fight I, not as one that beateth the air. But I keep under my body,
and bring it into subjection. . . .”
This reads to me as if there is a material body to be overcome, and
also that the power to overcome it is not to be sought through denial
of it.
St. Paul had no Mrs. Eddy to teach him the desirableness of
exercising mind over matter when he wrote thus, and was not his a
life full of that need? “But none of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course
with joy.”—Acts 20: 24.


Later, what a glorious record is given by those martyrs who, even
at the stake, followed in his steps. One dares to question, would
Eddyism, cradled in the comforts of Boston life, find equal
supremacy in the minds of its adherents?
Doubtless, Mrs. Eddy started with a measure of “divine discontent,”
but instead of it leading her to search the Scriptures to find Eternal
Life—so to speak, her charger took the bit between its teeth, and
made hurdles of Scripture, reason and common sense, finally landing
her as a rival of Jesus Christ.
In this aspect very tolerant of Mrs. Eddy’s doctrine are those
of the Jewish persuasion—even as to-morrow they would welcome
Mrs. Brown or Mrs. Jones as rivals of the hated Christ.
An epidemic points to the need of cleansing the channels of
contagion, even as from the folly, miscalled Christian Science, “the
sermon—the good in everything” may well act as a warning to all,
triflers included, to adhere to the Fountain Head, there to find the
spiritual—the God with us—in its purity; and that from nowhere
else should the young have their teachings should be our constant
care.
To proceed from Dr. Radford’s lecture:—
“What, then, is the philosophy of life which calls itself Chris-
tian Science? Briefly, it runs thus. All is One, the One is
Supreme Being —is God. Therefore All is Mind. Therefore
Mind alone is real, and Matter is not real —has no real existence.
The material or physical world is not real—we only think it is.
There is no reality in the physical body, and, therefore, no
reality in disease —we only think there is. Think differently,
and the disease will disappear. All our ideas of the reality of
these things come from something in our nature which is called
‘mortal mind’—a sort of perverted intelligence. These wrong
ideas we must destroy by simply disbelieving them, and then evil,
whether as sin or disease, will disappear, and all will be well.”
Herein is a pasture for the would-be scientist to lose his wits. May
I here refer to those days when, willingly sacrificing the serious to
the humorous, we listened to one who, in justice to the position I
may state, had lately taken up Christian Science as a means of making
a living—who, pointing to the door, proclaimed its non-existence,
except in our imagination, and that Christian Scientists, in the true
sense, could get up and walk through it, etc., etc.


One day we met this healer, returning all agog with importance.
“What do you think has been my mission?” we were asked.
Needless to say, we felt privileged to conjecture pretty far afield.
But our friend supplied the answer: “I have been sent for to raise
the dead. One whom you knew”; and one well known as having
held a prominent military post in Australia was mentioned.
“And did you?” was our spontaneous query.
“Did I?” with a blending of sorrow and supreme contempt. “Did
I? How, indeed, was that possible? I went, full of faith, to prove
that death was an illusion —once more to restore him to his friends
and family; but I was met on my arrival by undertakers, the coffin, all
the preparations for a funeral and mourning for the dead. How
then could I, in the face of this supreme want of faith, accomplish
my mission?”
Many such absurdities were poured into our amused ears. Alas!
that they should have been amused only! Their Wednesday evening
meetings instance richly their folly. These are occasions of “testi-
mony giving,” when, ranging from mosquito dispersing by believing
in their non-existence, to falling out of a tram injured, but by imme-
diately “declaring the truth” —i.e., the non-existence of evil—getting
up unhurt and sound resulted.
Evidently much thought during the week is directed to making
up these testimonies, and opportunity often limited; but that is a
matter of small importance to an audience wrapt in such complete
sympathy that reason and sense of humour are equally under the
spell of science.
Thus, not in the least abashed, after each lull up pops from
amongst the audience one after another equally brave.
Here is a sample. He rose to a height of six feet, and with due
solemnity and preliminary made known how, through meeting a
fellow Christian Scientist, such strong witness of the truth had been
forced home to him that he desired to share it with them that evening.
They had met in a railway carriage, and as they proceeded on their
journey his friend, by scientific deduction, had given him a great and
wonderful pleasure, a triumph of mind over matter so complete that
he placed it amongst his records accordingly. His testimony of the
truth was that they two, travellers on this journey, were not in that
carriage—no, they were not seated in that carriage, as ordinary minds
would assume (here he paused, and looked round on the expectant


company). No! That railway carriage was in them. Mark, “the
carriage was in us.” It was our imagination that misled us into
thinking we were travelling in the train. Then, after further glorying
in this mental triumph, that no such material actually existed as the
train, etc., etc., he sat down. The atmosphere was one of reverential
silence; those who had not grasped the great truth registered vows
to bring their stubborn minds into due order. No one laughed; no
one hastened to catch their trains —evidently there was still faith in
the material existence of that mode of locomotion.
Dr. Radford quotes: —
“How did it come about that man, created in the image of
God, created for himself a world of evil, consisting of a variety
of false beliefs, which take such different forms as those of sin
and pain, and that he created this by means of something, mortal
mind, not originally in his constitution?”
He says: —
“Christian Scientists repudiate the appeal to logic—their
science is spiritual and divine. . . . There is something
radically wrong in the foggy and unhealthy state of mind which
comes from thinking and talking in language which is so obvious-
ly contrary to the ordinary meaning of words, and to the ordinary
things which even Christian Scientists must do in order to live
in this ‘unreal’ world—viz., eat, drink, sleep. . . . Christian
Science is ultimately neither scientific nor Christian in its philo-
sophy of life. Christian Science misrepresents the character of
science, and its methods of reasoning, ... A critic describes
it as ‘nothing less than philosophical anarchy, concealed beneath
confusedness of thought and ambiguity of words.’ ”
* * *, *
Referring to the above quotation, “How did it come about that man,
created in the image of God, created for himself a world of evil, con-
sisting of a variety of false beliefs, which take such different forms as
those of sin and pain?” etc., etc. What other answer can be possible
than that it is also recorded how, immediately evil was introduced by
the Devil, under the name Serpent, who says to Eve: “For God
doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.” Then
from Genesis hi., 15-24, we read of the creation of death and the
evils, which this heresy for its own ends ignores when asking the
question. Indeed, it does seem a foolish question, to begin with.
Call it Satan, Devil, Beelzebub, Belial, or what you will, as the
adversary of God and man, who questions this power questions the


Bible throughout. We daily say we “renounce the Devil and all
his works,” and we cannot renounce what does not exist. Yet Eddy-
ism will have none of him, nor acknowledge the existence of evil.
Then, may I ask, what is this heresy but one of his guises? Christ
says, “Go, and sin no more.” Is that not acknowledging its existence?
Before I referred to the evil disposed as one section of Eddyists, Con-
sider what license this doctrine of non-existence of evil means to them!
They can go on and sin for ever. A lie to them is not evil; but we
know that the results of untruth can turn heaven to hell, that it can
girdle the earth; and on the other hand, no sane person can deny
that, by resisting evil, evil will fly from us. And, to the contrary,
strengthening the power of Satan on earth must result.
Almost pathetic is all this antagonism; and surely the climax
is reached in the denial of death. It, too, is an illusion, were our
minds at the right tension! Yet the Scriptures say: “So when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in Victory. O Death, where is thy
sting? 0 Grave, where is thy victory?”
Quoting again from Dr. Radford: —
“What are souls, or spirits, according to Christian Science:
It is very doubtful. We are told that ‘the term souls or spirits is
as improper as the term gods. Soul, or Spirit, signifies Deity,
and nothing else. There is no finite soul or spirit.’ If this
means that every soul or spirit is infinite, it would be a pardon-
able exaggeration, and a welcome recognition of the truth, that
the soul of man has a far wider range of desire and capacity than
the immediate environment of the man. . . . But our vision
of great things for man is at once rudely shattered. ‘Soul or
spirit means only one Mind, and cannot be rendered in the
plural.’ It is difficult to deal patiently with an argument of this
kind. God is infinite, and God is Spirit; therefore there is no
such thing as a finite spirit. What in the world, then, is poor
man? He is ‘idea which has no separate mind from God.’ He
is ‘the reflection of God,’ but God is not in His reflection any
more than man is in the mirror which reflects his image, or the
sun is in the ray of light which goes out of it. Yet ‘man’s
individual being can no more die or disappear in unconscious-
ness than can soul, for both are immortal.’ It is comforting
to find that man is going to last, but it is difficult to see what
he is now.”


Referring to the above, and knowing how my heart goes out to
such children as are helplessly at the mercy ?f these fanatics, dear
reader, conceive what were my feelings when one of five years —dearer
than life to me —thus placed by childish effort tried to express their
teachings in reference to her sweet young mother, thus early taken
from her, that she was bid forget her, to lose all trace of her, in that
she had become absorbed, as above indicated. To my death I shall
not forget her staring, lovely eyes, as she tried to propound her teach-
ing, that her mother was now —as the wee mite plainly put it—“ God.”
I said, “Who has told you this?” “They did. They told me lots
of things I don’t ’member.” This, when the baby mind craved, as it
were, its natural food of love, and recognition of its daily little
needs!
Yes, thus early these Traitors had dared to subject infant life to
their teachings. By great effort, and as far as in my power lay, I
effected a rescue. So may I beg of you, dear friends, to use your best
efforts on behalf of the young who are being entrapped, and for your
own sakes beware of leniency, realising that it is a wolf in sheep’s
clothing that is in our midst. The open announcement, “I am a
Christian Scientist,” is honesty to be respected. Even the open
threat —in reference to above —“if these children are taken from us
Christian Scientists, you —their next of kin—and they shall be
parted” is at least throwing down the gauntlet. But when this
heresy’s octopus nature is demonstrated by the non-confessed—those
who boast “I go to church,” “I go to Holy Communion”-—who
dares say, “I am a Christian Scientist”? Then can the cry, “Wolf!
wolf!” be heard none too loudly in the land. Even as I write
fresh testimony ever occurs.
To what state of rebellion against nature and her professed faith
must this secret worship have brought the mother, who, in further-
ance of the above threat, coerces her son to the unmanly action
of standing between those wbom God and nature would unite?
St. Luke 21: 13—“ And it shall turn to you for a testimony”—of
sons devoid of love and respect for such mothers, country and God.
“Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling
of the law.”—Rom. 13: 10.
But Eddyism professed or in secret is known by its fruits —of
which love and truth are not, and thus, under whatever guise, its
works will betray it.
♦ * *


Returning to Dr. Radford:—
“It would seem reasonable to suppose that mind must surely
have put something of itself into matter —something, at least, of
an orderly and intelligible meaning. But Christian Science will
not admit this. ‘Matter does not express Spirit.’ Matter is the
source of evil and error. ‘To regard God as the Creator of
matter is not only to make Him responsible for all disasters,
physical and moral, but to announce Him as their Source, thereby
making Him guilty of maintaining perpetual misrule in the form
and under the name of natural law.’ To this argument there
are many answers. (1) Man can walk erect and calm in a
world in which disaster is within the purpose, and therefore under
the control of a God who, in contrast to chance, knows what
He is doing, and, in contrast to a devil, is known to be
bent on doing good. . . . (2) Christian Science destroys
the unity of the universe; it is Christianity that preserves that
unity entire. . . . The mind, or whatever it is which is the
image of God in man, is recognised as the creation of Mind. But
the body is left fatherless, disowned, in God’s name. . . .
But as a matter of fact, is it impossible to approach God through
the senses? It is, on the contrary, impossible, under certain
circumstances, to approach Him except through the senses. . . .
A man wants to meditate on God in Christ; directly or in-
directly he owes the material and the method of his meditation
to black marks on a white paper leaf, in a little book called the
Gospel. ... If the Son is known at all, it is because He
took flesh, to be visible and audible to men, that so they might
rise through flesh to spirit, and through spirit to God. ‘The
very foundations of Christian Science are planted in the denial
that there is any connection between the spiritual and the physi-
cal.’ But even for Christian Scientists the spiritual has to use
the physical, and live and work in a physical environment. . . .
‘Know ye not that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit, which
is in you, which ye have from God? . . . Glorify God,
therefore, in your body.’
“It will be observed that the virgin birth is attributed not to
the action of the Divine Spirit, the Giver of all Life, upon the
physical nature of the Virgin, but to the influence of the Spirit
as truth upon her mind. In other words, the unique example of
the connection of the spiritual with the physical is explained as
a purely mental process. ... Two inferences have naturally
been drawn. The first is that children may be generated by a
mental idea or obsession; and this impression has produced an
agony of fear in pure-minded girls. The second is—and
Christian Science has not hesitated to advocate the belief—that
the generation of children in the ordinary way is not according
to the ‘science of being,’ and is to be tolerated only as expedient


until the world becomes more spiritual, when children will be
born as products of Spirit only. , . . Such are the results
of a theory which presumes to rewrite the laws of divine creation.
. . . In ‘Science and Health’ we read: ‘Until it is learned
that God is the Father of all, marriage will continue.’ In
other words, Christian men and maidens, who, of course, already
know that God is Father of all, will not proceed to marriage.
It is not, for them, a divinely-appointed fulfilment of their being;
it is a relapse into unbelief in the reality of spirit, and spirit
alone. In the preface to ‘Science and Health’ we read of the
star coming where ‘lay the Bethlehem Babe, the human herald
of Christ.’ If language means anything, this means that the
Babe was not Christ.
“We are practically told that His teaching was identical with
Christian Science. ‘Jesus demonstrated Christian Science on the
shores of Galilee.’ . . . Apparently the writer of ‘Science
and Health’ felt that Christ’s teachings did not contain all that
was desirable from the Christian Scientist point of view. In
language appalling to Christian reverence, she permitted herself
to write deliberately that ‘to Christ Jesus God certainly revealed
the spirit of Christian Science, but not the absolute letter.’ Side
by side with this must be set the statement that “the Scripture
gave no direct interpretation of the scientific basis for adminis-
tering the spiritual principle of healing until our Heavenly
Father saw fit, through the key to the Scriptures, in ‘Science and
Health,’ to unlock this mystery of godliness.’
“We cannot stay here to comment at length on the new Pro-
testant Mariolatry which has led some Christian Scientists to
claim for Mrs. Mary Eddy equality with Jesus, or to represent
her as embodying the feminine principle of Deity. Extravagant
and irreverent as these rhapsodies sound to Christian ears, they
are but exaggerations of Mrs. Eddy’s own language, ‘I should
blush to write of ‘Science and Health,’ with Key to the
Scriptures, as I have, were it of human origin, and I apart from
God its Author; but as I was only a scribe echoing the har-
monies of Heaven in divine metaphysics, I cannot be super-
modest of the Christian Science text-book.’ . . . But Mrs.
Eddy could also write of herself: ‘No person can take the indi-
vidual place of the Virgin Mary. No person can compass or
fulfil the individual mission of Jesus of Nazareth. No person
can take the place of the author of ‘Science and Health,’ the
discoverer and founder of Christian Science. . . . The second
appearance of Jesus is unquestionably the spiritual advent of the
advancing idea of God, as in Christian Science.’ . . . After
this it is a trifle to note that the title-page of the ‘C.S. Sentinel’
bears the lines on ‘A Lady with a Lamp,’ which Longfellow
wrote in honour of Florence Nightingale’s work in the hospital


at Scutari. Every Christian nurse has a right to protest against
the application of these lines to a movement which denies the
reality of physical disease, and contradicts the faith in which
Florence Nightingale, and her train of nursing sisters ever since,
have faced and fought the realities of human suffering. , . .
‘The disciples believed Jesus to be dead while He was hidden
in the sepulchre, whereas He was alive, demonstrating within
the narrow tomb, the power of Spirit to overrule mortal, material
sense.’ . . . ‘His resurrection was the vindication and exhibi-
tion of this knowledge that the body need not die if only the
spirit insists on its not dying.’ . . . Christian Science cannot
get away from its insistent idea that Christ is always and every-
where demonstrating the ‘scientific’ principle of the unreality of
sin, sickness and death. . . . From‘Science and Health’: ‘We
worship spiritually only as we cease to worship materially. . .
Worshipping through the medium of matter is paganism.’ . .
On the principles of Christian Science, no spiritual worship is
possible except silent thought. A man must not even read the
Bible, to be logical, for the Bible, the Word of God, has a
body of paper and print. Common worship is a necessity to man
as a social being; but common worship requires lips and ears.
But argument is needless. . . .
“Christian Science, apparently, objects to positive petition, on
the ground that it conflicts with the principle for which Christian
Science stands —viz., the principle that things 'are made all right,
not by prayer that they may be set right, but by believing that
they are all right. In other words, things are not all wrong; we
only think they are! Christian Science, in fact, seems bent on
substituting thought instead of prayer. . . . ‘The common
custom of praying for the recovery of the sick finds help in
blind belief, whereas help should come from the enlightened un-
derstanding.’ The ‘blind belief’ is the belief that the sickness
is a reality, and may, in answer to prayer, be healed by God
through the action of divine laws of matter. ‘Enlightened un-
derstanding’ means the Christian Science, which knows that, the
sickness being the product of mistaken human thought, vanishes
before true thought, and that, therefore, there is nothing to pray
for but that we may think aright about the reality of spirit, and
the unreality of matter. St. James says that ‘The Lord shall
raise him up.’ Christian Science bids the man raise himself up
by a change of thought.’ . . Amongst the gravest dangers of
Christian Science is its description of sin, sickness and death as
being alike illusions of mortal mind. . . . Christian Science
commits itself to the absurd statement that death is a dream that
‘the body cannot die, because it has no life to surrender.’ . . .
But, worst of all, the fact that sin is an intrusion in the world is
made the basis of the statement that ‘God, or good, never made


man capable of sin.’ . . . Surely the truth is that God
set so high a price upon willing, loving obedience to His will
that He made man capable of choosing, and that means capable
of serving or of sinning!
“Our investigations thus far will serve to give point to the
judgment of the Lambeth Conference, 1908: —‘A grave and
emphatic warning ought to be uttered against the peril of being
thoughtlessly drawn into alliance, in the desire for health, with
any who, under whatever attractive name, are in antagonism with
the Christian faith upon such subjects as the Resurrection,
the reality of Sin, and the use of the Holy Sacrament.’ ”
Though starting apparently inclined to allow “the many beautiful
ideas” the possession of Eddyism, it will be seen by his quotations
and criticisms on same that Dr. Radford cuts any such pretensions
from under their feet, and my plain contention —i.e., that
Eddyism is anti-Christian, and that its real possessions begin where
reason and common sense ends finds support.
That by its denial of death its spiritual superiority becomes a
farce, and that the essence of its teaching is really sordid, a clinging
to this life, the life we know, though denying its realities.
I trust Dr. Radford’s learned lecture on Christian Science in
“Ancient Heresies in Modern Dress,” may be carefully studied by
those who have read these few quotations, taken in support of the
necessity I feel that in Eddyism we should recognise a deadly foe to
Christ’s teachings. To that end I culled the above valuable sup-
port.
Those who actually govern the world of to-day, and are responsible
for the to-morrow in their children’s up-bringing, are mostly those
too busy or too careless to take the trouble to search, yet would, in a
broad sense, like to know what it is all about—this pretentious
remedy of all human woes.
Meanwhile others, on whom such knowledge has been forced, con-
tent themselves too often showing disapproval by shrugs, smiles of
derision, or contemptuous allusion to Christian Science as unaccount-
able for unlimited anything! But this apathy is what the evil thrives
on. Nero fiddled whilst Rome burned!
If, instead, these would give their “testimonies,” it would be
just what is wanted, bringing home, without the embellishment of
learning, the every-day events, proving that instead of derision, we
should recognise that, before our eyes, the prophecy is being fulfilled :


“For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect.”
These would be “testimonies” of mischief-making and evil-doing,
family disruptions, hungry needing but spiritual guidance lured to
destruction —often to mental aberration. These would be testi-
monies of warm, loving hearts turned cold and callous, of family ties
severed; but amongst all results none so cruel and heartless, none
so charged with future tragedy, as the effect of Eddyism on children.
Is this, then, a matter to be dismissed with a shrug only?
“By their fruit ye shall know them,” evidenced so disastrously in
the generation of adults, will, as affecting childhood, be known by
results appalling to contemplate.
Thus, to those who can “testify” would I appeal to supplement my
humble effort, whilst calling on others to seek further “testimonies.”
“I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.” (1 Cor.
3; 10.) Then what Mrs. Eddy has built thereon, let it be our task
to overthrow. Watching a dark dust storm sweep up the road, I
involuntarily likened it to this heresy—the fragments borne on its
disastrous course the Bible’s pages, and the young lives wrecked to
make its holiday.
When there arose a reasoning as to which should be the greatest,
Jesus set a child by Him, saying: “He that is least among you all,
the same shall be great”; and though the young may be dominated
by age and strength, let it be our duty to stay the destruction, for
“Ye are of God, little children —because greater is He that is in
you than he that is in the world.”
Strange it seems that, whilst I am writing about this pretentious
mockery of things holy, about a faction that professes power to
work miracles, that the subject chosen for the Moorhouse lectures
(1914), by Dr. Headlam, should be “Miracles.” Surely a sad satire
on the times that it is found necessary to defend our Lord’s power in
that respect —whilst a rapidly growing medley of converts give cred-
ence to that, ah! and greater power as possessed by Mrs. Eddy!
But, alas, still sadder to find these lectures more intent on justi-
fying doubt, and supporting the vagaries of Eddyism, than upholding
belief in a God not only capable of these miracles, but of ones
greater than man’s mind can suggest.
Contemplating the miracle of creation might, in the light of
science, be all satisfying, that even greater signs and wonders were


possible with God, than these simpler manifestations used as impor-
tant to convince a material age that Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
had appeared amongst them.
Before Dr. Headlam opened his lips in St. Paul’s Cathedral,
he had received from me a simple memo, begging that Eddyism would
find no support in his forthcoming lectures. Yet in these words we
find him describe a miracle in an edifice surely built to uphold
belief and faith in God: —
“A miracle means really the supremacy of the spiritual forces
of the world to an extraordinarily marked degree over the mere
material.”
Again, allowing that the man speaking from the pulpit of St. Paul’s
Cathedral is honest and faithful, is the following condescending
allowance likely to strengthen faith in the doubting?
“If, then, to us the message of the Gospel, and through Jesus
Christ, seems reasonable and true 1 1 do not think that we should
trouble ourselves if some particular incident causes us diffi-
culties”
Far better, surely, to advocate that our faith be strengthened to
accept that message, nothing doubting; and that elsewhere the dust
of ages be shaken from arguments that neither glorify God nor
enlighten man, than within consecrated walls.
Who, I would ask, went from Dr. Headlam’s lectures in more
spiritual touch with the Infinite? —with head erect and firmer step,
as if hearing one of “them that preach the gospel of peace and bring
glad tidings of good things!”
The ungrateful—or call them what you will —'may and do question
the message of the Gospel; but even they cannot but see its effect on
the world, and how age following age has responded to the spiritual
life manifested through Jesus Christ. This current, which, though
checked, thwarted, diverted, ever bears on to the brink of embryo
miracles —that developed as fresh discoveries —evidence to the faithful
that even through us Christ is ever revealing His power, though such
in common parlance is described as evolution.
May we pause to consider this admonition, “O, Timothy, keep
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain
babblings, and appositions of science falsely so-called” (1 Tim. 6:
20), and observant of it, how greatly would be hastened the overthrow
of the Devil and his power on earth!


Though our Lord, dealing with the existence of evil, demon-
strated His power over it by miracle, for us it is to realise that He
be not far from every one of us —“For in Him we live, and move and
have our being” (Acts 17 : 26, 27), and seek to strengthen the spiritual
power within us rather than raise doubt.
Excluding personal experiences, I have throughout confined my-
self to what is passing under my eye, and though feeble my effort
of expressing dissatisfaction and disapproval of these lectures on
Miracles, and of their evident support of Eddyism, it needed courage.
But barely had I written as above, when I was cheered by
support from an unexpected quarter —a Roman Catholic priest—
and in this morning’s “Argus” (12th May, 1914), I find the Rev. R. J.
Little upholding my views, and undertaking to instruct us in our
duty to our Church. Where are we drifting —who once protested—
when the rev. gentleman’s criticism is so justly needed? On my own
and my Church’s behalf, I gratefully thanked him for so doing.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CRITICISM.
The Rev. R. J. Little, S.J., in the course of a sermon preached
at St. Ignatius’, Richmond, on Sunday, referred to the addresses
on “Miracles” delivered by the Rev, Dr. Headlam, at St. Paul’s
Cathedral, and also to the proposed theological chair at the
University. He said: —
“Dr. Headlam is a faint-hearted temporiser, inclining to water
down the miracles of our Lord to the milk and water heresy,
or, rather, infidelity of Mrs. Eddy’s Christian Science, thus
inclining to superstition in attributing to nature a power of
working miracles —a power which is infinitely above any natural
power, whether in man or the world about him.
“Dr. Headlam, who also seems to minimise the sacred duty,
and the very strict obligation laid on those who understand plainly
the evidence advanced by our Lord in proof of His claim upon
our faith. Dr. Headlam asks at least for a suspension of judg-
ment on the part of those who understand, but still doubt.
Our Lord speaks in a very different way to all men who under-
stand His evidence, and our Lord requires of such men some-
thing much more than a suspension of judgment. Are we allowed
to require less? In all these points Dr. Headlam seems to hold
and to teach lower views than many of the best Anglicans,
Methodists, and Presbyterians, who still cherish part of the
Christianity of their Catholic forefathers. If a teacher, or a
preacher, of the religion of Christ, our Lord, holds a great
truth, he makes a great mistake in attempting, even with the
best intentions, to water it down to suit modern fashions of


belief or unbelief. Not so did St. Paul water down the truths
about Christ, his Lord, who was ‘to the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Gentiles foolishness,’ even when preaching or lecturing
to the brilliant and sceptical thinkers of Corinth, or Athens, or
Rome. Those thinkers would have relished St. Paul’s explana-
tion of miracles much more if it had been given on their own
modern lines (not very different from our modern ones), but
St. Paul dared not water down the truth even in order to be
‘all things to all men ’
“It is highly undesirable to have a chair of theology at the
University of Melbourne if Christianity is to suffer by having
defenders who will injure the cause of firm Christian faith; or
if lectures are to lead to religious controversy, continually re-
curring on fundamental truths most sacred to those who are
true Christians. . . . But these views, as I have pointed out,
are most objectionable, not only to Catholics, but also to many
sincere believers of all denominations.”
THE MOORHOUSE LECTURES.
18th May, 1914.
Sermon by Rev. R. J. Little.
In the course of a sermon at St. Ignatius’ Church, Richmond,
yesterday, Rev. R. J. Little made further reference to Dr.
Headlam’s Moorhouse lectures. He stated that he had received
several letters from persons of different denominations, all non-
Catholics, deploring the fact that the faint-hearted temporising
of Dr. Headlam and other Christian teachers, their pandering to
the superstition of Mrs. Eddy, and to the spirit of modern
naturalism, and apparent rejection of the Bible as the unerring
Word of God, must be working cruel harm to the Christian faith
and the cause of morality and commercial morality.
“What good,” asked Mr. Little, “can Dr. Headlam expect to
win from modern unbelievers by sacrificing the supernatural
element in the very foundation of a faith which ’is essentially
supernatural? I fear I must draw one logical conclusion, namely,
that Dr. Headlam has been busy among us describing our
Lord’s miracles in the terms reserved by St. Thomas for the
false miracles of Satan. As for those who understand plainly
the evidence left by our Lord, a university in a Christian land
should not take sides in encouraging sectarian lecturers who
would teach us that our Lord has left us in a defective know-
ledge which allows men to suspend their judgment, and that
He has so far failed in His great mission of enlightening the
world. Surely the majority of the professors and fellows of
the University cannot desire to antagonise many of the most
enlightened and earnest Christians in a matter of conscience and
religion.”


Is it not, then, also undesirable to have such teachings in St.
Paul’s Cathedral? “Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal
life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good pro-
fession before many witnesses” (1 Tim. 6: 12).
Without questioning the right to reason common to all according
to their lights, we may surely exercise that privilege in respect to
those who, accepting positions in a Church built on Faith, when they
cast doubt on the same, even to countenancing heresy.
* * *; *
Let us not, by forcing on our imagination that matter is an illusion,
as Eddyists would have us, saying there is no death, but by faith
rise above the material till, by the miraculous supremacy of the
spiritual we feel the great mystery press so close on us and the
“Communion of Saints” so near that we realise how thin is the veil
that divides. Death alone can lift that veil to reveal what mortal
mind is denied. Death that Eddyists deny.
Again, I repeat that all the “beautiful ideas” claimed by Eddyists
are pillaged. They are my possession—yours —ours. Claim them as
such; be not deterred by the cry, “Oh, you must be a Christian
Scientist,” or coerced to ignore your heritage—our children’s heritage.
When feelings of revenge, envy and hatred are aroused in those
of passionate nature, and strong mental influence, uncontrolled by
reverence for Truth (God), and a force, as it were, radiating from
a very furnace of evil, victimises those of weaker mental balance,
so that pandemonium is made of all order—when, indeed, the pen-
dulum of evil seems to have found perpetual motion —then, seek-
ing the reason, we find it in Eddyism’s denial of evil giving license
accordingly—for they claim that it is impossible for those lin
contact with them to remain uninfluenced; thus hearts, heretofore
warm with Christian teachings, become often moral fungus—even
whilst their owners scorn having become converts.
Again, I repeat that Mrs. Eddy’s claim to possession comes in
after the limits of reason and common sense have been reached. When
we hear upheld as an example of Christian Science results those
whose life and acts are commendable, be sure—inquiry even is un-
necessary —that such are only responding to a possession inherited
and inculcated before that heresy made its claim.
'Christ’s teachings are all sufficient —could triflers be so persuaded—
and that within their forsaken Churches lay the true relief for
their discontent, in following Christ’s example, who, finding the


Holy Temple desecrated, cast out its perverters, crying, “Take these
things hence; make not My Father’s house an house of merchandise.”
Speaking for my own Church, I know its chief enemies are
within —that, under the cloak of religion, the spirit of merchandise
and hypocrisy often check the spiritual life and the essence of
Christ’s teachings.
Though the third chapter of Genesis makes plain that sorrow, pain
and death are our portion, yet an exalted Church authority stated
the other day, “Perfect obedience to the laws of God would bring
perfect health.”
To me that savours of Eddyism—for, even ignoring our heritage,
would accidents and their results be thus averted? Is death also
an “error” of thought? Perfect obedience will make us strong to
endure, and wise to control mind and body, and thus make its claim
felt; but we can see around us perfect physical health without these
conditions, and vice versa, and even whilst ignoring the existence of
God—nor is our reward always on earth.
Finally, to gain the child’s complete confidence should be a
parent’s first aim, and that its complaints are heard and considered
need not mean pampering. But Eddyism would force a child to
keep silent on such mundane things as heat, cold, chills, aches, etc.,
until often illness speaks for them.
Thus, if Mrs. Eddy’s teachings survive to be demonstrated in a
generation deprived wholly of Christian influences, then will be
verified, “Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye
have eaten the fruit of lies.” (Hosea 10: 13.) It is such results
we would avert, by acting up to the beautiful words, “My little chil-
dren, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in
truth.” (1 John 3 : 18.) Let this self-glorification that makes sacri-
fice of the young —of those who will themselves rule the generations
to come for weal or woe be overcome by deed and truth on our part.
Instead of peering into the Creator’s words and works to dwarf the
spiritual, did we more often gaze into the mystic heavens by night
to realise the chrysalis state of humanity, and that its world is as a
grain of sand in the vast dominions of the firmament, we might all
enlarge thereby our capacity for receiving His revelation in the
spirit typified when “In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said,
I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight.”


PETITION.
WE, believing that Eddyism is a name better adapted to a religion
that denies the divinity of Christ, and the existence of those ills
and evils for which Christ for our sakes suffered, agree henceforth
to sever His name from the connection known as Christian Science,
and substitute instead that of Eddyism, etc.
ADDRESS.
NAME.


ADDRESS.
NAME.


ADDRESS.
NAME.


* -


’
