

PtSTH PHit,
% & °!
6.0 A S
IN MEMO RT. AM
JESSIE BALLINGALL CAIENS TURNBULL
ADAM CAIRNS, D.D.
Minister of Chalmers- Church, Melbourne.
“ Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.” —Rev. xiv. 13.
|Tt 1 1 bonx n e:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS,
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST).
MDCCCLXXV.


.
f


IN MEMOEIAM
JESSIE BALLINGALL CAIENS TUENBULL
ADAM CAIRNS, D.D.
Minister of Chalmers’ Church, Melbourne.
“ Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.” —Rev. xiv. 13.
Pdlionnu :
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS,
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST).
MDCCCLXXV.


Jessie § ailing all Cairns Qbuxnhull,
BOEN AT CUPAE, FIFE,
September sth, 1840 ;
DIED AT EOCKLANDS, YICTOEIA,
August 30th, 1872.


Melbourne, February 20th , 1875.
ii| }l| cii|nricui|.
It is now nearly two and a half years since the daughter
died who is the subject of the following memorial. Some
of her friends, if not all of them, may think that the time
for such a notice has gone hy ; that it is now too late to
call attention to the virtues of one who, while she lived, was
greatly beloved, and was mourned, when she died, hy all
who knew her. No one can regret so much as myself the
delay that has occurred. Of the many who esteemed her,
none could love her with more tender affection, and of the
many who lamented her early decease, not one sorrowed
with a deeper sorrow, than her afflicted father. The delay,
perhaps unfortunate, was owing to two reasons. The first
was the shock caused hy a death, unforeseen, unexpected,
and therefore overwhelming; the second was a desire
to secure a season of rest from other anxieties, that I
might enjoy the sad pleasure of retracing my daughter’s
uneventful life without the interruption of what may he
called professional engagements. The former of these


difficulties did of course fade away, though by slow
degrees; the wounded spirit ceased to ache, excitement
subsided into the calm of humble acquiescence in the will
of our heavenly Father. But the other continued, or
rather proved one of a succession that occupied my mind,
so as to indispose, and as I thought, to unfit it for a
task which demanded the hallowed quietude of a heart
at once resigned and hopeful. On that subject it is
needless to enlarge. I have said so much in the way
of explanation, due to friends, who have felt surprise
and disappointment, too, I have no doubt, on account of a
silence continued too long, and which to them must have
appeared strange and inexplicable. The mystery is now
cleared up, so far as I can do it, and I must appeal to their
Christian sympathy for forbearance, if not for justification.
One advantage from the delay has resulted to myself, and
I mention it with a feeling of sincere thankfulness. Grief
has abated, and hope has brightened during the interval. I
think less of the past and more of the future. I am less
concerned about a loss which befell me a few years ago
than about a restoration which I confidently expect after a
very little while. The prospect of a speedy re-union
replaces the shadow* of death. In the valley of Achor I
have found a door of hope, and instead of mourning’ under
a sense of bereavement, my spirit rises. I am borne up-
wards, as on eagle’s wings. I begin to rejoice in the
anticipation of a re-union with the Lord and his redeemed
—my own beloved ones among- them-—to spend not a
brief day but an endless life in mutual love and blessedness.
“ Even so come, Lord Jesus ! ”


The subject of this notice was born in September, 1840.
The birtli was a premature one, and no one expected that
the tiny babe would live above a day. To the surprise of
all, it lived and throve. To the assiduous and skilful care
of its nurse, its preservation is, under God, to be ascribed.
The parents of the tender infant can never forget their
obligations to the unwearied watchfulness and sound
practical wisdom of Katie Rentoul. As time passed nature
gradually developed, displaying a mind of singular sweet-
ness and amiability. The happy child expanded into the
ever-smiling girl, on whose radiant face a cloud never
gathered, and whose cheery voice was never known to be
inflamed with anger or roughened with ill-humour. To
this rare gentleness and benignity of disposition there was
united a sound judgment and a fair amount of solid talent.
Her lessons were no burden to her, she learned with com-
parative ease, and gained the favour of all her teachers.
As she increased in years, her natural abilities were more
and more revealed. It was found that she was endowed
with the faculty of wit as well as a taste for literature, and
in consequence became the light and charm of our domestic
circle. Her brother, next her in age, had the same cast of
mind, with this difference, that while his humour was less
salient and less habitual, his studies were more comprehensive
more classical, with a view to a future profession. There
could hardly be a sunnier home than mine. The parents
had but one will in the government of the family; the
law of the little kingdom was love, that love which is
the spirit of power and of a sound mind. We resolved
to study how best to gratify our children, and to make


their own home the choicest and happiest spot on earth to
them. In this we succeeded; our children believed in our
love for them, and never rebelled. We had no scenes of
punishment; for we never had wilful, much less obstinate,
disobedience. We found that the fear of God is the be-
ginning- of wisdom, that the blessing of God maketh rich,
and addeth no sorrow. In a well-ordered Christian family
there is a savour, as it were, of the Garden of Eden, as
there is a foretaste of the pure delights of the inheritance
that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away.
The Christian household is Bethel, or heaven foreshadowed
here below. Of all the days of the week the Sabbath was
the most highly prized, as it was the most reverently
observed. We rejoiced and were glad in it. Our children,
who were guided, and never constrained, devised for them-
selves a method of spending the Sabbath with equal pleasure
and advantage to themselves. A subject was selected a
week beforehand, it might be a character, or a history—a
particular providence, or a divine and significant institution.
After tea, they assembled round the table, with the Bible
in their hands. Each in turn put a question, which must
be answered from the Scriptures, and so for an hour, or
perhaps two hours, they were eagerly engaged in testing
each other’s knowledg-e, and ascertaining- all that the
Bible contained on the subject under consideration. The
effect was excellent; stored their minds with a correct
knowledge of the manifold truths and lessons embodied
in the infallible record, the written Word of God. They
thus educated themselves to be efficient teachers in the
Sunday-school, and to contribute something to the health


and prosperity of the congregation. Dear Jessie excelled
in this sphere of usefulness. Her habitual suavity, com-
bined with patience, simplicity, and earnestness, bound to
her the members of her class with the cords of love ; whilst
her stated visits to them in their respective homes, won for
her not only the respect hut the warm sympathy of parents
and relatives. I may he forgiven for referring to the past
with deep emotion, or recalling times and scenes of happi-
ness which can never return. Whatever the climate outside,
there was sunshine in the manse, so long at least as health
was enjoyed by its inmates : a blither company never dwelt
under the parental roof. Our occasional visitors, ever
welcome, retain, I believe, a pleasant recollection of our
family reunions. The fare was simple, luxury was unknown.
There was much hilarity, hut no taint either of coarse-
ness or levity —the joyousness of a fellowship which
expressed the sympathy of congenial spirits ; conversation
was animated, fitted to refresh, and therefore to benefit,
ranging freely over many topics beyond the news or the
gossip of the day. There were the gentle play of fancy,
the happy jest, the flow of humour, as racy as it was
exhilarating, intermixed with music’s quickening or soothing-
harmonies. The brightest of that gladsome company was
she whose unlooked-for decease has plunged us into
mourning, and whose memory is sweet with a fragrance
that will never die.
In November, 1865, she was married to the man of her
choice, one like-minded with herself, w-hose faith and
resignation under a bereavement as agonizing as it was
unforeseen, proves at once the wisdom of her choice, the


depth and tenderness of their mutual affection, and the
truth of the heavenly word that “ whom the Lord loves He
chastens, and that chastening-, though for the present it
seemeth to he not joyous hut grievous, nevertheless,
afterward it yieldeth the pjeaceahle fruit of righteousness
unto them who are exercised thereby,” Heh. xii.
What follows consists —
First, of an extract from a sermon preached after the
funeral, by the Eev. James Henderson, of Balmoral,
and
Second, of one from a discourse delivered by myself in
Chalmers’ Church, Melbourne, on the same occasion.


The first occasion on which we saw her was in 1853, when
Dr. Cairns and his family were literally leaving the shores
of Scotland to sail for Victoria. Beside the central figure
in that group, the chief interest was drawn to a tall and
graceful youth, and to a girl, somewhat older, watching over
his steps with affectionate thoughtfulness; and when the
rest were entering the tender which was to convey them on
hoard “ The Hurricane,” they seemed to hesitate, as if
unwilling to tear themselves in final separation from their
native land. These were Jessie and Ebenezer Cairns.
When next we met her, seven years later, she was gene-
rously devoting herself as companion to her beloved brother,
who was then sinking under that disease which ended after
a few years in his early death. Yet both she and her
brother were so fully pervaded with a joyous and kindly
liveliness, were so richly possessed of intelligence and
accomplishments, and were so heartily in sympathy with
all that is good and true, that there was often much of
brilliancy and charm of quiet humour in their conversation,
and they naturally filled a large space in the circles that
surrounded their father in Chalmers’ Manse.
As a true daughter of the manse she took a deep and
generous interest in everything hearing’ on the increase of
genuine religion, and the success of her father’s pastorate.
In the congregation, as a visitor to the poorer families, as
a teacher in the Sabbath-school, she was both a diligent
and successful labourer.


In 1865 she was married to Mr. Alex. Turnbull, of
Rocklands, and came to reside in this neighbourhood • and
though some of her friends dreaded lest the comparatively
dull and solitary life which she would have to lead in her
bush home would prove distasteful, we believe that, from
first to last, she invariably expressed a preference for it.
When she came into her husband’s home she brought with
her a treasure far beyond a 'princess’s dower. In the re-
tirement of family duties she practically set herself to solve
the great problem of every earnest disciple—“ how to make
the common holy,” or “ how to carry religion into common
things.” This in reality was her vocation —it was the one
great interest of her life, the finding of which depended
little on outward changes or worldly circumstances, and
in her marriage to one most congenial to herself in all
the best elements of character, she sought, and sought not
without success, to make full proof of her high calling.
On the 11th of August she gave birth to her fourth
child, and though during* the next fortniglit no one appears
to have suspected that death was in her cup, she never
rallied from the prostration of childbirth. It was not till
the morning of the 29th that any fears of a fatal issue
were entertained; but on the following day it became
fully patent that life was fast ebbing away. It fell to our
duty to convey an intimation to her only a few hours before
her death that her life on earth was apparently near its
close. She received the news very quietly, expressed
herself to the effect that she had no feeling of extreme
weakness and could hardly think she was dying. She
remained a short time in silent reflection, asked us to


join in prayer, seemed gradually to become conscious
of her real state, was satisfied that it was even so,
and with calm courage meekly set her house in order.
By no word or sign did she betray surprise or agita-
tion ; her mind even increased in strength and clear-
ness until the end. Her whole life had been one of pre-
paration, and it was meet that it should close in a tranquil,
peaceful death. She entered calmly into considerations of
the future, suggested a judicious arrangement for her chil-
dren when she should be taken from them; then, with all
the simplicity and trust of a little child, she yielded herself
up to God, saying, at lengthening intervals, “ It is very
hard to part with you all ; but not my will, 0 Father, but
Thine be done ; ” and in broken utterance, but with start-
ling emphasis, “My sins, which are many, are all washed
away in the blood of Jesus.” A few more words of peculiar
interest and of mournful satisfaction to her dearest friends,
and, without any apparent pain, her spirit took leave of its
earthly house, and entered into the joy of her Lord. She
fell asleep in Jesus, as the day was closing in a gentle sun-
set, on the 30th of August, 1872.
The death of Jessie Turnbull created a profound sense of
bereavement and feeling of grief throughout this district.
The amount of loving sympathy that found expression
around the bereaved husband and motherless children was
something astonishing*. It was only then discovered how
much and how widely her worth had been prized. And
when a large company assembled to commit dust to dust, —
when her remains were borne into the sanctuary where she


had so frequently worshipped,—when devout men seated
themselves around her coffin, —and when the officiating
minister sought to find acceptable words—the church had
become a place of weeping-. Tears seemed to fill all eyes,
and sobs hurst out without control.
We believe she had early embraced the truth from the
side of intelligence and Christian nurture, and that this,
working- on natural amiability, had given to her piety a
singular attractiveness. Among strangers and those with
whom she was not very intimate she made no parade of her
religious sentiments. But her whole being was vitalized
by its living power. Her sterling good sense and cheer-
fulness, her meekness and courtesy disarmed the most
prejudiced, and caused her to be universally admired. To
some who had been long intimate with her, her self-denial
and disinterestedness appeared the most conspicuous of her
virtues. Her piety had become natural; she possessed the
best attributes of a Christian character in graceful propor-
tions.
The vocation of her husband involved grave anxieties.
But when worldly troubles were heaviest it was noticed
that she invariably manifested a cheerful courage. She
firmly stayed herself in the promise that the Lord would
provide. She committed herself and her family to the care
of her Heavenly Father, and it was not for her to fret or
be anxious concerning the future. In poverty, should it
come ; in wealth, should it increase—it was enough for
her to prosecute the work God had given her to do, and to
wait His holy will.
“ The memory of the just is blessed.”


It is cheering to realize that one so rich in gifts and graces
was matured amongst us. It makes this world all the
brighter that one so well-beloved has passed across its
narrow stage. Let us cherish her memory. She is now
washed from sin, freed from sorrow, and one of the saints in
light, rejoicing not in a hope, but in an inheritance which
is full of glory.
“ A few short years of evil past,
We reach the happy shore.
When death-divided friends at last,
Shall meet to part no more.”
JAMES HENDERSON,
j ßalmoral.


I have been led to address you as I have done, by a
recent dealing’ of God with myself, a trial wholly unex-
pected and keenly felt. I would have kept my sorrow to
myself had it not been that she whose decease I mourn was
for years a member of our church and a teacher in our
Sabbath school. To most of you she was well known, best
known, however, to her fellow-teachers, and to the young
whom she endeavoured to instruct. From her infancy she
was very dear to her parentsj there were special reasons
for this, and as she grew in years and understanding she
was greatly beloved by all who knew her. Her natural
dispositions were exceedingly amiable—she was as gentle
as she was loving’, of a guileless spirit too, incapable of
deceit—a very model of simplicity and candour. To great
warmth of heart was added a sound judgment and quick
apprehension ; but the most conspicuous feature of her
character was a generous disinterestedness. It can be said
of her with perfect truth, that she thought more of the
things of others than of her own —was ever ready, not only
to deny herself, but, to sacrifice her own comfort, her ease,
even her health, for the sake of others, that she might please
them or do them some good. These attractive qualities
were enhanced by religious principles, and the indwelling
of the Holy Spirit. She was from an early age a child of
God. Indeed, so imperceptible was the growth of spiritual
grace in her, that I find it impossible to think of a time
when she was not under the influence of divine love. She


was a light, a grace, a joy, all her days. Never did I see
a flush of passion on her face; nor hear an angry word
from her tongue. I have seen her saddened, I have seen
her vexed, but at such times no word of complaining escaped
her lips; no sign of impatience marked her expressive
countenance.
Her call came of a sudden, unlooked-for by all, quite
unlooked-for by herself. When informed that she had not
long to live she said, had it been the Lord’s Avill, she would
have liked to live a little longer. She said many comforting
things, amongst others, “My sins, which are many, are all
washed away in the blood of Jesus.” “ There is salvation
in no other name; my trust is in Him; I believe in Him.”
And so she fell asleep.
I must go to her, she will never return to me ; hut she
is home now in her Father’s house—she is now a white-
robed saint, her peace is perfect, her joy is full; and paying
this tribute of affection to her memory, I repeat, I trust
with an humble and upright heart, the words of one much
more deeply tried, “ The Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.”
For ever with the Lord !
Amen ! so let it be ;
Life from the dead is in that word,
’Tis immortality.”
Walker, May, & Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.






