







23 BOOTH (BARTON). Memoirs of the Life of Barton
Booth, Esq. To which are added Several Poetical Pieces
written by himself. Printed for John Watts, 1733-
First Edition , marbled boards , entirely uncut , B vo.


Memoirs of the LIFE
OF
BARTON BOOTH, Esq;
With his CHARACTER.
To which are added
Several POETICAL PIECES,
Written by Himself, viz.
TRANSLATIONS from Horace,
SONGS, ODES, &C.
To which is likewife annex’d,
The CASE of Mr. BOOTH'S last Illness
and what was observ'd (particularly with regard
to the Quick-Silver found in his Intestines)
upon Opening of his Body, in the Presence of
Sir Hans Sloan , by Mr. Alexander Small, Surgeon.
-Luœ doctus Roscius egit: Hor.
LONDON:
Printed for John Watts at the Printing-Office in
Wild-Court, near Lincoln's-Inn Helds. 1733.
[Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]




THE
LIFE and CHARACTER
OF
BARTON BOOTH , Esq;
N BOOTH, the
late Excellent Tragedian,
£so]r '• —was born in the Year i 68 1,
| B yF~ and was Son to John Booth ,
Efq; nearly related to Booth
Earl of Warrington , an an-
tient Family, and long feat-
ed in the County of Lancajier ; and tho*
Mr. Booth's Father was of an elder Branch,
yet, either by Misfortune or Mifmanagemenr,
his Eftate was fo much impair’d* that he
was oblig’d to quit his rural Life, the better
to provide for himfelf and Children. About
A 2 the


the Year 1684, he brought his Family to
London , and took a Houle in Wefiminfter ,
where he liv’d with Decency and Credit,
and by his Intereft foon got Employments
for his two eldeft Sons.
Mr. Barton Booth being the youngeft, was
put to Wejlminfter- School, in the ninth Year
of his Age, under the Care of Dr. Busby ,
who, at firft, excepted againft him, as be-
ing too young; but finding him a Boy of a
forward Genius, he was not only admitted,
but foon became a Favourite. Mr. Mait-
taire, a Gentleman now living, was at
that time an Ulher in the School, and re-
members Mr. Booth in the Fourth Form, in
the Year 1693: This Gentleman fays, Fie
was a good Scholar, and well acquainted with
the Claffics, particularly with his belov’d
Horace; and that he had then a very great
Affedtion for Poetry, and delighted in repeat-
ing Parts of Plays and Poems; in all which
he dilcover’d a very promifing Genius for
the Stage. But Mr. Booth 1 s firlt Encourage-
ment in Adting came from his Mafter,
that celebrated Speaker, Dr. Busby , at the
Rehearfals of a Latin Play, adted at that
School, in which he perform’d with general
Applaufe.
The following Lines are Part of a Prologue
fpoke within thefe Seven Years at IVefiminjier -
School, which will evidently difeover their
high Efteem for Mr. Booth, as an Adtor and
Schoolfellow. Bour


Tour Antique Actors, as we read ,
No more than Anticks were indeed:
With wide-mouth'd Masks their Babes to fright ,
‘They kept the Countenance from Sight.
Now Faces on the Stage are flown;
Nor fpeak they with their Tongues alone ,
But in each Look a Force there lies ,
That fpeaks the Fajjion to the Eyes.
Say then , which Left defences our Praife ,
The Vizard , or the Human Facet
Old Rofcius //JourßooTH muft bow ,
’Twas then but Art , ’tis Nature now.
But to return: Dr. Busby dying in the
Year 1695, was fucceeded by Dr. Knife ,
who took the fame Notice of Mr. Booth as
his Predeceffor had done, and diflinguifh’d
him for the fame remarkable Qualities.
Mr. Booth was at that time defign’d for the
Univerfity, and the Study of Divinity; but
as -he had receiv’d fuch early Praifes of his
blooming Qualifications for an Ador, and
that from Perfons of fuch Importance, ’tis
not to be wonder’d at, that his Inclination led
him to the Stage.
To purfue that Inclination, and to prevent
his Father’s Defign of devoting him to the
Service of the Church, he left Weftminfer-
School at Seventeen Years of Age, without
the Knowledge of his Friends, and went to
Ireland


Ireland to make his Application to the The-
atre at Dublin , where he was well receiv’d
by Mr. AJhbury , who was then Matter of the
Company: There he firft met with his Co-
temporary, the late Mr. Wilks , who was then
a celebrated A&or on that Stage.
He remain’d there Two Years, and ac-
quir’d the Reputation of a very good Player;
but being, on many Accounts, dittatisfied
with his Situation, he return’d to England in
the Year 1701, and apply’d himfelf to the
Lord Fitzbarding t a Lord of the Bedchamber
to the Prince of Denmark , who recommend-
ed him to Mr. Betterton as a very promifing
Genius.
Mr. Booth gain’d the good Opinion of
that great Matter of the Theatre, at their
firtt meeting; not only by his Manner of
Speaking, but by that good Senfe with
which he acknowledg’d his Errors, and his
Defire to be inftru&ed. The Part of Maxi-
mus in Valentinian , was chofe for his firtt:
Appearance: Mr. Verbruggen play’d the
Part of Valentinian ; Mr. Betterton , Etius 5
Mrs. Barry , Luana ; &c. There never was
fuch general Applaufe exprefs’d by an Au-
dience, as what was given to Mr. Booth on
that Occafion : The Parts beforemention’d
were admirably perform’d, but that was
what the Audience expe&ed; the Surprize
was, to fee a young Man, graceful of Per-
lon, performing his Part with a Judgment
equal


equal to that of the oldeft A dors, and fpeak-
ing with a Harmony peculiar to himfelf.
Soon after, Mr. Rowe brought his firft
Play to the Houfe, call’d, The Ambitious
Stepmother ; and gave the Part of Artaban , a
principal Character, to his Friend and School-
fellow Mr. Booth , by which he gain’d an uni-
verfal Reputation.
In the Year 1704, he married Mrs. Frances
Barkham , Second Daughter to Sir William
Barkham , Bart, of Norfolk , who died in 1710,
without Ittue.
About two Years after, Mr. Addifon's Tra-
gedy was brought to the Houfe, and the
Part of Cato given to Mr. Booth by two of
his Matters, who were Ading Managers.
Could they have forefeen the uncommon
Succefs of that Play, and the Confequence
that attended Mr. Booth's large Share in it,
I believe their Interett, as well as their jea-
lous Love of Fame, would have prevented
the Gift. This Play was aded five and
twenty Nights fucceflively. The Part of
Cato greatly augmented Mr. Booth's Interett,
with his Reputation, and procur’d him the
particular Favour and Service of the Lord
Bullingbroke , then Secretary of State, who,
within a "Year after, as a Reward for fo
much Angular Merit, got him added to the
Number of the Managers, by procuring him
a fpecial Licenfe from the late Queen.
Amongtt


Amongd the many Compliments that were
made Mr. Booth on his playing Cato, I think
the following Lines (that came at that time
from an unknown Hand) have fomething
elegant and uncommon in the Thought,
and truly Epigrammatick in the Turn of Ex-
preffion.
Cato, a lonely Spirit long had been ,
Aereal, and unbodied never feen ,
Hover d o’er States, o'er Theatres ; but then
Still found , or fervile , or unequal Men.
The Briton Booth the Genius did receive ,
j took home the Soul, and made our Cato live ,
The great Advantage which was given
Mr. Booth on this Occadon, by bringing
him into the Management with Mr. Wilks ,
Mr. Cibber , and Mr. Hogget, fo much dif-
gufted the laft-nam’d famous Comedian, that
he left the Stage forthwith, and play’d but
twice, fome Years after, at the particular
Command of the late King.
Mr. Booth being thus fettled in the Ma-
nagement of the Theatre, I can meet with
no remarkable Obfervation, during the In-
terval of Seven Years, but his Amour with
the late. Mrs. Mountfort j and I fhould be in-
clin’d to leave this Circumftance beneath
that friendly Veil, which Humanity direds
us to throw over the Failings of the Dead,.
if


if Juftice due to the Memory of my Friend
did not compel me to clear him from fome
bafe Afperdons, which have been cad: on him,
even dnce his Death, in relation to this Af-
fair. The Falfhoods I mean, are, That
Mr. Booth not only injur’d Mrs. Mountfort in
her Love, but her Fortune; which Ufage
occadon’d her unhappy Catadrophe. To
thefe I can reply with Truth, That Edward
Min —/, Efq; was his Rival and Succedor in
her Affection {Mrs.Mountfort cohabiting with
him at his Houfe in Pallmall, above a Year
before Mr. Booth's Marriage) and, to her ve-
ry great Misfortune, became the Guardian
of her Money; for, at the Difcovery of their
Intimacy, Mr. Booth deliver’d up her Effects,
in the Year 1718, as is fully tedified by the
following Difcharge, dgn’d by Mrs. Mountfort ,
in the Prefence of Mr. Min full , and ma-
ny Witnedfes, fome of whom are now liv-
ing.
“ \T7HE REAS I Sif anna Mountfort,
« \V 0 f t h e Parjfh 0 f St. Giles, in the
<c County of Middlefex, Singlewoman, did
u fome time pad: depodte in the Hands of
“ Barton Booth , of the Parifh of St. Giles
<£ in the Fields , in the faid County of Middle-
“ J'ex, Gent, feveral Exchequer and Bank Bills,
“ amounting in value to the Sum of Three
“ Thoufand and Two Hundred Pounds :
w Now know all Men by thefe Prefents , That
B “ He


“ He the faid Barton Booth hath this Day
“ deliver’d unto Me the faid Sufannah
“ Mountfort, all and every of the fame Ex-
“ chequer and Bank Bills, fo by me formerly
« deposited with him the faid Barton Booth,
u as aforefaid ; and that the fame now are
“ of the full Value of Three Thoufand and
« Two Hundred Pounds; the Receipt of all
« and every of which faid feveral Exchequer
u and Bank Bills I do hereby acknowledge,
“ and thereof, and therefrom, and from each,
“ every, or any, and all of them, do hereby
“ for my Self, my Executors, and Admi-
Cf niftrators, acquit, releafe, and for ever
u difcharge the faid Barton Booth, his Exe-
“ cutors and Adminiftrators, by thefe Pre-
“ fents. And I the faid Sufanna Mount-
u fort, do hereby declare that I am fully
“ contented and fatisfied with fuch Rede-
*c livery of the faid Bills, and do releafe
“ all Claim which I might or could have
“ or demand of, or from the faid Barton
“ Booth, his Executors or Adminiftrators,
“ by means or reafon of my depofiting the
“ faid Bills in the Hands of the faid Barton
“ Booth, as aforefaid, and of all other Mat-
“ ters or Things whatfoever. In Witnefs
<c Vv'hereof, I the faid Sufanna Mountfort
“ have hereunto let my ’ Hand and Seal,
“ this Twenty Firft Day of June, Anno
“ Domini 1718, and in the Fourth Year of
“ the Reign of our Sovereign Lord George,
“ by


“ by the Grace of God, of Great Britain ,
“ France , and Ireland , King, Defender of
“ the Faith, Gfr.
Susanna Mountport.
Sealed and Delivered, (being firjl duly
Stamped ) in the Prefence of
Edward Minfljull,
John Bickerjtaffe ,
Samuel Wrexham y
'John Harrifon y
Robert Dowling ,
Thomas Bambridge.
In the Year 1714, in the State-Lottery,
Mr. Booth and Mrs. Mountfort had each of
them the fame Number of Tickets, which
inclin’d them to agree to lhare their For-
tune together. A Prize of 5000 Pounds came
up to one of Mrs. Mountforfs Numbers $
and tho’ Mr. Booth was very much perfuaded
by fome of his Friends, who were Witnefles
to the Agreement, to demand the Half of
that large Sum; yet he never could be pre-
vail’d on to do it, but excus’d himfelf by
faying, their Agreement was only Verbal,
and fmce it was her own good Fortune, fhe
fhould enjoy it all. The Truth of this Cir-
cumftance can be attefled by Mr. Wrexham
the Mercer, in Taviflock-S'treet , who bought
the Tickets. '
B 2 I forbear


I forbear to mention the Misfortunes that
attended that unhappy Woman, occafion’d
by her Conduct, which firft bred a Diffe-
rence and Separation between them, and
foon after brought on her Death; and fhall
conclude with this Obfervation, That in-
jur’d Perfons are generally irritated by too
much Revenge to give proper Difcharges, at
lead:, without the Conviction of Juftice;
and that thefe Falfhoods were rais’d by the
Propagators of Scandal and Calumny, with-
out the Foundation of Truth from either
Party.
In the Year 1719, Mr. Booth married
Mrs. Hejler Sant low, his prefen t Widow and
Executrix: This was a happy and fortunate
Marriage to him, which he exprefs’d by the
Overflowings of his grateful Heart on all
Occahons: That conjugal Friendfhip which
he has finely defcrib’d in his Digreifion in
the Firft Ode from Horace , is nothing more
than a juft Reprefentation of what he had fo
flrongly experienc’d himfelf. This Domeftick
Harmony qualified him at all times to re-
ceive his Friends with Pleafure, and prov’d
an uncommon Inducement to them to be
more frequent in their Vitits.
Thus lie remain’d in the full Poffeffion of
all the Feiicicies that Human Nature could
enjoy, till the fatal Year 1727; when he
was leiz’d with a violent Fever, which con-
tinu’d


tinu’d on him 46 Days without Intermiftion.
He was attended by Dr. Broxham , and
Dr. Friend ; and in all that time, it was ve-
ry remarkable, he was delirious but two
Nights and one Day: I thought it proper
to take notice of this Circumftance, to ob-
viate a falfe Report, viz. that He was out
of his Senfes during the whole time of his lll-
nefs.
He return’d to the Theatre (to the great
Joy of the Town) the next Seafon, which
was his Bane, being unequal in Strength to
the laborious Bufinefs of the Stage. Howe-
ver he play’d feveral principal Characters,
and continu’d in the Revival of Henry the
Eighth , which was play’d a great Number of
Nights fucceflively, on the Account of their
prefent Majefties Coronation, a pompous
Reprefentation of which Ceremony was in-
troduc’d into that Play. After this he re-
hears’d the Part of Julio , in a Play call’d
The Dijlrejsd Lovers , which is faid to have
been written by the famous Shakefpeare , and
was compleated from an old Manufcript,
and brought on the Stage by Mr. Theobald.
When the ACtors were all perfect in their fe-
veral Parts, and the Piece juft in Readinefs
to be given to the Publick, Mr. Booth was
unfortunately confin’d by a Relapfe, and his
Fever was fo violent, that his Part was fup-
plied two or three Nights by the late
Mr. Williams ; but being foliated by
Mr. Theobald


Mr. Theobald, to return, if poffible, for the
Good of his Play, his Good-nature made
him difregard his Indifpofition, and prevail’d
on him to perform it himfelf from the
Fifth Night to the Twelfth, which was the
kft of his Appearance on the Stage.
Mr. Booth fent again for Dr. Broxham ;
who, after feme few Days call’d in Dr. Friend
to his Afliftance; to whom Dr. Colebatch was
likewife added. Thefe three Phyficians at-
tended him conftantly for a confiderable
time; and, after long Application, they per-
ceiv’d his Fever to be turn’d into an inveterate
Jaundice.
Upon this Difcovery Dr. Mead was fent
for; and in April 1729, by that Gentle-
man’s Direction, Mr. Booth went to Bath ,
where he remain’d Eleven Weeks, and re-
turn’d to Town without finding any Bene-
fit. He remain’d in London Three Weeks,
and fanfying the Sea-Sicknefs might prove a
Cure for his Jaundice, he embarqu’d in a
Packet-Boat, with Mrs .Booth, for OJlend\ from
thence he went through Flanders to Antwerp;
defigning to make the Tour of Holland , to
confult with Dr. Boerhaave , who had before
been acquainted with his Cafe : But his Fe-
ver returning fo fa ft, and fo feverely upon
him (compelling him as he travell’d to keep
his Bed every other Day) he was oblig’d to
alter his Relolution, and return the neareft
way to England.
Here


Here he continu’d a confiderable time in
a very fevere and dangerous Condition, be-
ing under a conftant Vifitation of violent
Fevers, attended with tormenting Colicks.
In the Year 1731, Mr. Booth took Lady
Manfdr s Houfe at Hampjlead y where his
Fever very much abated, and he foon be-
came capable of receiving a Pleafure from
the Vifits of his Friends: From this time
he continu’d apparently mending every Day,
which may be principally attributed, I be-
lieve, to his chewing of Rhubarb, which
Practice he then enter’d upon by the Ad-
vice of Mr. Small the Surgeon, and which
he afterward continu’d with very great'Sue-
cefs. This happy Alteration flatter’d his
Friends, as well as himfelf, with the Hopes
of feeing him once more on the Stage.
The following Ode was wrote on that
Occafion, by a Gentleman whom I have
before-mention’d as his Tutor at Wefiminjler -
School.
An


An ODE.
On Mr. BOOTH 'S Recovery.
By Mr. MAITTAIRE.
QUA LEM magiftrum vocis, & arbitrum
y Ceftus honefti (cut meritum decus
Et hijiriones in Latinos
Ars perperit fua principatum)
Rom ana vidit natio Rofcium,
Mentes potentem jledlere, plaufibus
Difrupta cum plebis patrumque
Undique conftreperent theatra-,
Qualemve pridem gens, It aid baud minor ,
Ne Rofcio ipji cedere credidit
Britanna Bettertonum {in ore
I’anta aderat gravitas venujlo) ;
His te magiftris voce pari, pari,
BA R T O NE, gefiu fcepius cemulum y
Fultum Sophocleo cothurno,
Vidimus, audiimusJlupentes:
Sive


Stve ore pleno rite fonantia
Pronunciares verba pOefeos
Shakefperiana , Jive atrocem
Indueres animum Catom's.
Olim locutum fic Periclem puto ,
Moviffe merites Jic populari urn*,
Seu civicos Jedare motus ,
Sen refdes populos ad arma
Ciere, fixis intus aculeis ,
loquela callidus artifex:
Audiveris quern fi loquentem ,
Credideris micuijfe fulgur.
’Te morbus ex quo corripuit gravis ,
BARTONE , mcerens , aufpiciis tuh
Nudata , J'ordet fcena: qua te
St ante Jlat , utque cadit cadente .
Nojlris fevera Mufa tragedies
Pin theatris abfuit: in vicem
Venere derij'or Latinus,
Et Phymele , tremulique mimi .
Hygeia tandem Mercurialium
Cujlos virorum te vetuit mori t
Infante fat o: Jpemque vita
Blanda dedit tibi longioris.
Tu , /*« loquaris , jeu quid agas, places)
Mulcere fenfus tu potes: intimi
Et expedis cordis recefus
Per varios tua vidlor arty a,
c Phu-


PIaudens theatrum te rcvocat ; prece
Pe * Dams ambit follicitd j fuam y
Te -f* Maurus , ut demum imminutam
Refiituas fibi dignitatem .
Plaudit theatrum j tamen nimis
Fit am theatri credere plaufibus:
Rurfus redonatam theatrum ,
iv7 caveas , rapiet falutem.
* Hamlet Prince of Denmark. j - The Moor of Venice.
But, alas! his fatal Enemy was, by this Suf-
penfion, only recruiting new Force; for,
near fix Months before he died, he had a
violent periodical Colick, which return’d on
him once a Month, and fo fatigu’d and har-
rafs’d him, that he could nat recover from
one Attack before the Approach of another.
About the middle of laft March his Co-
licks began to be attended with an Intermit-
ting-Fever. On the 22d of April his Fe-
vers left him* after which he feem’d once
more to think of recovering. But on PueJ-
day the 8th of May following, he was feiz’d
with his laft fatal Illnefs, a fatisfadory and
curious Account of which is hereafter an-
nex’d, as it was drawn up by Mr. Small y who
open’d the Body; all I fhall fay therefore is,
that on Phurjday the 10th of May he ex-
pir’d, being feniible to the laft of violent
Torture in his Bowels, which he continued
making Signs of fome Hours after he was
fpeechlefs. The


The fame Day his Body was open’d in
the Prefence of Sir Hans Sloan , by Mr. Small %
who gives the following Account, viz.
The CASE of Mr. BOOTH.
SIR,
TH E abfolute Neceffity of attending
fome Bufinefs in Town, and the ad-
jacent Villages, has prevented my tranfmit-
ting to you fooner, what was obferv’d in the
Opening of the Body of the late Mr. Booth \
and what Quantity, (as you defire to be in-
form'd) of crude Mercury he had taken, by
Dr. D- r s Advice ; with the particular
Circumftances that attended it, which I have
now procur’d you, from Mrs. Booth's Rela-
tion, viz.
May 3. Mr. Booth being apprehenlive of
a Return of an Intermitting Fever, which
about ten or twelve Days before had left him
by the Ufe of the Cortex , he was refolv’d,
after reading Dr. D r s Book of Crude
Mercury , and fearing the Return of his Fe-
ver, to take the Doctor’s Advice: He ac-
cordingly fent for him, and from the En-
couragement he gave him, ‘Chat it would
not only prevent the Return of his Fever y
but effectually cure him of all his Complaints ,
C 2 on


on the Day following he began the Mer-
curial Courfe , as direded, and fo pundually
follow’d thofe Directions, that he had taken
within two Ounces, two Pounds weight by
%efday May the Eighth, at which Time
he began to complain of a very great Pain
on the forepart of his Head, and as great in
his Bowels alfo, with a univerfal Uneafi-
nefs of his Body, infomuch that he could
not remain one Moment in the fame Po-
jfture.
This continued till the next Day, when
he flill hoped his Mercurial Courfe would
have the promifed Effeds; but Mrs. Booth
apprehending the ill Confequences, fent away
lor Sir Ham Sloan , who, for the Relief of
his Head, order’d nine Ounces of Blood to
be drawn from the Jugular. Plaiders alfo
pro Plantis Pedum , ex Emp. Cephal. cum Eu-
phorhio. Having had no Palfage, the follow-
ing purging Draught,
R Pit. Puff. fs. Aq. Lacl. Alex. iii.
m. f. potto quam primum fumenda & repe-
tatur vj a quaque hora donee Alvus foluta
fuerit.
This proving ineffectual, the following
Glyfter, s
R DecoSl. com. pro. Glyft. § x. Eletf. Le-
nt t. §i. Syr. de Spin. Cerv, § i fs. m. f.
Enema


Enema injic'iendum bora fexta Vefper-
tina Ji Afaus non fuerit prius fo-
luta.
In the Evening, finding him faint and
lifpirited, this cordial Mixture was prefcrib’d
or him, {fell.)
Jc Aq. La sl. Alex. Menth . a 3 iv. Conf. Ra-
leigh 3 i. Alkerm. f. o. 3 ii. Aq. Ste-
phan. | ii. Syr. Caryoph. 3 hi- Spir. La-
'vend. C. 3 ii- M. Capiat. Cochl. IV. Sta*
if/V/z £? /« languoribus repetatur.
Pergat in XJfu ultimo prcefcript.
Vlaii 9 9 1733. for Mr. Booths H.
The next Day, the Head-ach fiill continu-
ing, an Epifpafiick was laid all over the Scalp ,
md this Emulfion prefcribed to obviate a
Strangury, viz,
Jt Amynd. dul. Decosl. N°. xii . Jem. 4. fr,
Maj. 3 fs. Contufis affunde Decocl. Hord.
lb ii. & f. Emulfio cui adde Syr. de Al-
thea 3 i. & bibat hujus copiofe 4s? fre-
quenter.
Maii 1733. for Mr. Booth H. S,
In


In the Evening, his Coftivenefs ilill con-
tinuing, and the Symptoms increafmg, the
following, which were the laft.
Jc Labi. Vacim rec. § x. 'Tereb. Ven. 3 iii,
01. Chamomel § ii. Syr. de Sptn. Cerv.
§ i fs. m. f. Enema injiciendum quam
primum .
Jfc OL Amygd. Dul. Syr , Viol. Eledt. Lenit.
a § i fs. flor. Sylph. 3 ii. Sper. Ceti 3i.
Sacch. cand. q. f. m. f. Linblus Capiat.
Coch. i m . 3“ quaq-y hora J'uper bibendo
Maufi. Emulf. prczjcriptce.
jfJ Spir. Lavand. Sal. Vol. 01. a X iii. m,
capiat, gut . xxx. cum quovis potulento.
Maii 1733* for Mr. Booth t H. S._
It was on this Day that Mr. Booth died.
Mrs. Booth fays, he made no new Com-
plaints till May the Eighth, nor had he
voided any of the Mercury before that Day.
The Method of looking out for which*
was by diluting the Excrements in the Bedr
pan he made ufe of, with fuch Quantity of
Water that the Faeces run out at the hollow
of the Handle, whilft the Mercury fubfided
to the Bottom of the Pan j the whole Quan-
tity of which thus collected, with what ad-
■ her’d^


her’d to the Pan, wag judg’d to be about half
a Pound weight.
His Body was open’d in the Prefence of
Sir Hans Sloan .
His Liver was in very good Order, neither
hard nor livid, but fomewhat larger than
ufual.
The Gall Bladder fix Times bigger than
what is commonly obferved, and filled with
Bile .
In the Dufius Cboledochus was found a Gall
Stone of the Size and Shape of a Horfe Bean,
which had fo entirely ftopt the Bile from paf-
fing into the Duodenum , that not the leaft Ap-
pearance thereof could be obferved in the
whole Tradt of the Inteftines.
There were five fmaller Gall Stones found
in the Vefica Fellis .
I endeavour’d to divide the Return and tie
it, but it was fo rotten that it broke between
my Fingers like Tinder, and fent forth amoft
offenfive cadaverous Stench.
The Re&um , with the other Inteftines,
were ripe up with a Pair of Sciffars, in which
was found very little Excrement, but the
whole Tradt on the infide, lin’d with Crude
Mercury divided in Globules, about the Big-
nefs of Pins Pleads.
The Infide of the Inteftines was not glaz’d
over with the,Mercury, as you had been told,
for they were as black as your Hat, and 16
rotten


rotten, that they would not endure the leaffc
{training without breaking in pieces.
I am , Sir,
With the greateji Refpeff,
1733*
Tour mojl humble Servant ,
Alex. Small.
2V. B. There was no Fault in any Part
of his Body, but what is here men-
tion’d.
POSTSCRIPT.
Mr. Booth had labour’d many Years under
an obftinate Jaundice, for which he had in-
effectually profecuted many Courfes of Me-
dicine, and had, by the Advice of his Phy-
ftcian, been falivated for the Space of a
Month, in each Day of which he fpit at the
leaft three Pints, oftner two Quarts, but with
no good ElfeCt.
The laft Remedy, before this fatal Illnefs,
he took, was Rhubarb , of which he chew’d
each Day, for near the Space of two Years,
at leaft three Drams; the EffeCt of which
was, that he purged Eighteen, fometimes
Twenty Times, in every Twenty four Hours,
without


without being any ways difpirited thereby;
by which Method the Jaundice entirely va-
nifh’d, and he recover’d his Strength and
Flefh, growing /Fat, and remaining in this
hopeful Way till about a Month before he
died, then he relaps’d into his Jaundice, at-
tended with an Intermitting Fever, the laft
of which he recover’d from by the Ufe of
the Cortex , as has been hinted before.
On the 'Thurfday Morning following, his
Corps was carried from his Houfe in Charles -
Street, Covent-Gar den, to Cowley Church
near Uxbridge, attended by fix Gentlemen
who fupported the Pall ; and there privately
buried, purfuant to his laft Will, which he
wrote two Years before his Death, and is as
follows,
<C XX/ HOLLY refign’d, and lubmitting
“ VV t 0 the Will of God, I Barton Booth,
<£ of the Parilh of St. Paul, Covent-Garden,
££ do make and ordain this my laft Will and
“ Teftament, as follows: I bequeath to
<£ Chrijlian Hannah the Sum of Five Pounds,
££ an old Servant! to my Father.
“ All and lingular my Eftate, as well
“ Real as Perfonal, Ready-Money, Bonds,
<£ Notes, Plate, Jewels, Goods and Chat-
<£ tels of what kind or nature foever, I give
££ and bequeath abfolutely to my deareft and
<£ well-beloved Wife, Hejler Booth, herPleirs,
D ££ Execu-


<c Executors, and Afligns for ever; and I ap-
“ point and conftitute my faid Wife, Hefter
“ Booth , full and foie Executrix of this
“ my lad Will and Tedament, hereby re-
<{ voking and making void all other Wills by
tc me made.
“ It is my earned; Defire to be buried
<c privately, without Odentation, Hatchment,
<£ Efcutcheon, &c. in Cowley Church near
cc Uxbridge.
“ As I have been a Man much known
<c and talk’d of, my not leaving Legacies to
<c my Relations may give Occadon to cenfo-
<l rious People to refledt upon my Condudl
<c in this latter Adi of my Life; therefore I
“ think it neceffary to declare, that I have
<c confider’d my Circumflances, and finding,
“ upon a flridl Examination, that all I am
“ now poffefs’d of does not amount to two
<{ Thirds of the Fortune my faid Wife
tc brought me on the Day of our Marriage,
“ together with the yearly Additions and
<c Advantages fince arifing from her labo-
£C. rious Employment upon the Stage, during
“ twelve Years pad, I thought myfelf bound
<{ by Honedy, Honour, and Gratitude, due
<e to her condant Affedtion, not to give away
any Part of the Remainder of her For-
“ tune at my Death, having already bedow’d
<c in free Gifts upon my Sider, Barbara
<c Rogers , upwards of 1300 Pounds, out of
“ my IVife' s Subjlance 5 and full 400 Pounds
“ of


of her Money upon my undeferving Bro-
k< ther, George Booth (befrdes the Gifts they
“ receiv’d before my Marriage) and all thej.i
li Benefits were conferred on my faid Brother
“ and Sifter , from Thime to ‘Pi me, at the ear-
tc neft Solicitation of my Wife, who was per-
“ petually intreating me to continue the Allow-
tc ances I gave my Relations before my Mar-
“ riage. The inhuman Return that has
“ been made my Wife for thefe Obligations,
“ by my Sifter, I forbear to mention: Once
t{ more renouncing and making void ail for-
u mer Wills, I declare this prefent Tefta-
(t ment to be my true and laft Will. In
<£ witnefs whereof I have hereunto fet my
“ Hand and Seal this Second Day of June ,
tc Anno Domini One Thoufand Seven Hun-
“ dred Thirty and One j and in the Fourth
« Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
“ King George the Second, &c. all written
with my own Hand.
B. Booth.
Signed, fealed, publijhed, and declared by
the Teflator, Barton Booth, as and
fur his laft IVHI and. feftament ; and in
the Prejence of us, who fubfcribed our
Names as bVitnejfes thereto , in the Pre-
fence of the faid ‘Teftator .
Henry Kirby,
J. Baskerville.
Geo, Pinchard.
D 3 Mr. Booth.


Mr. Booth's Merit, as an Ador, was of late
Years unrivall’d, and even fo extraordina-
ry as to be almoft beyond the Reach of
Envy. He was of a Form altogether
Graceful, accompanied with an Air that
gave the higheft Dignity to all his Ge-
stures. His Face had a manly Sweetnefs;
and his Features were fo happily turn’d, as
to be able to exprels the rougheft Paffions,
without lofing any thing of the Agreeable-
nefs of his Countenance. His Voice had
great Strength in it, and a Tone uncommon-
ly mufical. His Articulation was fo ex-
ceedingly diftind and clear, that he could be
heard to the fartheft Part of the Theatre, e-
yen in a Whifper.
With thefc Talents, join’d to a mofl accu-
rate Knowledge of the various Paffions, and the
proper Peculiarities by which they exprefs
themfelves, he could perfonate Majefty with-
out Grimace, and .Rage without Ranting 5
and when any Paffiage in the Part he aded
requir d the Extent of his Voice, he never
deliver d any thing harffi or difagreeable.
It was in many Inftances he prov’d thefe
excellent Qualities, but particularly in the
following, viz.
In the Part of Pyrrhus in the Dijlrefsd
Mother - y where his Entrance —his Walking,
and mounting to the Throne his Sitting
dovvn his Manner of giving his Anfwer to the
Ambaffiador his riling from the Throne
his


his defcending, and leaving the Stage tho’
Circumftances of a very common nature in
Theatrical Performances, yet were execu*-
ted by him with a Grandeur not to be de-
fcrib’d.
In the Part of Hotfpur , in the Play of
Henry the Fourth, he preserv’d the Fire of
that Character, without thofe Diftortions of
Countenance we fo frequently fee in other
Axftors on the like Occafions.
In the Part of Othello, and particularly
in the following remarkable menacing Speech:
Villain, he Jure thou prove my Love a Whore,
Be Jure of it! Give me the ocular Proof!
Or by the Worth of mine eternal Soul,
*Thou hadft been better have been born a Dog,
A Dog, Jago! than anfwer my wak'd Wrath .
He not only difcover’d the Firmnefs of his
Voice, but his great Skill in managing it;
fo that in the higheft Expreffions of Fury
and Diffraction it never became untunefui;
and he cou’d immediately fpeak in the or-
dinary way, without its appearing flrain’d.
I might here take notice of another Advan-
tage he poilefs’d (very neceffary in a Player)
and that was an exquifite Ear, fo as ne-
ver to fpeak out of Tune, or a proper
Key.
In fhort, all Defcription that Words can
give of this great Man, ferve only to put
thofe


in mind of him who have feen and heard
him, rather than give juft Ideas of him to
thofe who have never had that Entertain-
ments It is not enough to fay, he was Grace-
ful, adted Juftly, and fpoke with the great-
eft Harmony and Propriety j for thofe Qua-
lities were peculiarly his own: But his man-
ner of exciting all the noble and tender Paf-
fions gave fuch complete Delight as cannot
be reach’d by Imagination, nor defcrib’d by
Language.
As for Mr. Booth' s Parts in Comedy, tho*
his particular Excellencies were not fo fully
difplay’d in them, yet not one has been at-
tempted after him but to the greateft Difad-
vantage. Thofe who deny’d him Talents
for Genteel Comedy, were fuch as plac’d the
Characters of Sir Harry Wildair , Sir Charles
Eafy, Dormant, &c. for the Standard of
Gentility. For Parts of that Caft, he was
indeed unfit, both in Air and Temper. But
then, I believe no one will fay he did not
appear the fine Gentleman in the Character of
Bevil, in the Confcious Lovers .
As for Parts of Humour, his playing Pbich-
wife in the Country Wife , and Manley in the
Plain-Dealer , are remarkable Inftances; and,
I am inform’d, he once aded Falftaff before
the late Queen Anne , to the Delight of the
whole Audience.
Cicero obferves, there are fo many Qualifi-
cations requifite tq make an accompliftfd
A dor,


A&or, that he thought it almoft impoffible
to meet with them in one Man j yet, fays he,
I had the Happinefs of feeing this Prodigy,
RoJ'cius! *We who have feen Mr. Booth ,
have enjoy’d a like Happinefs with Cicero ,
and (without the Gift of Prophecy) may ven-
ture to boaft of a Pleafure, which the next
Age muft defpair of.
In order to do Juftice to this Character, I
made Application to a Gentleman, whofe
long Acquaintance with Mr. Booth , whofe
Knowledge of the Stage, and Kindnefs to
me, prevail’d on him to favour me with the
following Letter on this Subject
To Mr. VICTOR.
SIR ,
« TWILL comply with your Defire, in as
« 1 brief a manner as I am able, and fend
“ you my Sentiments concerning what was
« chiefly remarkable in Mr. Booth , as an
“ A<ftor.
« Two Advantages diftinguifh’d him in
“ the ftrongeft Light, from the reft of his
« Fraternity: He had Learning to under-
“ ftand perfectly whatever it was his Part
“ to fpeak; and Judgment to know how far
“ it agreed or difagreed with his Character.
« Hence arofe a peculiar Grace, which was
“ vifible


“ vifible to every Spe&ator; tho’ few were
ct at the pains of examining into the Caufe
“of their Pleafure. He cou’d foften and
<c Hide over, with a kind of elegant Negli-
<c gence, the Improprieties in a Part he a<fl-
<£ ed, while, on the contrary, he wou’d
“ dwell'with Energy upon the Beauties; as
“ if he exerted a latent Spirit which had
“ been kept back for fuch an Occafion, that
“ he might alarm, awaken, and tranfport, in
<£ thofe Places only, where the Dignity of
tc his own good Senfe could be fupported by
££ that of his Author.
“ A little Reflexion upon this remarkable
££ Quality, will help us to account for that
££ manifeft Languor which has fometimes
£C been obferv’d in his Action, and which
£C was generally, tho' I think falfly, im-
<£ puted to the natural Indolence of his
££ Temper.
££ For the fame Reafon, tho’ in the cu-
£C ftomary Rounds of his Bufinefs he would
* condeicend to fome Parts in Comedy, he
£C feldom appear’d in any of them with much
££ Advantage to his Character. The Paffions
££ which he found in Comedy were notftrong
££ enough to excite his Fire; and what feem’d
£C Want of Qualification, was only Abfence
“ of Imprefiion.
£C He had a Talent at difeovering the Paf-
££ fions, where they lay hid in fome cele-
<£ brated Parts, by the injudicious Pra&ice
££ of


Ci of other A&ors ; when he had difcover’d,
c< he foon grew able to exprefs them: and
“ his Secret for attaining this great Leflbn of
“ the Theatre, was an Adaption of his Look
“ to his Voice; by which artful Imitation
“ of Nature, the Variations in the Sound of
<c his Words gave Propriety to every Change
“in his Countenance. So that it was
“ Mr. Booth's peculiar Felicity to be Heard
“ and Seen, the fame, whether as the Pleas'd ,
tc the Griev'd , the Pitying, the Reproachful ,
“or the Angry. One would almoft be
<£ tempted to borrow the Aid of a very bold
“ Figure, and to exprefs this Excellence the
“ more fignificantly, beg Permiffion to af-
“ firm, That the Blind might havefeen him
“ in his Voice, and the Deaf have heard him
“ in his Vifage*
<£ His Gefture, or, as it is commonly call’d,
<c his Aftion, Was but the Refult and necel-
“ fary Confequence of this Dominion o-
<£ ver his Voice and Countenance: For
££ having, by concurrence of two fuch
£C Caufes, imprefs’d his Imagination with
<£ the Stamp and Spirit of a PaiTion, his
££ Nerves obey’d the Impulfe by a kind
<£ of Natural Dependency, and relax’d or
££ brac’d fucceffively into all that fine Ex-
£t preffivenefs, with which he painted what
“ he fpoke, .without Reflraint or Affeda-
u tion.
E
“ I can


ct I can fcarce forbear to be fuller on fo
<c inviting a Subject; but I confiaer the
tX Size of the Treatife you are about to pub-
c< lifhj and fball add nothing but the good
“ Wifhes, with which I am,
SIR ,
Tour mojl obedient
July 8, 1733. bumble Servant,
A. H I L L,
I {hall now only beg leave to trouble the j
Reader with a Word or two more concern-
ing Mr. Booth as an Author: He was a Man
of ftrong, clear, and lively Imaginations; hi 9
Conversation was engaging and inftrudlive.
That he had the Advantage of a finifh’d Edu-
cation, to improve and illuftrate the bounti-
ful Gifts of Nature, will appear by the fol- j
lowing Infcription, which he wrote under
the Pi&ure of Mr. Smith a celebrated Ahtor,
in the Reign of King Charles 11. and has
been greatly admired for the claliical Stile
and Sentiment.
Scenicus eximius , regnante Carolo Secundo ,
Bettertono Cocetaneus & Amicus , nec non prope-
modum ce quails. Maud ignobili jlirpe oriun-
dus, nec liter arum rudis humaniorum; rem
Scenic am per multos feliciter Annos adminiftra-
vit; jujloque moderamine & morum fuavitate ,
omnium


omnium infra ’Theatrum Obferv anti am , extra
*1 he at rum Laudem , übique Benevolentiajn ci?
Amorem , conciliavit.
His Genius for Poetry is evident by the
following Pieces, thro’ all which there flows
the greatefl: Harmony in the Numbers, and
Accuracy in the Stile; but that Modefty
which obftrutted his Progrefs in the Poetical
way, prevented the Publication, of any thing
he wrote, in his Lifetime : Tho’ I think three
of the Songs appear’d about the Time they
were written; but as they were not printed
from his Copies, they are full of Errors.
The Ode on Dancing was wrote in the
Year 1718, and left incorrect: But if the
Reader will confider the Author, at the
Time he wrote it, in the Character of the
real Lover, perhaps fome Allowances may be
made for the Flights of Fancy.
E s
POE-




POETICAL PIECES.
SONG.
Written by Mr. BOOTH ’
I.
p||l§|Gg N vain unhappy Damon tries,
I % To find Repofe in Liberty;
Pleafure, the dull Condition, flies,
A Lover he muff: live and die.
His amorous Heart no more can bear
The tedious Night, and irkfome Day;
He pines for fome good-natur’d Fair,
To pafs the heavy Flours away.
11. Be


11.
Be kind, ye Pow’rs! and hear his Prayer;
Propitious to his Wifhes prove;
Biredt him to the dedin’d Fair,
Who befi deferves his Truth in Love:
Fain wou’d he tade her friendly Charms,
And longs the healing Balm to try;
Fain wou’d he languifh in her Arms,
Wou’d with her live, and with her die.
SONG.
i.
AM I then condemn’d by Love,
Still to wander, dill to
Ever fearching, never finding,
Hearing, lwearing Oaths not binding \
Still purfuing, dill adray,
Hunting Truth that flies away.
11.
Yet 1 the Chafe can never leave,
But ftill my own fond Hopes deceive:


’Till Mira! foft, inviting Fair!
By Nature form’d to blefs my Arms,
Shall flop me in my full Career,
A Victim to her friendly Charms;
Obferve her Blulhes, and her Sighs,
Mark not her Words, but watch her Eyes!
111.
Truth is in her tender Breaft;
Her Looks are fweet, and full of Love ;
My Soul in her alone wou’d reft,
Nor any further Trial prove:
But if my Wifti I fail to gain,
No Difappointment I’ll deplore;
But fwear, and lye, and ftiil remain
The wand’ring Thing I was before.
SONG.
I.
CA N then a Look create a Thought,
Which Time can ne’er remove ?
Yes, foolifh Heart, again thou’rt caught,
Again thou bleed’ll for Love.


11.
She fees the Conqueft of her Eyes,
Nor heals the Wounds (he gave;
She fmiles, whene’er his Blufhes rife;
And fhuns her fighing Slave.
111.
Yet Swain, be bold, and Hill adore her.
Still her flying Charms purfue;
Love and Friendfhip both implore her,
Pleading, Night and Day, for you.
SONG.
I.
WHAT need of Words, or Oaths, to prove,-
The Truth of my unbounded Love:
Or that the Flame which warms my Bread;,
Long as my Breath of Life will laft.
11.
When Phoebus in the Spring appears,-
Nature a verdant Livery wears;
The whole Creation blith and gay,
Revives to feel the warmer Day, Nearer


111.
Nearer the Zenith now he moves 5
Nature her various Charms improves*.
And all her Beauties now difplays,
Pierc’d by her Lover’s kindly Rays.
IV.
But lo! the Wanderer retires!
Nature laments her fick’ning Fires':
Her various Beauties all decay,
And, in his Abfence, die away*
V.
Thou, Faireft! Phoebus art to me,
As Nature Him, I worfhip Thee!
The quickning Fires thy Eyes impart,
Shoot thro’ my Veins, and warm my Heart.
VI.
But Oh! take heed, and ftill improve,
With conftant Rays, the Plant of Love;
The tender Root decays, and dies,
Robb’d of the Warmth that made it rife.
F
VIL Theii


VII.
Then ask nor Words, nor Oaths, to prove
The Truth of my unbounded Love:
Since You alone, my only Joy,
Your own Creation can deflroy.
DAMON to PHILOMEL.
I.
MIDNIGHT Charmer of the Grove,
Where I lament my wretched Fate:
Our joint Complaint, alas! is Love,
The Difference of our Fortune, great.
11.
Relief to me no Seafons bring;
For ever doom’d to figh in vain:
But you, fweet Bird, who mourn in Spring,
In Summer Pleafures lofe your Pain.
111.
Already from yon bloomy Spray,
Your willing Mate your Plaint returns;
Already feems to chide your Stay,
And with an e<pal Ardour burns. IV. Go,


IV.
Go, Philomel , accomplifh all
The Joy, that happy Love bellows:
Obey the tender Warbler’s Call,
And leave poor Damon to his Woes.
V.
And when the new, returning Year,
Again lhall call you to the Grove ;
Sweet Philomel , you’ll find me here,
Complaining Rill of hopelefs Love.
SONG.
SWEET are the Charms of her I love,
More fragrant than the Damask Rofe $
Soft as the Down on Turtle-Dove;
Gentle as Air when Zephir blows $
Refrelhing as defcending Rains,
To Sun-burnt Climes and thirfty Plains.
F 2
Tru*


True as the Needle to the Pole,
Or as the Dial to the Sun;
Conftant as gliding Waters roll,
Whofe fwelling Tides obey the Moon:
From ev’ry other Charmer free,
My Life and Love fhall follow thee.
The Lamb the flow’ry Thyme devours $
The Dam the tender Kid purfuesj
Sweet Philomel , in fhady Powers
Of verdant Spring, his Note renews :
All follow what they moft admire,
As I purfue my Soul’s Defire.
Nature muft change her beauteous Face,
And vary as the Seafons rife;
As Winter to the Spring gives place,
Summer th’Approach of Autumn flies:
No Change in Lo ve the Seafons bring,
Love only knows perpetual Spring.
Devouring


Devouring Time, with dealing Pace,
Makes lofty Oaks and Cedars bow;
And marble Tow’rs, and Walls of Brafs,
In his rude March he levels low :
But Time, deftroying far and wide,
Love from the Sou} can ne’er divide.
Death only, with his cruel Dart,
The gentle Godhead can remove ;
And drive him from the bleeding Heart,
To mingle with the Blefs’d above:
Where, known to all his kindred Train*
He finds a lading Reft from Pain.
Love, and his Siftea* fair, the Soul,
Twin-born, from Heav’n together came*
Love will the Univerfe controul,
When dying Seafons lofe their Name:
Divine Abodes fhall own his Pow’r,
When Time and Death fhall be no more.
S 0 NG ■


SONG.
L
WANTON Cbloe, young and charming,
Kindles but a jfhort-liv’d Fire:
Fickle Humours Love difarming,
Quench the Flame her Eyes infpire,
IL
So a gliding Vapour (hining,
Bright as Stars that deck the Skies,
Quickly from its Height declining,
Glitters in its Fall, and dies.
111.
Mira ev’ry Grace adorning,
Gently warms my fond Defire;
Sigh for ev’ry Sigh returning,
Like a Veftal, feeds the Fire.
IV.
Hiding ftill the facred Pleafure
From the prying vulgar Eye;
Still refigning all her Treafure,
Giving, without Pain, the Joy.
Written


Written Extempore on a blank Leaf in Rymer's
Remarks upon S HAKESPEARE.
RTM ER , in queft of Helicon ,
To Pudde-Dock the Mufes brings;
He drinks the muddy Water down,
And fwears ’tis Aganippe's Spring.
To Addle-Hill then takes his Way,
Which feems to him Parnajfus fair;
And there invokes the God of Day ,
Who, propitious, grants his Pray’r.
ec Poet be thou, and Critick too,
( Apollo laughing faid)
« A double Infamy’s thy Due,
“ And Midas Ears {hall grace thy Head.
Edgar * thou art doom’d to write:
Shakefpeare divine {halt dare to blame;
Thy Works {hall wait on Bums that fh ,
Of Laureat Dunces, firft in Fame.
SONG,
* Edgar, a tniferabk Play wrote by Rymer, as an Example of true Tragedy,


SONG.
Tranjlatedfrom the French.
AS in the Myrtle Bow’r I lay,
A mournful Echo fill’d the Grove;
’Twas Silvias Voice imploring Love:
“ Oh ceafe to wound me, cruel Boy!
cc Be kind, and fend a faithful Swain,
‘ c Whofe Balm apply’d, may heal my Pain.
11.
Straight I approach’d my Soul’s Defire ;
And thus, with tender Looks, I faid:
“ Love ever hears the fighing Maid,
“ And kindly feilds the faithful Swain,
<c In whom a longing Maid may find
" The Balm to heal a love-fick Mind*
111.
Trembling, fhe pufh’d me from her Side ?
Which ftill the more increas’d her Pain 5
Finding, at length, fhe ftrove in vain,
ct O Love! fhe cry’d, I feel thy
Who can the raging Smart endure ?
So took the Balm, and found the Cure.


ODE.
On MIRA, DANCING.
SH E comes! the God of Love aflerts his Reign,
Refiftlefs o’er the gazing Throng:
Alone fhe fills the fpacious Scene I
The Charm of ev’ry Eye! the Praife of ev’ry Tongue!
Order and Grace together join’d,
Sweetnefs with Majefty combin’d,
To make the beauteous Form compleat,
On ev’ry Step and Motion wait.
Now to a flow and melting Air fhe moves >
Her Eyes their Softnefs fteal from Venus Doves:
So like in Shape, in Air, and Mien,
She paflfes for the Paphian Queen;
The Graces all around her play;
The wond’ring Gazers die away,
Whether her eafy Body bend,
Or her fair Bofom heave with Sighs;
Whether her graceful Arms extend,
Or gently fall, or flowly rife;
G
Ot


Or returning, or advancing;
Swimming round, or lidelong glancing;
Godis! how divine an Air
Harmonious Gefture gives the Fair!
We fee, in ail her Pride,
The welbtrimm’d Bark at Anchor ride;
But when her hoifled Sails {he fpreads,
And o’er the bounding Waves her wat’ry Dance (he
leads,
With new Delight the Objedt we furvey,
While in the Winds her wanton Streamers play.
Strange Force of Motion! that fubdues the Soul,
Like fweetefl Mufic’s magic Pow’r!
That can the noify Multitude controul !
Can Eloquence her felf do more?
But now the flying Fingers drike the Lyre!
The fprightly Notes the Nymph infpire;
She whirls around! {he bounds! {he fprings!
As if Jove's Meflenger had lent her Wingjs.
Such


Such Daphne was, when near old Peneus Stream
She fled, to (hun a loath'd Embrace;
(Of antient Bards the frequent Theme) j*p ace j
Such were her lovely Limbs, fo flufh’d her charming
So round her Neck! her Eyes fo fair!
So rofe her fwelling Cheft! fo flow’d her Amber Hair!
While her fwift Feet outftript the Wind,
And left th' enamour’d God of Day behind.
While the light-footed Fairy flies,
Pur mounting Spirits nimbly rife;
The Pulfe ftiil anfwer to the Strains,
And the Blood dances in our Veins.
Of Cynthia s Air let Poets dream,
When from the hoary Mountains Height,
Down to Eurotas filent Stream,
She leads her Virgin Train, and charms the Sight:
Whether on Mountains, or in Woods,
In flow’ry Launs, or verdant Fields,
Or bathing in the filver Floods,
Lo! to a mortal Fair the fanfy’d Goddefs yields.
G 2
The


Q. Horatii Flacci Carminum Liber I.
ODE XXIV.
In EPICUREOS.
PAR CVS Deorum cult or, infrequens,
Infanientis dum fapientiee,
Confultus erro: nunc retrorfum
Vela dare, atque iter are curfus
Cogor relidlos. namque Diefpiter
Igni corufco nubila dividens,
C Plerumque per purum tonantes
Egit equos, volucremque cur rum,
Quo bruta tellus, & vaga flumina,
Quo Styx, & inviji horrida Teen art
Sedes, Atlanteufque finis,
Concutitur. valet ima fummis
Mutare, & infgnem attenuat Deus,
Obfcura promens, hinc apicem rapax
Fortuna cum firidore acuto
Suftulit, hie pofuifle gaudet .
An


The xxxivth ODE of the First Book of
Horace, Imitated.
BY wild Philofophy milled,
Regardlefsof the Gods, too long I Aray’d.
Urg’d by Impulfe Divine, at length I mourn
My Crimes, and to Religion’s facred Rites return.
Mark the blue Light’ning from Jove's fiery Carr!
Sedate he drives his thund’ring Steeds from far!
Swift through the burfting Clouds and flaming Air!
Earth, our dull Mother, groans; the River-Gods,
Confounded, tremble in their deep Abodes! ow .
From their broad Bafeupheav’d, the lofty Mountains
Ev’n Hell’s Foundations feel the dreadful Blow.
Headlong amidfl: the bafe-born Croud,
He flings the Haughty, and the Proud;
Now lifts the Lowly high in Air!
Now finks the Mighty in Defpair!
Sudden, he feizes on the Tyrant’s Crown,
/Vnd bids another fill the vacant Throne!
ODE


Carminum Liber III. Ode I.
In ANIMI TRANQUILLITATEM.
OD I profanum valgus , & arceo ,
Favete linguis: carmina non priu%
Audita Mufarum facer do s
Virginibus, puertfque canto.
Regum timendorum in proprios greges. x
Reges in ipfos imperium eft Jovis,
Clari giganteo triumpho y
Cundla fupercilio moment is,
Eft, ut viro vir latiiis ordinet
Arbufta fulcis: hie gtnerofior
Defcendat in campum petitor :
Moribus hie , meliorque famd
Contendat: iili turba clientium
Sit major: aqua lege neceftitas
Sortitur inftgnes y & itnos:
Otnne capax movet urna nomen\
Di-


An Imitation of the First ODE of Horace,
Book III.
Great Liberties are taken with the Original: fometimesheis
clofely follow'd, and as often intirely forfaken. If the Rea-
der pleafe to look upon this Attempt as an Amufement only,
’tis all can be defir'd. My Obligations to a Friend , who
deferves infinitely more than I have faid of her , interrupt-
ed my firft Defign , and led me into the Digreffion which
occafion'd the Conclufon. B. Booth.
IH AT E the common Herd. Hence ye profane 1
A filent uncorrupted Train,
Virgins, and blooming Youths, attend my Lyre:
Lo! great Af olio's facred Choir,
With Strains unheard before, their Pried; infpire.
Empires mighty Monarchs Sway;
Thofe mighty Monarchs Jove obey:
He bends the Heavens with his Imperial Nod,
Proftrate the Giants fell, and own’d the Conqu’ror God.
Some the firft Poft of Honour claim,
Proud of their Birth and ancient Name;
Rivall’d by Thofe, whofe wide-fpread Furrows bear
The various Harveft of the Year:
Vain is their Conteft, vain their Boaft,
In Death is all Diftin&ion loft: While


Dijlriftus enjis cut fuper impid
Cervice pendet> non Siculce dapes
JDtulcem elaborabunt faporem:
Non avium , citharaequc cantui
Somnumseducent. fomnus agrejliunt
Lenis virorum non humiles domos
Fajlidit y umbrofamque riparri,
Non Zephyris agitata Fempe .
Defderantem y quod fails ejl y nequt
Fumultuofum follicitat mare y
Nec fcevus ArEluri cadentis
Impetus , aut orientis Hcedi ‘
Non verb er at a grandine vinece y
Fundufque mendax : arbore nunc aquas
Culp ante , nunc torrentia agros
Sidera, nunc by ernes iniquas „
Contract a pifces cequora fentiunt
Jaftis in altum molibus. hue frequens
Ccementa demittit redemptor
Cum famulis, dominufque terras
Fajlidiofus . fed timor y & mince
Scandunt eodem quo dominus: neque
Decedit ceratd triremi , &
Poji equitum fedet atra cura.


While o’er the impious Courtier’s Head,
Threat’ning aloft, the Dagger hung;
In vain the codly Fead was fpread,
In vain the charming Mindrel fung:
Sleep weighs his Eyelids down no more,
Strains his murder’d Peace redore*
Lolling at Eafe in humble Cells,
Gentle Morpheus ever dwells:
Or by the hoary Fored’s Side,
Or where the murm’ring Waters glide.
Seek what Nature can fuffice;
And fearlefs view the troubled Shore,
When the black Temped: veils the Skies,
And the tumultuous Surges roar.
Whither, at length, will Human Pride afpire!
The Great their Fathers’ Palaces difdain,
Encumb’ring with vad Tow’rs the Main:
From the contracted Latian Shore,
Old Ocean’s various Broods retire,
And didant, and more fpacious Seas explore.
Go climb thy lofty Argos Side;
Or trud thy Courfer’s fwift Career;
Or in thy marble Tow’rs confide;
Vain is thy Flight, alas ! from Care,
There’s no Retreat, proud Man, from Guilt and Fear.
H Since


* Since then, fair Peace and Innocence,
Difdaining Pomp, and Pow’r, and Pride,
United £hed their fweeteft Influence,
Where artlefs Maids, and lab’ring Hinds refide,
Grant my Deflre! A homely Seat,
Far from the Guilty, and the Great;
A limpid Stream an antient Grove; ?
And Plealth and Joy to her I love; s
Grant my Defire, propitious Jove ! j
Happy the Hour when firft our Souls were join’d!
The focial Virtues, and the chearful Mind
Have ever crown’d our Days, beguil’d our Pain;
Strangers to Difcord, and her clam’rous Train.
Connubial Friendship, Hail! but hafte away,
The Lark and Nightingale reproach thy Stay;
From fplendid Theatres to rural Scenes,
Joyous retire ! bounteous Heaven ordains.
There We may dwell in Peace ———
There blefs the fifing Morn, and floW’ry Field,
Charm’d with the guiltlefs Sports the f Woods and
Waters yield.
FINIS.
* Here begins the Digreffion from Horae *, mention’d in the
Author’s Preface to this Ode.
f Flum'ma am era Sylvafque ixglorius! Virg.


BOOKS lately Publish'd,
And Sold by the Booksellers both of Town and Country .
FOLIO.
ANTIQUITY EXPLAINED, and reprefented in SCULPTURES, by the
Learned Father MONTFAUCON. In TEN TOMES. Trauflated into Engl.fh
by DAVID HUMPHREYS, D. D. And Fellow of Trinity- College m Camondge.
And alfo the SUPPLEMENT, in FIVE TOMES.
Lately Publijh'd, Curioujly Printed m §LU A R TO, on a fine
ROYAL PAPER, and EmbelhfPd witn. Copper Pmtes,
the following BOOKS, viz.
TLUTARCHI Chmronenfis VIT/E PARALLELS, cum Singulis ali-
tor Grrece 5c Larine, in Quinque Volumina divife. Adduntur Vanantes
Lcdiones ex MSS. Codd. Vereres 3c Nova:, Doftovum Vnorum Norm 8c Emen-
dattones & indices accuratiffimh Reccnfmt AUGUSTINUS BRIANUS.
DIONYSII LONGINI de SUBLIMIT ATE COMMENTARIES, Grace ;
Oucm nova Verfionc donavit, perpetms Notis iUuftravn, plunm.fcjue m locis,
paitim audorirate optimorum Manufcrrptorum pamm co.qedurcemendav*
ZACHARIAS PEARCE, S. T. P. Regis Majeflati a Sacns Domeftim, fr.
p TERENTII GOMOEDIAE ad Exemplar FAERNIANUM a PETRO
VICTOIUO editum Anno 1565. Summa fide recenfitae. Ledore lemper moni,
tn obi a FAERNO difeeditur. In hac infuper Editione verluuro genera diveria
ddiigenter indicata font; qmcquid veto in iis difficile aut rmpeduum, nova
quadara methodo tam facile redditur, uc qmvis ft
F AERSI emendationes integrae, Sc quae alia erant in editione V ICTORIANA,
Difl'ertationem de metris comicis adjeCit HARE, S. T. P.
Decanus Wigornienfis, Sc Regiae Majeftatia Sacns.
OE UVRE S de MonfieUr ROUSSE A U, en Deux Volumes: Rcveue &
Augmencee par l’Autheur.
OEUVRES de R A C I NE, en Deux Volumes: Avec de Nouvelles
Eftampes.
Les ESSAIS de MICHEL Seigneur it MONTAIGNE. N™. ela
EdWon Faire fur lea plus andenue, * lesplus co,refless augnren.ee de <,uel-
Edition, rauo mi y Paffaees Grecs, Larins, Sc ltahens, lone
ques Lettres de l r,uteu » que dans aucune des Edi-
rraduits plus fideliemeiM.£«“£'““ k \ „„„,eaua Indices pin,
COSIE.
La GIERUSALEMME LIBERATA di TORQUATO TASSO: Conle
. r’.,n-r.i]i ele Annotationi di Scipto CLentih edi Giul o
?Ta, :,i trtf h V'a del-Aurora ferirra /a Gio. Barrifta Manfo,
Marclrefe'di vflfa. E la Ta.ola delle Rimer coa al« » BS m«.e. e Correr-
tioni. In Due VolUmi.


Lattly Publijh'd, curioujly Printed in One Volume in 0 CTA VO,
DIO NIS 11 LONGINI de SUBLIMITATE COMMENTARIES, quem
Nova Verfione donavit, Notis illuftravit, 8c partira Manufcriptorum opc, par-
tim conje&urd emendavit (additis ctiam omnibus ejufdem Au&oris Fragmcntis)
ZACHARIAS PEARCE, S. T. P. Regix Majcftati a Sacris Domefticis, See.
Editio fecuuda, Notis Sc Emendationibus au&ior. Ex Officina Jacobi Toulon,
& Johannis Watts.
BVCKII NOVUM TESTAMENTUM Greci.
C. JULII CdESARIS qux extant, accuratiffimb cum Libris Editis
8c MSS. optimis Collata, Recognita 8c Correfta. Accefferunt Annota-
tiones Samuelis Clarke, S. T. P. Item Indices Locorum, Rerumque 8c Ver-
boium, Utililfimi. Ex Officina Jacobi Tonfon, 8c Johannis Watts.
Lately Publijh'd, by Mr. M A I T T A IRE, very Convenient for
SCHOOLS, Curioujly and Correftly Printed in Duodecimo,
the following Books, to be had of the Bookfellers both of
Town of Country .
NOVUM TEST AMEN TUM. Grace.
SOPHOCLIS Tragoedix feptem. Cum Verfione Latina 8c fele&is qui-
bufdam vaiiis Lettionibus.
HOMERIUias. Adiicitur in Calcem Interpretatio Latina. Scholis in
Anglia Celeberrimis ; Econenfi, Weftmonafterienfi Regiis ; Wintonienfi, Car-
thufianx, Paulinx 8c Mercatorum fciflorum, hxc Homeri Editio, in Earum
prxcipue Ufum Concinnata, humillime Offertur Dedicaturque.
P. VIRGILII MARONIS Opera.
Q. HORATII FLACCI Opera.
CATULLI, TIBULLI, ScPROPERTII Opera.
P. OVIDII NASONIS Opera, tribus tomis comprehenfa.
PUBLII TERENTII Carthaginienfis Afri Comoedix fex.
TITI LUCRETII CARIde Rerum Natura libri fex.
M. ANN.EI LUCANI Pharfalia : five de Bello Civili inter Cxfii-
rem 8c Pompeium libri decern.
PHjEDRI Aug. Liberti Fabularum ALfopicarum libri quinque; item Fa-
bulx quxdam ex MS. veteri a Marquatdo Gudio deferiptx ; cum Indice Vo-
cum 8c Locutionum. Appendicis loco adjiciuntur Fabulx Grxcx quxdam Sc
Latinx ex variis Authoribus colleftx quas claudit Avieni .Efopicarum Fabu-
larum liber unicus.
D. JUNII JUVENALIS 8c AULI PERSII FLACCI Satyrx.
M. VALERI I M ARTIALIS Epigrammata.
CHRISTUS PATIENS, Rapini carmen Heroicum.
MUSARUM ANGHCANARUM ANALECTA: five Poi'ma-
ta quxdam melioris Notx, feu haftenus Inedita, feu fparfim Edita, in duo
Volumina congefta. Editio Quaita, Prioribus auftior.
T. LIVII PATAVINI Hiftor.arum ab Urbe condita Libri qui fuperfunt
In <5 Vol. r
C. PL I Nil CECILII Secundi Epiftolx 8c Panegyricus.
CORNELII NEPOTIS excellentium Imperatorum Vitx.
LUCIUS ANNiUS FLORU S. Cui fubjungitut Lucii Ampelii liber
memorialis.
CA I I SALLUSTII CRISPI qux extant.
VELLEII PATERCULI Hiflorix Romanx qux fuperfunt.
JUS TI N I Hiftoriarum ex Trogo Pompeio libri XLIV.
Q_. CURTIUS RUFUS de rebus geftis Alexandri Magni.
C. JULII SARIS 8c A. HIRTII de rebus aC. Julio Cxfare
geftis Commentarii : Cum C. Jul. Cxfaris Fragmentis.
CONCIONES fic OR.ATIONES ex KUloiicis Latiais excerpts.


Lateiy Publijh'd , with the Addition of Nine I* IEC E S (mark'd thus *
in this Adzertifement) and Adorn'd with curious CUTTS, De-
fin'd by Mr. John Vanderbank and Mr. Highmore, and Engrav'd
by Mr. Gerard Vandergucht, the Second Edition of
4 * 4 A SELECT COLLECTION of NOVELS and HISTO-
RIES. In Six Volumes. Written by the mod Celebrated Authors in feveral
Languages. Many of which never appear’d in Englilh before. All New
Tranflated and Compiled from the moft Authentick Originals.
VOL. I. Containing
An Extraft of Monfieur Huet’s Dif-
courfe concerning the Original of
Romances.
2 AY D E.
The Marriage of Belphegor.
4 The Adventures of MelefiCthon.
The Jealous Eftremaduran.
4 The Hiftory and Fall of the Lady
Jane Grey.
4 The Adventures on the Black Moun-
tains.
VOL. 11. Containing
The Princefs of Cleves.
The Fair Maid of the Inn.
The Force of Friendlhip.
4 Charon : or, The Ferry Boat.
The Hiftory of the Captive.
VO L. 111. Containing,
Don Carlos.
The Hiftory of Count Belflor and
Leonora de Cefpedes.
The Curious Impertinent.
4 The Hiftory of Jane Shore.
The Prevalence of Blood.
The Liberal Lover.
The Beautiful Turk.
VOL. IV. Containing
The Happy Slave.
The Rival Ladies.
* The Lo yes of King Henry 11, and
Fair Rofamond.
The Innotent Adultery.
The Hiftory of the Confpiracy of the
Spaniards againft the Republick of
Venice.
VOL. V. Containing
The Little Gypfy.
Ethelinda.
The Amour of Count Palviano and
Eleonora.
4 The Unhappy Favourite: Or, the
Fall of Robert Earl of Elfex.
Scanderbeg the Great.
VOL. VI. Containing,
The Life of Caftruccio Caltracani of
Lucca.
The Loves of Ofmin and Daraxa.
The Spanilh Lady of England.
The Lady Cornelia.
4 The Hiftory of Maffanielo.
The Falfe Dutchefs.
4 Memoirs of the IrnprifoniVient and
Death of Mary Queen of Scots.
The Third Edition of
Dr. CROX ALL’s FABLES of and Others. Newly done into
Englilh. With an Application to each Fable. Illuftrated with Cutts.
* garrit aniles
Ex re Fabeltas - * * Hor.
The FAIR CIRC A SSI AN, a Dramatick Performance. Done from
the Original by a Gentleman-Commoner of Oxford. To which are added
feveral Occaiionai Poems, by the fame Author.
Les AVANTURES de TELE MAQU E Fils d’Ulyfle. Par feu Mef-
fire Franjois de Salignac de la Motte Fenelon, Precepteur de MefTeigneurs,
les Entans de France, &: depuis Archeveque Due de Cambrai, Prince du faint
Empire, &c. Nouvelle Edition conforme au Manufcript original. Avec les
Remarques pour rcclaiicillement de cet Ouvragc.


Lately Puhlijhed,
{Being a ’very proper PRESENT to young Gentlemen and Ladies at
BOARDING-SCHOOLS, &c. not only as a great Inducement
to their learning the French Language, hut likenvife the mo ft Chafte,
Moral, and Diverting Amufement to employ their Leifure Hours )
V A SELECT COLLECTION of MO LlE\E’s COMEDIES,
■French and Englijh, in EIGHT POCKET VOLUMES, neatly Printed
on a Fine Paper, with a Curious Frontifpiece ta each Comedy. To which is
prefix’d a Curious PRINT of the AUTHOR, and his LIFE in French
and Englijh ; Extra&cd from Monlleur Bajle, Rapm, See.
N. B. The Tranflation is entirely New, and was undertaken by feveral Gen-
tlemen, who all join’d and confulted together about every Part of it; in
which particular Care has been had to keep as clofe as poflible ro the Origi-
nal, and obferve the very Words of the Author as well as the Senfc, fo far as
was confiftcnt with the Freedom and Spirit of the Dialogue, in order to make
it more ferviceablc to thofc of our own Nation, who defire an Acquaintance
with the Language or Genius of their Neighbours; and likewife to Foreigners
who may have the fame Inclination with refpeft to Us.
Lately Publijh'd.
The TRAVELS and ADVENTURES of the Sieur JACQUES MASSE.
Being a very entertaining Account of his Arrival in an unknown Country in
Terra after having differ'd two Shipwrecks: Of the Arrange Manner*
and Cuftoms of the People: Of his curious Converfations with the Pricfts,
Judges, and with the KING himfclf, on the Subjefts of Religion, Trade, and
almoft all the Arts and Sciences: Of his Paftage from the Southern Coun-
tries to Goa, where he was iraprifon’d in the Inquifition: Of his being taken
by Pirates in his Voyage from thence to Lisbon ; and of his Ranfom from
Slavery, and Arrival at London ; Betides many other mod diverting Inci-
dents, which are very agreeably intexfpers’d in the Narrative.
LETTERS of ABELARD and HELOISE. To which is prefix’d a parti-
cular Account of their Lives, Amours, and Misfortunes, extrafted chiefly
from Monfieur BAYLE. Txanfiated from the French, by the late JOHN
HUGHES, Efq;
The Works of Mr. Henry Needier; confiding of ORI GI NA L POEMS,
TRANSLATIONS, ESSAYS and LETTERS. Nemo parum din
vixit, qui Virtutis pcrfeftw perfeclo fun&us eft munere. Cicero de contem-
iienda Mortc. The Second Edition. Publilh’d by Mr. Duncombe.
In OCTAVO.
The VO YA GE S and A DVE NTU RE S of CAPTAIN T{pBET{T BOTLE ,
In feveral Parts of the World. Intermix’d with the Story of Mrs. Villars, an
Engltfl) Lady with whom he made his furprizing Efcape from Barbary, The
Hiftory of an Italian, Captive; and the Life of Dan Pedro See. Full
of various and amazing Tutus of Fortune. To which is aided, The Voyage,
Shipwreck, and Miraculous Prefervation of Richard Cajlelman, Gent. With a
Defcriprion of the City of Philadelphia, and the Country of Pcnfjlvania, The
Second Edition.


JL •very curious Edition in <sl_U A K T O, tf
The BIGGAR’sO PER A. As it is A&ed at the Theatre-Royal in
Lincoln’s-lnn Fields. Written by Mr. GAT. Nos hac novimm ejfe nihil.
Mart. With the OUVERTURE in SCORE, the SONGS and the
BASSES, (the OUVERTURE and BASS E S Compos’d byDr.PE-
P U SH) Curioufly Engrav’d on COPPER PLATES.
CHI\ON to ACHILLES. A POEM. By Hildebrand Jacob, Efq;
T[es eft fever a. Voluntas.
In OCTAVO.
Fifty One NEW FABLES in Verfe, (Invented for the Amufement of
His Highnefs WILLIAM Duke of Cumberland) By Mr. GAY: With
Fifty One Cutts, Defign’d by Mr. Kent and Mr. Wotton, and Engraved by
Mr. Baron, Mr. Vandergucht, and Mr. Fourdrinier. The Third Edition.
Juft Pubifh'd ,
MEMOIRS of the LIFE of BARTON BOOTH, Efq; With his
CHARACTER. To which are added fevexal POETICAL PIECES,
written by Himfelf, viz. Tranflations from Horace , Songs, Odes, Btc. To
which is like wife annex’d, The CASE of Mr. BOOTH’* laft Ulnef*, and
what was obferv’d (particularly with regard to the Quick-Silver found in his
Inteftines) upon Opeaing of his Body, in the Prefence of Sir Hans Sloan, by -
Mr. Alexander Small, Surgeon. Publilh’d by an Intimate Acquaintance of
Mr. Booth. By Confent of his Widow. Qua dottas'Rofcitcs egit: Hor.
Lately Publijh'd, Curioufly Printed in SIX POCKET VOLUMES.-
The MUSICAL MISCELLANY: Being a Collc&ion of CHOICE
SONGS tnd LYRICK POEMS. Set to MUS I C K by the moft emi-
nent MASTERS, (With the BASSES to each Tune, and Tranfpos’d fox
the FLUTE) viz.
Mr. Attilio. Mr.Geminiani. Mr. D. Purcell.
Mr. Barret. Mr. Gough. M. H. Purcell.
Mr. Betts. Mr. Grano. Mr. Ramondon.
Mr. Bononcinl. Mr. Graves. Mr. Ravenfcraft.
Mr. Bradley. Dr. Green. Mr. David Rizzio.
Mr. Brailsfotd. Mr. Handel. Mr. Seedo.
Mr. Burgers. Mr. Haym. Mr. J. Sheeles.
Mr. Carey. Mr. Holmes. Mr. Trevers.
Mr. Charke. Mr. Holcomb. Mr. Vincent.
Mr. Cole. Mr. Leveridge. Mr. Webber.
Dr. Croft. Mr. Monro. Mr. Weldon. •
Mr. Dieupatf. Dr. Pepufch. Mr. Whichello.
Mr. Flemming. Mr. Potter. Mr. Anth. Young.
Mr. Galliatd.
TRAGEDIES.
C& LI A, or The Perjur’d LOVER. A True Tragical Story in Common
Life, and the Incidents very Natural and Moving.
PERIANDER, King of Corinth: A Tragedy. As it is ACted at the
Theatre Roval in Lincoln’s-Inn Fields. Written by Mr. JOHN TRACY.
To which is prefix’d, The HISTORY of PERIANDER: Extracted
from the moft Authentick Greek and Latin Hiftorians, and the Chevalier
I lamfty's Cyrus. Addrefs’d. to the Readers and Spectators of the Trage-
dy of PERI ANDE R.
Tl MO LEON. A Tragedy. As it is ACted at the Theatre Royal, by His
Majefty’s Servants. Written by Mr. Benjamin Martyn. The Second Edition.
The FATAL EXTRAVAGANCE. A Tragedy. As it is ACted at
the Theatre-Royal in Lincoln’s-lnn Fields. Written by Mr. Mitchell. The
Fourth Edition Corrected.


DOUBLE FALSHOOD; or, The DISTREST tOVERS. A
Play, as it is Afted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. Written Originally
by Mr. W. Shakefpeare} and now Revifed and Adapted to the Stage by Mr
Theobald, the Author of Shakefpeare %eftor'd. & 3
The VIRGIN QUEEN. A Tragedy. As it is Afted at the Theatre-
Royal in Lincoln s-Inn Fields. Written by Mr. Richard Barford.
The FATE of VILLANY. A Play. As it is Afted by the Company
Comedians at the Tncatre in Goodman , s*Fields»
SCANDERBEC. A Tragedy. As it is Afted at the Theatre in Good-
man s-Fields. By Mr. Havard. Va man Enfan, preni ta. Fortune.
*r \ G »I of TRAGEDIES; or The Life and Death of TOM
TH l GRE AT. As it is Afted at the Theatre in the Hay-Market.
With the Annotations of H. Scriblerus Secundus.
The COVENT GARDEN TRAGEDY". As it is Afted at the The-
atre-Royal in Drury-Lauc. By His Majefty’s Servants.
COMEDIES.
. The PROVOK’D HUSBAND; or, a JOURNEY to LONDON
A Comedy. As it is Afted at the Theatre-Royal, by His Majefty’s Servants’
Written by the late Sir John Vanbrugh, and Mr. Cibber. The Second Edi-
tion.
The MISER. A Comedy. Taken from Plautus and Moliere. As it is
Afted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury Lane, by His Majefty’s Servants B*v
Henry Fielding, Efq; * *
The MODERN HUSBAND. A Comedy. As it is Afted at the
Theatre Royal in Drury-Lane, by his Majefty’s Servants. Written by Henry
Fielding, £fq; 1 ■>
Tnc L °TTERT. a F ARCE, As it is Afted at the Theatre-Royal
by his Majefly s Servants, With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song. *
The MODISH COUPLE. A Comedy. As it is Afted at the Theatre
Royal, by His Majefty’s Servants. Written by CHARLES BODENS, £%
. T^ e L ° VER " A COMEDY. As it is Afted at the Theatre Royal
in Drury-Lane; By His Majefty’s Servants. Wiitten by Mr. THEOPhi
L US CIBBER, Comedian. W
The COFFEE-HOUSE POLITICIAN; or, the JUSTICE cauvht in l;.
own trap, as it h Afted at the Theatre LiicolnvSn Field's Wei!
ten by Mr. Fielding. 1
The HU M OURS of OXT O\D. A Comedy. As ir ?c u.j . .
SferCdfeg* * by ““ Maiefly ’ S Smma - w,i ““ b r * enutamiitf wld-
"u Aa ' d “ ,he ««'•' i»
The DISSEMBLED WANTON ; or, My SON get MONEY A
,lh ' Th ' atre ' R “ >a ‘ ta w,i t
the Theatre.R.oyal, ' d
Kn t.^ «KBS o,theXOW».


The WIDOW BEWITCH ’D. A Comedy. As it is A&ed at the
Theatre in Goodman’s-Fields.
, The LETT.E R-WRITEB-Sj or; A New Way to keep a Wife at Home.
A Farce. As it is Attcd at the Theatre in the Hay-Market. Written by Scrib-
lerus Secundus.
The OLD DEBAUCHEES. A Comedy. As it is A&ed at the Theatre-*
Royal in Diury-Lane,
OPERAS after the ITA Ll A H manner.
DEBORAH. An ORATORIO: Or, Sacred Drama. As it.is Perform’d
at the King’s Theatre in the Hay-Market. The Mufick Compos’d by Mr. HAN-
DEL. The Words by Mr. HUMPRHETS.
AThAIIA. An OR ATORIO: or SACRED DR AM A. As Per-
form’d at the Theatre in Oxford. At the Time of the Publick Aft. The
Mufick Compos’d by Mr. HANDEL. The Drama by Mr. HUMPHREYS.
ACiS and GALATEA: An Englilh Paftoral OPERA in Three A&&»
let to Mufick by Mr. HAN DE L.
VLTSS E S. An OPERA. As it is Perform’d at the Theatre Royal in*
Lincoln's-Inti Fields. The Mufick Compos’d by Mr. JOHN CHRISTOPHER
SMITH, Juriidr. The Words by Mr. HVM PHT{ E TS.
AMELIA. A New Englifh OPERA. As it is Perform’d at the New
Theatre in the Hay-Market. Sfet to Mufick by Mr. John Frederick Lampe.
OPERAS with the MU SICK.
. The BEGGAR’S OPERA. As it is A&ed at the Theatre-P.oyal in
Xincoln’s-Inn Fields. Written by Mr. Gay. The Second Edition : To which
is Added the Ouverture in Score; With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
i The TDN.ES to the SONGS in the BEGGAR’S OPERA Tranfpos’d fot
the FLUTE. Containing Sixty Nine Airs.
ACHILLES. An OPE R A : Written by the late Mr. GAY. The Second
Edition. To which is added the LIFE of ACHILLES, EXtra&cd from
various Authors.
The LIVERY RAKE, and COUNTRY LASS. An OPERA. As
it is Perform’d at the Theatres in Drury-Lane and the Hay-Market, With the
Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
The BO ARDING-SCH OOL; or, The SHAM CAPTAIN. Ait
OPERA. As it is Perform’d at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, by His
Majefty’s Servants. Written by the Author of The Beggar’s Wedding, and
The Devil to Pay. With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
TheDEVIL to PA Y ; or, TheVif IVES MET AMORPHOS’D. An
bPER A. As it is Perform’d at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. By His
Maiefty’s Servants. Written by the Aiithor of thtf Beggar’s Wedding. With
the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
The MOCK DOCTOR; or* The DU MB LADY Cur’d. A Comedy.
Done from MOLIERE. As it is Attcd at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane.
By His Majefty’s Servants. With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
The HIGHLAND-FAIR; or UNION of the CL A NS. An OPERA.
As it is Ailed at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, by His Majefty’s Servants.
Writtehby Mr.MITC H ELL. With the (vrhiefe whollyconfifts
toots TUNES) Press’d to each Song,


The JOVIAL CREW. A Comic Opera. As it is Afted at theTheatra*
Royal, by his Majefty’s Servants.
SILVIA; or, the COUNTRY BURIAL. An Opera. As it is Afted
at the Theatre-Royal in Lincoln’s - Inn Fields. With the Mufick prefix’d to
each Song. Written by Mr. LIL LO, Author of the Tragedy ofGEORGE
BARNWELL.
LOVE in a RIDDLE. APA ST OR AL. As it is Afted at the Thea"
tre-Royal by His Majefty’s Servants. Written by Mr. Cibber. With the Mu'
fick prefix’d to each Song.
The VIL LAGEO P E R A. As it is Afted at the Theatre-Royal, by His
Majefty’s Servants. Written by Mr. Johnfon. With the Mufick prefix dto
each Song.
The LOVER’s OPEPvA. As it is Afted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane-
Written by Mr. Chctwocd. The Third Edition, with Alterations: And th«
Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
MOMUS turn’d FABULIST: Or, VULCAN’s WEDDING. An Ope-
*a- / fter the Manner of the Beggar’s Opera. As it is perform’d at the Thea-
tre-Royal in Lincoln’s-Inn Fields. With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
The FASHIONABLE LADY; or E QVJN’s OPERA. In
tie tanner of a REHEA R S A L. As it is Perform’d at the Theatre in
Goodman’s- Fields. Written by Mr. Ralph. With the Mufick prefix d to each
S6ng.
PiAtlE and PEGGY: Or, the FAIR FOUNDLING. A Scotch Ballad
Opera. As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Diury-Lane. With the Mu-
fick prefix’d to each Song.
D.A MO v and VEIL LI DM : A Ballad Opera of One Aft. As >t is Per-
formed at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. With the Mufick prefix d to
each Song.
The CHAMBER-MAID. A BALLAD OPER A of One Aft. As
iris Perform’d at the Theatte-Roytal, by His Majefty’s Servants. With the
Mufick prefix’d to each. Song.
The QUAKER’S OPERA. As perform’d at Lee’s and Harper’s Great
Theatrical Booth in Bartholomew-Fair. With the Mufick prefix d to each
Song.
robin HOOD. An OPERA. With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.
The GENEROUS FREE-MASON : or, the CONSTANT LADY. With the
Humours of Squire Noodie, and his Man Doodle. A Tragi-Comi-Farcical
Ballad Opera. In Three Afts. With the Mufick prefix’d to each Song.








