

INSTITUTION ETHNOGRAPHIQUE.
THE ABORIGINES
OF
AUSTRALIA.
STORIES ABOUT THE KAMILAROI TRIBE,
BY
JOHN FRASER. B.A.,
Le Delegue General pour I'Oceanic,
MAITLAND :
Tucker, Gillies, and Thomsso'jt, Prcntebs, “ Mbbcuet” Office, Hig^stJeex.
MDCCCLXXXrI,


>
y -
‘ y
M*


INSTITUTION ETHNOGRAPHIQUE.
THE ABORIGINES
OF
AUSTRALIA.
STORIES ABOUT THE KABIILAROI TRIBE,
BY
JOHN FRASER, B.A.,
Le Deletjue General pour VOceanic.
MAITLAND :
Tucker, GriLLtE.s. and Thompson, Printers, “Mercuric" Office, High-street,
SIDCCCEAXXXI.


INSTITION ETHNOGRAPHIQUE.
STORIES, &c.
PREFACE.
The aborigines are rapidly disappearing
amongst us. Not so long ago a score of
blacks of the Maitland tribe could have easily
been\collected here; now only two or three
are to be seen in our streets; soon the tribe
will be extinct. Do we regret the decay and
disappearance of the native tribes ? Assuredly
we ought, for we are the cause of it. We
have seized bheir territory; we occupy their
hunting grounds; we destroy the food suited
to their physical constitution and their ances-
tral habits; out horses and cattle and sheep
have usurped tho lands of the black man’s
birthright. Nor can he escape from us and
our oppression by., a voluntary migration
to another locality, for the native laws
compel each division of the tribe to keep
within its own territory. Thus he wanders
about as an outcast in his own country,
exposed to the abuse of the violent,
and with few to pity him. In our more
thickly peopled districts, contact with us has
brought the blacks into an artificial style of
living, one which reduces their strength, and
renders them an easier prey to the inroads of
.disease and the effects of exposure to the
weather. Besides this, we have sown among
.them our vices, even the worst, and our fire-
water, which they have learned to like, soon
makes havoc of their simple frame. In our
remoter pastoral districts, although dis-
lodged from the plains, they still exist in con-
siderable numbers in the bush, but a much
feebler race than they were in the early days
of the colony. On newly formed stations
they were once shot down like wild beasts,
and even now they do not, in many instances,
receive the protection and sympathy which
they deserve. They indeed deserve better
treatment, for, to an ethnologist, one who
studies the origin of nations, with their laws,
customs, and habits, our blackfellows present
a field of most interesting investigation, a
field as yet scarcely touched. Our native
tribes exhibit society in one of its lowest
states, yet preserving many traditions of
better things; for they have retained and rigor-
ously observed from age to age social regula-
tions suited to their exigencies and fitted to
promote their comfort; they have or had
virtues which we might profitably imitate;
they are faithful and affectionate to those
who treat them kindly; they have rules of
family morality which are enforced by severe
penalties; they show the greatest respect to
age; they carefully tend and never desert the
sick and infirm ; their boys are compelled to
content themselves with meagre fare, and to
bring the best of the food which they have
found and present it to the aged members of
the tribe and to those who have large families.
Some of their observances, it is true, are to
us absurd and even reprehensible, but others
of them are amusing. For instance, a young
man must marry only after having passed
through a certain number of tribal ceremonies
of initiation, and even then he cannot take to
wife any one he pleases, but must choose
according to fixed rules of class; a man must
not speak to his mother-in-law; if they chance
to meet, they turn back to back and converse
through a third party! As to the nobler
endowments of mind they rank very low;
they can count only one, two, three—for four
is two-two, and five is two-three, and so on;
they are timid and superstitions towards the
unknown ; they appear to have no religious
ideas except a belief in the Great Baiamu
“ the builder,” who made all things, and jn
the existence of the spirits of the dead.
In these circumstances, an effort should
be made now to rescue from oblivion the
beliefs, laws, social regulations and habits of
our native tribes, for ere long the task will
be impossible ; even already the tribal
customs are in many parts no longer observed
or remembered. In each of our colonies
there are some men who take an interest in
the blacks, and by converse with them have
acquired much valuable information about
them. To these men we now appeal; their
information, if collected, compared, and
published, would form a faithful record of
what the blacks once were before they
received the polish of our refinement. We


will therefore publish a list of questions,
prepared by Mr. Alfred W. Hewitt, P.M.,
E.G.S., Sale, Victoria, a member of the
Ethnographic Institute of Paris, who has
already written a book on the subject,
entitled “ Kamilaroi and Kurnai.” This
book treats chiefly of the Kamilaroi tribe of
Liverpool Plains, and the Kurnai of Gipps-
land ; but the learned author is now collect-
ing material for a history of each of the
tribes, if possible, in these colonies—in fact
a monograph on the aborigines of Australia.
Answers to these questions and any other
information communicated will be thank-
fully received and acknowledged if sent
to him direct, or to Mr. John Eraser, 8.A.,
Maitland, Delogue General (pour I’Oceanie)
of the Ethnographic Institute of Paris.
In order to excite an interest in these en-
quiries I have taken down some stories of
past experiences among the Kamilaroi tribes
50 years ago, from the lips of Mr. C. Naseby,
of Maitland. The questions will be printed
an an appendix.
J. F.
Stories About the Kamilaroi
Aborigines.
(COMMUNICATED BY MR. C. NASEBY.)
I went to the Gwydir in 1833, and settled
at Yaggabi. The tide of settlement was by
this time flowing rapidly over the Liverpool
Plains, and over the Gwydir district, away
north even to the Macintyre, on what is now
the Queensland frontier. Many cattle
stations had been formed, and the blacks, not
understanding and not recognising the rights
of ownership which the squatters had in the
beasts, considered bullocks and cows as law-
ful game ; and, finding them more accessible
food and dainterthan kangaroo and opossum,
had speared great numbers of them. The
white men then began to use their guns
freely ; and in retaliation, the natives, regard-
ing every white man as a member of a hostile
tribe, were killing all white men they could
find at other places in the district, wherever
they had opportunity. 1 was one of the
party that first occupied Yaggabi. Four
white men were killed there about a year
later, and thereafter no shepherd would go
out with the sheep without a horse, carbine,
pistols and holsters; two men always went
together for mutual protection. This was the
state of matters on the Gwydir in 1833-4-5,
and great was the insecurity of life, when an
incident occurred which not only made my
life and property ever afterwards safe at the
hands of the black men, but also brought me
into so friendly and intimate relations
with them that I was able to acquire a
thorough knowledge of their tribal and family
laws and customs. And at this hour, eA-
though I have for twenty years ceased to
have any immediate connection with the
tribes, 1 am still remembered by them, 1
believe ; and if any one were to go into an
encampment of the Kamilaroi blacks, and
ask the old men if they ever knew of a white
man called Charley Nay Mnrfuha or Char-
ley Nay Olebai (names by which I was
known to them), the answer would at once
bean emphatic “Yes.” The incident was
this : —“ 1 had gone down to the Peel for
supplies, and was about to start for home,
when Commissioner Main asked me if 1
would take on my dray a small bale of
blankets and a bundle of tomahawks, which
the Government bad sent for distribution
among the blacks in the Gwydir district. 1
consented, brought them to Yaggabi, ami lett
them in charge of the Superintendent of tho
station. Some days after this, 1 was going
to an out-station on the run with supplies for
the shepherds, and had proceeded some dis-
tance on my way, looking carefully and
anxiously about, lest the blacks, who had
been very troublesome just before that time,
should take me unawares. As 1 approached
a belt of scrub, I saw a hat and a head peep-
ing out from behind a tree ; and, suspecting
danger, stopped my dray, and shouted,
Eelyan inda —‘ Are you angry ?’ to which
a voice n plied, hi mil eely —‘ not angry
karcela —‘ friendly.’ The head and body
now came out from concealment, and 1 too
was asked eelyan inda, to which I gave tho
same answer. Friendship having been thus
established between us, about a dozen blacks
who had also hidden themselves among
tho trees came out and joined mo
at the dray. Wo then entered into
conversation, and I chanced to say to
them that I had brought up blankets and
tomahawks for them “along a wheelbarrow,”
and that if they would go at once to the
head- station they would get them. At first


they seemed afraid to go, till I assured them
that there were no police officers lying in
wait for them, and that I was not deceiving
them. They went off accordingly, but as they
drew near to Yaggabi, still fearing a snare,
they crossed to the other side of the river and
shouted Eelyan inda. Receiving satisfactory
assurances, they went over, and were delighted
to find that the blankets and tomahawks were
really there. As this was the first distribu-
tion of blankets in that locality, 1 seemed to
their grateful minds to be the cause of all
this new comfort to them. From that time I
was to them boodgera fellow ; my word was
trusted and everything was safe to me and
minb.. From this incident I gained their
confidence, and in any emergency whatever I
was sure of hearty assistance from any blacks
who might be near.”
About * v e year 1837 or 1838, many men
and cattle had been killed by the blacks, and
Commissioner Main issued warrants for the
apprehension of all concerned in these out-
rages. The warrants were put in the bauds
of Corporal Doolan, who, with a trooper and
a stockman known as Tommy Tommy, started
from the Peel to execute them. After scour-
ing the plains without success, they came to
Yaggabi, where I was. There happened to be
camping near by, two chiefs, Bullinkodjie and
Yabbawnba, a “ great talker.” The troopers,
thinking that they were now in luck, rode up
to the two chiefs, and said, presenting their
pistols, “ We want blackfellows who speared
bullocks—you find blackfellows for us or we
shoot you.” The altercation that ensued
attracted my attention, and, learning what
was the cause of it, I bade my black boy
Georgie (whom Commissioner Main had
assigned to me) explain to the chiefs in their
own language that they would not be hurt, if
they would only assist the troopers to get
bold of the blackfellows who had speared
the cattle and the white men. Here was a
sad dilemmafor Bullinkodjie and Yabbawnba;
either they must be the means of getting
some of their own kindred shot or hanged, or
be shot themselves. After having some con-
sultation they consented to do as they were
required, but said to the troopers —“ You
take dinner with you ; long way ; no water-
hole till dinner-time.” So the party set out,
the chiefs leading. The first part of the road
lay over a considerable extent of level ground.
Now, the keenness of vision of a blackfellow
is such that on these plains be can see a horse-
man approaching fully 20 minutes before a
white man could. Thus, some of the tribe
who were wandering about saw the troopers
coming, hastened to a scrub, climbed the trees
and hid themselves, all unobserved except by
the sharp eyes of Bullinkodjie and his com-
panion, who understood the manoeuvre. So
when the exploring party was passing through
the scrub, toe two chiefs, as if to ease their
grief, broke silence, and seemed lamenting to
each other in Kamilaroi their own misfortune.
But not so. They were tolling their friends
in the trees the errand on which they
were come, and bidding them make
haste to go round another way, and as-
semble as many of the tribe as possible at a
waterhole a little way further on. In due
time the troopers reached the waterhole, and’
dismounted, the chiefs assuring them that
they must rest here for dinner, as there was
no water to be got beyond. They dine, and
after dinner one of the troopers goes off to
the waterhole to drink, and there puts his
gun between his legs, while he raises the
water in his hands; the other trooper follows
him, but not so cautious, he leaves his gun
lying on the ground where he had dined. The
chiefs, too, must have a drink, and slip up
behind the troopers, toss the guns into the
water, shout kawee (“ come here”). Then
blacks, all around from their places of con-
cealment, rush out, spear in hand. The
troopers, in alarm, run to catch their horses,
which had been startled by the shouts, jump
on them and gallop away through the scrub,
wherever a path of safety seemed open.
Their clothes are torn, they lose some of their
stirrup-irons and leathers, and when they
reach Yaggabi they tell nothing of their
discomfiture, but only say that the blackfel-
lows cannot be found. In a few days, how-
ever, Georgie hears the whole story from the
blacks and tells it to his master. And so
here it is.
On another occasion the sharp sight of a
blackfellow did not bring so satisfactory
issues either to himself or to others. In those
days a number of adventurous gentlemen of
the lower sort had taken to the public roads, and
familiarly known as “croppies” were levying
forced contributions, “ benevolences,” on all
passengers and traffic. Captain Hebert Main,
of Wyalda station on the Gwydir, had sent his
dray to the Peel to bring up stores. After
loading, the teamster, who was a resolute
fellow, and anxious for the safety of his
master’s property, carefully cleaned and
charged his firearms, and, determined not to


be taken unawares, he procured from Com-
missioner Main the services ot a black boy,
whom he perched on the top of the dray to
give warning of the approach of any bush-
•rangers. The journey had advanced so far in
safety, when one day the blackfellow aloft
suddenly exclaimed, “Massa! croppies.” The
driver stopped his bullocks, and bringing out
his guns entrenched himself behind a corner
of the dray, and as soon as bis visitors came
near enough challenged them to stand or be
would fire. They did halt, but assured him
they were peaceful men travelling on their
own business. He, in reply, demanded why
two men, if, as they said, on peaceful errand,
should travel so heavily armed as they were;
this they said was rendered necessary by
their fear of bushrangers. Meanwhile, during
this debate, a third bushranger had, un-
noticed, made a circuit to the rear, and com-
ing up behind he disarmed the teamster and
made him a prisoner. Then, seeing the
blackboy still on top of the dray, he with a
huge oath ordered him to come down, or he
would shoot him. The black boy came down,
but, watching his opportunity, he darted off,
and ran in terror all the way from Oakey
Creek, where this occurred, to Wyalda, a dis-
tance of 60 miles. When Captain Main
wanted him to go back to see how it had fared
with the dray, he replied “ Bail me any more
croppy—bail me ride any more on top of
wheelbarrow. Bail me stop for food or sleep
when I got away from croppy.”
To free themselves from the severity of
penal discipline in those days, prisoners of
the Crown, working on the public roads, some-
times succeeded in hiding themselves in the
bush, and then would join an encampment of
the blacks. A man named Pheeny, who had
been sentenced on a charge of robbery, thus
escaped, and lived among the native tribes
for seven years, naked as they. His impor-
tance in their eyes was such that he was
allowed three wives to wait upon him as ser-
vants, and to carry his personal goods from
camp to camp. A warrant, however, was
issued for his apprehension, and one day he
fell into the hands of the troopers, and was
conveyed to the Peel to Commissioner Main.
The Commissioner, perceiving that Pheeny,
£ r °m his knowledge of the language and the
haunts of the blacks, might be of service
to the police, got him pardoned for both
offences— first the robbery, and then his
escaping and harbouring among the blacks—
and made Government interpreter. Soon
after, Pheeny, zealous in his new office, and
proud of his dignity, proved his usefulness
by enabling the police to capture fifteen of
his former associates. These poor unfor-
tunates the troopers arranged in a file for the
march, each pair secured by handcuffs and
by a rope from neck to neck, while Pheeny
led the way with one end of a long rope
round his body, and the remainder of it
fastened to the neck ropes of the prisoners
behind him. Thus they moved on till they
reached the Gwydir at Bingera, three days?
march. The river was then in a fresh, end
not quite safe to cross; but, as the livbs of
blackfellows were of little consequence, the
troopers would allow no delay. » Pheeny ac-
cordingly entered the swollen stream,
his train of natives behind him< and, after
some difficulty, reached the other side. Not
till then did he discover that the rope was all
he had, for the prisoners had managed to free
themselves from their neckties and handcuffs,
and, favoured by the muddiness of the water,
had slipped down the river, diving under,
and could not be found
When the legs are fastened with handcuffs
it is not so easy to get rid of them, as a black
man, to my knowledge, once experienced in
a painful way. Two troopers had appre-
hended two black men on warrants, and were
taking them down the country. They halted
for the night at Taggabi where I was, and, to
secure the prisoners, they bound the one, leg
to leg, with handcuffs j the arm of the other,
notwithstanding my strenuous protests, they
fastened to the leg of my black boy in a simi-
lar manner. In the morning all three were
gone ! After breakfast the troopers went out
in search, and 1 accompanied them, to see if
I could find any trace of my servant. In
passing along the river I was a little behind,
and, chancing to look over the edge of the
bank at one place, I saw two heads just visi-
ble in the water near the margin—my black
boy and his attache. I bade Georgie take
hold of a tree that was growing near him, and
thus pull the other out; the prisoner strug-
gled so violently that I had to give him
several heavy blows and put my pistol to his
head to make him surrender, but he would
not; he even tried to catch hold of my legs
and pull me in ; I was compelled to call the
troopers back to my assistance, and then
only by sundry hard knocks on the head was


he persuaded to submit. He was taken down
the country for trial; there he sulked, would
take no food, and died. The other criminal
got away ; like bis own kangaroos, he hopped
from Taggabi to the river, swam across and
reached a blaekfellow’s camp; every effort
was used there to remove the iron handcuffs
from his legs, but these efforts, as there was
no friendly blacksmith at hand, only caused
wounds and irritations of the flesh, and in a
few days he died.
Even as early as the years of which I am now
speaking, that war of extermination had begun
which has been so destructive to the native
races. One day we were making a hut near
Taggabi, assisted by a blackfellow called
Frying fan. Presently there came by six
station hinds, armed with pistols, carbines,
cutlasses, hunt on shooting all the blacks that
they could i,nd. In spite of all my remon-
strances and entreaties, they seized Prying
Pan, and would have shot him on the snot
had we not resolutely forbidden them. In-
tending to take him to a scrub about a mile
distant, thereto be shot, they fastened a dog-
chain round his neqk, one of them on horse-
back holding the end of the chain. The
blackfellow, knowing the fate to which they
were leading him, watched his opportunity,
and, when near the scrub, suddenly seized the
foot of the white man on horseback who had
the chain, threw him off, and bolted, run-
ning like a snipe among the tall grass, and
dodging bis pursuers. He got one bullet
through the wrist, and another in his neck,
but succeeded in making bis escape. The
white men told us nothing of this, but twelve
months thereafter Frying Pan, to our sur-
prise, oame to visit us, and proved the truth
of his story by showing us the marks of the
wounds, the ball still in his necfe.
Another clever escape of blackfellows oc-
curred in 184(>, on the Macintyre River. I
was myself then living at Koradjeen, on the
main road to the Macintyre. The blacks
there had been making great havoc among
the stock on the stations of the squatters, and
complaints to that effect having been sent
to Commissioner Main, a party of troopers
was despatched from the Peel, and these were
accompanied by stockmen, whom they after-
wards induced to join them on the way.
They passed Koradjeen and reached the river.
Moving cautiously and quietly along they came
near to a bend of the river, into which the blacks
had driven a great number of cattle, and were
busy killing them with large and heavy spears
made for the purpose. Caught in the act,
as soon as they saw the troopers they
made for the nearest shelter, a scrub about
two miles off, the troopers pursuing and doing
much execution with their pistols and cut-
lasses. Most of the blacks, however, seemed
likely to reach the scrub, when their assailants,
to prevent this, galloped up between them
and the scrub to intercept their flight, shoot-
ing and cutting down all in their way. The
blacks, now desperate, rushed beneath the
bellies of the horses, each man grasping a
fore leg, and thus holding the horse fast,
safe for a moment from the blows of the
trooper. Telling each other in their own
language what they purposed to do, at a
signal-cry, they all at the same moment threw
off the riders above them, and, taking advan-
tage of the surprise and confusion caused by
so unwonted a manoeuvre, they reached the
scrub and were safe. The troopers, too, after
catching their horses, were glad to leave so
wily an enemy undisturbed.
Notwithstanding the current opinion to
the contrary, vindictiveness is not a natural
feature of the aboriginal character; they
seem rather to have a rude perception of the
lex talionis, as the following incident will
testify. In those days, two squatters, Mr.
E. and Mr. G-. had stations near each other.
Mr. G. had been an officer in the army,
and, being of an unfeeling disposition, he in-
variably treated the blacks with unkindness.
If any of them, at a time when food was
scarce in their haunts, came in to the station,
offering to work for a meal, he would send
them to chop wood for him and draw water
from the river. When the poor creatures,
hungry and tired of working, asked if that was
enough which they had done, he would answer
them with rough words, and order them to do
more, sometimes in very wantonness pouring
out on the ground the water which they had
so toilsomely brought. The other gentleman
was always kind to the blacks, giving them
food whenever they asked it, and talking with
them as friends. One day Mr. E. was out
alone on a distant part of his run —then very
extensive —looking after his cattle, and in
returning he lost his way ; night came on,
and he was in great distress of mind and
alarm as to his safety. After wandering
much, he saw the fire of a blackfellow’s camp,
and, approaching it, he told who he was, and
asked if they would guide him to his own


home, and he would reward them. They said
they could not go then, but they would take
him home in the morning. When he con-
sented to remain with them all night, they
gathered a quantity of leaves and made a
comfortable bed for him in a corner, they set
supper before him, but, finding that he could
not eat their opossum food, they enquired
in the camp till they found some one who
had a piece of fish; this they gave him to
eat and they saved the remainder of it for
his breakfast. In the morning they led him
to within sight of his own house, refusing to
take any recompense. Not long after, by a
strange chance, Mr. G., in exactly similar
circumstances, fell into the hands of the
blacks, but, instead of giving him shelter and
kind entertainment for the night, they dis-
charged upon him all the oaths and hard
words which he was wont to give to them,
and compelled him to draw water and carry
wood for them all night long ! In the morn-
ing they led him safely home.
I have already mentioned a white man,
Fbeeny, who lived many years among the
blacks. The story of his capture is worth
telling. We were all convinced in our
own minds, from the movements of the
blacks, that a white man was among them;
hut no one bad ever seen him. There was,
however, on a station on this side the
river, a stockman named Eowley, who was
skilful in the use of the musket, and could
kill a swan at 100 yards with ball—well
known to the blacks as a dead shut. One
day he bad been visiting at another station,
about a quarter of a mile distant, but on the
other side of the river. The river here was
thickly overgrown with reeds along the banks,
.and the cattle, in passing through them to
water, had made many lanes. Eowley, in
returning home, was on the alert, and chanc-
ing to glance along one of these he saw a
blackfellow, and at once put his gun to his
shoulder ready to fire. The blackfellow saw
him at the same instant. Eowley shouted,
“ Stand, or I fire.” The man, knowing his
danger, stood still, and then cried out in
English, _ “ Don’t shoot.” Eowley, surprised
to hear him speak English, said, “ Who are
you ?” “I am the same flesh and blood as
yourself,” said he. Eowley then called out
to him, “ Come straight to me, or I will
shoot and when the man complied he
marched him up to the hut, and secured him.
Then, learning that this was the escaped
■Convict Pheeuy, he handed him over to
the troopers. The blacks were much exas-
perated at the loss of so valuable a man as
Pheeny, and held a general council, in which
it was resolved that Eowley should die.
Eowley and another man occupied two huts
under the same roof, having between them
only a six feet high partition of slabs, and
open at the top. The door of Eowley’s
house faced the river, but the door of the
other man’s was in the end. All the fire-
arms, perhaps a dozen guns, pistols, etc.,
were kept in Eowley’s room; and, knowing
this, the blacks formed a plan to overpower
both men, and kill them. Two of them came
to Bowley’s door, and asked for some
food, and, when this was given them,
they further asked permission 'to ait
down at the fire and eat it. This also was
allowed. Their plan was to wait till Eowley
should happen to go outside, theji they would
jump up, close the door, and, seizing the arms,
would shoot both men; the firing of two
shots was to be the signal for their friends
in ambush to rush in. Unfortunately for the
success of their plan, Eowley and his mate
had been cleaning their firearms that day, and
had left them ready loaded in the other hut.
So when the blacks bolted him out, Eowley at
once saw their design, ; and ran round to the
end of the house to*'get possession of the
arms. One of the blacks within, however,
not finding the arms there, bad already
scrambled over the partition slabs and was
just shutting the other door, when Eowley
managed to get his foot in, and by his superior
strength forced it open. The black, alarmed
to find himself at close quarters with such a
man, made for the partition and rushed over
again as fast as he had come. Eowley, now
master of his weapons, was soon after him
and shot him. Searching about in his hut,
he at last discovered the other black up the
chimney, and shot him too. The report of the
two shots brought the other blackfellows from
their concealment, and they were about to
rush in to take possession of the huts, when
to their dismay they saw Eowley, whom they
well knew for his prowess, standing ready to
receive them, surrounded with bis guns and
pistols, and assisted by his mate, who all this
while had been inactive through timidity and
want of energy. Eowley’s appearance made
them pause; but one of them resuming cour-
age began to advance, holding a ‘ gin’ before
him,for he knew that white men always spared
the lives of women and children. Eowley
put his gun to his shoulder and fired; the


•
ball passed through the woman without
materially injuring her, but the black man
behind her was seen to leap several feet into
the air, and then drop dead. 'This seemed to
the other blacks so incomprehensible, and so
sure a proof of Eowley’s supernatural power,
that they all retreated, leaving Eowley
master of the situation. Thereafter many a
camp fire must have beard of the skill and
the humanity of the white man who could
make his gun spare the ‘ gin,’ but kill the
‘ murri ’ behind her.
In these early times, ere yet they had
gained experience in the use of the white
man's weapons, the blacks had some amusing
adventures in the handling of firearms. At
Taggabr, we had as a station hand a blacL-
fellow whom we called Denis; he lived in a
hut with his wife and children, and was very
useful to uk. Having his rations regularly
supplied to'him and no privations to endure,
he grew fat, much to the envy of his wild
brethren in the bush, who often urged him to
leave the station life and return to his former
habits; his gin also who, I fear, did not get
her fair share of food, urged him to leave, but
he would not; he s&id he liked to stay there.
Thus he incurred the displeasure of the other
blacks, who were quite ready to do him an
injury, so as to hasten the effect of their argu-
ments upon him. One day, his family requir-
ing some additional food, Denis resolved to
go a-huntiug, and for his protection against
any hostile attacks he borrowed from us a
loaded musket. Denis soon found a tree with
recent marks of opossum’s claws on it, and,
preparing to climb, he placed his musket
against the tree, the butt on the ground and
the muzzle touching the tree and pointing
upwards; but with the hammer at full cock
and outwards from the trunk of the tree.
When he began to climb, he must have touched
the barrel with his feet, for the musket swung
round and went off, the hammer having struck
the trunk. This brought him speedily to the
ground, his face, whiskers, and hair scorched
with the powder. There he stood for some
time, feeling himself all over, and' scarcely
aware whether he was dead or alive. Find-
ing himself still alive, he came home to tell
his tale. The stockmen bad loaded the musket
for him, but without ball!
On another occasion I had brought up
from the Peel a load of station supplies, and
among them a dozen flint muskets. On ar-
riving at the Owydir, I found the river in
flood, and was thus unable to get across
There were many blacks camped near me on
the south side of the river; some of these I
employed in carrying across, by swimming,
such articles of consumption as were most
needed at the station, for a blackfellow can
easily carry across in safety 6 or. Gibs, of
flour or the like on his head. To amuse the
blacks while we were waiting for the fall of
the river, I took down one or two of the
muskets, and, cutting a mark in a gum tree
40 or 50 yards distant, I fired a bullet into
the tree. The blacks were eager to dig out
the bullet in order to see how far it had,
entered the trunk, doubtless mentally specu-
lating what the effect of such a bullet would
be on their own bodies. One of them think-
ing to emulate my performance clamoured to-
have a shot, and seemed to be angry with me
if 1 denied him the honour. I therefore took
a musket that had the habit of kicking vigor-
ously, and putting in it an extra charge of
powder I banded it to him that he might try his
skill. To my surprise he placed the butt up to'
his nose and a little in front of it, evidently
expecting thereby to take better aim, and
forthwith pulled the trigger. To say that he
immediately found himself supine on the
ground, with a face looking as if it had been
visited by a ‘ nulla nulla ’ is a feeble de-
scription of his consternation; his companions
clustered round him, wondering at the effects
of the white man’s fire-tubo. Me they blamed
not; the creature was quiet and manageable
in the hands of a white man, but very
“ koola” (hostile) to blacks I offered the
others- a shot but with one voice
they cried Bail musketo, hail.
The blacks have a great dread of the
“ dibbil dibbil,” butnone of them basever seen
him. I have seen him, or at least something
like him. At Bundella, an out station of
Taggabi, on the Gwydir, there is a large and
deep water-hole just opposite Mt. Gravesend.
On one occasion another and myself were
out on this water-hole in a currajong boat?,
trying to catch swans. We had caught five,
and although we had been pursuing the swans
up and down on that pool for three or four
hours to tire them, yet now for the first time
1 observed floating on the water near the
middle, a huge object, which I had not
seen before. We paddled cautiously up to
it, and found it to be a round scaly back, with
no head, tail, foot or fins that we could dis-
cern. 1 struck it with my oar, and forthwith
it disappeared below. Was this the Yaho on'
the Bunyip ? What was it ?


I have heard a shepherd tell a story
about a dilhil dihhil, but as the incident does
not fall within my own experiences J do not
vouch for its truth. Geo. Long and his mate
had yarded their sheep at sundown for fear
of the blacks, and were sitting down to their
supper, when the dogs came running in to the
but in great alarm ; the shepherds drove them
out, but presently they returned, evidently
frightened by something outside. Long rose
and peeping cautiously out of the door he
saw under a tree at a distance, an object like
a blackfellow, but considerably larger. Whis-
pering to his companion to bring him the
gun, he raised it to his shoulder, and aiming
at the breast of the blackfellow he fired. At
once the object began to move, and with huge
strides fled away across the river, making a
clattering noise on the shingle, as if with the
hoof of a horse. Unable to satisfy them-
selves what it was, they next morning obtained
the assistance of a blackfellow, and proceeded
to examine the track. They discovered seve-
ral footprints, and as soon as the black saw
the first of them ho exhibited every symptom
of terror, and muttered dihhil dilhil. They
said, “ Nonsense, dilhil dilhil does not care
for white men.” “ No,” he said, “ but dilhil
dilhil has come to look for blackfellows.”
The marks were like those of an emu’s feet,
but there was one long claw which penetrated
several inches into the ground.
On another occasion, at Bundella, 1 was
near the river, accompanied by a blackfellow.
As I passed along I noticed, high up iu a
lofty gum tree, about 30 feet from the ground,
a log of oak 16 or 18 feet in length, and ap-
parently about a foot in diameter. It must
pave been there for a very long time, for the
wood of the gum tree had so grown round it
and embraced it that the log had become part
of the tree itself. I asked my black servant
how it came to be there. “ Long ago kalqnn
water,” he said—“ from mountain to mountain
(this must have been fully 80 miles of coun-
try)—all blackfellows go to Terry hai hai
(there is high land there) —at first plenty
kangaroo, opossum, and other food—(they
too had taken refuge on the high land) —then
when these failed blackfellow catch fish and
live • until land dry again—happened
long ago —father and father and father
tell it long, long, long ago.” This was
his account of , the matter, and it
was clearly a tradition in the tribe, for they
do not make up stories, and until the white
men came in among them (from whom they
have learned all bad habits) I never knew
them to tell a lie. In fact Ido not know any
Kamilaroi word for a lie. Only when a man
is romancing too much they say he is using
yuldinna golya, “ gammon-talk.”
One of the earliest developments of civiliza-
tion is the stone axe, but the axe to be useful
to the savage must be kept sharp, and this he
can accomplish only by rubbing. Near Yag-
gabi there is a great rubbing place, which
must have been used by the tribes around for
many generations. It is an extensive deposit
of sandstone of a gritty nature, fit for grind?
stones. The rock rises out of a deep reach
of the river and slopes backwards for about
30 feet, and then terminates in a fl.at top,,
much of which is now covered with grass.
Yet over at least two acres of this top there
can be seen innumerable in the
stone by the blackfellow when sharpening Ins
axe, for as soon as one groove became too
deep, be would begin another beside it. Not
only on the top but also on the sloping side
these marks are seen dotm to the water’s
edge, and below it as far as the eye can pene-
trate. In 1841 there was a great drought in
these parts —so severe that the large timber
on the black ridges elsewhere all died for ten
or twelve miles. At jthat time the water in
the river at the rubbing-place was very low,
and yet the rub-marks could still be seen far
below the surface of the water. How many
generations of Uamilaroi blacks had encamped
there we cannot tell, but the rocks still tell
us why they came there and how laboriously
they had toiled.
When game is scarce the black man must
subsist on fish or roots. At Brewarrina, on
the Lower Barwon, there is an ingenious fish
cage constructed in the river by the blacks,
and still called by the settlers “ The Fishery.”
The cod fish come up here from the Darling,
of all sizes, from 4to 401bs. weight. Here
they lodge in the deeper waterholes, and,
feeding on mussels and smaller fish of their
own and other kinds, they attain to a huge size,
their mouth as large as an 18-inch globe, and
their body weighing from 120 to LjOlbs. To
catch these fish of the smaller size, the blacks
have taken advantage of a “ falls” or shelving
part of the river, just below the crossing
place, and have placed in the river, from bank
to bank, a solid wall of stones, each about as
large as two men could carry. Below this
solid wall they laid in the river other
stone walls at right angles to each
other, much like the dividing lines


of a chequer board, thereby forming
open spaces, about 8 feet square, and about 3
feet 6 inches deep. In these walls, which
cross each other, they left small slits, open
from top to bottom, and about Id inches
wide, thus large enough to let a fish of 401bs.
pass through The uppermost wall next the
crossing place is the most substantial of
all to resist the force of the current in the
river. It also rises higher out of the water,
the others being just so much lower as to
cause a slight ripple over them. This fish-
trap is used in flood time, and the build-
ers of it, knowing the habits of the cod
fisn> which' abound here, have so arranged
the slits in the lower walls, that the fish in
going upwards can proceed only in a zigzag
direction, and as they never try to turn back
they at last collect in great numbers in all
the squares) but especially in the uppermost
ones, from v&ucb there is no exit, as the wall
is solid throughout. Meanwhile the black-
fellows are staeding in the squares and are
plying their spears with such effect that tons
of fish are landed on the river’s bank. Being
unable to use them all, the blacks sell them,
as much as you like for a shilling, and they
speedily turn the shillings into rum. The
river is here about 800 yards wide, and the
noise of the rush of water is so deafening
that horses in teams crossing the river cannot
hear what their drivers are saying to them,
and a man shouting in the middle of the river
would not be heard on either bank.
When the river is low, and this trap can-
not be used, the blacks hunt the large fish in
the deep holes in the river. They swim in
with their head under water and their eyes
open, and, finding the big lazy fish in some
corner, perhaps gorged with mussels and
asleep, they spear them, and fastening on a
line they drag them ashore dead. Their camp
is three quarters of a mile distant, and the
fish must be carried thither. This is a labour
under which they sweat profusely. Three
men are needed for each fish. The first man
carries it a part of the way, then the second
relieves him of his burden, and then the
third. Thus they arrive at the camp, where
there is soon a grand feast for all. Men, gins,
and piccaninnies rejoice and stuff themselves*
with food; the feast is followed by a big sleep.
Having, as we hope, now secured the at*
tention and interest of our readers by these
stories of aboriginal life and experience, we
proceed to print as an appendix the questions
to which we referred at the outset. Answers
to these questions may be sent to the writer
of these narratives. Those gentlemen who
kindly assist in this matter by answering any
one or all of these questions will have the
satisfaction of knowing that they are con-_,
tributing to secure a reliable and permanent
store-house of information about the aborigi*
nal tribes of Australia, and are thus benefac-
tors to ethnical science. Every scrap of
information in these directions is important,
however insignificant it may seem to be, for
“ mony littles mak a muckle,” and the in-
formation given by one may supplement and
explain what another has said.
Information is particularly desired about
the coast tribes from Sydney to the Richmond
River, for of them very little is known.


APPENDIX.
1. What is the locality to which your answers
Veter; its distance and direction from the nearest
■postal town ; the tribe ; its name as distinguishing
it or its members from other tribes by which it is
■surrounded ; its local organization in sub-tribes,clans,
«r lesser divisions; the boundaries of the country
occupied by the tribe?.
2. The class divisions of which the tribal com-
munity is composed, such as the well-known Kami-
laroi classes, Ipai, Kumbo, Muri, Kubi, &c. ?
3. The laws of marriage between the classes of the
tribal community ?
4. the laws governing descent in the classes P
5. The terms used for the various degrees ot kin-
dred and relationehip P
6. The tribal government; whether .in the hands
Of one bead-man, or of several head-men, or of a
council of elders, or of the elder men generally;
whether such head-men hold their office by election
or by right of descent; whether the tribal govern-
ment is in the hands of the Wizards or Doctors P
7. The Tribal Council; its consititntion and
powers?
8. Offences against tribal law or custom, and the
methods of punishing such; offences against the
Individual, and the means of redress for the same P
9. The offices of Herald and Messenger.; the use
ot message sticks and emblems tor calling together
Assemblies for festive, ceremonial, or deliberative
purposee, or for declaring war or proclaiming peace P
10. Ihe Wizards and Doctors of the tribe; their
pretention to communication with spirits and to
the possession of supernatural power; the practice
ot magic and the uss of charms for producing or for
curing disease ?
11. Beliefs as to death and-its causes; funeral
ceremonies, and the after existence of the disem-
bodied spirit ?
12. The Bora and its ceremonies ?
13. Rules regulating the distribution of game and
ot food, or prescribing the positions to be occupied
by the respective huts in a camp ?
14. Infanticide; how, and when practised and the
reasons assigned for it ?
15. Cannibalism; when and where practised, and
by whom of the tribe, and upon whpcu; the reasons
assigned for it P
16 Gesture-language; signs and Ognals by smoke
or otherwise ?
17. Belieft* as to the structure of the world; the
nature of the sky, the sun, moon, stars, and other
heavenly bodies, and generally of natural pheno-
mena P i
18. The folklore of the tribe; the fables, tales and
legends told of animals, men, and supern.iural
beings ? v
(19) Vocabularies— Give the native words corres-
ponding to the English—(l) man, (2) woman, (3)
head, (4) hair ot head, (5) eye, (6) nose, (7) tongue,
(8) ear, (9) hand, (10) thumb, (11) foot, (12) blood,
(13) bone, (14) fire, (15) water, (16) sun,(l7) moon,
(18) my, (19) thy, (20) his, (21) mv foot, (22) one,
(23) two, (21) three, (25) four, (26) fire, (27) tan,
(28) twenty, (29) father, (30) mother, (31) son, (32)
daughter, (33) brother, (34) sister, (35) cousin, (36)
uncle, (87) aunt. Jn writing native words, observe
that a is sounded like a as in father, e like eh, t like
ee, u like 00, at like eye, au like ow as in now.
* Fate 1, The above queries refer solely to the
beliefs existing at the time of the settlement of the
country by the whites—and not to any beliefs or
customs acquired from them.
Note 2. In answering, please prefix to your answer
only the number of the questions to which the
answer refers.
