

[?]
ON THE DEME AND THE HORDE.
BY
A. W. HOWITT, F.G.S.,
AND
LORIMER FISON, M.A.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1884.


On the DEME and the HORDE.
By A. W. HOWITT, F.G.S., and LORIMER FISON, M.A.
Twenty or thirty years ago, if any one had hinted at the remote
possibility of there being the slightest resemblance between-the
social structure of the Attic tribes and that of the Australian
aborigines he would have been looked upon as a madman; and
even nowadays an assertion to that effect may perhaps be received
with ridicule. Nevertheless, we do not hesitate to assert that
there is a very close resemblance between the two, not only in
general organisation, but even in usage, which affords a valuable
addition to the fast accumulating evidence in proof that much of
later custom in civilisation can be traced to very ancient practice
in savagery.
In endeavouring to show this, it will be necessary for us to go
over certain ground which has already been surveyed and mapped
out by ourselves as to the Australian organisations, and by others
as to those of Attica. For this we must crave the reader’s
indulgence. We have also to premise that, while we state
without hesitation, and perhaps even with some little modest
approach towards authority, what we have ascertained by our
own investigations to be facts in savagery, we have no such
confidence in our ability to state with fulness and accuracy
the other part of our subject. This we present, under submis-
sion, to the judgment of competent scholars.
§ 1. The Australian Horde.
Among the Australian aborigines there are divisions of the
community determined by locality—geographical divisions—
and there are also divisions on which the marriage regulations
are based. The former are distinguished by certain local names,
in a few cases by eponyms, while the latter are denoted by
“ class-names,” 1 or by totems —frequently by both class-names
and totems. In the aggregate of the whole community these
two sets of divisions are conterminous, but no division of the
one set is conterminous with any division of the other. That
is to say, the people of any given locality are not all of the same
totem, nor are the people of any one totem in the community
collected in the same locality. 2
1 Class-names, so called by us solely for the sake of convenience, and because
they cannot always be positively asserted to be totems, though the strong
probability is that they are always totems.
2 This is the general rule. But'a few exceptions are known to us, where the
local organisation has prevailed over the social, the line of descent has Changed
to that through males, and all the people in a certain locality have come to bear
the same totem.
a


We have perceived that we were misunderstood to affirm in
our joint work, “Kamilaroi and Kurnai,” 1 that “ the members of
a class, or totemic division, live in a community apart from those
of other divisions.” In order to prevent further misconception
on this point, it seems absolutely necessary to fix upon some
term which shall unmistakably indicate the local divisions as
distinguished from the social. In a short memoir entitled “ Erom
Mother-right to Father-right,” 2 we called them “local clans.”
But the term “ clan ” is misleading when applied to people who
have descent through the mother, and it had better be kept
exclusively for those who follow the other line. The very
sight of it suggests agnation, and the mind refuses to remain
continually on its guard against old impressions. Too frequently
it takes in the report of the eye without testing its accuracy.
In the place of “ local clan,” we therefore now propose the word
hokde for want of a better. This at least is not so likely to be
misunderstood.
By horde, then, we mean a certain geographical section of an
Australian community which occupies certain definite hunting-
grounds. Its members are of different totems. In fact, all the
totems of the community may be represented in any given horde.
Descent being through the mother as the general rule, the child
is of its mother’s totem, not of its father’s. But it belongs to the
horde in which it was born. Bearing these two facts in mind,
we may now get a clear view of the two organisations for com-
parison with those of Attica.
§ 2. The Constitution of the Two Organisations.
a. An entire community—nation, tribe, or whatever else it
may be called—of Australian blacks is divided socially into
two principal exogamous intermarrying sections, A and B. 3
Each of these sections has exogamous subdivisions, distin-
guished by totems. 4 But since their sum =A+B, we need
1 “Kamilaroi and Kurnai.” George Robertson, Melbourne; London: Mac*
millan.
2 “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.” for August, 1882.
3 Tbis is the statement of a very extensive rule—which, however, has a consider-
able number of exceptions. The four classes of the Kamilaroi and other tribes
are not specially considered in this memoir; nor is there any need to consider
them specially, for it is now positively ascertained that they are subdivisions of
two primary sections.
4 The main sections themselves are frequently, probably always, so distinguished.
What we have called class-names have been found in some cases to be “ major
totems,” as distinguished from the minor totems of the subdivisions. The
probability is that they are all totems. A hostile critic has told us we “do not
see that by mating tills admission we throw up the anthropological sponge.”
He is quite right: we did not see it. Nor have we yet been able to perceive it.
His view requires the taking for granted of a certain origin of the totem, and
that is begging a very large question in dispute.


not take them into account for the present. They will come in
farther on.
This we have called the social organisation.
/3. The community is also divided geographically into a
number of hordes, X, Y, Z. We take three for the sake of
convenience. There may be many more.
This we have called the local organisation.
X is made up of individuals belonging to A, and of others
belonging to B; so is Y; so is Z.
The children of the horde belong to the horde— e.g., the
children of X males are of X horde, and so forth.
But since A (male) must marry B (female), and descent is
uterine, the son of XA is XB. In other words, the son is of
the father’s horde, but of the mother’s totem —of the local
division to which the father belongs, but of the mother’s social
division.
Frequently we find the hordes to be exogamous as well as
the social divisions, 1 probably a later regulation to prevent close
intermarriage —as if an English village were to determine that
its children should marry beyond its bounds, the sons bringing
their wives to the village, while the daughters go to their
husbands’ villages. In this case XA (male) must marry YB or
ZB (female), but his son is XB still.
§ 3. Aggressiveness of the Local Organisation.
The local organisation is hostile to social; —not consciously so,
in the minds of the natives, but from the very nature of things.
In fact, it is the earliest germ of the State. Its tendency is
to modify and contract the range of the social organisation, to
usurp its authority, to bring about descent through males, to
arrange society on its own basis, and finally to make itself
paramount.
This tendency is plainly to he seen even among the Australian
hunters, and it is far more clearly perceptible among agricultural
tribes. But to state this in full would be merely to repeat
the greater part of our paper, “ From Mother-right to Father-
right.”
§ 4. Mother-right.
Before we go any farther let us be quite clear as to what descent
through the mother involves. It has to do with the social
1 But there is the clearest distinction between these two exogamous laws.
Breach of the social law of exogamy is a capital felony, causing pollution and
punishable by death. Breach of the local law is a simple misdemeanour. The
distinction between the two offences is like that which lies between the worst
kind of incest and running off with a ward in Chancery. The latter is doubtless
highly reprehensible, and to be severely punished, but it docs not cruse pollution.
a 2


organisation only; it does not touch the local. We have seen that
it does not take the son away from the father’s residence, and we
may further note that it does not remove him from under the
father’s authority. The daughter may go away when she marries,
hut the son remains in the father’s horde. He is under the
dominion of the father. 1 He is even recognised in some tribes
as the actual re-incarnation of the father. “ Here I am, and there
you stand with my body ! ” cried an old blackfellow to his dis-
obedient son, “ There you stand with my body, and yet you won’t
do what I tell you.” 2 I3ut in spite of all this, the son is of the
mother’s social division. He is Dilbi or Kupathm, 3 Eaglehawk
or Crow, as his mother was before him, and as his father was not.
This at first sight may appear to be merely the inheritance of
a name. Bnt the name is a word of power. It carries with it
a marriage right and a marriage obligation, a paternal right and
a paternal obligation, involving many important duties and
privileges. Among nomad hunters like the Australians it has
little or no concern with inheritance, for the simple reason that
there is little or nothing to inherit, except a hunting right which
is common to all members of the horde, of whatsoever social
division they may be. The succession of the son to the father’s
horde can scarcely be called inheritance from the father. It is
mere continuance in the locality where he was born. But among
agricultural tribes who have descent through the mother the land
goes with the “ name.”
§ 5. Aliens.
In addition to the born members of a community there may
be a few aliens—war-captives taken in boyhood, and others who
have been admitted into a horde and furnished with wives. If
the captive be of a tribe which has the social organisation of his
captors —as he very usually is, for this organisation extends over
a vast area—there is no difficulty in his case. Indeed he is not
really an alien, for he belongs to either A or B, and is matri-
1 Our statement in “ Kamilaroi and Kumai,” p. 74, that “ the father is utterly
ignored,” lias been entirely misunderstood. Wo were dealing with the line of
descent, andwith that alone, as the context plainly shows. In accordance with
the group-relationship prevailing among the Australians, the sou may have
“ many fathers ” nominally, and a number of men may have access to his mother.
But his putative father is the man with whom his mother habitually cohabits.
3 It must be noted, however, that the tribe to which this man belonged had
advanced to descent through the father.
3 Dilbi or Kupathfai. These are the two primary sections of the Kamilaroi,
of which Ipai, Kunefa, Muri, and Kubi are subdivisions. Though theoretically
inferring their existence, wo had not discovered them when we published “ Kami-
laroi and Kurnai.” Wo have now not only been able to establish their existence
in the Kamilaroi, but also as tribes existing in other tribes far northward into
Queensland.
[?]


monially placed accordingly. But since there are tribes which
have not this organisation, and captives from them are occasion-
ally admitted into a horde by tribes which are so organised, it
is necessary to take aliens into consideration.
The alien woman, if she is really an alien, is, in many if not in
all cases, brought before the elders, who decide as to who shall
have her. Apparently she is feigned to belong to some one of
the totemic divisions which furnish wives to the man who takes
her, and any children she may have are placed in that division.
It may be, however, that the elders are able really to determine
what totem in-- their tribe is the analogue of her own. This is
certainly the case in the Carpentaria tribes, whose class systems
are at first sight entirely dissimiliar.
§ 6. Summary.
From the foregoing we get three clear equations:—
The whole community = X + Y + Z (which take in aliens).
= A + B + aliens.
Hence X+Y+Z=A+B+ aliens.
That is to say, the sum of the local divisions is equal to the
sum of the social divisions, leaving aliens out of the account.
An alien may become a member of X, Y, or Z, but he cannot
become a member of A or B. His child, however, will be
admitted, because its mother is either A or B, and it will have
her totem.
The main Australian facts may now be compared with those
which present themselves in Attica. Let us recapitulate them
in order to keep them clearly before our minds :
1. Two distinct and essentially different organisations, each of
which (eliminating the aliens) includes the whole community.
They are conterminous in their entirety, but non-conterminous
as to their parts.
2. Exclusion of aliens from the organisation, which is based
on descent.
3. Admission of the children of naturalised aliens into the
exclusive organisation, by virtue of a right derived from their
mothers.
4. Tendency of the local organisation to modify, and finally to
supplant, the social.
5. Subdivisions of the main sections of the social organisation
into minor sections, which are genealogical, exogamous, and of
uterine succession.


§ 7. The Two Organisations in Attica.
It is clear that there were in Athenian society two great
organisations: one based originally on locality, and another
whose sole qualification was that of birth. But the difficulty in
the way of distinguishing one from the other, and of determining
the relations which they bore to one another, is increased by the
fact that the later Greek writers themselves are confused in their
accounts of them. As Wachsmuth says, in his invaluable work
on the “Antiquities of the Greeks ”: 1 “ The accounts of the gram-
marians ... are written without proper attention to the
subject, and are incomplete and misplaced. In attempting to
explain the nature of the divisions 2 they constantly confound
one with the other; but still the real fact that they were
essentially and not merely nominally different may he gathered
from their pages.”
These divisions may be examined in the Denied as distinct
from the Fhratries. The demotic is the local organisation; the
phratrial is the social. The denies were a political organisation,
artificially and arbitrarily constructed in the first instance, but
they were originally arranged on the basis of locality. 4 Having
been once constituted, they had a genealogical continuance
because the son entered his father’s deme; and probably they
lost their local character to a considerable extent, owing to the
removal of members to other localities. No provision seems to
have been made for a change of settlement, excepting in cases
of adoption. It was as if a Middlesex man, removing to York,
still retained his Middlesex rights and obligations, but acquired
none at York.
Both the organisations—the demotic and the phratriac—
included the free-born citizens; and therefore (leaving out of
1 Woolrych’s translation, p. 343.
2 Wachsmuth speaks of three kinds of divisions, those of “ caste,” as well as
the phratriac and the demotic. We take the last two only into considera-
tion, not troubling ourselves with divisions such as dmarpibai, yeapopoi, and
Srjpiovpyoi. These seem to have been based on rank, or hereditary occupation
They do not effect either of the two great organisations.
3 Of course we do not mean that the Attic deme rsyrer sc anything like the
Australian horde. The ancient geographical divisions of which the domes were
the modern representatives would be more to our purpose, though even these
would not take us back to the horde of nomad hunters. But we know little or
nothing about them beyond their names, and these do not always tell ua with
certainty even as much as what sort of divisions they were.
4 Some of the domes bore the names of clans, not of localities. It seems likely
that in some cases, especially in the country, when Klcisthenes arranged the
demes, certain localities may have been occupied, chiefly at least by powerful
clans with their retainers—as one might say, by certain Macs and O’s, and in
such cases the name of the deme might bo derived from the clan, and not from
the locality.


the account the aliens, who were admitted to the former, hut
not to the latter), the two coincided in the aggregate. But no
deme coincided with any phratria, or with any subdivision of a
phratria. The members of the one organisation were scattered
among the divisions of the other.
§ 8. Aliens.
The statement that the two organisations were conterminous in
the aggregate must be qualified, as in the Australian parallel, by
the elimination of the aliens, because, though every phrator was
a demote, every demote was not necessarily a phrator. 1 The
naturalised alien was enrolled in one of the demes, but there
could be no admission for him into a phratria. He lacked the
indispensable qualification of birth. If, however, he obtained
the right of liriyapia, and married a free-born woman, his
children by her were not excluded. They were enrolled in her
father’s phratria, the relationship between a child and its
maternal grandfather being looked upon as a very near tie of
blood. Isteus even maintains that it is nearer than the tie
between own brothers, on the ground that a man’s daughter is
nearer to him in blood than his own brother, the former being
begotten e’£ i/celvov, the latter only yer’ e/celvov. 2 This, however,
may be only a lawyer’s quibble; but it seems likely that we find
here the true explanation, not only of Aristophanes’ skit upon
Exekestides, (pvadrco Tramrous Trap'ypuvKaifyavovvTai typdrepes?
but also of that upon Archedemos, o? emeTys wr ovn e<f>vae
(frpdrepas*
The fact that the child of a naturalised alien by an Athenian
mother was registered in its maternal grandfather’s phratria will
account for both (pvaaroi Tramrous in the former, and e<j}v<re
tppdrepa’i in the latter. The hit at Archedemos has indeed been
taken to mean that he had failed to obtain citizenship ; 5 but the
real meaning seems to be that, though ho was a naturalised
demote of seven years’ standing, he had not been able to get a
free-born woman to wife, and therefore had produced no phrators.
His mere admission to citizenship could not give him phrators;
and were nothing more than this referred to, the gibe would miss
its point.
In Australia we have seen that the child of an alien was
1 This and other matters it is necessary to s( ate in full, ( hough nobody disputes
them, in order to exhibit the striking parallel afforded in the low savagery of
Australia.
2 De Cir. Her., 217.
3 Ayes, 705.
4 Ran®, 119.
5 Fritzschius annot.: “Qui, quum diu Athcnis esset, nondum civitate eral
donatus.” I’aley follows to the same effect.


admitted to the social organisation by virtue of descent through
the mother. It received its mother’s totem, and it is a curious
fact, well worth noting, that even at Athens, where the line of
descent was through males, maternal descent was regarded more
than paternal, as far as the children of aliens were concerned.
For, though the child of a naturalised alien man could be admit-
ted into a phratria if its mother were a free-born woman, the
child of an alien woman could not be admitted, even though its
father were free-born and high-born. At all events it could
not be legally admitted, though the law seems to have been
disregarded in later times. No such child could be legitimate.
The marriage of a citizen with an alien woman was forbidden
under heavy penalties, and all the children of such cohabitations
were rralSes dWorpioi. 1
The Australians could not afford this arrangement, for a
woman was too valuable an acquisition to be repelled. So they
admitted the alien captive, and placed her under one of their
totems.
§ 9. The Two Aliens.
The distinction made by the Australian blacks between the
two aliens, of whom one belongs to a tribe having a like social
organisation with that of his captors, and the other to a tribe not
so organised, is like the Greek usage, though not precisely on
all fours with it. The one is indeed a stranger from beyond the
community, but he is not (as one may say) from beyond to
' EKKrjvucov. The other belongs tc3 Bap/3dpa) with which the
very thought of any kind of union was indignantly repelled as
utterly monstrous and repugnant to humanity. And as in
Australia the social organisation, though a complete entity in
any given community, extended far beyond it over vast areas,
and formed a real, though not a very powerful bond of union,
keeping up a feeling of kindred among the tribes it covered—
so also in this widest sense it may be said to have taken in,
not Attica only, but the entire Hellenic race. 2
1 Dem. C. Near, 17. Why this should have been so in Attica, where descent
was through the father, it is not easy to explain, on any theory which rejects the
possibility of former uterine succession. But if we can take the practice as a
survival of former descent through the mother, the explanation is clear and
easy. For it is the direct logical consequence of descent in that line, and we are
told by Herodotus that it was accepted in actual fact by the Lycians who had
descent through the mother.
2 Herod., viii, 144; to ‘EXXjjwkoi/ tor opaipov re Kai opoyKattraov, Ka'i 6eav
Ihpvpara re Koiva Kai 6valm, rjdcd re oporpoTta. In the early days of Australian
colonisation the blacks admitted white men into their communities readily
enough—Buckley, for instance. But in cases such as his they were not
looked upon as aliens. The natives supposed Buckley to bo one of their
defunct warriors, redivivus, and he was therefore in no sense an alien, but


§ 10. The Two Jurisdictions.
Though the two organisations in Attica, as in Australia, were
co-existent, mutually interpenetrating, and (eliminating the
aliens) conterminous in the aggregate, they were essentially
distinct, each having its own regulations, its own offices, its
own festivals, and its own jurisdiction. Thus, in the oration
against Necera, we find Stephanos accused of offending against
two different sets of men, by bringing alien children for enrolment
both to the phrators and to the demotes. 1 Here we have two
distinct tribunals before which children had to be brought for
enrolment in the two organisations. That these tribunals were
composed of different sets of men is certain, because (as several
writers have pointed out) Phrastor, Neoera’s son-in-law, belonged
to the deme called Hekale, and his son must have been presented
for enrolment in that deme; but of the six yevvfjrcu belonging
to the A phratria with himself, and to the same subdivision of the
phratria, who testified that they had voted against the admission
of his son among the phrators, only one belonged to Hekale, the
other five being members of as many different demes.
We have here, not only a clear distinction between phrators
and demotes—between the social organisation and the local,
but also what is far more interesting and important, a clear and
most instructive distinction between the nature of the offence
against the former and that of the offence against the latter.
The one is a breach of morality “ doing despite to the gods ”;
the other is a civil wrong “ defrauding his deme of its lawful
gains.” 2 The latter is a case for the law courts; the former comes
under the jurisdiction of the phratriac tribunals.
The distinction between these two jurisdictions seems to be
clearly marked. The former administered what we may call
the Law of Enactment, the latter dealt with the Law of Custom.
In ancient times, when there was little or no law of enactment,
would have attributed to him the totem —whatever it may have been—aa
well as the name of Murangurk. The natives very generally looked upon
white men as ghosts. This was no unreasonable theory among tribes who
believed that the individual could during sleep leave the body and wander about,
or who subjected their departed friends to a slow wanting until the epidermis .
loosened and peeled off, showing the white skin beneath it. This custom cannot
be said to have been general, but then very many of the tribes are cannibals, and
doubtless often witnessed the phenomenon in their practice of the culinary art.
A good example of the adoption of an alien would have been afforded by John
King had he not been rescued before the process was complete. When found
living with the Yantruwunta tribe he was certainly adopted to some extent, and
would have been completed in the course of time.
1 Neccra, 17 : dWoTpiovs Trend as elcayayovra els re to vs (f>paTepas Kat els
tovs Sr/poras.
2 TjvefiTjKOTa h'eis tovs 6eovs—aKvpov he noiovvra tov hf/pov Tav avrov.
tX'Q. 'C.X—


the phratriac tribunals were undoubtedly real judicial bodies
with very great power in their hands; hut in the later days they
had been completely set aside in all civil matters. As much of
the old customary law as it was necessary to adopt had been
formulated and made into common law by enactments, and little
was left to the old tribunals but questions of morality and
religion. 1
§ 11. The Areiopagos.
Of these phratriac tribunals it seems clear that the highest
was none other than the Areiopagos itself. Judging from what
we find elsewhere, we may suggest that originally it was the
Great Council of the Elders from all the phratries, who were
the depositories and exponents of the customary law—the men
who, before the rise and establishment of hereditary chieftainship,
were those who were qualified to pronounce with authority,
“ Thus and thus say the gods,” and before whom flagrant offenders
against custom, and therefore against the gods, were brought
for trial, minor culprits being dealt with by each phratria in its
own council. Though formerly awful in sanctity and all-power-
ful in action, it was completely shorn of legal authority in later
times, and reduced to the singular position of a tribunal dealing
with sin, offences which made the gods angry, as distinguished
from crime and tort, offences of which the State took cognizance. 2
And even in the matters which were left to its jurisdiction,
we are expressly told that it had no power to punish ; and that,
if it did so, it must keep its proceedings secret. Thus, in the
case against Necera, we find it secretly inflicting a heavy fine on
the King-archon without having any legal authority for so doing,
“ in secret and with a decent regard to appearances, for they have
no power of their own to punish any Athenian at their will.” 3
With our modern notions we stand amazed and almost incredu-
lous before a record such as this. To us it is as if an Anglican
Synod, or a Presbyterian Assembly, or a Wesleyan Conference, had
1 Customary law is essentially religious. For custom is determined by the
practice of the ancestors, and they are the gods.
2 But we must remember that there was no such distinction in the minds of
men in very ancient times, any more than there is in the minds of savages at the
present day. Sin—to them but another name for breach of custom—was crime
and tort and treason against the community. It is true that murder was left
under the jurisdiction of the Areiopagos, but this docs not tell against our view.
For murder was sin in the sense in which we have used the word. Anywhere
within the community —according to the widest range of the old notion, which,
however, became contracted in more modern times—it was shedding the “ blood
of kin,” an impious offence which it was the express function of the Erinyes to
avenge. Killing an alien was mere homicide, but there was no guilt attached to
it—the gods were not concerned.
3 iv diropptjTco be kcu bid KO(rp,ioTr}Tos‘ ov yap dvroKpdropes claw, cos uu
Bov\u)VTai uvd KoXdaai,


fined a prominent Church-member in the amount of a considerable
fortune for taking unto himself a wife from among the ungodly. 1
But the Athenian seems to have perceived no incongruity in it.
He had taken his legal business out of the hands of his ancestral
gods, as represented by their great tribunal, but he still kept up
an appearance of profound submission to their jurisdiction,
because he was afraid of them. Even the most advanced thinkers
had very likely somewhat of the old dread still lingering deep
down in the secret recesses of their hearts. At all events, if they
had not, they were wise enough to keep their opinions to them-
selves.
Nothing can be more instructive than the Neoera case in
showing how completely, for all practical purposes, the new order
had shelved the old, even though the utmost reverence was still
professed for the latter. It was all very well for the plaintiffs’
counsel to denounce with virtuous indignation Stephanos’ offences
against phratriac law in order to serve his purpose in a civil
suit. But it is evident that the old regulations, though reverenced,
were practically disregarded, and that the heinousness of an
offence against them—like that of the Fijian’s “ entering his
brother’s house,” to use the decent euphemistic phrase—lay in
its being a matter of public notoriety. It is simply incredible
that an alien woman so notorious as Pliano, daughter of a mother
more notorious still, could have been palmed off upon the King-
archon as a full-born virgin, without his connivance, and it is
certain that if a money squabble had not arisen there would have
been no action taken against Stephanos on the score of outraged
morality. The insulted gods would have been left to take care
of themselves. It is true that the Areiopagos accepted the
King-archon’s plea of offence through ignorance; but it may
well be asked, if they had repelled it could they have enforced the
fine ? If a Greek of that day—and an Athenian Greek to boot—
were under no legal obligation to pay so much as a single oholos,
what power on earth, with no torture-chamber at its command,
could have screwed several thousand mince out of him 1 The
proceedings before the Areiopagos have all the appearance of a
solemn farce.
But if any one of the few substantial rights which had been
left to them were invaded, they still had power enough to assert
themselves effectually, and even to reverse the decision of the
1 The gravamen of the charge against the King-archon lay in the fact that
Phano was an alien. As his wife, she, an alien woman, administered the oath
to the priestesses of the Bacchic Mysteries, was herself “ given in marriage to
Bacchus,” and looked on secret riles which none but women of full birth could
dare to see. The aliens were literally “ the ungodly.” They had neither part
nor lot in the gods.


Ecclesia itself, as in the case when the Assembly elected iEschines
to represent Athens at the Amphictyonic Council. This was
clearly an invasion of their rights, for the Amphictyonic league
was distinctly an affair of the social organisation of which they
were the representatives in Attica. It was a league of affiliated
tribes, not of confederated states ; that is to say, it had a genea-
logical, not a political basis. By its election the General
Assembly had invaded the clear right of the Areiopagos. It was
as if the British Parliament had taken upon itself to say what
Catholic bishop should represent England at the last (Ecumenical
Council.
But, after all, this was in reality no very great matter, for
even in early times the Amphictyonic Council had lost so much
of its influence that Demosthenes could speakof it contemptuously
as of “ that shadow at Delphi.” 1 We do not find him speaking
thus of the Areiopagos itself. The politicians of that day knew
that it still had a strong hold upon the reverence of the masses—
the sons of the men who had burst into a wild storm of fury,
excited by fear, at the mutilation of the statues of Hermes. So
they were always careful to speak of the august tribunal with
the highest respect; but they were equally careful to keep all real
authority in civil and political matters out of its hands. 2
1 De Pace , edd. Priestley, p. 82.
2 It is well to note here what the nature of the jurisdiction is, which is exercised
by what may be termed the Great Council of an Australian tribe. A very good
instance is afforded by the Dieri tribe. It occupies the delta country of Corpus
Creek, on the eastern side of Lake Eyre in South Australia. It is the central
tribe of a group of at least nine, whose aggregate territory extends fully three
hundred miles north and south and east and west. Besides personal acquaint-
ance with several of these tribes, acquired before their country was occupied by
the whites, we have received a very full report from Mr. S. Gason, who, as an
officer of the South Australian police, lived for six years in the Dieri country, and
not only acquired the language but also became an initiated member of the tribe.
What may be well called the General Council of the Dieri tribe consists of all
the fully initiated men. Within this there is the Great Council, composed of all
those men who are venerable through ago, or eminent by reason of same mental
or physical superiority combined with years. It includes, therefore, the extremely
aged men, the heads of totems (murdurs), the principal warriors, the great orators,
the powerful wizards; and the most eminent man of them all becomes the
headman of this council.
Within the last fifteen years, if not even now, it was the headman of the Manyura
Murdu who presided over this council. The Manyura is the Portulacca oleracea,
and this vegetable is one of the most valued of the food resources of the Dieri.
The headman of this Portulacca totem prided himself on being the “ root of life.”
lie is described as a persuasive orator, and a renowned wizard, who professed to
be guided in his counsels by dreams and visions from the great spirit Kuchi.
The Great Council of the Dieri holds its meetings in secret, and to wrongfully
reveal its deliberations is deemed worthy of death. It decides upon the times on
which the great ceremonial meetings of the tribe are to be held, including the
several successive initiations, and the propitiatory ceremony to produce rain in
times of drought. It allots to each other those who under the Dieri form of
group-marriage thenceforward became “ accessory ” husbands and wives to each


§ 12. The Two Qualifications.
The distinction between the qualification for membership in
the phratriac organisation and that for full admission into the
demotic, finds a striking parallel in the Australian usage.
A child became a member of its father’s phratia at birth, or
at least as soon as it had been presented at the ancestral altar,
and accepted by the phrators as the true seed. But not so with
the demotic organisation. .Though the son became a member of
his father’s deme, he was not formally admitted until he had
gone through a long period of probation. Not until he had
reached the age of eighteen, and had passed two years in the
gymnasia, was he armed in the presence of the assembly,
registered in his deme, and qualified to look for a wife. Even
then he had still to serve two years on the frontier before he
could take his place in the assembly; that is to say, the qualifi-
cation for the admission of a born citizen into the demotic
organisation w T as proof given that he was qualified to take his
place in the community, and to contribute to its defence.
This is wonderfully like the Australian usage. In tribes
which have uterine descent a child becomes at birth a member
of the social division to which its mother belongs. In all the
tribes with which we are acquainted a boy is by birth one of his
father’s horde, but he cannot exercise either his totemic or local
privileges until the men of the community, assembled in their
local organisation, formally admit him to them. This will be
made clear by a short review of the main points of Australian
initiation ceremonies.
(1) The ceremonies are held by the assembled community
periodically; the community being the aggregate of hordes, or
of tribes between which there is epigamy. The community is
divided into two exogamic sections, neither of which can by
itself initiate its youths.
(2) At the the age of puberty the boy is taken from his
other. It also sends out embassies to its kindred tribes, and declares war and
proclaims peace. It tries persons charged with offences against the tribal
welfare. For instance, within our knowledge it punished with death a man
who had acted as guide to a party of white men, who thereupon took possession
pastorally of part of the Dieri hunting and food grounds, to the manifest injury
of the tribe. It also tries persons who are charged with offences against the
moral code of the community, as, for instance, such who, being “ Buyulu-
parchuna ” to each other, hare disregarded the prohibition of marriage which is
attached to that relation. This term, which means “ all near relations,” has
become one of the most insulting expressions which it is possible to apply to a
Dieri man or woman, from the implied meaning of “ incest ” attached to the words.
The Great Council of the Dieri tribe deals, therefore, with crimes and .moral
offences, as we should call them ; that is, with offences against both the local and
social organisations.


mother and the assembled women by the initiated men —that
is, by the local organisation. He undergoes certain ceremonies
which are partly personal to himself, as circumcision, or the
extraction of a tooth, and partly instructive, as by his being
taught the ancestral laws which govern the relations of the sexes
and the general morality of the tribe. The ceremonies have in
some tribes a quasi-religious character, as where the youth is
taught the existence of a great spirit by whom first the initiation
ceremonies were instituted, who still watches them when they
are being held, and who will punish by sickness, or perhaps
death, the disregard of his laws, such as those which forbid to
the novice the use of certain food during his probation. Some
parts of the ceremonies are symbolical, as wdien the youth is
invested with the “ belt of manhood,” or where his mother does
some act signifying the termination of her maternal control over
him.
(3) The period of probation which follows the initiation is
intended to test the youth’s power of self-restraint, as well as his
skill as a hunter; for he is forbidden to eat certain food animals,
some of which are more nutritious than those which are per-
mitted to him, while others are more plentiful. Thus in the
midst of plenty he is placed in circumstances of scarcity, and
being banished from his kindred he is thrown upon his own
resources. We have known this period of probation to last
nearly twelve months.
(4) It is oidy when the elders of the tribe— i.e., the Great
Council—are satisfied with his fitness to rank with the men that
the novice is recalled to his horde, and, after a still further
period of probation, permitted to acquire a wife in that mode
which is customary in his tribe. He is now permitted to attend
the general assembly of men, but is not yet permitted to speak
during council. He is expected to preserve a respectful and
attentive silence, and it is only as he grows older that he actually
participates in the discussions that take place. We have noted
as one of the marked features of such a general council the
silent attention with which the young men receive the directions
of the elders.
Thus it is that the right which comes to a boy at birth with
his inherited name to obtain a wife from among the women of
that totemic group (class, sub-class, or totem) with which his is
epigamic, cannot be exercised by him without the permission of
the local organisation. We have heard the novices forbidden
by the old men to exercise such inherited privileges until
permitted to do so in the lawful manner. In some tribes
within our knowledge a certain amount of informal previous
indulgence is allowed to novices during their probation, yet there


also the formal exercise of the right acquired by birth is not
permitted until the old men—that is, the council of the tribe
—are satisfied as to the youth’s qualifications. The inherited
right and its restriction come out very clearly in the Kamilaroi
instance, as stated to us by Mr. Naseby of Maitland, N.S.W., who
has had fifty years’ acquaintance with that tribe. The youth,
after having attended a sufficient number of initiation ceremonies,
is free to marry, and according to tribal law may select any
unappropriated girl of that class, sub-class, and totem with which
his own is epigamic, always provided that she is not within
any of the forbidden degrees of relationship to him, and that
his hands are free from the blood of her kin. The wrongful
exercise of this inherited privilege—that is, its exercise before
the youth has received the formal sanction of the local organisa-
tion—is punishable by death.
§ 13. Summary.
Thus far our case seems tolerably clear, and may be summa-
rised as follows;
a. The Attic community was divided into sections, whose
qualification was solely that of birth. These were ancient,
natural, and religious. 1
/3. It was also divided into other sections based originally on
locality. These were modern, artificial, and utilitarian for civil
and political purposes. But they were the modern representatives
of far older geographical divisions. They did not destroy or even
modify the structure of the other organisation, though their
ultimate tendency was to do away with it altogether. They
simply ignored it for all State purposes, and left it to manage its
own concerns.
Making all necessary allowance for difference of culture in
the two peoples under view, and especially for the difference in
their lines of descent, we think we may now safely say that—
The former of these two organisations—the phratriac—is
analogous to what we have called the social organisation of
Australia. These are the <j>v\cu <yevuccu.
The latter—demotic, or rather the old geographical division.
1 The demotic organisation had its own religious apparatus j but this was
artificial, not organic. The phratriac gods grew : they were the ancestors. Tho
demes “made unto themselves gods.” The founder and the promoters of the
democratical organisation w-ere men far too astute to leave the vast power of
religion in tiieir rivals’ hands. They were as wise in their generation as Jeroboam,
the son of Nchat, was in his. They did not adopt “ strange gods,” they put tho
demes under the protection of those with whom the people were familiar. So
Jeroboam set up gods which were known to tho Israelites of old,’and ho
quoted Aaron the great high priest as their guarantee, “ Behold thy gods,
O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.”
A. W. Howitt & L. Fison. —On the Dome and the Horde. 15G


far older than the naucraries which were superseded by the
denies—are analogous to the Australian hordes. These are the
(pvXai ToiTiKai. They must always have existed in Attica side
by side with the phratries, unless there was a time when every
geographical division of the people coincided with a genealogical
division.
§ 14. The Genos.
We now come to a very important question, which is far from
being clear, but which we think is capable of being cleared.
We have already pointed out that in Australia the two primary
sections of the community are subdivided, and that the sub-
divisions are distinguished by totems. Of these totems there
are two distinct sets, one of which belongs to one of the primary
sections, while the other set belongs to the other primary
section. Reverting to our formula for showing the constitution
of an Australian community, and taking one set of totems as
a, b, c, d, &c., and the other set as I, m, n, o, &c., then—
A = a + b + c + d, &c.
B = I + m -f n + o, &c.
All persons in the community who bear the same totem are
looked upon as of common descent, and they are considered to
be so closely related that no connubium can be permitted between
them. 1 In other words, the totemic division is genealogical and
exogamous ; and the question is, can we find any subdivision of
a phratria which is analogous to it ?
That there were subdivisions of the phratries— yevrj —no one
disputes ; but it has been positively asserted over and over
again, by the very highest authorities, that the yevos was not a
genealogical clan, and that its members were not connected by
any tie of relationship.
It seems even to have been doubted whether it was really a
definite corporation, with a separate existence of its own. It is
not without fear and trembling that we advance to the attack of
a position which is armed by such a weight of authority, and we
must ask the reader to bear in mind that, on this part of our
subject, as we said in our introductory remarks, we claim nothing
more than permission to state our case, “ under submission, to the
judgment of competent scholars.” We venture to think it can
be shown that the Genos was a distinct corporate body, the con-
stitution of which can be accurately determined; that it was a
1 Some of our critics have denied most positively that these are real relation-
ships. All we can say is that the natives consider them so real that intercourse
between the persons bearing them is looked upon as incest, and in most tribes
punished by death to the man, if not to the woman also.


true genealogical clan ; and that the denial of relationship to its
members may be clearly traced to a confusion in the use of the
word yivos for which the grammarians are responsible.
§ 15. The Genos a distinct Corporation.
Here again the invaluable Necera case throws light upon our
subject. Phrastor, we are told, brought for enrolment his son
by Hecera’s daughter, not only both to the phrators and to the
demotes, as already noted, but also “ both to the phrators and
to the Brytidse of whom Phrastor himself was a gennete.” 1
The point here is the statement that the child was brought both
to the phrators and to the Brytidae—in other words, both to the
phrators and to the gennetcs. If there be no real distinction 2
here, we have an instance of mere tautology of which we cannot
suppose an Athenian orator to have been guilty. It seems to
be a clear distinction between the jurisdiction of a phratria and
that of a genos. The Brytidae were not merely a house-father
with his sons and grandsons: they were a number of house-fathers
with their families—quite possibly even a number of groups of
house-fathers belonging to many different domes, and yet held
together by a valid and enduring bond, which secured to them a
common right of decision as to the eligibility of children for
admission among them. They were therefore a real corporate
body. This body was a definite integral part of a phratria,
distinct from and yet connected with all similar parts of the
same phratria, each of which, like itself, had a distinguishing
title of its own. Phrastor had to bring his son first to his own
gennetes, and subsequently to the larger division to which his
genos, in common with certain other yevg, belonged. The council
of his genos had to be satisfied as to the qualification of the child,
and their decision had to be ratified by that of his phratria, and
finally by that of the assembled phratries before whom the
sacrifice had to be offered for the child at the festival of
Apaturia.
§ 16. Constitution of the Genos.
The constitution of the genos seems to have presented a
difficulty, for we are told that it consisted of thirty 7 ewgrai, or
avZpe ?, rendered by Hermann “ houses,” 3 and it is not clear at
first sight how this number could be a constant. If we could
take these houses as equivalent to the Koman familial, the
1 Hcocra, 77 : els tovs tf>paT€pas . . . khi els tous BpvriSas, eSv Kai alnos
ianv 6 (jypaaroip •yervijTijf.
2 See also Istus, “ De Apollod. Her.,” 3-5.
3 “ Greek Antiq.,” § 09.
h


difficulty would vanish. For, since the various households,
however they might increase in number, would be ranged under
one or another of the familise, the number of these would
naturally be a constant. But this would be unsafe, for there is
no evidence that the familia had developed within the genos,
though it is quite possible that there may have been something
very much like it.
The real explanation, we venture to suggest, may be as
follows:
The thirty gennetes were probably the council of the genos,
elected from among the house-fathers and restricted in number
to thirty for the sake of convenience. 1
They were The Gennetes par excellence ; but in addition to
them there might be many yevprjrai (house-fathers) who were all
classed, together with the juniors, as arpiaKdirToi. This is ana-
logous to what we find in Australia, and (one may almost say)
everywhere in savagery—a council of elders in which many
members of the community have neither seat nor voice, or a seat
without a voice.
§ 17. Relationship of the Gennetes.
Thus far all seems clear enough, but when we go to the
grammarians for information as to 7 evos and yevvrjTrjs we plunge
straightway into confusion worse confounded. We are at once
confronted by the misleading definition of Julius Pollux—
-61 rov 7 evous (eieaXovvTo) yevvijrai, teat o/j.oydXaKres,
7 evet fiev ov rrpoarjKOVTes, e/c Be rijs crvvoSov ovreo rrpoaayopevop-
evoi, 2 which Niebuhr thus paraphrases: “ The members of a house
or genos, who were called gennetes, or 6p.oydXaKres, were no way
akin, but bore this name solely in consequence of their union.” 3
But how was this union effected ? How did the avvoßos come
about ? Harpocration, on yevvijrai, says they are oi eg dp%fjs
el? rd KaXovfieva yevrj Karavejirjdevres. But how did they get
themselves allotted to the tcaXovjLeva yevrj ? The grammarians
help us in no wise by thus summarily disposing of the difficulty.
One thing is absolutely certain, namely, that the far-away
ancestors were not arbitrarily drafted into yevrj. Ancient
1 The council of a phratria, if each genos sent a representative to it, would
consist of thirty members, and thus the number might be suggested for the
lower council. Of course this is mere conjecture. But when we consider how
the members of the phratries and the yevrj were scattered among the denies wo
can but allow a strong probability that they would have local executive councils
to deal with their every-day affairs.
2 “ Onomasticon,” viii, 111.
3 “Eom, Hist.,” Hare and Thirlwall’s translation, p. 311.


society—the more ancient—does not thus regulate itself.
“ Nascitur, non Jit.” One can understand a Kleisthenes redis-
tributing into demes a civilised community which has grown
into a State, but the notion of any such arbitrary distribution of
men into 7 ivrj in the beginning of things cannot be entertained
for a moment. The genos must have been genealogical at that
very indefinite starting-point. This we think will be readily
granted; and we may now ask, at what period in its subsequent
history could it have become non-genealogical ? When could
any one single individual have got into it from without ? We
see it jealously guarding itself against intruders even in the
latter days when the State had supplanted the kin, and most
assuredly we cannot expect to find any relaxation in this jealous
care as we go back towards the time when the kin was all in all.
Adoption certainly introduced members from without; but in
the first place none but phrators could be adopted—that is to
say, none but those who belonged to one or another of the
phratriae which made up the community, and of these one’s own
phrators and the nearest of kin among them would naturally be
preferred. The adopted son must be a person known to the
ancestral gods. The sacra must not be defiled by a stranger’s
hand. Therefore, if the genos were genealogical in the beginning,
it follows that the gennetes of historic times were, by either
birth or adoption, the direct descendants of its earliest members.
In other words, they were of common descent. This conclusion
brings us apparently into violent collision with Julius Pollux;
but we think it can be shown that his statement admits of a
clear and satisfactory explanation, and that there is in reality
no collision at all. The fact of the case is, that at the time of
the grammarians, and long before their time, the word 7ero? had
come to have two meanings; and this fact, as it seems to us,
affords a complete solution of the entire difficulty. Primarily
the word indicated the yeVo? which was an aggregate of 7 evvrjrac.
In its more modern and narrower sense it also denoted a certain
kind of relationship, which, according to Pollux, did not extend
beyond persons of one direct line, nor beyond one generation,
taking a complete generation to reach from grandfather to
grandson — olov ’yoveas, met?, dSeXjibus teat tou? irpb tout coy teat
i/c tovtcov, icj) oiv teat r) 7 evved Tarrerat. 1 Hence we can under-
stand him when he says that <yevv7)Tat are not 76m TTpocnj/covres ;
and his definition of them may be taken as follows:—“ Gennetes
did indeed belong to a certain section of a phratria which was
called a ryevos, but they had not to one another that particular
kind of relationship which we understand by the word yivos
1 “ Onomasticon,” iii, 6.
A.W. Howitt & L. Fison. —On the Dcme and the Horde. IGO


nowadays; 1 and by this I mean to say that they were not
brothers to one another, nor own brother’s sons, nor fathers and
sons, nor grandfathers and grandsons.” Niebuhr’s “no way
akin ”is far too strong a phrase here. “ Not connected by the
very closest blood ties ” would perhaps be nearer the mark, and
it might be well to guard even this by adding “ according to the
modern notion of relationship.”
For the fact that the gennetes were not reckoned to be thus
related in the time of the grammarians cannot be taken as proof
that they were not so reckoned even in the time of Demosthenes.
Most certainly it is no proof that they were never so reckoned
that they were not traditionally of common descent, and
consequently that the genos was not a genealogical clan. The
assertor of the negative here should be provided with proof far
stronger than any the grammarians can afford, for he would be
asserting that the social unit was always the individual in the
Attic tribes. And this would be only another way of saying
that the older history of their development is altogether different
from that of other branches of the Aryan stock, and indeed from
that of all other tribes which have come under our ken. From
what has been ascertained concerning these, the fair inference
is that in the more ancient times the gennetes were “tribal
brothers,” 2 and that the genos then consisted of groups which
bore the relationship of 7 e'ro? to one another — group to group;
in other words that yivos the relationship covered and coincided
with 7 eVo? the aggregate of jevvfjTai. As the individual asserted
himself more and more strongly against the group and prevailed
over it, 7 eve; the relationship would become more and more
contracted in its range, until at length it would be confined to
individuals who were ascendants or descendants in a single line,
e<f> oiv Kai 7] 7 evvea rarrerai. 3
1 The fact seems to hare been strangely lost sight of that Julius Pollux could
not have written his “ Onomasticon ” until near the end of the second century of
our own era. His notions of relationship seem to be taken as if they were
necessarily identical with those of men who lived in the days when the old
genealogical basis of society in Attica was only in process of being superseded
by the political. Nay, more, they are taken as if they represented the notions
of relationship held by the Attic peoples' long before that of the State found
its way into their minds.
* This relationship being allowed the right of decision as to the eligibility of
children for admission into the genos was naturally common to all the gennetes
in their joint paternal capacity. We have seen that it descended intact to their
modern representatives.
s We may note the same tendency even in tribes which are supposed not
to be of the Aryan stock. Thus, Fijians marrying within their own matanggah
(genos) acknowledge that this is a breach of ancient rule, the father of the
contracting parties being tribal brothers by common descent. But they excuse
themselves on the ground that “ their fraternity is far away”— i.e., they are not
yem Give the Fijian a political bias, and as many centuries as


We venture to think that what we have advanced is sufficient
at least to show that the refusal to accept the genos as a
genealogical clan needs reconsideration. To our own minds—
biassed, perhaps, as they may be by our investigations of
savage customs—there is no difficulty whatever in the way of
accepting it as a subdivision of the phratria, consisting of various
familue—not necessarily the Eoman familim, but various lines of
ascent all converging into one line, at the head of which stands
the Eponym, or common ancestor. Why it should be so strongly
asserted that the Attic genos differed essentially from the Eoman
gens, and still more that “ the Eoman gens is the only gens we
know,” 1 we are at a loss to conceive, unless it be that the gram-
marians’ definition of yevos and yevvijrat have been taken as a
full and authoritative settlement of the question. They were
certainly thus taken by Niebuhr, for he refers to them as an
“ express denial of common descent,” and accepts their verdict,
whereas they are no more than a denial of a particular kind of
relationship.
§ 18. Was the Genos Exogamous ?
The Australian totemic division is not only genealogical, hut
exogamous also. We have endeavoured to show that there is
good reason for reconsidering the decision that the Attic genos
was non-genealogical, and we have now to inquire whether there
is any evidence that it was exogamous.
In later times most certainly it was not, nor is there any
evidence within our knowledge that it was exogamous in any
historic time. Morgan was unfortunately led to assert the
contrary by a passage in Metcalfe’s translation of Becker’s
“ Charikles ” : “ Eelationship was, with trifling exceptions, no
hindrance to marriage, which could take place within all degrees
of and avyyeveia, though naturally not in the yevos
itself.” 2 We have not had an opportunity of examining this
passage in the German, but Dr. E. B. Tylor has been kind enough
to inform us that he finds Metcalfe’s rendering to be a mis-
translation. The true meaning undoubtedly is that marriage was
prohibited to those only whose relationship was within the degree
of yevos as defined by Julius Pollux. This does not prohibit
marriage within the genos, nor is there any ground whatever for
supposing that it was prohibited. On the contrary, judging from
the usage of agricultural tribes of the present day, who have
intervened between Demosthenes and the grammarians for that bias to deflect
his course, and he would come to define yevos as Julius Pollux defined it.
1 “ Imperial Encyclopedia,” Art. Gens.
2 “ Charikles,” Excursus to Scene XII; The Women. Quoted by Morgan,
“Ancient Society,” p. 225.


descent through the father, it seems quite certain that it was not
only permitted, but encouraged. We find the custom of giving
a dower of land with the bride to be a powerful incentive towards
such marriages. Thus in Fiji the matanggali (genos) always
desires to keep its marriages as far as possible within its own
bounds, confessedly for the purpose of keeping the dower lots
within the matanggali.
But may we not infer from the facts as to exogamy which the
researches of late years have brought to light that there was
most likely a time in the earlier history of the genos when it
forbade marriage witliin its limits ? As we have already stated,
the Fijians though encouraging marriage within the matanggali,
acknowledge it to be a breach of ancient rule; and that rule is
still absolute in “ the present practice of the pure Indian tribes.” 1
The legend of Kekrops points to the former prevalence of group-
marriage among the ancient Attic tribes; and if there were
group-marriage, there must have been exogamy within some
tribal division or another. This, however, is but another way
of saying that the utmost we can safely assert is a possibility
which is very likely to represent the actual fact.
§ 19. Mother-right in Attica.
It is not at all necessary to our case that we should endeavour
to show the former prevalence of descent through the mother
among the Attic tribes, nor do we think that it can be shown.
Most of the available evidence has been presented by Mr. J. F.
McLennan, 2 with all the skill of a practised advocate; but the
verdict seems to be against him. If we could take the Lycians
to he undoubtedly of Hellenic blood, as he takes them, the case
for mother-right would have a somewhat better appearance; but
Canon Eawlinson is as strong in the negative 3 here as Mr.
McLennan is in the affirmative.
And even if we could take the middle course, and conclude
with Dr. Smith that the Lycians were half-caste Greeks 4 we should
still be under obligation to prove that this was not an instance
of the mingling of a superior race with an inferior, in which the
custom of the latter prevailed over that of the former. In short,
if our case required us to show that mother-right was formerly
the rule in Greece the statement of Herodotus as to the Lycians
1 See the discussion of the “ Principle of Exogamy ” in Dr. W. E. Hearn’s
luminous work, “ The Aryan Household,” pp. 155-162. George Robertson,
Melbourne, 1878 (London : Longmans; Melbourne: (1. Robertson, 1879).
2 “ Studies in Ancient History,” pp. 235-309.
3 Rawlinson’s “ Herodotus,” i, 173, note.
4 Smith’s “ Class. Diet.,” Art. Lyvia. “It is clear that . . . the historical
inhabitants were Greeks, though with a mixture of native blood.”


would have to be dismissed as useless to us. And indeed it
would be well if we could get the Father of History out of the
witness-box without damage to our cause. For, as Dr. Hearn
points out in a keen examination of Mr. McLennan’s Greek
evidence, he expresses his astonishment at the custom of mother-
right by saying that the Lycians are the only people in the world
who have it, “ and if of all the nations that Herodotus knew—
that is, all the Greeks and all the Mediterranean peoples—none,
save the Lycians only, practised the Mutter-recht, what becomes
of the stories of Spartan polyandry, and of the Athenian or
Messenian traditions on which Mr. McLennan relies ?” 1 Hero-
dotus is in this instance like a witness who, after giving evidence
favourable to the side on which he was called, suddenly blurts
out something which completely proves the case for the other
side, or at all events damages that of his own. Mr. McLennan
did good service by pointing out the significance of the old Greek
myths which suggest the former existence of the totem in Attica,
and there seems to be no doubt whatever that it did exist there.
But, in the first place, the mere presence of the totem is not
proof absolutely positive of descent through the mother, because
there are real agnatic clans which are distinguished by totems.
Even among the Australians such clans are found ; nevertheless,
it is important to note that they always present indications of
former uterine succession; and we think it will come to be
established, as a general rule, that the totem indicates that line
of descent, either in actual prevalence or of former occurrence.
But, in the second place, even if we take the evidence of the
myths as conclusive in proof that the totem was present among
the ancestors of the Attic tribes, this does not prove that they
brought it with them from their ancient seats, or that they ever
bore it as their badge. It may be true, for instance, that the
totem peers out from the legend of Kekrops, half man and half
serpent; but this and the other myths may be nothing more
than reminiscences of love and war between encroaching settlers
and totemic aboriginal tribes, A like status of civilisation being
given, the Eandolphs and other good Virginian families might
come in time to trace their descent from one Eolfson, 2 a sort of
centaur whose lesser half was that of the animal represented by
Pocahontas’ totem ; and they might tell their children, listening
wide-eyed, how the ancestral heroes of their race slew monstrous
bears and wolves and other ravenous beasts, which used to tear
off the hairy scalp of their victims before devouring them; and
how, even after their fathers had grown into a mighty nation.
1 “Kinship in Early Greece” (Victorian Review, May, 1880).
2 ‘ ll n T "' 1!o " rn ' !n< ‘ ■■■!■" ■—»- »" "f M"
Qo-jzJ' t fiuJC.


they were sore afflicted by a hybrid monster who, reversing the
usual order, was a bison as to his head and bust; but human as
to the hinder end of him. 1 There is nothing satisfactory to he
got out of the myths.
On the whole, the most that can be affirmed is this : Searching
for mother-right in Attica, we find here and there in the historic
period certain marks—such as the rule with regard to the
children of aliens 2 —which look like traces of it, but which, for
aught we know, may be traces of something else. And in the
shadowy border region where the horizon melts and loses itself
in the cloudland of myth, we see what may well be taken for.
the thing itself. But we cannot determine the exact position.
Though the present usage of savage and barbaric tribes furnishes
us, as it were, with a powerful glass which brings it nearer to
us, the distance is still so vast that we cannot distinguish with
absolute certainty between the solid peak and unsubstantial
cloud, and it would be unsafe to lay down any positive land-
mark on our charts. Which is simply a round-about way of
saying that there is nothing to be said.
§ 20. Conclusion.
In our introductory remarks we stated that “ there is a very
close resemblance between the social structure of the Attic tribes
and that of the Australian aborigines, not only in general
organisation but even in usage also,” and we now venture to
submit that, to some extent at least, we have made good our
statement. It is, of course, to be distinctly understood that we
undertook no more than this. We undertook to show a
resemblance, not an identity, and most certainly not a proof that
this resemblance establishes any link of connection between the
Greeks and* Australians. Not even positive identity of organi-
sation could prove as much as that.
Our object was twofold. First, to show that Athenian society
was built upon an old foundation whose outlines, and even
whose inner dividing lines, coincide substantially with those of
savage society, and that those lines may still be distinctly traced.
The stately edifice of civilisation built itself upon them, and it
was their arrangement which determined its general form. And
secondly, our purpose was to show in the low savagery of
Australia the beginning of that conflict between the two organi-
sations which ultimately wrought the cluster of genealogical
clans into the political organisation called the State.
We are not unreasonable enough to affirm that the tendency
1 Sitting Bull, the Indian Chief who was so troublesome of late.
2 Supra, § 9.


of the local organisation to alter and supplant the social, as we
see it in Australia, is sufficient of itself to produce the Athenian
State. It takes the community out of mother-right into father-
right, 1 and establishes the true agnatic clan; but at that point in
many tribes its force appears to be exhausted. In any given
clan the social organisation now coincides with the local—that
is to say, the two organisations are now conterminous as to their
parts as well as in their entirety, and an equilibrium results which
may last through untold centuries. When the totemic division
with descent through females is replaced by the local clan with
descent through males, further development then seems to
depend chiefly, if not entirely, on birth. When that point is
reached, and not till then, the possibility arises of chieftainship
hereditary in a direct line among a group of agnates, of a caste
of nobles, and of various grades determined by birth: the high-
born, the well-born, the full-born, the free-born; and on the other
side of a great gulf, the men who had the misfortune not to be
born at alb All these begin to come by an orderly process of
evolution as soon as the clan is formed with descent through the
father, and a preferential right is established in favour of the
firstborn over his younger brothers.
At this point most of the early communities stopped; but in
Athens appeared the force which was destined to set aside this
firmly established order. And this was a conviction in the
minds of men that the heaven-born caste has no inherent
vested right to exclusive authority. The rise and progress of
this remarkable phenomenon in ancient history has been traced
by far abler hands than ours, and we mention it here only
because we wish to call attention to the fact that, whcKLthis
disturbing element arose in the established order, it was the
truce which had lasted through ages that was broken; it was
the old strife that renewed itself on the old lines. The in-
novating politicians saw clearly that the social organisation was
the enemy’s stronghold, and that it was necessary to their
purpose to make the local organisation dominant over it. So
they attacked it cautiously but persistently; by sap, not by
storm. They did not attempt to overturn and destroy it; but
they dug out from under it all the authority on which it rested,
and and even reverentially, “ eased it down ” below the
height on which the rulers sit.
In Attica we see a number of petty, independent, more or less
mutually hostile, affiliated clans consolidated under the leader-
ship of Athens. This seems to be undoubtedly the meaning of
1 The process may be clearly seen still going on, but not yet complete, in tribes
within our knowledge.
c


the story that Theseus united them in one city. 1 Not that the
clans were fused, and recast in new forms, but simply that they
were now held together under one head by a political bond.
Here they begin to come out into the light of history, and we
see plainly that thus far they are in nowise different from
many similar confederations which existed unchanged through
century after century. But the keen, restless Athenian intellect
does not long remain content to stand in the old paths, merely
because they are the old paths. It commits the impiety of
thinking and choosing for itself, and of innovating; and so we
see the old strife renewed and the local organisation setting
itself against the social organisation once more. Gradually it
usurps more and more authority as the political bond grows
stronger and stronger, until at length it grasps all real power
over affairs, and leaves to its supplanted rival nothing but a
registry of births, a religious festival, and a tribunal once awful
and all-powerful, but now shorn of legal authority, though per-
mitted still to look after the morals of the community and to
levy fines upon sinners, 2 on condition that it does so in secret.
Nothing is more interesting than to watch the progress of the
local organisation, at first unconsciously, but afterwards of set pur-
pose, ousting the genealogical from the place of power, until at
length it culminates at Athens in the deme,from which there seems
to be only one step —that of enrolment consequent upon settle-
ment—to our own “township.” And yet, the other organisation
was still living and full of vigour. In our own day modern
•notions and institutions exist side by side with old beliefs and
regulations—the one in civilisation, and the other in contem-
poraneous savagery —running merely in parallel lines, not
touching or in any way affecting one another, so long as the
superior race does not come into collision with the inferior.
But at Athens we see the two interwoven -with one another in
the same people, and each exerting a powerful influence upon
the other. What the outcome might have been if the Athenian
State could have been isolated and left to work out its own
problem in its own way, or if it had been strong enough to hold
its own against the pressure from without, can be only a matter
1 “ Thucydides,” ii, 15.
2 Among garages it is the elders who have this authority, and in their case it
is real and efficient. Thus, in some of the Fijian tribes, there are certain ciders
who are efficiently custodes morum. It is their business to see that the young folks
walk in the ancient ways, to warn them against transgression, and to punish
them for it. For instance, one of them seeing a young follow with his malo
(waist-cloth) unduly elevated towards his chest—an assumption of rank to which
he had no claim —cried threateningly to him, “ You there ! What are you doing
with the strangling-cord of your father high up like that ? ” And the club was
raised to enforce the reproof.


for conjecture. It was open to attack, and not Athene herself,
spear, aegis, and all, could stand against the forces which beset
her.
“ Liberty said, ‘ Let there be light,’ and like a sunrise on the
sea Athens arose.”
But Liberty uttered her fiat too soon. The age was not ready
for it; and so, as Walter Bagehot says, “Athens was the great
free failure of the ancient world. 1 The age of Discussion had
begun before people were willing to hear it, and a stiffnecked
and perverse generation put it down.”
DISCUSSION.
Mr. Hyde Cdaeke, -while regretting the absence of Dr. Tylor,
pointed out that the paper before the Institute was an example of
the service which anthropological science could render in the
illustration of classical history. In fact, it was the substitution of
men practically acquainted with human nature and the institutions
of man, for recluses who applied their own imaginations to the
texts of the writers of Greece and Rome, and only confused what
was of itself obscure. It was legitimate to examine the institutions
of Attica by the light of those of Australia; but it was questionable
whether the institutions of the one could be regarded as those of
Aryans, or of the others as those of savages. The earliest known
inhabitants of Attica were certainly not Hellenes or Aryans, but
Turanians; and the point with regard to Australia was whether the
institutions were invented by the black savages or introduced by
a higher race. Ho had given evidence as to former intercourse
with Australia, and in that continent there was a growing disposi-
tion to attribute the institutions to an extinct race. From one
origin were derived the institutions of antiquity throughout the
world. Personally he regarded the paper with great satisfaction, as a
contribution in support of his own researches. It would be seen by
reference to his paper on Autonomous Coins, in the “ Transactions
of the Royal Historical Society,” that he had shown the population
of the Mediterranean countries and islands to be Turanian. Each
settlement consisted of members of several populations and tribes,
and this he suggested was in reference to the institution of exogamy.
This was consequently the condition of Attica, and he should there-
fore regard with some hesitation the conclusion that the local
organisation was to bo regarded as so much later than the phratria
in the organisation of these states. Whether an island or a petty
kingdom there was a local organisation from the beginning of the
settlement, and within which was to be found the phratria to the
number of four, five, or six apparently. This condition was repre-
sented in a paper of Mr. Man as to the traditions of the Anda-
manese. Therein it was distinctly stated that for the origin of
1 “ Physics and Politics,” p. 28.


the population tribes were created with separate languages. Such
appeared to be the condition of the populations in the countries
around the Mediterranean, and it was to be presumed in other
regions.
[Reprinted from ike Journal of the Anthropological Institute, November, 188
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty, St, Martin's Lane,
