

AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY
Copies of Correspondence
BETWEEN
MR. R. R. R RANGE
AND THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY ;
WITH EXTRACTS FROM THE
COMPANY’S ACTS OF PARLIAMENT.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
Appointed by a Special Resolution of the Proprietors.
30th JANUARY, 1857 ;
WITH EXTRACTS OF
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE,
MACLURE AND MACDONALD, PRINTERS, 37, WALBROOK, E.C.




AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY
Copies of (Lomspoißmicc
BETWEEN
MR. R. H. PRANCE
AND THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY;
WITH EXTRACTS FROM THE
COMPANY’S ACTS OF PARLIAMENT.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
Appointed hy a Special Resolution of the Proprietors,
30th JANUARY, 1857 :
WITH EXTRACTS OF
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE,
&c., &c.
LONDON :
MACLURE AND MACDONALD, PRINTERS, 37, WALBROOK, E.C.
1873.


INDEX.
Letter, E. H. P.’s, dated January 28th, 1873 .... 3
~ Shareholders’ Requisition, dated May 23rd, 1873 . . 4
„ Governor’s Reply, dated May 26th, 1873 . . . 6
„ Secretary of the Board of Directors’ Reply, dated May
27th, 1873
„ R. H. P.’s, dated May 31st, 1873 8
„ Secretary’s Reply, dated June 10th, 1873 ... 9
Clauses in the Company’s Act of Parliament, 5 George 17.
Clause XX 10
Clause XXXI
Clause XL . 11
Clauses in the Company’s Act of Parliament, 20 & 21 Victoria,
cap. 68 (page 965) :
Preamble and Clauses XIII and XVII . 12
Report of the Committee of Consultation, appointed by a Special
Resolution of the Proprietors, 30th January, 1857 . . 13
Supplemental Report 2g
Extract from Minutes of Evidence .... 31
Prices of Shares at various dates .... £0


f-l j A4»3 f 4
- Vl5 .
CORRESPONDENCE.
Stock Exchange,
January %Bth, 1873.
My Dear Sir,
In accordance with our conversation of this
afternoon, I have now to request that you will take the
necessary steps to enable you to issue certificates to
represent the shares of the Australian Agricultural
Company, in accordance with the usage in almost all the
modern share companies. I presume that the clause in
the Act of Parliament might run thus : —To enable the
Company to issue 20,000 certificates of shares of T 25
each, numbered from 1 to 20,000 respectively, to he
signed by the Governor and Secretary, and having the
seal of the Company attached, which certificates would
he given to the Shareholders on the register on a certain
day. Should a sale be made, the vendors would hand
over the certificate to the purchasers, with the transfer
which would specify the number of the shares ; and the
purchaser or his broker would see that the numbers
agreed with the transfers. The Company’s registrar
would then only have to add the numbers of the shares
transferred to the certificate of registration, which is
usually given to the purchaser. At present great incon-
venience and risk is occasioned by the fact that as only
an ordinary transfer is used the purchaser has no


evidence that the vendor is the holder of the shares
which he is called upon to pay for on the mere delivery
of the transfer. The case of the Bank of Australasia is
not exactly in point, because the Company make out
their own transfers, which is much more labour to the
office than the introduction of the numbers in the
register and transfer certificates.
Thanking you for the courtesy with which you
received my suggestions,
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) Beg. H. Prance.
To the Chairman,
Australian Agricultural Company.
2, Hercules Passage,
Old Broad Street,
London, 2 3rd May, 1878.
To the Chairman of the
Australian Agricultural Company.
Dear Sir,
We, the undersigned, being Shareholders in the
Company, beg to remind you that a wish was very gene-
rally expressed at the last Meeting, that the affairs of the
Company should be more fully made known to the
Shareholders and the public at large. We, therefore,
request that you will send to Mr. Slaughter, of the Stock
Exchange, a monthly statement of the amount of coals
raised to hank, the amount sold, price per ton, and
average expense of getting, together with any other
information, such as amount of latest remittance, sales
of land, stock, &c.


With regard to the important statement made to the
proprietors at the last meeting as to the dispatch of the
100 tons of iron-stone from the Port Stephens property,
we beg to ask if the shipment has been made, by what
ship, and when it may he expected to arrive in this
country.
In the event of your having received no advice on this
subject, we suggest that a telegram should he despatched
asking for this information. We believe that this would
be the most effectual way of putting to silence rumours
that private telegrams on the subject have been received
from Australia, one of which is to the effect that no iron-
stone of marketable value exists on the estate.
We are, Sir,
Your
obedient
Servants,
Beg. H. Prance.
Lewis Paine.
Chas. C. Gowan.
Sydney Laurence.
Edwin W. Legg.
Thos. F. Shattock.
H. Staples.
J. M. Paine.
R. Case.
J. Case.
Thos. Faulconer.
Albert Levy.
H. F. Shattock.
Thomas Grieveson.
H. O. Downer.
F. Campion.
Edwin H. Laurence.
James Hilton
J. Marnham.
E. Hamshar Hardwick.
Albert 11 . Petre.
G. D. Gibbes.
Charles H. Prance.
W. D. Anderson.
J. Y. Stock.
J. E. WOODROFFE.
Robt. Say.
E. Donnison.
Henry Tudor.
J. K. Philip.
H. L. Scott.
E. Frith.
Thos. Boulton, Jun.
A nd 9 other Shareholders.


Australian Agricultural Company,
196, Gresham House,
London, 26th May, 1873.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of a letter of
the 23rd instant, signed by yourself and other members
of the Stock Exchange, and haying reference to the affairs
of this Company.
It shall be submitted to the Hoard at our next meet-
ing, and the conclusion they arrive at will bo immediately
communicated to you.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
Edward Hamilton,
Gov. A. A. Co.
Beginald H. Prance, Esq.
Australian Agricultural Company,
196, Gresham House,
Old Broad Street,
London, 21th May, 1873.
Gentlemen,
Your letter of the 28rd instant, addressed to the
Governor of the Company, was brought under the con-
sideration of the Board of Directors to-day, and I am
instructed to make the following reply
The Directors do not recognize the right of a section
of the Shareholders to demand a monthly statement of
the affairs of the Company. Such a course would be
contrary to ail commercial precedent, and they are at a


loss to see in wliat way it would promote the interests of
a Company which is engaged in two of the staple trades
of New South Wales, viz., wool growing and coal mining,
the fluctuations of which the Directors have neither the
power nor the wish to conceal. The details of the
Company’s coal trade, which used to he given very fully
in the annnal reports, have been withheld during the
last two years with the assent of the Shareholders present
at the General Meeting held in July, 1870, because it
was thought, on the whole, more prudent to do so.
As regards the minerals on the Company’s Estate at
Port Stephens, to which your letter refers, it has been
known for many years, from the printed and circulated
reports of Mr. Odernheimer that there are large deposits
of iron, coal, and limestone. The iron ores are therein
described as magnetic and hematite, and to the latter
the attention of the public in this country has recently
been directed, owing to its increased value here. By
order of the Directors, a few small samples were sent
home last year and were tested. The test was not
favourable ; but, as the result may have been due to the
size and bad selection of the samples, the Directors,
thinking that the test should be repeated on a larger
scale, have requested the Superintendent to send over, at
his convenience, 50 to 100 tons. The shipment is not
yet announced, and therefore they have no information
to give on the subject.
In conclusion, I am instructed to say that a private
telegram, if any such has been received, professing to
affirm that no ironstone of marketable value exists on an
estate of nearly half a million of acres, which is known
to contain that mineral in large quantities, could not be


entitled to any credit. No search could be made without
the sanction and knowledge of the Superintendent; and
as nothing of the kind has been mentioned in the
despatches, the report may be dismissed as an idle
rumour.
It has been observed by the Directors that among the
signatures to your letter there is the name of one
gentleman who is not a registered Shareholder of the
Company.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
Wm. Robinson,
Secretary to the Company.
Messrs. R. H. Prance and others,
Stock Exchange.
2, Hercules Passage,
Old Broad Street
London, E.C., Blsi May, 1873.
To the Secretary of the
Australian Agricultural Company.
Sm,
I beg to acknowledge your reply to the letter of
23rd instant, and shall be obliged by your forwarding me
a copy of the Resolution passed by the Shareholders at
the General Meeting held in July, 1870, authorizing the
Directors to withhold the details of the Company’s coal
trade.
Yours faithfully,
R. H. P.


Australian Agricultural Company,
196, Gresham House
Old Broad Street,
London, 1 Oth June, 1873.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 31st nit., I am
directed to inform you that no formal Resolution to with-
hold the particulars of the coal trade was submitted to
or passed by the General Meeting in July, 1870. The
change of practice was recommended by the Directors
and assented to by the Shareholders then present. At
the Special General Meeting held in February last, the
subject was again mentioned, and the course that had
been adopted by the Directors seemed to meet with
general approval. It is a point to which the Directors
have never attached much importance, and if the object
of their reserve is misunderstood, the best course will
probably be to raise the question at the next annual
meeting.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) Wm. Robinson,
Secretary.
R. H. Prance, Esq.


CLAUSES
IN THE COMPANY’S ACTS OF PARLIAMENT.
5 George IV.
General XX. And be it further enacted, That there shall be held in each
be held in Year One General Meeting of the said Company ; that is to say, on
every j ear. Third Tuesday in the Month of January in each Year, or within
Fourteen Days next after; of which Meeting Fourteen Days Notice at
the least shall be given by Advertisement in Two or more of the Public
Daily Newspapers published in the City of London or County of Middle-
sex ; and the First General Meeting to be held by virtue of this Act
shall be holden on the Third Tuesday in the Month of January One
thousand eight hundred and twenty-five ; and at such General Meeting,
and at every Special General Meeting to be held in pursuance of, and to
be called in the manner prescribed in this Act, the Governor or Deputy
Governor, or One of the Directors of the said Company, to be chosen at
such Meeting or Meetings respectively, or, in the Absence of all the
Directors, any one Proprietor, to be chosen at such Meeting or Meetings
respectively, shall be the Chairman of such Meeting or Meetings respec-
tively ; and all such Meetings may be adjourned from Time to Time,
and from Place to Place, as shall be found expedient ; and the Sub-
scribers and Proprietors, or any Nine or more of them present at such
General Meeting, or at any other Special Meeting to be called for that
Purpose, of which Fourteen Days’ Notice shall be given, specifying the
Purpose for which such General Meeting is called, or at any Adjourn-
ment thereof, shall have Power, as herein is mentioned, to elect Persons
qualified according to this Act, to be the Governor, Deputy Governor,
and Directors, and Auditors and Examiners of the Accounts of the said
Company, and to serve in the Place of such Person or Persons whose
respective Office or Offices shall have become vacant by Death, Resigna-
tion, or Want of Qualification, or otherwise; and all Questions at any
General or other Meeting of the said Company shall be decided by a
Majority of Votes of the Proprietors present, according to their respec-
tive Shares.


XXXI. And be it further enacted, That the said Directors shall
and may at any Time or Times, and for such Purpose or Purposes as tors as to
they may think proper, have Power to call a Special General Meeting |pecM
or Meetings of the said Company, of which Notice shall be given by Meetings.
Advertisement in Two or more of the public Daily Newspapers pub- Meetings, f
lished in the City of London or County of Middlesex, Fourteen Days at t 0
the least previous to such Meeting.
XL. And be it further enacted, That if at any Time any Nine or W p^ oprie .
more of the Subscribers or Proprietors of the said Company, who shall call
together be Holders of Ninety Shares at the least, shall deem it neces- General .
o J Meetings in
sary or expedient to call a Special General Meeting of the Subscribers certain
v cases.
or Proprietors at large, for the Purpose of taking their Opinion and
Determination upon any Matter or Thing relating to the said Company,
and shall sign a Requisition in Writing to the said Governor, Deputy
Governor, and Directors for that Purpose, which shall specify the
Object of such Meeting, and shall deliver or cause the same to be
delivered to the Clerk to the said Company, it shall be lawful for the
said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, and they are hereby
required to call a Special General Meeting of the Subscribers and Pro-
prietors at large; and in case the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Directors shall refuse or neglect, for the Space of Thirty Days, to
comply with such Requisition, then and in such Case it shall be lawful
for the Subscribers or Proprietors who shall have signed the same to
call a Special General Meeting of the said Subscribers and Propraetors
at large, by Advertisement in the London Gazette, and in Four or more
of the Newspapers published in the City of London or County of
Middlesex, specifying the Place within the Cities of London or West-
minster where and the Time when such Meeting is to be held (the Time
not being less than Fourteen Days after such Notice), and the Reason
for and intention of calling such Special Meeting ; and the Subscribers
and Proprietors are hereby authorized to meet pursuant to such Notice,
and take into consideration the Matter or Matters to be submitted to
them by the Persons calling such Special Meeting, and specified in such
Notice; and the Decision, Determination, and Order of the Subscribers
and Proprietors present at such Meeting, or the Majority of them,
according to the Number of Votes they shall have a right to give
respecting such Matter or Matters, shall be as valid, to all Intents and
Purposes, as if the same had been made at any General Meeting of the
said Company as aforesaid ; Provided always, that Ten Proprietors at
the least shall be present at such Meeting as herein-before is mentioned.


20 & 21 Victoria, cap. 68 {page 965),
And whereas the Introduction of Railways has recently taken place
in the said Colony of New South Wales with much Advantage thereto,
and the Construction of Railways over or near the Lands held by the
said Company would be of great public Benefit, and would increase the
Value of such Lands, and the said Company are desirous of constructing
such Railways, and are also desirous of more effectually developing the
Collieries of the said Company, and that Portion of their Property which
has been lately discovered to contain Minerals, and of adopting Measures
for bringing the same to the Harbour of Fort Stephen , and for opening
out Trade and Communications with the District of New England to
and from the said Port, and for such Purposes it is expedient that such
Powers as herein after contained should be given to the said Company :
And whereas the Objects and Purposes aforesaid cannot be carried into
effect without the authority of Parliament: May it therefore please
Your Majesty that it may be enacted; and be it enacted by the Queen’s
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, as follows; (that is to
say,)
XIII. If the Votes on any Question submitted to a General Meet-
ing shall be taken by Ballot, the Shareholders entitled to vote shall, in
lieu of the Votes to which they are in that Event at present entitled,
have such Number of Votes as follows; (that is to say,) every Share-
holder shall have One Vote for each of the Shares not exceeding Ten
# O
held by him, and he shall have an additional Vote for every Five Shares
held by him beyond the first Ten up to and including One hundred, and
he shall have an additional Vote for every Ten Shares held by him
beyond the first Hundred.
XVII. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors of the said
Company, with the sanction of a Resolution passed at a Special General
Meeting of the said Company convened for the Purpose of considering
the same, to apply any Portion of the Capital of the said Company in
the Construction of Railways over or through any Land for the Time
being held by the said Company, and in developing the Mineral and
other Resources of the Company’s Lands and Properties, or otherwise
for the general Purposes thereof.


REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE OF CONSULTATION
APPOINTED BY A SPECIAL RESOLUTION OF THE PROPRIETORS,
AT THE
®j)tr(ii-t(jtrb Annual HRetiitg of tl|e Company,
HELD AT THE
LONDON TAVERN, BISHOPSGATE STREET,
FRIDAY, 30th JANUARY, 1857. 1
TO BE PRESENTED TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE COMPANY,
AT THE
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING,
INTENDED TO BE HELD AT THE
LONDON TAVERN, BISHOPSGATE STREET,
THURSDAY, 2nd APRIL, 1857, AT ONE OCLOCK.


#obtmcrr.
JOHN HURDIS RAVENSHAW, Esq.
CHARLES DASHWOOD BRUCE, Esq.
s)mcfors-
HENRY BUCKLE, Esq.
WALTER STEVENSON DAVIDSON, Esq.
THOMAS DYER EDWARDS, Esq.
SIR WALTER M. TOWNSEND FARQUHAR, Bart.
EDWARD W. T. HAMILTON, Esq.
DUDLEY COUTTS MARJORIBANKS, Esq., M.P.
♦THE HON. JOHN THORNTON LESLIE MELVILLE
HENRY PORCHER, Esq.
GEORGE ROBERT SMITH, Esq.
GEORGE SMITH THORNTON, Esq.
THOMAS TOOKE, Esq.
WILLIAM WALLACE, Esq.
COLONEL J. S. BROWNRIGG, C.B.
ROBERT BROOKS, Esq.
OSWALD AUGUSTUS SMITH, Esq.
WILLIAM TOOKE, Esq.
* This Gentleman has resigned his seat at the Board.


At the Thirty-third Annual General Meeting of the Company,
held at the London Tavern, Bishopsgate Street, in the City of London,
on Friday, the 30th January, 1857,
It was moved by Philip Cazenove, Esq.; seconded by Rokeby
Hall Price, Esq.; and resolved unanimously, that the undermentioned
Gentlemen, viz.
Philip Cazenove, Esq.
William Fane De Salis, Esq.
Samuel Ellis, Esq.
Edwin Henry Lawrence, Esq.
James Johnstone Macintyre, Esq.
John Robert Thomson, Esq., and
Morgan Meatman, Esq.
be and they are hereby appointed a Committee of Consultation with the
Directors, to consider the Report and the general position of the Com-
pany’s affairs, and to report on the same to a General Meeting of the
Proprietors, to be called on or before the 20th day of March, 1857.
The Committee regret that they have not had the benefit of
Messrs. Cazenove and Thomson’s assistance, letters having been
received from these gentlemen, stating that they were unable to act,
and requesting leave to withdraw their names from the Committee.


(fetrad from %
MINUTES OF THE PROCEEDINGS op the COMMITTEE.
The Committee met at the Company’s Offices, 5, Cannon Street, in
the City of London, on Tuesday, the 3rd of February, 1857, at Twelve
o’clock.
PRESENT.
William Fane De Salis, Esq.
Samuel Ellis, Esq.
Edwin Henry Lawrence, Esq.
James Johnstone Macintyre, Esq.
Morgan Yeatman, Esq.
Read letters from Messrs. Cazenove and J. R. Thomson, stating the
grounds upon which they were unable to act, and requesting leave
to withdraw their names from the Committee.
The Committee then appointed William Fane De Salis, Esq,, to
be their Chairman, and Edwin Henry Lawrence, Esq., to be their
Honorary Secretary.
Since the above period, the Committee have been occupied in their
investigation almost daily.


R E P 0 R T.
Your Committee now beg to report to you the result of their
conference with your Directors, and they desire, at the same time, to
place before you the views they have formed relative to the position of
your affairs.
Your Committee think it right, in the first instance, to explain to
you the mode in which they decided on conducting the duties you had
entrusted to their care. Prior to entering into any conference with
your Directors, the confessedly anomolous position of the Company
required attentive study as well as explanation. With a paid-up
Capital of £380,000, and with a territorial possession extending over
690,702 acres, all granted to you by the Crown, without purchase, the
last accounts presented to the Proprietors showed that, in a flourishing
colony, where the returns from all kinds of private property are
unusually high, your investments of Capital had not only brought you
no return, but had produced an actual loss, equivalent to sevei’al
thousand pounds.
Under these circumstances, your Committee felt that, in order to
enable them to confer with advantage with your Directors, it was essen-
tial that they should first gain a clear insight into the past and present
management of your affairs. With this view, they requested to be
permitted to inspect the Court’s minute books, the letter books, the
books of account, and other documents immediately bearing upon the
conduct of your affairs —a request which, it is only justice to your
Directors to say, was freely granted, all documents required by your
Committee having been placed, without reserve, at their disposal.
Having, after a lengthened and laborious perusal of the Company’s
books, in some measure mastered the actual position of your affairs,
your Committee had interviews with the governor of the Company,
with a Committee of Directors, with your secretary, Mr. Engstrom,
with the Company’s accountant, Mr. Linstead, as also with the public
accountant, Mr. J. E. Coleman.
Anxious to convey to you the the fullest information, and aware that
no words of theirs could give you so accurately the views of the various
gentlemen who appeared before them, your Committee resolved on


employing a short-hand writer, and are thus enabled to place befoi’e
you, in the words used by the witnesses, the more interesting portions
of the statements made by them. The evidence so given will hereafter
be frequently referred to in this Report, and is subjoined in an Appendix,
wherein your Committee have also published such documents as it
seemed to them important your attention should be directed to.
CAPTAIN M. F, BROWNRIGG, R.N.
Your Committee have deemed it expedient to commence their
Report with this gentleman’s appointment as your superintendent, an
event which took place on the 3rd of June, 1852.
Your Committee regret to have to inform you that Captain
Brownrigg’s administration of your affairs has proved of the most
unfortunate and unsatisfactory character, its main results being as
follows :
Ist.—Your horse stock, which at one time stood so high in the
estimation of the Colonists—in the formation and importa-
tion of which so large a sum of money has been invested,
and which has mainly contributed to give to the present
Australian breed of horses that excellence which they are
known to possess—your horse stock is now reported by your
present superintendent, Mr. Hodgson, to have so far
deteriorated in breed as to be, comparatively speaking,
worthless.
2nd. Your valuable Merino sheep, the purchase price of which
represents a considerable portion of the Company’s paid-up
Capital, are reduced in numbers by unusual death casualties,
and are reported as deteriorated in breed, from causes more
fully detailed in Mr. White’s report of 24th November,
1854, and Mr. Hodgson’s despatch of Gth November last, to
which your Committee desire to refer you, and for which
they solicit your attentive consideration. Their present
value was stated by the governor at the last meeting, on a
rough estimate of five shillings per head, to be £5,011,
but they represent in your books a value of at least
£130,000.
3rd. In defiance of the usual colonial custom, many of your calves
have not been branded, nor have your cattle been mustered
since 1848 ; in consequence of which neglect large numbers
must have been irretrievably lost; and it appears there-
fore to your Committee highly problematical whether any-


tiling like the number returned as feeding on your pastures
can ever be collected. Owing also to the fences put up
in 1842 by Captain King, at great cost to the Company, See
. . r j > Appendix,
having been permitted to go to ruin, strange bulls have p. 64.
mixed with your herds and affected the purity of their
breed.
4th. Captain Brownrigg’s correspondence appears to have been | p e pendix
characterised by extreme irregularity; as an instance of p- 76 -
which it may be stated, that forty-three despatches were
at one period without acknowledgment on his part.
sth. To such an extent has this irregularity been carried, that See
° J ’ Appendix,
the accounts for the year 1855 only reached this country pp-21 & 32.
in November, 1856, and no accounts of any hind for the
year 1856 have as yet been received.
6th. Without consulting your Directors, Captain Brownrigg Append,
embarked, of his own authority, in 1854, in sundry specu- p ' 33>
lative coal shipments to Melbourne and elsewhere, the
result of which has fixed the Company with a loss of
<£5,400. It appears, also, that such shipments were con-
tinued after Captain Brownrigg had received advice of the
Board’s strong disapproval of them.
7th. Captain Brownrigg further appears, without the authority
of the Board, to have invested a sum of £4,212 in the
purchase of 10,530 sheep,—the result of which speculation
still continues in abeyance.
With these facts before them, it is a matter of surprise to your
Committee, not only that your Directors omitted earlier to suspend
Captain Brownrigg, but that they have hitherto abstained from
expressing to you, as freely and frankly as they have done in their Appendix
despatches to that gentleman, their just and numei’ous causes of dissatis- pp 6 70 a t 0 d 77
faction arising out of his disastrous management of your affairs.
In making you this communication, your Committee think it due |_o^ ernor . s
to Captain Brownrigg to state, that they were informed by the Evidmce,
governor that the Board considered his character for honour and P- 33 <
integrity unimpeached; that he had in many matters evinced much
assiduity and zeal; and especially that he had been called to the
management of your property during the height of the gold mania, and
that his attention had perhaps been much diverted from the more imme-
diate duties of his office by the transfer of part of your land and stock to
the Peel Paver Company. It is also proper to add, that another of your See
Directors informed the Committee that the blame attaching to the p p^ endix ’


present lamentable condition of your live stock does not rest solely with
Captain Brownrigg, but must be shared by his immediate predecessors
in office.
In these views your Committee concur, so far as to express their
belief that the mismanagement of your affairs dates anterior to Captain
Brownrigg’s appointment.
The other facts reported to you admit neither of palliation or excuse ;
and they confirm your Committee in their view that the appointment
of Captain Brownrigg to act as your superintendent was a great error
of selection on the part of your Directors.
That selection now forms part of the past history of the Company,
and your Committee would not here further refer to it, but that it is
characterised by circumstances which will be found fully detailed in the
Extract of the Board’s Minutes, printed p. 60 of the Appendix. From
this record of your Directors’ proceedings it appears, amongst other
things, that Captain Brownrigg, apart from his relationship to your late
governor, had some time previous to his appointment failed in business,
and compounded with his creditors. Your Committee are willing
to accord to the Board collectively full credit for a sincere desire to pro-
mote the interests of the Corporation in appointing Captain Brownrigg
to act as your superintendent; it cannot, however, be denied, that in
nominating that gentleman, under the circumstances above stated, they
accepted a grave responsibility ; and they doubtless now have cause to
deplore, in common with every Shareholder, that the expectations which
they entertained of his capacity and ability to direct your extensive
establishment should not have been realized. In the interim your
Committee permit themselves to observe that they trust no considera-
tions save those of capacity and merit will hereafter, under any pretence,
be permitted to influence appointments in this Company ; and above
all they would impress upon you that no individual should hereafter be
appointed to the responsible office of presiding over your affairs, who
has proved himself incompetent to manage his own.
THE company’s ACCOUNTS.
Much dissatisfaction having been expressed at the form and mode
in which the Company’s accounts were presented to the Proprietors at
the last General Meeting, the careful consideration of your Committee
was directed to this subject, which they unanimously resolved to refer
to the eminent public accountant, Mr. J. E. Coleman. They have
accordingly instructed that gentleman to go into your accounts —to
20


report specially thereon—and to draw out for your approval a simple,
concise, and intelligible, form, in which the Company’s accounts may
hereafter be rendered to the Proprietors.
Owing to the pressing demands on Mr. Coleman’s time, your
Committee find that some period may possibly elapse before he is able to
complete the duties confided to him ; aware, however, as they are of the
anxiety felt by the proprietary body to become acquainted with the
result of their labours at the earliest possible date, they have determined
to place before you their Report in its present shape, leaving Mr.
Coleman’s Report on your accounts to be considered by you at an early
date, when it will be presented to you by your Committee in the form
of a Supplemental Report.
One of the main causes of the confusion existing in your accounts
having arisen from the closing of your books in the colony and in
England at different periods, your Committee have impressed, both
upon Mr. Coleman and your Directors, the expediency of following the
plan adopted by the Bank of Australasia, and the other colonial insti-
tutions established in Loudon, of closing their books botli in the colony
and in England at one and the same period, say, on 31st December in
each year. At the present time your colonial accounts are rendered to
you fourteen months in.arrear; but, viewing the recent introduction of
a rapid and frequent steam service with the Australian colonies, your
Committee have intimated their opinion to the Board that imperative
instructions should be given to your superintendent at Sydney, to cause
your accounts to be made up to the 31st December in each year, and to
be transmitted to England in ample time to be laid before you at your
usual Annual Meeting, which they recommend shall in future be held in
the month of June or July, in lieu of the month of January, in each year.
In connection with this subject, your Committee desire to remark
that Captain Brownrigg had the power conceded to him of appointing
the Company’s accountant in the colony ; this, in the opinion of your
Committee, was a mistake of a serious character. The irregularities of
this office were patent to the Board during the first six months of
Captain Brownrigg’s administration ; and the accounts rendered are un-
satisfactory, as well as, to a great extent, unintelligible. Your Com-
mittee have the satisfaction to state that the Directors have recently
sent out to the colony an accountant appointed by themselves ; and the
instructions they have given on this head to your present Superinten-
dent, Mr. Hodgson, will, if adopted by that gentleman, insure results
more satisfactory to the Proprietors.


AUDIT OF THE COMPANY’S COLONIAL ACCOUNTS.
In the course of their examination of your affairs it came to the
knowledge of your Committee that although provision is made by the
Company’s Act for the due audit of your home accounts, still no audit
whatever of the colonial books, which comprise by far the largest
portion of the disbursements of the Corporation, had ever taken place.
Your Committee have accordingly suggested to your Directors that the
audit of your colonial accounts should be undertaken by the Committee
of Advice in Sydney ; and they are happy to be able to inform you that
in this decision your Directors entirely concur.
PRESENT POSITION OF THE COMPANY’S SHEEP, CATTLE, AND HORSE
STOCK.
The deplorable position of your live stock will be found fully
detailed in Mr, White’s report, of date 24th of November, 1854, and
Mr. Hodgson’s despatch of the 4th November, 1856, both of which
documents are printed in the Appendix.
For the heavy loss thus entailed on the Company your Directors
are not wholly to be blamed, as it is obvious that the destruction of
your live stock occurred through the neglect of your superintendents,
and in defiance of the instructions of your Directors. Your Committee
think it, however, part of their duty to point out to you that Mr,
White’s Report reached this country in March, 1855 ; and it would
therefore appear that an explanation is due, on the part of the Board, of
those reasons which have induced them to withhold the contents of a
communication which, when verified, should have been at once made
known to every Shareholder in the Company.
SUPPRESSION OF THE COMPANY’S SHEEP ESTABLISHMENTS ON THE PORT
STEPHENS ESTATE.
The causes which have led the Board to authorize the Committee of
Advice, in conjunction with the superintendent, to suppress your sheep
establishments, are fully detailed in the evidence given by the Governor,
printed p. 29, Appendix. Your Committee see no reason to dissent
from the policy of the course adopted in this respect by the Board; it
is, however, their opinion that this step, when taken, should be pi’omptly
followed up by the dismissal of those numerous officials and mechanics
whose salary and wages have hitherto proved a most onerous charge on
22


the Company’s revenue. The sale or lease of the pastures vacated by
your sheep stock is a subject which your Committee have not failed to
press on the attention of your Directors, and to which it has been
gratifying to them to find that they were fully alive.
ROAD-MAKING THROUGH THE COMPANY’S ESTATES
Large sums of money appear from time to time to have been laid ip e pendix
out in forming roads on the Company’s property, the main object of p * 31,
such expenditure having been to divert the New England traffic from
roads maintained by the Government to Carrington, situate on the
harbour of Port Stephen. Owing to the objectionable form in which
the Company’s colonial accounts have lately been kept, your Committee
are unable to state to you the exact amount of such outlay, but they
believe it amounts to several thousand pounds; and they have strongly
urged upon your Directors the importance of discontinuing all works of
this character, which, in the opinion of your Committee, should be left,
as is done invariably by private individuals, to the Government of the
colony. The expense of forming cuttings, embankments, bridges over
the creeks, &c., in a colony where labour is high, must necessarily be
excessive, while the annual injuries consequent on the heavy tropical
rains to which Australia is subject, necessitate constant repairs, which
must constitute a large tax on your annual revenue, without producing
any corresponding advantage.
THE COMPANY’S COLLIERIES AT NEWCASTLE.
The lengthened conference your Committee entered into on this See
. . Appendix
important subject with the Governor are detailed to you in the Appendix, p- 38.
p. 38. You will perceive thence, that the subject of leasing this portion
of your establishment, and thus securing to you a fixed annual revenue,
without further indefinite outlay of capital, has had serious consideration
on the part of your Directors, and that they are ready to entertain the
first favourable proposal which may be made to them by substantial
parties for a lease of your coal mines. This policy your Committee
entirely approve of, and they would add, that it is gratifying to them to
find that, so far as they can judge from the documents submitted to
them, the vend of coal during the past year has greatly increased, and
that the evils of competition in price, between your collieries and those
of a Company recently established in the vicinity of Newcastle, have
been obviated by both Companies adopting and adhering to a fixed scale
of prices.


IMPROVEMENT OF THE PORT OF NEWCASTLE, AND FORMATION OF DOCKS.
Your Committee are of opinion that such works are of a public
character, and should be undertaken, as has been the case with railways,
by the Government of the colony ; they could, therefore, in no way
recommend any portion of the Company’s capital being appropriated to
such objects. Your Committee have, however, suggested to the Board
the propriety of expressing to the authorities of the City of Newcastle
the great interest the Proprietors naturally feel in projects which would
so materially add to the value of their collieries, as well as to their
extremely valuable suburban estate situate in the vicinity of the town ;
and farther, that this Corporation will at all times be ready warmly to
co-operate in any effort to place before the Parliament of the colony the
undeniable claims possessed by the Port of Newcastle to be rendered a
fit recipient for the trade of that rich and extensive district of which it
forms the natural outlet. Your Committee have also suggested to the
Directors the policy of according, upon liberal terms, any land they
possess available for Docks, should the Government or private indi-
viduals be disposed to enter upon their construction.
THE IRON ORE DEPOSITS ON THE PORT STEPHENS ESTATE.
The attention of your Committee has been specially directed to
these deposits, which assume an additional value, owing to their having
been found at no great distance from the thirty feet seam of coal dis
covered by Mr. Odernheimor, and in juxtaposition with limestone.
Although there seems no probability of this valuable ore being im-
mediately turned to a profitable account, your Committee are not
without hopes that the extension of the railway system in New South
Wales will soon necessitate the erection of iron works in that colony,
and thus be the means of hastening the exploitation of what may even-
tually prove a source of great mineral Aveath to the Company. The
Committee are strongly opposed to smelting operations being undertaken
on the Company’s account, and they have suggested to the Directors
that it would be advisable to make every effort to let these mines, with
which view it will be requisite to direct public attention to the subject
by occasional advertisements in the newspapers.
In order to render the working of. the above deposits possible, it is
obvious that a tramway will have to be constructed from the locality
of the mine to the head of the navigation of the river Karuah, at
Pumpkin Point, a distance, as your Committee are informed, of eleven
24


miles, and involving, according to the calculations of your Governor, at
£3,000 per mile, a cost of £33,000. This expenditure would in part be Governor’s
available to open collieries on the thirty-feet seam above referred to, and p. 36,
, . Appendix.
therefore merits serious consideration. Your Committee, however,
would recommend the Proprietors not to authorize any outlay, unless
the mines be first let at an adequate rental, and the lease duly signed
before the construction of the tramway is commenced.
OPERATIONS OF THE COMPANY DURING THE PAST YEAR.
It has already been stated to the Proprietors that no accounts
whatever for the year 1856 had as yet been rendered by Captain
Brownriffff ; but as the Committee feel that their fellow-shareholders
oo s
will gladly receive information on this subject, they have published such
extracts bearing upon this point as they have been able to gather from
letters and other documents, which they submit to the Proprietors in
the shape of the statement which will be found p. 83 of the Appendix.
LAND SALES AND LEASES OP LAND.
Taking date from 1849, there stands credited in the books of the |l e pendiX)
Company, 4,619 acres of land, sold for the sum of £29,550 3s. 5d.; but p- B *-
respecting leases of land and other property no correct statement can
be given, in consequence of the imperfect and insufficient information
supplied from the colony by your superintendents. The books of the
Company, however, exhibit property let for the sum of £1,105 11s.,
which comprises a lease of about 81,000 acres of the Liverpool Plains,
originally let to Mr. Hamilton at the annual sum of £5OO, but which
he has since sxib-let. The Company also hold on lease for twenty-one
years 53,360 acres of church and school lands, the rental of which is,
for the first term, £266 10s. ; for the second, £399 155.; and for the
third term, £533 ; 535 acres of this land are sub-let at ten shillings per
acre.
OUTSTANDING CLAIMS ON THE COMPANY.
It having been reported to your Committee that several claims on
the Company were outstanding, they are gratified to be able to inform
you that no claims have come to their knowledge, save a bill of the
solicitors of tho Company at Sydney, and two claims under land orders,
which now form the subject of judicial proceedings, and upon which
your Committee therefore refrain from offering any remarks.
There appears to be also some difference between the Board and
Captain Brownrigg, respecting commission claimed by that gentleman.


NEW ACT OF PARLIAMENT.
\oui' Committee have carefully perused this document, the tenor
of which, so far as it relates to the reduction of the number of your
Directors, they fully approve of. The expense, however, of the appli-
cations which this Company has so frequently been compelled to make
to Parliament has attracted the serious attention of your Committee.
In the present instance they find that the projected Bill, if opposed,
will cost you from .£9OO to £1,050, whereas the minimum cost, even
if the Act be not opposed, will amount to £750, which sum was paid
for your Act of 1853. It has further been made to appear to your
Committee that, in Companies as ordinarily constituted under the
Limited Liability Act, all the objects sought to be obtained by the
proposed Act could be gained, without any outlay, by a simple resolution
of the proprietary body in Special Meeting assembled. Under these
circumstances, your Committee have suggested to the Directors the
expediency of putting an end to the possibility of future parliamentary
applications, by inserting a clause in the proposed Act, authorizing this
Company to surrender its Act of Incorporation, and to adopt every step
requisite to avail itself of the protection of the Limited Liability Act,
which, while it fully secures each individual Shareholder against all
personal responsibility, brings with it none of those restrictions and
objectionable conditions annexed to your present state of corporate
existence. Your Directors have promised to consult your solicitors,
Messrs, Freshfield, how the above suggestion may best be carried out;
in the interim, your Committee are strengthened in their desire to see you
emancipated from the thraldom of your parliamentary constitution,
owing to the fact of the Chairman of Committees of the House of Lords
—against whose decision there is, practically speaking, no appeal—
having, by striking out sundiy enabling clauses inserted in your pro-
posed Act, sought to fetter the free rights of the Proprietors;—a
proceeding which, in the present position of your affairs, may prove
highly detrimental to your interests.
In connection with the proposed Act of Parliament, the right of
voting now enjoyed by the proprietary body has engaged the attention
of your Committee.
Under your present Act, no Proprietor is permitted to give any
vote whatever at ballots unless possessed of at least ten shai-es ; hence
it follows that as the shares of this Company were distributed amongst
the public, and purchased by them during the late extravagantly
high price in small lots—viz., chiefly in ones, twos, and threes—more
26


than one-half of the proprietary body are now absolutely deprived of
all rights of A r oting whatever.
Your Committee have in consequence urged on the Directors the
equity of adopting a new franchise; and they have suggested that a
clause be inserted in' the proposed Act, conferring upon the Proprietors
a right of voting in conformity with the scale of votes adopted by the
Joint Stock Companies Act.
THE PRESENT OFFICES AND OFFICE EXPENSES OF THE COMPANY.
The removal of the Company from the present expensive offices has
engaged the notice of your Committee, and they are happy to be able
to inform you that this subject has already had the anxious attention
of the Directors, who have been in negotiation with parties to relieve
the Company of the lease of the premises now occupied by them.
Your Committee have also pressed upon the Directors that the
present London office expenses of the Company are high, and admit of
considerable reduction.
directors’ remuneration.
Your Committee have further felt it part of their duty to suggest
to your Directors that, in the present non-dividend paying state of the
Company, a diminution in the amount allotted to the Board for their
remuneration should take place. From the sympathy evinced by your
Directors on a former occasion, when this Company ceased to pay
dividends, your Committee entertain no doubt that your Directors will
meet this suggestion in a manner which will give perfect satisfaction to
the proprietary body.
SALES OF SHARES BY DIRECTORS.
Viewing the remarks made on this subject at the last General
Meeting, your Committee felt that it was due to your Directors that
a charge, publicly made, should be examined into. Your Committee
find that your Directors, as a body, are free from the imputation of
selling shares ; but it is their duty to report to you that it is true one
member of the Beard, Walter Stevenson Davidson, Esq., has, during
the past year, sold 1,090 shares. Notwithstanding, however, this sale,
it is fair to add, that gentleman continues the largest Shareholder in
the Company ; and, in relation to this point, it will no doubt be satis-
factory to you to learn that the Board hold upwards of one-tenth part
of the stock of the Company.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Your Committee cannot close this Report without a few remarks
on the general position and prospects of the Company.


The disastrous condition of your live stock, and the loss thereby
entailed on the Company, render it impossible for your Committee to
hold out to you hopes of any but meagre dividends for some time to
come. The immediate prospects of the Company ai’e, therefore, not
favourable; but they assume a brighter aspect when it is considered
that the value of your property is indissolubly linked with the
great and growing future of a young and prosperous community.
With the vast tract of territory which you possess—with its acknow-
ledged mineral wealth, and with ycur valuable suburban property
contiguous to the great Emporium of the Hunter’s River—the City of
Newcastle, it is for the Proprietors to wait, patiently, the sure though
perhaps slow development of the great stake they hold in one of the
most promising dependencies of the Crown.
On the other hand, it rests with your Directors to permit that
slake to assume, at an earlier or later period, its just value in the
market. If they adhere to their resolution of rigidly cutting down all
expenses, and suppressing those expensive establishments which have
hitherto eaten into your resources, then, by judicious sales of your land,
and the introduction of a tenantry on your estates—as yet almost desti-
tute of population—it appears to your Committee that a fixed and
increasing revenue may be secured to the Proprietors, and those ex-
pectations which many of them had formed of the value of their property
be yet realized, at no very distant date.
CONCLUSION.
As regards your Committee, they permit themselves humbly but
with confidence to affirm that if their labours are the means of placing
the position of your affairs before you in a clearer light—if their repre-
sentations induce the adoption of more intelligible forms of account—
if, through their instrumentality, an end is put to the expenditure of
your funds on road-making, and other profitless outlays—and last, not
least, if they confirm your Directors in the resolution to exercise the
most rigid economy at home and abroad, as well as to suppress the esta-
blishments so often referred to in this Report, then your Committee
trust that the time devoted by them to the consideration of your affairs,
far from being wasted, will have materially contributed to the progress
and prosperity of the Company,
William Fane De Salis,
Samuel Ellis,
Edwin Henry Lawrence,
James Johnstone Macintyre,
Morgan Ye atm an.
28


SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT.
Your Committee had brought their Report to a conclusion, and
the manuscript was in the hands of the printer, when the recent arrivals
from Australia brought despatches from your superintendent, Mr.
Arthur Hodgson, down to a late date, the 17th of December last.
Anxious to convey to you the most recent information respecting
your property, your Committee have given these documents an attentive
perusal, and from them they have made some extracts, which are pub-
lished in the Appendix. The contents of these despatches are extremely
discouraging. It appears that Mr. Hodgson has not been able to effect
a sale of the sheep on your Port Stephens estate—a failure which can
only be attributed to the deplorable condition to which, by mismanage-
ment and neglect, those flocks are now reduced. The impression is
therefore increased on the minds of your Committee that, if not
absolutely unsaleable, this portion of your property will only realize
a very insignificant amount.
It also appears that, from the period of his previous despatch of the
4th of November last, Mr. Hodgson has continued his general inspection
of your estate. His report is a painful narrative of extravagance,
mismanagement, and even of peculation, which, through the neglect of
your previous superintendents, has been practised on your property.
To adopt Mr, Hogdson’s language, “ the gross and extensive abuses
which have been allowed to germinate on your estate, and the promis-
cuous mode in which your accounts have hitherto been kept, have
fostered a system of extravagance which no private establishment could
have possibly survived.” Mr. Whytte, your new colliery superinten-
dent, has also furnished a report, from which it is evident that abuses
and mismanagement have been as common in. this as in every other
department. The opinion Mr. Whytte expresses respecting the con-
dition of your coal mines, and the manner in which they have been
worked, is not favourable; it is, however, satisfactory to learn that the
new machinery for the colliery reached the colony on the 17th day of
December last. The arrival of this powerful appliance, will, it is to be
hoped, inaugurate a reign of improvement; and it is gratifying to gather
from these recent despatches, the fact that both Mr. Hodgson and


Mr. Whytte appear to be fully impressed as to the necessity of a prompt
and energetic reform iu the various departments of your service, and
that they are adopting measures to produce this result. Your Com-
mittee sincerely trust that they will prove fortunate in this endeavour.
Much praise will hereafter be due to these gentlemen, and to the Com-
mittee of Advice, should they succeed in resuscitating your colonial
affairs from the deplorable condition in which they are at present
immersed.
In conclusion, your committee have to place before you the follow-
ing letter received from Mr. J. E. Coleman, regretting on their part that
they are not prepared to give you that which, up to the latest moment,
they fully expected to accomplish—viz., the fullest possible information
respecting your accounts, together with a concise and clear form for
your future adoption; they have now no alternative but to submit this
letter of Mr. Coleman’s to your consideration, leaving you either to
adopt that gentleman’s suggestions, or to take such other steps in this
matter as to you may seem expedient.
William Fane De Salts,
Samuel Ellis,
Edwin Henry Lawrence,
James Johnstone Mactntyre,
Morgan Yeatman.
Dated this 17 th day of March , 1857.
36, Coleman Street, London, 1 6th March, 1857.
To Wm. Fans De Salts, Esq., Chairman ; Samuel Ellis, Esq., Edwin Henry
Lawrence, Esq., James Johnstone Macintyre, Esq., and Morgan
Yeatman, Esq., Committee of the Australian Agricultural Company.
Gentlemen, —Circumstances of a most pressing and important character have
engrossed nearly my whole time, both by day and night, for the past week, and I
have thus been prevented from examining the accounts of your Company as
promised.
I have attentively looked through your draft report, and perfectly concur in all
the observations that apply to the accounts ; and, having done so, do not think I can
at present give any further elucidation than you have already done ; but when the
agent arrives home, and further accounts are received to some more recent period, so
as to bring the English accounts to a corresponding date with those of the colonies, I
shall then have much pleasure in examining the same, either with you jointly, or
otherwise, when, no doubt, accounts somewhat more readily understood by your
shareholders and the public generally can be compiled, and any beneficial suggestions
or alterations that can be made, shall then have my best attention.
I am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
J. E. COLEMAN.


AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY.
No. I.
EXTRACTS FROM
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
Taken before the Committee of Consultation, appointed hy special resolution
of the Proprietors, at the Thirty-third Annual Meeting of the Company ,
held at the London Tavern , Bishopsgate Street, Friday, 3 Oth January,
1857.
PORT STEPHENS.
Mr, Ravenshaw, Governor of the Company, introduced and examined.
By the Chairman,
Q. We are anxious to ask you a few questions relating to the general
policy of the Company, and more particularly to be certilicd, in the first
place, with regard to the abandonment of Port Stephens sheep stations.
From the papers before us, there appears some doubt hanging over this
matter. Are you going to suppress that establishment altogether 1 Is
this your understanding of the instructions Mr. Hodgson took out with
him 1 ?
A. After the Boaid had expressed to him their views, which are
recorded fully in writing, he was at liberty to take any such course as he
might see fit; either to maintain the establishment of Port Stephens or
reduce it, as he, in consultation with the Committee of Advice, might
see fit.
Q. This matter is then left entirely to him and the Committee of
Advice ]
A. Entirely. If you will read the letter of instructions you will see
it is clear upon that; and, to prevent any misunderstanding, you will
see a subsequent letter which was written immediately after the half-
yearly meeting, in July last, approving that principle.
Q. You are not able to inform us whether the cattle station is to bo
suppressed or not ?
A. My impression, from conversations with Mr. Hodgson, and from
the remarks which you will perceive are made by Mr. Hamilton in his
paper, that Mr. Hodgson’s impression is, that at a comparatively small
expense of management he will be enabled to keep on the cattle esta-
blishments, and to derive a satisfactory revenue from them.


Q. I observe that Mr. Hamilton estimates the revenue as something
verv considerable 'I
A. Yes. Mr. Hodgson’s view (as far as I could gather from conver-
sations with him—we have nothing upon record) was, that with a
trifling establishment the cattle might be maintained His view was,
that we have out-stations at Giro and Nowendoc, and also certain lands
which we rent from the churches and schools, which would enable us
to breed considerable quantities of cattle in the Port Stephens district,
and send them to Liverpool Plains to fatten.
Q. What is the distance between Liverpool Runs and Stroud 1
A, About 100 miles.
Q. You would not contemplate letting the Warrah Run 1
A. I think Mr. Hodgson’s view was, that the other arrangement
could be carried out more satisfactorily.
Q. Then, at that rate, you would increase the cattle to a very con-
siderable number 1
A. As many as could be satisfactorily bred and carried by those
two operations.
Q. Does it not appear to you, from the last despatch of Mr. Hodgson,
that it is very doubtful whether anything like the number stated in the
last return of the proprietors will be mustered ?
A. Ido not think he seems to write clearly upon that point;
though you will see, from a previous despatch that we have had, that
there seems considerable doubt as to getting in some of the wild cattle
from the stations.
Q. With regard to these cattle, you never have had any information
from Capt. Brownrigg that he was in the habit of mustering them as is
usually done in the colony 1
A. There is a despatch, which came about this time last year, with
Mr. White’s report, in which he states that the cattle had never been
mustered, I think, since 1848.
Q. But the directors were never aware of that ?
A. It only came to their knowledge incidentally.
Q. Of course they would have disapproved of it 1
A. Yes.
Q. You are aware it is customary in most stock stations to muster
the cattle sometimes half-yearly, and at all events, yearly 1
A. I have understood it is customary, where you can well do it,
every twelve months ; but, at the same time, I have heard a very
experienced colonist say that there was always considerable loss in mus-
tering cattle in particular countries, and if he was pretty well satisfied as
to the slate of the stock he would not do it.
Q. You are aware that the mustering is usually at the calf-dropping
time, in the spring—that is, in the month of October in that hemisphere 1
A. I do not exactly know the time.
Q. If the stock has not been mustered it is quite clear our claves
have not been branded 1
A. I think you will see from that report of Mr. White’s that that
view is confirmed, that a very large proportion have not been branded.


Q. Then the unbrauded calves would be, as it were, belonging to
nobody ; they could be branded by anybody who had a brand about him,
and pleased to light a fire for that purpose in the bush. Are you aware
whether that is not a common practice with the small settlers, and that
a great many cattle are lost in that way 1
A. You will observe that the Company purchased a little lot of
cattle from one Mr. Holmes, alluded to in the report, because he was rather
a nuisance. He had got that station by a slip. We purchased the cattle
and got the station back again, to prevent his appropriating any of the
Company’s cattle.
Q. These small settlers are the pest of large stock owners. With
regard to the horses, you contemplate an absolute sale of the horse
stock 1
A. I hope and I think that is Mr. Hodgson’s view ; and that the
horse stock, except such few as may be required by the Company, will
all be suppressed; and you observe the Board in their instimctions
express themselves strongly upon that point.
Q, I presume, when the sheep are sold, the whole of the Port
Stephens establishment will be put down, so that all salaries will cease ?
A. Exactly so ; that is the object.
Q. What stall’ would you contemplate keeping up after the sheep
were sold 1
A. I am not competent to judge upon that point.
Q. One or two individuals 1
A. I should think that one superintendent and an assistant would
be the very outside that would be required.
Q. It is clear the sale of the sheep would throw a large quantity
of land upon the Company’s hands ; now, is it your opinion that you
would be able to get any return in the shape of rent 1
A. I think the Company’s policy will be to lease for short
periods, if they cannot occupy the land themselves. It would never do
to allow it to be a wilderness.
Q. A great portion of the land would not be fit for leasing; but
there are portions, I presume, flats, which parties would take either
for grazing or cultivation 1
A. You saw in a late despatch all the shepherds would be very
glad, from what Mr. Hodgson says, to take their homesteads, and some
little portions of land there.
Q. You are not aware whether any attempts have been made to
cultivate the vine and mulberry 1
A. The vine has been cultivated on the Company’s land. I think
it was in the neighbourhood of Stroud.
Q. Has the mulberry ever been cultivated ?
A. I think not ; I have never heard of it.
Q. Do you not think it would be a very good plan to have a sxxxall
plot of groxxxxd, say an acre of ground, with plexxty of vine cxxttings axxd
youxxg mixlbex-ry tree*, attached to the house of the person whom you
leave ixx chax’ge of the property, with instnxetions to sell to tenants at
cost price'?


A, That would be a small nursery, and we could hardly conduct a
nursery without a competent person to look after it. Our object, I
think, is rather to throw this sort of thing upon other people’s hands;
but I am inexperienced in actual colonial arrangements of that sort.
Q. Well, but suppose it could be done for about ,£3O per annum;
suppose we could get a contract taken to maintain at that price the
nursery, as you term it, don’t you think it would be a good investment
of capital on the part of the Company, with the view of introducing
the vine and the mulberry upon our estates ?
A. I have had some knowledge of agriculture in this country, and
I have always said that/as ageneral rule, large landed proprietors would
find it their best policy to keep small model farms, and try experiments
for the benefit of the farmers. If the same thing could be done in
Australia for a moderate expense, I think it would be advisable.
Q. Is there not a good deal of excellent land on the banks of the
Manning River, to the northern part of the Company’s property 1
A. Yes ; and you will see there have been some farm allotments
sold upon the Government side, where there have been some considerable
settlements.
Q, What have the allotments averaged on the Manning ]
A. I do not remember off-hand, but I can give you a memorandum.
Q. Have the parties been permitted to select these allotments, or
have they been put up to auction by the Company ?
A. The surveyor has gone and measured off certain allotments in
different parts—l think there were about fifty acre allotments, but I
can tell you in a few minutes by referring to the books down stairs—
and having surveyed off certain lands, they were then offered for sale.
Q. Specific lots 1
A. Yes ; not allowing people to go and choose here and there.
Q. I presume the Board have made up their minds that these
rights of selection are very objectionable. We understand that Mr.
Ebsworth holds some rights of selection 1
A, That was done under the late system ; but we disapprove of it,
and it will never be adopted again.
Q. Do you happen to be aware of the quantity of land on the Man-
ning that is available for cultivation 1
A. No, I could not say off-hand ; I should like to refer to the
despatch where there are some remarks alluding to it. Ido not re-
member now. My impression is, that there is a great deal of land upon
that river. The despatch alludes to the prosperous state of the settlor's
on the opposite side. Then, I think, there was a subsequent despatch
that said the allotments on the Manning had not sold equal to Captain
Brownrigg’s anticipations, that there were not so many people come
forward on our side as were expected.
Q. Probably, the cause was that we deferred selling till the demand
had somewhat subsided ?
A. Ido not remember. I rather think that in the plans that have
been prepared there have been some allotments marked out upon the
Manning.


Q. Of course the Board have it in contemplation to sell as much
land as they can at reasonable and satisfactory prices in that district 1
A. Yes ; but I must say I think Capt. Brownrigg has exercised,
generally speaking, a good discretion in the management of the sales of
land. He has brought forward land when he thought there was a de-
mand for it, and when the demand has slackened he has not pressed it
into the market ; because if we had pressed any quantity into the market
when tliere was not a great demand, we should have sold larger lots than
we liked at comparatively low prices; and then, when there was a
demand, our own lands which we had sold to other people would have
come into the market in competition against ours. He has endeavoured
to sell the land, as far as possible, to parties who intended actually to go
and locate upon it.
Q. Have you been endeavouring to sell much land near Stroud 1
A. Yes; there has been a good deal of land marked off near
Stroud. \ou shall have the list. We have the register, which will tell
you exactly where it is.
Q, How do the sales at Carrington progress ?
A. I think there is not much sold there.
Q, You are aware of the views that Mr. Hamilton entertained
with regard to’ Carrington and the Port Stephens grant, generally 1 I
refer specially to his opinion that it would be difficult for the Company
to force the Hew England traffic through Carrington, by diverting it
from the course it now pursues, which is to proceed direct to Morpeth,
and so on to Newcastle.
A, Mr. Hamilton did originally express that view ; but whether
or not he entertains it now, I am not certain. Circumstances have
arisen, with regard to the formation of this new road, which I think
have opened the eyes of parties with regard to the traffic. Ido not say
that has altered Mr. Hamilton’s opinion. I will not be certain upon
that point.
Q. A considerable sum of money has been invested by the Com-
pany in the formation of this road ?
A. About £330 last year.
Q. Why, we find, on looking over the labour returns, that the
superintendent of roadmakers, alone, received £2OO last year 1
A. That appears in this last account, or one of the last despatches,
which we were not aware of; but we see that the expense of the roads
amounts, I think, to about £334.
Q. Should you not imagine that the roads had cost the Company
thousands instead of hundreds of pounds 1
A. It has been going on for some time. lam only speaking of a
particular year. We have had for some time a body of Chinese improv-
ing the Hungry Hill Road.
Q. The wages of these Chinese would appear in the general labour
account; they would not appear in the account under the head of road-
making 1
A. Well, our accounts, certainly, have been in that state—the
colonial accounts—that it is utterly impossible to bo certain. You
must have seen expressions in the despatches front the Board to that


effect. It is almost impossible to ascertain in the agricultural depart-
ment, or any other, whether the money has been spent for one purpose
or another. It is a thing I have complained of, from the very instant I
had anything to do with the Company’s affairs. The amounts are lumped
together. In our instructions to Mr. Whytte, Mr. Gr. M. Linstead,
and Mr. Hodgson, we have expressly impressed upon them the necessity
of our having an exact and distinct account of the various classes of
expenditure.
Q. We collect, then, from what you state to the Committee as well
as from the depatches read by the Committee, that you do not approve
of the accounts in the form in which they are rendered ?
A. Certainly not. That is upon record.
Q. You think they admit of considerable simplification and
improvement 1
A. With regard to the cash and the journal I do not know that we
can improve them, because it is the general system that is adopted ; but
what I complain of most is this, that the journal entries arc not sufficiently
detailed. They ought to give us subsidiary accounts from the colony,
showing us the appropriation of the different amounts to the different
classes of work. The fact is, we ought to know what the horses cost,
what the cattle cost, what the sheep cost, what the road-making costs,
and what the survey costs. You will observe that matter is very closely
gone into in the letters of instruction, so that there maybe an apportion-
ment of the various expenses to be thrown over the different depart-
ments.
Q. Your superintendent appears not to have attended to your
instructions 1
A. In I’egard to Newcastle, that has been impressed upon Capt.
Brownrigg more than once; but I am now more particularly alluding to
the late instructions that have been sent out with Mr. Hodgson for the
re-modelling of the whole concern.
Q, Has it not occurred to you that it is a great fault in our system
that there is no audit whatever in the colony 1 ? Your accounts come back
here, as Mr. Linstead informed us, without any kind of vouchers accom-
panying them. Does it not occur to you that this is a great fault ?
A. A very considerable fault ; and you will observe that more as
regards the Newcastle account, which will now be under the separate
management of the colliery agent. In the printed instructions sent out
to the Committee of Advice, Mr. Linstead, the accountant, is directed,
as auditor of the Newcastle accounts, to go over there every three
months, and audit the accounts. But, as regards Port Stephens, our
hope was that the whole thing would be brought into a comparatively
small focus; and that Mr. Hodgson having the accountant immediately
under his eye, and the Committee of Advice having these accounts
immediately under their eyes, would act as auditors on their own
account.
Q. That has suggested itself to the Committee. We think that the
Committee of Advice ought to audit the accounts, as many boards of
direction do in this country; this matter, therefore, lias had the attention
of the Board I


A. You will observe it is upon record that Mr. Linstead has to go
over and audit the accounts once in every three months at Newcastle ;
and that he is to go into the details of the cost, so that he may be able
to render a perfect statement to the general superintendent. Being an
old collier myself, I impressed upon Mr. Hodgson that all these different
matters should be kept perfectly distinct ; and you will observe an
expression in the course of these despatches that everything is to be
brought, comparatively speaking, into a tabular form. I have had it
all drawn out, so that immediately Mr. Hodgson opens the book he can
see what has. been the amount of cost with regard to labour in getting
every ton of coal during the month, and what has been the cost of the
new works, and so on, all divided into different heads. When he comes
to look into the matter he will see at once whether the labour has been
more in any one month than another, or whether there has been an
additional expense under any particular head. The forms have all been
ruled, and put into their hands ready, so that the colliery accounts may
he brought into a tabular shape, in order that Mr. Hodgson and the
Committee of Advice, on opening the book and looking at it, may see at
once whether there is any excess. T could show you patterns of the
book.
Q. We have read several of the Board’s despatches, and the Com-
mittee concur with me in thinking that they are remarkably clear and
business-like. We should like to know by whom they were written
—by the secretary or yourself 1
A. Every despatch has been written by me, and, whether good or
bad, I am responsible for them.
Q. The discovery referred to by Mr. Odernheimer, of the magnetic
iron-stone, is very important. Perhaps you would give the Committee
your views with regard to bringing that to market 1 So far as I know,
it is about fifteen miles inland, and it must be brought to the water in
order to give it value 1
A. I do not sec that the magnetic iron-stone, in the present state of
things, can be of any material value to the Company. Certainly not
until such time as some means of communication to the shipping port
is made. A large body of hematite ore has been discovered also by
Mr. Odernheimer, lying more contiguous to the coal than the magnetic
iron-stone. With these two ores in combination, and the coal so near,
I cannot conceive that you could have any place in the colony where you
could make iron cheaper, barring the rate of wages you would have to
pay.
Q. To bring the ore to the water, I take it you must lay down a
tramway of fourteen or fifteen miles at least 1
A. Yes.
Q. You are aware that the Fitz-Boy Iron Mining Company has
turned out a failure 1
A. I do not understand that they had anything more than rolling
mills ; Ido not understand that they had blast furnaces. I thought
they had got at the wrong end of the stick. For making pig iron,
which is the first and a simple process, yotr require no skilled labour,


further than that of a man who manages the furnaces ; but directly
you convert that into bar iron, or into rails, or anything of that sort, you
require a great deal of skilled labour, and a large outlay of capital. I
saw some reports of their having put up mills, and so forth, and I
thought they did not understand what they were about. If they had
made a small quantity of pig iron, to supply the casting trade, and so
forth, and the foundry business, they might have done well; but to go
into the manufacture of iron was a very costly proceeding, requiring
skilled labour of a character which, in the state of the labour market in
Australia, they would have great difficulty in getting.
Q. Have the relative distances between the mouth of the Karuah
and the William River been measured by you 1
A. From Raymond-terrace, at the mouth of the Williams River,
to the mouth of the Karuah River, is about fifteen miles in a straight line.
Stroud is five miles, I think, from the head of the navigation of the
Karuah at Pumpkin Point.
Q. Only five miles 1
A. I think so.
Q. The Karuah is navigable for small vessels only 1
A. For vessels under 300 tons. The Warfield has run up to
Pumpkin Point, within five miles of Stroud.
Q. Then five miles of rails is what we should have to lay to bring
our iron ore to water carriage t
A. Yes.
Q. Do you not think it would be advisable to do as people do in
this country when they have mineral properties to dispose of j to call
public attention to their existence by advertisement from time to time?
A. I do not think the Company could go into anything of the sort
themselves.
Q. Might not parties come forward to lease, if you put advertise-
ments in the Melbourne and Sydney papers 1 Say you made up your
minds to spend £2O a year in advertising, might you not put it into the
heads of some parties to come and lease 1 Money is made very fast in
these countries, and people might be induced by advertisements to lay
their capital out in works upon this property.
A. I am quite sure that some course of that sort would be the
best that could be adopted. I do not know that there is any necessity,
however, to wait until the tramroad is made. You remember this news
has now only reached us a few months since.
Q. As regards the tramroad—you have, I believe, had some expe-
rience in such matters—have you calculated what would be the cost of
laying down five miles 1
A, I have calculated, and I can show you my calculation. It is
small—about £3,000 a mile. I think this is not very far out. I have
long been connected, more or less, with the colony of Adelaide; and I
have a relative out there, one of the chief proprietors of the Kapunda
mines. I sent him out a calculation as to what would be the quantity
of materials, and everything required for laying down a tram or railroad
to be worked with horses.


Q. What would be the weight of rail ?
A. Forty-two pounds a yard. I see, from an Adelaide paper,
that Capt. Bagot and some one else have been calculating the expense
of a tramroad of that sort. One makes it £2,200, and the other £2,600.
I have allowed for more contingencies, and a higher rate of labour ; and
Ido not think you would find it come under £3,000. I shall be happy
to give you all the particulars in detail.
Q. Would such a rail as you have described be available for a
locomotive in the event of its being required to be used for the transit
of the produce of these works 1
A. You may run a light locomotive over a 42-lb. a yard rail ; but
that would not be a proper mode of doing it. There is no economy in
having light rails to run locomotives upon. If you were going to make a
tramroad, you would make it upon a different principle from a railroad.
In the one case you must have certain levels ; in the other case, where
you are merely going to have a rail for horses, you do not mind going a
little up-hill and a little down-hill.
Q. Do you think these works could be properly developed by a
horse tramway ?
A. I think they might for some years.
Q. Supposing we could get substantial parties to enter into a lease,
agreeing to pay a considerable rent per annum, do you not think it
would be worth the Company’s while to advance a sum towards making
the tramway 1
A. Yes j especially if this New England traffic can be directed
down this road. Mr. Hodgson was very much surprised when he arrived
at Gloucester to find a dog-cart that had brought down six persons, and
drays with wool were coming down the line.
Q. And shipped at Port Stephens ?
A. At Pumpkin Point. A considerable sum of money has been
laid out in making a store and wharf at Pumpkin Point, because previ-
ously the wool had to be put into open boats, and there was a difficulty
about it.
Q. Allow me to ask you, do your colonial directors hold out any
hopes that Port Stephens can ever be made to compete with Newcastle 1
Remember it is not more than seventeen miles in a direct distance from
Newcastle. Do they hold out any hopes that any money you can lay
out will induce people to come and ship at Port Stephens in lieu of
Newcastle ? Of the desirableness of getting them to do so there is but
one opinion, the question relates to the policy of an expenditure of the
Company’s capital,
A. Our colonial directors are only just in harness. They have only
met once or twice.
Q. I meant the colonial directors on the Board here, Mr. Hamilton
and Mr. Edwards.
A. I do not think they have said much about it. It is eighty
miles shorter to come by Port Stephens than the other line. A colonist,
second to none in experience, told me the other day that there was wool
up in the New England district for three years which parties had not
been able to bring down.


Q. You would have to induce ships to come there and take it
away ?
A. Three hundred ton vessels can come to Pumpkin Point. The
Warfield has been constantly running up there ; and vessels going there
will take the wool and bring it away to Sydney. At present the vessels
do not go to Newcastle to load wool.
Q. Occasionally they do ?
A. They may occasionally, but not often.
Q. The Company’s annual wool vessel has gone to Port Stephens
to load our wool several times to my knowledge?
A. Yes; but not generally speaking. Ido not know more than
one occasion when she has loaded there. The wool is sent by small
craft coasters round to Sydney, and so, in like manner, from Newcastle.
By Mr. Lawrence.
Q. We have become aware that the cattle and horses on the Com-
pany’s estate have not been mustered since 1848 ; but you inform us
that the Board have not long been acquainted with this fact?
A. They became aware of it when they received Mr. White’s
report, and I leather think that report came in about this time last year;
we did not know anything about it previously.
Q. Is it not, therefore, evident that the returns of the Company’s
flocks and herds, as stated in the Reports annually presented to the
Proprietors, are not to be relied upon.
A. We have reported the stock according to the returns we have
X’eceived from the colony; but it was only when we I'eceived Mr.
White's report that we found they made up the stocks from estimates
only.
[The Committee then adjourned.
COMMITTEE MEETING
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 17th, 1857.
Present, all the Members.
Mr. Ravenshaw, Governor of the Company, further examined.
By the Chairman.
Q. We did not touch on the subject yesterday of leasing the col-
lieries. The Committee would be glad to hear your views on the point.
A. When we come to look at all those coal seams at Port Stephens, I
can have no doubt in my own mind that the coal seams at Port Stephens
and at Newcastle form parts of one and the same great mineral basin.
And if it were necessary I could give you ample proof of that, and will
be prepared to do so if you require it. But it rather requires techni-
calities, which I do not think there is any occasion to enter into. But
that view was communicated to Mr. Odernheimer; and, as far as I see,


all those views which were communicated to Mr. Odernheimer, with
regard to the extent of the mineral basin at Newcastle and Port Stephens,
have been in a great measure confirmed, more so, almost, than it was
possible to suppose. Now, when you establish the fact by two modes,
partly by boring, and partly by geological analogy, that you have many
seams of coal much under those that you are now working ; and that in
fact, the deeper you go the better is the quality of the coal, which is illus-
trated by every step that you take in the development of your Newcastle
colliery ; because, even when you are working to the deep of the D and
E pits, you will see’it is stated in many places that the coal as it is worked
to the deep improves in quality. I had all these forms drawn out [refer-
ring to a document], and they give us very nice information of what is
going on. “State the character of the measures opened with respect to
the quality of the coal, and otherwise. In the dip, between the D and
E pits, the coal improves.” The “ dip” means the “ deep.” As you work
down the quality of the coal improves; and simply for this reason, that
nothing deteriorates coal so much as atmospheric influence, and the
nearer you are the surface the worse will be the quality of the coal; and
dii’ectly you get to work at the deep of any pit, and get more earth and
land upon it, then the quality of the coal improves.
The Chairman. Now, with regard to Port Stephens, we were discus-
sing the policy or impolicy of laying out large sxims of money on road-
making. Has it never been suggested to you that it would be preferable
to encourage a steam communication betwixt Port Stephens and Sydney,
or betwixt Port Stephens and Newcastle, providing it could be done at
a trifling outlay, and thus induce persons to purchase or rent, with a
view to raise articles suitable for the Sydney market, and which are all
along the coast where steam communication extends 1
A. Capt. Brownrigg was under a sort of implied arrangement, which
has been fulfilled by the Company, of keeping a vessel running between
Pumpkin Point, or between the Karuah River and Sydney. I think
the vessel sailed once a month.
Q. That was a sailing vessel 1
A. A sailing vessel.
Q. My question referred to steamers.
A. I was going to answer. Further, and beyond that, there has
been a communication entered into (you will see it in one of the late
despatches from Capt. Brownrigg) to run a steamer once a month in the
same direction.
Q. But what did he propose to pay for that service ?
A. Ido not remember exactly what it was. The arrangement did
not come to anything. It is stated, at least, that he feared the arrange-
ment he was about to enter into would go off, because the number of
diggers was rather falling off. I will get you the despatch, and you will
see exactly what was staled.
Q. Has it ever been stated to you that the class of individuals who
usually buy or who rent small plots of land in New South Wales, will
never settle at Port Stephens, unless they have a frequent and certain
means of communicating with Sydney market ?


A. I conceive such a communication is of the very greatest possible
importance, and, therefore, if this arrangement is carried out, of the
road being made through to the New England district to come down to
Port Stephens, one of the consequences will be, that vessels will be in-
duced to come there.
Q. Steamers you mean 1
A. Steamers, and other vessels, will be induced to come there, for
the purpose of conveying the wool on to Sydney, and will effect that very
species of communication which you are now referring to.
Q. You said, yesterday, that there would be a saving of eighty
miles in going to Port Stephens. Now, in looking over the map, I own
Ido not see that. Perhaps you will be able to point it out to me 1
A. It is so stated in a little pamphlet, which is in one of the des-
patches, with a little map attached to it.
Q. Has it ever occurred to you that these railways that are now
being laid out, and which, I hope, will soon pass through the Company’s
property, will add directly to the value of land in this way—that they
will facilitate the sale and export of that large mass of timber which
covers so large a portion of the Company’s estate ? Has that ever been
pointed out to you ?
A. Of course it would act in that way, and there has been some
attention paid to the subject of timber; so much so, that Capt. Brownrigg
let a portion of the land upon the banks of the Karuah to parties for the
purpose of building vessels there. He has not mentioned it lately, but
it was a very satisfactory arrangement,
Q. But I was going to ask you whether you are aware that in
Canada, for instance, land that was, comparatively speaking, valueless,
has, by the making of the Grand Trunk line, acquired a considerable
value solely on account of the timber, which could in no way be moved,
but which is now a source of great profit to the landowners, as well as
to the Hallway Company 1
A. Oh, yes; there is no question about that, and even the commu-
nication, as far as it has gone, has brought down a good deal of timber.
I see in one of the late despatches Capt. Brownrigg states that he has
purchased, for the purposes of our railway, £5OO worth of timber for
railway sleepers, which had been cut at Port Stephens and brought to
Newcastle.
By Mr. Ellis.
Q. What instructions has Mr. Hodgson, our present superintendent,
as regards new works 1
A, Do you mean at the colliery 1
Q. I mean generally—the colliery in particular, because Capt.
Brownrigg has been in the habit of expending large sums.
A. You will find in Mx\ Hodgson’s instructions, and in Mr. Whj'tte’s
instructions as regards the colliery, that no new work is to be entered
into until Mr. Whytte has made an estimate of it; until he has made a
report of its advantages and its disadvantages, and has obtained the


approval of Mr. Hodgson and the Committee of Advice. You will find
a clause in the instructions to that effect.
Q. The Committee of Advice, I understand, consists of four gen-
tlemen 1
A. Of three gentlemen.
Q. And is it a portion of their instructions that they do audit the
accounts before they leave the colony 1
A. No ; there is no specific instruction on that point. I explained
to you yesterday—l dare say, if you refer to my answer, you will find it
pretty much in these words—that, as regarded Newcastle, Mr. Linstead
had been ordered to go every quarter to Newcastle and to audit the
Company’s accounts there, and to look into the details of the cash
account, to put them in a tabular form, and to bring them in such form
to Sydney, for the information of Mr. Hodgson and the Committee of
Advice. And I think I further stated, that although there were no
express instructions with regard to the auditing of the other parts of
the accounts, still the Committee of Advice and Mr. Hodgson would
consider it a part of their duty, as a Board who would meet here, to
audit those accounts, without there being any express and direct instruc-
tions to them upon that point. I think that was what I stated yes-
terday.
[The witness referred to the despatch of Capt. Brownrigg, in
reference to the running of the steamer.]
The Chairman. It would be a most important thing, in my view, if
it could be done. You will never get any people to settle on the Port
Stephens land, or to buy it, unless they can dispose of their produce in
the market; and there is no market for them except Sydney.
The Witness. We have quite felt that.
No. IY.
STATEMENT OF THE COMPANY’S SHEEP, CATTLE,
AND HORSES IN NOVEMBER, 1854.
Extracts from Mr. White's Report, dated Stroud, %Uh November, 1854,
transmitted to the Court by Captain Brownrigg, and received in
London 17 tlo March, 1855.
“ With reference to the despatch No. 12, from the Court of Direc-
tors of the Australian Agricultural Company, enclosing extract from a
letter written by Capt. King, dated 19th February, 1848, on the subject
of the distribution of the Company’s flocks and herds, and the alleged
capabilities of the estate, I beg to submit a statement of the Company’s


stations and stock, the particulars of which are derived from practical
experience and personal observation for many years.
“ The larger portion of the Port Stephens estate consists of land of
inferior quality, totally unfit for sheep—more especially the block
between Stroud and Carrington, and from the Karuah River to the sea-
coast between the two townships above-named. At Stroud sheep cannot
be kept, as they would interfere with the working bullocks and stock
horses; and at Telligherry, three miles from Stroud, only a limited
number. One flock has been kept during six or seven months of the
year, as the sheep brought down for shearing are congregated in the
vicinity of the shed for about two months during that operation, and it
is necessary to keep the run free of stock for three or four months prior
to shearing; and unless it is a very favourable season there is no feed
upon it for some time'after shearing is concluded.
“ From Telligherry northwards the estate improves, and is better
adapted for sheep farming; but it is a well-known fact that all the land
in the vicinity of the sea-coast in New South Wales, with the exception
of a portion of the Soalhaven district, is unfit for fattening purposes.
Sheep may be bred to advantage, and the wool improved ; but size is
never obtained, nor do the animals become fat.
“ When Sir Edward Parry was commissioner of the Company the
land was surveyed by Mr. Armstrong, surveyor, who compiled a map,
showing the quality of the land in three divisions : Good, coloured
green ; middling, light red ; and indifferent, shaded dark. With a copy
of this map I travelled over nearly the whole of the original estate,
prior to the exchange for the land at Peel’s River and Liverpool Plains;
and I can bear testimony to the accuracy of its survey, for I could find
every flat laid down as I travelled along. This map shows a prepon-
derance of bad land.
“ I may observe that by far the worst portion was got rid of by the
exchange alluded to.
“ At this period, 1830 and 1831, sheep-farming was tried in several
places nearev the coast, and found not to answer ; and consequently the
lower or southern portion of the estate was devoted to cattle and horses.
“ Bundobah, on the shores of the harbour of Port Stephens, being
the head station for cattle, and Pindyambah, on the North Arm, for
horses.
“ Running somewhat parallel with the Karuah River, but much
nearer the coast, is the Myall River, whose shores are covered with
dense brushes growing on swampy lands; and the cattle from Bundobah,
which in former days consisted principally of the Kyloe breed, straggled
from the station and took up their quarters in these brushes, from
whence it was found impossible to dislodge them, as, naturally of a wild
breed, they became wilder and scarcely approachable, in consequence of
being waylaid and hunted by the blacks.
“From 1837 to 1841 I was over this country several times in the
year, and I found the mobs contained a large number of wild bulls, which
invariably turned upon the horses after a .short run ; and we had to
carry pistols and shoot them in self-defence.


“In a mob of twenty-two head of cattle I have counted fifteen
bulls, from calves to aged, not one of which ever saw a stock-yard.
These cattle were generally so nimble of foot that I have seen a'two-
year-old half-bred Scotch heifer run clean away from our bcst horses.
“ With the exception of a small flat of land, here and there con-
taining good herbage, the country from about four miles east of Booral
and Stroud to the sea-coast consists of mountains, swamps, and brushes,
with scrubby land in ridges.
“ Several years ago a sheep station was formed about seven miles
east of Booral, at the head of the branch, under one Lewis, overseer ;
but it was soon abandoned as worthless. This station is ou the borders
of the Company’s land, and has since been taken up by the Ren wicks of
Booral as a cattle station. Their cattle, however, run principally on the
land which used to be the ‘ Branch paddock ’ in former days, the fences
of which have been allowed to fall to decay.
“ The Bundobah station was considered a good breeding station for
cattle, but the wild mobs being so near, it was deemed advisable to re-
move the growing cattle to Gloucester, and when the Liverpool Plains
estate was obtained, to that locality, for the purpose of improving in
size and condition.
“ Pindyambah paddock was found to be too poor a locality for
breeding mares, which were subsecpiently removed to the Avon ; and
this paddock (Pindyambah), up to the time that I left the Company’s ser-
vice, in 1841, was reserved for keeping young stallions in, until sufficient
age was attained for the development of points upon which depends a selec-
tion for sale, or for our own purposes. It was also used as a weaning
paddock for the Bundobah calves.
“ I may here remark that these 'paddocks have been allowed to go to
ruin, and also the new line offence, erected by Captain King in 1842-3,
extending from the Branch Paddock to the Myall Lakes, a distance of
about nine miles ; this fence was put up to keep the Bundobah cattle in
their own run, and to prevent their mixing with the wild mobs in the
inaccessible country alluded to. The consequence now is, that the cattle
are scattered far and wide, and, until some large tract of country is secured
as a mustering paddock, I shall be unable to do anything in the way of
collecting the stock.
“In round numbers,
“ Bundobah paddock contained. . . 10,000 acres.
Pindyambah paddock „ . , . 4,000 „
Branch paddock „ 12,000 „
“This last paddock was formed by a line of fence about seven
miles in length, running from Booral, the head of the navigation of the
Karuah River, to the crossing place on the Branch, a tributary of the
Karuah. It is well watered, and contains some first-rate grazing land.
It is centrally situated, and was formerly used for all the young stock,
especially horses, except young stallions at Pindyambah. The fence has
been completely destroyed ; the huts and stock-yards dilapidated, lam
now having it enclosed, and strong stock-yards erected ; and I purpose,


From Bundobah
-
-
-
10 miles.
,, Heads of Branch
-
.
-
5 „
„ Boolaydulah
-
-
-
12 „
„ Stroud
-
-
7 „
as soon as it is ready, to put into it every head of stock I can collect, to
be left there until it be decided whether they are to be sold or removed
to Liverpool Plains.
“ The paddock, when finished, will be situated the undermentioned
distances from the places where the Company’s stock are running
wild :
It adjoins Booral. The road from Stroud and Booral to Carrington
passes through it—the former for about four miles, and the latter for
about six miles ; and in the fence self-shutting gates will be erected on
these thoroughfares.
“The country between Telligherry and the Avon is principally
occupied with sheep, there being one head station (Laver’s), and four
out-stations. Eastward, towards the sea-coast, is Campbell’s Valley, a
spot hemmed in by mountains, and frequented by many cattle, the Com-
pany’s as well as strangers. During a bad season, Laver is compelled
to send some of his flocks to this locality. The general run of the
country, from Telligherry to the Avon, is ordinary ridges, thinly clad
with herbage, with a few good flats on the banks of the creeks.
“ This country will carry about 5,000 sheep.
“ I stated that the brood mares were removed from Pindyambah to
the Avon—a station situated about twenty-two miles from Stroud and
about eight miles south of Gloucester, on the road to the Manning and
Port Macquarie. The land about here consists of rich alluvial flats,
with abundance of the purest water at all seasons, the Avon being a
tortuous stream, with never-failing water-holes. The horse stock did
well here, the more especially as this station, and the Gloucester sta-
tion on which the Durham cattle were kept, were surrounded by sheep-
stations, which prevented the animals straying beyond a certain dis-
tance ; for the stock-men had strict injunctions to ride round periodi-
cally, and on being informed that a mob of horses or cattle was seen by
the numerous shepherds in any particular direction, they headed them
back again. The cattle had their regular bedding places, and the horses
their runs; they were undisturbed, and could be found when required.
“The result of this system was apparent in the fact that, on leaving
the service of the Company in December, 1841, I was enabled to make
a good muster of the cattle and horses to my successor, Mr. King.
“For some unaccountable reasons, the sheep have been allowed to
encroach upon these runs, so that they feed light up to the buildings on
these stations; and the consequence is, that, for years, the cattle at
Gloucester and the horses at the Avon have not been mustered.
“The Avon is a station only in name. The paddocks are
destroyed, and the boxes erected for the stallions, with large five-rail
and cap-yards adjoining for exercise, are dilapidated; and this season,
1854-5, the mares have to be kept at Booral, Alderley, and Stroud,
where there is but scanty feed after a severe winter,


“ The state of the stock I will come to by-and-hy.
“ The Gloucester station is situated on the river of that name, and
consists of fine alluvial flats, on the centre of which stands a range of
remarkable mountains, called the Buckens.
“ It is a fine watered country ; the rivers being the Gloucester,
Avon, Bowman, and Barrington, with their tributaries. On this station
are some of the finest paddocks on the Company’s estate, containing up-
wards of 1,000 acres each.
“ The fences are, at present, insecure. In these paddocks, the
weaned cattle are kept, until a sufficient number is collected for removal
to Giro, the heifer station, about thirty-three miles from Gloucester, on
the mountain line of road.
“ With the exception of the two stations situated between the
Avon and Gloucester, from which the sheep encroach as alluded to, the
nearest stations are situated all round, about a distance of six miles.
These form the principal sheep establishment of the Company. Each
station has fine alluvial flats, with fine healthy ridges for wet weather.
“The present overseer at Gloucester, Mr. Armstrong, tells me
that the cattle were never mustered over to him, and he does not know
how many he has in charge.
“ About seven miles from Gloucester, on its mountain line of road,
is the present pure Durham herd, which feed on the banks of the
Barrington Elver, and a tributary called Craven’s Creek. The land
consists of fine alluvial flats. The cattle seldom stray beyond the first
crossing-place of the Little Manning, a distance of about six miles. In
1811, this station was the heifer station, and the pure Durham herd was
at Gloucester.
“ The present heifer station is at Giro, on the Barnard River—■
Government land on lease, about thirty-three miles from Gloucestei’.
It is a very hilly run, with abundance of feed and water, but the cattle
require much looking after, as stations have been formed within a
distance of ten miles by Messrs. Mackay, Holmes, and Hook.
“ Since the alienation of the Company’s land, a great number of stray
cattle overrun the Company’s estate from Booral to the Manning Kiver.
The establishment of a public pound will be of great importance as a
means of checking this evil. These cattle belong to the various settlers,
who, of course, have the use of the Company’s bulls.
Extract from Despatch of Arthur Hodgson.
Sydney, November ith, 185 G.
“ STROUD.
“I was much pleased with Stroud ; generally the buildings are in
good repair, with the exception of “ Stroud House,” now occupied by
Mr. J. C. White, and formerly by Mr. P. G. King. The parsonage and


the residence of the medical gentleman have been thoroughly repaired.
I purpose calling a sale by auction in all January next, of some allotments
at Stroud, and farms in the neighbourhood. It will be most advisable to
lease or dispose of those buildings which, after the removal of the sheep
establishment, will no longer be required; auction will test the value,
and serve as a guide, for some time to come, in the future disposal of
your lands privately.
“ GLOUCESTER.
“ The town of Gloucester is laid out with great judgement; some few
allotments have been sold by auction. The road from New England
passes through a part of the township ; it is my intention to put up for
sale in January a few allotments here, withdx’awing restriction as to the
building of a public house, now that the removal of the sheep is decided
upon. There is a bouse of accommodation, distant one mile from the
site of the township, well kept by a man who for many years was sheep
overseer in your employ ; but I think that, in the present state of
things, the inn is quite necessary ; from the absence of a rising popula-
tion, there is no immediate occasion for a schoolhouse to be erected ; at
Giro, thirty miles from Gloucester, I shall endeavour to establish a
blacksmith on his own account, where drays can be repaired, and
travellers’ horses shod; and on the Nowendoc run, sixty-four miles from
Gloucester, I have sanctioned the immediate erection of a public house,
its cost not to exceed £lOO, which, when completed, will be readily let
at a remunerative rate; the travellers to and from the Rockey River
gold diggings, on foot and on horseback, are considerable, and these New
England diggings are increasing in importance.
“ CARRINGTON.
“ I visited this settlement, which is a heap of ruins, save the
church, built of rough stone, and in good repair; there is a storekeeper
here, with a salary of £75 per annum, and three men, who may be
called his staff; this establishment, which costs the Company £250 per
annum, will cease to exist at the end of this year. Pumpkin Point is
now open, and all cargoes can be discharged and taken in there.
“THE TRAM ROAD SURVEY.
“ This survey is going on very satisfactorily, but not unattended
with expense, about £3OO per annum. It would be premature for me
to offer any opinion as to the advantage of a trararoad through the Port
Stephens estate, especially as the subject has been so fully repotted upon
by Capt. Brownrigg; but I may be allowed to add, that every facility
will be given to the present surveyor and his party, and care shall be
taken not to dispose of any lands contiguous to their marked tree-line.
Mr. Lavelle, the surveyor, who is a corporal of the Royal Sappers and
Miners, and known to the Govexnox’-General, writes to me on October
31st, ‘The line passes throxxgh the best part of the Australiaxx Agri-


cultural Company’s land, and I think it would be wise policy to make the
tramroad first, or railroad if they wish, for the district is practicable for
either, and sell the land afterwards ; for undoubtedly, it would enhance
the value of the land five-fold ; and at the North Arm, near Carrington,
a hundred fold or more.’
“NEW ENGLAND ROAD.
“On my arrival at Gloster, on 20th October, I was astonished to
find at the house of accommodation there a dog-cart, which had brought
down in three days, from New England, six persons over the new
marked tree-line—a Mr. Baker and his family. Two other families
have since come down the same line, and dray-loads of wool have left
New England for Stroud and Port Stephens. I have not yet seen this
new line, but hear that it is quite practicable, and with a small expen-
diture of money, for which application has been made to the Govern-
ment (£400), it may be expected that most of the squatters in the
south-east corner of New England will avail themselves of it. This is
very important; nothing will tend to open out your valuable lands for
sale so quickly and surely as a good line of communication between New
England and the harbour of Port Stephens.
“ MINEEALOGICAL SURVEY.
“ My predecessor, at the repeated suggestion of Mr, Odernheimer,
has been induced to retain Mr. Herborn’s services for another year.
This is a very heavy expense, nearly £BOO per annum. In addition to
his assistant and two servants, there are two Newcastle miners employed
at sixty shillings per week each. I shall not feel myself justified in
continuing such a heavy expenditure beyond the current agreement,
believing that the valuable survey by Mr. Odernheimer will have given
the Court as much information as they could desire. The iron mine,
which I visited is, undoubtedly, a very important discovery in future;
at present, difficult of access. Mr. Herborn is prospecting for gold in
the River Barrington. As Mr. Odernheimer is going home, it may
be as well to mention that Mr. Herborn and himself have married
sisters, two Misses Rudder. I notice that the retention of Mr. Her-
born’s services is urged, on three different occasions, in Mr. Odern-
heimer’s report.
“ Newcastle will be the subject of a separate despatch. The
Eamona, as yet, has not arrived. Mr, Whytte, who arrived here in the
Vimiera on Ist instant, proceeds with me to Newcastle on the 10th, and
it has been recommended by the Board of Advice that he returns to
Sydney at the end of this month, to make his report from Newcastle.
I proceed to Stroud with the new assistant-superintendent, Mr. Green ;
his first duty will be to superintend the shearing of the sheep. I shall
go out to see some deserted cattle stations, where horses and cattle are
running wild, and make arrangements as to the yards and fencing, in
order that these animals may, if it be possible, be entrapped before the


expiration of the summer, I then proceed to Nowendoc with Mr
White, to see the cattle running there, and draft out 600 steers for
Warrah ; and after looking at the new line of road, 1 shall travel over
Liverpool Plains to Warrah, and thence to Newcastle, returning here
about the end of the month.
PRICES OF AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL SHARES
At Various Epochs.
2nd January, 1862 15
26th November 75 & 100
17th December 85 & 205
21s * » 258 & 335
4th January, 1853 300
22nd February „ . . . . . 260
4th March » • • • . . 115 ex Peel River Stock
and ex div.
16th July „ £25 Shares, 17A paid . 341
2nd January, 1871 . . , . . 30
1872 ..... 28£
1873 35
5? 10*0 . . . . • OO
Highest Price this year, Ist April . . 80
Present Price, 27th November ... 64
Macivbb a Macdonald, Printers, 37, Walbrook, E. C.






2, Hercules Passage,
Old Broad Street,
London, 2nd December, 1873.
To the Shareholders of the
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COMPANY.
Gentlemen,
1 beg to call your attention to an error in
the tiftli paragraph of my circular dated the 29th ultimo,
which reads, “Every proprietor of two Ordinary Shares
to have one ‘A ’ Share and one ‘B’ Share allotted,”
instead of which read, “ Every proprietor of one
Ordinary Share to have live ‘ A ’ (Free Shares) and five
‘B’ Shares (deposit 10s.) allotted.
1 he Capital of the New Company will then be —
100,000 “A” Shares, at £o each, free £500,000
100,000 “B” Shares, at £5 each, 10s. deposit 500,000
200,000
£1,000,000
I am Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant
BEGINALD H. PRANCE
