

W.E.A. Pamphlet No. 2.
The Massacre of the Innocents.
BY
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
SYDNEY.
WILLIAM APPLECATE CULLICK, COVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
*1247 2-a 1917.
PUBLISHED BY THE
Worker's Educational Association of South Wales,
EDUCATION BUILDING, BRIDGE-STREET, SYDNEY.


W.E.A. Pamphlet. No. 2.
THE MASSACRE OF THE INNOCENTS.
LECTURE
DELIVERED BV
PROFESSOR D. A. WELSH,
M.A., B.Sc., F.R.C.P., Rwtf.
SVCITEY s
WILLIAM AITLEQATE GDLUUK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1*917.
12 2-A
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
Workers’ Educational Association of New South Wales,


SYNOPSIS.
INTRODUCTION.
TART I.
Mbnta i, Attitudes, Right and Wrong.
1. Mental entanglements'.
! ‘2. Ignorance and indifference.
3. The comnionaonac of sex.
TART 11,
• Th« Massaoru, iu.ustba.trd «y some Findings or th«- :
Royai, Commission.
I. The effects of syphilis.
0, The efifoota of gonorrhcea.
8. The relation of alcohol,
■l. Economic effects.
5. Treatment by unqualified, persons. „ <
6, Disqualification for marriage.
' 7- Education of the public.
8. General conclusions.


Workers' Educational Association of A.S.W.
WHAT IT IS.
The Workers' Educational Association is a Federation of Working Class,
Social and Educational organisations, united for the purpose of promoting the
Higher Education of the People. It is entirely non-sectarian and non-partisan
in policy. Its membership includes individuals of widely different tempera-
ment and outlook, bat who can unite for the one purpose for wluoh the Association
exists.
WHAT IT DOES.
The Association endeavours to promote the Education of the people in any and
every way possible, whether of the child, the adolescent, or the adult. It seeks
to impress upon our Educational systems the point of view and the Educational
interests of the wage-earners, both men and women. Our principal work, how-
ever, is, and must always bo, to promote adult education, particularly on those
subjects of broad human interest, such as “ Industrial History,” “ Economics,”
“ Sociology,” “ Political Science,” “ Psychology,” “ Biology,” or “ Literature."
Our work in this direction is not designed to have a technical value, but aim*
at giving to students a mental training and a knowledge of the subject they are
studying, which will enable them to become worthier and better citizens by
equipping them for more efficient social service. It is the desire to servo the
community which, in the eyes of the Association, constitutes the real hall-mark
of true citizenship.
HOW IT WORKS.
The Association believes that the only way by which it can provide such a
training is to euoourags absolute freedom of thought and freedom of discussion
on all phases of whatever subject any particular group of students may be interested
in, at the same time giving each student free access to all the latest books and
sources of knowledge that are available, and also the assistance of a skilled tutor,
who has specialised in that particular subject, to assist him in his search for
knowledge, and to discuss the subject with him.
WHY NOT JOIN?
If tills movement appears to you to be good, then why not. join f And
why not try to influence any organisation to which you may belong to affiliate ?
SUBSCRIPTION.
There are three minimum rates of subscription for individual members.
They are : 2/6 for membership only; 5/- for membership and twelve copies
of the “Highway” (monthly magazine of the Association), sent post free to
any address; and 7/6 to include membership, “Highway,” and free admission
to ell Public Lectures organised by the Association.
JOIN NOW.
If you are not personally acquainted with a Card Steward send your sub.
Boription direct to the General Secretary,
D. STEWART,
Education Building,
Bridge Street, Sydney.


The Massacre of the Innocents.
(BY PROFESS OR D. A. WELSH, M.A., B.Sc., M.D,
F.R.C.P., Ed.)
INTRODUCTION.
If I were to tell you all that I know, or only all that I have
aeon, of the massacre of the innocents, you would experience
something of the shell-concussion from which our soldiers suffer
at the front. But it is far from my intention to shock you.
On the contrary, i hope to quicken your interest and your effort
in a great cause. Hence my words concerning the actual massacre
will be few. Nevertheless, the keynote of my address is the’fact
that we tolerate in our midst an enemy which makes an appalling'
levy on our greatest- national treasure—-the lives of our children.
And the: chief object of my address is to enlist your sympathy
and your service in the campaign against the Herod of the modern
world disease. '
It is not difficult to reconcile my object with the purjiose of
this Conference. As expressed in the circular letter, that purpose
isto train .the children to grow up pure in mind and in body,
fikcitizens with whom to entrust the future of the race.” That
is a.high ideal* worthily expressed. The procedure of the Con--
ference is defined by the statements that the committee is not
hampered, by- any fixed idea, and that it hopes the question will
he discussed from every point of view , possible.
The point nf vi- w that I propose to discuss is twofold. (1) Be-
fore the children can be trained, the parents and teachers must
themselves be trained. Otherwise the blind are leading the
blind. The first step in this preliminary training is to seek and
find the proper mental attitude and outlook on the facts and
problems of sex, (2) Before the children can be trained, there
must.be.children,,to train, and they must be sound in mind and
in.body... We cannot shut.our eyes to the fact that we are losing
hosts of children either because they are killed before they are-
Ijorn or because 'hey,are born diseased. The campaign against
those most devasating. diseases known as venereal must-be
planned intelligently and effectively. Here again the first step
must be the attainment -of the right mental attitude by those
who propose t$ engage in the campaign.
The greater part of my address, therefore, will be an attempt
to reach an Attitude of Mind that shall lie both truthful and
progressive. We must create a sane and wholesome public opinion
sa the first condif on of any social reform. Many are anxious to


help who require things to be done in their own narrow way-
Some insist that the problems of prostitution must be tackled first-
and in only one way—their way.- Others insist that intemperance
in alcohol is the root of the evil. Recognising that both questions
are only parts of a greater problem which demands the closest-
Study, 1 suggest that we take a lesson from the founders of this
Conference, and approach the matter with an open mind. Let us
try to grasp the whole truth before we begin to lay down the law
about any part of it. Let us earnestly try to learn before we
rashly try to teach. I take that warning to myself most
seriously.
PART I.
MENTAL ATTITUDES, RIGHT AND WRONG.
Oar mental attitude towards the problems of sex and venereal
disease has undergone an evolution. The open licence of the
Restoration and of the Regency led to a reaction which went too
far. , It developed the prudei'y of Victorian times, which was
■offensive to the truth and harmful to the race. Wc are now
entering upon a more promising attitude of candour and
couunonsense.
A more rational and frank treatment of the whole subject had'
begun before the war. The. sittings of the Royal Commission in
Britain wore interrupted by the outbreak of war, to bo resumed
some months later. The final report was issued early this year.
Undoubtedly, the more thoughtful men and women were reacting
both from licence and from mock-modesty. They were awaking
to the fact that a great social evil was also a great social wrong.
They were beginning to realise their individual responsibility fer-
tile continuance of that evil and that wrong. -. The war opened
at the psychological moment. Its awful experiences made men
more intolerant of intolerance; more resolved to have done with
pretence and make-believe, more determined to release innocent
suffering from all forms of cruel and unjust oppression.
While it is true that the great war is of prime importance, it
is also true that the problems of venereal disease are secondary
only to’ the problems of the war, and are indeed complementary
to them. Next to the war the campaign against venereal disease-,
the most important thing that could engage our attention.
1. MENTAL ENTANGLEMENTS.
The enemy is well entrenched. He has been digging himself
in tor generations. Had we been openly on his side, we could,
not have done more to help him than we have done by barri-
cading his positions with Our prejudices. It is the first condition.


■of a successful campaign that these mental entanglements of our
own making should be disrupted by the high explosive force of
truth and commonsense. The ground must be cleared for action.
One of the factors which has done more than any other to
hamper the campaign against venereal disease is the confusion of
immorality with disease. The two things are quite distinct. The
- one is a moral lapse ; the other is a microbic infection. Hence
' the means of combating the two are fundamentally different.
The prevention and cure of immorality is an educative process,
•slowly advancing through the generations. The empty mind
must be occupied with healthy interests, directed to healthy
•activities, refreshed by healthy amusements. The defective
character must be buttressed by strengthening the will, and by
spiritual, humanitarian and patriotic appeals.
The prevention and cure of venereal disease is a campaign
Tequiring medical weapons of precision. Our scientific know-
ledge of venereal disease is for ahead of any practical application
of that knowledge. The mass of research waiting to hie put to
practical use is already enormous, and there is no gap in our
scientific equipment of such a kind as to embarrass the campaign.
There need, therefore, be no delay. The ways of dealing with
such diseases are well-known to medical men, though even medical
men cannot wholly rid their minds of prejudice when they discuss
venereal disease.
There are then two great objects to be attained : (1) an im-
provement of public morals, and (2) an improvement of public
health. I submit that each of these objects is a good thing in
itself, and that there is no necessary relation between the two.
The eradication of venereal disease is a most worthy ambition, and
at should not,be made conditional on that other worthy ambition
with which it is only incidentally related—the education of the
moral sense of the community. To put an extreme case, if we
could lessen the incidence of venereal disease without lessening
immorality, we should have gained an immeasurable good for our
race. It is hardly possible, however, that improvement in one
direction could take place without improvement in the other also.
One aspect of the problem must appeal to all. Moral regen-
eration must be slow. Contagious diseases may be rapidly
diminished. Hence, whether we act as an Empire or as a
Commonwealth, as a University or as a Church, as a Conference
or‘as individuals, we are under an obligation to act immediately
and to act effectively. In view of the wastage of our manhood,
in view of the,peril of our race, this becomes an imperial and an
individual duty on the highest plane of patriotism.
Another most damaging misconception, only gradually being
removed, is that venereal disease is a just punishment for sin.
The truth is that the cruellest suffering and the greatest risk of


death are borne by chaste women and innocent children ; the
real sinner often suffers least. Moreover, a great number of
those who suffer are perfectly innocent, while, of those who are
nibt innocent, a great number are certainly not vicious. One of
the reasons why the problem is more insistent now than ever, is
that many of our soldiers have become infected. Yet they are
men who have done more for the Great Cause than you or I have
done. If they have stumbled into a dirty ditch that we have
avoided, they have also scaled a glorious height that we have not
attained. It is only fair to add that- more care is taken now to
guard our soldiers from this ditch. '
In this regard many worthy persons have lost all .sense of
proportion. Surely, the sins of the spirit are more deadly than
the sins of the flesh, and uncharitableness more soul-destroying
than unchastity. I do not seek to palliate or to excuse intem-
perance in any form, but I suggest to those who are loud in its
condemnation that they may be guilty of a greater evil of which
it is more becoming that they should first repent Those, in
particular, who, by their'narrow views and perverted sentiment
have permitted or encouraged the growth of this social wrong,
bear a heavy load of responsibility for the mass of innocent
suffering.
Another mental attitude is responsible for untold misery. It
is still a prevalent and very horrible idea that it is pandering to
vice to check the ravages of these plagues. It is an idea which
has dominated generation after generation of well-intentioned
men and Women who feared that vice would be encouraged if
venereal disease were prevented. It has discredited much of the
effort of Christianity to deal with the problem. A church has
indeed despaired of its spiritual appeal when it cannot afford to
lose the support of foul diseases for the enforcement of that
appeal.
The best thought of the Church is against that idea, and there
are urgent reasons why all thinking men and women should
repudiate the unholy alliance. The fierce light of the world in
flames has thrown into sharp relief outlines of truth and of duty,
which were indistinct before. This is no sham fight in which the
Empire is engaged. It is a fight against the powers of darkness,
both material and spiritual, and that fight must go on long after
.the great war is over. The work of the commissions in Britain
and in Australia has left no room for doubting the grave menace
of the social evil, its incidence on the unprotected, its calamitous
effects on the national welfare and on the race. Looked at in
their proper light, the reports of these commissions witness an,
appeal from, outraged motherhood, from blighted childhood, and
from'babes unborn, for deliverance from an appalling form of
frightfulness.


2. IGNORANCE AND INDIFFERENCE.
It takes some courage to enter the fray. It is natural for .the
clean-minded man or woman to shrink from contact with uncleafa
things. But it is no less natural for-a man to recoil from a
painful death. Yet thousands have conquered that fear, and have
died for us. It is hardly a fair return .that we should continue
to avoid a painful subject. Shrinking from this great work,
because it offends our delicacy, is only another form of shirking..
I cannot bring myself to believe that this cruel war with the
Central Powers of Europe formed any part of the eternal
purpose.. I prefer to believe that it had its origin in that abyss
of barbarism and brutishness from which mankind has not Inlly
emerged; that it was in no sense necessary; that it was made
inevitable only by the Prussian lust of world-power, their
negation of right, their worship of might. Our fatal policy «f
irresolution made the British Empire guilty of contributory
negligence. If our culpability is not that of the 'savage beast
which holds by the throat the liberties of mankind, it is at least
that of the careless guardian of those liberties,
i-The great war seems a terrible retribution for eternal justice
to exact for what at its worst is a trifling national lapse—a lapse
that has in it some of the elements of a virtue—for our unpre-
paredness is often quoted «s proof of our innocence of warlike
motive. ' Now that is just what many a man has thought when
he has traced the ruin of. hisimarried life to a lapse which he had
looked upon as a trifling indiscretion—a lapse which he may
indeed have taken as a proof of his manliness. It is part of .the
ordered scheme of things that Ignorance-and indifference -may -
have to pay a penalty out of all -proportion to their degree of
moral turpitude. Innocence is no-safeguard against aggression-
The man, or the race of men, who takes ito thought for defence,
takes also .the risk of disaster. History is full of the sternest
warnings both in the military and in the medical-spheres. ■<
„It is- monstrous to entertain the thought that venereal diseases
were developed among us for disciplinary purposes, or for
good purpose whatever. We are too ready to' put the blame on
other shoulders than our own. We are too ready to counsel
submission to the will of Go<l, when we should urge resistance
to a scourge of unmitigated evil. There is some' excuse 1 -iot
ignorance; there is none for indifference ; there may be hideous
consequences for both. Ignorance and indifference are the-two
great allies of venereal -disease, and the campaign can never--be
assured of victory until these allies have been routed.
• The education of the people must be directed firstly to the facts
of sex and secondly to-the facts of venereal disease. As a people
we had’entered into a conspiracy of silence in regard to.tbe


social and racial diseases. We have now begun to undo the
damage which our reticence had created. Those of us who stay
at home should welcome the chance of making some return for
the sacrifices of our fighting men. We must try to ensure for
their children a better chance of a clean life than their fathers
had. There could be no higher purpose in life than the endeavour
to realise this new hope for our race. But, before we can bring
light to others, we must bring to the work an open mind cleansed
of all'prejudice and intolerance.
3. THE COMMONSENSE OF SEX.
h There is nothing vile or degrading in the facts of sex, nor in the
sex impulse. It is only in abuse that degradation lies. We may
abuse any of our appetites to our hurt. We may so eat or drink
that eating or drinking becomes a degradation. Otherwise they
are all natural activities, and must be accepted as part of the
cnvironmentjn which we live, and move, and have our being.
' ‘ In the facts of sex are centred some of the most intimate and
ennobling of human emotions and experiences—the love of men
and women—the love of children. Neither modesty nor decency
is'outraged by these facts. Candour and openness in dealing with
the primary facts of life need never offend clean and wholesome
men or women, nor need they offend children. Character is
degraded and decency is insulted in respect of sex only by two
things—by an unworthy attitude in thought or word or deed, and
by that perverted sense of delicacy which degenerates into prudery
■and intolerance.
•Whether we decide to act courageously, or whether we decide
to shirk our duty, education in sex matters will go on. It is going
on how. At every school boys are educating themselves in a
furtive and unwholesome manner, and throughout their lives they
may never bo able to rid themselves of the idea, gained in their
most impressionable years, that secrecy and indecency are the
necessary associates of sex. It is wrong that we should allow
this self-education to continue unguided. It we decide to take
the rightful place of a University in the community,' we shall
endeavour to be a source of enlightenment to the people. We shall
do all that lies in our power'to remove that fungus-growth which
too long has been allowed to soil the essential innocence of our
youth. >We shall insist that sex is not a matter for obscene jest,
hut a great central fact of life, which carries with it high moral,
social and patriotic responsibilities.
• There is no limit to the age at which education in the facts of
sex should begin. When the child first begins to ask questions,
tire answers should be consistent with the truth. It is possible
to give an appropriate answer to every question at every age. It
may - not be to wait until questions are asked. The


earlier this education is begun, the easier it is to continue. To be
of real value, the teaching must be adjusted to meet the growing
needs of the growing body.
Beginning in the home, progressive instruction should be con-
tinued at school, in technical and training colleges, and at the
University. It must be given to both sexes. Parents and
teachers should be helped in the choice of words, which should be
of the simplest. As matters stand, the parent is much more
embarrassed than the child, and the teacher more than the pupil,
because both parent and teacher start handicapped by traditional
mental attitudes and prevalent misconceptions. But the
University and the Workers’ Educational Association are actively
interested in working out a solution of this problem. It should
not be impossible to find an acceptable formula for what must
always be a most diplomatic communication.
In many minds innocence is confused with ignorance, when in
■ reality the two conditions are opposed. Innocence is an asset to
be treasured; ignorance is a liability to be discharged. It is
always possible to enlighten innocence without destroying it.
Indeed the innocence of ignorance is a fragile structure, whereas
enlightened innocence is a tower of strength.
We are but animals in the framework and needs of the body.
Within our flesh are kennelled fierce-hounds ready to work havoc
if we should slip the leash. There too, in some mysterious way,
is housed a being with spiritual aspirations and a spiritual destiny.
How much we are to demand of the spirit of man, and how much
we are to concede to his flesh, are questions each must answer.
The will is free. We can elect to follow the lead of the beast that
perisheth, or we may so accept the naturalness of sex that it is
in harmony with the “one far-off divine event,- to. which the
whole creation moves.”
PART II.
THE MASSACRE.
(Illustrated by some findings of the Royal Commission.)
'■ There are only two venereal diseases of importance—syphilis
and gonorrhoea—but they are responsible directly and indirectly
for greater incapacity,- greater suffering and greater loss of life,
actual and potential, than any % otber two infectious diseases.
Nevertheless there is no fundamental difference between them and
other ■ infective -processes, such as smallpox or epidemic
meningitis. Like other infectious diseases they too are caused
by microbes invading the body, and they are transmitted from one
person to another only • when the 1 microbes are ■ transmitted


Further the microbes of syphilis and of gonorrhoea are among the
best known to medical science. They can be freely handled:an,d
readily examined in the laboratory. Their ravages have .been
investigated in great detail. Highly technical and very exact
methods of diagnosis have been worked out for every stage of
syphilis. In gonorrhoea, early diagnosis is easy, later diagnosis
is difficult. Syphilis can now be treated with remarkable success
owing to the recent discovery of a powerful germicide which can
destroy the microbe within the human body. Gonorrhoea in its
earliest stages can be treated with great success, but, where
prompt and proper treatment has not been carried out, it may
prove one of the most intractable of diseases.
The subsequent part of my address will consist mainly of
extracts from the final Report of the Royal Commission on
Venereal Diseases. I associate myself with the weighty words
which I shall quote. They reflect my own experience in the
investigation of these diseases at universities and hospitals, and
my conclusions based on that experience. In particular, what
the Commissioners emphasise in regard to gonorrhoea is just
what I myself for many years have taught to students of
medicine. Given in the form of quotations, the facts and
recommendations derive an added authority. As you grasp their
meaning you will appreciate that not Herod himself could have
-achieved so pitiless, so diabolical a massacre as that which we
by our wrong mental attitudes have provoked and encouraged.
1. THE EFFECTS OF SYPHILIS.
The Commissioners explain that the immediate effects of
syphilis are inconsiderable as compared with the later develop-
ments. Under the heading of acquired syphilis, they compile
a most formidable catalogue to? damaged goods manufactured
by the syphilitic microbe. Every tissue and organ of the body
is liable to be invaded and “ colonised ” by these microbes.
Some parts of the body are specially affected by this invasion,
notably the circulatory and nervous systems.
In regard to hereditary syphilis the Commissioners say :
“ Syphilis may be inherited from a diseased mother. It may
possibly be inherited from a diseased father directly, without
the mother being obviously diseased. It is believed by some
that the disease can be transmitted to the third generation.
“ We have received much Evidence showing that both in the
foetus and in the child after birth, hereditary syphilis is an even
more serious disease than the acquired form, since it attacks
tissues still in process of development. It is a frequent cause of
ante-natal death, producing abortion, miscarriage, or still-birth., ■


“ In the great majority of cases, the subjects of hereditary
syphilis are free from obvious symptoms of the disease at birth,
and are apparently healthy and normal. In the few cases in
which symptoms are present at birth, the child seldom survives."
The Commissioners then trace the first twenty years of the
tainted life, if the child should survive so long, and disclose a
veritable chamber of horrors. I shall not attempt to raise ttye
curtain further .than to quote two sentences: “ The child’s
growth is cheeked, its vitality depressed, and its intelligence
stunted The central nervous system may be gravely
affected, leading to optic atrophy and blindness, nerve deafness,
meningitis, hydrocephalus, idiocy, or various forms of paralysis.”
“ The effects of congenital syphilis can best be studied by the
examination of family histories. ... In the case of 34 syphilitic
mothers, Dr. Mott found that 175 pregnancies resulted in only
30 ‘apparently healthy ’ children, leaving 104 premature births,
still-births, or deaths in infancy, and 41 ' seriously diseased ’ off-
spring. Of the apparently healthy children, it is possible that
some may show the effects of congenital disease later. . . Several
witnesses gave other evidence of family histories, illustrating
in the most startling manner the effects of syphilis in producing
miscarriages, still-births, infantile mortality, and diseased off-
spring.”
2. THE EFFECTS OF GONORRHCEA.
‘‘ Gonorrhtea is generally regarded by the public as a trifling
ailment, though it has in reality serious and far-reaching
consequences. Since the gravity of the disease is insufficiently
realised, it follows that early treatment is often neglected, and
the opportunity of attacking the disease in the incipient stages,
when it is much more amenable to treatment than later, is lost.
The treatment of gonorrhoea, if neglected, becomes extremely,
difficult, and the disease may be contracted time after time,
rendering the patient more and more liable to complications on
each successive occasion.
“ The consequences of gonorrhoea in males are grave and far-
reaching. It is a frequent cause of and the disease is
•a source of the greatest danger to the community at large. ...»
It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of gonorrhoea in
women. In the earlier stages it inflicts on her a serious ailment >
subsequently it , may cause sterility, and in later years it
frequently leads to conditions which may necessitate grave and
difficult operations, to chronic invalidism, and sometimes to
death.”
from these facts it would appear that, compared with syphilis,
gonorrhoea is not less destructive, though it is more merciful to
the children. It does not kill. When the microbe of gonorrhoea


has completed its work, there is nothing left to kill, and there
never will be anything to kill. The last hope of motherhood has
been destroyed.
It is true that venereal diseases (syphilis and gonorrhoea) are
the outstanding causes of children never being born, of children
being killed before they are born, and of children being born
diseased. Yet I must warn you that they are not the only causes
of any of these events, and you will do a grave injustice to many
innocent persons if you do not recognise that fact.
3. THE RELATION BETWEEN ALCOHOL AND VENEREAL DISEASES.
“ Abundant evidence was given as to the intimate relation
between alcohol and venereal diseases. Alcohol renders a man
liable to yield to temptations which he might otherwise resist,
and aggravates the disease by diminishing the resistance of the
individual. Alcohol makes latent syphilis and gonorrhcea active.
It makes the treatment of syphilis and gonorrhoea much more
refractory. . . . The facts point to the conclusion that de-
crease in the use of alcohol will be an important factor in
■diminishing the prevalence of venereal diseases.”
4. ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF VENEREAL DISEASES.
“ The grave economic losses to the State which venereal diseases
involve constitute a powerful argument for the initiation of
general measures of prevention and treatment at the earliest
possible date.
“These diseases take effect at every stage of life, and in the
case of syphilis any part of the body may be temporarily or
permanently affected. Both gonorrhoea and syphilis lead to an
enormous annual loss of child life. Gonorrhoea is one of the great
causes of sterility in men and in women. Of ante-natal deaths
and deaths in early infancy a large proportion are due to syphilis.
. . . At the earlier stages of life, therefore, the total loss
to the State is certainly very large.
“ Among adults the loss of working power from the earlier
effects of the diseases is important. . . . The evidence we
have taken clearly establishes the fact that the neglect of venereal
diseases, apart from the risk of later manifestations, has the effect
of rendering the treatment more difficult, protracted, and expen-
sive, thus entailing a large aggregate loss of working power. . .
In their later manifestations, both gonorrhcea and syphilis are
responsible for a vast amount of incapacity.”
The Commission quotes statistics of general paralysis of the
insane, refers to other forms of insanity due to syphilis, recalls
the cases of idiots and imbeciles whose brains have been arrested
in development on account of congenital syphilis, and emphasises
the resultant loss to the State,
12
TEACHING OF SEX HYGIENE.


“ It is clear that if the various sources of loss above referred
to could be rendered in terms of annual expenditure, the resulting
total must be enormous. We cannot expect that the whole of
this loss can be avoided; but we are satisfied that a large pro-
portion of the total expenditure can, in the future, be saved, and
that the savings would far more than counterbalance the cost pf
measures for the prevention and treatment of the diseases.”
5. TREATMENT OF VENEREAL DISEASES BY UNQUALIFIED PERSONS.
“ We have no hesitation in stating that the effects of unqualified
practice in regard to venereal diseases are disastrous, and that, in
our opinion, the continued existence of unqualified practice con-
stitutes one of the principal hindrances to the eradication of those
.diseases. ...
“ It cannot be too strongly emphasised that the essential point
in the control of venereal diseases is to secure for the patient the
best treatment at the earliest possible moment. By the inter-
vention of the unqualified person, the stage at which the per-
manent eradication of the disease is possible is lost, and the many
and terrible after effects which we have described may supervene,
for, although the disease is difficult to cure, symptoms are readily
made to disappear. In any case, the treatment is rendered more-
difficult, protracted, and expensive, and the risk of the disease
being communicated to others is very largely increased.”
6. VENEREAL DISEASES AS A DISQUALIFICATION FOR MARRIAGE.
“In view of the comparatively small importance with which,
until recently, the consequences of gonorrhoea, have commonly
been regarded, it is our duty to emphasise that the evidence given
before us seems to establish that gonorrhoea, until it has been
effectively treated, should be considered as a hindrance to
marriage. Speaking of the communication of gonorrhoea by the
husband to the wife, Dr. Thomas Barlow told us that gonorrhoea
was the cause of a large percentage of sterility in women and of
‘ suffering incalculable.’ In answer to the question, ‘ Should we
not endeavour to get a more serious view taken of it?’ he replied,
* Yes, I think we should. I think there has been a considerable
improvement in the way in which it is regarded, of course, of lato
years, but lam entirely with you. I think it is terrible.’
“ As regards syphilis, the importance of preventing the marriage
of any person who is in an infectious state is far more generally
appreciated than in the case of gonorrhoea.* 1
7. EDUCATION OF THE PUBLIC.
“We attach great importance to the educational aspect of the
question. It is, in our opinion, absolutely necessary that the


public should have fuller knowledge of the grave evils which
exist among us, and of their effect upon the national life, present
and future. At the same time we believe that instruction should
bd given to the young of the moral and physical dangers which
imperil them.
“ The evils which lead to the spread of venereal disease are, in
great part, due to want of control, ignorance and inexperience,
and the importance of wisely conceived educational measures can
hardly be exaggerated. If venereal diseases are to be stamped
out, it will be necessary not only to provide the medical means of
combating them, .but to raise the moral standards and practice .of
the community as a. whole. Such an improvement can only-be
brought about by closer co-operation between. religious bodies*
the teaching and medical professions, and education authorities. 1
“ Though we are not unmindful of much excellent work that is
being carried'-on, we are strongly of opinion that there is an
urgent need for more careful instruction in regard to self-control
generally, and to moral conduct as bearing upon sexual relations
throughout all types and grades of education. Such instructions
should be based upon moral principles and spiritual considerations,
and should by no means be'concentrated on the physical con-
sequences of immoral conduct.”- '
8. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.
“ Our task is now ended. We have endeavoured to make clear
the grave and far-reaching effects of venereal disease upon the
individual and the race. The evidence we have taken proves
conclusively that these'effects cannot be'too seriously regarded,
and that they result in a: heavy loss, not only of actual but of
potential population, of productive power, and of expenditure
actually entailed.
“The medical’evidence establishes the fact that, by : early and'
efficient treatment, these diseases could be brought under control
and reduced within narrow limits .. . Recent discoveries have
armed the medical profession with means of ’ combating venereal
disease which were unknown in tile past. The'object must be to
bring these means to bear- upon every infected person at the
earliest possible moment; We areconvinced that this object can
be accomplished only by the action of Government directed to the
solution of a great national problem. ■■ \
"We are deeply sensible of the need"and‘importance of the
appeals to conscience and Honour which are made by the religious
bodies and by associations formed for this purpose. We believe
that these appeals will gain force if the terrible effects of venereal
disease upon innocent children and other persons, who have no
vicious 'tendencies, are more fully realised. •


“ Our report must issue at a tilde when all public, activities are
pre-oceupied in fulfilling the manifold needs of war. We are
conscious of the disadvantage thus arising, and we feel that there
is some risk that our recommendations may not receive the
immediate attention which their national importance demands.
We desire, therefore, to place on record our strong opinion that
the conditions now existing and those which must follow on the
conclusion of the war, imperatively require that action should he
taken without delay. •
. "Lastly, we wish to lay stress upon the needs'of the future.
The diminution of the best manhood of tins nation, due to the
losses of the war, must tell heavily upon the birth-rate-already
declining—and upon the numbers of efficient workers. The
reasons for combating, by every possible means, diseases which in
normal times operate with disastrous effects alike upon the birth-
rate and upon working efficiency are, therefore, far more urgent
than ever before. Now, and in the years to eoino, the question
of public health must be a matter of paramount national impor-
tance, and no short-sighted parsimony should -be 'permitted to
stand sin the way of all means that science can suggest and
organisation can supply for guarding the present and future
generaeions upon which the restoration of national prosperity
must dpend."
Sy4n«r: WHIUtn Applefftle Qnlllak, OawßiaMt MntSTy—MMl






W.E.A. PUBLICATIONS.
“TRADE UNIONISM IN AUSTRALIA."
Report oj a Conference held in 1915, containing Papers on—
“ Relation of Trade Unionism to Co-operation, Co-partnership and
Profit-sharing.” By Meredith Atkinson, M.A.
“ Trade Unionism and Efficiency.” By Professor R. F. Irvine.
“Trade Union Administration and Industrial and Craft Unionism."
By the Hon. W. Q. Sponoe.
“The Historical Development of Trade Unionism in Australia.” By
Gerald Lightfoot, M.A., and J. T. Sutcliffe.
“The Effect of Industrial Legislation in Australia upon the Ideals
and Aspirations of the Workers.” By F. W. Eggleston.
“ Industrial Legislation in Relation to Socialism. ” By F. A. A.
Russell, M.A,
Price 1/6, post free.
■ TEACHING SEX HYGIENE."
A Book no Parent, Teacher, or Social Worker can afford
to be without. ■
Report of a Conference held in 1916, containing Papers on—
“ The Massacre of the Innocents.” By Professor D. A. Welsh.
“ Prostitution.” By Mrs. James Booth.
“ The Child and the Sex Problem from the Psychological Point of
View. By H. Lovell, Ph.D.
“ Sex Irregularities of Childhood and Youth.” By W. A. T. Lind,
M. 8., 8.8.
“ How Much Should be Taught to Children and Young Adolescents.”
By Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart.
“ How the Church could Co-operate in the Teaching of Sex Hygiene.”
By Right Rev. G. M. Long.
“Teaching Sex Hygiene to Children and Teachers. By Dr. Q. Savill
Willis, Principal Medical Officer. Department of Education, K.S.W,
“ Teaching Control of the Sex Instinct.” By Dr. Riohard Arthur,
M.L.A.
“ Preventive Training for Young Children in Relation to Sexual
Control.” By Miss Zo6 Benjamin, Lecturer in Psychology, Sydney
Kindergarten Training College.
“The Case for Sex Education of the Adolescent Girl.” By Mrs.
James Booth.
“ Sex Education for Boys.” By J. Smyth, M.A., D.Phil., Principal, Teachers’
Training College, Melbourne.
‘ The Double Standard of Morality." By J. Smjth M.A., D.Phil.
Price 1/9, post free.
