

Bi o
Commonwealth of Australia.
iUmnrial
FOR THE LATE
Right Honourable John Curtin,
M.P.
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA.
■parUamrtit Sjouap, (Eanberra.
A.C.T.
Sffrifcag. fiti| lulij, 1945. at 2 p.m.
[The funeral will take place in Karrakatta Cemetery, Perth, Western
Australia on Sunday, Bth July, 1945, and will be conducted by the Reverend
Hector Harrison, M.A., B.D.]


The memorial service will be conducted by the
Reverend Hector Harrison, Minister of the Presbyterian
Church of St. Andrew, Canberra.
Q&rbrr of g»pnriw.
Scripture Sentences.
jgLESSED are they that mourn : for they shall he comforted.
T’HE eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms.
T AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord ; he that beiieveth
in Me, though lie were dead, yet shall he live : and whosoever liveth
and beiieveth in Me shall never die.
Prayer.
Eternal God, our heavenly Father, who lovest us with an everlasting
love, and canst turn the shadow of death into the morning ; help us now
to wait upon Thee with reverent and submissive hearts. In the silence
of this hour speak to us of eternal things, that through patience and comfort
of the scriptures we may have hope, and be lifted above our darkness and
distress into the light and peace of Thy presence ; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
Psalm 23.-—To be said by all.
'Y’HE Lord is my shepherd ; I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures : He leadeth me beside
the still waters.
He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness
for His name’s sake.
Yea, though 1 walk through the valley of the shadow of death, i will
fear no evil: for Thou art with me ; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort
me.
Thou prepares! a table before me in the presence of mine enemies ;
Thou anointest my head with oil ; my cup runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life :
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.


Lesson.
Address by the Reverend Hector Harrison.
Prayer,
Hymn.
with me ; fast falls the eventide ;
The darkness deepens ; Lord, with me abide ;
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee.
Help of the helpless, 0 abide with me.
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day ;
Earth’s ioys grow dim, its glories pass away ;
Change and decay in all around 1 see ;
0 Thou, Who changest not, abide with me.
I need Thy presence every passing hour ;
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power ?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be ?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.
1 fear no foe with 1 hee at hand to bless ;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness ;
Where is death’s sting ? Where, Grave, thy victory ?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
Hold Thou Thy Cross before my closing eyes ;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies ;
Heav’n’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee
In life, in death, 0 Lord, abide with me.
Benediction.
The Last Post.


■
