

VICTORIAN ACADEMY
OF ARTS.




CONSTITUTION AND LAWS
OF THE
VICTORIAN ACADEMY
OF ARTS.
FOUNDED JANUARY 31, 1870.
OF THE




CONSTITUTION.
1. The Academy is formed for the purpose of establishing
Schools for the study of the various departments of the
Fine Arts, and for the Annual Exhibition of Works of Art
in Melbourne.
2. Members of the Academy shall be composed of two
classes—viz., Artists and Amateurs, who shall have the
entire management of the Academy, and from whom Officers
and “ Council” shall be selected.
3. Twenty acknowledged Artists and six selected Ama-
teurs shall form the original basis of the Society, after which
the Council shall elect all Members by ballot (if demanded).
4. All Artists and Amateurs are eligible to become Mem-
bers of the Academy.
5. The Annual Subscription for Members shall be £1 Is.,
payable in advance on the first day of January in each year.
6. All Members shall subscribe to the Rules of the
Academy, and pay their Subscriptions within one month
after their election, and no Member shall be entitled to vote
at any Meeting wdiile his Subscription is in arrear, or be
eligible for the Council, or any office.


7. In the election of Members, a majority of votes shall
decide. In the event of an equal number of votes being
recorded, the Chairman shall have the right of a second or
casting vote.
8. Any artist or amateur unknown to the Members, and
desiring to become a Candidate, shall apply to the Secretary
by letter, and shall, if required, send specimens of his work
which he shall guarantee to be his own.
9. No Member shall claim the right of having his pictures
placed on the line.


GOVERNMENT OF THE ACADEMY.
10. The Officers of the Academy shall consist of a Presi-
dent, Secretary, Treasurer, and two Auditors.
11. The government of the Academy shall be vested in the
President, Treasurer, Secretary, and a Council, which latter
shall consist of not more than twenty nor less than ten
Members, one-half of whom shall retire by rotation annually,
but who shall be eligible for re-election, such rotation to be
governed by the result of the last election —the lowest half
on the poll to be the first to retire.
12. All the Officers shall be elected annually by ballot, and
(with the exception of Auditors) be eligible for re-election.
13. When a vacancy shall take place in any of the offices
by death, resignation, or otherwise, the Council shall appoint
an officer pro tem., who shall hold the office and perform
the duties thereof until the next General Meeting of the
Academy. The Council may also fill up any vacancies that
may occur in their own body during the year.
4
14. The Council shall conduct the general business of the
Academy, and shall meet for that purpose at least once in
every month, five Members to form a quorum. In the
absence of the President, a chairman shall be appointed.
The Secretary’s petty cash shall be audited, accounts passed


for payment, and any business considered that may be
necessary.
15. Every motion or proposition made in Council, or at
any general meeting, shall have a mover and a seconder ; but
where the adoption of a new law, or the alteration of an old
one is concerned, the consideration thereof shal] not ensue
for the space of one calendar month from the date of
proposal; and in the event of the mover and seconder, or
both, being absent, or declining to proceed, it shall be com-
petent for the Members present to deal with the question,
they having been informed of the object of any such motion
by the circular convening the meeting.
16. Any member who may be guilty of acting in a non-
professional or ungentlemanly manner shall be liable to
expulsion from the Academy by a vote of two-thirds of the
Council. Special notice shall be given of such business in
the circular convening the meeting.
o o
17. The Council shall have power to strike off from the
list of Members any one who is in arrear with his subscrip-
tion, and who declines or neglects to pay the same within
one month from the time of the Secretary’s application to
him for payment.


DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
18. The President shall preside at all general and special
meetings, and meetings of the Council, at which he shall
have a second or casting vote.
19. The Treasurer shall attend all meetings and shall
receive from the Secretary any money that may have been
received by him, which amount he shall pay into the
account of the Academy at the Bank (so soon as it is found
necessary to open such account). He shall pay all accounts
when passed by the Council, and shall produce his cash
account whenever called upon by the Council to do so.
20. The Secretary shall attend all the meetings of the
Academy, both general and in Council. He shall receive all
subscriptions, and other sums which may be paid on
Academy’s account. He shall produce his account of such
receipts, and the counterfoil of his receipt-book, when
required to do so by the Council. All subscriptions and other
sums received by him on account of the Academy shall be
handed over to the Treasurer at the usual meeting of the
Council, and the Treasurer shall then sign the Secretary’s
book for such sum. He shall manage all the correspondence
of the Academy, shall issue all notices of meetings, &c., keep
the Minutes, and prepare the accounts for audit in con-
junction with the Treasurer. He shall also have the direction
of the servants of the Academy.


21. The Auditors shall examine the accounts of the
Academy annually, report upon and certify as to their
correctness to the Annual meeting, inspect the Bank Book,
and specify the balance of cash in the Treasurer’s hands at
the time of passing the balance-sheet, and shall also make a
special audit of accounts whenever directed by the Council
to do so.
22. There shall be annually a General Meeting of the
Academy to elect the Officers and Council, and transact any
other business that may be necessary.
23. The Council may convene a Special General Meeting
of the Academy, or the Secretary shall do so upon the
requisition, in writing, of any eight members of the Academy;
which requisition shall state the subject to be considered; of
which notice shall be given to each member of the Academy
at least one month previous to the meeting being held, and
no other business shall be taken into consideration at such
meeting.


SUBSCRIBING AND LIFE MEMBERS.
24. Ladies and gentlemen who are friends and patrons of
Art will be admitted as Subscribing Members on payment
of £1 Is. per annum, and be entitled to free admission to the
Exhibitions, but shall take no part in the management of
the Academy.
25. Each subscriber of £25 or upwards shall have free
admission to all Exhibitions of the Academy for himself and
family, or three friends, for life.
26. A subscriber of £lO 10s. will be entitled to free admis-
sion for himself and one friend to all Exhibitions of the
Academy, for life.
27. A subscriber of £5 ss. will be entitled to free admis-
sion to all Exhibitions of the Academy, for life.
28. The Council will have the power to confer on donors
of Paintings, Prints, Casts, Books, and other objects of Art,
privileges similar to Subscribing Members.
i
29. Conversaziones may be held and lectures delivered
upon subjects connected with Art, to which all subscribers
will have the privilege of admission.


REGULATIONS FOR THE EXHIBITION.
1. All works intended for exhibition must be sent to the
gallery free of expense on the days announced in the public
papers for their reception, after which no work will be
received. They must be addressed to the Secretary and be
accompanied with a letter (tvritten on one side only),
describing them as they are meant to be inserted in the
Catalogue (no advertisement, unnecessary quotation, or
narrative, can be admitted), and whether they are for sale
or not. At the back of each frame must be written the
name of the artist and the number (if there be more than
one) to which it refers in his list. Particular accuracy is
requested in this respect.
2. All works of Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Model-
ling in Wax, and Engraving, are admissible.
3. No copies of any kind will be admitted.
4. No picture or drawing will be received without a gilt
frame.
5. No drawing shall be admitted with a margin of more
than three inches.
6. All works must be subjected to the approval of a Com-
mittee of Selection, which Committee shall consist of seven


members of the Council, to be elected annually by ballot,
whose decision shall be final.
7. There shall be a Hanging Committee of not less than
three members, whose duty it shall be to arrange for exhibi-
tion the works that have been accepted, with a proper sense
of justice due to each Exhibitor and the appearance of the
Exhibition.
8. None but the Hanging Committee, the President, and
Secretary shall be entitled to enter the Exhibition Room
until the former have completed the arrangements of the
Exhibition.
9. No Exhibitor shall be allowed to exhibit more than
twelve works.
10. No work after it has been placed shall be removed
until the Exhibition has closed, and then only on the pro-
duction of an order from the Exhibitor.
11. Artists may communicate the prices of their works to
the Secretary, which prices will be printed in the Catalogue
foi the information of intending purchasers. Members will
be charged a commission of five per cent., and other Exhi-
bitors one of ten per cent., on the price of any works sold
during the continuance of the Exhibition.
12. No work will be received for sale unless it be bond
Jide the property of the artist.


13. All Members and Exhibitors shall have free admit-
tance to the Exhibition during its continuance.
14. Two days or more (at the discretion of the Hanging
Committee) will be permitted for varnishing and re-touch-
ing pictures previous to the time appointed for the private
view.
15. All works must be removed within one week from
the closing day of the Exhibition.
16. Every possible care will be taken of works sent for
Exhibition, but the Victorian Academy will not hold itself
accountable in case of injury or loss; nor will it pay the
carriage of any package which may be presented by carriers y
or unpack or re-pack any works.




