

The Interior of Australia.
Some Notes and Incidents of Travel.
BY W. H. TIETKENS, F.R.G.S., EXPLORER, &C,
Reprinted from the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia, South Australian Branch (Vol. XIV.)


The Interior of Australia:
Some Notes and Incidents of Travel.
BY W. H. TIETKENS, F.R.G.S., EXPLORER, &C.
My first experiences of Australian bush life may be
said to have commenced in January, 1865, when 1 was 21
years of age. I left Melbourne with the late Ernest Giles,
the.well-known explorer, whom I had met some time before
in that eity. Giles was then about to start on a journey
to the country west of the Darling, the object being to exa-
mine and take up country for certain capitalists in the
extreme north-west part of New South Wales. If I remem-
ber rightly, we had five horses, two riding and three packed.
We travelled by way of Swan Hill to Balranald, and from
there, instead of taking the longer river route to Went-
worth and up the Darling' to Menindie, Giles decided to take
the back track across what was then called Scott’s back
country. At Balranald we were told that there would pro-
bably be a 100-mile stage without water on that route, and
it turned out to be so. We kept the horses at their best
walking pace for 36 hours, and then reached a tank belong-
ing to Tarcoola station, which was ten miles distant. On
leaving Balranald we supplied ourselves with five bottles
of water, and by using this very sparingly we managed to
ggt. through, but the horses were very much distressed. The
last ten miles of heavy’porcupine sandhills seemed to have
been placed there to finish both man and beast. Arriving
at the tank the horses and ourselves were soon swimming
about and drinking much, to our inconvenience afterwards.
Such was my first experience of dry country travel and
thirst. Prom Tarcoola we travelled easily up the Darling
for 100 miles to Menindie, thence to Mount Murchison (now
Wilcannia), another 100 miles. From this point we were
to leave the Darling and go north-west to the Depot Glen
of Captain . Sturt, in the Grey Ranges, then north and north-
easterly to Tongowoko, a position of Burke and Wills ex-
pedition of 1861, thence to the Bulloo and the lower part of
Cooper’s Creek, t


At this time, 1865, very little settlement had been ef-
fected in the country west of the Darling. Messrs. Myers
and Bonney had Momba station, about 60 miles west of
Mount Murchison, and a Mr. Hazlewood was just forming
a station for Messrs. Henty Bros., 40 miles further west,
on Yencanya Creek, but in a general way comparatively
little was known of the country west of the Darling. Dor
my own part I looked upon this as almost an exploring
expedition, views that, I think, were also entertained by
rny companion.
We reached Yencanya, and were kindly) entertained
by Mr. Hazlewood, The Darling River had been very low
for a long time, and flour was £IOO a ton. The- river
soon afterwards came down in flood, allowing a steamer to
travel as far as Mount Murchison. Flour and provisions
were once more plentiful. A large number of blacks were
■camped in the immediate vicinity of Yencanya, which
gave Mr. Hazlewood good cause for uneasiness. I think he
was glad of our presence for a while, as giving him addi-
tional security. I learned that some time after we had
left the Paroo River blacks Joined those of Yencanya and
there was serious trouble. I may here say that Giles was
on the Paroo the year before, and his companion, a young
fellow named Curlewis, was'killed by the blacks on that
river. I have forgotten the circumstances. We left
Yencanya, travelling by way of Binjiwilpi Spring and
Yantara, to the Grey Ranges and the Depot Glen. All
through this country, now fenced, and where there .are
now townships, rest houses, telegraphs, and mail roads, we
travelled by compass, and at the time I am speaking of
the native ’population was very numerous and had to be
reckoned with.
Excepting perhaps Mr. J. C. Woore who was at that
time Commissioner of Crown Lands, stationed at Mount
Murchison, I suppose Giles and myself were the first white
men to visit the Depot Glen since it was abandoned by
Captain Sturt in 1845.
We found the Grevillia tree marked <! J.P., 1845,”
the spot where 1 James Poole, of Sturt’s Expedition, was
buried; also the fallen-in remains of their underground
dwelling, the stumps of many trees felled and partly over-
grown with large second growths, also two trace chains thftt


were partly overgrown dangling from the fork of a mulga
tree near the camp, and amongst tne driftwood against
the big gum trees in the creek channel, some distance be-
yond the Gorge, were found fragments of the boat that
Captain Sturt
“Left floating on the waters of tne Depot Glen,”
and with which he hoped to plough the waters of , the in-
land sea, which at that time was supposed to fill so large
an extent of the interior. Fragments of this boat were
taken to Melbourne, and, I believe, were placed in the
Museum. Here there were substantial evidences of an
expedition that vras in the field about the same time as that
of Dr. Leichhardt, the fate of wmch stxi*. remains a mys-
tery. Again, in the drift sand of Morphett’e Creek, on the
Barrier Ranges, 100 miles further south, the greater part of
a dray of Captain Sturt’s expedition has been found. This
dray must have been carried down by successive floods
nearly fifteen miles below where Captain Sturt crossed or
camped on this* creek.
Evidence of Captain Sturt’s presence at the Depot
Glen, I have no doubt, may be seen to this day, notwith-
standing the fact that a township has been in existence
for some years in the immediate vicinity. Dr. Leichhardt
had even a heavier equipment than Captain Sturt, hut no
vestige of his expedition has ever been found. The con-
viction is forced upon me that if any remnants of Dr.
Leichhardt’s expedition were above the surface of the
ground, they must have been found long ago. I have ar-
rived at the conclusion that, baffled and beaten back by
waterless country and heavy sandhills at every point except
to the north, Leichhardt turned in that direction, and that
the whole party was overwhelmed, and their remains have
been silted over by the torrential floods of one of the
rivers that convey the waters from the tablelands of the
Gulf of Carpentaria to this region.
We crossed the track of Burke and Wills at Toro-
woto Swamp, between Yeneanya and Yantara, but it was
very faint. Travelling in a north-easterly direction for
several days, examining the country and looking for waters,
we reached Tongowoko, where we found a camp of Burke
and Wills. I remember seeing fragments of crockery,
lying about,


I omitted to mention that when at Menindie the veran-
dah of C, Berry’s store contained a great quantity of mate-
rial of every description belonging to this party. No one
appeared to be in charge, so people took what they wanted,
Wright was supposed to have kept the Cooper’s Creek de-
pot supplied from this point, but he appears to have lived
at Bothinjee, an out-station of Tolarno, a few miles down
the river from Menindie. It was rumored at the time that
Wright had waterbags hung round the verandahs of the
hut, these being filled with bottled ale and stout to keep
cool.
Lyons and McPherson were the only two men dis-
patched to Cooper ’& Creek and they appear to have nearly
lost their lives in the attempt. I don’t, think they ever
reached Cooper’s Creek, or, if they did, they could not
have taken any supplies. Many strange and some very
amusing stories concerning this expedition were current
in the neighborhood at that time, but, being mostly un-
favorable to those who cannot refute them, they arc bet-
ter forgotten. ■ Giles recommended certain tracts of coun-
try to his supporters. I quite forget how long this
ramble lasted, but for the greater part of the time we
were in unknown country. Upon our return to Mount
Murchison (Wilcannia) we separated, Giles going to Mel-
bourne, while I joined a party travelling to Adelaide with
cattle, a three-months’ journey, which I so thoroughly dis-
liked that I have never again attempted it. I was glad
to be once again in Adelaide, for I landed there in Sep-
tember, 1859, when I first came from England. An old
couple lived there who had been very kind to ma when in
sore straits, I went to see them and was glad to be able
to help them in a small way. Having once experienced
something of a bush career, I was not inclined to change
it lor a city life, so bought a horse, saddle, and bridle, and
rode back alone to Menindie. At that time there were no
fences beyong Blanchetown. Anyone could go where he
liked when travelling. At the North-West Bend of the
Murray I met a party of three men, who wished to go to
the Darling by way of the Wilpitara scrub. I offered
my services as pilot and was engaged, rather a forward
thing for a youngster to do, 60 miles without any track,
but something told me I could make for Pcmcarie pretty
straight, and I did it. Prom that time out I considered
myself a bushman. I remember writing about it to Giles,
and his reply was, “Not at all bad.”


For some two or three years I was engage i as-■overseer
on a sheep station on the Barrier Ranges (Corona). Giles
was about there occasionally. At this time I. am tempted
to relate one incident that happened. The partner nl a
neighboring station-owner was taken suddenly ill and I was
asked if I could make a straight line for Menindie for
medical help, which I undertook at once. We (Mr. King
and myself) started that night well mounted and reached
Menindie next day at noon, after hard riding.. We found
the doctor lying under a form in the bar of the public-
house, and it took two clays to persuade him to start. Mean-
time Mr. King rode back alone (by the road) with some few
emergency medicines, I followed after with the doctor,
who was very had all the way. Unfortunately for the .poor
old doctor a heavy rain set in and we both were drenched.
It was pitiable to see the old man, wet through, being
urged on, hut I got him to the station at last and in time
to be of help. I learned afterwards that he sent in a long
bill, over which there was some dispute, hut Wentworth, the
nearest place where such matters could be settled judicially,
was 300 miles away, so I never heard how it was adjusted.
When Corona station,' upon which I was engaged, changed
hands I went to Wagga, and while there Giles wired to me of
his return from his first attempt to cross Australia, and
of his hopes of raising another party for a further attempt,
and, if successful, would I join? With the assistance
of Baron von Mueller, a fluid was raised, and to this expedi-
tion I was appointed second in command. The journals
of this and, subsequent expeditions are in print, so it ■i£
unnecessary to say more about them here.
It #as upon the 1875 expedition, that was equipped by
the late Sir Thomas Elder, and when the main party was
camped at Oldea, that Giles went south to Fowler’s Bay,
while Jesse Young and myself went north to about S. lat.
27 deg. 40 min., and it was during this trip that !. was
much impressed with the pastoral capabilities of the north-
eastern part of the Null arbor Plains. Upon this journey I
discovered Oldabinna, to which place the whole caravan
removed, and from this point the whole party moved west-
ward, and'finally reached Perth.
Being anxious to qualify myself as a licensed surveyor,
I did not return with Giles, hut took steamer at Fremantle
for Adelaide, where I was engaged surveying upon Torke’s
Peninsula. In 1877 I went to England, and while there


met a distant relative. Mi'. Leister, of Glasgow, to whom 1
laid out ray plan to develop the Nullarbor Plain, by sink-
ing wells, with the ultimate hope of opening up tile whole of ,
the territory between Fowler’s Bay and the Musgrave
Ranges. Mr. Leislor thoroughly entered into my project,
and promised £I,OOO upon my return to Australia. i
passed tilts licensed, surveyors’ examination of Boutli Aus-
tralia and was then engaged for about 18 months in the
Survey .Department of New South 'Wales. In Sydney I.
met the Rev. J. M. Tonison Woods, to whom I unfolded my
project of laying for water on the Nullarhor Plains, and
had several interviews with him upon the subject. His
advice was to go as far as possible beyond the crystalline
limestones that prevail inland from' the Groat Bight; “the
farther north the .more likely yon are of success.”
Mr. Leislor had now placed £I,OOO to myi credit with
Messrs. Elder, Smith, & Co., which, with about £2OO, formed
the capital of this undertaking. Before leaving Adelaide I
took out a lease of 100 square miles of country, to include
Oldca Water, also a preferential right of 300 square miles
of country, to include the position where I intended to put
down the wells about 40 miles northerly from Oldca, and
about 100 miles north of Fowler’s Bay. I bought four
camels from Sir Thos. Bide)’, and sent well-sinking plant,
material, and provisions to Fowler’s Bay by schooner. In
due course all arrived at Oldca. A site was selected for
the well about 40 miles north of Olden and sinking opera-
tions commenced. There were many vexatious delays and
constant trouble with the well-sinkers. The great distance
from civilisation made it impossible to obtain adequate sup-
plies of materials, food, and water. Owing to the nature
of the ground, the wells had to ho timbered to a depth of
30 feet from the surface, and, considering that suitable tim-
ber was scarce and difficult to secure, progress was extremely
slow. This state of tilings continued for nearly two years,
with the result that two wells were sunk, one about 60 feet
which was then abandoned, and the other about 180 feet
in which a small supply of water was struck, but, alas, it
was salt. Unable to continue further operations for want
of funds, I was compelled to abandon the undertaking,
but feel sure that with further means a supply of water
would have been* obtained. About this time the South
Australian Government had a diamond drill plant borinS
for water north of the Great Bight, which met with no


results. I wished very much that I had their appliances
in order to continue my work. I might, mention that
an Adelaide merchant had a small interest in this under-
taking, which hampered rather than helped, for he with-
drew at a critical time, when financial aid was impera-
tive, and I learned later that his interest in the matter
was merely in furtherance of other schemes.
When I look hack and think of the territory that would
have been developed and now be profitably occupied if only
one water had been secured north of Oldea, a feeling of
disappointment prevails which even that sense of self-ap-
proval in having made the attempt will not. always con-
quer.
I returned to Adelaide and practised as a licensed sur-
veyor, and during this time was placed in charge of the Cen-
tral Australian Exploring and Prospecting Association Ex-
pedition, the diary of which journey is in print.
Thk terminated my travels in the interior of Aus-
tralia.
I was later offered the post of second in command of
the Elder Scientific Exploring Expedition by the late Sir
Thomas Elder 5 6.0.M.GL, but owing to domestic affairs I was
unable to accept the appointment.
Eastwood, New South Wales,
October, 1913. , -
