





OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS
--
Serieo of Ciiilil lectures
DELIVERED AT THE
PITT STREET CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
AS A HELP TO
YOUNG MEN OF FREE THOUGHT,
BY
J . JEFFE R I S , L. LB .
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY SAMVEL E. LEES, 134 PITT STREET.




PREFACE.
O') 115 S f toff
3-7* s*7^
I hold that without free thought truth is not to be found. These
lectures are addressed to those who arc bold enough to think
freely, and to those, too, who are struggling against the terrible
incertitude of modern thought, and are asking painfully, “ What
is Truth T
But if a man calls himself a Freethinker, I know not how to
appeal to him. They who boast of their Freethought are but the
old PyiThonists come back to life, —“ Possibly there is a God, but
we can never know. Possibly there is a future existence, but we
can never be sure. A.s for the life that now is, let every man be a
law unto himself. Truth is that which each man troweth.” This
is not liberty. It is license. With true freedom there comes
modesty, reverence, hopefulness, trust,
If here and there I have let slip a strong word against Free-
thought, it is in behalf of Freedom. My strongest word, with my
soul after it, is against those who, in the name of Religion,
trample upon our Divinest instincts of liberty,
The Retreat, Newtown,
November, 1882.
y\ I A


Thl'lcs ami Ijqtqh,
3 —Parseeism
4 —Mohamedanism ..
s—iluddism5 —i luddism (No. 1)...
6- „ (No. 2)...
I—Roman1 —Roman Catholicism
B—Grech Church
9
17


For some time it has been oh my mind to speak to you, and
especially to the young men among you whose minds are athirst
for knowledge, about the great religions of Asia. We Australians
in the future of our history shall have a much more intimate
connection with the great and populous empires of the Old World
than our countrymen dwelling in their island home. Japan,
China, India, Arabia, are separated from us only by a breadth of
peaceful ocean. The watery highway connects rather than
divides. England has for her next door neighbours France,
and Germany, and Russia. Our next door neighbours are the
Mongols, and Malays, and Hindoos, and Arabs. Ihe future com-
merce between Australia and Asia will be immense. If trade
with India has given England her wealth and power, what will it
be with this country in the centuries that ai’e coming 1 But we
have cause for anxiety such as our forefathers never felt when
their ships first ploughed the eastern seas. We are here, a hand-
ful of Englishmen, in possession of this great contimnt —a piece
of the earth’s surface greater than the United States of America.
Will Australians always, as now, in point of numbers, belong to
the Anglo-Saxon race, or the races of Western Europe 1 May
there not come a time to us, such as has often come in the world’s
history, even to nations strong in arms, when the out-populating
power of other races will burst their barrieis, and hurl itself with
irresistible might upon our shores. I know not what God has in
reserve, either in favour for others or in judgment for us. But of
this 1 feel sure, that Englishmen in Australia, whether for
brotherly welcome or defensive war, need to know more than they
do about these countless millions of Asia, about these empires, in
comparison with which our own is but of yesterday, about their
politics, and their social life, and their religion. It is,not my
province to say aught to you about their ernment or their mode
of living ; but I may, without going beyond my functions as a
religious teacher, say something to you about the faiths of Asia.
Indeed, I may go further, in considering it to be my actual duty,
supposing lam able. For was it not in the uplands of Asia that
man’s life began to be ? Did not the great systems of philosophy
that have controlled the thoughts of the race take their rise
among Eastern peoples'? Have not the religions that have over-
spread the world sprung from the teeming soil of Asiatic thought ?
Abraham, David, Isaiah, and Baul—were they not men of Asia 1 ?
And was it not on the western verge of the same great continent,
just where Europe and Africa joined it, that the Christ was born,
the Great Teacher of the woild 1 ? No one can understand the
progress of religious thought who has not considered it in its
Eastern origin and history.
Now I want to say, before we set out together in our
examination of these other religions, that I am not going to look


at them as too many have done, just to discover and denounce
their falseness, in order to exalt the trueness of ours. We have
no right to try, as James Martineau recently said, “ to establish a
monopoly of revelation by maligning the great heathen religions
and philosophies.” I hold this to be a fact in the order of Provi-
dence that the things of human life and work that last long, last
by reason of the truth that is in them. Nothing enduring has
ever been founded on a lie. I have seen stately temples in the
land of Egypt that have reared their lofty columns for thrice a
thousand years. These faiths of Asia have had a long existence
—some at least 3000 years—and have held sway over great and
intelligent peoples. Were their founders instructed by the Father
of Lies? Have their prophets been utterly false and their
diviners wholly mad ? I will believe so when I believe that this-
world is, or ever has been, the Devil’s world, and that God has
had no place in it, and His word no power. I know too well,
looking no further than my own people and my own religion, that
falsehood gets mixed with truth, and the divinest instincts of
humanity get overlaid by selfishness, and greed, and miserable
expediency. And it is but matter of history how, in the uplands
of Persia, and on the plains of India, and among Arabs, and
Turks, and Tartars, and Mongols the purer and simpler tenets of
religion have been corrupted and almost destroyed by a huge
system of priestcraft. In the course of our investigation we shall
see both the false and the true. But let us, as followers pf Him
who is Truth itself embodied in human life, do honour to the true,,
while we expose and denounce the false.
I am to speak to you about “ Other Bibles and Other Beliefs.”
The word Bible, as you know, simply means Book. It is a Greek
word, Englished, used by us to mean the collection of writings we
deem to be sacred, and which, therefore, we call the Book, the
Book of books. Precisely in the same way, those who profess
other religions think and speak of the writings they deem to be
sacred. Such writings are, to them, their Book, their Book of
books, their Bible.
The Bible ave look at to-night is the Yeda, which is regarded
by about 120 millions of Hindus as the product of inspiration.
The religion they profess is called Brahmanism or Hinduism. A
strange people, these Hindus, and yet not strange. For they are
not men of an alien race, conquered by us in battle, and held as
the prize of war. They are closely related to the English—quite
as closely as the Welsh or the Irish, and far more closely than the
Jew 7 . The religion of India in its most ancient form is the
religion of our own ancestors before they dwelt in German forests
or among the fiords of Scandinavia. There was a time, long after
the earliest separations of mankind took place, as recorded in the
tenth chapter of Genesis, which is the oldest and most trustworthy
fragment of ancient history in existence, long after the fathers of
the Jews and Arabs, the Chinese and the Negroes, had gone far
away seeking other homes, when the fathers of the English, and


Irish, and French, and Germans, and Indians, and Persians were
dwelling together in or near the first old home. That old home
was somewhere on the highland of Western Asia, not far from the
shores of the Caspian Sea, and our ancestors who dwelt there
called themselves the Aryans, or nobles, a proud name, but one
which history has endorsed. When they multiplied and the land
became too small, they separated. The fathers of the Celt and
Teuton, the Greek and the Russian, went west and north to
inhabit Europe, and the fathers of the Persian and the Indian
went south and east to dwell in Persia and Hindustan. So lar as
we can judge, this swarming off from the parent hive took place
somewhere about 2000 years before Christ.
Of course the Indian stock of the Aryan race took with them,
as did all the rest, those religious thoughts and beliefs which they
had in their old home. Some of the most ancient hymns in the
Veda, or at least parts of them, we may well think were sung in
field and forest and dwelling by our own fathers before and after
their emigration to Europe. To me this very greatly enhances
their interest. No doubt you will be curious about die date when
this Bible was composed, and when it was first received as a trust-
worthy religious book. I remember in my student days attending
a religious debating club in my native town, at which one of the
speakers maintained that the Hindoo Bible was far more ancient
than ours, and asserted that nearly all the great and worthy con-
ceptions, both in the Old and New Testaments, were borrowed
from it. I did not see then as I see now, that he knew little
about the subject he was discussing. He confounded all the sacred
writings of India together, and gave them the date of the most
ancient. Now, these sacred writings are almost innumerable.
They were composed during long centuries. It would take a life-
time te compass their study. The older and the more recent have
the same relation to one another as the Pentateuch has to the
Talmud. The Talmud is a huge mass of learning, gathered from
every source under heaven by the Jewish Rabbis, to explain and
illustrate the law and the prophets. But in spite of the deference
paid to it, the Talmud is not the x'eal Bible of the Jews. Their’s
is the same as ours—the Old Testament writings from Genesis to
Malachi. And so the Bible of the Hindus is not the chaotic
writings of the laws of Manu, and the Puranas, and Tantras, and
the score of others. It is a collection more ancient than all these
—the writings called the Veda. But the Veda itself is divided
into several parts. We have first of all a collection of hymns,
then a series of ritualistic precepts, and then a course of mystical
•or secret doctrine. The first alone is the true Veda, which
■consists of a number of hymns—lo2B, containing 10,622 verses. We
have literary evidence that 600 years before Christ, every verse,
every word, every syllable had been counted. It was then an
ancient book, and the language had ceased to be generally
intelligible. In all probability the poets who composed these old
hymns lived from 1500 b.c. to 1000 8.C., that is from the age of


Moses to the age of Solomon, but I see no reason for rejecting the
supposition that the very oldest of the hymns may contain verses
that were composed centuries before.
Let me now give you some idea of the religious conceptions
embodied in these Yedic hymns. By many they' have been
greatly over rated. As Max Muller says : “ Large numbers of the
hymns are childish in the extreme, puerile, low, common-place.
Gods are constantly invoked to grant food, large flocks, large
families, long life, for all which benefits they are to be rewarded
by praises and sacrifices day by day, or at different seasons.” But
we find also noble thoughts and high aspirations, conviction of sin
and yearning for forgiveness, trust in the mercy of God and a
belief in a personal immortality. Reading these we shall no
longer think of our Aryan ancestors as mere heathen, sunk in
darkness, living degraded lives, but as simple, earnest, godly men,
living, on their small farms among their flocks and herds, much
the same sort of life that the Jewish patriarchs lived when they
began to exchange their nomadic for an agricultural life. The
Aryans settled in India not only understood the principles of
agriculture, they built towns and worked in metals, and had some
knowledge of art, and science, and philosophy. There is proof,
too, I am sorry to say, that they fought with one another, and
gambled, and drank intoxicating liquor, pretty much the same as
their English cousins of to-day.
In one of their hymns, the “ Mystery of the Divine Being”
is described. Mark in it the subtlety of the Hindu mind.
: ‘ In the beginning there was neither naught nor aught.
Then was there neither death nor immortality.
Then was there neither day, nor night, nor light, nor darkness.
Only the Existent One breathed calmly, self-contained ;
Naught else but He there was ; naught else above, beyond,”
How like this is to the “ I Am that I Am ” as the name of Jehovah.
In a similar mystic manner Creation is described. Some-
times the poet confesses his ignorance. In the same hymn he
speaks of it thus :
‘ ‘ First came darkness hid in darkness, gloom in gloom ;
Next all was water, all a chaos indiscrete,
In which the One lay void, shrouded in nothingness.
Then turning inward, He, by self-developed force
Of inner fervour and intense abstraction, grew.
First in His mind was formed desire, the primal germ
Productive, which the wise, profoundly searching, say
Is the first subtle bond connecting Being
With non-being.”
Less subtle, but far grander, is the description of creation in the
first chapter of Genesis. “In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and void,
and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters.”
It is worthy of notice, too, how in the same hymn, which is
full of lofty speculation, the poet is distracted by the manifold
mysteries of created Being.


“ Who knows f \>m whence this great creation sprang ?
He from whom all this great creation cune.
Whether His will created or was mute,
The Most High Seer that is in higlnst Heaven,—
He knows it. Or, perchance, even He knows not. ’
This is the deep, true wail of the earnest soul that asks but can-
not answer. For what is there in nature or in man’s own being
to still our doubts 1 It is from without, not within, that we get
the satisfying word. “In the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth. . . . And God saw everything that He had
made, and behold it was very good.”
And you must not think because the Self-existent One is
.spoken of in the Veda, that there was any such clear conception
of one personal God , such as we find in every page of our Bible.
The Deity of the Indian Bible, so far as He is one and not many,
is an abstraction, born of a philosopher’s thinkings and a poet’s
dreamings. He is the same sort of Deity we find in the later
poems of Tennyson, who appeal’s to me to have lost some of his
old faith in the “ Strong Son of God, immortal Love.” Tennyson
sings thus about the “Highest Pantheism”:—
“The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and plains,—
Are not these, 0 soul, the vision of Him who reigus ?
Is not the vision He? though He be not that which He seems.
Dreams are true while they last, and we do not live in dreams.
Speak to Him, then, for He hears, and Spirit with spirit can meet,
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet.”
The Brahmanic conception of God was much the same that
we find in the Agnosticism of to-day. Force, energy, spirit, wis-
dom, power, love even, but separated from personal individual
being, something that underlies all the moving phenomena of this
visible world. But such a conception is utterly unfitted for the
many, and for ordinary human life. And so side by side with
this speculative Monotheism thei’e arose the recognition
and worship of gods many. To the simple untutored mind
the great powers of nature, so directly and mightily acting,
became invested with life, and being, and power. The sky, the
•earth, the sun, fire, the dawn, the clouds, the storms, these all
were invoked by proper names as actual deities. And yet this
Polytheism seemed at first not to be opposed to Monotheism, If
the many were w orshipped, the one seemed to be recognised ixr the
many. When an individual god say Dyauspitar (the father of
heaven), or Agni (fire), or Surya (the sun) —was invoked, he was
regarded for the time as absolute, supreme, as good as all the
gods. This, of coui’se, was in the earlier stages of Indian religious
thinking. As soon as the process of worshipping separate gods
fairly commenced, it tended swiftly downward, until in India
to-day there are as many gods as worshippers.
But listen for a moment to one of the old Vedic poets, as he
pours out his soul. He is addressing Varuna, the Greek Ouranos,
the heavens. “ Wise and mighty are the w’orks of Him who
stemmed asunder the wide firmaments. He lifted on high the
bright and glorious heaven: He stretched apart the starry sky


and the earth.” “Do I say this to my own self 1 How can I get
near unto Yanina? Will He accept my offering without dis-
displeasure 1 When shall I, with a quiet mind, see Him pro-
pitiated I” “I ask, O Yaruna, wishing to know this my sin. I
go to ask the wise. The sages all tell me the same. Yaruna it is
who is angry with thee.” “ Was it for an old sin, 0 Yaruna, that
Thou wishest to destroy Thy friend, who always praises Thee i
Tell me, thou unconquerable Lord, and I will quickly turn to
Thee with praise, freed from sin.” “ Absolve us from the sins of
our fathers, and from those we committed with our own bodies.
It was not our own doing, O Yaruna ; it was a slip, an intoxi-
cating draught, passion, thoughtlessness. The old is there to mis-
lead the young. Even sleep is not free from mischief.” “ O Lord,
Yaruna, may this song go well to Thy heart. May we prosper in
keeping and acquiring. Protect us, 0 God, always with your
blessings.”
Which of you does not feel that here was a man who felt, and
under the influence of strong feeling lifted up his heart to God ?
Will such an one be rejected, think you, though he saw not the
lightning flashes of Sinai, or stood beneath the mid-day darkness
of Calvary 1 He yearned for the Almighty God, because he had
sinned and knew that God only could forgive and release him.
And God will forgive. This soul Christ will save.
Let me show you, by a few selected verses, how certain other
primary truths of religion were believed. Indra is the God
of the watery atmosphere. The dew, the mist, the rain—
these are Indra. Imagine a worshipper looking at his brown fields
and lean kine, and looking up to the clouds wreathed round the
mountains or glowing with the splendour of the setting sun.
“ Indra, twin-brother of the God of Fire,
Thou art our guardian, advocate, and friend ;
A brother, father, mother—all combined,
Most fatherly of fathers, we are Thine,
And Thou art ours. 0 let Thy pitying soul
Turn to us in compassion when w r e praise Thee.”
Of course it was foolish and wrong to make the rain a god, but to
me it seems wholly and utterly right to pray to the God of the
rain for rain, as for anything else that we really need. The
phenomena of the universe are no more beyond the direct and
immediate action of the Supreme than are any other phenomena,
say of our spiritual life. If all things are bound together in a
rigid chain of causation, with which the Almighty himself cannot
interfere, then let us be as hopeless of getting forgiveness for our
sinning soul as of getting rain for our wasted fields.
Agni is the God of fire. In heaven he is the sun, the
great source of light and heat. On earth he lives among men,
approaching the sacrifice, listening to the praises of his worshippers.
“ Agni, Thou art the cherished guest
In every household ; father, brother, son,
Friend, benefactor, guardian, —all in one.
Deliver, mighty Lord, Thy worshippers,
Purge irs from taint of sin, and when we die


Deal mercifully with us on the pyre,
Burning our bodies with their load of guilt,
But bearing our eternal part on high
To luminous abodes and realms of bliss,
For ever there to dwell with righteous men.”
Here you see a distinct expression of belief in The
worshipper, conscious of sin, prays to be purged from it, and
beseeches Agni to transport at death the delivered soul, the eternal
part, to the happy homes of heaven, where the righteous are
already gathered.
Before the age of the Veda had passed there commenced that
degradation of the old faith by which the Creator and His creation
became thought of as one. Pantheism began to be. God is every-
thing. Everything is God.
“ He is himself this very universe,
He is whatever is, has been, and shall be,
He is the Lord of immortality.”
In one of the very latest poems, either belonging to the Veda
or tacked on to it, we reach the conception of God which the
Brahmans received and taught. Chevalier Bunsen quotes an
eloquent passage, full of meaning, but most dangerous in its
tendency. “ When the eye has wearied itself with seeing, and the
ear with hearing, and the imagination with the effort to gather up
into one vision of material splendour all the glories of
the visible world, we feel, we know, that that after which we are
seeking is something ineffably greater. Not by words can we
attain unto it, not by the heart, not by the eye. He alone
attains unto it who exclaims —It is, it is. Thus may it be per-
ceived and apprehended in its essence.” “ A wise man must
annihilate all objects of sense in his mind, and contemplate con-
tinually only the one Existence, which is like pure
Brahma is without dimensions, quality, character, or distinction.
And so there came gradually into the mind of the Hindu peop e
the false thought that the Deity could be known and adequately
worshipped only by a race of men in which the capacity of fellow
ship with the Divine is produced and transmitted. And so the
Brahmans, the leaders of religion, became the priests, the clergy,
born into holy orders, and separated from the rest of the people by
barriers that none could pass. The spiritual despotism that
ensued was of the most terrible character. Perhaps no hierarchy
in the world has exercised the power that has been exercised by
the Brahman. The ceremonial of the Indian priesthood embraced
every moment of a man’s life, from his birth to his death. With
out their help he could not tell what food to eat, what dress to
wear, what work to do, what amusements to enjoy. And as to
religious worship, woe to the wretch that tried to approach t it
gods without their help ! If he made a single mistake in pro-
nouncing the words of his prayer, or if the butter or intoxicatrng
drink he offered was not of the right quality, or the vessel in
which it was brought was not of the right size or shape, the anger
of the Deity might descend upon his home in disease and death.


This tendency to yield to clerical power is to be seen, alas,
in other branches of the Aryan race. I can understand it in con-
nection with the thought of Hinduism, but I cannot understand it
in connection with the thought of Christianity. Where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty, “In Christ we are no more ser-
vants but sons.” “ Stand fast, my brothers, in the liberty where-
with Christ hath made you free, and be not entangled in any
such yoke of bondage.” Choose, if you will, men to be leaders of
your worship and helpers of your faith, but warn off every priest,
whether of Rome or of Geneva, who dares to Tstand between you
and the Living God.
Monotheism (the belief in one God), Polytheism (the belief in
many gods), Pantheism (the belief that everything is God) how
all these have had their power in India ! Strange to say, they all
exist there to-day. Every morning at daybreak millions repeat
the famous Vedic hymn which for more than three thousand
years has been the daily prayer of every Brahmin. “ Let us
meditate on the adorable light of the Divine Creator. May he
enlighten our understandings.” In Ceylon I saw the shrines of
Vishnu, Siva, and Krishna, who were worshipped together. In
Bombay I saw more than one temple dedicated to the monkey-
god Hanuman, and the god Ganesa, lord of the imps of darkness.
In the caves of Elephanta I saw symbols of a worship as licentious
as that of Adonis or Astarte. The Pantheism of the Brahmans
offers no hindrance to idolatry or immorality. Nay, it leads to
them. All finite things are with and in God. The Eternal
Being manifests itself in things noble and vile, pure and obscene,
beautiful and deformed. All moral distinctions disappear. What-
ever is, is divine. Terrible is the descent and degradation from
the teaching of the Veda, 3000 years ago, to the religion of
India to-day. Let those Englishmen explain the difference
between the Hindoo and the Christian, who have the effrontery to
say that our Bible and the Indian Bible are equally inspired.
You can well afford to be generous, my young brothers, in
dealing with the Bibles of other faiths, while cleaving to your own
with enthusiastic loyalty as the Word of the Living God. Our
Bible as the revelation of God in Christ has changed the history
of the race. All genuine civilization is permeated by its teachings,
all true philosophy is based upon its principles, all righteous
government acknowledges its rule, all wise efforts after social
reform are the product of the spirit of self-sacrifice which it reveals
in the cross. Hold fast the Bible ;it is the message of salvation
to you, it is the charter of liberty for the world.


No. 2—OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
Everyone who has made the history of religion his study must
have been struck with the decay of the religions themselves. In
that region of man’s thought and life, where we should have
anticipated and almost expected the enduring and the permanent,
there we find the changeful and the fleeting. To know what
a religion really is, to understand the power it has exerted in the
world, we must go back to the life of the founder, and hear the
preaching of its apostles. We saw last week how the simple
beliefs of our Aryan ancestors, 4000 years ago, have become the
monstrosities and vileness of the Hinduism of to-day. The religion
we consider to-night has in like manner been greatly perverted.
To understand what Buddhism really is, you must go back to the
founder of it, and read in its Bible the precepts which were at
first delivered.
In visiting Ceylon, which I did on going to England and
returning, I had some opportunity of seeing Buddhism as it exists
to-day, for Ceylon is one of the most sacred centres of the faith.
Of course I went to the leading temple of the town of Galle, a
temple which I doubt not many of you have seen. It was a
structure of no great architectural pretensions. A rectangular
court-yard enclosing a square building, plain to ugliness, sur-
mounted by a dome. Within, eight figures of Buddha, some ten
or twelve feet high, in plaster relief, occupying with their shrines the
central space, each with a rudely fashioned altar, on some of which
lay fresh gathered flowers. The whole of the internal walls were
covered with paintings coarsely executed, some depicting different
scenes in the life of Buddha, and some representing the 132 hells
—with men and women in horrible torments —which are said to
receive the wicked. The priest who kept the temple was ill-
dressed and not scrupulously clean. He was at pains to tell me
that he had been brought up in a British school, and was well
acquainted with our Bible. The only other official was a scribe,
busily engaged in copying from manuscripts of palm leaves, many
centuries old, the ancient doctrines of Buddha. There was no
evidence of enthusiasm on the part of the worshippers. Now and
then a woman would enter and say a word or two, and put down
a few wild flowers and leave. I saw nothing of what we term
devotion. Whatever of religious feeling there was, did not


display itself. Everything connected with the priest, worshippers,
and service was cold, and dull, and heartless. And is this, 1 said
to myself, the great religion of Buddhism, which numbers nearly
as many votaries as all the rest of the religions put together,
which has spread itself through Mongolia, Tartary, Tibet, China,
Japan, Siam, Burmah—in fine, through the whole of the great
east of Asia? Is it, then, in the last stages of decrepitude,
waxing old and ready to vanish away ? But I knew it was not.
I knew that it held with a tenacious grip the homage of nearly
600 millions of our race, and that the Christian missionary, after
long years of effort, has too often to confess that Buddha will not
give place to Christ.
But who is this Buddha? What is the Bible of his faith?
What are the beliefs held by his disciples ? These questions I
propose to try and answer to-night. They should be of real
interest to everyone of my audience. For this religion is not one
at the other side of the globe. It is near us. It is among us.
One of the great eastern nations that received the Buddhist
doctrine is spreading itself throughout the great archipelago that
stretches south-east from Asia. They have come by thousands
into Australia, You may see them by hundreds in George-street
and Castlereagh-street. These men with oval face, sallow' com-
plexion, black hair, oblique eyes, with a physiognomy so entirely
different to that of the European, are Buddhists. It makes no
difference that at one and the same time they ate believers in
Confucius and in Lao-tse. However different, and even dis-
cordant, may be the teachings of these three great masters, the
Chinaman implicitly believes them all. But above all things he
is a Buddhist. His joss-houses are built to Buddha. Buddhist
priests perform incantations for him when setting out on a
journey, or commencing business. He invokes Buddha at the
cradle ot his child, and at the grave of his parents. Some of
them, happily, are becoming Christians. This is not adding one
more to the religions they already possess. Christ endures no
rival. The Chinese who meet every Sunday for worship in this
very street must, in so far as they are Christians, renounce all
belief in Buddha, and Lao-tse, and Confucius. But how r few of
those who come to our Australian cities are won over to the
Christian faith? AVhat is there in us to attract them ?
I cannot speak to you fairly about Buddhism without
saying something to you about the founder of it. He is no
imaginary person. Unless all the canons of evidence are false,
we are bound to believe that this great man, this noble man, for
great and noble he undoubtedly was, spent his life in our world
just as you and I are living to-day—between 500 and 600 years
before Christ, He was born in India, not far from the mighty
Himalaya mountains, among the net-work of streams which
rush through their vast ravines to fill the sacred Gauges, in a
land most fertile and beautiful, inhabited by the Aryan race.


The age of the Vedas had passed. Brahmanism had become
fully developed, and was pressing with all its weight of unbear-
able priestcraft upon the nation’s life. I pointed out to you in
my last lecture the condition into which Hinduism had drifted,
how the Brahman had become the keeper of conscience for all
his fellows, looking down on them from his height of sanctity
with supreme contempt, saying, as the Pharisees said in ti e
days of Christ, “ This people which knoweth not the law are
cursed.” But it is wholly impossible for the human heart to be
satisfied with a spiritual dictatorship and a multitude of
religious ceremonies. Just as 2000 years afterwards the great
heart of Europe rose up against Papal tyranny and the gorgeous
ritual of the Roman Church, so the heart of India rose up
against the tyranny of the Brahmins and the crushing weight
of the Hindu worship. Buddhism was the Reformation of
Brahmanism, and Buddha was its Luther. He was the son of
a king, with a court, and an army, and a loyal people, nor was
he without those blandishments and luxuries by which so many
sons of kings have been enfeebled and destroyed. There were
flatterers in abundance, banquets, soft couches, and singing
men and dancing women. Happily, he was married early, and
his wife is described as a model of beauty and virtue. But
Gautama (this was his real name, that of Buddha came after-
wards when he had become a religious teacher) Gautama in his
young and thoughtful manhood found no rest for his soul, either
in the comforts of the home, or the luxuries of the court, or the
ceremonies of religion. He looked round on life, and the dark
mystery of it appalled him. He looked within, and the dark-
ness seemed darker yet. I hardly know in the whole range of
biography a more beautiful story than that which is told of his
sympathy with human suffering and of his devoting himself to
its relief. Driving out with his charioteer, he met on successive
days an old man, bent, and wrinkled, and haggard, breathing
with pain, a sick man, smitten with some fell disease, a loath-
some object, and the corpse of a man, pale and rigid, on its way
to burial. “ And is this life?” said he. “ Sickness, old age,
death—are these the common lot, and trill they he mine ■ Is there
no remedy, none ! Can the Supreme Intelligence give no rest, no
deliverance ! Can Ido nothing to help my fellows ? 0, for light
from above, or from without, or from within /” It seemed to come
to him almost before he expected it. Driving soon afterwards to
his pleasure garden, he met a religious mendicant, one of those
of whom there are so many in the East. This man possessed
nothing in the world but the garment that covered him, and a
wooden bowl to receive food from the charitable. And yet his
step was firm, and his face was bright. He had renounced all
pleasures, and in the daily conquest of his passions found his
happiness. “ Surely this is the trite life,” said Gautama. “ I
too trill flee from the false and seducing joys of life, and by


conquering the senses, which are the sources of all our misery, 1 will
win far myself and others true rest and true peace." Whereupon,
in the dead of night, after a yearning look upon his sleeping
wife and first-born son, he left his palace and his kingdom,
exchanged his dress for that of a beggar, and entered upon a
life of self-denial and austerity. Months and years passed.
He lived in solitary places, spent all his time in meditation,
starved himself almost to death. Peace and rest were as far
from him as ever. Then he gave up his ascetic habits, after
winning the renown of a saint, and lived more like an ordinary
moita!, revolving still the same dark problems of being. At
last there came a terrible crisis in his history. He was
assaulted by temptations such as great souls have nearly all
been called to endure. “ Why not give up the pursuit of a good
that seemed to mock the soul, and take the good that teas close at
hand ? There was fame for the winning, pleasure for the enjoying.
Why should he try to be better than other men ? Why not indulge in
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the pride of life ?
Why not forsake the hard and rugged way to virtue, and betake him-
self to Vanity Fair, with its juggles, and dances, and plays ? There
were Gurus and Brahmins, then, as now , to tell him that these things
were in the very way of religion .” But the soul of Buddha was of
too noble a temper. He met these temptations as foes to virtue,
as enemies to peace. He fought and conquered after such a
day and night of horror as Christian had in the Valley of
Humiliation and in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. But
the morning dawned. Somehow, though he knew not how,
deliverance had come. The supreme moment of his existence
had arrived. From out of the dark void, voices with an
infinite meaning spoke to his mind. The calm of a deep peace
settled on his soul. Priuce Gautama became Buddha, the
Enlightened One. Henceforth nothing remained to him but to
proclaim his method of salvation to his fellow-men.
Is there not something in this story that appeals to your
higher nature, my young brothers ? Have you not had your
times, even when passion was pursuing enjoyment at her
swiftest, and life seemed ablaze with glory, times of thoughtful
sadness in the intervals of pleasure, when the soul cried out for
something better than this common earthly food ? What young
soul before me that has ever been quickened by divine feeling,
but has stopped to think, and has thought with sorrow : “ What
am 7? What is the meaning of this life that lam living?
Whence came the evil of the world ? How can we escape from the
sorrow of it ? Hoiv can we be delivered from the sin ? What is this
evil that I find within me? Is it a part of myself? Who shall
deliver me from this body of death? May rest and peace be won,
even, as some have told me, rest abiding and peace that passeth under-
standing ?” Painful thoughts, do you say ? Yes, painful. But
what soul, worthy of being, would not a thousand times rather


have such noble sadness than the spasm of pleasure that comes
with the gauds and shows of life.
But it is more than time that I should invite you to look at
the Bible of Buddha, the teaching he delivered to his followers
when he sent them out—east, west, north, and south —to preach
salvation to the sorrowful and the sinning. If you are not yet
acquainted with it, you will be surprised. In one aspect it
seems so divine, that you will wonder how a man could have
discovered it. In others it seems so inhuman that you will
wonder how a man could have avowed it. I have already told
you that Buddhism was a protest against the religious tyranny
of Brahminism. The Brahman said, I alone am wise and holy.
Buddha said, All men are equal. The Brahman said, \cu
can never be saved unless you worship the gods exactly as I tell
you. Buddha said, Religious rites are worthless. Every
man must suffer to be blest, exactly as he has lived. The
good man that has become perfect will reach “ Nirvana, abso-
lute rest and peace. The bad man will be degraded from the
human into the animal and from the animal to the devil,
happy if, after passing through innumerable hells, he reach
annihilation. The sacred canon of Buddhism was settled in
three synods held after Buddha’s death. Some of you perhaps
think our Bible long enough But what will you think of the
Buddhist Bible ? It differs somewhat, as you may suppose, in
different countries. Not long ago an edition of that received in
Tibet was published by command of the Emperor of China. It
comprised 335 folio volumes, weighing four to five pounds each.
Seven thousand oxen were given by one of the Tibetan tribes for
a portion of this Bible in 108 volumes. It is not, however,
necessary for the European scholor to wade through or dive into
this sea of literature in order to know the chief points of
Buddha’s teaching. I will endeavour to give you from reliable
sources some idea of what the book contains. The Scriptures
received as authoritative are contained in three collections
called the Tripitaka, or Three Baskets. In the first we get the
discourses of Buddha, in the second the duties of the people, in
the third rules for the priests. The second and third may be
regarded as an expansion of the first. The teaching of the
Buddhist Bible may be divided into two parts. We have a
moral code of law. We have certain strange theories about the
human soul and its destiny.
Let me try to show you something of the code of morals .
You would find it hard outside the New Testament to discover a
code more perfect. Spence Hardy, a Wesleyan missionary,
speaking of one of the books called the “Footsteps of the Law,
says that a collection might be made from its precepts which
could hardly be equalled by any heathen author. In one of the
discourses of Buddha the enquiry is made (the enquiry made by
every earnest soul) “ What is the chief good ?” I will quote a
verse or two of the answer.


“ Much insight and education, Self-control and pleasant speech,
Aud whatever word be well spoken : This is the greatest blessing.”
“ lo support father and mother, To cherish wife and child,
lo follow a peaceful calling : This is the greatest blessing.”
“To bestow alms and live righteously, To give help to kindred,
Deeds which cannot be blamed : These are the greatest blessing.”
“ Reverence and lowliness, Contentment and gratitude,
The hearing of the law in due season : This is the greatest blessing.”
In the schools of Buddhism in China, a collection of
Scripture verses is used. Let me give you two or three.
“ Never in this world does hatred cease with hatred,
Hatred ceases by love ; this is always its nature.”
“ hollow not after vanity, nor familiarity with the delight of lust,
4or the earnest and the thoughtful obtain ample joy.”
“ As long as the sin bears no fruit, the fool he thinks it honey ;
But when the sin ripens, then he goes down into sorrow.”
“ A man may conquer a thousand men in battle,
But he who conquers himself is the greatest victor.”
These, I am sure, you will admit are both beautiful and
true. Now listen to the commandments of Buddha. There are
ten negative and eighteen positive. Five of the prohibitions are
for all—kill not; steal not; commit no adultery ; lie not;
drink no strong drink. Five are for ascetics or priests—eat no
food, except at stated times ; abstain from dances, theatres,
songs, and music; use no ornaments or perfumes; use no
luxurious beds ; receive no gold nor silver. Six of the positive
injunctions are for all—charity, virtue, patience and forbear*
ance, fortitude, meditation, knowledge. Twelve are for the
priests, I will give five of them—to dress in rags ; to eat only
one meal daily ; to live only on food collected from door to
door; to have no shelter but the leaves of trees ; to frequent
cemeteries every month, in order to meditate on the vanity of
human life. There are many secondary precepts connected
with these rules, e.y., not only is patience required, but the
bearing of injuries, resignation under misfortune, humility,
repentance, and confession of sin to one another. Will you
pooh, pooh ! Buddhism after this ? Will you look upon the
teeming multitudes of Asia, and simply thank God that you are
not as they. I for my part thank God that in the absence of
Christian truth there are 500 millions of our race who are
brought into contact with teachings like these, even if they are
Atheists, as they undoubtedly are.
For now must come the darker side of Buddhism. Let us
praise its morality, but how can we sufficiently condemn its
religion ? We saw that the Vedas proclaimed the existence of a
Supreme Being, the Cause of all that is or seems to be. But
Buddha admitted of no real Cause in this unreal world. He
denied the existence of God. Richter must have had Buddha in
bis mind, when, in that strange unearthly dream, he heard the
dead cry to the dead Christ, “ Christ, is there no God ?” And
He answered, “ There is none. I have traversed the worlds, I


have risen to the suns, by the Milky Ways I have passed across
the great waste spaces of the sky. I descended to where the
very shadow cast by being dies out and ends, and I gazed into
the gulf beyond, and I cried, Father, where art Thou ? But
answer came there none, save the eternal storm which no one
rules. There is no God.” But Buddha went even farther than
Atheism itself. He declared that the universe had no reality,
that everything seemed to be and was not, that the wise man is
he who perceives the nothingness of all things, and whose whole
absorbing desire is to become nothing himself. These are the
four great truths revealed to Buddha; —1. Suffering exists
wherever there is life ; 2. Suffering is caused by desire ; 8. Re-
lease from suffering depends on the suppression of desire, and
the extinction of being, which he calls Nirvana; 4. Nirvana
can be obtained only by following the paths he himself has dis-
covered. 1 know there is a controversy as to the meaning of
this Nirvana. Some deny (as in a recent number of the
Spectator) that it is absolute annihilation—eternal death. But
all agree that the rest, and peace, and blessedness, of the Bible
of Buddhism is a state without thought, without feeling, with-
out desire, without consciousness. What is this but the
extinction of being, the ending of life, the rest of death ?
You will not wonder, now, that in spite of so pure a code of
morality, the nations that have embraced Buddhism have fallen
so far behind in the world’s march of progress ? For blind
brute force they count much. Civilization of a certain order
they have all attained. In their social and national life there is
a great deal to admire. But there is no enthusiasm, no
quickening, no aiming at some idea not yet attained. Custom
lies upon them like a weight. It stiffens then like frost.
Mohammedanism is more effective in lending impulse to the
life. Even Hinduism has greater motive power. And as to
Christianity, it is energy itself when compared with Buddhism.
When a Buddhist people like the Japanese begin to feel the
stirring of a noble life, it instinctively cries out for the religion
of the West.
I should like to have drawn out the parallel between the
morality of Buddhism and the morality of the Gospels, and
shown you, as I think I could, that though both are based on
the instincts and intentions of natural religion, the morality of
the New Testament is larger, more liberal, more in accordance
with the needs of human nature. But I must content myself
with one concluding thought. Religion makes demands upon
our social life. It is nothing if it does not bind us in a fellow-
ship. How does Buddhism meet this craving ? Having said in
its heart “ There is no God,” it invents a Supreme, endows it
with faculties which it knows it does not possess. It calls on
men to believe a lie, and at the behest of an eternal nothing to
join together in being true, and pure, and good in order to


become nothing. You can’t get union and fellowship out of
that. The great mass of Buddhists consists of atoms without
organic union, without corporate life. Christendom has not yet
attained to its ideal, and is open to the reproach of its enemies.
But what is the ideal of Christianity ? It says that we are all
children of a Heavenly Father, that Christ has come to
reconcile us to Him and lead us to His house, and that by His
Spirit we are brought into a divine fellowship, which embraces
all nations, peoples, kindreds, tongues. In Buddha men are
units. In Christ they will be eternally one. “ Now, therefore,
ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with
the saints, and of the household of Cod, and are built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself
being the chief corner-stone, in whom all the building, fitly
framed together, groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord.”


No. 3 —OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
--n
There is a tendency in all religions, even the noblest and truest,
to degenerate into superstition. The religion of the “Parsees”
or “ Fireworshippers,” which we are to consider to-night, is a
signal illustration of this. In one of the sects of Christendom,
as we know, worship is performed by the priests in a tongue
unknown to the congregation. That is sufficiently surprising, but
what will you say of a religion, in which neither priests nor people
understand a single word of their prayers and recitations 1 Whal
will you say of a religion in which the entire education consists
in teaching children a number of prayers in a language dead for
long centuries, the very meaning of which was utterly lost until
about 50 years ago, when European scholarship brought the dead
to life] What will you say of a religion that has a Bible, the
Zendavesta, which to all, save one or two of the more learned of
the believers, is an utterly sealed book, a book that is studied for
pronunciation and grammar, and for the reciting of its words; but
not for its thought and its meaning, and its doctrine.
And yet that book was once, as its name implies, a “ Living
Word,” and the faith it enshrines a living faith. The Zendavesta
was the Bible of Cyrus, the conqueror of Babylon, and of Darius,
the Lord of Asia. There have been times in the history of the
world when the teachings of Zoroaster, the prophet of the
Zendavesta, seemed likely to have surpassed all others in their
influence upon mankind. As Max Muller said in an eloquent
passage, “ If the battles of Marathon and Salamis had been lost, and
Greece had succumbed to Persia, the State religion of the Empire
of Cyrus, which was the worship of Ormuzd, might have become
the religion of the whole civilised world. Persia had absorbed
the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires; the Jews were either in
Persian captivity, or under Persian sway at home ; the sacred
monuments of Egypt had been mutilated by the hands of Persian
soldiers. The edicts of the great king, the king of kings, were
sent to India, to Greece, to Scythia and Egypt, and if by the
grace of Auramazda, Darius had crushed the liberty of Greece, the
purer faith of Zoroaster might easily have superseded the
Olympian fables.” But a century later Alexander the Great, the
u mighty king ” of the prophet David smote the empire of Persia


to its destruction, and though the faith of the Persians long
survived, and • became so powerful in the 3rd century of
our era, that it aimed at the extirpation of Christianity, yet in
the 7th century it fell by the sword of Mahomet and his conquer-
ing Arabs. To the furious zeal of Islam it is to be ascribed that
the Persia of to-day receives the Koran for its Bible, and that the
70,000 Parsees who alone remain out of the great hosts of ancient
Persian believers, are exiles in India, under the tolerant rule of
the British Government, where they form one of the most united
and prosperous communities in the whole world.
It is in Bombay that the greater number of the Parsees are
found. In Bombay I saw them. My first contact with them was
at a funeral. Nearly all religions have something special and
peculiar in rite and ceremony when the dead body is disposed of.
We bury our dead with expressions of belief in the resurrection
and life immortal, while we say “Earth to earth, ashes to ashes,
dust to dust.” The Hindu burns his dead with observances
strange and disgusting. The Parsee funeral is, I think, the most
singular upon the face of the earth. Their cemetery is situated
upon the summit of a hill not far from the city. It is kept in
perfect order with cypress, palm trees, and flowering shrubs.
Within it there rise five circular towers about twenty-five feet
high, and ninety feet in diameter, built of solid granite, and
looking like huge fortresses of mediaeval times. While there and
wondering, I saw a funeral procession coming up the hill. Never
1 think at anytime have I seen a procession more striking or more
beautiful. The corpse, covered with a white sheet, and stretched
upon a bier of lattice work, was carried by four beareis, habited in
purest white. Behind them came by two and two, the relatives of
the deceased, and the priests of the faith, wearing the black
conical headdress peculiar to the Parsees, and dressed like the
bearers in spotless white. There must have been sixty of them
altogether, every one a man in the prime of life or the vigour of
age. Nowhere have I seen a collection of human faces with more
ot manly beauty of the highest type. Slowly and reverently the
procession moved, in utter silence, save for the solemn footfall of
the mourners, until it entered the massive gates. Contrast this
with the funeral processions that are continually wen dir g their
way through the streets of Sydney, the unwieldly hearse deco-
rated with black angels and black feathers, the lumbering
mourning coaches with relatives in crape—let their grief be
sacred—the funeral officials walking or riding with dismal hat
bands and scarfs, and faces with no gleam of sympathy, and.
behind a dozen or twenty cabs with men talking, and often
laughing, with no consciousness of death, no thought of
immortality. As soon as the mourners entered the cemetery
they passed into a building set apart for prayer. Here prayers
were offered in the old Zend language. Meanwhile the bearers
carried the corpse to one of the circular towers, the inside of


which is open to the sky. By a small square door they passed in
and were hidden from view, returning after awhile without the
body of their late companion and friend. Except these men, who
are solemnly set apart for the office, no one, even to the highest
in rank among the Parsees, is ever permitted to enter the Towers
of Silence, or to approach within forty feet. What takes place
within seems to us terrible enough. Perched on neighbouring
trees, or seated waiting on the stone coping of the tower were
scores, were hundreds of vultures, huge carrion-eating birds of
prey. When the procession entered the garden, there was move-
ment among them. As soon as the bearers left the tower, they
swooped down and devoured the body. In a few minutes nothing
was left but bones. I could tell you of the construction of these
Towers of Silence, of which an accurate model is shown, of their
three concentric rows of graves, seventy-two in number, corre-
sponding to the chapters in the Yasna, the most ancient book of
their Scriptui’es, the outermost row for men, the middle for
women, the innermost for children, of the deep well in the centre,
wherein the bones, bleached white by the sun, are reverently laid,
of the lights kept perpetually burning by night and day, in lamps
fed with fragrant incense, from which rays fall in the darkness
upon the poor remains of mortality. But my object is rather by
means of this impressive spectacle to bi’ing before your minds some
of the Parsee religious beliefs.
If with feelings of disgust at the sight of these foul birds
gorged with human flesh you were to ask an intelligent Parsee
why they had chosen such a mode of burial, he would reply, “ We
have received from ancient times the traditional teaching of our
prophet. We look upon the elements, earth, fire, and water, as
symbols of the Deity never to be defiled by corrupting flesh.
Instead of poisoning the air like the Hindu, or the earth and
water, like the Christian, we dispose of our dead in such manner
that the Deity is not offended, and our fellow creatures are not
injured. You Christians bury your dead oftentimes within your
very cities, and the air and the earth and the water are poisoned
for your living. And is it, after all, more revolting to the sacred
instincts of humanity that the birds of the air should swiftly
devour, than that the worm should slowly devour. The dread
secrets of our towers of silence are not more dreadful than those of
your charnel houses beneath the soil.”
If you were to pursue your enquiries further, as I did, and
ask after the general belief of this singular community, you would
be told that it is but slander to call them worshippers of the fire.
“We are not idolaters. We are taught, indeed, to face some lumi-
nous object while we worship God. We bow before the rising
sun, or some pure flame, because we look upon the sun and fire as
emblems of the Divine Power, but we never pay divine honours
to either. If we feel emotions of reverence, and the kindlings
of awe at the sight of sun and flame, what more is this than the


reverence and awe by which Catholics are moved when they look
upon an image of the Madonna, or the picture of a saint. We
worship Ormuzd, the God of light revealed to us by our prophet
Zoroaster.” Some twenty or thirty years ago a small catechism
was written and published in one of the dialects of India giving in
the form of a question and answer, the leading doctrines of the
Parsees. I will quote one or two passages from this that you may
form a clear idea of their present religious belief. Q. “ Whom do
we, of the Zarthosti community believe in?” A, “We believe
in only one God, and we do not believe in any besides Him.”
Q. “ Who is that one God ? ” A. “ The God who created the
heavens, the earth, the angels, the stars, the sun, the moon, the
fire, the water, all the four elements, and all the things of the two
worlds, that God we believe in. Him we invoke. Him we
adore.” Q. “ What is the form of our God? ” A. “Our God has
neither face nor form, colour nor shape, nor fixed place. There is
no other like Him. He is himself singly such a glory that we
cannot praise or describe Him, nor our mind comprehend Him.”
Q. “ What command has God sent us through His prophet,
the exalted Zoroaster?” A. “To know God as one ; to know the
prophet as the true prophet; to believe the religion of the Davesta
brought by him as true beyond all manner of doubt; to believe in
the goodness of God; not to destroy any of the commandments of
the Mazdiashna religion ; to avoid evil deeds ; to exert oneself in
good deeds ; to pray five times in the day ; to believe on the
reckoning and justice the fourth morning after death ; to hope for
Heaven and to fear Hell : to consider as beyond doubt the day of
general destruction and i esurrection; to remember always that
God has done what He willed, and shall do what He wills; to face
some luminous object while worshipping God.” In some other
paragraphs in the same catechism, they scornfully reject the idea
of salvation by any other than themselves. “ There is no Saviour.
In the other world you shall receive the return according to your
actions. Your Saviour is your deeds and God himself. He is
the pardoner and the giver. If you repent your sins and reform,
and if the great Judge considers you worthy of pardon, or would be
merciful to you, He alone can and will save you,”
I shall not now consider how much, if any, of this most
admirable morality has been gained by contact with Christianity.
Whether or no, it is something to rejoice in that some 70,000 or
■BO,OOO of our subjects in India believe in one God, believe
in a morality of “ pure thoughts, pure words, pure deeds,” believe
in the punishment of vice, and the reward of virtue, and trust for
pardon to the mercy of God. Our rejoicing may be moderated by
the thought that the prayers enjoined are meaningless words, that
certain of their religious ceremonies to be performed daily are
filthy to a degree, that women, until lately, received no education,
and that they refuse to eat food cooked by one of another religion.
But allowing for these blemishes, how shall we account for the


ill-success of a faith with an ideal so exalted 1 How is it that the
millions of Asia have turned away contemptuously from a religion,
so superior to all that they have received 1 How is it that
Parseeism has dwindled away until, from at one time being almost
supreme in Asia, it has now but a handful of followers 1 I believe
it is largely in this, that they have rejected the doctrine of
vicarious obedience and sacrifice, which is the central live-giving
power of the Christian faith. A code of morality 1 ? It requires no
revelation from Heaven to tell us the chief points of right conduct
towards our fellows. Why any half-dozen of us here to-night,
fairly intelligent and really earnest, could produce out of conscience
■and heart, without reference to any revealed religion, the leading
moralities that are binding upon life. Pure thoughts, pure words,
pure deeds, truth, justice, charity, who does not see by the divinest
instincts of his being that—God, or no God, these are impera-
tively required of the good man. But the curse of our manhood
is, that seeing and knowing the better, we have deliberately
■chosen the worse. Video meliora proboque , deteriora sequor. Wb
have sinned against thee, O most pure and most good, wilt thou
forgive 1 ? AVe are weak and passionate and sinful yet, beating
ourselves blindly against the bars of our cage, the appetites of our
body, vainly seeking the freedom of our soul, wilt thou come to
our help 1 It is not merely by virtue of its moral teaching (though
that is the most liberal and the most pure of all the religions of
the world) that Christianity has won its mightiest victories. It is
by the Cross we triumph ; it is by the Crucified we are saved.
In hoe siyno, vinces. The Cross ! The Cross ! It is the symbol of
our dearest faith, the so iree of our loftiest inspiration. Out
proudest monarchs wear it among the emblems of their royalty.
It has glowed upon the banners of our greatest heroes. Philosophy
has stood silent beneath its shadow. The genius of poetry has
made it the most exalted of her themes. A million hearts are as
ready to die for it to-day as were ever the Bed Cross Knights.
“ God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world.”
It is more than time that I should attempt to give you some
idea of the Zendavesta and its teachings. The Bible of the Pat sees
began to be written about 600 years before Christ. Zoroaster
came forth as a religious reformer of the corrupted religion of the
Vedas, about the time Solon taught wisdom to Greece, and
Nebuchadnezzar reared his image of gold, and Daniel the captive
.Jew reproved the s -usual m march ot Babylon to his face, and
translated for him the handwriting upon the wall of his palace,
Tekel, thou art weighed in the balances and found wanting.
Peres thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Modes and
Persians.” - .
That branch of our Aryan race which settled in Persia,
carried with them the religious doctrines which our fathers and


theirs had received. The simple monotheism of the Rig-veda was
speedily corrupted into the worship of the heavenly bodies. In
Persia this worship became all-absorbing. The nights of Persia
are as clear as the nights of Australia. The stars glowing in the
vault of heaven were adored as actual powers and rulers of the
world, until the people became utterly debased by the idolatry.
Then Zoroaster arose. He declared that those lights of heaven,
and all light, testified of one who was the source of light. He
called Him Ormuzd, the Lord of Light. He said that they who
worshipped material things were slaves of Ahriman, the Lord of
Darkness. The modern Parsees, indeed, say that Ahriman was
not regarded as co-equal and co-eternal with Ormuzd, but there are
passages in the Bible which clearly affirm the dualism of their
ancient faith. Ahriman, the evil God, is the Prince of Death.
He is likened to an immense reptile, enveloping the world in its
coils, and infusing his poison into every creature. Under Ormuzd
and Ahriman are ranged a multitude of spirits which carry on the
struggle between light and darkness.
The Zendavesta is comparatively a small book. The sacred
writings of the Persians were, however, considerable. It is
believed that many perished dui’ing the invasion of Persia by
Alexander the Great. I will quote only from the Gathas, the
oldest part of that which remains, and which sets forth the leading
doctrines of Zoroaster, Nearly all of this part consists of
prayers, songs and hymns. The translations I give are by
Professor Haug, a German oriental scholar of great ability. One
of the most important of the Gathas represents Zoroaster standing
before the sacred fire and speaking to his assembled countrymen,
adjuring them to forsake idolatry. “I will now tell you who are
here the wise sayings of Mazda, the praises of Ahura, and the
hymns of the good spirit, the sublime truth which I see rising out
of these sacred flames. Everyone, both men and women, ought
to-day to choose his creed. In the beginning there was a pair of
twins, two spirits, each of peculiar activity. These are the
good and the base, in thought, word, and deed. Choose one of
these spirits. Be good, not base. . . . You cannot belong to
both of them. . . . Wisdom is the shelter from lies, the
annihilation of the destroyer. Therefore perform ye the command-
ments which, pronounced by Mazda himself, have been given to
mankind.” In another Gatha we have a collection of sayings
about the protection of the good creation from the attacks of
wicked men and evil spirits. Those who long for the agricultural
settlement of Australia will be glad to hear that Zoroaster
regarded the cultivation of the soil as the chief means of checking
evil influence. “ When my eyes behold Thee, the essence of
truth, the creator of life, who manifests His life in His works,
then I know Thee to be the primeval spirit, Thou Mazda, so high
in mind as to create the world. In Thee was the spirit of earth ;
in Thee the very wise fertiliser of the soil; when Thou hast made


her paths, that she might go from the tiller of the soil to him who
does not cultivate it.” Let our squatters listen to this ; “Of
these two (the agriculturist and the herdsman) the spirit of earth
chose the pious cultivator, the propagator of life, whom she
blessed with the riches produced by the good mind. All who do
not till her have no share in the blessings of civilisation. Whoever
furthers the works of life by tilling the soil, that one will be in
paradise.” Where outside the Christian Scriptures will you find a
truer philosophy of creation than this ? “ This I shall ask Thee,
tell it me right, O Ahura. How arose the present life ? By
what means is the world to be supported 1 Who was in the
beginning the father and creator of righteousness 1 Who created
the path of the sun and stars ? Who causes the moon to increase
and wane, but Thou ? Who is holding the earth and the skies above
it ? Who made the waters and the trees of the field ? Who
created the sleep of good effect and the activity ? How may I
come, O Mazda, to your dwelling place ? ” In the mind of
Zoroaster, light and darkness, good and evil, are seen in perpetual
activity and perpetual antagonism. “ The wise have manifested
this universe as a duality. Let not the mischief maker destroy the
second life. The soul of the righteous attains to immortality, but
that of the wicked to everlasting punishment. Whatever man or
woman, O Ahuraraazda, performs the best actions for the benefit
of this life, promoting thus the truth for theagel of truth, and
spreading thy rule through the good mind, all these will I lead
over the bridge of the gatherer to Paradise,” “ I cease to be an
idolater. I ascribe all good things to Ahuramazda. I forsake the
false gods, the wicked, bad, wrongful originators of mischief. I
forsake them with thoughts, words, and deeds. I forsake them
hereby publicly, and declare that all falsehood is to be done away
with.”
Conversion, consecration, profession, the renouncing the
devil and all his works of darkness, and the bearing witness to the
Lord of Light and Life, is as old you see, as Zoroaster. Will you
wonder, you who know something of the* history of Christian
thought, you who have dared to think about yourself and your
duty and your destiny, will you wonder at the belief in the rival
powers of good and evil? I wish I had time to show you how
this doctrine of the Magi, this exaggeration of one of the direful
facts of the universe, affected Christian thought in the early
centuries, and showed itself in one of the most prevalent heresies.
I wish 1 could show you how this belief in Orumzd, the Lord of
Light and in Ahriman, the Prince of Darkness affects the Christian
thought of to-day, leading some —Christian disciples on the one
hand, and pious Eoman Catholics on the other—to regard the
world as evil, and to leave it so far as possible. But it cannot be,
or at least to-night, and I want if I can to drive home to the
hearts of my young brothers who are listening to me the solemn
truth enshrined in the Zendavesta, in the Christian Scriptures,


and in all rightful teachings about this wondrous life we are
living. God is, and there is an enemy of God, call it a being or a
principle, which you like. The one calls you to a life of purity
and truth, the other solicits you to be impure and false. The one
bids you be master of yourself by self-denial, and temperance and
chastity. The other suggests that by self-indulgence, by yielding
to appetites, by wine and wantonness, the beauty and glory of life
shall be yours. Both declare that you were made for happiness.
The one says that which is right is pleasurable. The other says
that which is pleasurable is right. I offer you the alternative
which Zoroaster offered to the Persians, which Joshua offered to
the Jews, which my Lord Christ offers to the world. “Choose
you this day whom ye will serve. If the Lord be God, then
follow Him ; if Baal, Ahriman, Satan, be your God, then follow
Him 1 ” Duty or pleasure, which ? Truth or falsity, which t
Goodness or evil, which 1 You must decide. You can’t help
deciding. You stand at a fork in the road. The two paths
stretch away into the unknown future. You cannot remain
standing. On the one path indeed, you cannot enter without the
exercise of will, resolve, determination. Into the other you may
drift, borne along by the crowd, carried away like a weakling by
your appetites and passions. What will you do ? Which course
will you take ? ; Tis a matter of awful moment. Life is swiftly
passing. Eternity draws on. Our God is a God of righteousness,
and by Him the decisions of eternity will be pronounced. They
that choose light for the light. They that choose darkness for the
darkness. “He that is holy, let him be holy still. He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still.” “ Behold,” he saith, “ I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according
as his work shall be.”


No 4-OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
My lecture to-night is on the Koran, the Bible of Mahomet.
During my recent travels I came into personal contact with
Mohammedans, both in India and Egypt. Two incidents
especially are prominent in my memory. At Assouan, on the
southern borders of Egypt, about 800 miles up the Nile, from the
sea-board of the Mediterranean, I fell in with a pilgrim, or Hadji,
who was on his return from pilgrimage to Mecca. His fellow-
townsmen, Arabians and Egyptians, were gathered in a great
crowd to welcome him. As soon as he left the steamer he was
seized in their loving embraces, and almost stifled with kisses.
It was evidently counted an honour to touch his hand or a part of
his clothing. When the first tumult of joy had subsided, he was
escorted with loving reverence to his home, where a banquet was
prepared. That over, the whole evening and the ensuing night
were employed in devotional exercises. The Koran was recited,
and a singular religious services was performed, called a Zikr,
which consists of occasional singing, and the repetition ot the
name of God and the profession of His unity, accompanied with a
movement of the head and a violent bowing of the whole body,
I was present at the Zikr. When I saw the men, in relays of
twenty or thirty, repeating together, “There is no deity but God,’
with vehement and distressing exertions, until some of them
fainted, and knew that this was being carried on all the night
through, I could not help thinking that the creed of Mahomet
still commanded enthusiastic belief, and that it was not the dead
or dying superstition which some declare it to be. I was yet
more convinced of this in Bombay. The vital force of a religion
may be estimated by the amount of proselytizing power there is
in it. When Christians, e.g ., are content with worshipping God,
and care nothing about making converts to God, I consider they
are in evil case. Bombay, with its 700,000 people, is of course
chiefly Hindu. But all the faiths of India are represented,
Mohammedanism among the rest. Passing along one day through
one of the great squares, I noticed a large crowd assembled, and
went towards it. In the centre, standing upon some steps at the
base of a statue, I saw a man addressing the crowd. By his
turban I knew him to be a Mohammedan. He was preaching
from the Koran, preaching about the one true faith. He was


telling them thut there was but one true God, and tha t the
thousand gods of India were only idols. He was proclaiming
liberty from the bondage of caste, inviting the poor wretched
Sudra, down-trodden and despised by the Brahmin, to enter Islam
and be an equal with the highest. The man was a genuine
orator. His eye kindled. His voice was now loud , and
denouncing, now soft and pleading. He reasoned. He de-
claimed. He entreated. Some time I staid charmed by his
eloquence. Eeturning by the same way after more than an
hour, he was still there, intent as ever upon the subject of his
teaching. I said to myself, Mohammedanism is a living power,
even to-day.
Practical men, as they are called, often laugh at ideas.
“You preachers, of what use are youl The world wants deeds,
and you offer them words—empty words.” No doubt there is
truth in the taunt, for oftentimes our words are empty. But
words that are full, words with an everlasting meaning in them,
these men want, and will always want. Stuart Mill, I think it is,
who said, “ After all, the world is governed by ideas.” Without
the idea there can be no true word, and wdthout the word there
can be no true deed. No man who knows what life really is
wonders that the Son of God Himself, the Life and the Light of
men, is called the Logos, the Word. I have to speak to-night of
words wedded to deeds, words most powerful, deeds most
valorous. Mahomet was a man and a hero who has earned and
almost won a place in the golden book of humanity, whatever
view you like to take of his character. But Mahomet by himself
would have achieved nothing. He would have been powerless,
even against the idolaters of his own tribe, but for that word of
of his in the Koran, which went thundering through the east
and west.
To day, there are 175,000,000 of men who cleave to that
word and reverence Mahomet as the greatest of the prophets.
One-fourth of these are our own fellow-subjects in India.
We must think of the man before we think of the book. He
was born rather more than 1300 years ago, nearly 600 years after
Christ. His home was in Arabia, near to Mecca, about half-way
up the Red Sea. Every steamer going to England by way of the
Suez Canal passess within about 100 miles of it. He lost his
father early, and lis uncle took charge of him. As a boy he
tended sheep, and looked after the camels. Somewhat later he
was engaged in trade. We are told he was a sickly lad, even sub-
ject to epilepsy. In his maturity he was of middle height, some-
what thin, though broad of shoulders, with a massive head
covered with dark hair. In his oval face were great, black, rest-
less eyes, and beneath it a full long beard. We are told that he
was of simple habits, mending his own boots and milking his own
camels even long after he had become a great king. He abhorred
strong drink, was gifted with mighty powers of imagination, was


very gentle, very fond of children, and never struck anyone in his
life. Usually, he was silent, but when he did speak it was no
garrulous nonsense, but clear, strong speech.
To this man, as to every soul that is earnest, there came
thinkings—dark, troubled, sorrowful. He was utterly dissatisfied
with the religious teachings of his countrymen. One God, indeed,
was regarded as supreme, but, in the language of the Koran,
“ they gave him companions,”—certain female deities, and various
national, local, and family idols. Round their chief temple, the
"Caaba, which contained the celebrated black stone which seems to
have been an object of worship, were reared 360 graven or molten
idols. Among the Arabs there is one month in the year which is
devoted to peace, a month for rest and holidays, and religious
exercises. When he was forty years of age Mahomet spent this
month in a small dark cave on Mount Hira, about an hour’s walk
from Mecca. There he fasted and prayed by day and night,
looking out upon the heavens. You can well imagine, you that
have tried to understand what life really is, the conflict that went
on in his mind. He was alone with his own soul, and the uni-
verse about him. “ What does it all mean ? What splendour is
this that comes streaming through the sky from sun and star?
What is this earth, those worlds, this universe ? What am I,
with this body of weakness, this soul of mystery? Is it true, as
the priests of the Caaba affirm, that the sun and moon, Jupiter
and Venus, are deities of power, gods to be worshipped ? If so,
let them speak. Here is a living soul eager for knowledge,
-panting for truth.” Days and weeks passed, and thei'e was no
response. The heavens were silent. The rocks ai’ound uttered no
voice. But suddenly, in the middle of the night, towards the close
of the month, he awoke fi’om troubled sleep. He heard a voice
calling, urging. Twice he straggled against it. But he was
pressed sorely—thought his last hour had come. For the third
time the voice called “ Cry,” and he said “ What shall I cry ?”
And the answer came “ Cry in the name of thy Lord, who hath
created all things.” No doubt he was in a ti’ance, but trances
count for something in the history of men. He awoke, we are
told, and felt “as if a book had been written in his heart.” For
some months afterwards the voice was silent, but by-and-by
revelations came, and continued without intermission for twenty
years. The resixlt you have in the Koran, which is one of the
strangest medleys of composition that the world has seen. It has
neither beginning, middle, nor end. It is not a book, but a
jumble of meditations, and prayers, and notes of sermons. They
were written, it appears, on palm leaves, and tablets of stone, and
bits of parchment, and shoulder blades of mutton, and thi’own
together into a chest. From this they were collected by one of
Mahomet’s disciples after his death, and arranged by the original
method of putting the longest chapters first. Much of the book is
weak and foolish. Some of it is mystical or nonsensical. Carlyle,


who knew what a book was, says of our book of Job, written
in the same region as the Koran : “ I call it, apart from all theories
about it, one of the grandest things ever written by pen. There
is nothing written, I think, in the Bible or out of it, of equal
literary merit.” But he speaks of the Koran as “ a wearisome
confused jumble, crude, incondite, endless iterations, long-winded-
ness, entanglement, insupportable stupidity, in short.” And yet,
standing out clear amid all this confusion, there is a doctrine
delivered, clear, positive, distinct, a doctrine preached (I use the
words of Immanuel Deutsch) by rending the skies above and
tearing open the earth beneath, by adjuring heaven and hell, the
living and the dead, by the foaming waters and the grim darkness,,
by the flaming sun and the setting stars, by the human soul and’
the small voice, by the moon and the dawn, by the angels, by the
ten nights of dread mystery, and by the day of judgment. And it
was by this doctrine, thus illustrated and enforced, rather than by
the Koran itself, that “ the Arabs conquered an empire greater
than that of Alexander, greater than that of Borne, in as many
tens as Borne required hundreds of years.” The doctrine is simply
this—l give you an entire chapter of the Koran ; “ Say God is-
one, the Everlasting God. He begetteth not and is not begotten,
and there is none like unto Him.” Closely connected with this is
the assertion “ Mahomet is the prophet of God,” and the implica-
tion “ Man is the minister of God, to accomplish His will upon
earth.” Bemember that Mahomet never claimed divine honours.
He would have denounced as the rankest blasphemy any attempt
to offer him worship. His repeated assertion was that there
were six prophets or apostles,—Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
Jesus, and Mahomet, of whom the last and greatest was himself.
He announced himself as sent by God to root out idolatry, and to-
restore the true faith which had been proclaimed in past ages by
his predecessors. He asserted that he was a preacher of righteous-
ness like Noah, that his mission was to declare that there is one
God, and none other but He, that He demanded of men that they
should be humble, and just, and merciful, and that He would
reward the good and punish the evil. This, at least, was his
teaching in the early part of his career, w r hen he lived as a loyal
citizen and a faithful husband. There came a time, alas, when his
hands were red with blood, and his purity was stained with lust,
and when in defence of slaughter and unchastity he produced
revelations from God. But men must be judged by their sur-
roundings, and it must never be forgotten that even in the worst
aspects of his career Mahomet was more merciful than his fellow r-
conquerors, purer than his fellow-sovereigns.
Before giving you a taste of the Koran itself, I want so far as
I can to answer two questions. Whence did Mahomet derive
the leading features of his religion ? What were the special
teachings of Mahomet which wrought such mighty results in the
world ]


Whence, then, came the religion of the Koran 1 So far as I
•can judge, Mahomet was not an original teacher, to anything like
the extent that Buddha and Zoroaster were. In his early man-
hood he travelled much as a trader, and came into close contact
with the various religions that had won a footing in the Arabian
peninsula. Gifted with a receptive mind and a retentive
memory, he learnt and held their common teachings and their
numerous histories and fables. His countrymen, as I have said,
were idolaters, but their idolatry, like that of the Brahmins of
India and the Magi of Persia, was a corruption of an original
worship of one God. They were accustomed, we are told, in
special emergencies to pray to Allah alone. It is to the lasting
credit of Mahomet that be reverted to the purer faith of his
ancestors and shivered into fragments the 360 brazen abominations
in and around the national temple. But besides this ancient
creed of the Arabs, there were three others which had obtained a
footing in Arabia. Some of the tribes had embraced the
Magianism of Persia. Judaism had been among them for
centuries. Christianity had made some advances. From each of
these Mahomet largely borrowed. From Magianism came the
fables of the Genii, and the various orders and ministries of angels.
The Koran contains the most absurd and childish stories about
these. From Christianity, which existed in Arabia in a very
corrupt and impure form, Mahomet derived some noble precepts of
morals, hut also a number of ridiculous tales about the childhood
of Christ and the Virgin Mary, as contained in certain spurious
Gospels. But it is in Judaism that we can trace the original of a
great part of the Koran, its theology and morals, its gorgeous
dreams, and its minute and wearisome details of social and family
duties. One who is competent beyond most to pronounce an
opinion on this subject, says : “It seems as if Mahomet breathed
from his childhood the air of contemporary Judaism—the Judaism
that is crystallized in the Talmud. He quotes from the Mishna.
He gives special injunctions taken from the Gemara. The
legends of Islam are borrowed from the Haggadah.” There can
be ne doubt that in the sixth century the Jews were the learned
of Arabia. They represented its culture. They were the school-
masters and professors. Belonging as they did to the same
Semitic race as the Arabs, it was not difficult to coalesce with
them. Nor can it be in the least degree strange that out of that
mighty mass of learning, the Talmud, which was both the Treasury
and the dust-heap of the knowledge and poetry of the world,
Mahomet should find everything he wanted for his successive
revelations.
But to what elements of his teaching or of his mission shall
we ascribe his wondrous success 1 The sword 1 But what gave
the sword its sharpness and the arm of the warrior its strength 1
The readiness of men to embrace imposture 1 Imposture often
wins success, but that which is false never endures. We may


need the imposture theory to account for some strange events in
the history of Islam, but it is powerless to account for it as a
whole. Will the character of Mahomet himself suffice 1 So Car-
lyle seems to think, who has given the Arabian conqueror an
ample niche in his temple of hero-worship. But even this is not
enough. I believe he was a great man, and that his character will
stand comparison (admitting the weakness of his later days) with
that of the noblest who have risen to sovereign power in the East.
But his noble career and the history of Islam shows that he
abhorred the worship and reverence of his fellows. During the
progress of his arms, one Moseilama became a rival prophet and
warrior. Moseilama wrote to him: “ Erom Moseilama, the
apostle of God, to Mahomet, the apostle of God. Now let the
earth be half mine and half thine.” Mahomet replied : “ From
Mahomet the apostle of God, to Moseilama, the liar. The earth
is God’s; he giveth it for inheritance to such of His servants as
he pleaseth, and the happy issue shall attend those that fear
Him.” I consider that the marvellous and enduring success of
Mohammedanism is to be attributed in chief to two things. He
proclaimed the unity of God, the Creator and Sovereign of the
universe, as against the flagrant idolatries that prevailed in the
East. “ God is. God is great.” The belief was a potent spell.
It nerved the hearts and strengthened the arras of bis followers.
His enemies had no such faith on their side. When they heard
the inspiring shout “Allah Akbar —God is great ” lifted up amid
the din of battle, they turned and fled. But we may also venture
to believe that the Most High God, who chooseth whom He will,,
called and appointed Mahomet to be the minister of His righteous
judgments upon the guilty nations of the world. Into what a
terrible condition the world was drifting history amply testifies.
The idolatries of India and Persia were becoming more and more
corrupt and devilish. The Christian Greeks at Constantinople
were sinking into effeminacy and debauchery, and the Christian
Visigoths of Spain were little better. The Roman Church, which
should have been the witness for God upon the earth, had become
morally corrupt and spiritually false. The very notion of a
Supreme and Sovereign Ruler was lost amid the jargon of the
schools, the worship of images, and the intrigues and profligacy of
the Papal court. These warriors of the Crescent were the scourge
of the guilty. Kings and princes, bishops and popes, trembled
and turned pale, and some of them repented and turned to the
Lord whom they had forsaken, when the hosts of the Saracens
ravaged the fields of Spain and the armies of the Turks besieged
and sacked Constantinople, and Christendom itself was on the
verge of ruin. I speak now of the earlier conquests of the
Mohammedan armies, when the prophet-voice spake clear and
loud. In the centuries that followed the establishment of the
Ottoman power, everything was changed. The Turk brought in a
worse despotism, and more moral corruption than those which he


had displaced. The government of the Turk in Roumania, Bul-
garia, and Bosnia has been “ simply an act of burglary prolonged
for centuries.” It needs another Mahomet to act as the scourge of
of God on those wretched imbeciles who pretend, amid the
infamies of their seraglioes at Constantinople to rule over the
empire of Islam. Of the future how shall we speak ! lhat there
is a power in the system yet as a spiritual force, none can deny.
Thousands of converts are being won yearly in India, and tens of
thousands in Africa. Advances are being made in the Malay
Archipelago, in China, in Tartary. It seems probable that at no
distant date the millions of Equatorial Africa, down even to the
Cadres under British rule in the South, will be won over to the
religion of the Koran. If it should be so, there will be little
to regret. Islamism is better than the degrading Fetichism of
I have little time left for extracts from the Bible of Mahomet.
In the second chapter you may read ; “Verily righteou ness is 1 is
who believes in God, in the day of judgment, in the in the
book and the prophets, who bestows his wealth for Gcd’s sake
upon kindred, and orphans, and the poor, and the homeless, and
all those who ask, and also upon delivering the captives. He who
is steadfast in prayer, giveth alma, who standeth firmly by his
covenants, who is patient in adversity, in hardship, and in times
of trial. These are the righteous. These are the God-fearing.
What could be better in a code of moral law 1 In the ninety-first
chapter you may read ; “ By the sun and its rising brightness ] by
the moon when she followeth him ; by the day, when it showeth
its splendour; by the night, when it covereth him with darkness ;
by the heaven, and Him who built it; by the earth and Him who
spread it forth ; by the soul, and Him who completely formed it,
and inspired into the same the faculty of distinguishing and power
of choosing wickedness and piety : now is he who hath purified
the same, happy ; but he who hath corrupted the same, miserable.
What still could be better! But the chapter continues—l will
quote the whole of it. Mahomet refers to a she-camel which God
had miraculously sent, produced with h. r foal out of a rock.
“Thamud accused their prophet Saleh ot imposture, through the
excess of their wickedness, when the wrench among them was sent
to slay the camel, and the apostle of G(d said unto them, Let
alone the camel of the Lord and hinder not her drinking. But
they charged him with imposture, and slew her. Wherefore their
Lord destroyed them for their crime, and made their punishment
equal unto them all, and he feareth not the issue thereof.” What
a fall after so noble an exordium. Listen again. “io God
belongeth the east and the west, therefore whithersoever ye turn
to pray there is the face of God ; for God is omnipresent and
omniscient. And when He decreeth a thing, He only saith unto
it Be and it is.” What more true, and more full of a reverent
piety! But hearken to this ; ‘‘On that day the heaven shall be


shaken and shall reel, and the mountains shall walk: and pass
away. On that day woe be unto those who accused God’s apostles
of imposture. . . On that day shall they be driven and thrust
into the fire of hell, and it shall be said unto them, This is the
fire which ye denied as a fiction, . . enter the same to be
scorched. But the pious shall dwell amidst gardens and pleasures,
. . and it shall be said unto them, Eat and drink with easy
digestion, leaning on couches, espoused unto virgins having large
Mack eyes. And we will give unto them fruits in abundance, and
flesh of the kinds they shall desire,” and so on and so on, through
many a maze of doctrine, with many an appeal to the baser
appetites of man. If this be the heaven of the faithful, who can
wonder at their debaucheries on earth.
And now in conclusion, let me ask you what there is in the
Koran worth the having, that you do not get in grander measure
in our own Book of God. Is it the proclamation of a living God,
acting, speaking, ruling? See how throughout the Old Testament,
Jehovah is the personal ruler and teacher of the sons of men—
king in Jeshurun, Lord of the World? Those ancient Jewish
books are without meaning, save as they show us the God of
history. Is it the belief that God has made known His will in a
book, has delivered His law in human words which may be read ?
How do we Christians appeal to the Law and the Testimony, as
against changing philosophies and traditional teachings—to Moses
and the Prophets, to the record of the Master’s life. Is it the
conviction, which in the earlier period of Islam was so mighty a
power, that the doing of God’s will was entrusted to men, as the
proclaimers of His law, and the ministers of his justice ? You
cannot understand the history of the Jews, if you do not think of
them as the sword of God to rid the earth of the wicked Canaan-
ites, who were poisoning the life of Western Asia. And you will
grievously misinterpret the New Testament if you do not read in
it the commission of our King delivered to each soldier of His
army, “Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to
every creature.” We fight, not as the Arabs fought under the
banner of the Crescent, but as they should fight who are under
the banner of the cross. “We fight, not against flesh and blood,
but against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiri-
tual wickedness in high places,”
May He who claims our a legiance find us faidiful even unto
death.


No. S—OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
Osb of the Jewish Rabbis said: “ Ten measures of wisdom
•came into the world ; the law of Israel received nine measures,
and the balance of the world one.” By the law he meant not
-only the words of divine wisdom contained in the Old Testament
Scriptures, but that strange encyclopedia of learning (religious
and secular) upon which the best spirits of his nation had con-
centrated their energies for a 1000 years. To-night I am to
lecture on the Talmud, the second Bible of the Jews.
But let us think for a moment of the singular people to
whom this literature belongs. If the human race is calculated
at 1,200,000,000, only 6,000,000 of these are Jews. That is a
fact not easily explained by laws of population. In the ear ler
years of their history they were in bondage, but though cruel y
and grievously oppressed and maltreated, they increased during
four centuries so greatly that the Pharoahs were troubled es
by their very fecundity they should become a menace to the
Egyptian Empire. For eighteen centuries they have been a
nation “scattered and peeled.” But they have proved their
adaptability to every climate under Heaven, and in many
■countries they have had opportunities of increase and advance-
ment, such as hardly any single race has enjoyed. And yet
here they are to-day but a handful of people, all told. .
years the Anglo-Saxon race has advanced from say a million,
to nearly a hundred millions. In 2000 years this leading
Semitic race has not only not increased, but has sensibly
•diminished. Their importance, however, as a factor in the
world’s civilisation, is not to be measured by their numbers.
They are a peculiar people still, with high gifts, and a moral
fibre of wondrous strength and tenacity. Beaten down every-
where bv the powers that be, reduced to galling servitude,
forced into the meanest and most degrading occupations by the
sovereigns and statesmen of Christendom, deprived by e
■cruelty of the people of the ordinary chances of secular
advancement, they have yet won for themselves everywhere
position and wealth. Perhaps we ought to speak with bated
breath when we think of our own fear of the Chinese, but
&now myself of few things more craven in modern history than


the anti-Semitic agitation now going on upon the continent of
Europe. I say nothing of the outbursts of murderous rage in
Bussia. The Muscovite is a barbarian with a thin varnish of
civilisation and religion. But it makes me blush for my own
kin, when I read of a noble and cultured nation like the
Germans degrading themselves by a crusade against the Jews.
What if the Semites have outstripped the Teutons in the
race for wealth ! The Hebrew nation, whenever free to expand
itself upon the great concerns of human life, has not been
content with money making by money lending. The most
sacred genius and the highest authority among them in their
free days forbade them to make gain by usury. Even interest
was not to be charged upon money lent, if it were lent to one of
their brethren. The truth is, and we Christians ought to-
remember it in our sneers against the modern Hebrew usurer,
that the Jews were driven by cruel and wicked enactments to
make their living by lending money. Unthrift, indolence and
profligacy, as well as the common necessities of commerce,,
imperatively in every age demand money for use or abuse.
Given a people thrifty, industrious and virtuous, you may debar
them from engaging in common and honourable pursuits, but
you cannot stop them from lending what they have made and
saved, for others must and will have it. And if the hatred of
the borrower diminishes the security, it is by the operation of a
natural law that lenders become usurers, and it is by the
operation of another that national habits get fixed. If the
sacred fire of heroism and learning burns less brightly in the
soul of the modern Jew than in the soul of his noble ancestor,
it is because the flame has been smothered by long centuries of
oppression. But the fire smoulders with intense heat, ready to
burst into a blaze. Lord Shaftesbury said a few months since,
that a friend of his enquired of a leading German what was tbo
cause of the bitter feeling against the Jews, and he got this
reply: “These Jews, if they go into commerce become the
first merchants ; if they go into the banking line they become
the first bankers; if they go into law they become the first
lawyers ; if they go into literature they beat us all. And I tell
you, sir, we won’t stand it.”
But, without accepting this as a true or a sufficient reason,
how shall we account for the terrible animosity of the Christian
against the Jew ? The sacred books of the Jews are our sacred
books. The history of Judaism is the earlier history of
Christianity. Abraham and Moses, David and Isaiah, were Jews.
The Divine founder of our religion was of the tribe of Judah.
He taught in Jerusalem. He worshipped in the temple. If
certain fanatics of His own countrymen put Him to death,
there were others who laid down life in His service. His
earliest disciples were Jews. The first Christian church was
composed of Jews. The effusion of the Spirit on the day of


Pentecost was upon Jews gathered out of every nation. When
the apostles went forth on their missionary journeys they
preached in Jewish synagogues. So close was the union
between Christianity and Judaism that for many years after ohr
Lord’s death, it seemed as though the religion of Christ would
be simply the religion of Moses reformed and enlarged. The
Old and the New Testaments alike teach the unity of the Divine
existence, and the mystery of a plurality in that unity. e y
both present the character of God as holy, just, and good. They
both speak of man as having broken the law of the Supreme,
and of the necessity of a mediator between the most High and
His sinning creatures. It was a Jew who said to a Jew : “We
have found Him of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did
write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” I cannot under-
stand the hatred betsveen the Christian and the Jew, but I am
inclined to regard it as one of those race hatreds which have
played so fearful a part in history, like those (e.g.) which have
given birth of late to the murders and massacres in Ireland and
Egypt, Celt against Saxon, Semitic against Aryan. The
Christian faith rejected by the Semitic race in Asia, Passed
over into Europe, and was accepted by the Aryan race. Would
that, in this case at all events, the old antagonism between east
and west had never been displayed, that the Jew had been con-
tent to receive the greatest of the prophets as his long expected
Messiah, and Jew and Gentile had been joined together in one
great religious confederation, under the world’s true Prince.
Let us to-night freely acknowledge our indebtedness to the
great Hebrew nation. No people in the world owes more to
them than the English. Their ancient literature has become
interwoven with our own. Their laws have exercised a strong
influence on our politics. Our corporate order and almost
instinctive obedience to recognised law have been derived in no
small degree from the temper and the ordinances of Israel. lor
more than twelve centuries the sacred thought of their sacred
books has been moulding the life of our sages, the character of
our saints, and the temper of the people at large.
My concern to-night is not with that portion of their
literature which we accept, as they do, as the product of special
divine inspiration, yet we cannot leave out of sight those
wonderful books of the Old Testament. A German critic has
expressed his opinion that “Hebrew literature, independently
of the fact that it contains the record of divine revelation,
possesses a peculiar scientific interest, that it surpasses in
antiquity, originality, poetic strength and religious importance,
that of any other nation before the Christian era. No doubt
some of our foremokt literati in their consuming zeal tor the
Greek and Roman classics, have no more respect for Hebrew
learning than they have for the science of to-day. Rut the
historian knows that long before the Ethics ot Aristotle, and the


Phaedo of Plato, and the Antigone of Sophocles, and even before
the Iliad of Homer, a literature existed which taught the purest
morality, which contained the loftiest poetry, which laid down
the basis of an immutable legislation, and which proclaimed to
the world the sublimest truth of theology. But outside of this
sacred literature, connected with it, professedly founded upon
it, there is another, strange and chaotic, on which for 2000 years
the highest intelligence and the deepest affection of the people
have been cast. I have called the Talmud the second Bible of
the Jews. It would be possible from the writings of some of
their great masters to assign to it even a higher position and
authority. Emanuel Deutsch (e.g.), the most eloquent modern
expounder of Hebrew learning, in speaking of the two great
divisions of the Talmud, says : “ The Mishna, from Shanah,
to learn, to repeat, has been of old translated Deuterosis, second
law. But this language, correct as it seems literally, is incor-
rect in the first instance. It simply means * learning,’ like
Gemara, which besides indicates complement to the Mishna, —
itself a complement to the Mosaic code, but in such a manner
that in developing and enlarging it supersedes it.” We have,
in fact, in the religious history of the Jews, the same process
going on, which has taken place in other religious systems. As
I have before pointed out in these lectures, we find that the
earlier writings of all the faiths have been supplemented by the
commentaries of teachers, and the ritual of priests. It was
scarcely intended in any of them that these subsequent writings
should do more than explain or amplify the sacred text. But
such is the proneness of the human mind to escape from any
settled rule of duty, that it seems almost glad to lose itself in
casuistry, and such is its tendency to rest in the outward and
material, that it welcomes any teachings that put ordinances in
the place of spiritual obedience. Just as in the Papacy of
to-day we have the dogmatic decisions of Popes and councils,
as interpreted by learned experts, taking the place of the simple
teachings of Christ and His apostles, so we have in the Judaism
of to-day the commentaries of a thousand Rabbis, to explain or
explain away the writings of Moses and the prophets. The
Jews (though there are noble exceptions) place the Talmud
above the inspired law. As in our Lord’s time, so now, they
“ make the word of God of none effect through their traditions.’*
One of their Rabbis said: “ The Biblical text is like water, and
the Mishna like wine, but the six orders like aromatic wine.”
Another said: “ The words of the Scribes are lovely above the
words of the law, for the words of the law are weighty and
light, but the words of the Scribes are all weighty.” We will
not indeed cast scorn upon the labours of those learned men
who commenced 450 years before Christ their voluminous
comments on their ancient Scriptures. They collected
and authenticated the canonical books which we receive;


they published them by causing many copies to be made ;
they expounded them so that they should be generally under-
stood ; they founded congregations, assemblies, synagogues,
for the reading and inculcation of the word of God; they
acted during long centuries as the custodians and librarians
of the Old Testament. They did all this even while producing
the second law, which has come almost to supersede the first.
How strange, but how just it would be if we Christians were
doing for the Jews what they did for us ; if in rejecting, as we
do, all the Talmudic authority, while cleaving with the sound
critical spirit to their ancient sacred books, we should be pre-
serving for them in their nobler future the oracles of God, free
from the interpretations of men. “Even to this day the veil
is upon their heart; nevertheless, when it shall turn to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away.”
But what is this Talmud so fondly venerated by the Jewish
people. It is more like an encyclopoedia than anything else,
but an encyclopoedia without order or method, without beginning
or end, without alphabetical or any other kind of arrangement,
a book of the sayings of wise men about everything thinkable
in heaven and earth. For a thousand years the Talmud was
the common receptacle of the thoughts of the old world
concerning science and philosophy, and legislation and religion,
as well as of the crudities and extravagance, and puerility of
the Eastern mind. Prose and poetry, fact and fancy, history
and romance, immutable law and daring speculation, every-
thing as it was conceived and thought, and spoken and written,,
was tumbled in pell-mell, until, as the centuries went by, the
most learned and the most industrious student stood aghast at
the confusion which nothing could reduce to order. Hebrew
literature, for 500 years before, and 500 years after Christ, was
as when, in oriental lands, a tract of country which had been
rescued from primitive jungle, and planted with nobles trees
and useful plants and flowers of beauty gathered from every
clime, has again been left to itself, until, from the fat alluvial
soil the primeval forest has again sprung up unchecked with all
its old power. See now from the mingling of nature and
cultivation, what foliage, what floral beauty, what fruits not yet
spoiled, what noisome weeds too, and plants of poisonous power.
Some, I believe, have called the Talmud a “ continent of mud.”
It was such a continent of mud as you may find in the delta of
the Amazon—mud alluvial, rich with every element of fertility,
bearing within it the seeds of all rare and precious and useless
vegetation, seeds which have sprung up and grown with such
luxuriance that the continent is covered by tropic forests, with
all manner of stately trees and underwood of rarest plants,
and open glades of grass and flowers, where birds of rich
plumage, and butterflies of gorgeous colour flit and play.
You remember how, as recorded in the Book of Nehemiah,.


the Jewish people that had returned from the captivity in
Babylon, gathered in one of the ruined streets of Jerusalem,
and how Ezra the priest, with some five and twenty of the
elder men, read in the Book of the Law of God distinctly, and
gave the sense and caused the people to understand the reading.
There and then was the commencement of the Talmud. This
comment upon the law became a passion. Schools and colleges
were founded. The sayings of wise and learned Rabbis were
eagerly treasured up in the memory of docile students, and
committed to writing by men specially appointed. The nation
had all at once become enthusiasts in literature, and full of
reverence for the law. It is not easy to account for it. They
had gone down to their captivity in Babylon a mere mob, with
little reverence for anything human or divine. They returned
after sixty or seventy years an orderly, god-fearing people.
Something they won from the noble religion of Zoroaster, and
something from the rigid rule of the Chaldees and the Persians,
and something, too, from the bitter sorrow which teaches
highest and divinest truth. But we may say, I think, that it
was the nation returning to its true and better self, revealing
once more, though in a different direction, those high qualities
which had gained for them such distinction under David and
Solomon. For some 900 years or more after this the labours of
the Rabbis were continuously carried on, and the students
ceased not from their studies. They passed through terrible
national vicissitudes. Rabbis were martyred, schools razed to
the ground, but the study of the law did not cease. Persecuted
in one city they fled to another. New schools sprung up as if
by magic. Suppressed among the mountains of Lebanon, they
found a new home, and a more vigorous life in the valley of the
Euphrates, and by the rivers of Spain. With their last breath,
the dying masters appointed and ordained their successors.
The law flowed on, and was perpetuated in the face of a
1000 deaths. There never was such an instance of national
devotion to a national faith. No influence from without changed
them, though this strange law of theirs absorbed into itself the
science and philosophy of no small part of the religious
teachings of the world. The cul ure of Greece and the legisla-
tion of Rome, the asceticism o" India, the demonology of
Persia, the thaumaturgy of Egypt, all failed to produce
permanent Jewish heresies; and yet all these forms of
intellectual life penetrated and coloured Jewish thought. John
the Baptist was welcomed with wild enthusiasm, and tens of
thousands were baptised of him ia Jordan, confessing their sins,
but they suffered him to languish in person, and entered no
protest when a harlot compassed his death The Messiah came,
speaking as never man spake, and proclaiming His divine
origin by superhuman works; but though they made for him a
triumphant entry into Jerusalem with cries of “Hosanna to the


Son of David,” they crucified him with the savage imprecation,
“ His blood be on us and on our children.” Nor did they
change when the might of Borne was arrayed against them in
their last bitter struggle for national life and faith. They saw
the legions camped on Olivet, their walls beaten down, their
temple consumed by fire, and a million and a half of their
people perish by siege and battle. But still the schools, met, the
Rabbis expounded, and the Sanhedrim delivered its judgments.
And so for nearly five centuries beyond Christ in Egypt and
Africa, in Asia Minor and Babylonia, in Greece, and Italy and
Spain, the law went on expanding its huge volume until at
last about a.d. 490, the canon was completed through the
forced closing of the schools, and the Talmud, pretty much as
it is to-day, took its place among the great literatures of the
world.
But let no one imagine that this law, which has been for
more than 2000 years the centre of Jewish thought, and the
object of their profoundest veneration, is very closely related to
the law delivered on Sinia, and embodied in the later books of
Pentateuch. If consists of two parts, the Mishna and Gemara.
The Mishna is a commentary on that early law, and the Gemara
is a commentary on the Mishna, but both of them have little
more connection with the original than the sermon of the
preacher who deduced the whole system of modern astronomy
and geology from the first verse of the Bible. The law of the
Talmud means all and every kind of learning, mathematics and
astronomy, botany and physiology, geography and history,
sanitary science and medicine, language and logic and even
astrology and magic. The Rabbinical code is not the Mosaic
code. The Mosaic code was for a nation of free men, exclusive
if you like, but free. The Rabbinical code is for a nation
content to receive implicitly the teaching of the past, to bow to
the dictation of men who prescribed ceremonials for the petty
details of life from the cradle to the grave. The pious Jew who
submits to the authority of the Talmud, is told what he must
eat and drink and avoid, he is required to wear phylacteries on
head and arm and hand when he offers his morning prayers, to
array himself in a Talith with a riband of blue, and fringes with
sacred threads and knots and twists, to fasten a parchment
writing of twenty-two lines taken from Scripture on every door
of his house, and to render obedience to 613 precepts which are
supposed to contain the essence of the law, the greater number
of which relate to a condition of society which has utterly
passed away. But the refinements and subtleties, and minute
ceremonial observances laid down by the Rabbis as binding
upon the true Israelite, constitute a burden that neither they
nor their fathers have been able to bear. Let us reverence
them for keeping the Sabbath, but how can we help smiling at
the Rabbinical questions gravely discussed and answered in the


Talmud. “ Whether it is right to kill a flea on the Sabbath, or
to eat a new laid egg ? ” The truth is that the Talmudic law is
honoured, but not obeyed. Especially among the English Jews
there is an increasing desire to be delivered from its galling
yoke. We are justified in entertaining hopes that for them a
good time is coming, a day of release, a year of jubilee, such as
never yet has been known in the history of their people. Our
Bible Society has done good work in disseminating among them
copies of the Hebrew Scriptures, Many forsake the study of
the Talmud for the study of the sacred text. The ritual of the
synagogue is less imperious in its demands. Preaching in the
vernacular has been joined to public worship. I may add, too,,
that some of the most learned Eabbis, Marks and Adler and
others, have spoken with reverence of Christ as one of their
prophets, and as a true reformer and leader of men. About the
future of the Jews as a nation I speak with diffidence. I have
no hopes of their restoration to their own land, nor do I think
they wish it. The prophecies of their return I have learnt to
interpret less with a material than a spiritual meaning. As for
the identification of the lost ten tribes with the Anglo-Saxons,
and the transfer bodily of the English people to the Semitic
race, I confess that I have not sufficient humility for this
portentous step. On the whole I prefer, in accordance with
sound ethnological and linguistic teachings to remain myself in
connection with the Aryan race. Indeed I am inclined ta
think, if I must express an opinion, that the Aryan race is
more fitted to work out God’s larger purposes in the world than
the Semitic race. Thera is progress in the administration of
the Empire of God, not only in the unfolding of His plan, but
in the choice of His agents. Let the Jews claim as they may to
be the chosen people of the past. The Anglo-Saxons of the
British Empire and the American republic, and let us add the
Teutons of Germany, so nearly, so closely related, with their
colonies girdling the world, and their ships whitening every sea,,
and their great men the leaders of the world’s thought and
action, and their religious men the witnesses for God’s truth and
righteousness in every land—these, the foremost families of the
Aryan race, are the chosen people of the present to bring in that
better future, when the kingdoms of this world shall become the
kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ.
In my next lecture, I shall take you to the Talmud itself.


I- complete to-night ray sketch of the Talmud as the second
Jewish Bible. In my last lecture I described to you the origin of
that wonderful book. I said that it commenced its existence in
the times of Ezra and Nehemiah, and that its origin might be
traced to the great upheaval of religious thought and feeling
immediately after the return of the Jews from their captivity in
Babylon. But I want to make more clear to you, if I can, the
way in which the Talmud began its strange history, and how and
why it is that it has taken such a mighty hold upon the Hebrew
nation. And I want to do this, not only on account of the
exceeding interest there is in the book itself as a noble specimen
of national religious literature, but because I see in the history of
its origin and development, the same process that has been going
on in connection with all the great religions of the world.
Go back with me to the times of Moses, i.e., 1000 years before
the times of Ezra. An Arab tribe from the fertile slopes of
Lebanon, some centuries earlier than this, had migrated into the
yet more fertile Delta of the Nile (the very land where Arabi Bey
is now marshalling his soldiers to oppose the advance of the
British). There they have increased and multiplied, until now
with Moses as a leader among them, they are strong enough to
break out from the tyranny of the kings of Egypt, and found for
themselves a new home. They choose, under Divine guidance,
the country of Palestine, where of old the chieftains of their tribe
had pastured their flocks. It was a perilous thing to do, but they
did it. On their way, after crossing the shallow waters of the
Gulf of Suez, at the head of the Bed Sea, just where you enter
the Suez Canal from the south, they turned into the great desert
of Midian, and were encamped for a while among the granite
peaks of Sinai. There, as both Jews and Christians believe, the
man Moses received special communications from God on behalf of
his people. A law was delivered containing precepts of morality
suitable for men of all lands, and a code of ritual and ceremonial
precepts intended for the Jews only. This law is enshrined (some
parts of it written by more than one hand) in the books of Exodus,
Numbers, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. Such as it is, is
accepted as the teaching of Moses, whom God inspired to receive
and communicate His truth, and is regarded by the Jews as their
immutable legislation, Divinely given, the law, the written law.
But no process has yet been discovered of embodying thought in
words so clear and definite, that all who receive the woids receive
also the thought. If you go into one of our law courts when some
celebrated case is proceeding, and some particular clause of some
particular statute is under discussion, you will find different, per-
haps contradictory, interpretations given by the opposing lawyers.
Indeed, to such an extent is this difficulty felt, that when a law
has been long in existence, the very Judge who is appointed to
interpret and administer the law is bound more by precedents


already established, i.e., by interpretations made and decisions
given by previous judges, than he is by his own independent views
of the meaning of the law. A necessary method of procedure,
lawyers tell us, but it certainly carries with it that glorious un-
certainty, and—shall 1 say it I— that irremediable confusion for
which the English law is famous.
As soon as the law of Moses was given it had to be ad-
ministered. Judges were appointed and tribunals set up. In the
councils held among the tents of the desert, and in those that
met within the gates when cities had been built, there were
decisions given and verdicts pronounced. These decisions were
recorded. Just as in the English law courts, they became pre-
cedents for subsequent Judges, and so were appealed to at once as
of some authority. There came a time, when, through their
venerable age as handed from the fathers, they came to be regarded
as of binding authority. At a further stage they came to be
looked upon as ot Divine authority. Jehovah, it was affirmed,
gave to Moses a vast system of detailed law, not inscribed on the
tables of stone, nor written in the code delivered to the people,
but communicated by him to the elders orally, so as to guide them
in all the difficult matters that should come before them in the
administration of justice. It is the very same kind of theory that
you will find in the Papacy. The dogmatic decisions of popes are
given from that inexhaustible treasury of truth, the tradition oi
the Church. As John Henry Newman said, when speaking oi the
infallibility of the pope,—“ I believe in the whole revealed dogma
as taught by the apostles, as committed by the apostles to the
Church, and as declared by the Church to me.” Scripture and
tradition, the Bible and the Talmud, the Ultramontane Roman
Catholic and the Rabbinical Jew. It is the same temper, the same
weakness, the same credulous belief. The analogy might be pur-
sued further. In Roman Catholic theology ot the wider sort you
must include the writings of the fathers, many ot which are
puerile, and the lives of the saints, which contain the most
wonderful and most incredible stories. In the Talmud you have
tales and fables, legends and romances, all of which are received
by the devout Jews as parts of a Divine message to men. Not
that all of them receive the Talmud in its entirety. Rabbi
Marks, e.g., I have been given to understand, gives it up alto-
gether as a product of inspiration. Others cleave to the legal
portion and repudiate the legendary. One of the earlier rabbis,
Jehoshua Ben Levi, said of the latter : “He who writes it down
will have no part in the world to come ; he who explains it will
be scorched.” And a great Jewish teacher of modern times, the
late Professor Hurwitz, freely admits that “ the Talmud contains
many things which every Jew must sincerely wish had never
appeared there. Some of these are objectionable per se , other's
may be explained, but without explanation are calculated to pro-
duce false and erroneous impressions.” How could it be other-
wise, when for a thousand years there was pouring into this


great reservoir of national literature ten thousand streams of
human knowledge,—clear and turbid, pure and polluted, from
every land beneath the sun, —India and Egypt, Parthia and
Arabia, Syria and Phoenicia, Greece and Rome.
The Talmud, then, consists of two distinct parts —the one
from the brain, the other from the heart, the one occupied with
legal disquisitions on the laws of Moses, the other with illustra-
tions of history, and prophecy, and social life, the one called
Halachah—the Law, the other Haggadah —Legend. I cannot
present you to-night with specimens of the profundity of the
Halachah, for I should simply weary you, or of the extravagance
of the Haggadah, for perhaps I should disgust you. Bat I will
•endeavour to give you such extracts from both as may show you
in some measure what learning, and what poetry, and what deep
religious feeling there is in the Talmud.
The being and power of God is most strikingly set forth in
the well-known apologue concerning Abraham. “ From his 'early
years Abraham was a lover of the Lord. God had granted him a
wise heart, ready to comprehend and understand the majesty of
the Eternal and the vanity of idolatry. When quite a child,
beholding the brilliant splendour of the noon-day sun, he said,
“ Surely this brilliant luminary must be a god; to him will I
render worship.” And he worshipped the sun and prayed to it.
But as the day lengthened the brightness faded, and the radiance
was lost in the clouds of night. And as the twilight deepened,
the youth ceased his prayers. “ No,” said he, “ this cannot be a
god. Where, then, can I find the Creator who made the heavens
and the earth V ’ But as the sun disappeared the moon arose.
And when Abram saw it shining in the heavens, surrounded by
its myriads of stars, he said, “ Perhaps these are the gods who
have created all things.” And he uttered his prayers to them.
But when the morning dawned and the stars paled, and the moon
faded into silvery whiteness and was lost in the x'etux’ning glory of
the sun, Abram knew God, and said, “There is a higher Power,
a Supreme Being, and these luminaries are but His servants, the
work of His hands.” From that day, even unto the day of his
death, Abram knew the Lord, and walked in all His ways.” The
Talmud goes on to relate how in righteous anger he seized an iron
implement and destroyed all the idols in his father’s house. For
this he was summoned before Nimrod the king, who commanded
him to be bound hand and foot, and cast into a fiery furnace.
But he walked uninjured through the flames, “and the king
called to Abram, Servant of the God of heaven, come forth from
the fire and stand before me.” And when the king saw that not
even a hair of Abram’s head was singed by the flame, he expressed
wonder and amazement. And the princes of the king bowed
before him, but he said bow not to me, but to the great God of the
universe, who hath created you. He is powerful to deliver from
-death.” Although the influence of Persian doctrines about angels


is very perceptible in the Talmud, the Rabbis denied what the
Magi affirmed—that the angels co-operated with God in the work
of creation. There were no angels at first, it was said, “ lest men
might say Michael spanned out the firmament on the south, and
Gabriel on the north.” Yet they were already in existence when
man was created.
In my lecture on the Koran, I pointed out that Mohammed
derived a great part of that strange book from the Talmud, its
theology and morals, its gorgeous dreams and its minute and weari-
some details of social and family duties. Indeed, it is claimed by
learned Jews who have pushed their investigations into the litera-
ture and folk-lore of other peoples, that, the Talmud is the store-
house from which a large proportion of the history, and ethics, and
legends of prose and poetry, has been derived. One says : “ Not
only is the entire world of pious Biblical legend which Islam has
said and sung in its many tongues, to the delight of the wise and
simple, for twelve centuries, now to be found either in embryo or
fully developed in the Haggadah, but much that is familiar to us-
in the circles of mediaeval ages, in Dante, in Cervantes, in Milton*
in Bunyan, has, consciously or unconsciously, flowed out of this-
wondrous realm,” I dare say it will be a new thought to most of
you, that the gorgeous dreams of Paradise Lost and the glorious
visions, and the quaint hyperboles, and the gleam and glitter of the
Pilgrim’s Progress, have been derived in great part from the
Talmud. I see no reason to doubt this, though much, perhaps*
that is common to all of them has been obtained from earlier
sources, from the thoughts and dreamings of the fathers of the
race, while yet the Semites and the Aryans dwelt together un-
divided in the uplands of Central Asia.
The existence of angels is assumed in the Old Testament.
Their powres and functions, however, are only hinted at. But
through the teaching of the Rabbis the Jews have become-
familiarized with the whole host of angels and demons. Seven
is the number of angelic princes, ruling over vast numbers of
ministering spirits. Their office is to render ceaseless worship
to God, and to be the protectors of man. “In their first
capacity,” writes a recent commentator on the Talmud, “ they
are daily created by God’s breath out of a stream of fire that
rolls its waves under the Divine throne. As guardian angels*
two of them accompany every man, and for every new good deed
man acquires a new guardian angel, who always watches over
his steps. When the righteous dies, three hosts of angels meet
him. One says (in the words of Scripture), He shall go in
peace ; the second takes up the strain and says, Who has
walked in righteousness; and the third concludes, Let him
come in peace and rest upon his bed. If the wicked leaves the
world, three hosts of wicked angels come to meet him.” There
are a multitude of legends concerning angels in the Talmud,
some of them strikingly beautiful. Take this one. When God


was about to create man the angels gathered round His throne.
Some of them exclaimed : “ Create, 0 God, a being who shall
praise Thee from earth, even as we in heaven sing Thy glory.”
But others said : “ Hear us, Almighty King. Create no more.
The glorious harmony of the heavens will be by man disturbed,
destroyed.” Then silence fell upon the contesting hosts as the
Angel of Mercy appeared before the throne of grace on bended
knees. Sweet was the voice which said intreatingly : “ 0
Father, create Thou man. Make him Thine own noble image.
With heavenly pity will I fill his heart, with sympathy towards
every living thing impress his being ; through him will they find
cause to praise Thee.” The Angel of Mercy ceased, and the
Angel of Peace spake with tearful eyes : “ 0 God, create him
not. Thy peace he will disturb. Blood will flow. Confusion,
horror, war will blot the earth.” And the Angel of Truth
approached, saying ; “ Cease, 0 God of truth. With man Thou
eendest falsehood to the earth.” Then all were silent, and out
of the deep quietness the Divine words came: “ Thou, 0 Truth,
shalt earth with him, and yet remain a denizen of heaven,
I twixt heaven and earth to float, connecting link between the
two.” Take, too, this one—one of many woven round the name
of Alexander the Great. He wandered to the gates of Paradise,
and knocked for entrance. “ Who knocks ?” demanded the
guardian angel. “ Alexander.” “ Who is Alexander? “ Alex-
ander ! the Alexander ! Alexander the Great, the conqueror of
the world.” “We know him not,” replied the angel; “this is
the Lord’s gate, only the righteous can enter here. Or taka
yet this about the Sabbath eve. Let me say here that our
popular ideas about the gloom and austerity of the Jewish
Sabbath do not seem to be well founded. It was a day of holy
joy and domestic gladness, a day when friends met, and rich
dresses were worn, and social festivities were indulged in,
“ When man leaves the synagogue for his home, an angel of
good and an angel of evil accompany him. If he finds the table
spread in his house, the Sabbath lamps lighted, and his wife
and children in festive garments ready to bless the holy day of
rest, then the good angel says : “ May the next Sabbath, and
all thy Sabbaths, be like this. Peace unto this dwelling,
peace.” And the angel of evil is forced to say “ Amen.” But
if the house is not ready, if no preparations have been made to
greet the Sabbath, if no heart within the dwelling has sung,
“ Come, my beloved, to meet the bride, the presence of the
Sabbath let us receive,” then the angel of evil speaks and says:
“ May all thy Sabbaths be like this,” and the weeping angel of
goodness responds, “Amen.”
There can be no doubt that the general tendency of the
Talmud was to multiply ceremonial requirements, to connect all
spiritual life with an outward form, and thus to impose upon
the pious worshipper a number of commands and restrictions


which fettered liberty at every step. There are thirty chapters,
e.g., in the Mishna, respecting measures, and household furni-
ture, and clothes, and their purifications ; four chapters on the
washing of hands ; eighteen on the cleansing of houses ; thirty-
four on the keeping of the Sabbath. The Talmud, indeed, has
exalted into high prominence a truth that we Christians need to
learn much more than w T e have, viz., that religious duty stands-
connected with the whole of life, that there is nothing too mean
or trivial to escape the notice of heaven. But then it fastened
too much attention upon modes, and methods, and outward
compliances, whereas the true, the Divine teaching fixes
thought upon the spirit, the temper and the motive with which
all things ought to be done. Cleanliness, e.g., is fitting and
necessary, but to insist on ceremonial washings, even if hands
and cups and platters are already clean, is not to honour purity.
The keeping of the Sabbath day is a Divine precept, but to be
worried about the lights, and the oil, and the food, and what
may be eaten warm, and what must be eaten cold, and what
dresses shall be worn, and what phylacteries shall be bound on
the forehead and hand, and what shall be the exact posture of
prayer,— all this is trivial, unworthy of the human spirit, and of
no account in the eyes of God. Therefore said Christ, “ I will
have mercy and not sacrifice.” “ The Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath.” But do not suppose that
the Eabbis were employed exclusively in framing laws relating
to external ordinances. Very much of their teaching is about
the highest and the most spiritual truth. Again and again some
of the nobler among them denounce the thought that outward
obedience can win the favour of heaven. Said Eabbi Simon :
“ The world stands on three pillars—law, worship, and charity.”
-Very noble are the words of the compiler of the Mishna—Eabbi
Jehudah : “ Be equally conscientious in small as in great pre-
cepts, for ye know not their individual rewards. Compute the
earthly loss sustained by the fulfilment of a law by the heavenly-
reward derived through it; and the gain derived from a trans-
gression by the punishment that is to follow it. Also con-
template three things, and ye shall not fall into sin ; know what
is above ye—an eye that seeth, an ear that heareth, and all your
works are written in a book.”
It w 7 ould be easy for me to occupy your time for many
lectures in reciting some of the noble precepts of the Talmud
concerning the conduct of life. The ethics of the Jews are very
practical, e.g., “ Men should be careful lest they cause women to
weep, for God counts their tears “ Love thy wife as thyself,
honour her more than thyself •” “ Commit a sin twice and it
will not seem to thee a crime “ Truth is heavy, therefore
few care to carry it“ Say little and do much “ First learn
and then teach ;” “ The house which opens not to the poor will
open to the physician.” It was said of Eabbi Tarphon that


though wealthy, he was not sufficiently charitable. Rabbi Akiha
said to him, “ Shall I invest some money tor thee in real estate,
in a manner which will be very profitable V Rabbi Tarphou
assented aud brought 4000 denars in gold to be so applied.
Akiba immediately distributed the same among the poor Some
time afterwards they met, and Tarphou asked Akiba where the
estate lay that he had bought for him. Akiba led his friend to
the college, and calling a little boy he told him to recite tor them
the hundred and twelfth psalm. When he reached the ninth
verse—“ He distributed, he giveth to the needy, his righteous-
ness endureth for ever,” “There,” said he, “Thy property is
with David, the king of Israel, who said, He distributed, he
giveth to the needy.” Rabbi Jochanan said : “Itis as pleasing
in God’s sight if we are kind aud hospitable to strangers as it we
rise up early to study His law, because this is putting His aw
into practice. He who is active in kindnesses towards his
fellows is forgiven his sins.” Take these precepts concerning
meekness, “ Meekness is better than sacrifice. “He w o
hardens his heart with pride, with pride softens his brains.
“ Speak pleasantly and kindly to everyone, trying to pacify
anger, seeking peace and pursuing it with your brethren and
with all the world, and by this means you will gain favour and
good understanding in the sight of God and man.” 1 need not
say that to honour one’s parents is constantly inculcated.
“ Three friends,” said the Rabbis, “ has man—God, his father,
and his mother.’” “He who honours his parents,” says God,
“ honours Me, even as though I lived among them. e&r
thy father and mother, by paying strict attention to their words
and interrupting not their speech. Be doubly careful not to
criticize or judge their arguments or controversies. Honour thy
father and thy mother by attending to their wants, giving them
to eat and to drink, put their raiment upon them, and tie their
shoes, if they are not able to perform these services for them-
selves.” It were to be wished that some Christian parents
of to-day could send their children to school to these ancient
Jewish Rabbis. The study of the law was, in past days, a
passion with the Jews. Said Rabbi Chonan ; “ The indolent
pupil says,—lt is impossible for me to study the Bible. Just
think of it; fifty chapters in Genesis, sixty-six in Isaiah, one
hundred and fifty psalms, and so on ; I cannot do it. But the
industrious student says, - I will study six chapters every day,
and so in time I shall acquire the whole.” Another said:
“ Holy Writ does not tell us that to study God’s commands
shows a good understanding, but to do them. We can learn,
however, before we can be able to perform, and he who acts
contrary through life to the teachings of the Most High had
better never have been born.” Many of the sayings about wis-
dom are full of pith and point. “The wise man is in his
smallest actions great; the fool is in his greatest actions small.


A pupil once enquired of his teacher, “ What is real wisdom ?”
The teacher answered: “To judge liberally, to think purely,
and to love thy neighbour.” Another teacher replied : “ The
greatest wisdom is to know thyself. Beware of conceit and
pride of learning. Teach thy tongue to utter, Ido not know.”
Precepts concerning worship are innumerable, some of them
trivial and common-place, but take these. One said: “We
should not hurry when we leave a place of worship.” “ This,”
said another, “is in reference to leaving, but we should cer-
tainly hasten on our way thither, as it is written, Let us know
and hasten to serve the Lord.” I should like some of you to be
scholars of that Rabbi.
After life comes death. Some of the sublimest sayings in
all the religions have reference to the solemn hour of our
departure. What is more expressive than this ? “ Man is born
with his hands clenched, he dies with his hands wide open.
Entering life, he desires to grasp everything ; leaving the world,
all that he possessed has slipped away.” The relation of this
life to the life to come is indicated by many similes. “ Life is
but a loan to man ; death is the creditor who will one day claim
it.” “It is not incumbent on thee to complete the work, but
thou must not therefore cease from it.” “ This world is like a
road-side inn, but the world to come is like the real home.”
“ Prepare thyself in the hall, that thou mayest be admitted into
the palace.” “ The good actions Avhich we do in this world take
form, and meet us in the world to come.”
About the resurrection, and the day of days, for which all
days are made, there are legends as grand and impressive as are
to be found in any literature. The departing soul beholds all
his deeds through all the years blazoned in light and graven
upon the memory in fire, even while he is subdued by the
terrors of the grave. Then comes the day of the great trumpet,
when, by the mystic power of the dew of life, the millions of the
resurrection rise and advance in rolling billows to Jerusalem,
there to appear in hosts innumerous above the Mount of Olives.
The awful form of the prophet Elijah then stands upon the
mountains of Judah, proclaiming peace and redemption to all
mankind. Three days after, the Messiah appears, with whom,
seated in royal state and attended by the chivalry of heaven,
comes the final consummation of all things, when hell and death
are swallowed up in the consuming fire.
I am conscious of having done but little justice to my
theme. But I shall have accomplished something if I have
diminished your prejudices against that ancient and noble
people whose religion is so akin to ours, and if I have shown
you that in that strange ocean of the Talmud there are isles of
beauty and grandeur, with flowers the fairest, and fruits the
richest, and a human life exactly like our own.


No. 7—OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
PAPAL DOGMAS, THE “ OYER-BIBLE ” OF ROMAN
CATHOLICISM*
I can see by the audience assembled to-night that there are
many who regard the question we are to discuss as one of vital
importance. Without any premeditation, determined solely by
a public utterance of Archbishop Vaughan, I chose for a supple-
mentary lecture to a course I have been giving on ‘‘ Other Bibles
and other Beliefs” the subject of the relation of the Roman
Catholic Church to our sacred books. Most of you, I doubt
not, have read that utterance of Dr. Vaughan s, dehvered on
laying the foundation-stone of a Bible hall. If you shared y
own impressions, you admired as usual the oratorical grace and
the forsenic skill with which he dealt with a difficult su j .
But what struck you even more, perhaps, was the happy audacity
with which he asserted claims on behalf of his Church that are
usually regarded as essentially Protestant. His object evidently
was to turn the flank of the opposing army; or like Hannibal
of old, to carry the war into the enemy s territory. As w
that general, there were alpine heights in w ay, and he
attempted to cross them, not, however by splitting the> rooks
with vinegar, but by smoothing them with oil It remains to be
seen whether he bas succeeded. If Dr. Vaughan l ® an ,
the satisfaction of the people of Sydney that the Church
which he belongs “ incessantly encourages her children to stu y
and ponder over the sacred page,” then, for them at all events,
the history of the past six centuries will have to be
I belong as you know to that section of the divided Christen
dom of our day which goes by the name of Protestant, borne
300 or 400 years ago a very large number of Christian
England and Germany considered it both right and necessa y
to separate from the Church which was at that time dom^
in Western Europe. It is not for me now to go into the whole
question of that separation. Many reasons were adduced. But
one of the chief undoubtedly was this : that the leaders and
* “ While the various forms of Protestantism humbly pore over the
ss®
made f or use.” —Da. Vaugaan, April 23id.


teachers of the Roman Church refused to allow the Scriptures
to be read by the people. This, I thought, was admitted on all
hands, both by Protestants and Roman Catholics. It formed
one of the leading grievances in the bill of indictment. It was
an alleged regulation of the Church against which those who
separated most eagerly and passionately protested. For a
revision of the Greek testament, as against the manifold errors
of the Latin vulgate, the learned Erasmus was unsparingly con-
demned by the Archbishop of York. For his translation of the
Bible into the German tongue, for the use of the German people,
Luther was bitterly censured by the Pope. The translation of
the Bible into the English tongue for the English people, by
Wycliff and Tyndale and Miles Coverdale, brought about the
English revolution against the Papacy. Said Erasmus :“ It
might be expedient that the secrets of kings should be concealed,
but the mysteries of Christ should be published. The Holy
Scriptures, translated into all languages, should be read not
only by the Scotch and Irish, but even by Turks and Saracens.
The husbandman should sing them as beholds the handle of bis
plough; the weaver repeat them as he plies ins shuttle; and
the weary traveller, halting on his journey, refresh him under
some shady tree, by these goodly narratives.” Said Wycliff:
“ Covetous clerks despise and stop Holy Writ as much as they
can, but the unlearned people cry after Holy Writ to ken it and
keep it, with great cost and peril of their life.” Said Tyndale:
“ Some say that it is impossible to translate the Scriptures into
English ; some, that it is not lawful for the lay people to have
it in their mother tongue ; some, that it would make them all
heretics, as it would, no doubt, from many things which they of
long time have falsely taught, and that is the whole cause where-
fore they forbid it.” Said Miles Coverdale: “ The Pope keepeth
the word of faith secret, lest his own decretals and decrees, his
own laws and constitutions, his own statutes and inventions,
should come to none effect.” All these, save Erasmus (and I
have my doubts of him), were opposed to Roman rule in old
England ; but they could scarcely be slandering the prelates of
the Roman Church when their very lives were in jeopardy for
translating into English the Word of God. I might give you
abundant testimony to the same effect from the other side-
When Cranmer (who died, you remember, at the stake) waa
resolved that a translation of the Bible should be published, he
asked the Bishop of London to help him, and got the following
answer : “ I marvel what my Lord of Canterbury meaneth,
that he thus abuseth the people in giving them liberty to read
the Scriptures, which doth nothing else than infect them with
heresy. I have bestowed never an hour on any portion, nor
never will; for I will never be guilty of bringing the common
people into error.” When Tyndale published his New Testa-
ment, the most vigorous efforts were made by Cardinal Wolsey


to suppress it. He commanded every one, on pain of beings
excommunicated, to bring to the Yicar-General all such books
within thirty days. Against those who imported them (for the
danger of printing them in England was too great) severe pro-
ceedings were taken. Several merchants of London were
obliged to do penance by riding with their faces to their horses
tails in Cheapside, with the books tacked on to their cloaks, and
then were compelled to burn them with their own hand. Even
Sir Thomas More, great and good man though he was, wrote
very violently against the translations. Ot the Bishop of
London of that day a story is told illustrating my point. He
was scarcely so good a man of business as the Bishops of our
times. Hearing that a very large number of Tyndale’s New
Testament had been smuggled into England, from Antwerp, ho
determined, as he said, to destroy that false and erroneous
translation. “ And so ”(I will give the quaint words in which
the story has come down to us) “ the Bishop, thinking that he
had God by the toe when, indeed, he had (as after he thought)
the devil by the fist, said, ‘ Gentle MasterPackington (Packing-
ton was the agent of the Bishop, but a secret friend of Tyndale s),
‘do your diligence and get them, and, with all my heart, I will
pay for them, whatever they cost you; and I intend surely to
destroy them all, and to burn them at Paul’s Cross.’ ” Tyndale,
it appears, was grievously in debt for the printing, and hailed
the offer most joyously. “ I shall get the money of him lor
these books for bringing myself out of debt, and the whole world
shall cry out upon the burning of God’s word. And I shall be
more studious to correct the said New Testament, and make it
better than the first. And so forward went the bargain ; the
Bishop had the books, Packington had the thanks, and Tyndale
had the money. The money to bring out a new edition larger
and more correct than the former.
It would be easy enough to bring forward a great mass of
evidence from original documents and impartial history, showing
that for centuries past access to the inspired writings has been
barred by the actual prohibition of their perusal, and by
throwing impediments in the way of translations. If you ask
me how this can be reconciled with Hr. "N aughau s statement
that the Church not only loves, cherishes, and reveres the
sacred page herself, but incessantly encourages her children to
study and ponder over it as the inspired teaching of the spirit
of Divine wisdom and everlasting truth,’ I frankly tell you that
lam unable. To me it seems that such a statement is opposed
not only to the obvious teaching of history, but to the well-
understood and admitted relation of the Church to the Book.
Proofs, indeed, are adduced that before Luther s Bible had been
dreamt of mauv editions of the Bible, in whole or in part, ha
been published for the people in the common tongue. I grant
it readily. The Scriptures had been translated more or less-


perfectly in many of the languages of Europe. But by whom
and when ? If indeed you set out with the assumption that
the history of the Koman Church is the history of the Church
of Christ, or that the early Roman Church is an exact equivalent
for the modern Papal Church, then by all means let the credit
of all the efforts to bring the Bible before the mind of the
people be assigned to those who claim them. But I appeal to
those of you who are acquainted with ecclesiastical history.
I appeal to the Roman Catholics in my audience who are
Catholics first and Roman Catholics afterwards. The question
before us is not a question of name or locality. It is a question
concerning the identity of a system, the permanence of a series
of doctrines, the continuance of a polity. For the first centuries
the Church at Rome was but one of the Churches of Christendom.
Cyprian it was, an African bishop of the third century, who
first conceived the idea of a vast hierarchy, with power over
the whole world of men. His idea was taken up by Innocent,
a Roman bishop in the early part of the fifth century. But it
was not till the eleventh century and the days of Hildebrand
that the Pope became—to use the words still employed at his
■coronation— •* King of kings and Lord of lords.” You will not
then expect me easily to assent to the claims that are implied
or advanced. I appeal to “ a Catholicity more Catholic, to an
antiquity more ancient,” than that which is the heritage of the
modern Papal Church. My contention is not that Catholic
Christendom was opposed to the spread of the Scriptures, for
Athanasius and Ambrose, and Jerome and Augustine, and Cyril
and Gregory and Chrysostom may all be cited in favour of their
common use. It is not even that the early Roman Church
denied to the people their vested rights in the Word of God, for
Gregory the Great was in favour of the open proclamation of
the truth. My charge is that the modern Papacy, dating, if
you like, from the twelfth or thirteenth century, has system-
atically opposed the free circulation of the Bible,and the study
of it by laymen. And why ? The reason is not far to seek.
Dr. Vaughan himself has given it. There is another word of
Divine teaching, addressed exclusively to the clergy, which,
without the intervention of the written Word, has communicated
to them their religioju, has told them what is the polity of the
Church, has defined their creed. You would hardly believe
this unless the greatest ecclesiastical authority of the Roman
Church in Australia had said so. But lest I should be accused
of exaggeration I will give you the very words of Archbishop
Vaughan. “ The Church came into existence before the Book.*’
“ That living voice which founded a Church before the Book
had been put together taught with the same authority as before,
after it had been put together.” “In place of the Book, which
from the necessities of the case, had she ever so much wished
it, the Church could not have placed in her children’s hands,


she taught and guided them with the living voice,—the voice of
Christ and His Apostles re-echoing down the ages till to-day,
speaking with Divine authority and witnessing to or interpreting
that sacred page which the prophet or the evangelist, as the
case might be, had penned. Here then I put my finger down
on the spot where the Catholic Church and the various forms of
Protestantism part company. Whilst the latter prayerfully and
humbly pore over the Book to gather a religion from it as well
as moral lessons, we, on the contrary, approach it with our
religion, our Church, our creed, cut and dried and made ready
for us.” I am not, of course, as conversant with Catholic
theology as Dr. Vaughan; but I think in this statement he has
gone beyond the bounds of authority to which he himself is
subject. I even venture to hazard the opinion that, if he were
to expand this thesis into a volume and were to publish it, he
would very considerably surprise the whole conclave of cardinals.
There would be some risk, I imagine, of having his book
inserted in the “ Index Expurgatorium.” Hear how different
Cardinal Newman deals with the relation of the Church and
the Book:—“ Infallibility is a supply for a need, and it does
not go beyond that need. Its object is, and its effect also, not
to enfeeble the freedom or vigour of human thought in religious
speculation, but to resist and control its extravagance. . . .
The great truths of the moral law, of natural religion, and of
apostolical faith, are both its boundary and its foundation. . .
It must ever profess to be guided by Scripture and tradition.”
Cardinal Newman evidently does not believe even in infallibility
approaching the Book with religion, church, and creed cut and
dried and made ready.
But now let me advance to the graver and more difficult
part of my subject, to which both these differing opinions will
form a fitting introduction. I have, I think, rebutted the
statement that the Roman Catholic Church in modern days has
incessantly encouraged her children to read for themselves the
Scriptures. I now proceed to discuss the actual relation of the
Papal Church to the written Word of God, and shall defend
my own statement that “ Papal dogmas are the over-Bible of the
Roman Catholic Church .” If the word “ over-Bible ” is a new
one, the meaning of it is clear enough. I intend by the whole
phrase to assert that there is a system of teaching in the Roman
Church, alleged to be Divine, which is regarded as of greater
authority than the written Word. Dr. Vaughan seeks to with-
draw it from the vulgar gaze, and surrounds it with an air of
mystery, by calling it the “ living voice,” as if to popes when
seated in the chair of St. Peter, or to (Ecumenical Councils
duly called, Divine words were uttered from out of the unseen.
But this teaching, whatever its origin, so far forth as it is em-
ployed for the edification of the Church, is contained in published
documents. It is said that the living voice was taught before the


Scriptures were written, and therefore it is superior in authority.
But all that can be left of the teaching of that voice in the first
century of Christendom, and in every century subsequent, must
have been committed to writing, in order to make it available
for instruction. Does any one conceive that it is locked up in the
breasts of priests and transmitted from age to age, like the
poems of Homer, or the theology of the Druids, so that they
have at their command, absolutely concealed from the knowledge
of the people, all the past inspired teachings of God? Of course
no one can believe this. The transmission of the teaching by
living voice must have been by means of writing or printing, by
published creeds, by published acts of council, by published
dogmatic decisions of popes. Since the last great act of the
Roman Catholic clergy, met in solemn conclave, was to declare
the past and present infallibility of the popes, I have summarised
the authoritative standards of the Church by calling them
“ Papal dogmas." These dogmas, then, committed to writing,
contained in a book or many books, I call an Over-Bible. The
one is over; the other is under. I will not venture, with Dr.
Vaughan, to exaggerate this into the notion that in the one set
of books the religion, the Church, the creed of Roman Catholics
have been defined and settled without any necessary appeal to
the other. But Ido say that by Roman Catholics generally
the Bible is regarded as subordinate to the authoritative teaching
of the clergy. What will take place, e.g., in the Bible Hall now
in process of erection ? The lecturer appointed is, I doubt not,
“ a scholar of acknowledged eminence,” and will “ expound the
truths imbedded in the sacred page.” But will he not warn the
young men who will assemble to hear him that Scripture is not
of private interpretation—that there is an infallible guide which
will determine all difficulties and settle all beliefs—that not
Scripture itself, but that other Scripture which he has made
his lifelong study, is that infallible guide ? Will he not go
even further than this and say in the course of discussion that
will arise (if discussions are permitted) that there are many
things necessary to a religious life that are not referred to in
the Old or New Testaments, but that these, too, are dealt with
and settled by the tradition of the Church ? He will quote, I
doubt not, plentifully from the Bible ; but will he say, as Paul
said to Timothy, “ The Scriptures are able to make you wise unto
salvation " Will be say, “Imitate the Bereans, and search the
Scriptures daily whether these things I tell you are so ?” He
will make many citations from the Fathers ; but will he cite
this from St. Augustine, “Ea quae manifesto posita sunt in
sacris Scripturis omnia continent quae pertinent ad fidem
moresque vivendi ?” “ Those things which are clearly laid down
in the sacred Scriptures comprehend everything relating to
faith and the conduct of life.” Ido not think he will, because
the modern Roman Church has utterly outgrown St. Paul and


Bfc. Augustine, and because his immediate ecclesiastical superior
has outgrown (so far as the Bible is concerned) even his own
■Church.
It is no strange thing in the history of religion, this
creation of a second Bible that comes at length to overshadow
the first. The earlier and simpler writings of all the faiths
have been obscured by voluminous commentaries and dogmatic
decisions. The Hindoos had a noble collection of hymns
embodying the simple and ancient Aryan worship. Their
learned men undertook to explain everything, and they ended
by creating a vast literature which entirely changed the national
faith, and which the most learned pundit of to-day fails to
comprehend. The Buddhists were content at first with the
Tripitaka, a small collection of the teachings of their master.
But an edition of their sacred canon has lately been published
oy the Emperor of China in 885 folio volumes. The Jews had
the Law and the Prophets of the Old Testament. They
paraphrased them in the Targums, and explained and illustrated
them in the Talmud, until, in the interminable jungles of
Jewish literature, the most learned rabbi is lost. The Roman
Catholic clergy tor 13 centuries have been explaining and defining
the New Testament by the wisdom of experts, the decrees of
councils, the bulls of popes, and the result is what you see to-
‘lay,—a Christianity wonderful to contemplate, a Christianity
enshrined in a thousand volumes of dogma and casuistry, a Christ-
ianity differing almost as much from that of the New Testament
as the religion of the Talmud differs from the religion of the Bible.
The great argument against the Protestant view of the
Bible and in favour of the Papal view, is that every Protestant
approaches the Bible to get his religion and his morality out of
it, whereas the Roman Catholic approaches it to illustrate and
confirm his hereditary faith. It is an argument often weakly
and sometimes wantonly made. The force of it I know is exag-
gerated in the minds of many to whom it is addressed. There
are Christians who speak as if there were no continuity in their
religion, as if there were no truly Catholic Church, as if there
was nothing for the Christian to do but to pore over his Bible
and out of his weak thinkings and strong feelings to construct his
faith, every man for himself. Instead of this, our boast is that
our Christianity has a continuous history, from Apostolic days
until now. Our charge against the modern Papal Church is
that it has broken with history, that it has again and again
introduced new doctrines, and changed the meaning of old ones,
and now at last put it into the pow'er of one man to decide
infallibly on all questions of faith and morals. The Papal
Church of to-day is not the Church of the Apostles, is not the
Church of Apostolic times, is not the Church of Athanasius and
Augustine. That Church is ours. The doctrines of Purgatory,
of human merits, of works of supererogation, of indulgences, of


transubstantiation, the praying to angels, to saints, to canonised
persons, with the use of images, statues, and a consecrated wafei,
the dogmas of the Immaculate Conception, of Papal infallibility,
and of °the duty of entire and implicit obedience to the Bishop of
Rome in the whole region of faith and morals —can you find these
in the Scriptures, in the writings of the Apostolic fathers, in the
theology of the ante-Nicene Church 1 I know but too sadly that
there is a connection between the present unlawful authority of
the Church of Rome and the past history of the Church in that
ancient Italian city. Do my fellow-countrymen of Ireland and
Scotland and England and Australia, who in politics exult in
Constitutional freedom, and would resent with scorn the least
attempt at foreign domination —do they clearly understand the
historical meaning of that rule of the Vatican over the Christian
conscience 1 The meaning is this ! That that old contjueiing lace
which sent its legions into every land, and brought every people
save our own Teutonic ancestors into subjection to the throne of
the Caesars, is issuing still from the same proud city its mandates
to the whole earth. The Roman Church grew up beneath the
throne of the tears; it entered into alliance with imperial
power ; it assumed and exerted imperial authority, until at length,
after & struggle of centuries, the other Churches yielded to its
might. This is not Christian history ; it is the history of Rome.
The boasted continuity is not the continuity of Christian life, but
of imperial power. The autocrat of modern Rome is a lineal
descendant of the tears. How the freedom-loving Englishman
can tamely submit to his spiritual tyranny is one of those inex-
plicable problems I cannot solve. That he does, even here in
Sydney, a home of freedom, the events of the last week or two
would seem to show. In order to obtain money for building
houses of God, both the Protestant Episcopal Church and the
Roman Catholic Church have resorted to means which very many
in both Churches unsparingly condemn. But while the Episcopal
Church, in solemn conclave, has purged itself of complicity with
these unchristian methods, what voice has been raised against
them in the Roman Church % What voice dares to make itself
heard 1 The spell of that ancient tyranny is upon the minds of
those who ought to be free.
There is a further extension of this argument which 1
ought not, and must not, pass by. We are told of “ the abuses
and contradictions of which promiscuous Scripture-reading has
been the prolific parent,” and hence of “the violent contrast
and everlasting dislocation,” of the “ decomposition and chaos,”
of the “hundreds of contradictory creeds” which are to be
found in Protestant Christianity. On the other hand, the Papal
Church is said to be “harmoniously united,” to form “one
sublime expression of unity,” and to join in the same creed
with an “ I believe ” that echoes unceasingly the wide world
over. That there is a wonderful unity in the Roman Catholic


Church, we must, of course, admit. The same creed is recited
in the same language, with the same forms of worship, in every
church from Labrador to New Zealand, from San Francisco to
Japan. But I may be pardoned for venturing to think, knowing
what human nature is, both in the faculties of it and in the rights
which justly belong to it, that such unity never could be secured
without a sacrifice of freedom—without giving up one of the
highest prerogatives conferred by God upon the human soul. To
me, this extenial unity of the Papal system is one of the strongest
arguments against that system. It could have been secured only
only by a long-continued exercise of spiritual despotism. I, too,
long for unity : the unity of a Catholic belief and a Catholic
morality. But I seek it not in the celebration of the same forms
of worship, and the recital of the same creed, and in obedience to
the same human authority. I seek it in the common acceptance
of certain great principles which any devout mind may see to be
contained in the Scriptures, and in the life that manifests itself in
the members of all the Christian sects, Papal and Protestant alike,
by acts of truth, and charity, and piety. But I do not believe in
the existence of this unity of genuine belief which is said to
characterise the Papal Church. Submission to a system is not
belief in the doctrines of that system. If this unity were real,
and of the true Christian order, I should expect it to be strongest
at the centre, and to show itself in loving devotion to the Chief
Bishop, the infallible teacher. Some twelve years ago I attended
high mass in the church of San Carlo Borromeo, at which Pope
Piiis IX. and some thirty cardinals were present. Along the
streets of Rome, through which the Pope’s carriage was driven,
and in the church itself, through which he was borne in state on
men’s shoulders, there was a double line of soldiers with fixed
bayonets, up to the very steps of the altar, guarding the spiritual
Father of Christendom from his own spiritual children. One of
the Papal guards told me that the Pope was in danger of his life,
not from the hands of an assassin, but from the onset of a revo-
lutionary multitude. The state of things is not much better
to-day. Will Dr. Vaughan call this, too, “ a sublime expression
of unity V ’
What loving heart here to-night is distressed and desponding
because of the conflict of opinion and the clashing of creeds among
us who believe in the Bible 1 I bid him be of good courage.
Things are better than they seem. The great principles of religion
are clearly revealed in the Old and New Testaments, and all the
Protestant Churches have seen and embraced them. Take the
leading Churches; consider well their polity and doctrine. They
differ, of course, but not in the fundamentals of religion and
morality. They differ in matters of speculation, about which
Christians may differ without danger and without “ dislocation.”
I will go yet farther, and say that the divisions and controversies
in the Church are a sign of healthy life. God has made many


men and many minds. Just as this England of ours, the stable
centre of freedom, would soon lose its much prized liberty but for
public meetings of the people, now and then a little clamorous, and
but for parties in Parliament, now and then a little contradictory,
so our liberty in Christ is preserved by a lawful conflict of
religious opinion. It will be a day of woe for Britain and for the
world if ever the English people give up their right of private
judgment and submit to an infallible teacher. And who dares to
affirm that being free we are not united 1 ? Those who take the
Bible as their rule of faith have clung to the same eternal truth
in every age. They have hated the same sins; they have shown
the same prudence; they have longed for the same perfect holi-
ness. They have sung the same hymns, they have joined in the
same prayers, united in the same Divine charities. They have
gathered round the same Christ, have been taught by the same
Spirit, and have looked forward to the same home. This is real
unity, and in accordance with our spiritual nature. It is a
thousand times better than unity in government, and discipline,
and creed. I charge it upon your consciences, my Christian
brothers—Papal and Protestant alike, to cleave to the Word of
God. It is your centre of union, your rule of faith, your charter
of liberty, and, above all, your Gospel of Christ.
“ Our little systems have their day,
They have their day and cease to be ;
They are but broken lights of Thee,
And Thou, 0 Lord, art more than they.”


No. B—OTHER BIBLES AND OTHER BELIEFS.
My lecture to-night is on the “ Greek Church.” The greater
number of you, I dare say, have but little knowledge of that
Church. You have often heard Christendom divided into three
great sections —the Roman Church, the Greek Church, the Pro-
testant Churches. With the Roman Church you are tolerably
familiar. You have heard it denounced with a good deal of
vigour, in season and out of season. Its priests and its Sisters of
Charity walk our streets. It has schools, churches, a cathedral,
and, above all, an archbishop. Indeed, you can seldom take up
one of our daily papers without reading an account of its latest
doings. Whether it is that our literary men are under the spell
of a system which has given so many subtle thinkers to Europe,
or whether they are simply doing homage to a master ol polished
rhetoric, I cannot tell, but this much is certain, thet no word of
Roman eloquence wastes itself, unprinted, upon the desert air.
We have had reason enough in the history of our country to look
a little closely into the doctrines and practices of the Papal Church.
Our very name Protestant indicates the revolt of the leading
minds of our race against an alien spiritual tyranny which for
centuries had fettered and almost destroyed our religious freedom.
Against Rome our ancestors, only three centuries ago, directed all
the force of their intellect, and passion, and piety, in the struggle
for Christian liberty. It is no wonder that their descendants look
with watchfulness, as well as curiosity, at a Church which though no
longer dominant, has abated none of her old pretensions to absolute
power. But the Greek Church! It is far away. We see
nothing of its ministers. We hear nothing of its labours. Our
history as a people has had no connection with it, either in com-
munion or in conflict. The Papal and Protestant Churches are
the product of the practical western mind. The Greek Church is
the product of the speculative eastern mind.
And yet if we were as interested as we ought to be in the
history and progress of Christian thought, if our minds and hearts
were broad enough to take account of all the provinces in the
empire of our King, we should think much more than we do of
that vast confederation of Christians which bears the name of
Greek. A hundred millions of souls belong to it. It covers a
vastly greater space on the map of Europe than that which is


ruled by Rome. It has resisted Mohammedanism in Turkey, and
has been the bulwark of Christendom in the East. Its convents
rise like fortresses in the deserts of Sinai, and amongst the moun-
tains of Lebanon, and on the sloping sides of Ararat, and by the
waters of the Nile. Its churches may be seen in stately grandeur
in Alexandria and Cairo, and the rites of its worship are celebrated
with barbaric splendour and superstition among the tribes of
Abyssinia almost as far south as the African Equator. But it is
in Europe that its chief strength lies, for Christianity, though born
and matured in the East, is essentially a Western faith. It is
dominant in the isles and the kingdom of Greece, and divides the
allegiance of European Turkey from Thessaly to Constantinople.
In the empire of Russia its power in the present and its influence
for the future reaches its greatest height. For four centuries past
its personal head has been the Emperor that rules at Moscow and
St. Petersburg.
If the present condition of the Greek Church is not without
an interest and importance of it own, that interest and importance
will be increased in your eyes if you look back on the history of
our faith. Protestantism, though in one sense the newest of the
three great Churches, is, in another (if her claims are valid), the
oldest of all. We believe that in simplicity of doctrine and of
worship we have reverted to that which prevailed in apostolic
days. But leaving Protestantism out of sight, if the controversy
is as to the relative antiquity of the Greek or the Roman Church,
the verdict of the impartial historian will be given in favour of the
Greek. Rome boasts proudly enough of her long succession of
bishops, reaching back to the times of Peter, but she is obliged to
admit that for the first three centuries of our era even Roman
Christianity was Greek. The Church established in the metro-
polis of the world was the Church of a Greek religious colony.
The Latin language was not heard in worship. The Scriptures
were read in Greek. Greek for the most part is inscribed on the
graves of the catacombs. All the earliest theological writers were
Greek. The strange fact that there was no public preaching in
Rome during the early centuries is only to be accounted for by the
fact that while the people of Rome spoke Latin, the ministers of
the Roman Church spoke Greek. Athanasius and Chrysostom
had long held Alexandria under the spell of their resistless
Grecian eloquence before Pope Leo I. preached his rude Latin
sermons to the populace of Rome.
The Emperor Constantine, who was the first Christian
emperor, transferred his court, in a.d. 330, from the Tiber to the
Bosphorus, so that almost as soon as the civilized world received
the teachings of Christ, the centre of greatest influence was
changed from Rome to Constantinople. It were a long story to
tell how the bishops of the East and the West struggled and
fought for ecclesiastical supremacy. For a long time it seemed as
if the victory were to be with the East. The first seven General


Councils—(Ecumenical, as the Romans like to call them—were
Eastern councils. Nearly all of them were held at Constantinople,
or near it. And if we are to judge by the effects produced on the
long course of Christian history, and in the enduring forms of
Christian doctrine, no Council that came after under the auspices
of Rome, from that of Constance down to the last one held in the
Cathedral of St. Peter, equalled in importance that held at Nicoea
in 325—the Council of Nice, as we usually term it. You will
readily understand the drift of my argument. I maintain that the
original Church of Rome was Creek—Creek in language, in ritual,
in doctrine, that almost as soon as it became Latin by increase of
numbers and the conversion of the Emperor, the chief ecclesiastical
power was transferred from Rome to Constantinople, that the first
seven General Councils of the Christian Church, by which
doctrines were defined and heresy beaten down, were Eastern in
spirit and in theology. It may suit the purposes of the Papacy as
we find it to-day, securely enthroned as it has now been for
centuries, to boast of having been always and everywhere the same
great ruling Church from the beginning of Christianity. But the
student of history knows better. During the first three centuries
it neither ruled, nor thought of it. During centuries more it had
but a divided sway, even over the Western mind and life. If the
rival claims of the Eastern and the Roman Church were to be
settled by antiquity, Rome would be obliged to yield the palm. If
they were to be settled by the great General Councils, which
represented the thought of the most ancient Christendom, the
Eastern Church would be still the victor. And if, which is more
to the real point, those claims are to be tested by the accordance
of their respective doctrines with the clear teachings of the New
Testament, Protestantism at least will say that the Eastern Church
is far above the Church of Rome.
Consider, now, with me some of the marked differences be-
tween the two. I will fix your attention only on those doctrines
of the Papal Church which we Protestants have repudiated as
corruptions of New Testament theology. Rome believes in Pur-
gatory. Sitting a few months ago in the Chapel of the Oratory,
at Brompton, known to us as being the chosen retreat of John
Henry Newman, and where, if anywhei’e, we might expect the
union of highest intellect with profoundest faith, I gazed sadly
enough on a picture at the left hand of the altar. It was a repre-
sentation of Purgatory. Agonised faces, clasped hands, upward
beseeching eyes, all around them burning flames. A_n angel
hovering above with a white soul, burnt clean, just rescued from
the fiery pit. High over all, with calm sorrowful face, the
Saviour of mankind, His heart spouting blood in a stream, blood
caught by an adoring angel in a cup of goM. That is the Papal
idea of Purgatory, not as you may see it in the rude daubs which
cover the outside of the little chapels in the Italian Alps, but as
you may see it in London, and in the chapel where the greatest


living intellect of the Roman Church is wont to worship. The
Greek Church is as much opposed to Purgatory as the Protestant
Church They reject the fable and the terrible abuses which have
sprung from it. Few thoughtful Christians have, I suppose, been
without dreams of some unknown process by which sinful sou s
may be purified in the coming life. There is a region of thought
wherein it is lawful to speculate, but unlawful to dogmatize, it
has ever been the shame, and even the curse, of religion, that the
dreamings of men have hardened into doctrines which others have
been forced to believe. The Greek Church, like the 10-
testant, has dreamt and speculated about Purgatory, but has not
dogmatized. , •
Rome believes in superogation and the power of granting
indulgencies from the punishment due to sin. The Greek Church
has never accepted either of these scandalous dogmas. as erl *
Christendom has never held that the excessive righteousness of
good men avails for the forgiveness of bad men. No ietzel has
ever gone about the streets of Alexandria, or Cairo, or Moscow,
offering the pardon of God for sale. .
Rome has assigned to the Virgin Mary a powerful influence
in the work of salvation, and has recently proclaimed her super-
human sanctity in the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, ihe
Greek Church regards the mother of our Lord with what we should
term extravagant veneration, but it is rather poetical and senti-
mental than practical—too abstract and indefinite for a place in
the articles of belief. . , . ~ ,
Rome has striven, almost from the beginning, to divide the
priesthood from the people, to make ministers of religion a privi-
leged and united caste, to invest them with spiritual authority
which might be used for upholding the authority of the Church.
History has shown in a thousand instances what you may read
to-day in this city, in events that are now passing, that with Rome
the Church means the clergy, and that, in defiance of the divinest
instincts of human nature, and the explicit example of the
apostolic age, the laity must have no voice in the coquet of
spiritual affairs. It is far different in the Eastern Church. There
the rights of the laity have been recognized, even more than in
the leading Protestant Churches. Holy orders are not indelible.
A priest may become a layman. The confessional, thou g h n °t
unknown, has not been employed to invade the sanctity of the soul
and the family. When the priest pronounces absolution and
remission of sins, he does not say with the Roman priest ‘‘l
absolve thee,” nor even with the Protestant minister of the
Episcopal Church, “He pardoneth and absolveth.” He says,
“ May the Lord absolve thee.” The celibacy of the clergy has not
only not been adopted, it has been continuously and solemnly
repudiated. Monasticism, it is true, has existed, and for hermits
there can be no marriage. But the clergy, the ministers of
religion, are compelled to be married. The bishops, indeed, by a


strange inconsistency, are single, but the parochial clergy must
take a wife before they are allowed to take a church. It is rightly
thought that he who knows nothing of the cares and responsi-
bilities, the joys and sorrows, of family life, is absolutely ignorant
of one of the most important departments of human nature. It is
properly considered that a celibate priest knows no more of the
true life of the family for whom he is called to administer the
solemn offices of religion, than the book botanist, who has never
cultivated a plant in his garden, or gathered a bunch of wild
flowers from the hill side, knows of plant life. In speaking of one
of the rites of the Eastern Church, a recent writer of that Church
says, “ It destroys the wall of separation that Rome has raised
between the ecclesiastic and the layman, for we are all priests of
the Most High—priests, but not pastors.” The sentence might
have come from the lips of Wycliff or Luther.
Rome has made liberty of thought and of spiritual life im-
possible by the creation of a Supreme Pontiff, a religious dictator,
whom she has quite recently endowed with the attribute of
infallibility. But spiritual despotism of this order, with no right
of appeal, is unknown in the Eastern Church. The hierarchy,
indeed, is there, with a Patriarch in the highest place, but its
powers and pretensions are small indeed when compared with those
of the Papacy. The Patriarch is more popularly elected, is easily
deposed, has no temporal power, has long abandoned any lofty and
exclusive spiritual claims. The several Churches in the different
countries where the Creek doctrine prevails have an almost co-
ordinate power. The Roman Catholic Church in Australia
receives with docility—shall I say servility!—a mandate from
Rome. The Greek Church in Russia or Turkey would receive
with something of self-respect and independence a decree from
Constantinople,
Rome (Dr. Vaughan notwithstanding) has exhibited no great
desire for the laity to study the Scriptures or to worship God in
their own mother tongue j and what is it but a badge of subjection
to an alien power that Englishmen, with the language of Milton
and Shakspeare, should be obliged to offer their prayers and hear
the Scriptures read in the language of ancient Italy. There is no
such tendency in the Greek Church. If. through the apathy of the
clergy, the ritual of the several countries and the public reading of
the Scriptures is in the language of each country as it was some
centuries ago, rather than as it is to-day, this does not oppose the
principle which is stoutly held, that the language of common life
ought to be the language of the soul. I myself have listened in
the great Coptic Church of Cairo to the reading of the Scriptures
in Arabic, the language spoken by the Coptic Christians in Egypt.
X have never heard that the efforts of the Bible Society hav e
received the blessing of the Pope, but they have certainly been
welcomed in Russia and in Greece by the authorities of the Greek
Church. “ God be praised ” (I quote from Dean Stanley) “ God


be praised ! was the expression, of a devout Russian layman,*in
speaking of the scandals occasioned by the ignorance of the
Russian priesthood, the Eastern Church has never ruled that
religious light and instruction are confined to the clergy. It is
still in our own power to redeem the future.”
So far, then, I have spoken favourably of the doctrine and
worship of the Greek Church. In many points of the utmost
importance to purity of faith and freedom of spiritual life, the
great Church of the East is greatly before the great Church of the
West. But there are other features in its history and present con-
dition which we cannot think of without sadness. Eastern
Christendom has denounced the use of images in public and private
worship as savouring of idolatry, but it permits the use of
paintings, and paintings are adored with at least as much of
veneration as in Roman Catholicism. Worship, too, is encumbered
(as in some of the ritualistic churches in England) with more of
ceremony, and ritual observance, and mystical gestures and genu-
flexions than is even the case in Papal worship. Those who have
been long familiar with the spirit and practice of the Greek
Church, both in Greece and Russia, tell us that it is utterly
wanting in energy, that spiritual life is low, that no attempts are
made to gain converts, that no missionary work is carried out as it
is from Rome, and London, and New York. This lethargy or
indifference may, perhaps, help in keeping them free from the
curse of religious persecution, but it ought surely to be possible to
carry out the Saviour’s dying command without breaking the
eleventh commandment—the law of love. We Protestants, too,
must condemn the use of prayers for the dead, and the invocation
of saints, and the doctrine of transubstantiation, i.e., that the
bread and the wine of the Sacrament are changed into the very
body and very blood of the Lord Jesus, All these several
doctrines, however, it must not be forgotten, are doctrines which
the extreme party in the High Church of England are en-
deavouring to introduce. Appeals to the senses by paintings,
gorgeous dresses, mystic ceremonials, as well as praying for the
dead, the adoration of the Virgin and saints, and the doctrine of
the real presence, are all considered fitting and right by the leaders
of the ritualistic movement in the English Episcopal Church. I
spoke just now, and that most favourably, of the breaking down of
the barriers in the Greek Church between priests and laymen, but
there is an aspect even of this which is sad, and even repulsive.
In the letter of the Herald’s Russian correspondent a month or two
ago, I met a few sentences which are of ill-omen. I would not
quote them, for I know that such letters are usually written too
hastily, but that the same testimony is given from many sources.
“ Whatever may be the faults and shortcomings of Catholic priests
and Protestant ministers, there is a spiritual link between them
and their parishioners; they are often, if not always, respectable
men, and live virtuous lives, and they can in an emergency furnish


enlightenment and consolation to soul and body ; whereas, the
majority of Russian priests are totally unfit for pastors. The
people, rough and ignorant as they are, feel this; they would
never dream of confiding in their priests; they cannot venerate
and respect a man who has the same vices, failings, and littlenesses
as themselves, who drinks with them in the village kaback, who
takes bribes, and sells the consolations of religion instead of giving
them.” This is a very terrible indictment, the more terrible
because to a great extent so true. But it is not an indictment
against the Christianity of the Greek Church, but against the State
Church of Russia, which has made no earnest attempt to secure
an educated ministry and to pay them honourably for honourable
service. It might be a lesson for us. Under the strain and stress
of strong religious feeling of the revival type, we have been too
willing (I will speak only of that brotherhood of Churches to which
this community belongs) too willing of late to place pious but
untrained men at the head of our Churches, making but ill pro-
vision for their daily needs. Piety is essential in our ministers,
but piety ought to be educated and intelligent, and any office to be
held in honour must be adequately paid. Given a ministry un-
educated and cheap the two invariably go together, and I foresee
a decline of that spiritual influence which for centuries we have
been able oO exert. It has been the glory of Congregationalism
that an educated ministry has been deemed absolutely essential for
her pulpits. I hope the day is far distant when piety, with a zeal
bordering on fanaticism, shall dissolve the marriage between
culture and Christianity, whom God hath joined together.
Attempts have been made during the last few years to bring
about something of religious union between the Greek and English
Churches. There has been an interchange of service, and much
courteous and friendly feeling expressed on either side, But Ido
not anticipate that anything will result beyond a diminishing of
prejudice—not a small result by any means. The habits and
dogmas of eighteen centuries of growth are not easily set aside.
Let the Greek Church fulfil her own mission in her own way
among her own people. What we wish for her above all is an
accession of spiritual li.e, that she may awake to earnestness,
and declare in the hearing of the populous East the Gospel first
delivered to an Eastern people by one born of an Eastern race.
1 end thus my lectures on “ Other Bibles and Other Beliefs.”
We have looked together at the great faiths that dominate over
the religious life of the world of to-day—at Hinduism with its Yeda,
at Buddhism with its Tripitaka, at Parseeism with its Zendavesta,
at Judaism with its Talmud, at Mohammedanism with its Koran,
at Roman Catholicism with its Papal dogmas, at the Greek Church
with its decrees of the early Councils. I have endeavoured to be
impartial,—but what mind is without prejudice ? Yet this lean
honestly say, that I love more to dwell upon the agreements than
upon the differences of universal thought. And so, while cleaving


intensely to the religion of Christ as expressed in our Protestant
beliefs, I have more hopes than most men concerning my fellows.
I link myself with all humanity when I lift up the prayer, “ Our
Father which art in heaven.” My sympathy broadens upon the
whole world as I hear my Saviour say, “ I, if I be lifted up, will
draw all men unto Me." And lam comforted under the gloom o
that great darkness which yet overshadows the world after these
long centuries of Christian effort, by that noble saying of the
apostle, “In every nation, he that feareth God and worketh.
righteousness is accepted of Him.”




