

JUNGLE
WARFARE
gh im
WAR DEPARTMENT FIELD MANUAL
WAR DEPARTMENT • 27 OCTOBER 1944


WAR DEPARTMENT,
Washington 25, D. C., 27 October 1944.
FM 72-20, War Department Field Manual, Jungfe
Warfare, is published for the information and guidance
of all concerned.
[A. G. 300.7 (7 Sep 44).]
By order of the Secretary of War :
G. C. MARSHALL,
Chief of Staff.
Official :
J. A. ULIO,
Major General,
The Adjutant General.
Distribution :
As prescribed in paragraph 9a, FM 21-6:
Continental: As prescribed in paragraph 9a, FM
21-6; B (1); R (1); Bn (1); G (1); Over-
seas: TofOpns (2); Base C (2); Island C (2);
Def C (2); Base Sectors (2); Depts (2); SvC
(2); in addition to the foregoing oversea distri-
bution, troops in the appropriate theaters will
receive distribution on the following basis:
Armies (5); Corps (5); D (5) J B (5); R (5);
Bn (5); C (5).
For explanation of symbols, see FM 21-6.


JUNGLE
WARFARE
WAR DEPARTMENT FIELD MANUAL
F M 7 2-20
» . T
This manual supersedes FM 31-20, 15 December 1941, including Cl, 26 May 1942;
C 2, 3 August 1942; and C 3, 24 September 1942.
WAR DEPART MEN T • 27 OCTOBER 1944
United States Government Printing Office
Washington : 1944


Contents
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL. Paragraphs Page
Section I. General 1 1
11. Nature of Jungle 2-4 1
111. Effect of Jungle, on
Troops 5-9 4
IV. Effect of Jungle on
Operations 10-15 7
CHAPTER 2. HEALTH, HYGIENE, AND SANITA-
TION 16-22 11
CHAPTER 3. JUNGLE SERVICE.
Section I. Training for Jungle
Service 23-24 27
11. Requirements of Jungle
Service 25-29 32
111. Weapons, Clothing, and
Equipment 30-32 34
IV. Practical Hints for
Jungle Living 33-40 39
V. Dealings with Native
Inhabitants 41-45 57
CHAPTER 4. JUNGLE OPERATIONS.
Section I. General 46-49 60
11. Arms 50-55 62
111. Marches and Bivouacs. 56-58 66
IV. Attack 59-64 77
V. Defense 65-73 84
VI. Patrols 74-76 89
VII. Special Operations 77-80 93
VIII. Supply 81-88 99*
IX. Evacuation 89 102
X. Communication 90-100 103
APPENDIX I. NATIVE PLANTS 1-7 108
APPENDIX 11. USE OF JUNGLE MACHETE 1-9 136
INDEX 140


Chapter 1
GENERAL
Section I. GENERAL
This manual supersedes FM 31-20, 15 December 191(1, including C 1,
26 Mag 191(2; C 2, 3 August 191(2; and C 3, 2i September 191(2.
1. General
In jungle warfare, the soldier often fights two enemies:
man and nature. The elimination of nature as an
enemy and the use of the jungle itself as an ally are
training objectives fully as important as the elimination
of the human enemy. The soldier must be trained not
to fight the jungle; he must be capable of living success-
fully in it and making it work for him against the human
enemy. The jungle is a strict taskmaster; unless an in-
dividual adjusts himself to the conditions imposed by
jungle environment, he will be unable to exist long, even
if there is no human enemy. It must be remembered
that the difficulties imposed by jungle environment are
impartially imposed upon enemy as well as friendly
troops, and that the unit which better overcomes the
difficulties imposed by the environment has a distinct
advantage over the opposing force.
Section II. NATURE OF JUNGLE
2. Terrain and vegetation
The term “jungle” is frequently applied to the entire
area where jungles predominate, although in many cases
they may cover only a portion of the terrain. The jungle
itself is that dense tropical growth including underbrush,
trees, vines, and giant ferns, found at elevations between
the lower foothills or beaches and the high areas above


the timber line. In the areas in which jungle operations
are likely to take place, the sequence of growth may be
as follows:
a. Shore lines, fringed with almost impenetrable man-
grove trees, or open beaches lined with bamboo or coco-
nut groves are typical of the coastal regions of jungle
areas. Mangrove trees are characteristic of lowlands,
and high tides frequently cover the areas where they are
found. The result is what is commonly known as
mangrove swamp,” where tidal waters cover mud
which is one to four feet deep. The twisting roots, the
mud, the sharp coral outcroppings, and the maze of low
hanging branches make such areas difficult and dan-
gerous to traverse.
b. Beyond the shore line there may be pineapple,
coconut, sugarcane, or rubber plantations, or rice pad-
dies. Some of these extend a considerable distance in-
land. The low lying foothills between these plantations
and the jungle itself are frequently open to the sunlight,
and may contain large areas of brush or long grasses 3
to 10 feet high.
c. Next comes the jungle. In some areas, dense
jungle extends to the shore line. The undergrowth varies
in density according to the amount of sunlight which
penetrates the branches of the tree; where it can pene-
trate, the underbrush is thicker than in jungles where it
is excluded. Where the undergrowth is thick, progress
(except along the few existing trails) is exceedingly slow
and laborious; in many cases a path can be hacked out
only with the greatest difficulty, and columns of troops
will be in great danger of being attacked in the flanks,
or isolated and surrounded. The jungle proper is fre-
quently interrupted by broad grassy savannas or other
open spaces; usually these areas are covered with the
long grass mentioned above. Water courses, either rela-
tively flush with the adjacent terrain, or following deep,
precipitous gorges and gulches, add to the interruptions
to progress which the jungle itself presents. In moun-
tainous terrain, streams that are normally shallow may


become raging torrents within an hour after a heavy
rain.
d. In some tropical areas, the jungle is broken by
higher elevations where growth is sparse and stunted.
Above the timber line, wind and unfertile soil limit
vegetation to small, hardy, scrub growth.
3. Weather
In general, jungle weather is hot, humid, and character-
ized by sudden changes. Within only a few minutes
clear, hot weather may change to a torrential downpour.
With equal suddenness, the rain may cease and sunshine
on the thickly matted vegetation will produce maximum
relative humidity. Humidity is constantly high because
of the swamps and the shading effect of vegetation.
There is a “rainy season” during which monsoons and
storms may prevail and rain is considerably more fre-
quent. Seasonal changes in weather are noticeable but
not pronounced. The humid heat of the day is often
relieved by cool air from the mountains in the late
evening.
4. Wild Life
a. Life, particularly plant and insect life, flourishes in
this hot, damp environment. The danger from wild
animals which roam the jungle is, however, largely a
creation of imagination. Animals are fairly abundant in
some places and rare in others, but even when abundant,
are not commonly seen by man. Most animals have a
natural fear of man and their keen senses enable them
to keep out of sight. There are relatively few dangerous
animals in the islands of the Pacific and in tropical
America. Snakes are seldom seen in the jungle, al-
though they may be fairly abundant. Some poisonous
snakes may be found in the sea around islands of the
East Indies, but like most other snakes will not attack
unless annoyed. Experience indicates that most of the
poisonous snakes that live on land are likely to be en-
countered only while clearing ground for a camp. They


present no more of a menace than in temperate climates,
but reasonable precautions must be taken. In some
regions, crocodiles are a menace and inhabit swamps,
lagoons, rivers, and occasionally the salt water areas and
beaches near the mouths of streams.
b. The military significance of animal life lies in the
fact that rapid movement of animals or birds may pro-
vide scouts with evidence of the presence of men.
Proper identification of wild plants and animals is of
further value to units or individuals cut off from supply
lines and depending upon plants and animals for food.
However, it is so difficult to come within range of jungle
animals that it is best not to rely on hunting as a means
of obtaining food; edible fruits, nuts, and plants are more
easily obtained. (See app. I and TM 10-420.)
Section III. EFFECT OF JUNGLE ON TROOPS
5. Physical Efficiency
Troops newly arriving in jungle areas experience a climate
to which they are not accustomed and are exposed to
diseases with which they are not familiar. These condi-
tions impose a special responsibility on all commanders;
they must assure themselves that their troops become ad-
justed to the climate and that the health and combat
effectiveness of the command is maintained to the degree
necessary to accomplish the assigned missions.
6. Physical Conditioning
The hardships of jungle operations demand physical fit-
ness and acclimation of individuals. The loss of body
fluids by perspiration, the increased concentration of the
blood plasma and urine, the elevation of body tempera-
ture because of physical exertion at high external tempera-
tures, and the effects of the sun all tend to lower the
resistance of the body. The outstanding effect of jungle
operations on the troops is fatigue. Fatigue can be over-
come only by constant physical and tactical training under
combat conditions. Physical training produces stamina,


and tactical training preserves stamina by teaching pre-
cision and preventing wasted effort. A day and a night
in the jungle do not comprise sufficient time to produce
the war atmosphere of fatigue. Exercises must be con-
ducted for long periods and over extensive distances.
(See par. 23.) Thorough hardening to jungle service is
a prerequisite to the effective execution of combat
operations.
7. Sanitary Instruction of Troops
Officers and noncommissioned officers must have, and
should give their men, a thorough knowledge of the
fundamentals of personal hygiene, preventive medicine,
and self protection against poisonous plants, noxious in-
sects, and venomous reptiles if they are to maintain the
health of their commands in the adverse climate and
primitive environment of tropical jungles. Armies have
been defeated and campaigns lost as a result of disease.
8. Psychological Effects
As in any area where physical hardship is the rule, there
are accompanying psychological reactions to the jungle.
These reactions take the form of magnifying the physical
hardships and the inherent dangers of warfare. Limited
visibility increases the feeling of insecurity, strange noises
assume an increased importance, and men tend to be-
come jumpy and panicky. The dull, shaded light and,
in many areas at certain periods of the day, the gloomy,
drifting mists of jungle areas have a morose and eerie
effect which further adds to the feeling of insecurity.
Morale is a most important factor in jungle warfare,
particularly when troops have experienced reverses.
Tactical conditions tend to appear much more adverse
than is really the case; our own casualties are exaggerated
and rumor is prevalent. It is important that troops be
kept informed not only of the local situation, but also
of operations elsewhere. Poorly trained troops lose
morale very quickly. Thorough prior training is neces-
sary to breed familiarity with jungle conditions, and par-


ticularly to counteract the feeling of loneliness caused by
isolation. Only training and experience can overcome
these psychological reactions. Again, to learn to live in
the jungle and to overcome these imaginary fears to a
greater extent than the enemy can, will go far toward
successful jungle warfare. As in other so-called adverse
conditions of weather, terrain, and climate, these very
conditions may, if properly met and exploited, prove a
help, rather than a hindrance, to military operations.
9. Morale
a. Maintenance of morale is a command responsi-
bility. To a great extent, however, much depends upon
the soldier himself. The jungle can be a place of in-
terest or it can be a prison, depending entirely upon the
individual’s attitude toward it.
b. Military life in the tropics is made up of two ex-
tremes : periods of intense activity and periods of almost
complete inactivity. The necessary work during some
periods is so great that it seems impossible ever to finish;
time passes rapidly and there is little opportunity to think
of anything but the job on hand. These periods are
followed by other periods when every effort to push the
job forward will be blocked; despite the best efforts to
carry on the work it will be necessary to wait for some-
thing or somebody; there is nothing to do but sit and
wait. During the .period of intense activity everyone
will be content. There need be no worries about morale
at this time. It is during the periods of inactivity that
special attention must be given to the small things that
mean much to soldiers. Such matters as mail, exercise,
variation in diet, and recreation are of particular im-
portance. The situation may be such that leaders can
do relatively little about such things, however, they
should exhaust every means to do what is possible. The
fact that the men know that their leaders have made
an extra effort to look after their comfort and welfare
will mean much in relieving a monotonous period.
c. Factors which promote contentment in the tropics


are good health, and sufficient work, rest, and recreation.
Rules for care of the soldier’s health must be strictly
adhered to, not only because it is the duty of a soldier to
try to maintain his health so that he can efficiently per-
form his duties, but for his own good and peace of mind
as well. No man can do his best when not feeling well.
d. The soldier must keep busy to be content. When
his military duties are completed for the day, he still
should keep busy. Idleness becomes an insidious habit
in the tropics and eventually works upon a man’s mental
make-up. Even though he has been doing hard physical
work, the soldier will find that participation in a not too
strenuous competitive game is a relaxation. He must
take every opportunity to enter into such forms of recrea-
tion. This is the sort of thing that prevents him from
going “stale” on a jungle assignment. In addition, the
soldier should attempt to practice his hobbies or cultivate
new ones. If he is of the type who enjoys the outdoors,
he will find plenty to do—hunting, fishing, and trapping.
He might also make a hobby of the jungle itself by learn-
ing something about the birds, plants, insects, or even
the inhabitants. Learning the local language may prove
interesting. Commanders should cultivate the friendship
of the natives. Friendly natives add to security, can
teach jungle lore, and can add immeasurably to the
amusement of soldiers by inviting them to tribal celebra-
tions and ceremonies. The necessary precautions against
malaria and other diseases must, however, always be
borne in mind. Movies and radio programs can be
made available to units not in close contact with the
enemy, and their use as morale builders is highly
desirable.
Section IV. EFFECT OF JUNGLE ON OPERATIONS
10. General
Tactical operations in jungle terrain do not vary in
principle from those under any other conditions. There
are, however, certain differences in their application re-


suiting from the conditions peculiar to jungles. For a
discussion of tactical principles and their general applica-
tion, see FM 100-5 and the appropriate Field Manuals
of the various arms and services.
a. Movement in the jungle is often calculated in terms
of time, rather than distance, the problem being how long
it will take to get from one place to another, rather than
how many miles it is between those places. Because of
the poor quality of trails, their insufficient number, or
their complete absence, and the difficulties of the terrain,
the movement of troops is slow. Generally there can be
no movement of tracked or wheeled vehicles larger than
the *4-ton truck until engineers have improved the tracks
and trails.
b. Flank security elements cannot maintain a fixed
rate of march when operating off trails in thick jungle;
their rate of movement, and consequently that of the
column, is slowed by the necessity for cutting a trail;
and the noise of their cutting may warn the enemy of
their approach. Flank security of a jungle column is
usually maintained by sending small detachments out a
short distance on each side of the trail to listen and
search for the enemy. These detachments withdraw and
rejoin the tail of the column as it passes.
c. Supporting weapons and ammunition cannot be
moved over jungle trails at the same speed as that at
which ground troops move. If artillery is required to
move over trails to support jungle operations, the speed
of troop movement must conform to the speed at which
artillery can displace.
d. Primary means of supply may be by air drop, carry-
ing parties, pack animal, boat, or canoe. All have been
used with success, but each has its limitations.
11. Observation
The dense foliage greatly restricts all observation. In
many cases visibility is limited to as little as 20 feet.
This makes contact and control one of the most difficult
problems of jungle warfare, and considerably increases


the responsibilities of small-unit leaders. Limited ob-
servation necessitates narrow frontages, reduced distances
and intervals between units, and increased patrol activity
and use of liaison parties. It increases the opportunities
for ambush and the achievement of surprise small-arms
fire. The difficulties of observation greatly restrict the
use of supporting units and weapons. (See par. 51.)
Indirect fires frequently must be adjusted by means other
than direct observation of burst. The limitations of
observation may be partially overcome by means of
greater use of observation posts and increased communi-
cation facilities.
12. Transport
Vehicle operation for the most part is restricted to
coastal regions and around plantations where adequate
roads and wider trails are available. Pack animals may
be used, but they require care and necessitate food for
their own subsistence. Trails suitable for pack animals
frequently are also suitable for operation of
trucks. However, hand-carry is the principal means of
transport. Native carriers are used for this purpose
when available, but are subject to the limitations dis-
cussed in section IV, chapter 3.
13. Communication
All organic means of communication are employed where
appropriate. Telephones have proved very serviceable;
even patrols sometimes lay wire. The usefulness of radio
is reduced by the screening effect of foliage and ground
masks. Visual signaling is limited by the vegetation and
the overhead canopy of trees, but smoke, lights, and
pyrotechnics may be used by careful planning. Prear-
ranged sound signals are important to security detach-
ments. Foot messengers remain the major means of
communication; these must be men of stamina and re-
sourcefulness, who can work their way with assurance
through the wilderness or along troop columns on narrow


trails, and deliver their messages. Subordinate leaders
must assure a constant flow of combat information from
front to rear.
14. Fields of Fire
Because of the undergrowth and rugged terrain, good
fields of fire are seldom obtained. Ideal firing positions
are almost never to be found. Machine guns and auto-
matic rifles seldom have fields of fire extending more
than 100 yards; about 50 yards may be considered the
average. Fields of fire for individual riflemen are even
more restricted.
15. Concealment
The jungle provides ideal concealment for both offensive
operations and for defensive positions. For this reason,
surprise is always possible. The undergrowth and the
dim light favor stealthy movement of attacking forces to
assault positions. Similarly, exact “fixing” of enemy
defensive positions is most difficult.


Chapter 2
HEALTH, HYGIENE, AND SANITATION
16. Diseases in General
a. Troops arriving in jungle areas are exposed to many
diseases with which they are not familiar. The level
of sanitation in jungle areas and among the native in-
habitants is frequently very low. Furthermore, there is
often great difficulty in enforcing even the simplest sani-
tary regulations, as many natives are too ignorant, super-
stitious, and lazy to cooperate. Water supplies are grossly
contaminated, and there are no modern water supply
systems. Rain-water cachments are used in some areas.
Most natives use shallow, poorly protected wells, or drink
from streams. There are no sewerage systems and na-
tives are unwilling to use latrines. Animals and some
natives dispose of body waste promiscuously, even di-
rectly into the streams used for drinking water.
b. Mosquitoes capable of transmitting malaria, ele-
phantiasis (filariasis), break-bone fever (dengue fever),
and yellow fever are found in large numbers. Flies are
abundant and are important mechanical carriers of in-
testinal diseases and yaws. Mites are numerous, and lice
and fleas are found. Blood-sucking leeches are
extremely common. Chiggers may be carriers of “scrub
typhus” (see par. 17f) and in areas where they occur,
are always at least a severe nuisance. Other pests are
ants, centipedes, cockroaches, scorpions, and rats. Poi-
sonous snakes and crocodiles are the principal dangerous
animals present.
c. Diseases of greatest military importance are ma-
laria, elephantiasis (filariasis), intestinal diseases, venereal
diseases, break-bone (dengue) fever, and typhus fever.
Of these, malaria is the most important and is wide-


spread in all seasons. The common diarrhea and amoe-
bic and bacillary dysentery are the most frequent in-
testinal diseases, but typhoid and paratyphoid fever also
occur. Gonorrhea is the commonest form of venereal
disease, but syphilis and granuloma inguinale are also
widely found. Fungus infections are frequent, as are
other skin diseases. Tropical ulcers are particularly
common. Parasitic infections, heat exhaustion, sun-
stroke, and pneumonia may affect small numbers of
troops.
17. Insect- and Animal-Borne Diseases
Insect- and animal-borne diseases are those in which the
agent which causes the disease is transmitted from man
to man, or from animal to man, by a bloodsucking
insect or animal. The germ may be introduced into
the blood stream or tissues of man during the bite of the
infected insect, or it may be deposited upon the skin by
the infected insect during the process of biting. In the
latter instance, the irritation resulting from the insect bite
causes scratching and' infection of the wound with the
germ. It is necessary for troops to exercise every pre-
cautionary and preventive measure described below in
order to avoid infection. The carriers of these diseases
are—
a. Mosquitoes. (1) Diseases transmitted. Malaria,
yellow fever, break-bone (dengue) fever, elephantiasis
(filariasis), and some forms of sleeping sickness are
mosquito-borne.
(2) Description. The three kinds of mosquitoes
which transmit disease are the Anopheles, Aedes, and
Culex.
(a) The Anopheles group contains a number of
species which transmit malaria. They bite during the
night, at dusk, and at dawn. They may also bite, when
disturbed during daylight hours, in shady, relatively cool,
humid areas. They do not sing while flying. The
adults have characteristic wing markings, long feelers,
and, except for a very few species, rest and bite with


the body at an angle of about 45° to the surface. (See
fig. 1 (T).) Many species hold the hind legs in the air
while biting.
( b ) The Aedes group transmit yellow fever, dengue
fever, elephantiasis, and a form of sleeping sickness.
They bite during the day, but may also bite at night.
The adults are characteristically marked with silver,
white, or yellow bands and lines. They rest and bite
with the body parallel to the surface. (See fig. 1 ©.)
( c ) The Culex mosquito transmits elephantiasis and
a form of sleeping sickness. Many species of this type,
even though nondisease-transmitting, are biting pests.
They bite at night, at dusk, and at dawn. The adults
Figure 1. Disease-transmitting mosquitoes.
1 Anopheles. 2 Aedes. 3 Culex.
have no stripes on the chest or abdomen and, with few
exceptions, rest and bite with the body parallel to the
surface. (See fig. 1 @.)
(3) Preventive measures. ( a ) Any collection of
water which persists for longer than one week may serve
as their breeding place. (See FM 8—40.) The species
vary in their preferences for types and locations of breed-
ing places. Most species prefer fresh, slow-moving
waters; some prefer brackish water; while others breed
in gutters, cisterns, rain barrels, broken coconut shells,
tin cans, ruts, and rot holes in trees. Certain species
prefer to breed in water containing organic material.
The preference of the different species for sunlight varies
greatly.
(b) Any mosquito-control measures used by moving


troops will be governed by the military situation. Con-
cealment against observation from the air is of prime
military importance, and the clearing of vegetation
therefore cannot be practiced except in limited areas.
Under such circumstances, control of mosquito-borne
diseases will be based upon the protection of men from
the bites of mosquitoes and the use of drugs to suppress
the effects of infection. A vaccine is used against yellow
fever.
(c) Headnets and gloves should be provided for all
personnel. These items of protective clothing are par-
ticularly valuable for personnel on outpost or similar
duty, and during darkness when personnel are on duty
which precludes the use of mosquito bars. Mosquito
bars must be used by all personnel when sleeping out of
doors or in shelters not fully protected by screening.
Insect repellent will be employed not only on the exposed
skin, but also on taut clothing. Insecticide spray or
aerosol will be used. It is important that clothing be
worn completely buttoned with sleeves rolled down, and
that it be free of tears and rents that expose the skin.
(d) Unless in the execution of some military duty,
personnel will avoid natives and native villages, partic-
ularly after sundown. Natives will not be permitted to
sleep in camp, and preferably will be kept at least one
mile from camp. (One mile is the approximate max-
imum flight range of mosquitoes.)
(e) Commanding officers are responsible for the ex-
ecution of mosquito-control measures. Their decisions
are based upon the military situation and the recom-
mendations of Medical Department officers upon com-
pletion of mosquito surveys. For a detailed discussion
of mosquitoes and mosquito control, see FM 21-10.
b. Ticks. (1) Diseases transmitted, (a) Hard
ticks transmit Rocky Mountain spotted fever, other kinds
of tick bite fevers (tick typhus), rabbit fever (tularemia),
and tick paralysis.
( b ) Soft ticks transmit famine fever (endemic relaps-
ing fever).


(2) Description. Ticks as a class may be identified
by the flat, oval body, small head and chest, and com-
paratively large abdomen. The legs are short and
jointed, all being approximately the same size. The
larvae or seed ticks have six legs; the nymphs and adults
eight legs. Hard ticks ordinarily do not attach them-
selves at once after gaining access to the body of man.
(3) Preventive measures, (a) Frequent inspection
of exposed skin areas and prompt removal of free ticks,
and complete body inspection each morning and night
when the military situation permits, with careful re-
moval of free or attached ticks, will aid in the prevention
of infection. Ticks should never be smashed or squashed
on the skin. When sudden force is used to remove a
tick, the biting parts often are left in the skin, and will
produce infection. It is not possible to remove a tick
by unscrewing it. Recommended methods of removal
are: grasping the tick firmly and tenting the skin with
gentle traction; killing the tick with gasoline or kerosene;
closing the breathing pores with vaseline or an oil; or
applying a lighted cigarette. Tincture of iodine should
be promptly applied after removal of the tick.
( b ) Huts, storehouses, native shops, and other struc-
tures in tick-infested areas should be avoided. Aban-
doned huts, storehouses, barns, and corrals should be
burned. Native domestic animals and pets should be
avoided as tick carriers.
c. Sand Flies. (Phlebotomus Flies). (1) Dis-
eases transmitted. Sand-fly fever, 3-day fever (Pappa-
taci fever); Oriental sore, Delhi boil, tropical sores and
certain other sores and fevers are sand-fly borne.
(2) Description. Sand flies are hairy two-winged
insects having long legs; these insects are so small as to
pass through ordinary mosquito netting. They are deli-
cate, apparently disintegrating into gray dust when hit,
but are vicious biters. Gloves, special headnets, and
repellents furnish some protection against sand filies, and
the insecticide aerosol or spray will kill them. They do
not fly high, and, since their flight range is not over 100
613291°—44 2


yards, can be avoided by proper location of camp sites.
d. Fleas. (1) Diseases transmitted. The rat flea
is a carrier of Black death (bubonic plague), and Brill’s
disease (endemic typhus). Fleas of other rodents may
also transmit these diseases.
(2) Description. Fleas are small, wingless, brown or
black insects with a laterally compressed body, small head
and chest, large abdomen, and large powerful legs. The
first pair of legs appear to be attached to the base of the
head. The female is larger than the male flea.
(3) Preventive measures. Since rats are the usual
hosts of the flea, the elimination of these rodents is the
best preventive measure. Food should be stored so that
rats cannot get at it, and all garbage should be burned.
In camps occupied for any length of time, trapping and
poisoning should be practiced as soon as rats appear.
See FM 21-10 for methods used in trapping. Rats (and
their fleas) are usually in huts, storehouses, and native
shops, and especially on animal pets in these places.
Abandoned huts and storehouses should be burned.
e. Body Lice. ( 1 ) Diseases transmitted. The body
louse and head louse may transmit jail fever (epidemic
typhus fever), famine fever (relapsing fever), and 5-day
fever (trench fever).
(2) Description. Lice are small, gray, flattened, six-
legged, wingless insects, with claws on the terminal joint
of each leg.
(3) Preventive measures. A man can be infected by
the feces of lice rubbed into the skin by the person
scratching, and by the body juices of a crushed louse.
To keep from getting lice, one should avoid close con-
tact with individuals likely to be infested, their clothing
and bedding, and should stay out of native huts, bazaars
and cantinas. Frequent bathing and washing of cloth-
ing is discouraging to lice, and the army louse insecticide
powder will kill them. This powder should be applied
with special attention to the seams of clothing.
f. Mites. (1) Diseases transmitted. Free-living mites
are widely distributed throughout the world. The adult


eight-legged mite does not attack man. The six-legged
mite larva attacks man and other animals, some of which
serve as a reservoir for “scrub typhus.” In the United
States and Europe, the variety known as chiggers (red
bugs) produce considerable skin irritation which may
become secondarily infected from scratching. In the
Far East, the Kedani mites transmit “scrub typhus”
fever (Japanese river fever, tsutsugamushi fever).
(2) Description. The six-legged mite larva is a mi-
nute, hairy insects less than % s th inch in length.
(3) Preventive measures. Clearing and burning of
grass and scrub about a camp reduces the number of
mites. Sleeping on the ground should be avoided if
possible. If exposed, troops should bathe with thorough
soaping and scrubbing. Clothing can be impregnated
with the standard quartermaster insect repellent by using
a hand spray, with particular attention to such openings
as the collar, shirt front, waist, socks, and trouser legs.
If quartermaster insect repellent is not available, flowers
of sulfur can be applied to the skin and clothing or taken
internally.
g. Bloodsucking Flies. (1) Diseases transmitted.
Flies of the genus chrysops transmit rabbit fever (tula-
remia) ; the western deer-fly transmits deer fly fever;
and mango flies and fruit flies transmit the filarial Afri-
can eye worm (loa-loa). Black flies and buffalo gnats
transmit a filarial worm (Onchocerca volvulus) causing
blinding filarial disease.
(2) Preventive measures. Mosquito nets, protective
clothing, quartermaster insect repellent, and insecticide
aerosol should be used.
h. Triatomidae (Cone-Nose Bugs, Assassin or
Kissing Bugs). (1) Diseases transmitted. Cone-nose
bugs may transmit American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas
disease).
(2) Description. They are large-sized, dark brown or
black bugs, having a narrow, cone-shaped head, a long,
oval-shaped abdomen, long legs, well-developed wings,
and regularly arranged markings on the forward part of.


the chest, wings, and borders of the abdomen. They are
common to tropical America, where they are called
“barbero” (because they frequently bite about the face)
and also “chincas voladoras” or flying bedbugs.
(3) Preventive measures. To avoid these, keep out of
huts, native shops, stables, barns, or chicken houses;
burn abandoned huts or barns. Do not sleep on the
ground. For individual protection, use mosquito nets
and protective clothing. At semipermanent camps or
stations, buildings should be screened.
i. Vampire Bats. (1) Diseases transmitted. Vampire
bats on the island of Trinidad transmit rabies (hydro-
phobia) to human beings and animals. The virus of
rabies is carried in the saliva of the infected bat.
(2) Preventive measures. Antirabic treatment must
be administered to persons bitten by this species of bat.
Immediate first-aid treatment consists of cauterization of
the bite wound with trichlor acetic acid or nitric acid.
After cauterization, the wound is treated by the applica-
tion of sterile tannic acid ointment and a tight compres-
sion bandage.
18. Water-Borne Diseases
a. Diseases. Typhoid fever, the paratyphoid fevers,
bacillary (bacterial) dysentery, amoebic dysentery, and
cholera may be disseminated by contaminated drinking
water. Infections from this source are prevented by
drinking treated or purified water only (see also par. 19).
b. Preventive Measures. (1) The water selected
for human consumption should come from as clean a
source as possible. When water is obtained from a
stream, the water point for men should be above that for
animals, the bathing point, the laundry point, vehicle
washing point, and fords. On lakes, the intake point for
drinking water should be so placed that wind and water
currents flow away from the intake point and toward
water points for other uses. The heavier organic or in-
organic matter should be removed by filtering, straining,


or settling. An infiltration basin may be constructed by
digging a pit 6 or 8 feet from the edge of the stream or
lake and 5 to 6 feet below the main water level.
(2) Except at high altitudes, boiling for five minutes
renders water safe for human consumption. For large
groups this method is unsatisfactory because of the time,
fuel, and containers required.
(3) Chemical purification of water may be accom-
plished as follows:
(a) Calcium hypochlorite ampules. Use one ampule
per canteen of water to make a purification solution.
One canteen capful of this solution is sufficient to purify
one canteen of water. Water thus purified should not
be drunk until J/ 2 -hour after the purification solution is
introduced.
( b ) Halazone tablets. Use two yi6-grain, or one
J /s -grain, tablets per canteen of water. If water is very
cloudy, double the amount of halazone used. Shake to
dissolve the tablets, and wait one-half hour before
drinking.
(4) Chlorination is a better method and may be ac-
complished- for the entire command by mobile purifica-
tion units operated by the Corps of Engineers, or by
organizations using water carts, small reservoirs, or the
water-sterilizing bag (Lyster bag). For a discussion of
the various suitable means of purifying water, see FM
21-10.
19. Intestinal Infections
a. Diseases. The principal diseases in this group
which occur in the tropics are amoebic dysentery, bacil-
lary (bacterial) dysentery, cholera, food infection, food
intoxication, worms (helminthic infections), paratyphoid
fevers, protozoal dysenteries, typhoid fever, and undulant
fever (Malta Fever). These diseases are usually trans-
mitted by the eating or drinking of contaminated food or
water. Contamination of food is common. The con-
tamination may be caused in vegetable products by


contact with infected material during growth, such as
human excreta used as a fertilizer. Contamination of
any food may be caused by dirty utensils or by food
handlers who have, or are carriers of, intestinal diseases.
Native fruits and vegetables which cannot be peeled or
cooked should not be eaten.
b. Preventive Measures. (1) In the jungle, all
perishables, both meats and vegetables, which cannot be
stored in a refrigerator below 40° F., should be cooked
immediately upon receipt, except that frozen meat should
be cooked immediately after thawing. All nonperish-
able food should be stored in vermin-free boxes or chests.
All food should be kept as free of dust as possible, and
every effort made to prevent contamination during
transit.
(2) All foods should be served immediately after prep-
aration. No left-overs should be served. Hard bread,
canned meat, and other canned foods should be issued
to troops in position unless hot food can be brought up
in original containers. Because of the possibility of both
contamination and the growth of an infectious agent
prior to the time they are eaten, sandwiches of other pre-
pared luncheons should not be issued for later con-
sumption,
20. Special Tropical Diseases
Yaws (Frambesia), Tropical Bubo (lymphogranuloma
inguinale), and granuloma inguinale are diseases which
may be transmitted through sexual intercourse. The
lesions of yaws are similar to those of syphilis. Tropical
Bubo is a virus disease. The initial lesion is so small that
it usually passes unnoticed. Later the lymph glands in
the groin become enlarged, break down, and ulcerate.
Granuloma inguinale is usually limited to the genitalia
and inguinal region, but may spread to other parts of
the body. The lesions consist of large ulcerating areas
which spread, gradually destroying the tissues as they
advance.


21. Fungus Diseases of Skin and Hair
a. Diseases. Ringdorm (tinea); dhobie itch (epi-
dermophytosis of the groin and body); athlete’s foot
(epidermophytosis of the feet); pinta, a fungus disease
of the skin, characterized by pigmented patches; and
trichosporosis, a fungus disease of the hair, are the prin-
cipal fungus diseases. The seriousness of these diseases,
especially those of the feet, is seldom realized except by
men with long jungle experience. These diseases are
especially serious in the jungle due to the fact that—
(l) The climate favors the growth of the tough plants
called fungi which produce these diseases.
(2) The native inhabitants, their houses and premises
are usually contaminated by harmful fungi.
(3) More individual effort is required to keep the
body and clothes clean due to difficulty in supplying
jungle troops.
(4) The extreme fatigue resulting from jungle march-
ing is apt to cause soldiers to neglect to wash their clothes
and bodies even though they have been told that their
health depends on cleanliness.
(5) Some men lacking jungle experience falsely be-
lieve they are tough enough to stay healthy in the tropics
and need not take the precautions prescribed.
b. Preventive Measures. To prevent fungus dis-
eases of the skin and hair is much easier than to cure
them. The following preventive measures are important:
(1) Keep as clean as possible, and wash as often as
is practicable. Use of soap and water, when
available, both for bathing and washing clothes. Socks
should be washed with soap at least once a day. If a
stream cannot be reached after making camp, use a part
of the water in the canteen and a little soap to wash at
least the armpits, groin, and feet. Do not use a towel in
the jungle.
(2) Do not go barefooted in the jungle.
(3) As far as possible avoid soiling clothes. Avoid
mud. Use the machete to provide a clea'n place to rest


during halts. Unnecessary dirtiness is a sign of stupidity,
not toughness.
(4) Keep the skin dry, well ventilated, and free from
tight clothing. Wear only enough clothing to afford
protection from insects and thorns. Avoid wearing un-
derclothes unless forced to do so by the rubbing of the
outer clothing. Wear clothing and shoes which will
allow air to reach the skin.
(5) Sleep with as little clothing as the temperature
permits. Never sleep in wet, dirty clothing.
(6) Sleep off the ground, preferably in a hammock
or on a platform.
(7) Clean under and around the nails of the hands
and feet.
(8) Take sunbaths for short periods whenever prac-
ticable. Be sure that exposure is increased gradually
and the skin is not burned.
(9) Stay away from native houses. Live and camp
in clean uninhabited jungle.
(10) Dust socks and insides of shoes with foot powder.
(11) Wash and sun articles, such as packboards, used
by more than one man.
(12) Officers should hold frequent foot inspections.
c. Individual Jungle Treatment of Fungus Skin
Infections. (1) During prolonged jungle operations,
each individual soldier must take care of his skin and
make every possible effort to keep infected skin areas as
clean, dry, well-ventilated and protected as possible.
Soap and water help cure, as well as prevent fungus
infections.
(2) After washing and just before retiring, treat in-
fected skin areas with antifungus medicine or half-
strength iodine. Do not scratch insect bites; treat as
above. lodine should not be applied before exercising
or exposure to sunlight. Although painful, washing the
infected skin areaS with undiluted alcohol is advisable in
rashes around the crotch and under the arms. The army


foot powder helps both foot and body rashes of the milder
types.
(3) In general, avoid bandages and greasy medicines.
Dry up fungus infections with drying medicines in con-
junction with air and sunlight.
(4) Clean off dead, infected skin. Do not scratch.
(5) Boil clothing, especially socks, daily. Do not
wear one sock first on an infected foot and then on a
healthy foot. Dry, stretch, and soften socks before re-
placing in field kit.
(6) Avoid overtreating. Follow instructions. Do
not use too much medicine or apply it too often.
(7) Consider all skin diseases as serious. Treat them
regularly, intelligently and patiently.
d. Remedial Action. Fungus diseases, if neglected,
will incapacitate many individuals, regardless of personal
cleanliness and the use of foot powder. At the first
symptoms of a fungus infection, prompt use should be
made of the prescribed medicine carried in the individual
or group first-aid kits. In the event of excessive inflam-
mation or itching, a medical officer should be consulted
as soon as possible.
22. Venomous Snakes and Snake-Bite Treatment
a. Venomous Snakes. (1) Snakes, both poisonous
and nonpoisonous, may be expected in jungle areas wher-
ever there are many small rodents, frogs, or other ani-
mals which are food for snakes. Although most of the
Pacific islands are completely free of snakes, a check
should be made with island natives or evacuating troops
to ascertain whether snakes are to be found in occupied
areas. Snakes exist on all tropical mainlands.
(2) Precautions to observe. The most important
single fact to remember about snakes is that more people
are bitten while trying to catch or kill snakes than in any
other way. There is no dependable rule by which a
venomous snake can be distinguished from a harmless
one at any considerable distance. If a snake is found,


he should be treated with the same intelligent precaution
as a high explosive “dud”; he should be left alone. In
general, the most effective snake repellent is cleanliness.
Open garbage pits, carelessly discarded ration containers,
or other evidences of carelessness which provide food for
rats, mice, or other vermin also attract snakes which eat
these small animals. Strict police of occupied areas will
discourage snakes, as well as other noxious pests. Some
units, encamped for extended periods, have found that
keeping a few pigs in the area is an effective measure
against snakes. Pigs are not usually affected by the bites
of snakes, and will hunt them down, kill them and eat
them.
b. Snake Bite. ( 1 ) The bite of a poisonous snake
will be accompanied by a sharp, burning pain which
will spread rapidly. Upon examination, the wound will
show one or two deep scratches or punctures where the
fangs have pierced the skin. These wounds usually will
not bleed profusely, but will be very painful. The snake
should be killed, if possible, and shown to a medical
officer, since the type of antivenom used will depend on
the kind of snake involved. Even if the snake should
be found to be nonpoisonous, the bite should be treated
medically, because the wound is multiple and dirty, and
very conducive to severe infection.
(2) Having killed the snake, it may be identified
generally as follows: Poisonous snakes have:
(a) Eliptical pupils in their eyes —like those of a cat.
( b ) Large bodies and diamond or spade-shaped
heads.
(c) A single row of belly plates behind the vent.
(d) Prominent forward teeth or fangs, usually curved
to the rear. Not all poisonous snakes conform to this
description; the above points serve only as a general
guide. If the bite is accompanied by a sharp pain, the
snake is poisonous.
(3) If the snake is poisonous, the sooner first aid is
applied to the victim, the better. Do not run for help,
nor waste time searching for proper implements.


(a) If no snake-bite kit is available, proceed promptly
as follows, using whatever materials are at hand: Sit
down. Apply a tourniquet between the bite and the
heart, above the knee, in foot and leg bites; above the
elbow, in hand and arm bites. Rope, belt, necktie,
undershirt, a shirt sleeve, or communications wire may be
used as field expedient tourniquets. Using a knife,
razor, or other sharp article, make crisscross incisions
across the fang marks and on any swollen or discolored
areas. These incisions should be about inch across
and as deep as the fangs are believed to have penetrated.
Twist the tourniquet so that only a slight flow of blood
comes from the wound —and start suction on the in-
cisions. If there are open sores or bad teeth in the
mouth, cause the wounds to bleed as much as possible
with the hand, using a “milking” or squeezing motion
away from the heart. If the inside of the mouth is
intact, it is safe to suck the blood and poison out of the
wounds and spit it out. After applying first aid, ride,
if possible, or walk slowly to an aid station for medical
treatment. The tourniquet should be kept tight for
about 20 to 30 minutes, then loosened for 10-to 15
seconds, then tightened again. Remember to take the
dead snake to the aid station for identification.
( b ) The snake-bite suction kit consists of a tourniquet,
a rubber bulb, two metal suction applicators, and a razor
blade. The tourniquet and razor blade are to be used
as outlined in (a) above. The metal applicator is in-
serted in the suction bulb, air is squeezed out of the bulb,
and the metal applicator is applied to one of the criss-
cross incisions. The bulb is permitted to fill with blood,
venom, and air; is emptied and applied to other criss-
cross incisions, if any. This process is continued.
Venom can be extracted from the tissues as late as three
to five hours after the bite. Multiple crisscross incisions
should be made over the swollen area, especially at the
advancing edge of the swelling, and suction applied.
After applying first aid as outlined herein, move the
patient to an aid station for medical treatment.


(c) Do not attempt “home remedies” such as drinking
alcohol, cauterization, eating the snake, or using potas-
sium permanganate —they do not work, and are very
dangerous. Suction and antivenom injection are the
best treatment, and the sooner they are applied, the
quicker will be the recovery.
Note. Some people are allergic to certain types of antivenom.
In some cases, the sensitivity of the victim to the antivenom may
cause a more dangerous condition than the original snake-bite.
Sensitivity tests should be made on all snake-bite victims before
injection of antivenom.


Chapter 3
JUNGLE SERVICE
Section I. TRAINING FOR JUNGLE SERVICE
23. Physical Conditioning
a. During training for jungle operations, continuous
emphasis must be placed on physical conditioning. Of-
ficers and men must follow a strict program designed to
increase stamina. In the final periods of training all
work should be in the field. Difficult tactical marches
constitute good conditioning exercises. Tactical exer-
cises should be conducted over the most difficult terrain
available. Swimming is one of the best all-around
exercises; jungle training areas frequently include swim-
ming facilities. Obstacle courses of the ordinary type
provide another excellent means of conditioning.
b. Acclimatization. ( 1 ) Prior to entering a jungle
combat area, troops from temperate zones should under-
go a special period of training, gradually increasing in
hardship, in a jungle area of similar climate and terrain
to that in which they are to fight. This training period
is required regardless of the physical condition of the
troops, although good physical condition will permit
considerable shortening of the period. For seasoned
troops, a period of four weeks should suffice. Longer
periods result in staleness and a decrease in efficiency.
The general health, and hence the effectiveness of a
command subject to strenuous exertion and poor living
conditions in the tropics, degenerates progressively with
the passage of time. Ideally, therefore, the period of
training should be conducted in a tropical or subtropical
area thoroughly controlled by friendly troops; movement
to the combat zone should be planned to permit arrival


of the troops only early enough before being committed
to action to allow a brief tune-up following the period
of inactivity during travel; one week should be sufficient
time for this tune-up.
(2) When work is begun at the time of first exposure
to the heat and progressively increased with the limits
of tolerance of the man, full acclimatization (the ability
to perform a maximum amount of strenuous work in
the heat) is attained most quickly. A schedule, with
alternating rest and work periods of one-half hour, and
which provides for work during the cooler morning hours
and in the hot afternoon hours, should be set up accord-
ing to the following plan:
Proposed Schedule of Work During Period of Acclimati-
zation :
When maximum air temp,
is 90° to 105° F.
Hours of work
When maximum air
temp, is 105° F. and
over
First day —
0700-0900 and 1500-1700
0700-0900 and 1500-1000
Second day
0700-1000 and 1430-1630
0700-1000 and 1500-1600
Third dav
0700-1000 and 1400-1700
0700-1000 and 1400-1600
0700-1100 and 1330-1750
0700-1000 and 1330-1630
Fifth day.
Regular duty
Regular duty
0700-1100 and 1330-1630
Sixth day
Regular duty
(3) Once acclimatized, the soldier will retain his
adaptation for from one to two weeks after he leaves the
hot environment. If not reexposed to high temperatures,
the acclimatization will then decrease at a variable rate.
Most men lose the major portion of their acclimatization
in one month.
(4) The well-acclimatized man deprived of adequate
rest at night is incapable of producing his customary
'■ amount of work in the heat on the ensuing day, or does
so less efficiently.
(5) Officers who know the work capacities of their
men can determine their degree of acclimatization and
whether or not it is safe for them to continue activity.


The acclimatized man is alert, performs his work ener-
getically and without symptoms. In contrast, the unac-
climatized man working in the heat becomes dull and
apathetic, performs his work poorly, and may manifest
to varying degrees, either singly or in combination, the
symptoms and signs of heat exhaustion.
c. Water Requirements. (1) In the jungle, where
the humidity is high, sweat does not evaporate but runs
off the skin; therefore, cooling is less efficient and water
losses may be greater.
(2) At high temperatures a resting man may lose as
much as a pint of water per hour during the day by
sweating; if he works, his water loss (and requirement)
will increase in direct proportion to the amount of work
done. Hardworking personnel, such as engineers, march-
ing men, and members of labor battalions, may require
as much as 3 gallons of water per man per day. Any
restriction of water below the levels necessary for the
men will result in rapid loss of efficiency, reduction in
ability to work, and deterioration in morale. If restric-
tion is continued for hours, temperatures will rise and
heat exhaustion occur. There is no advantage in using
thirst quenchers such as chewing gum, fruit drops, etd
For a given amount of work under high temperature
conditions, it has been found that water consumption is
substantially the same whether water is taken only at
meal times or taken when thirsty. The greatest benefit
will be obtained and maximum efficiency result if water
is taken at short rather than at long intervals. Drinking
in small amounts when thirsty is the ideal practice.
d. Salt Requirements. In all circumstances, the
loss of a large volume of water through sweat is associ-
ated with a loss of salt. The amounts of salt taken in
the normal diet are adequate to supply and make up
for the losses when the total water intake is under 1
gallon per day. Above these levels, added salt is needed.
It is best taken in solution in the drinking water. It is
particularly necessary that salt be taken in the first few
days of exposure to heat, since the losses of salt then are


greater than after acclimatization. Water containing the
proper amount of salt can be prepared as follows:
(1) One pound table salt to 100 gallons of water.
(2) 0.3 of a pound table salt to the Lyster bag (36
gallons).
(3) One-fourth teaspoonful table salt to each canteen
of water.
(4) Two 10-grain salt tablets dissolved in every quart
of water consumed. The consumption of undissolved
salt tablets is not recommended.
e. Heat Stroke, Heat Exhaustion and Heat
Cramps. (1) General. Troops training or operating
in hot climates may experience one or more of the ill
effects of exposure to high temperatures. This is more
likely to occur if there is also a high humidity. There
are three well-defined conditions which should be under-
stood by all line officers and enlisted men. These are:
(a) heat stroke, ( b) heat exhaustion, (c) heat cramps.
The cause and methods of preventing these are similar.
However, the three conditions produce distipctive signs
and symptoms which everyone should be able to recog-
nize at once in order to give proper care and attention
to the victim.
(2) Heat Stroke, (a) General. This condition
often appears suddenly. There is headache, dizziness,
often with nausea and vomiting, and then collapse, de-
lirium and unconsciousness. The first sign may be that
of collapse. The important thing to remember is that
the skin is hot and dry. This is due to the fact that in
heat stroke the temperature goes very high (106° F. or
higher).
(b) Emergency treatment. The one thing that will
save the victim’s life is to lower his- temperature quickly.
In the field do not wait for medical treatment or an
ambulance, but immediately remove the patient’s clothes
except for the shorts, and whenever possible sprinkle his
entire body with water. Have some attendants briskly
rub the arms, and legs, and trunk to increase blood circu-
lation to the skin and others fan him continually to in-


crease the speed of water evaporation and its consequent
cooling effect. Medical attention should be secured as
soon as possible, as the patient will have to be hospital-
ized. However, measures to cool the body must be con-
tinued during the transfer of the patient to the hospital.
(3) Heat exhaustion, (a) General. This condition
is manifested by headache, drowsiness, extreme weakness,
dizziness and inability to walk. There may be some
muscle cramps. The important thing to remember is
that in heat exhaustion the skin is moist, cold, and
clammy. While this condition is frequently incapacitat-
ing, the death rate is low.
(b) Emergency treatment. Removal of the individ-
ual to a cool place where he may rest and receive large
quantities of salt water will usually bring about recovery.
However, no chances must be taken, and medical at-
tention must be secured or the patient hospitalized.
(4) Heat cramps, (a) General. Heat cramps are
manifested by painful spasms of the muscles, more fre-
quently of the legs, arms, and the abdominal wall. Their
severity varies from mild and annoying to severe and
completely disabling.
(b) Emergency treatment. These symptoms are di-
rectly due to lack of salt in the body. They are relieved
when this salt loss is replaced. Treatment consists of
drinking salt water freely. Severe cases must be hospital-
ized as it will probably be necessary to give the salt
solution intravenously.
24. Mental and Psychological Training
The psychological effects of the jungle as outlined in
paragraph 8 can be completely overcome only by experi-
ence, although common-sense talks are helpful. Train-
ing in jungle areas will do much to overcome these
effects. In jungle warfare, as in all warfare, psycholog-
ical and mental training to accustom the men’s minds to
the rigors of the battlefield are essential. The use of live
ammunition and high explosives, overhead fire, and
other phases of battlefield inoculation exercises are of in-
613291°—44 3


creased importance in jungle warfare training because
the jungle itself adds to the mental strain encountered in
other battle areas. Extensive training of this type
should be conducted in noncombat jungle areas.
Section II. REQUIREMENTS OF JUNGLE SERVICE
-25. Discipline
An unusually high state of discipline is essential for suc-
cessful jungle operations. Mental discipline, camou-
flage discipline, fire discipline, march discipline, light
discipline—all phases of conduct must be guided by a
strict sense of the effects of one’s every action on the
operation as a whole. Discipline in all its forms should
be so thoroughly inculcated in the mind of each man
that he not only conducts himself properly, but knows
that each of the other men in the unit will do the same,
under conditions of uncertainty and profound psycholog-
ical strain. Strict enforcement of discipline by unit
leaders is essential in all phases of jungle service.
26. Suspicion
The jungle fighter must be constantly suspicious. The
high degree of concealment which the jungle offers re-
quires slow and careful searching for the enemy; ele-
ments assigned security missions must search every
possible hiding place to prevent the bypassing of enemy
groups which might thereby be enabled to attack from
the flanks or rear. There is always the possibility that
enemy observers may be concealed nearby to discover
and report preparations for a forthcoming operation. It
is best to assume that the enemy is always nearby, watch-
ing and listening. The limited visibility of the jungle
facilities deceptive tactics; adroit deception can fre-
quently permit a small unit to overcome a force many
times its own size. Ruses of many kinds may be applied.
Demonstrations of strength in one area while attacking
from another; ambushes; infiltration to attack command


posts, supply points, and disrupt communications; and
extensive use of snipers are forms of deceptive and har-
assing tactics which are well adapted to jungle terrain.
It must be borne in mind that ruses are equally usable by
the enemy, and constant care must be exercised not to
fall a victim to deception. Important ruses must be
initiated and coordinated by the largest unit involved in
a particular operation.
27. Patience
One of the primary requisites of jungle operations is
stealth. Stealthy movement requires patience. Simi-
larly, patience is necessary to detect stealthy movement
of the enemy. Patience, though not an American char-
acteristic, can be learned and developed by constant
practice. It is an essential of successful jungle
operations.
28. Scouting and Patrolling
a. Small patrols of trained scouts will be able to move
through jungle areas, avoid enemy outposts, slip through
hostile defenses, and penetrate enemy rear areas. Such
patrols will often constitute one of the most important
means available to the commander for gaining informa-
tion of the enemy.
b. Special training of members of such patrols should
include jungle lore, training in concealment, movement,
observation, knowledge of enemy characteristics and
habits, and the identification of weapons by sound.
c. For a detailed discussion of jungle patrolling, see
section VI, chapter 4, and FM 21-75.
29. Leadership
The hardship, of jungle operations demands the highest
type of leadership. The difficulties of control necessitate
decentralization, which results in increased importance of
small-unit actions. Because of this, junior officers and
noncommissioned officers must possess outstanding initia-
tive, boldness, and determination. Similarly, the de-


velopment of self-reliance on the part of each individual
is an important training objective.
Section III. WEAPONS, CLOTHING, AND EQUIPMENT
30. Weapons
a. Weapons must often be reduced to those which,
with the required amount of ammunition, can be carried
by the troops themselves or on the limited transport
capable of moving with the troops. This frequently
reduces the number of supporting weapons, requiring
that tactical plans be based mainly on the use of weapons
which can be carried by hand and which do not use too
much nor too heavy ammunition. Decisions concerning
the amounts and kinds of ammunition and weapons to
be carried are command decisions which must be made
by the local commander after careful consideration of
the difficulties of transport and the types of weapons
needed to accomplish his mission. Hand and rifle
grenades and -mortars, although heavy and difficult to
transport, are highly effective jungle weapons; small-
caliber weapons and ammunition, though less difficult to
transport, are inadequate by themselves for the accom-
plishment of any large-scale mission.
b. Suitable weapons for use in jungle warfare, where
observation and fields of fire are very limited, are short-
range arms easily supplied with ammunition and readily
transported over difficult terrain. The weapons which
best meet the above conditions are the rifle and bayonet,
automatic rifle, carbine, pistol, submachine gun, hand
and rifle grenades, machete, and trench knife. The
submachine gun and pistol have the advantage of using
the same type of lightweight ammunition. The bayonet
should be sufficiently short to reduce danger of its be-
coming entangled in vines and foliage. Hand grenades
are the most important defensive weapons for night at-
tacks and are invaluable in attacking dug-in positions;
they may also be used in booby traps. Each rifleman
should carry five or six hand grenades. The machete,


a tool indispensable to the jungle soldier, is also an
excellent weapon for close combat.
c. Light and heavy machine guns and 60-mm and
81-mm mortars are less maneuverable, less suited to in-
stant use, and require ammunition more difficult to trans-
port; however, they are very valuable and can be
transported by pack, small carts, or on the backs of men.
Lightweight, 60-mm and 81-mm mortars, specially de-
signed for jungle use, are more easily transported, and
their effectiveness in jungle warfare is equal to that of the
heavier models. Rocket launchers, firing either high
explosive or white phosphorous rockets, are desirable for
use against caves and well constructed defensive posi-
tions; flame throwers are also effective against such
positions.
d. While light, mobile units are an essential in jungle
warfare, their armament may be insufficient for the at-
tack of strongly organized positions. Other troops, with
heavier weapons, must be moved up rapidly to reinforce
advanced units once such a position is uncovered. It
must be borne in mind that jungle regions often adjoin
savannas or other open areas, in which jungle growth is
relatively sparse, as well as villages and towns from which
artillery and other supporting ground weapons can be
effectively employed. The prompt preparation of trails
and roads for rapid movement of artillery is one of the
primary missions of engineers. In preparing for opera-
tions in jungle regions, a careful preliminary study of
terrain conditions in the probable area of operations will
aid the commander materially in determining the com-
position and armament for the forces involved.
31. Clothing and Equipment
a. Each item of clothing and equipment must be con-
sidered in terms of its necessity, and serviceability in
jungle environment. Lightness of weight is essential be-
cause of the difficulties of transport. Serviceability is
essential, because of the problems of resupply. Every
effort should be made to reduce to the minimum the


amount of equipment to be used, but care should be
exercised that no essential items are omitted. During
training, men should be required to use only items of
clothing and equipment which will be taken into com-
bat areas; not only will this teach them to live with a mini-
mum of essentials, but also it may indicate the nonessen-
tiality of some things originally thought to be necessary.
Clothing worn during training should be of the same color
and pattern as that to be worn in combat. To change
will create additional difficulty in identification of friendly
troops at a time when reduced visibility necessarily
creates an identification problem.
b. Tight-fitting clothing is unsatisfactory, since such
clothing is hot and restricts movement. Articles of cloth-
ing and equipment made of wool, leather, or felt have
proven unsatisfactory for jungle use because of their
heat-retaining qualities, absorption of moisture, and sus-
ceptibility to mold and fungus rot. Such articles should
be replaced whenever possible by cotton, rubber, and
canvas items. As an article of outer clothing, the com-
bat suit, two-piece, dark green, herringbone twill, has
been found highly satisfactory. Rubber-soled canvas
boots are desirable for stealthy movement through the
jungle, but are hard on the feet if worn for long periods.
The issue field shoe, with composition sole, is satisfactory
for general use. In some rocky areas, hobnails in the
soles of the shoes are desirable. The helmet liner, Ml,
has been found to be much more satisfactory than the
fatigue hat for jungle wear. In combat, the steel helmet
may be easily camouflaged by the use of leaves and
twigs held in place by a rubber band, or by the helmet
net. A mosquito-proof head net and gloves are an
inseparable part of each individual’s equipment. A
raincoat or a lightweight combination poncho and
shelter half is indispensable.
32. Care of Weapons, Clothing, and Equipment
a. Weapons, clothing, and equipment receive hard
usage in the jungle. Men must be trained to protect all


articles and to clean, dry, or repair them whenever prac-
ticable. Our weapons and equipment are the best and
will not become unserviceable unless neglected, but the
damp heat of jungle areas requires that special care be
given to all weapons and other nonrustproof equipment
in daily or frequent use. The humidity, the mud, and
the frequent shortage of oil and other materials necessary
for cleaning weapons combine to make weapon main-
tenance in the jungle particularly difficult. All weapons
and equipment must receive constant preventive main-
tenance. The potential battle efficiency of a combat
unit undergoing training can be determined almost pre-
cisely by the condition in which it maintains weapons
and equipment. Equally, this reflects the military lead-
ership qualities of its officers and noncommissioned
officers.
b. One of the most important duties of subordinate
leaders is to carry out frequent personal inspections to
determine the state of maintenance of weapons, ammuni-
tion, magazines, spare parts, and accessories. Time and
circumstances will rarely permit a thorough inspection
of all weapons in a platoon at one time. Under such
circumstances, frequent random inspections or spot
checks will be made.
c. (1) All personnel (including officers) of a unit
operating in the jungle should carry individual small cans
of preservative lubricating oil. Extra oil must be car-
ried by members of machine-gun squads.
(2) In hot, humid climates, light or special preserva-
tive lubricating oil should be used on weapons; in salt-
water atmospheres, medium preservative lubricating oil
should be used.
(3) Three or four cleaning rods must be carried in
each rifle squad. Patches should be carried by each
individual.
(4) Weapons must be disassembled, inspected, and
cleaned daily; in rainy weather, it may be necessary to
do this 2or 3 times a day. By laying rifles on crotched


sticks several inches off the ground at night, and placing
banana leaves over them, they can be kept dry.
(5) Breech mechanisms can be protected by tying an
oil-soaked cloth around them. This should be attached
in such a manner that the cloth can be easily removed
by means of a quick pull on one end.
(6) Wooden parts of weapons should be inspected to
see that swelling caused by moisture does not cause bind-
ing of. the working parts. (If swelling has occurred,
shave off only enough wood to relieve the binding.) A
light coat of raw linseed oil applied at intervals and
well rubbed in with the heel of the hand will help to
keep out moisture. Allow oil to soak in for a few hours
and then wipe and polish the wood with a dry, clean
rag. Care should be taken to see that linseed oil does
not get into the mechanism or on metal parts, as it will
gum up when dry. The stock and hand guard should
be dismounted when this oil is applied.
(7) Accessories, spare parts, and magazines will rust
and deteriorate rapidly if not cared for diligently.
(8) Optical equipment such as mortar sights, com-
passes, and field glasses should receive special care. Field
glasses and compasses, when not in use, should be pro-
tected from moisture.
(9) All machetes must be sharpened and oiled before
going into a jungle operation. (See app. II.) If one
man in the squad carries a small commercial stone, it
will be found helpful for sharpening machete blades
which soon get badly dulled and nicked.
(10) Tropical insects, especially termites and ants,
will often damage or destroy fabrics or wood in a few
hours. Therefore, whenever practicable, clothing and
equipment should be hung off the ground, away from
most of the destructive insects. Troops leaders must
check each night to see that their men hang their cloth-
ing, packs, shoes, etc., from bushes, ropes, or other avail-
able supports.
(11) Exposing clothing and equipment to sunlight to
dry them and kill germs is desirable. However, unneces


sary exposure of fabrics to intense tropical sunlight
weakens them and bleaches even the best of dyes. Cam-
ouflaged uniforms will fade more quickly if they are
left for hours in the sunlight.
d. A tendency exists to turn in dirty clothes and to
draw new whenever possible, rather than to launder the
dirty clothes. When the situation is an active one, this
is to be expected, as no time exists for washing clothes.
When the situation is stabilized, and time, soap, and
water are available, dirty clothes should be boiled and
washed. Enforcement of these provisions is a function
of command.
e. Immediate disciplinary action must be taken when
men waste or lose their equipment through carelessness.
Much equipment will be unavoidably lost or damaged
incident to training and active operations. Such losses
are legitimate, but wastage due to carelessness is a serious
military offense.
Section IV. PRACTICAL HINTS FOR JUNGLE LIVING
33. Sleeping
a. During the dry season, men can sleep comfortably
on the ground. They must, however, sleep under mos-
quito nets. (See ch. 2.)
b. (1) When sleeping in the jungle during the rainy
season, a man must be off the ground and under a mos-
quito net. This is best accomplished by the use of an
insect-proof hammock fabricated of light, durable, water-
proof material. The hammock should be furnished with
a rainproof, adjustable top with attachable insect netting,
and should not exceed six pounds in weight complete
with netting. In dry weather, a man can sleep on the
ground in a sleeping bag improvised from ponchos (see
figs. 2 and 3).
(2) Lacking a hammock similar to the one described
above, improvised hammocks or jungle beds may be used.
Hammocks are made of blankets, oblong pieces of canvas,
or shelter halves. A two-man, off-the-ground jungle


Figure 2. Poncho used as raincoat.


bed may be made as follows: Four forked posts are
firmly planted in the ground, the forks one foot above
the ground. A frame of 2-inch poles is laid in the forks;
across this frame thinner poles are laid. Poles are
fastened together with vines or strips of bark. The plat-
form is then covered with light branches and leaves to
form a mattress. Care must be exercised that the
branches and leaves used for this purpose are free of in-
sects. A blanket is then spread over this mattress to hold
Figure 3. Ponchos used as sleeping bag.
everything in place; over all are pitched the shelter tent
and mosquito net, or in dry weather, only the mosquito
net.
34. Food
a. For jungle service, all food carried should give the
maximum food value for the minimum weight. The use
of utensils in cooking and transporting cooked food only
creates danger of food contamination; to the maximum
extent possible, foods should be limited to those which
are ready to eat with the minimum amount of cooking.
b. Most foods eaten by Americans contain a high
percentage of water in their natural state. Rations for
long distance mobile foot operations should be essentially
dry. Since water obtained locally in wet tropical regions
may be made safe to drink by the use of purification
tablets, its increased intake should make up for the lack
©f water in such rations, and is much simpler than back-
packing water. Furthermore, since cooking or heating


food during jungle fighting is usually impracticable, com-
bat rations are designed to be eaten with or without the
application of heat. The advantages of ready-to-eat
rations of minimum bulk and weight should never be
forgotten by men operating on foot under exhausting
jungle conditions.
c. All components of the C and K rations may be
eaten unheated. Only the cocoa beverage powder, the
lemon powder, and the coffee powder need to be pre-
pared in any way. These powders dissolve in unheated
water. The sugar can be used to sweeten any of these
soluble foods to taste.
d. Variations in the ration can be provided by heat-
ing, although troops who are actively engaged cannot
expect to eat hot meals. They must get along on field
ration C, D, K, the 10-in-1 ration, or other prepared
rations. Field ration Dis suitable for use as an individ-
ual reserve and may be regarded as an emergency ration,
however, it creates thirst and should not be eaten except
when drinking water is available. Small cans of fruit
juice may be issued to supplement the basic rations.
Soy-bean foods, if obtainable, provide high nutritional
elements.
e. All soldiers should learn how to cook rice, a staple
of most oriental diets which will usually be contained in
the captured rations of oriental armies operating in the
jungle. Rice should be prepared with a small quantity
of water, and steamed. Boiled rice, the meat and vege-
table component of a “C” ration, and soy sauce make
a good field meal.
/. (1) Waterproof food bags are designed to carry
dry rations under humid conditions. Since these bags
are made of high-grade coated materials, men should
keep them for the many months of service they will give.
(2) The containers of the C and K rations protect
their contents from insects, and from contact with humid
air. However, this protection ends as soon as the con-
tainers of such rations, or of dry foods such as milk
powder or dried fruit, are broken or opened. All wet


or damp foods must be eaten immediately after opening
the containers. Dry foods, however, may be kept for
several days, provided they are placed at once in water-
proof food bags, and the bags are securely closed.
(3) To prevent humid air and insects from damaging
rations in waterproof food bags, the mouth of each bag
should be closed by binding its string tightly around its
mouth, and securing it with a simple bow knot.
(4) Waterproof food bags are also very useful for
carrying foraged foods, such as rice, dried meat, and
nuts.
g. Clean food is essential. A lifelong disease such as
amoebic dysentery may be contracted from eating even
the smallest amount, of unclean or contaminated food
(see also par. 19). The following rules are basic re-
quirements for keeping food clean:
(1) Keep flies and all other insects away from food
and utensils.
(2) Stay away from native buildings. They are fre-
quently the worst sources of disease.
(3) Wash hands before eating. The use of soap is
essential if cleanliness is to be assured.
(4) Disinfect each drinking or eating vessel. A small
amount of chlorine solution will kill germs.
(5) If forced to eat food cooked by natives, be sure
to dish it up while it is boiling. Put it into a plate
which has been washed and disinfected.
(6) Clean the top of every can and the can opener
(or blade of knife used for can opener) by pouring a
small amount of boiling water over them, or by using a
small amount of disinfected water from the canteen.
If the contents of the can are more than will be used at
one meal, pour from the can into the mess kit only the
amount desired for the meal. The remainder of the
can is sterile and will keep until the next meal if it is
protected from insects and not disturbed or contami-
nated by introducing into it a utensil or other device.
There is no danger of keeping food in the original con-
tainer if it is handled in this manner.


'(7) Cook all meats until they are thoroughly done.
(8) Cook only enough food for one meal. Do not
keep cooked food for future meals.
(9) Remove the skin of any fruit prior to eating. Do
no bite through the skin.
g. Men must be instructed never to eat with their
hands. They must always use a utensil or they must
fashion a spoon out of the top of a ration can, or a
piece of cardboard from a ration container.
35. Cooking Utensils
a. Most cooking in the jungle is done by individuals or
small groups of men who pool their resources and pre-
pare food for themselves in one or two containers. Gen-
erally, the only cooking vessels available will be helmets,
empty “C” ration cans, canteen cups, or the tops of
mess cans. Heating the helmet will remove the temper
and reduce its effectiveness.
b. Cooking utensils need include only a spoon and a
metal vessel for boiling. The canteen cup is useful both
as a cooking and eating utensil. Most foods obtained in
the jungle can be cooked over an open fire.
36. Alcohol
Do not drink alcoholic liquor in the jungle. Taken in
any quantity, it numbs the senses, and leads to excesses
and the violation of fundamental health rules. It may
be the direct cause of sickness which not only affects the
man personally, but also decreases the effective fighting
strength of the whole military team.
37. Medical Care
Frequently, the individual must provide his own first aid
by attending to his own scratches and bites at once. If
medicines are in sealed kits or are carried inside a pack,
men will not use them early or often enough for pre-
ventive purposes. Each man should carry, easily avail-
able, a small bottle of iodine with applicator top and a
small roll of adhesive tape. Water purification (Hala


zone] tablets, salt (sodium chloride) tablets, atabrine of
quinine, and a small bottle of insect repellent should be
carried by each man. A supply of these items is in-
cluded in the individual jungle first-aid kit, M 2.
38. Trails
a. Trails are necessary for rapid progress in the jungle.
The beds of swiftly flowing streams may be considered
natural trails, if the water is not too deep. Before start-
ing on any jungle trip, one should study the trails shown
on maps and make inquiries of natives. Questions should
be put to the natives in such form that they are forced to
give information themselves, and cannot merely answer
“Yes” or “No”; natives will almost invariably give an
affirmative answer to a “yes-or-no” question. For ex-
ample, one should ask a native: “Where does this trail
go?” and not “Does this trail go to the village?”
b. It is usually safe to assume that trails exist between
important habitations even if none appear on maps.
Often a circuitous trail will be better than the most di-
rect one, because during the dry season trails are often
shortened by use of ground that is swampy and im-
passable in the wet season. Many trails that traverse
steep slopes are very difficult after rains, especially if they
have been traversed by pack animals. Maps can seldom
be depended on for accurate trail routes, since trails
change due to erosion, fallen trees, and swollen streams.
During the rainy season, vegetation rapidly overgrows
trails which are not regularly used. Aerial photographs
do not show trails which lead through dense growth.
c. If unfordable streams are to be crossed, men and
animals must previously have been trained to enter water
and swim without hesitation. Care must be taken to
prevent them from entering deep water with a full pack.
Loads should be removed and towed across. A full pack
load, much of which is above water, may drown the
animal. Flotation bladders may be used by the men.
d . When not in close proximity to the enemy, and
rapidity of movement is essential, full use should be made


of existing trails and stream beds. Movement off trails is
laborious, and is impracticable except for special opera-
tions of short duration. The danger of ambush is greater
along trails, but proper reconnaissance, patrolling, and
use of scouts (especially native scouts and trained dogs)
minimize the danger.
e. Natives are often in the habit of blazing trees as
“sign posts,” in a manner similar to that used by woods-
men throughout the world. The type and shape of the
blaze mark can be used as a code to indicate where the
trail leads to. In rear areas, artificial signs may be used.
Rope or vines stretched waist high may be used to indi-
cate the route of short trails at night.
39. Expedients
Jungle expedients require both originality and fore-
thought. The following suggestions are offered as aids
to development of expedients by individuals and patrol
leaders:
a. Carry matches in a completely waterproof con-
tainer, or carry waterproofed matches; otherwise perspi-
ration alone will often make them useless.
b. Never go anywhere without a compass, preferably
a lensatic or prismatic compass; be certain that its use is
understood.
c. Carry a light hook and line or a light gig, such as a
spear with barbed points, for fishing. A stick of black
powder or other explosive may be used to stun fish. Ex-
plosives are the quickest and surest of all fishing
equipment.
d. Next to the machete, a good pocketknife is a man’s
most useful possession in the jungle.
e. Ponchos, in addition to their primary use as rain-
coats, may be made into improvised sleeping bags, sun
shelters, and tents. (See par. 33b and figs. 2 to 5
inclusive.)
/. A watch is useful in determining direction and esti-
mating distances.
g. Most mud or other solids in water can be removed


by straining the water through a cloth or by stirring a
small amount of alum into the water to cause the solids
to settle. If used for drinking, the water must then be
boiled or otherwise disinfected.
h. If lost, remember that if a man goes down slope
he will come to a stream, and that watercourses, besides
furnishing a means of travel and a supply of water and
food, almost always lead to inhabited valleys or coastal
regions.
Figure 4. Ponchos used as sun shelters.
i. Do not attempt to travel alone at night. Halt early
enough in the afternoon to make camp, build a fire, and
collect plenty of dead wood before darkness. Fires are
advisable only when not in the presence of the enemy.
j. In order to build a fire in wet weather, first obtain
shelter from the rain, and then split out the heartwood
of dead limbs broken from trees. A small can of solidi-
fied alcohol is very useful for starting a fire if damp
wood must be used for fuel. It will last for many days.
The synthetic fire tablet may be used, if available.
613291°—44 4


k. Vines can be used in place of string or rope for
many purposes.
l. Edible fruits can usually be identified by signs of
animals having eaten them. Avoid eating unknown
Figure 5. Ponchos used as tents.
fruits and plants except in emergency; some of them
contain deadly poisons. (See app. I.)
m. Sleep off the ground to avoid dampness, reptiles,
and insects. Climb a tree if mosquitoes and other insects
are too bad near the ground.
n. If possible, travel with one or more companions.


o. Do not fear the jungle. A man can travel alone
for weeks in uninhabited country if he uses his head and
does not become panicky. Do not try to tear a path
through vines or other jungle growth. Cutting a path
saves energy. Pick a route carefully, making full use of
the sun, the stars, the compass, and the terrain.
p. Do not try to bully or rush the natives. (See par.
45.)
q. Know how to find water, for it is indispensable.
Small amounts can be found in certain plants, including
the wild grape, the traveller’s palm, and the water vine.
Sand breaks in a coral reef often indicate fresh water
several feet below the surface, since coral will grow in
salt water only.
40. Jungle Navigation
a. For determining direction without compass, map
reading in the field, and use of the compass, see FM
21-75 and FM 21-25.
b. Land navigation is one of the most important sub-
jects of special training for jungle operations. Without
a good knowledge of this subject, control is impossible.
Without control, excellence in other phases of training
goes for naught. The ability of all commanders and
leaders to maintain control enhances the fighting value
of the unit.
c. Density of vegetation makes jungle navigation
difficult by day or night. Maps are seldom dependable
for accurate portrayal of roads and trails which quickly
become unrecognizable through erosion and under-
growth when not in constant use. Aerial photographs
of jungle terrain seldom show more than the treetops,
while limited fields of vision restrict the use of the com-
pass. These difficulties can be overcome, however, by
training the individual soldier in jungle navigation in
the jungle. This consists of training of the individual’s
faculties, as well as training in use of the artificial aids
given him.
d. If the use of trails is not restricted by tactical con


siderations, they should be followed in the interest of
rapid progress. A study of map trails should be made
before starting on the mission. It is usually safe to as-
sume that trails exist between important villages, even
though not shown on the map.
e. Navigation through the jungle without dependence
on roads and trails requires considerable map-reading
ability. It implies skill in following a predetermined
route through terrain which offers no landmarks, and
knowing constantly one’s location with reference to the
starting point. To do this successfully one must know
the relationship between direction and the distance
covered.
/. Successful jungle navigation will be facilitated by:
(1) Movements of short distances at a time, 100 to
300 yards, with frequent checks of map with ground,
measuring back azimuths with the compass when prac-
ticable. Direction once lost in the jungle is very difficult
to regain.
(2) An up-to-date large-scale map or route sketch,
preferably 1/25,000 or larger, together with a compass
in good working condition.
(3) Navigating personnel. These include a map
reader, a compass man, a recorder of detail, and a dis-
tance measurer who counts his strides, and computes
distance covered by elapsed time. Personnel of this type
should be thoroughly trained in advance.
g. Jungle navigators should be trained in the jungle.
There is no substitute for this type of training.
h. If a man becomes lost, he should sit down and
think calmly. He should ask himself these questions:
Were my compass calculations correct? Where did I
get off the route? In most cases, careful, calm thought
will reveal where he went wrong.
i. The question of the route to be followed and the
method of maintaining direction will depend upon the
size of the objective to be reached. For example: if it
is desired to reach a river known to be located west of
the present position, it is only necessary to strike out


through the jungle, following the easiest route, but main-
taining a general westerly direction. If the traveling is
fairly easy and the route followed does not wind too
much, the river should eventually be reached. If, how-
ever, it is desired to reach a native village which the map
shows to be located on this river and due west of the
present position, more precise navigation methods must
be employed. Two possible routes could be followed
to the village; first, a straight line going up and down
the mountains and possibly across a swamp or two, or
secondly, a course following a circuitous path, but one
so controlled as to come out on the river at the village.
-The first route is the shortest one, but should not be the
one chosen unless the country is reasonably flat, the
jungle fairly open, and there are no swamps to cross —
a series of conditions seldom found for any great distance
in jungle terrain. The route actually followed in most
cases should be a combination of the two methods; that
is, following a straight line where the going is good, but
skirting around a swamp or hill. If any route but a
straight line is followed, however, it is necessary to keep
a plotted record of the directions and distances travelled,
in order to reach a final objective as small as a village.
j. In choosing the route, the general rule is that walk-
ing is usually best on the ridges and most difficult on the
banks of the rivers (except small, fast streams with tra-
versable beds). The jungle is usually more open on the
ridges, drainage is good, and the ground is therefore less
muddy. In addition, since walking is easiest on the
ridges, animals and men have often made trails there.
Walking along the river bank is likely to be difficult be-
cause of dense, second-growth jungle, mud, swamps, and
side streams. The general rule therefore is to walk on
the top of the ridges if they run in the right direction.
If they do not, walk in the river valleys, but well back
from the river’s edge. If it is necessary to travel in the
valley of a small stream, it may be easier to wade in the
stream if the water is low and the bottom hard.
k. The easiest way to travel through the jungle is by


water if there are no rapids. If a boat cannot be ob-
tained from the local inhabitants, a raft can be made.
However, water routes are very vulnerable to ambush.
/. Because it is seldom possible to maintain direction
in the jungle by landmarks, it is necessary to know how
to navigate by the process of “dead reckoning.” The
process is similar to that used by a ship captain attempt-
ing to reach a small island in the middle of the ocean,
if he were forced to sail other than a straight course and
if he were unable, because of dense fogs, day and night,
to determine his position from time to time by celestial
observation. The process is to determine and plot on
paper the direction and distance traveled on each leg
of a journey. As an example, assume that it is desired
to travel from village Ato village B. The map indicates
that the azimuth of the line from village A to village B
is 45 °; that is, village B is exactly northeast of village A
(see fig. 6). The map also indicates that the distance
between the two villages is ten miles. Obviously the
shortest path between the two villages is the straight line
on an azimuth of 45°. But assume that it is not possible
to follow this line because of a large swamp. To skirt
the swamp it is necessary to leave village A on an azimuth
of 90°; that is, due east from the village. The traveller
continues due east from village A for a distance of seven
miles before he finds dry land on which he can turn
north toward village B. He then sits down and plots his
position on his map. He sees that village B must be due
north of his present position and at a distance of about
seven miles. He therefore turns due north and follows
this line directly to village B. This is a simple case, as
the course comprised only two legs, or elements. In
actual practice, many more legs will often be involved,
but the principle used is the same. The direction and
distance of each leg of the journey is plotted on the map
as a continuous line extending from the starting point.
The position at any time is known, therefore, and the
direction and distance from that point to the destination
can be determined. (See fig. 7.)


Figure 6. Jungle navigation by dead reckoning. The simplest case in which the
course comprises 2 legs or elements.


Figure 7. Jungle navigation by dead reckoning. Case involving by-passing of
two obstructions, in which the course comprises 4 legs or elements .


m. There are two methods of determining distance
by other than direct measurement. These are by pacing
and by intervals of time. Pacing means counting the
steps or strides (two steps) taken, the number of steps,
or strides, per hundred yards being known. The average
length of a step will be different for each man and it
will vary for each individual depending upon whether
the terrain is level or hilly, dry or muddy, wooded or
open. This can be determined only by a man actually
walking a known distance over each type of terrain at
his normal gait and counting his steps or strides. With
practice, considerable accuracy can be obtained by pac-
ing. Another method of measuring distance for general
jungle navigation is by time. No rules can be laid down
for determining exactly the distance a man will travel
through the jungle in a given time, however, this rate
will seldom exceed one mile per hour. By using this
figure as a guide, the rate of movement over varied ter-
rain can be estimated with reasonable accuracy. By a
check of the length of time of travel, the distance travelled
can be calculated. Such checking and estimating will
not enable a man to walk 10 or 15 miles from one village
to another and come out of the jungle exactly at the
second village. The method should, however, enable
him to come close enough to the second village to
encounter the trails leading to it.
n. If neither a compass nor a watch is available, the
sun must be used for determining both time and direc-
tion. This method is, however, very inaccurate. On
approximately 22 June, the sun is north of the
Equator; that is, over the Tropic of Cancer. Within
accuracy limits suitable for jungle navigation, it will
appear from any point within the Torrid Zone to rise
25° north of due east and set 25° north of due west.
On approximately 22 December, the sun is 23*/2° south
of the Equator; that is, over the Tropic of Capricorn,
and from within the Torrid Zone will appear to rise 25°
south of due east and to set 25° south of due west. On


approximately 21 March and 23 September, the sun is
directly over the Equator, and from any point within the
Torrid Zone will appear to rise in the true east and set
in the true west. With these few dates in mind it is
possible to estimate the position of the rising and setting
sun for any time of the year. It is then possible to
estimate directions from the sun until about 1000 and
after 1400. The sun may thus be used as a general
guide in walking a line in any desired direction. The
higher the sun above the horizon, the more difficult it
will be to estimate direction by its location; during and
about mid-day, its location will not serve as a practical
guide to determine direction.
o. In attempting to use a shadow to determine direc-
tion, it is desirable to use an improvised plumb bob. A
rock or piece of wood tied to the end of a 3- or 4-foot
length of thin vine will serve the purpose. This method
is unsatisfactory when the sun is nearly directly overhead.
p. Telling time by the sun is merely a matter of esti-
mating divisions of the sun’s arc overhead. For in-
stance, half of the arc would put the sun directly over-
head and the time would be noon. One quarter of the
arc would indicate 0900, and three quarters of the arc,
1500. This is based on the assumption that the sun
rises at exactly 0600 and sets at exactly 1800 when
observed from any point in the Torrid Zone, which is
not precisely true. The assumption is accurate enough,
however, for practical purposes.
q. Another method of determining direction in the
jungle is by the direction of prevailing winds. This is
an exceedingly doubtful procedure and should be used
only in an emergency. Although tropical areas are
characterized by winds which blow regularly from one
direction during a particular season, topography, local
storms, and the trees themselves affect wind direction,
making it impossible to determine directions from the
wind with any degree of accuracy except by averages
based upon observations covering a period of several


days. Factors close to the ground do much to influence
the direction of the wind, but reasonably reliable esti-
mates of direction can be made from observing the direc-
tion of the wind over water.
Section V. DEALINGS WITH NATIVE INHABITANTS
41. General.
a. Unless the sentiments of friendly inhabitants have
been clearly determined, they must be regarded with
suspicion. In general, since operations may be ma-
terially affected by their attitude, their friendship and
cooperation must be cultivated. Men must learn that
any act of violence or any effort to browbeat them can
have serious effects.
b. Loyal natives have been used as scouts, guides,
sources of military intelligence, carriers, litter bearers,
and as laborers in rear areas. The extent to which they
may be relied upon varies widely in different areas.
42. Native Troops
A commander of any expedition into jungle country
should take early steps to ascertain the sentiment of na-
tives. Once their friendly attitude is established, he
should attempt to avail himself of their assistance to
whatever extent possible. In some cases, a native auxil-
iary force may be formed. These troops will be of great
advantage in operations over unfamiliar terrain. They
provide a force at the disposal of the commander which,
for scouting, raiding, and harassing enemy communica-
tions, will prove invaluable. Their familiarity with the
terrain and knowledge of the people and the language
will compensate for their limited military training. The
use of native troops, organized and controlled by the
commander, will not only help to lessen objection to the
presence of our forces, but will strengthen solidarity
against a common enemy. In some regions, native
troops cannot be depended upon to stand and fight either
offensively or defensively. They may be used in raids


or ambushes or assigned in small numbers to act as guides
and scouts, to interpret, and to contact chieftains of
native villages.
43. Limitations.
a. Some native tribesmen are experienced fighters, but
others are bewildered by modern war. Reports by na-
tives concerning the size, armament, formation, and
equipment of the enemy cannot be depended upon and
in every case must be verified. This is not deceit on
their part, but merely a result of their lack of experience
in military matters.
b. All official dealings with natives must be conducted
through the proper agency. If there is no colonial agent
or administrator available, dealings should be through the
head man of the district, and all agreements relative to
employment should be with him. All pay and rewards
of cash, tobacco, cloth, or other medium of exchange
must be made through the agent or head man. In-
dividuals must not be permitted to barter or trade with
natives except with the approval of the agent.
44. Languages
Although native languages vary widely, most natives of
the southwest Pacific area are familiar with “pidgin
English,” and often, provided it is spoken slowly and
distinctly, can understand correct English. Their re-
plies in pidgin are fairly easily understood by anyone
familiar with English, although the limited scope of pid-
gin does not permit involved or technical discussions.
In Central America, Spanish is spoken except in rare
instances. A working knowledge of this language is easy
to acquire.
45. Relations with Natives
a. Natives are usually very particular about their
womenfolk, and about such possessions as canoes, gar-
dens, and livestock. In the absence of positive evidence
to the contrary, it must be assumed that these are strictly


forbidden to anyone else; violation of this restriction is
certain to bring disastrous results.
b. Native religions, superstitions, and customs must be
respected at all times.
c. They react favorably to firmness, kindness, and
justice. They are quick to take advantage of undue
familiarity or excessive generosity (a common American
trait).
d. They usually have very little sense of humor and
do not understand American joking and “kidding.”
e. Natives should always be paid a fair price for
everything purchased from them. A jungle soldier must
not use terrorist methods against the natives to get them
to work for him or to conceal word of his whereabouts
from the enemy. Jungle natives move about a great
deal; members of a family requently are not all at home
at the same time; but if they are not threatened or
abused, they will seldom give news of a soldier’s presence
to the enemy. Therefore, the jungle soldier who abuses
or antagonizes the natives is working against himself.
If a native is wronged, he becomes not only the enemy of
the soldier who wronged him, but possibly the enemy
of our entire Army.


Chapter 4
JUNGLE OPERATIONS
Section I. GENERAL
46. Standing Operating Procedure
The constant limitations of low visibility and slow move-
ment tend to reduce the potential flexibility of operations
and hence permit a more extensive standing operating
procedure (SOP) than is desirable on other types of ter-
rain. Control will be facilitated by having the unit SOP
include all activities which lend themselves to standard-
ization without loss of effectiveness. Minor tactics, in
particular, may be somewhat standardized and a variety
of small operations planned and included as SOP, much
in the nature of prearranged and rehearsed plays of a
football or basketball team. However, tactics in general
should not become standardized, lest the enemy become
familiar with the standard pattern and anticipate the
action.
47. Security
a. In general, security in the jungle is maintained in
the same manner as in more open areas, except that the
reduced visibility necessitates decreased dispersion of
security elements.
b. Security in jungle warfare must be continuous. It
must never lapse. In jungle warfare, there is no “front.”
It must always be considered that the enemy may appear
from any direction.
c. Maintaining the initiative is the best form of se-
curity. The enemy is then forced to conform to our
movements. The next best form of protection is pro-
vided by vigorous and aggressive patrolling. Counter-
reconnaissance screens are useless, as it will always be
possible for the enemy to infiltrate through them.
d. All positions, no matter how remote from the fore-
most troops, are likely to be attacked at any time. Se-
curity must be obtained by laying out positions in the


form of a perimeter capable of all-around defense.
Every officer and man must have an alarm post, and
everybody must be ready to fight. This includes per-
sonnel of all headquarters and all supply installations.
e. Night positions must furnish security, particularly
during darkness and at dawn, facilitate distribution of
supplies, and serve as lines of departure for the next day’s
operations. When taking up night dispositions, recon-
naissance parties should reconnoiter bivouac areas during
daylight, but the troops should not be brought into the
area until just before dark. Patrols pushed out by each
company will deter enemy patrols and mislead them as
to the dispositions. Such patrols are withdrawn to the
perimeter defense as darkness falls. This procedure
makes it difficult for the enemy to reconnoiter the posi-
tions in daylight.
48. Reconnaissance
a. Map studies should precede a movement in a
jungle area—if maps are available. Reconnaissance by
air photos, including mosaics and strips, is valuable in
that such natural features as rivers, lagoons, inlets, off-
shore coral formations, and such works of man as coconut
plantations, native gardens, and villages are clearly
delineated; vertical photos, however, will not reveal ter-
rain details hidden by a solid jungle canopy. Obliques
will reveal the contours of the ground, though not to
scale, and with considerable distortion. The most
desirable types of air photos are stereo-pairs and
vectographs.
b. Ground reconnaissance should, when possible, pre-
cede an attack in the jungle. This is often feasible if
scouts are properly trained. It will not always be pos-
sible to determine the state of development of enemy
defenses, but the extent of the defensive area usually can
be ascertained. This requires alert, intelligent, and ag-
gressive patrolling. Patrolling must be continuous, for
the enemy is just as capable of making daily changes
in his dispositions as are friendly troops. In most cases,


his day and night positions are not identical, except
where defenses are highly developed.
49. Maps, Sketches, and Air Photographs
a. Maps of jungle areas are scarce and those available
are usually very inaccurate except in the delineation of
coastlines and principal rivers; the countless unnamed
streams, inlets, and lagoons are seldom indicated, and
contours, if shown, are seldom accurate. Except for
coastal tracks and trails, and trail nets indicated on avail-
able maps can seldom be depended on, owing, in part, to
the fact that trails are rapidly grown ovei; and new and
easier routes take their places. Native towns and vil-
lages may or may not exist as shown; when they do, they
frequently bear native names entirely different from those
on the maps; this is also true of a large number of ter-
rain features.
b. Maps must be corrected at every opportunity.
This is the duty of all officers, who should send cor-
rected copies to higher headquarters, where corrections
will be consolidated and checked, and new maps
prepared.
Section II. ARMS
50. Infantry
a. Jungle fighting is performed largely by infantry.
Combat is usually characterized by close fighting.
Whenever possible, infantry will be supported by other
arms.
b. Prior to the initiation of operations in jungle areas,
a careful analysis of the terrain must be made to de-
termine the practicability of transporting and employing
the various organic infantry weapons within each area
of operations. Based upon this analysis and the mission,
task forces are organized so as to assure maximum tactical
mobility and combat effectiveness.
51. Artillery
a. The principles of artillery employment in open areas
are equally applicable in the jungle, however, the em


ployment itself presents many difficulties. The value
of artillery support is so great, however, that every effort
must be made to make this fire power available and
effective. (See FM 6-20.) All calibers of artillery are
desirable. The thick vegetation restricts the effective
radius of shell burst so that in general, larger caliber
shell are necessary than for similar targets in more open
terrain. Artillery should be of sufficient caliber (105-
mm and 155-mm) to blast away jungle undergrowth
and also to destroy hostile positions. All such weapons
should be capable of high-angle fire, and should be
drawn by tractors capable of fording small streams, fn
some mountainous jungle areas, it may be impracticable
to use other than pack artillery. Engineer equipment
must be made available for the improvement of trails,
construction of firing positions, and the clearing of fields
of fire.
b. Forward observer teams are seriously handicapped
by the jungle’s restricted visibility. Usually they are
unable to see the bursts and must adjust by sound spot-
ting and sound sensing. Registration by high burst,
smoke shell, or other visual means is preferable and is
used whenever possible. Firing of unobserved fires, the
data for which is based on maps or photo maps, can be
used only to a limited extent. Triangulation may some-
times be used, and aerial observation is frequently
possible.
c. The concealment which the jungle affords facili-
tates enemy raids on artillery positions and necessitates
stronger close-in protection of such positions than in
more open terrain.
d. Around coastal areas, plantations, and near
beaches, there are usually adequate areas for the em-
placement of artillery. Similarly, in jungle areas on
islands, it frequently is possible to emplace artillery on
nearby islands for long-range support of infantry
operations.
613291°—44 5


52. Antiaircraft Artillery
a. Jungle troops in close contact with the enemy pro-
vide their own antiaircraft protection. Rear installa-
tions from which front-line troops operate, including
supply depots and airfields, should have antiaircraft
artillery protection even though air superiority is main-
tained. All calibers of antiaircraft artillery are suitable
for jungle use, but their mobility is limited in the same
manner as that of other artillery. Tractors are essential
for towing the weapons, and bulldozers are necessary
for trail and road maintenance and improving of fields
of fire.
b. Antiaircraft weapons should always be sited for
alternate, direct-fire missions at ground or water-borne
targets. Frequently they can be employed in support of
attacks on enemy positions on ridges.
53. Air Corps
a. The efficiency of the air arm in cooperation with
ground troops is strictly curtailed. The complete leaf
canopy prevents pilots from seeing troops on the ground,
and troops are often unable to catch more than fleeting
glimpses of the planes. Pilots usually cannot see identi-
fication panels laid out on the ground; it is often difficult
for them to see panels or strips displayed in the tops of
trees. Colored smoke pots placed on the ground may
be used to indicate the position of ground troops but
the high leafy canopy of the jungle frequently causes
diffusion of the smoke to such an extent that 'pilots can-
not see the smoke. Smoke rifle grenades fired upward,
to produce colored smoke above the foliage, may over-
come this difficulty. Sometimes, smoke containers may
be hoisted or otherwise placed in the tops of trees, or on
high ground to overcome this difficulty. par. 97.)
Flares may also be used. Another method is to fire a
vertical column from a flame thrower.
b. Although observation aviation has only limited
usefulness in discovering and tracking an enemy moving


through the jungle, air observers will often be an effective
aid in adjusting artillery fires.
c. Bombardment by airplanes is limited because of
the difficulties of identifying targets. The lack of ac-
curate maps and the absence of specific terrain features
for use as reference points make target designation diffi-
cult. Firing smoke shells from mortars is a practical
method of target designation
54. Engineers
a. Engineers are a necessary part of every jungle force.
They are employed chiefly for trail improvement and
maintenance, bridging, preparation of obstacles and
demolitions, the clearing of obstacles (see FM 5-30),
water purification, and the coordination of defensive
works. Engineer equipment and tools will be limited
because of the problem of supply and transport. How-
ever, the jungle itself will furnish much of the material
which, by improvisation, can be used in construction.
One of the primary missions of engineers in the jungle
is the construction and maintenance of roads and trails
sufficient to permit the passage of -ton trucks for sup-
ply and evacuation, and to permit displacement of sup-
porting artillery. Engineers equipped with modern
road-building equipment may often profoundly affect
the speed and scale of jungle operations. During pro-
longed wet weather, the maintenance of vehicular roads
is most difficult, but under reasonably favorable weather
conditions, considerable lengths of temporary vehicular
track may be quickly cleared and made passable. Vig-
orous engineering reconnaissance is of prime importance,
both to enable the commander to select the best lines of
advance and to ascertain the location of native construc-
tion materials and water sources.
b. Engineer units also construct various beachhead
installations such as unloading ramps, roads along
beaches and to supply installations.
c. Engineer bulldozers are useful in establishment of
dug-in medical installations and larger command posts.


55. Cavalry
a. Horse. Cavalry mounted on animals (horses,
ponies, or mules) indigenous to the area may be of great
use. Since imported animals cannot subsist on native
forage, the transportation demands for their food renders
them too costly. Furthermore, they are too susceptible
to local diseases and require a protracted period of
acclimatization.
b. Mechanized Units. The movement of tanks is im-
possible in heavy jungle unless routes have previously been
prepared. Tanks may be used to advantage against defi-
nitely located, limited objectives where the terrain per-
mits. Thorough tank-employment reconnaissance is
necessary. Normally, tanks are restricted to coconut
groves, beaches, grass- and brush-covered fields, tracks, or
improved trails. When operating under these condi-
tions, they are vulnerable targets for well organized anti-
tank defenses. Frequently, tanks are attached to infantry
companies; the two elements operate closely together, the
infantry providing close-in protection to the tanks. The
principal value of the tanks will be in the use of their
cannon, flame throwers, machine guns, and crushing
weight in the destruction of enemy bunkers and other
field fortifications. (See also FM 17-36.)
Section III. MARCHES AND BIVOUACS
56. Marches
a. Troops moving on good jungle trails will rarely ex-
ceed a rate of 1 mile per hour. When moving over poor
trails, their rate may be reduced to per hour.
b. Night marches in the jungle are extremely difficult
and should be avoided whenever possible.
c. Jungle trails usually restrict the formation to a
column of files. Advance and rear guards are detailed.
Countersniper personnel are designated. To facilitate
control, to improve security measures, and as an aid to
more rapid movement into battle, each unit in the column
moves as compactly as possible. Connecting files main-
tain liaison between units in the column and between the


main body of the column and the advance and rear
guards. Advance and rear guards should be changed
two to four times daily. Within them there should be
rotation of assignment as far as practicable. Since point
duty is very fatiguing, the same squad should not
constitute the point for more than two hours.
d. Flank patrols must be sent out when the situation
dictates and the terrain permits. When a rapid move-
ment is being made in an effort to gain surprise, it is
not desirable to send out flank patrols if they have to cut
trails, because the rate of movement of the column will
be slowed, and the noise made by cutting may alert the
enemy. (See par. 1 Ob.)
e. All lateral trails should be investigated for several
hundred yards, and covered by combat patrols until the
column has cleared them. These combat patrols are
sent out from the advance guard. After the column has
cleared the lateral trails, the combat patrols rejoin the
column, falling in at the rear. They rejoin the advance
guard at the next hourly or other periodic halt.
/. Distances between men on trails varies from one to
three yards depending on visibility. The column com-
mander usually marches with the advance guard or at
the head of the main body, in order to deal quickly with
any situation. He should always have with him his
S—2, S—3, and one messenger from each of the next sub-
ordinate units of the column, in addition to several
messengers from his own headquarters group.
g. Radio communication with the column may or
may not be permitted, according to the need for secrecy.
Owing to the restrictions of radio silence, or mechanical
breakdown of the radios, messengers will often be the
primary means of communication. Another method
is for wire parties to move with advance units, laying
wire as they move, and thus insuring wire communica-
tion to the rear at all times.
h. (1) It is the duty of all personnel to observe strict
trail discipline. The commands to halt the column will
in all cases be given by an officer. Trail discipline is


of particular importance in the jungle, as the enemy is
afforded opportunities for ambush that do not exist
under normal conditions of combat. Trail discipline
may be defined as alert, orderly conduct on the trail.
The following points are emphasized:
(a) Prescribed distances must be maintained on a
jungle trail. The distance between men and between
elements of a column will be less than under normal
conditions. Jungle trails are narrow and winding, and
are often confined by walls of brush on both sides. Con-
tact must be maintained, but all members of the column
must be alert to prevent “telescoping” the column.
(b) Talking is prohibited except to transmit whis-
pered orders or instructions.
(c) Men leave the trail and stand motionless on the
approach of unidentified aircraft.
(d) At halts, men may relax physically. They can
never afford to relax mentally.
(e) Men who cannot keep up must be left behind.
(See FM 7-30.)
(2) Squad leaders are responsible for the enforce-
ment of trail discipline. They insure that their squads
are closed up, and that contact and proper distances are
maintained. They do not permit straggling, falling out,
or talking. They verify and pass on correctly all code
words and instructions relayed through their squads by
word of mouth.
i. The speed of the column will be largely dependent
on the terrain, temperature, humidity, and condition of
the trail. The rate of march must be adjusted to the
speed that can be made by the men of the weapons
platoon who are carrying machine guns, mortars, and
heavy ammunition loads. On some terrain, the column
may be able to march 40 to 45 minutes and rest for
the balance of the hour. Under more trying conditions,
the column may march for 15 minutes and then halt to
rest for 10 minutes.
j. All men should be provided with salt tablets or
ordinary table salt before the march starts. Troops


should be instructed by medical personnel how often
salt is to be taken. The supply of halazone tablets or
other medication in the hands of the men for the purifi-
cation of water should be checked every time troops
obtain drinking water.
k. All weapons must be thoroughly cleaned and oiled,
and all ammunition inspected before the march starts.
Oil-soaked rags, dark in color, that can be removed with
a quick jerk, should be wrapped around all operating
mechanisms to protect against humidity and the mud
that will clog mechanisms if the men fall, as they fre-
quently do. All rifles and carbines are carried loaded
and locked. Automatic rifles and submachine guns are
carried with magazines inserted, bolts forward. In the
advance and rear guard, weapons are carried ready for
instant use. In the main body, they may be slung. Ex-
cept for members of the point, bayonets are not fixed
during the march, since they catch in vines and bushes.
/. During a jungle march, two meals are eaten daily,
morning and evening. No regular noon meal is eaten,
although a rest period of about 45 minutes may profit-
ably be ordered at about the halfway mark. During
this period, men should be encouraged to drink choco-
late, lemonade, or bouillon prepared from powder in the
“K” ration. All these drinks are quickly assimilated by
the body and are palatable and refreshing.
m. Columns on the march are halted only on the
order of an officer. The identification number, initial,
or code name of the officer should be passed with the
command to halt the column. Thus: “Soup Bone
says red light for 5 minutes,” or, “H. B. says red light
the column, message on the way.” At every halt, all
men immediately leave the trail and move into the bush
on alternate sides, facing out in positions of readiness.
If the halt is a periodic one of 10 to 20 minutes duration,
security must be pushed out on both sides of the trail.
The remainder of the men may relax and should be en-
couraged to do so; for those not on security, permission
should be given to lie down or to rest against logs and


stumps. During rest periods, men must keep one hand
on their weapons at all times. Periodic halts should not
be ordered strictly on a time basis, but instead, at appro-
priate times, when the larger portion of the column is on
ground that lends itself to defense.
57. Bivouacs
a . Bivouac areas must be prepared for all-around de-
fense, with suitable fields of fire. Patrols should be sent
out for a distance of 800 to 1,000 yards on all trails
leading to the bivouac area, to determine if any enemy
are nearby. Outpost elements are stationed on all roads,
trails, and stream beds leading to or near the bivouac
area. Figures 8,9, and 10 show a suggested plan for
movement into a bivouac area and disposition of units
within the area. Frequently, the length of the column
will dictate bivouac along the trail in depth. In such
instances, security must be decentralized to the smaller
units.
b. A bivouac site must first be defensible, and second
be near fresh water. In the jungle, neither requirement
will ordinarily be hard to satisfy. High ground is de-
sirable for a bivouac, not only because it is more easily
defended, but because it is freer from flies, mosquitoes,
and other insects. Also, it is better drained and cooler.
A native village should never be selected as a bivouac
site. This precaution must be taken not only because
the enemy may have the village spotted and because there
may be unfriendly villagers present, but also because the
unsanitary conditions of most native villages might sub-
ject our troops to many diseases.
c. The halt for the night must be made in time to
permit the following:
(1) A brief daylight reconnaissance of the bivouac
area and assignment of units to sectors for all-around
defense.
(2) Movement of the troops into assigned sectors.
(3) Clearing of limited fields of fire for automatic
weapons.


Figure 8. Movement from column into bivouac. This plan is
applicable to a unit of any size. Occupation of such positions is
usually a matter of Standing Operating Procedure.
(4) Preparation of hasty all-around defense. Dig-
ging of foxholes (2- or 3-man), siting of machine guns
and other automatic weapons, and preparation of shallow
emplacements. Installation of booby-trap warning de-
vices around the perimeter. Distribution of extra hand
grenades.


(5) Excavation of straddle trenches.
Figure 9. Perimeter disposition ( schematic) of weapons and units
within the regimental combat bivouac. When appropriate, a
company may establish a single perimeter defense, rather than a
perimeter defense for each platoon.
(6) Preparation and consumption of a meal.
(7) Completion of arrangements for sleeping.
d. A battalion requires approximately three hours to
make these arrangements. Accordingly, the halt for the
night should be made sometime between 1430 and 1600
in order to establish the bivouac before darkness. After
the bivouac area has been selected and the troops moved
into assigned sectors, the column commander should
hold a conference, at which time the countersign for the


night and plans and orders of march for the following
day are issued. In the meantime, platoon leaders super-
vise the establishment of security, the progress of fox-
hole and emplacement construction, and the progress of
Figure 10. Perimeter disposition (schematic ) of elements of the
regimental command post. This disposition is applicable, in part,
to battalion command posts.
the cooking. One-third of the men should prepare their
food while another third prepare their individual posi-
tions, and the remaining third establish security. On
completion of tasks, details are rotated within squads.
e . Each platoon must have a designated straddle
trench. It may be desirable for each squad to have one.
As far as possible, all calls of nature should be attended


to before darkness. If a man is required to answer a
call of nature after dark he should dig a small hole near
his foxhole.
/. All fires and other lights are extinguished at sunset.
Cooking is done with canned heat, or similar smokeless
preparations, or on one-burner cooking outfits.
g. After movement into the bivouac area, medical
personnel examine and treat those who have foot com-
plaints, coral cuts, or who have been slashed by jungle
growth. At this time the daily atabrine is issued and
water purification tablets and salt tablets for the follow-
ing day’s march distributed to squad leaders.
h. The countersign for the night is announced. Words
chosen for use in countersigns should contain sounds
known to be foreign to the enemy and therefor difficult
for him to pronounce.
i. Machine guns should be emplaced to permit firing
of interlocking bands of fire around the perimeter of the
bivouac.
j. Mortars must be set up within the bivouac area so
that they can fire barrages in support of the defense.
k. All weapons must be cleaned and oiled, and am-
munition cleaned and inspected.
/. During the night, one-third of the command must
stay awake. All men are alerted for a period of about
one hour from sunset to darkness, and again for about
an hour preceding dawn. Strict fire discipline must be
maintained. There will be no firing, even at occasional
snipers. Firing is justified only when an actual attack is
being made on the position. There is a great tendency
in the jungle at night to start “seeing things.” This will
result in indiscriminate firing unless positive measures are
taken to prevent it. Such “blind” firing not only has
a bad effect on morale, but also discloses our dispositions
to the enemy. The best weapons in repelling night at-
tacks are hand grenades, knives, bayonets, and machetes,
because these do not reveal individual locations.
m. Approximately 1 hour of daylight will be needed
to get moving in the morning. Men prepare and eat


breakfast, check the adjustment of their equipment, and
move off on order. Security detachments are the last
to move out of the area.
n. Squad leaders supervise the conduct of their squads
in the bivouac area. When the column halts and the
squad’s area has been indicated, the squad leader moves
the squad in. He posts a security group of two to four
men forward of the squad area, while he makes a recon-
naissance of the position. He then:
(1) Posts the automatic rifleman and indicates the sec-
tor for which he is responsible.
(2) Posts the riflemen and indicates to each the sector
for which he is responsible.
(3) Supervises the clearance of limited fields of fire
and the installation of warning devices outside the
perimeter.
(4) Supervises the excavation of foxholes (2- or
3-man type).
(5) Ascertains and informs the squad of the location
of the platoon or squad straddle trench.
(6) Ascertains and informs the squad of the location
of the platoon command post.
(7) Ascertains the location and fire missions of ad-
jacent squads.
(8) Checks on the preparation of the evening meal.
(9) Inspects weapons and ammunition and supervises
distribution of extra ammunition and hand grenades.
(10) Inspects feet.
(11) Checks on the progress of work and insures
rotation of groups.
(12) Checks to see that men are properly fed.
(13) Personally sees that each man takes his pre-
scribed does of atabrine.
(14) After securing orders from the platoon leader,
issues the countersign and orders for the night. Informs
the squad of the time of resumption of the march.
(15) Informs the squad of the situation, and the lo-
cation of his foxhole and that of the assistant squad
leader.


(16) Sees that the squad is alerted at sunset until
l / 2 -hour after darkness and that it is again alerted at first
light, prior to dawn.
(17) Before the resumption of the march, checks the
area for forgotten or mislaid equipment. Supervises
police of the area.
o. With a unit the size of a company, it is desirable to
halt at about 1500, feed, clean weapons, answer calls of
nature, change socks and so forth in one area and then,
about 45 minutes before dusk, move to a night bivouac
area previously selected and reconnoitered. This biv-
ouac area need be only a short distance from the area
where the earlier halt was made. Movement to the
night bivouac area must be made in time to allow siting
of automatic weapons and excavation of foxholes.
58. Security
a. Bivouac area security is assured by a number of
listening posts established along the outer edge of the
perimeter defense. The men on these posts should re-
mote their helmets. They may occupy two- or three-
man foxholes. Either the two- or three-man foxhole is
preferable to a one-man foxhole, because they allow the
occupants to take turns at observing and listening, and
they permit comradeship which has high morale value.
Men may sleep in, or immediately adjacent to foxholes.
No patrolling is carried on at night between these posts.
Men should be trained to listen for the normal night
sounds of the jungle. Any cessation of these noises is
fair warning that something is abroad which is disturbing
night life.
b. Warning devices in the form of booby traps impro-
vised from hand grenades may be installed around the
perimeter of the bivouac. Communication wire or vines
may be used as trip-wires on these devices. Individuals
responsible for the installation of warning devices must
also be held responsible for their complete removal.


Section IV. ATTACK
59. General
a. The principles of offensive combat in the jungle do
not differ from those of offensive combat in other areas;
however, as in all other jungle operations, the methods of
application of these principles are specialized.
b. Forms of the attack in the jungle do not differ from
the normal. Penetrations, infiltrations, close and deep
envelopments and encircling movements are employed in
the jungle as they are in other places (see FM 100-5 and
appropriate Field Manuals of the 7-series).
c. In the jungle, as in all combat, every effort is made
to gain surprise. To this end, any measures that will
increase mobility are usually adopted.
d. Because of the difficulty of maintaining control, it
is essential that the mission and the plan of attack are
understood by all personnel.
e. The attack against the jungle enemy may result from
a meeting engagement. It may be a coordinated attack
against a hastily organized position, or a coordinated
attack against prepared positions of great strength.
60. Meeting Engagements
a. Other things being equal, the leader who with the
greatest rapidity estimates the situation, arrives at his deci-
sion, issues his orders, and executes his plan, will be suc-
cessful. By rapidity of action, he seizes the initiative and
gains surprise.
b. If emplaced artillery is supporting or is attached to
the column, it should be used as soon as possible if the
enemy appears to be in strength. Supporting artillery
fires are controlled by forward observer teams of artillery
personnel who communicate directly by phone or radio
with their battery or batteries.
c. 60-mm mortars should bring short-range fire to bear
as quickly as possible. Control is by voice.
d. As soon as 81-mm mortars are emplaced, they are
assigned targets. Their fire is controlled by forward ob-
servers, who use sound-powered telephones.


e. It is not always possible for the commander to make
a reconnaissance. When there is opportunity for any
reconnaissance, even though closely limited, it must be
made. Scouts and patrols investigate the extent of the
enemy position and try to determine his approximate
strength. The nature of the engagement and the lim-
ited observation may require the commander to make
his estimate and decision and to issue his orders based
on very limited information. To await additional in-
formation might result in loss of initiative.
/. Should the commander decide on an envelopment,
the enveloping force must move out rapidly. Orders are
always oral. The commander indicates his desires as
briefly as possible with the aid of maps, air photographs,
hasty sketches, or diagrams traced on the ground.
g. The enveloping force must always indicate by pre-
arranged signal when it is in position and ready to attack.
If wire-laying teams can keep up with the enveloping
force, the signal will be transmitted by wire and radio.
Signals can be transmitted in the clear once battle is
joined. If no wire can be laid, the signal may
consist of prearranged colored flares or any other avail-
able visual means. Flare signals should be repeated.
These signals are necessary in order that friendly fires can
be lifted so the enveloping attack can close with the
enemy. The principal objection to signaling by flares or
by the firing of weapons is that both methods disclose
the position of the enveloping force, and the phsycho-
logical factor of total surprise, which frequently can be
achieved in the jungle, is lost.
h. The following features common to meeting engage-
ments should be noted:
(1) There is no stage of development of the column.
The troops move from route column to departure
positions.
(2) Artillery and mortar fire is brought down on the
enemy immediately upon contact and he is held under
as great a volume of accurate fire as possible during
movement of the enveloping force.


(3) The enveloping force must move rapidly. At the
same time, the men must arrive at the departure position
in physical condition to enter the fire fight.
(4) In a meeting engagement, it may not be possible
to use supporting aircraft even if they are on call. Be-
cause of the pilots’ inability to see, the ground com-
mander may neither be able to indicate to them his own
position and progress with precision, nor to pin-point the
enemy installations which he wishes the planes to attack.
(5) If aircraft are to be used, the plans for their
employment must be made known to the leader of the
enveloping force, and the pilots carefully instructed as
to the areas, times, and direction in which it is desired
that they make bombing and strafing runs.
(6) If supporting fires are being delivered, the officer
commanding the enveloping force must give the signal
for lifting.
(7) Provision must be made for protection of the
rear, and defense against enemy counter-envelopments
by the use of reserve elements. If not required for such
purposes, reserve elements can be employed to exploit
a success or extend an envelopment, but they should
always be held out initially until the situation is
developed.
61. Coordinated Attacks Against Hastily Organized
Positions
These do not differ in execution from the attack just de-
scribed. Single or double envelopments or circling move-
ments are used when possible. The following points
should be noted:
a. Reconnaissance can often determine the location of
automatic weapons. The lateral extent and depth of
the enemy position may also be ascertained by small
ground patrols with a fair degree of accuracy.
b. When observation permits, artillery may be regis-
tered and all fires massed for preliminary bombardment.
c. Since time is available to locate and describe the
enemy position, supporting aircraft may be employed on
dive bombing and strafing missions prior to H-hour.
613291°—44 6


d. Time may be available to get heavy supporting
weapons into position.
e. The attack must be conducted from objective to
objective in order for subordinate leaders and command-
ers to regain control frequently and reorganize for further
advance. For a unit as small as a platoon, the distance
between objectives usually is short, and may not exceed
100 yards. Visibility is the governing factor.
62. Coordinated Attacks Against Elaborate Defenses
a. The methods of reducing elaborate defenses require
the application of effective fire power. When the at-
tackers are called upon to reduce a system of defended
localities, they may expect to encounter heavy bunkers,
barbed wire, and antitank and antipersonnel mines.
b. Movement alone does not suffice to force the Jap-
anese enemy from bunkers or pill boxes. He must be
forced to surrender or be burned or blasted out of them.
In attacks against positions of this type, the frontages
must be narrow in order to insure the greatest possible
concentration of fires. As in all jungle attacks, limited
objectives must be established or control will be lost.
c. The preparatory phases of such attacks involve con-
struction and improvement of roads and trails behind
friendly lines, the movement of supplies and ammuni-
tion, and the coordination of all arms and weapons that
are to be used in delivering and supporting the attack.
d. If naval gunfire can be used to advantage, it should
be requested, and a schedule of the fires desired worked
out in advance. The presence of a naval liaison party on
the ground is most helpful to assist in directing the gun-
fire. Direct radio communication between the ship and
shore should be provided.
e. Arrangements should be made for maximum artil-
lery preparation and continuing support by all available
artillery according to a time schedule, or on call. The
artillery may require several days for regrouping, dis-
placement to new and better positions, and registration'.
/. Air liaison officers make ground reconnaissance,


employing every possible means to locate accurately the
targets for preparatory dive bombing and strafing
attacks.
g. Continuous reconnaissance by air photo is made and
stereo pairs and vectographs studied daily to gather all
possible information of the terrain. Terrain or sand-
table models of the area to be attacked are an excellent
aid to briefing of leaders.
h. Every attempt should be made to capture prisoners
prior to the attack. Frequently, this will be difficult, but
the close jungle terrain favors an ambush (see par. 77)
and small patrols can ambush parties on trails. Such
patrols usually consist of not more than three or four
men, all of whom must be experienced jungle fighters
and expert riflemen. It should be borne in mind that a
steady flow of prisoners at all times is highly desirable
for intelligence purposes.
i. Daylight patrolling must be continuous. An aggres-
sive attitude must be maintained. Patrols secure infor-
mation, keep the enemy on the defensive, inflict casual-
ties on him, and prevent him from patrolling. Patrol
leaders are given the priority when both combat and
reconnaissance missions are prescribed.
j. Prior to the jump off, artillery and naval gunfire
attack assigned targets. They concentrate their fires on
the first infantry objective. If large-caliber artillery is
employed, its fires will probe more deeply into the enemy
position. Fires may be lifted at a prearranged time or
on signal passed over all communication channels and
by flares. When the fires of the heavier guns are lifted,
the mortars in close support of the infantry should lay
down their concentrations. As soon as fire lifts, the
troops must assault. Provision must be made for
mopping-up units to follow the assault waves closely.
Such units search out stragglers and blow up emplace-
ments. During the period of reorganization and prepa-
ration for farther advance by assault units, mopping-up
units hold the ground gained.


k. The capture of the objective must immediately be
announced by pyrotechnic signals or over all wire and
radio circuits so that previously planned protective fires
may be brought down around the objective to protect
it from enemy counterattack.
/. The second objective must not be too distant from
the first. Following the capture of the first objective and
prior to the jump off for assault on the second, assault
elements must reorganize. A commander must expect
delays during the progress of a jungle attack.
m. The maximum possible latitude in the execution
of orders must be allowed subordinate commanders and
leaders. Limited observation and the difficulties of move-
ment in the jungle make all tactical situations obscure,
and exact actions of subordinate units cannot be pre-
scribed. It is usually impossible for a regimental or
battalion commander to control the actions of his assault
units once they have been committed. He supports them
by all means at his disposal.
63. Use of Tanks
Tank operations are limited by the conditions outlined
in paragraph 55. Because jungle terrain thoroughly
canalizes tank movement, the danger of antitank fire and
ambushes by tank-hunting parties is great, and tanks
must be closely protected by infantry. Frequently one
or more tanks may be attached to a small infantry unit
for the reduction of enemy pill boxes or other emplace-
ments by close-range fire. In such cases, the tank(s)
must be surrounded by infantry patrols which reconnoiter
for routes of advance, antitank guns, tank traps, or other
antitank obstacles, and protect the tank from tank-
hunting parties. Close coordination between tank and
infantry leaders is essential. In some cases, special radio
equipment will facilitate this coordination; frequently
direct communication is maintained by telephone be-
tween the infantry leader advancing immediately behind
a tank and the tank leader inside the tank. Information
as to routes and antitank resistance reported to the in


fantry leader by his patrols can thus be passed on to
the tank leader (s). In such cases, the rate of movement
of the tank(s) must be reduced to that of infantry.
However, the above method will permit armored direct
fire power to be brought well forward thus avoiding the
difficulties imposed by limited fields of observation.
64. Night Attack
Night attacks in the jungle are seldom desirable because
of the extreme difficulty of control. However, the pos-
sible surprise effect of a night attack might, in some cases,
make such an operation worthwhile. The doctrines ap-
plicable to the execution of night attacks are enunciated
in FM 100-5 and Field Manuals of the 7-series. The
characteristics of the jungle will frequently modify the
application of these doctrines, as indicated below.
a. The number of columns into which the assaulting
units are divided will ordinarily depend on the number
of existing trails within the zone of action and leading
toward the enemy position. To cut new trails before-
hand is a slow, noisy process likely to warn the enemy of
the impending attack. While small groups (such as a
squad) of experienced men may be able to move quietly
through the jungle, a large group is likely to betray itself.
While it may be possible for one or more small assault
parties to approach directly through the jungle, it must be
considered as axiomatic that night movement will ordi-
narily be confined to trails, stream beds, or similar fea-
tures, easily identified and followed.
b. Jungle conditions increase the difficulties of coordi-
nating the time of attack of columns. If effected by a
time schedule, ample allowance must be made for delays,
even if the columns move on trails. Landmarks and
easily distinguished features will be scarce or entirely
absent. Because of the dense overhead growth, pyro-
technic signals may not be seen by all column leaders, and
dampness and heat may make the pyrotechnics them-
selves undependable. Preliminary reconnaissance and a
careful analysis of the conditions under which the attack


is to be launched will permit the commander to effect
the proper coordination.
c. Even to a greater degree than in open areas, night
attacks in the jungle must be conducted on a small scale
and with limited objectives. Where suitable avenues of
approach exist and mobile troops are available, a move-
ment around the hostile position at night, followed by
early morning attacks against hostile rear areas and in-
stallations, may prove a major factor in the demoraliza-
tion and defeat of the enemy.
d. Assault troops must depend on the bayonet, grenade,
and machete. If the attack is made over an open area
in the jungle, it is organized and conducted as in open
areas in ordinary terrain.
e. Preliminary reconnaissance, the use of guides, the
identification of distinguishing marks, and maintenance of
quiet will be more difficult than by day. On the other
hand, the assault will be in no danger of observation,
even on moonlit nights, for troops will not cross open
skylines, fields, or highways.
/. When supports are placed in rear to cover a possible
withdrawal, they must be close to the avenues of with-
drawal. They should preferably be located along the
trails, facing the trail and not the enemy position, so that
they can quickly strike with the bayonet elements of the
hostile force seeking to overtake the retiring assault units.
Section V. DEFENSE
65. General
a. Defensive combat in jungle terrain does not differ
in principle from defensive combat in other types of ter-
rain. For principles governing defensive combat, see
FM 100-5, and Field Manuals of the 7 -series.
b. The extent to which a defensive position is devel-
oped depends upon the length of time available for
construction purposes, the length of time the position is
expected to be occupied, and the material, equipment,
and troops available. Defensive installations are con-
stantly improved as long as the position is occupied.


66. Organization of the Ground
a. The principle of all-around defense of the position is
of outstanding importance in the jungle. The limited
fields of observation facilitate the enemy’s approaching
the position to very short range without being detected.
Infiltration is facilitated, and the danger of attack from
any direction increased.
b. When possible, one or both flanks should rest on
a natural obstacle such as a river, lagoon, swamp, steep
cliff, or the sea. While such features constitute obstacles
to the attacker, they should never be considered as insur-
mountable barriers, and provision must be made to meet
with fire the enemy who attacks through them. All ter-
rain is passable. There are no impenetrable jungles, im-
passable swamps, unfordable rivers, or unscalable cliffs.
The commander who assumes that his command is pro-
tected by an impassable barrier courts disaster. Count-
less experiences have proved that no terrain is impassable
to troops who have been trained to make their way
over it.
c. The strength of the unit, the terrain, and the enemy
situation are all factbrs determining the type of defense
to be adopted. Mutually supporting defensive “islands”
are established whenever possible. In the jungle, limited
fields of fire and fields of observation might make it im-
possible to establish such a position. If the terrain does
not permit such a disposition, a shoulder-to-shoulder
perimeter defense is the next most desirable, since it
closes the formation to such an extent that infiltration
by the enemy is made difficult.
67. Security
a. To prevent surprise by the enemy, an outpost po-
sition should be established around the main battle po-
sition. Outposts must be of sufficient strength to delay
the enemy in his approach to the position, and prevent
his attacking before the occupants can be alerted. The
difficulty of night movement, however, usually makes it


necessary for the outpost to witdraw from its position
and return to within the perimeter before dark.
b. Trip wires connected to rattles, booby traps, or
illuminating flares may be installed around the position
at night to provide warning of the approach of the
enemy. Other means may be improvised for illuminat-
ing the enemy at night. Cans filled with gasoline and
having a remote control system of ignition may be placed
in strategic areas and ignited when the enemy ap-
proaches. Locations for such illuminators must be care-
fully selected. They should be far enough from the
position to silhouette the enemy while he is in the field
of fire of the position. They should also be sufficiently
far from the position so that the light will not blind the
defenders nor illuminate them for the enemy. The
length of the illumination period can be controlled by
the amount of gasoline or other fuel used in the device.
c. Companies responsible for the defense of outer areas
of the perimeter send out patrols to investigate areas
forward of their positions. These patrols should move
out from the perimeter just before dawn, and return
about an hour later. In the evening, patrols should move
out about an hour before sunset, and return just before
darkness. This will provide additional security to the
position during the hours when conditions of light are
most favorable for an enemy attack.
d. Platoons and larger units always establish supports
and reserves within the position to deal with infiltrating
enemy troops, reinforce areas that are hard pressed, and,
in the case of companies and larger units, to counter-
attack.
68. Automatic Weapons
a. The location of automatic weapons in the position
is of primary importance. The enemy may be expected
to make every effort to locate and destroy them early in
his attack. Such weapons must be moved frequently be-
tween primary, alternate, and supplementary positions,
and constant care exercised to maintain deception as to


their true locations. Machine guns must be protected
by members of their squads armed with carbines. If
machine-gun squads are so depleted that they are unable
to provide this protection, it must be furnished by adjacent
rifle units.
b. The manner of employment of machine guns de-
pends upon the terrain, the extent of the sectors to be
covered, and the number of likely avenues of approach
to the position. It will often be desirable to employ
machine guns singly, instead of by section, in order to
provide continuous bands of interlocking fires around
the position, and to cover all likely avenues of approach
thereto.
69. Fields of Fire
Cutting of vegetation to improve fields of fire is held to
the minimum. All cutting should be carefully planned
and controlled by squad and platoon leaders. Particular
care must be exercised in improving the field of fire of
automatic weapons. To clear the area in front of the
weapon will plainly indicate the weapon’s position. A
fire “tunnel” 1 to 4 yards in width, but with overhanging
foliage and shrubbery left in place is difficult to detect,
and offers the defender the same type of grazing fire as
he has when he clears the area of all undergrowth.
70. Supporting Weapons
As soon as the position is occupied, artillery and mortars
should register, and protective concentrations should be
planned. Arrangements should be made for massing all
protective fires on any selected point. Maps and over-
lays showing planned concentrations should be in the
hands of all company commanders. Information con-
cerning the location of planned concentrations protecting
platoon areas should be given to all platoon leaders.
71. Fire Control
Authority to call for final protective fires covering com-
pany areas is delegated to company commanders. The
extent of decentralization of fire control is dictated by


the size of the battle position, the type of terrain, and the
higher commander’s range of observation. Companies
whose defense areas are not under attack, or whose weap-
ons are not required to fire in support of areas which are
under attack, will exercise fire discipline to prevent dis-
closure of their positions.
72. Counterattack
Plans must be made and movements practiced for
counterattacks to restore company and battalion positions
which might be penetrated by the enemy. Brief but in-
tense mortar and artillery concentrations in preparation
for such counterattacks are planned. Counterattacks
must be launched before the enemy has had opportunity
to consolidate a position he has succeeded in taking.
73. Night Defense
a. To forestall night attacks by the enemy, intensive
patrolling is conducted to prevent his daylight reconnais-
sance of the area.
b. Strict fire discipline must be maintained, particu-
larly during darkness. The primary weapon for defense
against night attacks is the hand grenade. Knives,
bayonets, and machetes are also used. Rifles and auto-
matic weapons are fired- only in the greatest emergency
or when grenades are gone, since their flash discloses the
location of the defender to the enemy. (See par 57/.)
Small enemy groups which may try to infiltrate the posi-
tion during darkness should be dealt with by bayonet
when possible. All bayonets should be fixed at night.
c. Hand grenades may be used at night. They should
be carried on the person, either in pockets or in bando-
leers. They should never be carelessly scattered about
loose in foxholes; a small shelf within the emplacement
is a convenient place for storing extra hand grenades.
d. One method of night defense is for all members of
the unit to remain in their foxholes when attack is immi-
nent; thus anyone outside his foxhole is assumed to be an
enemy who has infiltrated the position and is subject to


immediate attack. There is no withdrawal from a posi-
tion during a night attack. All men must understand
that they are “frozen” to their positions regardless of what
happens.
Section VI. PATROLS
74. General
a. For the general principles of patrolling and the de-
tailed instructions concerning the operation of patrols,
see FM 21-75.
b. Patrolling is carried on to secure information, to
deny information to the enemy and to attack and de-
stroy enemy patrols, groups, isolated detachments, and
supply points and other key installations.
c. Night patrolling is difficult in the jungle unless the
patrol keeps to a defined trail or track. In jungle terrain,
either on or off trails, patrols will operate in column for-
mation most of the time. It is generally not feasible to
have a number of separate groups hacking their way
through the thick growth at the same time; progress is
too slow, the elements of the patrol become isolated, and
too much noise results. Progress through the under-
growth is of necessity in a column. Nevertheless, pro-
vision is made for flank groups in all jungle patrols;
while these groups may not function on the flanks during
forward movements, they observe to the prescribed flank
and move out to the limit of visibility up to 100 yards
during halts when march outposts are established. When
normal terrain is entered, the designated flank groups
function on the flanks in the usual manner. Jungle for-
mations of 8 men or larger may be regarded as collapsed
diamond formation, drawn together by terrain restric-
tions, but opening out to the normal form when the
restrictions are no longer present. Jungle patrols must
be assigned clearly defined sectors in which to operate.
d. The urgency of the mission will indicate the route
to be followed by a patrol. When the jungle growth
permits, all patrols should operate off the trail, but guide
on it. If speed is essential, the patrol will have to operate


on a trail or track. When so doing, the members must
bear in mind that they are in constant danger of ambush.
They must observe trail discipline and proceed alertly,
ready for instant action. Small reconnaissance patrols
should operate entirely off trails.
e. If a patrol is to be absent for a period of 6 or 7 days
or longer, it should establish a small, hidden base from
which it can operate. This base must be well removed
from traveled trails. If the patrol is small, no security
personnel need be left at the base. On return to base,
the patrol must use the utmost caution. If the patrol is
large, it should leave a security detachment at the base.
By establishment of a base, the patrol is able to operate
with the minimum of equipment, thus increasing its
mobility.
f. All patrols should have one or more assembly points
selected by the leader in advance. This is necessary in
case the patrol meets superior opposition and is forced to
disperse. At the assembly point the leader can rally his
patrol and give fresh instructions for the accomplishment
of the mission.
g. For sudden encounters, all patrols, regardless of
their size, should have a planned scheme, or SOP, for
engaging the enemy to the left, right, front, or rear.
Each member must be instructed in the action which
he is to take automatically in each case.
h. Friendly units through which a patrol must pass
will be informed of the times and places where the pa-
trol is expected to clear the lines and to return through
them.
i. Patrols will be armed and equipped in accordance
with their missions. All jungle patrols must be equipped
with machetes or jungle knives for cutting trails. If the
patrol is to be out over night, head nets must be taken.
A supply of atabrine tablets, salt tablets, and halazone
tablets or other medication for water-purification must be
carried and used, regardless of the length of time the
patrol is to be away from its unit or base.


j. A sufficient quantity of maps or air photos of the
area are taken. Care must be exercised that such maps
or photos do not provide information which would be
of value to the enemy.
k. If radio communication is to be used between the
patrol and its unit, operating schedules and frequencies
must be carefully planned before the patrol leaves.
Sufficient personnel to operate the radios, and to replace
radio operator casualties must also be included in the
patrol. The range limitations which the jungle imposes
on radios must be carefully considered.
/. If native guides are to be used, they must be con-
tacted in sufficient time to permit the patrol leader to
interview them.
75.• Combat Patrols
a. The size, armament and equipment of a combat
patrol depend on the mission assigned it and the available
information of the enemy in the area in which it is to
operate. A combat patrol, though not ordered primarily
as a means of gaining information, gathers and reports
all information possible, as a secondary mission. Combat
patrols vary in size from three or four men, to a platoon
or more. It is often desirable to increase the proportion
of automatic weapons within the patrol. Carbines are
frequently more desirable than rifles, because the reduced
length of these weapons lessens the difficulties of move-
ment through thick undergrowth. If a demolition mis-
sion is assigned, sufficient personnel trained in demolition
work must be included in the patrol. Under such cir-
cumstances, the mission of the rest of the patrol may be
to protect the demolitionists while they are doing their
work, and while withdrawing.
b. All members of the patrol must be familiar with
the enemy situation in the area in which the patrol is to
operate. They must be familiar with the patrol’s mission,
route of advance and withdrawal, and the leader’s plans
for accomplishment of the mission.


c. Before the patrol’s designated time of
the leader will inspect each member to insure complete-
ness of equipment, knowledge of the patrol’s plans, and
his physical condition.
d. Competent aid men should accompany a combat
patrol. If a patrol is a large one and expects to be gone
for several days, a medical officer should be a part of the
patrol.
76. Reconnaissance Patrols
a . A reconnaissance patrol is sent out for the specific
purpose of gaining information of the enemy or of the
terrain. Reconnaissance patrols are small so that they
can move rapidly and secretly. They move rapidly
when possible, but concealment and positions from which
enemy activity can be observed are the determining lac-
tors in their conduct. It may be necessary for them to
fight in order to accomplish the reconnaissance mission.
b. A Three-Man Patrol (Scout Team) usually con-
sists of one man armed with the rifle or carbine acting as
a point, followed at 10 to 20 yard distance by a second
man armed with the rifle, who is in turn followed at 10
to 25 yards by the third man armed with a light auto-
matic weapon. All members of the three-man patrol
may be armed with the submachine gun. The leading
man gives his entire attention to observing the ground to
the front and flanks, the second concentrates on observ-
ing for tree targets, and the third furnishes the fire power
for protection of the group, and observes to the rear.
The distance that is maintained between individual mem-
bers of the team, 10 to 20 yards normally, will vary with
the visibility, as conditioned by the cover, bends in the
trail, and whether the patrol is operating in daylight or
in darkness. All members of the team must be con-
stantly within visual distance of one another to afford
mutual protection and control. At night, sound signals
are used and distances reduced.
c. The limited fields of observation offered by the
jungle require that reconnaissance patrols operate in close


range of the enemy in order to secure information. Skill
in stealthy movement is essential.
d. Regimental and battalion commanders cause their
intelligence sections to send out small patrols to secure
information that immediately affects them.
e. All members of a reconnaissance patrol should be
accomplished woodsmen fully acquainted with the prin-
ciples of scouting.
/. All members of the patrol should have a complete
knowledge of how to read maps and aerial photos. All
must be equipped with and know how to use the com-
pass. All must have machetes or jungle knives. Car-
bines are often preferable to rifles. Light automatic
weapons are desirable. If possible, there should be at
least one member of the patrol who can understand and
speak the enemy language. Patrol equipment should
include at least two watches and two pairs of field glasses.
Leaders, and assistants should carry books and
pencils.
g. All members of the patrol must know in detail just
what information is to be secured, and the leader’s plan
for securing it. They must know where the patrol is
going, time and place to which it is to return, and their
own jobs.
Section VII. SPECIAL OPERATIONS
77. Ambushes
a. Offensive Ambushes. (1) A force which is
trailbound, which tends to close up while moving, main-
tains inadequate security, or whose noise gives warning
of its approach is particularly susceptible to ambush.
(2) The effectiveness of ambush relies upon the sur-
prise delivery of close-range fire. The fire should come
from at least two directions and should converge on the
target.
(3) A part of the ambushing force may be held out
as a reserve to exploit the success of the ambush and to
counter the attack of near-by troops which might come
to the aid of the ambushed enemy.


(4) Primary and alternate routes for rapid with-
drawal of the ambushing party must be previously recon-
noiterea and selected because the ambush will invariably
attract nearby enemy troops.
(5) Assembly points or rendezvous points for the am-
bushing party must be designated, so that on signal to
withdraw, the men can do so rapidly and without
confusion.
(6) To achieve surprise, fires of the ambush party
should not commence except upon prearranged signal.
(7) If the object of the ambush is solely to inflict
casualties, all firing should cease and withdrawal should
commence promptly on predetermined signal.
(8) After entry into the ambush area, the path fol-
lowed by the ambushing party while going into position
should be carefully inspected to remove all evidence of
the party’s presence. If possible, the ambush area should
be entered from the rear.
(9) When time and circumstances permit, antiperson-
nel mines should be emplaced beside the ambush area
so that when the enemy seeks cover from the ambush
fires, he will contact the mines.
(10) In order to cause the enemy to bunch or close
up in the area of converging ambush fires, it frequently
is desirable to use some form of “bait.” A piece of
equipment, or some unusual disturbance of the vegetation
or terrain in the desired spot will frequently arouse his
curiosity, and, unless he is sufficiently wary, cause him to
move to the bait and thereby enter the sector of fire
selected by the ambush party.
(11) In order to achieve an added degree of surprise,
it might be desirable to select an ambush position which
is not tactically ideal. The sacrifice of observation and
field of fire might be more than compensated for by the
increased surprise. It is frequently desirable to occupy
the ambush position prior to daylight.
b. Defense Against Ambush. (1) The best defense
against enemy ambush is skillful scouting in advance of


the unit. Native scouts and trained dogs are invaluable
for this purpose.
(2) Observance of strict trail discipline is essential for
defense against ambushes; Men should not
( a ) Bunch up along the trail,
\b) Straggle,
(c) Talk,
(d) Lose contact, or
( e ) Relax vigilance.
(3) Surprise and the convergence of fire on the am-
bush point is the basis of a successful ambush. Thus,
although the victims may be surprised by the ambush,
rapid movement for only a short distance will usually
place them beyond immediate danger.
(4) The ambushing party must be enveloped
promptly. Delay will result in casualties. Speed will
upset the ambushing party and will save lives.
(5) A plan should be prearranged for the employment
of the unit in case of ambush from any direction, and
every member of the unit should be thoroughly familiar
with this plan and his part in it.
78. Maneuver away from Supply Lines
a. The ideal concealment offered by the jungle facili-
tates deep incursions by large forces into enemy positions.
Such operations have as their mission, the harassing of
the enemy, attack of his rear installations, and the cutting
of his lines of communication. The difficulty of trans-
port in the jungle, however, makes supply of such forces
a major problem. *
b. Supply by air is one method of solving this problem.
For technique of supply of ground units by air, see FM
31-40.
c. Supply by boat is another method. Not only may
boats be used for supply between islands, but, in many
jungle areas, streams, lagoons or other waterways are
navigable by small boats and provide an easier route for
supplies than overland through the jungle.
d. When supply is by boat or by air, it is essential that
613291°—44 7


the unit responsible for supply be given control of suffi-
cient boats or airplanes to permit accomplishment of its
mission. Unnecessary problems of coordination are
created when a unit has the responsibility of supplying its
subordinate units and must rely on a higher headquarters
for the means of transporting supplies.
e. All possible details concerning supply should be
planned in advance. In making such plans, every effort
must be exerted to reduce to the minimum the admin-
istrative effort required of the tactical unit. The burden
of administrative effort must fall on base personnel in
all cases where additional work on their part will lessen
the time or work of the detached tactical unit.
/. A previously prepared schedule should be estab-
lished whereby, at specified times, the tactical unit will
notify the supply base as to what supplies are needed,
and the time and place where delivery is to be made.
In general, frequent resupply in small quantities is more
desirable than larger deliveries at less frequent intervals.
This will reduce the weight and bulk of the supplies car-
ried by the using troops between deliveries.
g. Supplies for a unit operating away from normal
supply lines should be delivered to the unit at times and
places of its own designation. As nearly as possible, sup-
plies should be of the types and quantities requested by
the receiving unit.
h. Break down into small-unit packages of mixed sup-
plies should be accomplished at the supply base, instead
of in the area of the receiving unit. So far as possible,
delivery to the receiving unit should be in packages of a
size and weight that can be easily handled as one-man
loads. Bundles containing these smaller packages should
be such that they can easily be moved by the receiving
unit as three- or four-man loads to concealed areas where
they may be broken open and their contents distributed.
79. Retrograde Movements
a. General. If the mission and situation do not re-
quire a defence in place, retrograde movement, partic


-ularly in the presence of an aggressive and much stronger
enemy, may be the most suitable type of action, initially.
Denying the enemy the use of roads, trails, and other
avenues of approach, and harrying his lines of communi-
cation as he seeks to advance, may so harass, discourage,
and exhaust his troops as to decrease materially their
effectiveness and permit a decisive counterblow by
friendly forces. Smoke may be a valuable agent for use
during retrograde movements, especially in open or semi-
open areas. It should be available in smoke pots and
grenades. All supplies and materiel, including water-
craft and vehicles, which must be abandoned are syste-
matically destroyed to prevent their possible use by the
enemy.
b. Withdrawal. Cover and concealment provided
by the jungle permit easy withdrawal by units in contact
with the enemy. Small groups familiar with the routes
over which they are to move can readily disengage them-
selves. Such groups, placed on trails, can deny these
trails to the enemy and force him to attack on a narrow
front or to cut trails around the delaying groups, thus
gaining sufficient delay for the withdrawal of the main
body. Withdrawal by daylight in jungle areas has many
of the advantages of night withdrawal (concealment and
cover) in more open terrain, and permits a greater de-
gree of control. However, personnel and equipment
moving on wide trails easily observed from the air offer
favorable targets to hostile combat aviation. (See FM
100-5.)
80. Delaying Action
a. In dense jungle areas, delaying action will be exe-
cuted principally on and near trails. In areas of lesser
density, delaying action will frequently require the occu-
pation and defense of one or more delaying positions,
since in these areas combat in the jungle will have gen-
erally the characteristics of woods fighting, and a defensive
position will be necessary to assure effective delay. The


flanks of such a position must be protected against en-
velopment by the enemy.
b. Small, determined groups can delay forces many
times their size; however, this type of combat in jungle
areas is especially tiring. Consequently, units should be
divided into groups which may alternate in the occupa-
tion of delaying positions and thus secure rest, while the
enemy is kept constantly engaged. Such groups should
consist of eight to ten men, two of whom are armed with
automatic rifles. If possible, artillery observers should
remain with the delaying force to adjust fire on the pur-
suing enemy.
c. Delaying groups, in addition to their normal equip-
ment, should carry axes, mines, and explosives for effect-
ing demolitions. Obstacles must be covered by fire if
they are to be of value. In order to cause the maximum
delay, particularly of vehicles, bridges should be de-
stroyed and trees and other obstacles placed across all
trails and roads as far forward from the delaying position
as time and the situation will permit. Mines should be
placed in the jungle on both sides of obstacles, and in
the obstacles themselves, to make the removal of the
obstacles hazardous. Booby traps are especially suitable
for this purpose. (See FM 5—30 and FM 5-31.) At
points where the jungle is thin and is not an obstacle to
the movement of foot troops, mines may also be employed.
As many obstacles should be constructed along the front
of a delaying position as time allows. Every effort should
be made to place them so that the enemy will tend to
filter into areas where the delaying force can place the
most fire power. »
d. Because of the difficulties of supply and coordina-
tion, small, well-trained forces, energetically led, are most
suitable for the execution of delay in the jungle. Sup-
ports should be available in rear of leading elements along
each trail. Tjhey may be used to extricate the leading
elements from serious combat, to patrol the trails to pre-
vent the leading elements from being cut off, and to
replace them if they are captured. (See FM 100-5.)


Section VIII. SUPPLY
81. Importance and Special Conditions
a. The importance of supply and the special con-
ditions affecting it in jungle warfare will limit and may
determine the extent of operations, rates of movement,
and the strength of forces employed. Available trails or
roads, waterways, density of natural growth, season, and
general terrain conditions will all have a direct bearing
on the several types of transportation, and therefore upon
the functioning of supply. Requirements must be antici-
pated well in advance of actual needs. Careful planning
is necessary to conserve transportation facilities, and sup-
plies of all classes must be closely supervised in order to
exclude surplus and nonessential items.
b. Unit supply officers must be unusually aggressive
and ingenious. They must be experts in advance plan-
ning and in forecasting needs. Replenishments must be
requisitioned well in advance. Reconnaissance of sup-
ply routes and watering points must be continuous. Al-
ternate routes and points must be located and developed.
c. Since the jungle ordinarily affords concealment
from air observation, and since the protection of con-
voys against ambush is more readily effected during day-
light, commanders should take maximum advantage of
daylight hours for the movement of supplies.
d. Special provision must be made to protect supplies
from spoilage caused by climatic conditions. Tentage,
tarpaulins, or thatched shelters are necessary to provide
protection from heavy rains and hot, tropical sunshine.
82. Transportation
a. The basic means of jungle transport is hand-carry,
although pack animals are frequently employed. Pack
units have the disadvantage that forage for their animals
must necessarily make up a large part of their load, be-
cause the natural jungle growth is not satisfactory forage
for most domesticated animals. Native pack animals
and handlers may be used when available, generally to


supplement organic means. Uncertainty as to the limi-
tations, and particularly as to the dependability, of this
means must be carefully considered. However, the em-
ployment of native labor and animals, if practicable, will
conserve combat efficiency.
b. Air transportation is considered an important factor
in the supply of jungle operations. It may be used for air
dropping of supplies either by parachute or free dropping,
or by the landing of supply planes. Emergency supplies
can be flown to units when all other means of supply fail.
Artillery liaison type planes have been employed with
complete success in supplying isolated patrols and small
units. Where suitable water areas are available, am-
phibian planes may be employed to transport supplies.
c. Water-borne transportation is the most economical
and often the surest means of supply. Streams, lagoons,
and other waterways should be used to the maximum
extent possible. Supplies transported over waterways are
less susceptible to loss or damage, fragile containers are
safer, and the destruction caused by insects is largely
avoided. Boats, canoes, and rafts are to be employed at
every opportunity. Where practicable, distributing
points should be established along waterways to save
transportation by men, animals, and vehicles.
d. Wheeled transportation is generally impracticable
except on roads, or in the dry seasons on wide trails, and in
areas where the jungle growth is light and free of inter-
twined vines and large trees. However, engineer and
pioneer troops frequently can improve trails sufficiently
to permit movement of *4-ton trucks and trailers in areas
close to the combat echelon. Track laying vehicles are
generally reliable in jungle operations and furnish one of
the principal means of logistic support.
83. Rations
Rations will necessarily consist mainly of nonperishable
items: canned meats, vegetables and fruit; bacon; dried
vegetables and fruits; and candy. Rice and hominy may
be substituted for potatoes. Fragile containers should be


reduced to the minimum to avoid loss due to insects,
damage, and breakage. To supply small reconnaissance
or security detachments, small tin containers are desirable.
It may often be advisable to distribute unit rations, such
as the 5-in-l or 10-in-1, so that meals can be prepared
by squads or individuals. The supply of food in small
(preferably individual) containers is of particular impor-
tance where lack of facilities precludes sterilization of
mess equipment. Field rations C, K, and D are suitable
for use in the jungle (see also pars. 34 and 35).
84. Ammunition Supply
Ammunition supply will become progressively more diffi-
cult in moving situations, especially where there are no
waterways. As is true of other supplies, ammunition
must eventually be carried by hand before it is distributed.
Therefore, a break-down to loads of 40 to 60 pounds, and,
in some cases, further break-down, will be necessary.
85. Water Containers
Five-gallon water containers will be required to carry
water where conditions make it necessary to supply units
at a distance from streams. When man-carry is neces-
sary, these are carried on packboards. Frequently, it
may be desirable for troops to be equipped with two
canteens per man.
86. Local Purchases
Local purchases to supplement the limited diet of a field
ration are useful in inhabited areas. Fresh food, par-
ticularly fish, fruit, and vegetables, are frequently avail-
able. Supply and mess officers should be prepared to
make such purchases for cash, provided the necessary
sanitary inspections have been made by authorized medi-
cal personnel. The importance of proper medical in-
spection of such supplies cannot be overemphasized.
87. Clothing
Since clothing, particularly shoes and socks, deteriorates
more rapidly in tropical jungle areas than in more tern


perate climates, special provision must be made for ade-
quate resupply. Companies and similar units should
carry a limited emergency supply of assorted sizes of
shoes and socks. Rear echelons and base units also must
carry larger stocks than in temperate climates.
88. Engineer Supplies
Engineer supplies, such as cutting tools, barbed wire, and
demolitions, should be available on call. It may be neces-
sary to place these supplies so far forward that there will
be a risk of loss, but the weight and extreme difficulty of
transporting engineer materials make it imperative that
they be moved by pack, vehicle or boat into or near areas
where they are to be employed.
Section IX. EVACUATION
89. General
a. The usual equipment and property prescribed by
Tables of Organization and Equipment for units con-
cerned with evacuation are not always suitable for opera-
tion under jungle conditions. Standard cross-country
ambulances are seldom practicable on jungle trails, in
swamps, and on unimproved muddy roads rutted by
heavier vehicles. For this reason, other types of vehicles,
particularly weapon carriers and -ton trucks, may be
used for transportation of the wounded. Any and all
types of transportation, whether by water or land, are to
be used for transporting casualties to the rear. This
principle applies not only to vehicles assigned primarily
for this purpose, but also as a routine measure in the
case of an empty supply vehicle returning from forward
positions. Evacuations in the jungle should normally be
along supply routes which are adequately protected
against enemy action. Boats, rafts, and ambulance
barges are used when practicable. Where open terrain
or water permits landing and take off, airplanes provide
an excellent and rapid means of evacuation.
b. The ordinary litter does not suffice in evacuating
across streams, gullies, or down precipitous cliffs. Metal


basket litters (Stokes) are more practicable under these
conditions and can also be used to advantage on im-
provised racks installed on *4 _ton trucks and trailers.
Improvised litters of salvaged canvas or cot covers are
invaluable in situations where weight becomes a vital
element.
c. One frequent error is to overestimate the ability of
litter squads. It has been found that well conditioned
men, carrying a patient in a litter for 400 to 600 yards,
over jungle terrain, are unable to repeat the performance
without appreciable rest. Surgeons must keep their com-
manders informed of the adequacy of organic litter
bearers in each operation, and commanders must detail
additional litter squads as needed. Natives often can be
advantageously employed to assist in evacuation. A sit-
ting patient can be carried pick-a-back in a sling for
great distances by some native porters.
d. No one method of evacuation will suffice. It is
rather by a combination of the means available that the
collection and transportation of the sick and wounded
will be accomplished satisfactorily. For the general
methods and means of transportation of sick and
wounded see FM 8-35.
Section X. COMMUNICATION
90. General
a. Methods of communication used in jungle warfare
include radio, field telephones, sound-powered tele-
phones, messengers, pigeons, dogs, whistles, voice, pyro-
technics, flags, prearranged messages, and improvised
signals such as beating two sticks together or tapping on
rifle stocks.
b. Communication instruments should be moisture-
proofed and fungus-proofed.
c. Dry batteries of all types have a much shorter life,
even when not in use, in jungle climates. At least twice
|he usual initial supply is necessary. Frequently, ad


ditional personnel must be detailed to carry this extra
equipment.
d. Communication personnel must be as well-con-
ditioned physically as other front-line troops, and must
have ready knowledge of the use of all rifle company
weapons.
91. Radio
Radio range in the jungle is reduced from 40 to 70 per-
cent below what is considered normal in open or lightly
wooded terrain. Radio personnel must specialize in
getting the traffic through with weak signals under poor
atmospheric conditions, rather than on speed of trans-
mittal. They must be trained in the proper siting of
antennas to obtain the maximum possible range from
their sets. Radio communication will be particularly
difficult at night, and special emphasis must be placed in
training to insure getting messages through during this
period. The use of small radio sets will be greatly re-
stricted because of the severe reduction in range. Their
effectiveness depends to a great extent on their location.
Dense undergrowth and precipitous slopes have a screen-
ing effect. Special training is necessary to teach operat-
ing personnel where to establish their sets and antennas to
reduce to the minimum the screening effects of jungle
terrain and vegetation.
92. Telephones
a. The field telephone is the most satisfactory means of
communication in the defense. In a fast moving attack,
or a deep enveloping or circulating movement, wire teams
will frequently have difficulty in keeping up. If the at-
tack is progressing, it should never be held up to allow
wire teams to catch up; but wire teams must move with
attacking echelons as far forward as possible to allow
prompt communication to the rear (see b below). In
the defense, all wire lines should be paralleled. Initially,
wire is laid on the ground; later when time permits, it
should be tied in the trees or buried. As a general rule,


ditional personnel must be detailed to carry this extra
equipment.
d. Communication personnel must be as well-con-
ditioned physically as other front-line troops, and must
have ready knowledge of the use of all rifle company
weapons.
91. Radio
Radio range in the jungle is reduced from 40 to 70 per-
cent below what is considered normal in open or lightly
wooded terrain. Radio personnel must specialize in
getting the traffic through with weak signals under poor
atmospheric conditions, rather than on speed of trans-
mittal. They must be trained in the proper siting of
antennas to obtain the maximum possible range from
their sets. Radio communication will be particularly
difficult at night, and special emphasis must be placed in
training to insure getting messages through during this
period. The use of small radio sets will be greatly re-
stricted because of the severe reduction in range. Their
effectiveness depends to a great extent on their location.
Dense undergrowth and precipitous slopes have a screen-
ing effect. Special training is necessary to teach operat-
ing personnel where to establish their sets and antennas to
reduce to the minimum the screening effects of jungle
terrain and vegetation.
92. Telephones
a. The field telephone is the most satisfactory means of
communication in the defense. In a fast moving attack,
or a deep enveloping or circulating movement, wire teams
will frequently have difficulty in keeping up. If the at-
tack is progressing, it should never be held up to allow
wire teams to catch up; but wire teams must move with
attacking echelons as far forward as possible to allow
prompt communication to the rear (see b below). In
the defense, all wire lines should be paralleled. Initially,
wire is laid on the ground; later when time permits, it
should be tied in the trees or buried. As a general rule,


wire should not be laid or strung along trails. It should
be laid or strung several feet to one side of the trail.
Frequent rains and constant dampness have a consider-
able effect on the talking range of field wire lines, par-
ticularly those of light assault wire. To insure continuous
operation, provision must be made to use ground-return
circuits. Because conversations over ground-return cir-
cuits may be easily intercepted by the enemy, prearranged
codes or ciphers should be used, and the ground-return
circuits supervised in the same way as voice-radio sets.
Because of difficulties of supply and transport, light as-
sault wire is usually used instead of heavy wire, and
relay stations may be necessary in order to maintain
suitable wire communication over long lines. It must be
emphasized that a moving attack will under no circum-
stances be held up for the installation of wire. If wire is
laid, it is the responsibility of communication personnel
to lay it as rapidly as possible.
b. Sound-powered telephones are valuable. They are
reliable, light, and easy to handle. When used with
assault wire, they can be employed for communication
from assault companies to the rear. They are especially
useful to connect observation posts with command posts
and in controlling mortar fire. They may also be used
by reconnaissance patrols working forward of friendly
lines, and for infantry-tank communication. If a suf-
ficient number are available, they will prove valuable
for use within command posts at night, since their use
will help to reduce movement within the command post
to a minimum. In the defense, each front-line platoon
should be provided with a sound-powered telephone.
93. Messengers
a. In battalions, companies and platoons, messengers
a it the primary means of communication both within
moving columns and in the attack. In the defense, they
supplement wire means. Messengers should be picked
men, selected for their reliability, intelligence, stamina,
courage, and initiative. In addition to the regularly de


tailed messengers, other personnel must be trained so
that they can replace messengers who are casualties or
temporarily noneffective because of exhaustion. There
is no substitute for good messengers.
b. All messengers should be skilled scouts and good
shots. They must be able to read maps and air photos,
and to make sketches and overlays. They must be alert
and observant.
94. Pigeons
Trained homing pigeons, properly used, are a reliable
means of communication. Fog, rain, snow, and darkness
decrease the efficiency of the birds. A trained homing
pigeon will return to its loft from a distant point carry-
ing any light weight message which has been properly
attached to it at an average speed in excess of 37 miles
per hour. Pigeons are suitable for use in the jungle.
95. Dogs
Dogs have been satisfactorily used in jungle operations
both as scouts and as messengers. Trained dogs have
proved their value under conditions of actual combat. It
is anticipated that dogs will be commonly used in the
future. Undertrained dogs, or dogs for whom no han-
dlers are available, should never be taken on a jungle
operation.
96. Whistles
Whistle signals may be used in the jungle. Most fre-
quently they are used to indicate that unidentified or
enemy planes are approaching or are overhead, or that
all is clear.
97. Voice
Communication by voice is frequently satisfactory in pla-
toons and squads either in attack or defense, although as
in all operations its practicability is largely contingent
upon the degree of battle noises. In all training, the
necessity for “passing the word” correctly must be


stressed. In large units, voice communication during
movement is unsatisfactory.
98. Pyrotechnics
There is an almost unlimited field for the application of
pyrotechnics as a means of signal communication. Pyro-
technic codes are set up in signal operation instructions
and in orders for all operations. They may be used to
call for fires; to announce the jump-off of an attack or
the capture of an objective; to call boats in; to indicate
general locations at which air drops of supplies are to be
made, or to indicate certain types of enemy movement
or activity. As a means of authentication, several pyro-
technic signals may be fired with a specified interval be-
tween signals. Similarly, color sequence can serve for
authentication. Smoke containers may be placed in tree
tops or on high ground for purposes of greater visibility
(see also par. 53a.).
99. Signal Flags
While of little use in the jungle itself, improvised signal
flags may be used for signaling along beaches or from
shore to ship.
100. Prearranged Improvised Signals
a. Small patrols should always plan to use prearranged
signals. Sound signals should be carefully selected to
insure that they simulate sounds natural to the particular
regions. Prearranged signals will indicate simple com-
mands such as “Halt,” “Down,” “Danger,” “Forward,”
or “All Clear.” Patrols should carefully rehearse such
signals before their departure.
b. Sound and visual signals should not be used during
darkness because they reveal positions. String connect-
ing adjacent foxholes may be used to effect reliefs at
night, and- to relay warnings. This is done by a pre-
arranged series of tugs on the string, each end of which
is attached to an individual.


Appendix I
NATIVE PLANTS
1. General
Wild fruits, nuts, and edible plants exist in great number
and variety throughout jungle areas. Personnel operat-
ing in such areas should make every effort to learn to
identify these, as well as the relatively few poisonous ones.
This may be done by making field trips, talking to natives,
and visiting botanical gardens and museums (see pars. 4
and 7).
2. Poisonous Plants
a. General. Poisonous plants are of three kinds:
those whose fruit, nuts or portions of the plant itself are
poisonous if eaten, for example, the physic nut (see fig.
11); those whose juice is a contact poison; and those
which produce a mechanical “poison” or sting. A plant
which is particularly dangerous if the juice enters the
blood stream is strychnos (see fig. 12) from which the
deadly curare poison is extracted by certain primitive
peoples of tropical America. Methods of distinguishing
poisonous fruits and nuts from the nonpoisonous are
described in paragraphs 4,6, and 7.
b. Contact Poisons. If a man has become exposed
to a plant whose juice is a contact poison, he should
promptly wash the exposed parts of his body with water
and issue soap. Local inhabitants can often furnish in-
formation making it possible to identify plants which are
dangerous or annoying in this respect. An example is
the manzanillo, found in tropical America and illustrated
in figure 13.


Figure 11. Physic nut. A shrub common in hedges throughout the
southwest Pacific area. The large seeds are violently poisonous,
and should not be eaten under any circumstances.


Figure 12. Strychnos. A slender, woody vine, easily recognizable
by the small hairs on all parts. The fruit is shaped like a ball,
and usually is 2 inches or more in diameter, with a hard green
or yellow skin. It holds several large seeds. In some parts of
Brazil it is called “Urari.” The bark and roots are a source of
“curare” one of the deadliest poisons known. A small quantity
in the blood stream will paralyze the nerves almost instantly, and
soon cause death. It has been used by the South American
Indians for poisoning arrows and the darts from blow guns. It
is reported that similar use of the plant is made by the Indians of
Panama.


Figure 13. Manzanillo. A small tree common on seashores in many
parts of tropical America, and abundant on both coasts of Pan-
ama, where it forms dense thickets along the beaches. The bark
is smooth and pale brown; the leaves are small, smooth and green.
The flowers are green, and are arranged in stiff spikes. The fruit
is over an inch in diameter, and resembles a small green apple.
The fruit is poisonous. The milky sap is highly irritating, like
the juice of poison ivy. Smoke from the burning wood may cause
irritation to the eyes.
613291° 44—8


c. Stinging Plants. Certain types of plants with
stingy hairs on their surfaces produce a mechanical irri-
tant, frequently highly painful and in certain cases, if the
hairs are taken into the intestinal tract or mucous mem-
branes, dangerous. Examples are the cowitch and the
nettle. One variety of the latter found in tropical
America is the ortiga (see fig. 14).
3. Native Use of Plants
In all parts of the region the inhabitants in general know
both the wild and the cultivated plants which may be
used as food. However, the use of a certain species of
plant as food may be common in one area, but quite un-
common in other areas. For example, the breadfruit,
which is a basic food in many parts of Polynesia, is little
used as food in most parts of Malaya, where the species
also occurs, simply because better foods are usually avail-
able there.
4. Advice of Natives
Whenever possible, one should try to get in touch with
natives even though one may be able to talk with them
only by means of signs. They can be most helpful in
times when regular rations are not available. They
usually know how these emergency food plants should be
prepared, and which may be poisonous if eaten raw. In
some of the actually poisonous plants, the poisonous ele-
ments may be eliminated by proper cooking or by other
treatment after which the material may be eaten with
safety.
5. Local Names
In jungle areas, there are many different languages and
dialects used. For all plants of this vast region there are
probably in excess of 50,000 native plant names actually
recorded; many locally used plant names are still un-
listed. Some native plant names are very widely used,
while others are local. Many of the plants have no
English names.


Figure 14. Nettle. (Ortiga in Spanish). The nettle is found in
many parts of the world. That variety known in Spanish as the
ortiga, is common on the Pacific slope of Panama, particularly in
dry regions along the beaches. It grows about 3to 5 feet high.
It is covered with stiff hairs which, when they sting the flesh, cause
great pain which often lasts for a day or longer, and is sometimes
accompanied by high fever. The flowers are white, and about
½ inch in diameter.


6. Guide for Eating Fruits
Cultivated trees and shrubs growing in and near the
settled "areas and bearing attractive fleshy fruits, for the
most part are actually planted for their fruits, which
generally may be eaten with perfect safety. In the wild,
where monkeys occur, a general safeguard to follow is to
observe what the monkeys actually eat in the form of
wild fruits. The feeding habits of birds is not such a
safe guide. One should keep in mind constantly that
fruit maturity in the tropics is normally seasonal, just as
it is in temperate regions, and only occasionally, as with
the coconut palm, are fruits produced throughout the
year.
7. Edible Plants
a. For a detailed study of edible plants, see TM
10-420.
b. The food plants described and illustrated in the
pages which follow were selected on the basis of their
abundance and their simplicity of preparation for eating,
as well as the comparative ease with which they may be
recognized. Many others exist, some of them as wide-
spread as the examples shown. Soldiers should make
every effort to learn first-hand of edible plants in the
particular locality where they are stationed. Positive
identification can be learned only by first-hand knowl-
edge of the plants. Study in botanical gardens and mu-
seums will help. Field trips, preferably under the guid-
ance of informed friendly native inhabitants, are the best
means of learning plant identification.
c. In addition to the edible plants listed herein, many
of the familiar garden vegetables such as cabbage, beets,
corn, beans, squash, cucumber, and egg plant are culti-
vated by natives. Fruits such as bananas, pineapples,
lemons, oranges, and limes are also found. These are
not shown on the following pages because of the average
man’s familiarity with their appearance. It must be
remembered that cultivated fruits and vegetables belong


to some native inhabitant, and must not be picked ex-
cept by permission of the owner. Few natives would
object to an individual soldier’s picking a small quantity
of his crop, particularly if the soldier is separated from
his unit and is obviously taking the food as an emer-
gency measure. However, the presence of cultivated
plants is an indication of nearby habitation where food,
shelter, medical aid, and assistance in regaining contact
with one’s unit can usually be obtained, and it might be
more desirable to find the nearby native village early,
rather than to stop and eat from a man’s garden.


Figure 15. Akee (Huevo vegetal in Spanish). A small tree with
double leaves. The fruit has three cells, and is colored red or
orange. It contains three large black shiny seeds each seated in
a white center. The center is the edible part of the fruit. It is
usually boiled in salt water, and then fried, but can be eaten raw.
The SEEDS and the UNRIPE FRUIT which has not opened
by itself on the tree, are POISONOUS.


Figure 16. Bamboo shoot. Bamboo, familiar to almost everyone, is
found throughout tropical Asia and the Pacific Islands. The
young shoots, up to a foot or so in height, can be eaten raw, but
are much more palatable when cooked. In addition to use as
food, bamboo provides material for the construction of many expe-
dient tools and receptacles.


Figure 17. Black palm. A tree with very hard black wood. The
meat around the orange or red fruits is sweet, and although stringy
can be eaten (raw only).


Figure 18. Breadfruit (Fruit ade Pan in Spanish). A large tree
20 to 40 feet, high, a native of the East Indies, and now found
throughout Polynesia, as well as in the West Indies and Panama.
The leaves are large, sharply lobed, dark, and glossy, and have a
sticky, milky juice. The fruit is from 6 to 10 inches in diameter,
round or oval in shape, and has a rough, yellowish green surface.
It may be eaten when thoroughly cooked by baking, and although
extremely dry is a good substitute for potatoes.


Figure 19. Cashew (Maranon in Spanish). A tree growing as high
as 30 feet, found in fields and on the sides of high bushy hills in
Central America. The leaves are leathery, and are yellowish-
green in color; the flowers are pink. The fruit consists of a large
grayish, kidney-shaped nut hanging from a red or yellow, spongy
juicy mass about the size and shape of a pepper. The pepper-
shaped mass can be eaten raw. The nut can be eaten after it
has been roasted until all the oil evaporates; otherwise it is poi-
sonous. The oil in the nut should not be touched with the bare
hands, as it irritates the skin, and causes swelling.


Figure 20. Coconut (Coco or Cocotero in Spanish). The coconut,
found in tropical regions throughout the world, usually grows in
flat areas along the banks of streams or on the coast. The tree
grows as high as 100 feet, with large green or brownish fronds
often 20 feet long. The nuts grow in clusters at the base of the
fronds. The meat of both green and ripe nuts is edible, although
that of the former is by far the more digestible. The water or
“milk” of the green nut is very palatable, and is frequently a satis-
factory substitute for water. In order to extract the water or
meat of the nut, the large outer husk must either be stripped or
cut away. A stout stake with a sharp point, buried in the ground
at an angle is useful in husking.


Figure 21. Grape. Wild grapes are, in general, confined to the
temperate zone, however there is one which is native to Central
America and is known as the Uva or Bejuco de Agua. . This
variety is common in thickets about Panama. The fruit is very
small and sour, but the stem contains a large amount of sap which
is a safe substitute for water.


Figure 22. Guava. A native of tropical America, now widely dis-
tributed throughout Malaysia and Polynesia, particularly in open
areas. The tree is from 6to 20 feet high, and has short stalked
leaves with strongly marked veins, and covered with a soft down.
The fruit is pear shaped, about the size of a hen’s egg, and covered
with a thin bright yellow skin filled with a many-seeded soft pulp.
This last is yellow, pink, or red. in color, has a pleasant sweet-acid
aromatic flavor, and is eaten raw. Jelly and paste are made from
the boiled fruit.


Figure 23. Hog plum (Circuelo in Spanish). A small tree, very
common in Panama, both in open fields or on bushy hillsides.
The fruit, which can be eaten raw or cooked, resembles a plum,
and is usually red or orange.


Figure 24. Ice cream bean (also called Guava in Panama). A tree
common in Central America. The leaves are hairy, dark green
on top, and light green underneath. The fruit, which can be
eaten raw only, looks like a bean, and has a thick, sweet, juicy
pulp, containing seeds.


Figure 25. Mango. The mango is common in Malaysia, Polynesia,
and tropical America, usually in a cultivated state, although a
few wild' ones may be found. The tree is usually large and
spreading, with smooth, dark green glossy leaves. The fruit is
2 to 6 inches long, and is green, yellow or orange red when ripe,
according to the variety. Some mangoes have a strong turpen-
tine taste, but are safe to eat. If not peeled before being eaten,
the juice of the skin, particularly at the base of the stem, may
cause a skin rash, particularly around the mouth, which develops
into “mango sores ." The sap of some of the wild species of
mango trees found in Malaya, all with edible fruit, has a very
irritating effect upon the skin, like that of poison ivy. Mangoes
are generally eaten raw, but may be cooked.


Figure 26. Papaya. Found throughout the Pacific Islands and in
Panama. The tree has a single straight, grayish trunk from 6to
20 feet high, with a cluster of long-stalked uneven-edged leaves
at the top. The trunk is pulpy and brittle, and can be cut
through with one or two blows of a machete. The fruit resem-
bles a muskmelon in appearance, is green or yellow when ripe, and
contains many black shot-like seeds in the interior cavity. The
skin of the fruit and the tree itself exude a milky sap which may
cause skin irritation. Ripe papayas are eaten raw, but green
ones should be cooked by boiling. The sap will make meat tender
if placed on it before cooking, or in the water if the meat is being
boiled.
613291°—44—9


Figure 27. Polynesian chestnut. A small to medium-sized, tree
found in Polynesia, and as a larger tree in Malaysia and tropical
Asia. The nuts, which are eaten either boiled or roasted, grow
in large pods, each containing a single seed or nut. They are
well-flavored and highly nutritious.


Figure 28. Sapodilla or Nispero. A large tree, growing as high as
60 feet, found in tropical America. The leaves are shiny and
dark green. The fruit, about 2 inches in diameter, is ball-shaped,
with thin brown skin which may be either scaly or smooth. It
is eaten raw only.


Figure 29. Soursop (Guanabana in Spanish). A small tree of
tropical America, with smooth, dark-green leaves which are
strongly scented when crushed. The spiny fruits are often as
large as a man’s head, and weigh up to 10 or 12 pounds. The
juicy white pulp, crushed and with water added, makes a pal-
atable beverage. This pulp can also be eaten raw.


Figure 30. Star apple (Caimito in Spanish). A common tropical
American forest tree which grows as high as 60 feet. The
leaves are dark green on top, and have shiny silky brown hairs
on the bottom. The fruit, which has-a smooth green or purple
skin, resembles a small apple in appearance. The fruit, which
has a sweet , greenish milky meat, is eaten raw only. When the
fruit is cross cut through the center, the brown seeds make a
star-shaped figure.


Figure 31. Taro (Badu in Central America). The taro, or badu
is widely cultivated in Oceania and Malaysia and is also culti-
vated in Central America. It is grown in swampy and, less com-
monly, in upland areas. The plant is 2to 3 feet high, and has
leaves closely resembling those of the larger, and inedible “ele-
phant ears” which are grown as ornamental plants in the United
States as well as in the tropics. Taro has thick hairy tubers
somewhat larger than potatoes. The tubers, as well as the young
leaves, are edible, but all must be thoroughly cooked, preferably
by boiling. “Poi,” a staple food in many parts of the Pacific, is
made by pounding and kneeding the peeled boiled tuber, adding
water and allowing the resulting paste to ferment slightly. It
is very palatable to those who become accustomed to it.


Figure 32. Water chestnut (Fruita de Mono in Spanish). A small
or medium-sized tree growing in wet forests or swamps in tropical
America. Only a few branches grow out from the trunk. The
shiny green leaves have 5 to 7 narrow leaflets, usually pointed at
.the tip. The large flowers are a pinkish color. The fruit is
reddish brown and about Bto 10 inches long. It is very hard
and heavy, and the brown seeds are imbedded in solid white flesh.
The large seeds are eaten raw, or roasted and eaten like chestnuts.


Figure 33. Yam. A plant found in both a wild and cultivated
state throughout the south Pacific and in tropical America. The
stems are long, usually twining, reddish-green in color, and have
numerous small flowers. The tuber resembles the sweet potato,
but is usually larger, sometimes weighing as much as 40 pounds.
The skin is rough and brown; the meat white to purplish. One
variety of yam, with a leaf made up of 3 leaflets with somewhat
spiny stems, is poisonous unless properly prepared, and should be
avoided. The edible varieties have either a single leaf, or a leaf
made up of 5 leaflets. Yarns must be cooked before eating, either
boiled or roasted in the same manner as a sweet potato.


Figure 34. Zapote. A large tree of tropical America sometimes
growing to a height of 100 feet. The leaves, pale green on top
and paler underneath, are 6 to 12 inches long. The fruit is ball-
shaped, 4 to 8 inches in diameter, with rough, brownish skin and
pink or reddish meat in which are several large shiny brown
seeds. It is usually eaten raw, but may be eaten cooked.


Appendix II
USE OF JUNGLE MACHETE
1. General
A machete is the most effective tool for cutting through
jungle. In combat, it is an effective weapon for attack-
ing at night when silence is imperative, and firing im-
practicable; for killing guards and sleeping enemies; and
for defense against attack when firing and reloading
weapons or throwing hand grenades is impracticable.
The machete is a cutting instrument that depends on
velocity, rather than upon weight, for its effectiveness.
Maximum velocity and resulting efficiency are obtained
by slashing with plenty of whip in the blade, as described
in paragraphs 4 to 6.
2. Carrying
The machete is best carried in its sheath, hung on the
cartridge belt under the third pocket on the left side.
When hung in this position, the edge of the blade is for-
ward, and can be drawn easily without danger of the
blade’s cutting the legs or body. To prevent possible
loss or injury, always make a practice of sheathing the
machete when not using it.
3. Handling
A machete should never be used with the hand tightly
grasping the handle as if it were a heavy hatchet. By
using plenty of wrist and finger movement, and by not
swinging with the whole arm and shoulder, a man is
able to cut his way through heavy vegetation with the
minimum expenditure of energy.
4. Starting Position
The starting position for a blow with a machete is to hold
the handle tightly with only the thumb and first two
fingers. (See fig. 35.) The blade should be turned
backward toward the forearm. The little finger and
third finger should not grip the handle. When striking


with a machete, the fingers and wrist should snap it for-
ward. At the instant the blade strikes home, grasp the
handle tightly with the entire hand and all the fingers,
in order to be ready to check a false blow or to prevent
the machete from slipping.
Figure 35. Starting position with machete.
5. Correct Cutting Angle
Always hit vines and limbs at an angle of about 45
degrees to their direction. Never attempt to cut any-
thing, whether it be a vine or a man’s arm, directly
crosswise. When cutting a new jungle trail, always
look ahead to pick out a route and avoid unnecessarily
difficult plants and vines.
6. Practice
Proficiency in handling a machete can only be won by
practical work in cutting brush and making trails.
7. Cutting Across Jungle
When a patrol is cutting across jungle, off trail, on a com-
pass course, men should be placed in the following order;
First, the leading machete man, who cuts as fast as he is


able to in the direction (s) indicated by the group leader.
Next, one or two other machete men open up the trail so
that those following do not have to stoop or tear their
way through with difficulty. The patrol leader should
place himself in the third or fourth position from the front
of the column. He should guide the leading machete
man on a compass course by selecting his route with care,
and looking ahead while constantly observing his com-
pass. The patrol leader should indicate the correct
course to the leading machete man, either by pointing or
by quietly telling him the number of degrees he should
move to the right or left. There should always be five or
more yards between adjacent men, whether in movement
or at a halt. Since heat prostration is one of the most
common causes of casualties during hard jungle marches,
leaders should give the men a five-minute rest every 30
or 40 minutes. The leading machete man sets the pace,
and must work the hardest; the patrol leader should there-
fore replace him with a fresh man every 15 or 20 minutes.
8. Sharpening
a. A newly issued machete has a rather dull and thick
edge. After being sharpened a little, this edge is suitable
for cutting hard wood, or for clearing land when there
is likelihood of striking rocks that will damage a thin-
ground blade. For cutting across tropical jungle, how-
ever, a machete blade should have a thin, tapered knife-
edge; it should come to a gradual point. (See fig. 36.)
The blade should be sharpened, as soon as possible after
issue, on a whetstone or a water-cooled natural-stone
grindstone that will not overheat the steel.
b. To sharpen a machete with a small hand whetstone,
bury the whetstone halfway in a notch cut in a log or
board, thus preventing the stone from slipping. Hold the
machete with one hand grasping the handle, with the
fingers of the other pressing down on the upturned side
of the blade. Rotate the blade on the whetstone. To
grind an evenly tapered, sharp edge, be sure to keep the
blade at a constant and very small angle with the whet-


stone. In order to avoid the possibility of cutting fingers
if the hand slips forward off the handle, do not sharpen
the four inches of the blade nearest the handle.
9. Cautions in the use and care of machetes
a. Sharpen the machete whenever practicable.
b. Oil the machete to prevent rusting. A thick vase-
line or grease is best.
c. Leave a machete handle smooth, as issued. Do not
wrap it with adhesive tape or cord. Do not cut grooves
in it. When in use, the machete handle will slip
thousands of times in the hand during a single day, and
any roughness will tend to blister the hand.
Figure 36. Point of machete when sharpened.
d. Do not use the free hand to grasp a vine or limb
that is to be cut.
e. Avoid striking the blade in the ground. Striking a
stone will damage the thin cutting edge of a well-
sharpened machete.
/. Sheath a machete when not using it.
g. When carrying a naked machete, turn the edge away
from the legs and body.
h. Never cut directly downward toward the feet.
Slant all blows to right and left.
i. Be sure that no one is within swinging distance of a
machete in use. Keep at a safe distance from other men
using their machetes.


INDEX
Paragraphs Page
Acclimation 6, 23 4, 27
Aerial photos 49 62
Air Corps : a 53 64
Ambushes 77 93
Ammunition supply (See also Supply) 84 101
Animals:
Pack 12,82 9,99
Wild 4 3
Artillery:
Antiaircraft 52 64
Field 51 62
Attack 59-64 77
Against elaborate positions 62 80
Against hasty positions 61 79
Ambushes 77 93
Meeting engagements . 60 77
Night 64 83
Tanks in : 63 82
Automatic weapons in defense (See also Defense)— 68 86
Bivouacs 57-58 70
Clothing:
Care of 32 36
Supply of 87 101
Communication 13, 90-100 9, 103
Dog messengers and scouts 38, 77, 95 45, 93,
106
Improvised signals 100 107
Messengers 93 105
Pigeons 94 106
Pyrotechnics 98 107
Radio 91 104
Signal flags 99 107
Telephones 92 104
Voice 97 106
Whistles 96 106
Concealment 15 10
Cooking utensils , 35 44
Counterattack (See also Defense) 72 88
Defense _ 65-73 84
Against ambush 77 93
Automatic weapons in 68 86
Counterattack 72 88
Delaying action „ 80 97
Fields of fire 69 87
Night, at 73 88
Organization of ground for 66 85
Security 67 85
Supporting weapons in 70 87


Paragraphs Page
Delaying action 80 97
Discipline 25 32
Diseases 16-21 11
Animal-borne 17 12
Fungus, of skin and hair 21 21
Insect-borne 17 12
Intestinal 19 19
Tropical 20 20
Water-borne 18 18
Dogs 95 106
Emergency food plants App. I 108
Engineers 54 65
Supplies (See also Supply) 88 102
Equipment 31 35
Care of 32 36
-Evacuation 89 102
Expedients 39 46
Fields of fire 14,69 10,87
Fire control in defense (See also Defense) 71 87
First aid 37 44
Food 34 41
Improvised signals 100 107
Infantry 50 62
Inhabitants, native (See native inhabitants).
Languages, native- 44 58
Leadership 29 33
Logistics 10, 56 7, 66
Machete 39, App. 136
Maneuver away from supply lines 78 95
Maps 49 62
Mechanized units 55 66
Medical care 37 44
Meeting engagements 60 77
Mental training 24 31
Messengers 93 105
Morale 9 6
Mosquitoes 16,17 11,12
Native inhabitants 41—45 57
Navigation, land 40 49
Observation 11 8
Patrols 28, 74—76 33, 89
Combat 75 91
3, Reconnaissance 92
Physical conditioning 6, 23 4, 27
Physical efficiency 5 4
Pigeons 94 106
Plants (See also Emergency Food Plants) 2 1
Ponchos, expedients in use of 39 46
Prearranged signals 100 107


Paragraphs Page
Psychological effects of jungles 8, 24 5, 31
Pyrotechnic signals 98 107
Radios 13, 56, 91 9, 66,
104
Rations 34,83 41,
100
Reconnaissance 38, 48, 62 45, 61,
80
Retrograde movements 79 96
Sanitary instructors 7, 16, 17, 19, 34 5, 11
12,19,
41
Scouting 28, 41 33, 57
Security 47 60
In bivouac : 58 76
In defense 67 85
On the march 56 66
Sketches 49 62
Signal communication (See Communication).
Snake bite 22 23
Special operations 77-80 93
Standing operating procedure 46 60
Supply 81-88 99
Ammunition 84 101
Clothing 87 101
Engineer , 88 102
Local purchases 86 101
Maneuver away from supply lines 78 95
Ration 83 100
Transportation 82 99
Water 54, 85 65,
101
Supporting weapons in defense 70 87
Tanks . 55 66
In attack 63 82
Telephones ‘ 13,92 9, 104
Trails 38 45
Training 23, 24 27, 31
Transport 12,82 9, 99
Voice signals 97 106
Water purification 18, 28 18, 33
Weapons 30 34
Automatic, in defense 68 86
Care of 32 36
Night use of 73 88
Whistle signals 96 106
Wild life 4 3
Withdrawal 79 96




