





Subflitutes for Whcaten Flour.
TREATISE
anfc potatoes.
AS FAR AS
RELATES TO THE USE OF THEM
PASTRY,
jDIRECTIONS FOR PREPARING EACH,
AS PR ACTISED AT
TUPP AND PERRY’S
OXFORD-STREET.
DEDICATED, BY PERMISSION,
iHajestp,
JOHN GEORGE PERRY.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY E. SPRAGG, 27, BOW-STREET, COVENT-GARDEN,
J. BELL, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
Ko. 148, Oxford-Street,
And fold by all the Bookfellcrs in the United Kingdom*.


©ntcreti at Stationer’s #all.


%$t Queen’s
MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,
Madam,
YqUR Majefty’s mbit gracious ap-
probation and patronage of the little
Treatife, which, by your royal per-
mifflon, I have the honor to Dedi-
cate to your Majefty, is a frefh proof,
among a multitude of others, that
your gracious beneficence is ever
ready to exert itfelf for the advantage
of your fubjefts, fince my humble
publication attempts nothing but the
means of furnilhing the tables of the
affluent without affefling the necef-
fary fufienance of the poor.
Your


Your Majelly’s exalted virtues have
long been the fubjefl: of panegyric,
and will long continue the boaft of
this kingdom; but it required a mo-
ment as diftrefsful as the prefent to
prove to the world with what anxiety
and benign folicitude you intereft
yourfelf for the comfort of your peo-
ple.
That they may be long bleffed with
a friend fo beneficent and powerful
is the wilh of.
Your Majesty’s
moft dutiful Subjeft,
and Servant,
JOHN GEO. PERRY.
FEBRUARY 3, 1801.


TO THE PUBLIC.
ThE following pages would never have
been fubmitted to the public* had not the
Proclamation of his Majefty recommended,
in the flrongefl: terms, every poffible fay-
ing in Wheaten Flour, and more particu-
larly- the difufe of it in Paftry,
Impelled to experiment by the neceflity
of continuing my profeflion, agreeably to
his Majefty’s gracious recommendation, I
was fortunate enough to difcover a me-
thod of making Paftry, Cakes and Bifcuits
wholly with Rice and Potatoes, without
any mixture of Wheaten Flour whatever.


The approbation of the Royal Family,
when in obedience to the commands of
her Majelly, the fpecimens of my Paltry
were introduced to them, at Buckingham
Houfe; and the thanks of the Noblemen and
Gentlemen of the Vellryof St.Mary-le-bone,
to whom I likewife fijbmitted fpecimens,
have led me to hope it might be render-
ing fome fervice to the public, to lay
the refult of my experiments before them,
and make my procefs known.
I have, therefore, ■written it with as much
and brevity as was in my
power, comprelling it into a fmall pamph-
let, that it might be more generally cir-
culated.
I cannot but embrace this opportunity
to return my moft grateful thanks to the
Nobility, Gentry, and the Public, for their
many favors for the lah thirty-four years.


to the Melfrs. Tupp’s and myfelf, trufling
that the fame care and attention to .their
commands will enfurp their future favors
to their.
much obliged
humble fervant.
J. G, PERRY.
No, j 5 B, OXFORD-STREET,
LONDON, 1801.
P. S. To the trade it may be neceflary
to obferve, that it is not my intention to
ufher into the world a Receipt Book, but
to teach thofe already acquainted with the
Art of Paltry the means of fubllituting
Rice and Potatoes for Wheaten Flour.




To Mr, JOHN GEORGE PERRY,
St. Mary-le-bone, Jan. 3, ißoi*
A$ a Meeting of the Vestrymen of the faid Parifli,
&c. &c. <&c.
Sir HENRY VAVASOUR, Bt. in the Chair.
Mr. JOHN GEORGE PERRY, of Oxford-
Jlreet , having laid before the Board a procefs, by
which he prepares Rice, Rice Flour, and Potatoes,
for the purpofes of making Cakes and Paftry, and
having intimated his intention of publifhing the
fame, under the fan&ion of her Majesty,
Refolvcd —That the thanks of this Meeting be
given to Mr. Perry, for his communication, and
that this Veftry will give him every fupport in
his propofed undertaking.
order,
JOHN JONES, Clerk.




T R E AT IS
muuSlHfffww—
Th E various information with which
the Committee of the Honourable Houfe
of Commons has furnifhed the public, ren-
ders any obfervation of mine either on Rice
pr Potatoes unneceffary, except as far as
relates to the ufe of them in Paftry.
Rice Flour, from its drynefs and want
of tenacity, is in no inftance fit for the
purpofes of Paltry, without previous pre*
paration. The belt method of making it
fubftitute for Wheaten Flour I have


found to be by flewing a part to produce
the tenacity in which it is deficient. To
do this in the ufual way requires parti-
cular attention for a confiderable length
of time; to avoid this delay, and to ma-
cerate the Rice with as little water as
pofliblc, I ufe the following method:
To prepare whole Rice for Paflry put
it into a foup pot, with water in propor-
tion of one pound of rice to two quarts
of water; let this pot, clofely covered, be
put into another pot, of larger fize, which
mufl be filled with water to within an
inch of the top of the inner pot; let this
pot, likewife, be clofe covered, by which
means the fleam will prevent any part of
the Rice from being crufly; fet it in a
flow oven, or over a flow fire, for eight
hours, by which time it will have abforb-
ed all the water, and being beat in a mor-
tar will become a tough pafle.


Great care fhould be taken to pick and
wafh the Rice, as befides the hufks there
is generally flones and fand in it.
If the Rice is foaked in water fomc
hours before it is put to Hew, one-fifth of
the water may be omitted*
TO MAKE PUFF PASTE.
To one pound of the Rice Paflc put
two pounds of Potatoes, boiled in the
ufual way, beat them together with the
yelks of eight Eggs and the whites of
two, to this add one pound and a half
of fine Rice Flour, when well worked
together, roll it out to the thicknefs of
half an inch, and lay on it two pounds
of Butter, cut in flices, fold the Pafte, let
it lay a quarter of an hour, roll it out
again, and again fold it, repeating this
till it has been four times rolled out and
folded, it is then fit for ufe.


Care mu ft be taken to keep the Pafte
from flicking to the board or rolling pin;
by conftantly dulling it with Rice Flour.
Of this pafte may be fnade all forts of
fmall Paftry, fuch as Tartlets, Puffs, Peut
d’Amors, Patties, &c. but in order td
firing the Tartlets, a little of the pafte
fhould be faved out before the Butter is
rolled into it.
POUND CAKES WITH RICE.
Let the whole Rice be ftewed with
milk inftead of water, following the fame
dire&ions as before given—the propor-
tions are as follows:
To one pound of Butter add one Pound
and a quarter of Sugar, finely powdered,
beat thefc well together firft, making the
Butter a little warm, to beat it to a
cream, than beat one pound of the Rice


Pafle in a mortar, with ten Eggs, fliring
the Eggs with Rice by degrees, to prevent
its being lumpy; beat this well into the
Butter and Sugar, adding half a gill of
Brandy; after which flir in one pound of
Rice and Potato Flour, in equal quanti-
ties, put them into fmall cake hoops, lined
with paper, and bake them in a quick
oven.
CRISP RICE BISCUITS
Are made by ftewing one pound of Rice
Flour in a quart of Cream .till it becomes
a Pafle, and afterwards working into, it
two Eggs and as much dry Rice Flour
as will make it fufficiently ftiff to roll out
thin, and flamp it into fliape.
ESCHAUDES
Arc made with half flewed Rice Pafle
and half Potato Flour, well worked, ufing-
ten Eggs to one pound of Flour.


The Flour of Rice and Potatoes in equal
quantities may be ufed for all forts of
Sponge and Savoy Bifcuits in the fame
proportions as Wheaten Flour; but is very
expehlive, the Potato feldom yielding
more Flour than one tenth of its weight.
To obtain the Flour pare the Potatoes
and grate them into water, which ftrain
to feparate the pulp, as, the feculence fub-
fides pour off the water and add frefh,
repeating this till the fediment or Flour
appears perfectly white, which, when dried,
beat, and lifted, is ready for ufe.
PRINTED BY E. SPUACG, 27, BOW-STREET.
