

*' % <2
B APTISM:
fAMS
ITS SUBJECTS AND MODE.
THREE LECTURES
THE
REY. R. FLETCHER,
/ rJ
OF ST. HILDA.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.
1861.


Circumstances having occurred to call more than usual attention to the
views on Baptism held by the Baptist Denomination, the author of the
following lectures was requested to preach upon the subject, and to permit the
discourses to appear in the Christian Times, of Melbourne. He deemed it
his duty to comply with the request, and now yields to a further solicitation to
allow them to appear in their present form. As they were, for the most part,
written before he saw any thing recently published on the other side, they are
not professedly an answer to such publications, but must be looked upon as
independent productions. The author is alone responsible for the sentiments
contained in them.
St, Kilda, May 28, 1861.


011
BELIEVERS’
BAPTISM.
Repent and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and
the gift of the Holy Ghost.”—Acts ii. 38.
ye shall receive
1 have rarely felt it my duty to make the baptis-
mal question, as a matter of controversy, a theme
of pulpit ministration. This has arisen from a
dread of diverting the attention of the people
from the weightier matters of the Gospel to the
mere-circumstantials and ceremonies of religion,
about which good men may differ, and which,
after all, have no necessary connection with per-
sonal salvation or even soundness in the faith.
Recent events, however, seem to render it desir-
able that silence should be broken, and will, I
doubt not, justify me in calling your attention to
the subject.
The general question of baptism is a large one,
branching out into several departments, among
which are its nature, its design, its subjects, its
mode of administration, its utility, the duty of
observing it, its history, and so on. This is too
wide a field for me to traverse throughout in the
lectures I think of delivering. The examination
of a few of these points will be sufficient for my
present purpose, and those I have selected are—
Relievers’ Raptism, Infant Baptism, and the
Mode of Baptism. Relievers’ Raptism will be our
present theme.
I begin with “ Believers’ Baptism,” because,
in my opinion, the controversy, in its most es-
sential features, mainly hinges upon it. It is
the point most frequently urged by our Baptist
brethren ; it is that characteristic of their system
which they deem most distinctive, essential, and
useful; and it is from their views on this branch
of the subject that their chief objections to infant
baptism arise.
It is important to have a clear conception ol
what is meant by the phrase “ Believers’ Bap-
tism,” or the “ Baptism of Believers,” as used by
our Baptist brethren. It appears to me there is,
in many minds, some confusion of ideas on this
subject, which wants clearing away.
The “Baptism of Believers” has a twofold
aspect, as it relates to the person baptised, and
to the person administering the ordinance.
1. Baptism as it relates to the Baptised. —What
are the moral and spiritual qualifications a person
should possess when he offers himself for bap-
tism ? When Jews or heathens, to whom the
Gospel was first preached, and among whom the
first baptisms occurred, presented themselves to
the Evangelists to be baptised, what did it be-
hove them to be, and what to profess ? It is
contended, by the advocates of Believers’ Bap-
tism, that the only valid qualification for
the ordinance, is, a change of heart, true
repentance, cordial faith. The candidate must
be an undoubted Christian before he is baptised.
He should have the baptism of the Spirit before
he has the baptism of water—the thing signified
before he receives the sign. The command ex-
plicitly given to inquirers is, “Repent and be
baptised every one of you,” Repent first, and bo
baptised afterwards. And the promise is, “He
that believeth and is baptised shall be saved.”
Now, in my opinion, there is much truth in this,
lo a great extent, so far as adults are concerned,
I admit these demands to be reasonable. The
Apostles and Evangelists had a commission from
their Master to preach the Gospel to everv
creature. It was every man’s duty to whom they
came to hear the Gospel, to receive it, and to be-
come a genuine disciple of Christ. “ God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them.” In Christ’s
stead men were besought to be reconciled to God,
and it was their duty to yield, and to yield sin-
cerely, to “ present their bodies a living sacrifice,
holy and acceptable to God.” This was their
reasonable service—the reasonable service of
every one. And it was the duty of all to embrace
the new religion, and to submit to its initiatory
rite of baptism ; and to submit to it—not hypo-
critically, but sincerely— not formally, but cor-
dially, with penitence and faith; or it could
not be acceptable to the Searcher of hearts.
If I said or admitted less than this, I might in-
duce some to think they had fulfilled the will of
God, met the requirements of the Gospel, when
they had done no such thing. They could
neither discharge their obligations to their
Saviour aright, nor fully understand the spiritual
significancy of baptism, nor reap all the benefits
it was meant to confer unless they were taught
of God, renewed by the Holy Spirit, and savingly
united to Christ by faith. °
It is the same, however, with every other re-
ligious duty required at our hand. We cannot
perform it rightly and acceptably, unless we per-
form it sincerely, religiously, and in an evangeli-
cal spirit. Prayer is a duty, incumbent upon all.
according to the command, “ Ask and ye shall
receive; seek and ye shall find; knock and it
shall be opened unto you.” But then, let them
ask in faith, nothing wavering. If those who
pray are insincere, formal, indifferent to the suc-
cess of their petitions, they will “ask amiss;”
and, in that case, they will “ receive not/’ but be


sent empty away. The precious volume of Holy Christians, before we administer to them the
Scripture is given to men. It is their duty to
search it, to meditate on it, to open their minds to
understand it. But they cannot be exonerated
from the obligation of doing this in a right spirit,
in humility and docility, in faith and self-applica-
tion, believing the doctrines,obeying the precepts,
living upon the promises; “with meekness re-
ceiving the engrafted word which,” when so
received, “is able to save their souls.’’ It is
the duty of all men to worship God and
sing his praises. But there is no magical virtue
in the outward service;-—“ God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth, for the Father seeketh such
to worship him.” If we sing God’s praises, we
should “ sing with the spirit and understanding
also,” —“making melody in our hearts unto the
Lord.” These are all duties, binding upon us as
God’s accountable creatures; but “ whatsoever is
not of faith is sin;” to be acceptable to God they
must spring from a right motive and a right
state of heart.
The command to be baptised is, in my view, in
the same category with these. “ Repent and be
baptised’’ is a duty enjoined upon all to whom
the Gospel comes. There is no evading this
obligation in any of its parts. Every person
should repent of sin; every person should receive
the ordinance of baptism;—and both should be
done from the heart and in faith.
All this I freely concede. But is there any-
thing special in this ? Does not the obligation
to do a thing rightly apply to every other service
—to public worship, public and private prayer,
hearing and reading the Word of God ? Regard-
ing baptism, then, as it relates to baptised adults,
it is certainly their duty to be true penitents and
genuine believers.
2. Let us next view baptism in relation to the
baptiser, —the administrator of the ordinance.
I do not mean, of course, his own state of mind
religiously considered, but his duty towards the
applicants for baptism, and the way in which he
should deal with them, and what is the signifi-
cancy of his act in baptising them.
In distributing the Holy Scriptures, whatever
may be the duty of those that receive them, we
do not consider ourselves bound to withhold
them till the receivers satisfy Us that they have
the spiritual qualifications necfessary to use them
to profit. In opening places of worship, we do
not deem it necessary to exclude from entering
them any who do not possess, in our opinion, the
qualifications of spiritual worshippers. In these
and such like cases, we point out faithfully,
men’s duty; concede to them the privilege;
and to their own Master, the Searcher of all
hearts, we leave them to stand or fall, according
to his righteous judgment.
Now, the question is, should we place baptism
among this class of obligations or not? Should
we state its nature, show its obligation, point out
the state of mind which will render it accept-
able, and enforce the duties which result from
it, and then give it to ail who apply, without
pretending to search into and pass a judgment
upon their state of mind, or without meaning to
affirm anything respecting their spiritual state
by baptising them ? Or, are we to wait for evi-
dence that will satisfy us that they are true
ordinance in question, as we do in respect to
church membership ? The former is my view
of Baptism, which, I believe, is the view pre-
sented in the New Testament; and this I will
attempt to substantiate by a glance at the evi-
dence in the sacred volume bearing upon it.
The latter is, as I understand it, the opinion
held by the Baptist body.
Those practising believers’ baptism, not only
inculcate the necessity of faith and repentance,
and a change of heart, but wait till they see evi-
dence to satisfy them that this stale of mind is
possessed by the candidate. Not only must
he be a Christian, but the administrator must
believe that he is so; and what he does in bap-
tising is not simply or chiefly to exhibit certain
great truths by the symbolical rite of baptising
with water, and to press certain great duties, de-
volving upon the baptised, in consequence of his
being baptised, but to certify that he, the baptiser
bdiev*s the baptised person to be a true Christian,
and receives him as such into the community of
the faithful. The baptism becomes thus the en-
dorsement or certificate of the baptiser, that the
baptised, in his judgment, is a true believer.
The ceremony is meant to separate believers
from unbelievers—the Church from the world;
but it cannot tell us infallibly who are really be-
lievers, but only whom the baptiser thinks to be
such. Many believers may be excluded, and
many unbelievers included.
That a separation in the present world, so far
as is practicable, of the converted from the uncon-
verted—of the true and earnest from the nominal
and worldly Christian, was part of the will
and purpose of Christ our Master, I firmly be-
lieve. But I also believe that such separation
was to be effected by 'Church membership, car-
ried out on Scriptural principles; and that it is
not, and cannot be effected by baptism, unless it
were administered under other circumstances
than it is, even by the strictest baptists.
In order to answer the purpose of marking off
he Church from the world, of designating such
s are real believers, and distinguishing them
rom unbelievers, with as near an approach to
ccuracy as the present imperfect state of things
will admit of, the validity of the candidate’s qualifi-
cations should be judged of by, if I may so speak,
a competent jury. We have such a tribunal in
the society which constitutes a Christian Church,
in the New Testament sense, whose average
numbers, average impartiality, average Christian
character and spiritual discernment, furnish a
fair security against mistaken judgments. But
is there such reasonable security, if so important
a decision be left with a single man, the person,
whoever he may be, who evangelises and admin-
isters baptism to such as apply to him, and whom
he thinks to be sincere and genuine penitents and
believers.
But above all, if baptism is to mark out real
Christians, so as to inspire any confidence in
the sign, as really significant of the thing signi-
fied, baptism itself should be revocable—a mere
temporary sign, lasting as long as the profession
remains consistent, and capable of being with-
drawn by those who imposed it whenever the
want of real repentance and faith might become
apparent. Baptism should be delible, it should


begin and end with church-raembeiship, or it
fails to indicate anything with certainty as to the
character of the baptised.
Now, we know that the general body of our
Baptist brethren believe that the person who
preaches and makes converts, or any one holding
the ministerial office is, of right, the sole judge
of the faith, conversion and general fitness of the
candidates for baptism ; the church or deacons
may, as a matter of courtesy or prudence, be con-
sulted, but need not as a matter of necessity • and
if they are consulted it is more with a view to
fitness for subsequent church membership than
fitness for baptism itself.
We believe, with the Baptists, that the respon-
sibility of determining who shall be baptised
rests with the missionary, itinerant, or pastor,
whose preaching may have produced the needful
impression, or to whom the candidate may have
applied for baptism. He could thus certify that
the man w'as willing to become a disciple, and
could impress some solemn and necessary truths
upon him by the significant rite of baptism. But
it .seems highly improbable that the Saviour
would entrust so sacred and awful a power to
any individual man to set apart, by a divinely
appointed symbol, those who were true believers
and real Christians, and to distinguish them
from loose professors and the ungodly world, es-
pecially when such impression, when once
affixed, is ineffaceable, and must last for life.
The minister baptising may not himself be a
real Christian, and may therefore be disqualified
from perceiving what is and what is not a
genuine work of the Spirit of God on the heart
and life, which alone can be spiritually discerned.
Or, he may, on the one hand, be so weak in
judgment, hasty in temperament, or lax in disci-
pliue, as to inclose many in the class of believing
professors who have no just claim to the dis-
tiuction, in the estimation of more prudent
judges: or, on the other hand, he may be so
stern and strict, and high in his standard, as to
exclude many real Christians of a timid and un-
obtrusive character. Such things have been, and
will be again. This, then, forms our first ob-
jection to “ Believers’ Baptism,” as I have ex- :
plained that phrase.
Again, we believe, with the Baptists, in the (
indelibility of baptism. We have no evidence of i
the repetition of Christian baptism on the re- i
storation of backsliders and apostates. The fact !
remains the same that they received the symbol 1
of discipleship, and are under special obligations f
to live to Christ, and that fact may be used as a (
powerful motive to exhort them to carry out c
their expressed or implied promises and vows. 1
The Baptists agree with us in this. They do not 1
re-baptise a baptised apostate when he returns t
from his evil ways, and at length gives evidence t
of genuine faith. Had they been in Peter’s place, t
they would not have baptised Simon Magus over t
again, if he had complied with the apostle’s ex- p
hortation to repent. Their principle is, once 1;
properly baptised, always baptised ; once baptised t
on a profession of repentance and faith which r
the administrator at the time believes to be s
genuine, the baptism remaims good for life what- p
ever may be the future conduct of the baptised d
person. Now this, we conceive, destroys baptism s
as believers baptism. It no longer becomes a n
it sign that the baptised person is a believer, even
e in the estimation of the minister who baptised
him. If the baptism stood good only so long as
ir the profession stood good ; if, when the baptised
o person fell into apostacy or sin, he, de facto, un-
g baptised himself; or if, on his exclusion from
e church fellowship as unworthy of the privilege, he
e was regarded “as a heathen man and a publican ”
s as one who had forfeited and obliterated his bap-
i- I tism ; and, if further, on his recovery from back,
d sliding he were to be baptised afresh—in other
0 words, if the Baptists were Anabaptists, not with
u respect to our baptisms alone, which they ignore
as useless, but with respect to their own, when
- thus virtually rendered null, and void, and un-
-1 meaning, we might see greater reason for admit-
, ting baptism to be a distinctive mark of believers,
1 For, in that case, Ijhere would be an opportunity,
3 which there is not at present, of rectifying a false
t judgment, cancelling a certificate now no longer
tme, blotting out a sign now no longer signifi-
-3 cant. But, ns this point is not conceded, as the
t Baptists rightly hold that baptism should be ad-
ministered only once in a man’s lifetime, we
) cannot conceive the Saviour meant this rite, left
1 to the administration of fallible men, to be the
’ chaiacteristic sign and badge of his regenerated
and spiritually-minded people.
Now, these reasonings, derived from the nature
of the case, for concluding that Christian baptism
is not “ believers’ baptism in the sense in which
I understand that phrase to be used by our
Baptist brethren, are corroborated, in every par-
ticular, by the manner in which the baptisms
alluded to in the New Testament actually took
place. Baptism is generally, if not always, men-
tioned incidentally as an adjunct to something
else which is the main matter of the narration.
Hence, we have no formal description of the"
ceremony, or of what passed between the bap"
tiser and the baptised, but mere casual hints and
allusions. e are left, therefore, to gather what
is pertinent to the present question from a care-
ful consideration of all the circumstances which
took place when the ordinance was administered,
so far as we can discover them from the'
narratives.
It is well known, that those who require the
evidence of saving faith before they baptise, have
to wait for it. Where the parties are not pro-
selytes from the other bodies but new converts,
a probation is deemed necessary to satisfy the
baptiser that the profession about to be made is
genuine. No Baptist minister of the present
day, would, I imagine, feel justified at the close
of a public service, in standing at the side of his
baptistry and inviting all persons present who
had been impressed and converted by the sermon
they had just heard, to come forward and be
baptised at once; nor would he immediately yield
to the wishes of such as might voluntarily offer
themselves for baptism, if he kneiv nothing of them
previously. Not even, I presume, would such
hasty baptisms be sanctioned in revivals similar
to those which have recently occurred in Ame-
rica and Ireland. Some trial is deemed neces-
sary to satisfy the officiator that the “goodness”
professed is not “ as a morning cloud and early
dew which goeth awayand in ordinary circum.
stances as much probationary delay is deemed
necessary as is usual in Independent churches


■when new converts apply for admission into their baptised had so far profited by his instructions
communion.
Do we find, then, anything resembling this
process in the baptisms of the New Testament?
There appears not to be even a trace of it there.
So far as the narratives of the baptisms spoken
of instruct us, it seems to have been the uniform
practice to administer baptism immediately on
the impression being made which awakened a
desire for discipleship, before there was any
opportunity of testing, by trial and delay, the
sincerity of the candidates and the genuineness
of their conversion.
1. The first baptisms spoken of in the New
Testament are those of John, the forerunner of
Jesus. These were so characteristic of the dis-
pensation he introduced, that he was called, by
way of eminence, “the Baptist,” and his dispen-
sation the “ Baptism of John.” His baptism is
styled, “the Baptism of Repentance for the Re-
mission of Sins.” This faithful preacher showed
the people their sins, exhorted them to X’epent,
and declared the time was just at hand when the
spiritual kingdom of Messiah would be set up, for
which, in the state in which he found them, they
were so unprepared. Of course, those that sub-
mitted to his baptism must have professed to
believe his statements, to be penitent for their
sins, and to be willing to become his disciples.
But did he tarry for evidence of the sincerity
of these professions? Did he wait till he was
assured they were true penitents? Did he sig-
nify, by baptising them, that he believed them
to be such? So far as we can judge from the
brief records which have come down to us, the
circumstances rendered this impossible. The
numbers that were attracted to his ministry, seem
to have been immense. They came from all the
surrounding districts, and from considerable dis-
tances. “ There went out to him Jerusalem and
Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,
and were baptised of him.” “It came to pass,
when all the people were baptised, that Jesus
himself also was baptised.” The fame of John
extended also to the north of the country; for
we find Andrew and Peter and Philip, and others
from the districts bordering on the Lake of Gali-
lee, among his disciples. The terms employed are
of the most general kind, and certainly import
that crowds of people came to him from
all quarters. The character of these mul-
titudes was such that John said to them,
“ O generation of vipers, who hath warned
you to flee from the wrath to come ? ”
These crowds of people were deeply impressed
and, excepting the Pharisee class, were baptised
confessing their sins. They thus received the
badge of disciples, and, for a time, attended on
his ministry. That some real good resulted from
his labours cannot be doubted. He was sent to
prepare the way of the Lord, and we must sup-
pose tin t in some sense his mission answered its
end. We know of a little band of John’s fol-
lowers who were in such a spiritual frame of
mind that they welcomed the holy and devout
Jesus of Nazareth as the true Messiah, and be-
came his personal attendants, his apostles, and
the nucleus of the Christian Church itself. From
the comment of the Evangelist Luke upon the
description Jesus gave of John’s character and
ministry, it appears that the people whom John
that they signified their approval of what Jesus
said about him, while those who refused his
baptism took the opposite course: “ And all the
people that heard him (Jesus) and the publicans
justified God, being baptised with the baptism of
John; but the Pharisees and lawyers rejected
the council of God against themselves, being not
baptised of him.”
All this we freely allow: But there is no evidence
of any extensive spiritual awakening; of conver-
sions which were proved genuine by “repentance
unto lifeof that preparation of heart which
made the people in masses welcome the glorious
Gospel as soon as it was preached to them
after Christ’s resurrection, especially in the
districts where John laboured. At all events,
from the recoi'd of his work as a baptiser,
it would seem that he rejected none, but baptised
all that offered themselves. What opportunities
could there be for personal examination of the
individual candidates?—what probation sufficient
to prove to John himself the sincerity of their
repentance, when they flocked to him in such
numbers, were utter strangers to him, remained
in the open wilderness a few days only, and then
returned to their homes to be seen by him no
more, while his time was so largely occupied in
publicly preaching and baptising (especially if he
immersed them all) ? Whatever they might feel
or profess, it appears certain that John could not
mean, by baptising them, that he had evidence of
their individual conversion and genuine repent-
ance, and that he signified as much when ho
admitted them to the rite.
2. These views, however, of the absence of
satisfactory evidence of spiritual qualifications
for John’s baptism, may be admitted, and yet it
may be objected that his baptism was peculiar,
exceptional, and imperfect; but that a different
state of things was inaugurated when baptisms
took place under Christ’s own authority. The
Evangelists inform usthatwhen Jesus fairly began
his ministry, he adopted the same course as his
precursor John had done; he instituted baptism
as a part of the economy he came to set up. They
apprise us of this by stating, that some of John’s
disciples, jealous of their Master’s honour, came
to him with the complaint that the people were
falling away from him and going after Jesus, the
new teacher. “Rabbi, he that was with thee be-
yond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, be-
hold the same baptiseth and all men come to
him.” The fact of baptisms in connection with
Christ’s ministry, and the extent of them, is
further intimaled by a remark of the historian’s
own : “ The Pharisees knew that Jesus made and
baptised more disciples than John, though Jesus
baptised not, but his disciples.’’ John, however,
only saw in this the fulfilment of his own predic-
tion : “ He must increase, but I must decrease.”
He was content to be cast into the shade when
the Son of Righteousness arose, whose appear-
ance he came to herald. He rejoiced that his
testimony had had the desired effect, and that the
people were now turning their attention to Jesus
as the great teacher of the day; and, as John had
baptised them, so did the new teacher, or rather,
he ordered them to be baptised by his disciples—
by those disciples, probably, who were afterwards
appointed to be apostles or evangelists. The


same general language of a widely extended receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” “Then they
J™ 18 nsed here as m John’s case. Upon that gladly received his Word were baptised; and
Pblr fp ! e n Wa , S ’a ?> ,TeSUS P ei ; eeived thfi the same day there were added unto them about
Strict 1 r P1 °n ° f ‘j 10 three thousand souls.” Here we tind that all were
distnct would use and make some open de- instantly baptised who expressed their willingness
* a l a 'T.., in fa !° Ur . of tle teache , r w hom they to beso. Thi this was agtorious work of the Snirit
themselves contemptuously rejected, and to pre-
vent disturbance and a premature display, he re-
moved thence northward to Galilee. And what
was the confession made by these early disciples?
No information is given us on this point; but
considering how ignorant of the real nature of
Christ’s kingdom the Apostles themselves were
at this time, and the dark and carnal views
which the people everywhere, in the subsequent
part of Christ’s ministry, entertained of him and
his mission, and the absence of all evidence
of a wide-spread spiritual preparation for the re-
ception of the Gospel, when fully preached after
Christ’s Ascension, and the statement of John—
He came unto his own, and his own received
him not”—we can hardly conclude that these
multitudes were all truly converted to God, and
were baptised by the Saviour’s own authority, to
signify that he acknowledged them as his spi-
ritual and believing people. In the absence of
positive evidence, the most probable conjecture,
from the known state of the Jewish people in re-
gard to spiritual piety, is, that all that the bap-
tisms implied on the part of the people who
offered them selves, was, that they believed Christ to
be the Messiah ; and all that was implied by the
Saviour in allowing them to be baptised, was, an
acknowledgement of their being disciples, to be
taught more fully afterwards the real nature of
the new kingdom Jesus had come to set up.
3. We come next to the Baptisms in the Acts,
as administered by the Apostles and their coad-
jutors when they fairly commenced the work of
preaching the Gospel to mankind. Here, as
before, the menfion of baptism, for the most part,
is incidental; it is glanced at rather than minutelv
described, and in the majority of the instances of
the successful preaching of the Gospel which are
related, there is no allusion to baptism at all;
though doubtless the converts were baptised as i
in the other cases. As the dispensation of the i
Spirit was now begun, and the time had come 1
when the Comforter, according to Christ’s pro- <
mise, would attend the heralds of the cross to i
6i' e effect to their labours, we must be prepared
to expect more decided evidences of true conver- f
sion in those who were baptised than before. More (
especially was this the case when adhesion to the t
cause of the new religion, which was now implied, c
in submitting to baptism, involved greater sacri- H
fices and bolder decision than in the lifetime of t
Christ, when no distinct organisation had been r
set up. We find, nevertheless, the same prin- v
ciple of immediate baptism, without probation, in t
every baptism recorded. «
Ihe first case is the baptism of the converts c
on the day of Pentecost. At the close of J
I eter s sermon, the record states that a large a
body of his auditors, when they heard his a
stirring address, “ were pricked in their heart, I
and said to Peter and to the rest of the a
apostles, Men and brethren, what shall w-e do?” tl
J hen Peter said unto them, “Pepent and be si
baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus tl
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall p
e- instantly baptised who expressed their willingness
jy to be so. That this was a glorious work of the Spirit,
3- producing a multitude of sound conversions, can-
b- not for a moment be questioned, as the perma-
it nence of the effect in founding the great parent
i? Church of Jerusalem clearly shows. But this is
it little to the point as regards the present con-
)f troversy. The real question is, how could the
e apostles be assured at the time of the baptism, of
s the genuineness of the work in the case of
it eveiy of three thousand strangers, many
d them foreigners, whom they never saw before,
e and of whose previous character they could have
i- known nothing. How could they be satisfied
r that moment that the excitement created
- might not subside, and the impressions pro-
-1 duced wear off in time? It will not help the
3 matter to affirm that they were miraculously
l guided to discern their spirit and character
) with infallible certainty, for there is no evidence
• of this; and it is much more probable that in this,
f the beginning of their Christian ministry, they
, would setaprecedentthatmightsafelybe followed
• in all subsequent cases by their successors, Noris
the difficulty which presses upon the theory of
i “ Believers’ Baptism’’ removed by telling us
1 hat the parties baptised constituted the Church
immediately afterwards formed; and, if they had
the qualifications necessary for church member-
ship, they, of course, had for baptism. For, first,
though, in the very brief record of this great
event, we have no account of what actual
measures were taken to constitute the Church,
or to form the converts into an organised society,
there can be little doubt that some kind of exa-
mination would take place; and, secondly, and
chiefly, there was more need for caution ’ and
delay in admitting to baptism than church mem-
bership, if baptism signified that the apostles
certified the baptised to be, in their opinion, real
believers. lor, if a mistake had been committed,
and an improper person had been received, they
had the remedy in their hand for rectifying it in
the one case, but not in the other; they could
expel from the Church, but they could not oblite-
rate baptism.
2. The next case is the Baptism of the
Samaritans. The Evangelist Philip preached
Christ to the inhabitants, and performed
many miracles. A great impression was pro-
duced, and there was great joy in that city.
Manj became disciples, and the baptisms seem
to have been upon a large scale. The brief
lecoid states that Simon the Sorcerer had pre-
viously acquired great power over the popula-
tion, but when the Evangelist came among them,
They believed Philip, preaching the things con-
cerning the kingdom of God, and the name of
Jesus Christ, and they were baptised both men
and women. Then Simon himself believed also ;
and when he was baptised, he continued with
Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles
and signs which were done.” Now, here we find
that among the numbers baptised was one who
soon proved himself to be very ignorant of
the nature of the Gospel, and destitute of its
principles and spirit; and whom the Apostle


Peter pronounced to be “in the gall of bitterness Spirit before the eyes of all. Then it was that Peter
1 • .1 i 1 /»• • • j !• 1/ 1. • I .i. „i. AwnlniTnA/1 < i C*c\-r\ nrttr wan fnvVii rl TOolov tlmf fTtQCfI
and in the bond of iniquity,’’ “ his heart not being
right in the sight of God.” Yet this man is said,
in common with the rest, to have “ believed
obviously in a loose sense: probably the expres-
sion meaning no more than that he professed to
believe. He was willing to become a disciple, and
he was baptised simply as such. Ashe bad been a
notorious sorcerer’, special care should have been
taken in his case to learn the soundness of his
conversion, but he was baptised without hesita-
tion. Does not this clearly prove that the bap-
tisms at Samaria were administered without the
opportunity of examining carefully the qualifica-
tions of every applicant, and that Philip could
not mean to signify, when he baptised Simon and
the rest, so soon after he began to preach to
them, that he thereby certified his beliej in their
real conversion ?
3. In the same chapter occurs the account of
the baptism of the eunuch by the same evangelist.
This is a celebrated case because of its supposed
bearing, both on believers’ baptism and the mode
of baptising. Passing by, in the present lecture,
the latter subject, I will say a word upon the
former. Philip was led, by an impulse of the
Spirit, to journey to a place where he met the
Ethiopian, reading in the Prophet Isaiah. From
the opportune passage before him, the evangelist
preached to him Jesus. The stranger was so im-
pressed with what he heard, and convinced that he
of whom the prophet spoke was Jesus of Nazareth,
that, on coming to a certain water, he said: —
“ See here is w r ater; what doth hinder me to be
baptised; ’ and Philip said, “ If thou believest
with all thine heart, thou mayest; and he an-
swered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God’’—“and he baptised him.” Philip’s
requiring a confession of true faith is supposed
by many to settle the question in dispute in
favour of believers’ baptism. But, first, on this I
remark that all modern critics give up the words
“ ij thou believest with all thine heart thou mayest,
and he said , I believe that Jesus is the Christ the
Son of God,'’ as spurious. They are notin the
Greek Testaments of the present day of the
best recension. And next, if the passage were
genuine, what does it prove ? Merely that Philip
required a profession of faith, which may he
allowed, but not that he had the means of being
sure that the eunuch was a real possessor of saving
faith. They were unacquainted with each other ;
they had had an hour or two’s conversation on the
very essence of the Gospel—the stranger saw the
truth as explained to him, made a profession
of his faith in it, and desired to receive baptism,
which was imraediatly administered. My belief
is that he was a true convert. But how could
the Evangelist be sure of this on so brief an
acquaintance ? The significance of the ceremony
could in the circumstances, so far as Philip was
concerned, import nothing more than that the
eunuch was recognised by him as a disciple of
the Lord Jesus.
4. The baptism of Cornelius by the Apostle
Peter, presents a case where satisfactory evi-
dence of moral and religious character was fur-
nished before baptism and with a view to it. A
miraculous attestation to the centurion’s piety was
given by an angel from heaven, and this was fol-
lowed by an extraordinary effusion of the Holy
exclaimed, ‘ ‘ Can any man forbid water that these
should not be baptised, who have received the
Holy Ghost even as we? And he commanded
them to be baptised in the name of the Lord.”
Why was special evidence of the spiritual
condition of the candidate given in this particular
case, when the administrators were left in all—or
nearly all—others to the ordinary means of judg-
ing of character? It was obviously to remove
Peter’s Jewish scruples about admitting Gentiles
to the enjoyment of Christian privileges.
C. The case of Lydia, recorded in the ICth chap-
ter of the Acts, is a similar one to thatof the Cen-
turion, in there being evidence of previous piety;
for, before Paul’s visit to Philippi, she consorted
with some devout women who met for prayer in
an oratory by the river side, and she is spoken of
as one who “worshipped God.” Probably the
apostle was acquainted with these par-
ticulars though the narrative does not state that
he made any inquiries. Of course his knowledge
of her piety would be no objection to her being
baptised, though the want of such knowledge
would, judging by other cases, not have been
an objection. All we know is that he appears
to have baptised her without any delay.
7. The well-known case of the jailer at Phi-
lippi, narrated in the same chapter, is very dif-
ferent and vei’y pertinent to the drift of this
lecture. The man was in all probability a
heathen, Philippi being a Greek city, and, at
the same time, a Koman colony. There can
be little doubt that the officials of the Government
were either Romans or Greeks, and this jailor
must have been an idolater. He had no sym-
pathy with Paul, for he manifestly with zest car-
x’ied out the magistrates’ orders to keep a close
watch upon the prisoner, and probably exceeded
them in severity. There was no preparation of
mind for the impending change, and in this con-
dition he went to sleep. Suddenly awoke by
an earthquake, he was on the point of committing
suicide, supposing the prisoners had escaped, and
he should be called to account. Conviction, how-
ever, atthatmoment seized him. In terror he asked,
“ What must I do to be saved ?” and received the
well-known reply, “Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shalt be saved an d thy house.” An d
the record tells us that forthwith he was baptised,
and all his, straightway, thereandthen, that very
night, rejoicing and believing in God with all his
house. We believe this was a genuine conver-
sion, and Paul had no doubt the same conviction
from the extraordinary character of the case. He
had not, however, the proof of his continuance
that we have. The case was then new to him;
the impression of so great an alarm might wear
off; and the heathen and ungodly habits of the
man’s mind might return upon him, for anything
the apostle knew at the time ; and is it likely, if
the apostle meant the baptism of him and his to
be his certificate and sign of the reality of their
conversion, he would have been in such haste to
administer it, before the morning dawn, and not
wait a few days at least, to see whether they re-
mained steadfast in the faith?
To sum up the evidence derived from these re-
cords of Scripture baptisms, so far as it bears
upon the present question of believers’ baptism,
we remark—


.1* t l , i baptisms were administered were not certain signs that the baptised were
immediately at the very time the impression was believers, or the Apostles and their coadjutors
made, or the application was presented. So far did not mean to certify any such thin*
as can be gathered from the narrative, no delay 5. From all this, we infer that whatever the
occurred in any one instance to afford time to test
the sincerity of the candidates.
2. Some of the baptisms were administered in
such circumstances as to make it impossible to
obtain proof at the time that the impressions
made on the baptised would be durable, or to
test the soundness of their religious character in
individual instances. This was obviously the
case with the crowds that were baptised by John
and by the disciples of Christ; and also with the
three thousand baptised on the day of Pentecost,
and the inhabitants of Samaria who were baptised
by Philip. Clearly, personal examination, in-
quiry into antecedent conduct and character, and
other modes of judging whether a profession
be sincere, or a peculiar excitement be a genuine
work of the Spirit, were out of the question, as
the baptisms were so instantaneous, and the
crowds of people so great,
3. We have no reason to believe that the
administrators were endowed with the extraor-
dinary and miraculous faculty of discerning
spirits and determining character without the
usual means of proof. To introduce the Deus
ex machind, the special intervention of the Diety,
without any evidence of it, in order to help over
a difficulty may be convenient, but certainly is
not allowable. God is ever sparing of miracles,
and performs none but such as are necessary;
and in this case the Apostles and Evangelists
were doubtless left to do as other pastors ought
to do in like circumstances, so that they might
be instructive models and guides to future ages.
4. In point of fact all the baptised were not i
believers, as is proved by the case of Simon, and '
other apostates mentioned in the New Testament, i
so that the baptisers were either mistaken in i
their judgment of character, and their baptisms
11. INFANT
5. From all this, we infer that whatever the
; baptised ought to have been, in a religious sense,
whatever was implied as their duty when they
sought for and submitted to baptism ; so far as
the administrators were concerned, their baptism
imported nothing more than that they received
and acknowledged these persons as disciples,
willing to be taught more perfectly the new reli-
gion, and to be dealt with afterwards in respect
to membership and recognition as genuine Chris-
tians, as their cases might require.
6. These facts and inferences are in harmony
with the terms of the great commission—“ Go ye
and teach (disciple) all nations, baptising them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatever I have commanded you, and 10, I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world.’’
7. Finally, I assert that the course pursued
by the Apostles and Evangelists in regard to
baptising candidates is precisely such as
preachers holding the sentiments expressed in
this lecture would have pursued had they been
in like circumstances ; but no Baptist minister
holding believer’s baptism, as I understand it,
could have done so with a good conscience. Re-
quiring evidence to satisfy himself of the faith
and conversion of the crowds that came around
him desiring to be baptised, without any previous
knowledge of their character, with no means,
within the time, of making the necessary in-
quiries, he would not have dared to have affixed
to them thus instantaneously, and therefore
hastily and rashly, the sacred and indelible sign
of baptism, which, according to his theory,
belongs to such only as are proved and known
to be real believers in the solemn and deliberate
opinion of him who administers the rite.
BAPTISM.
“And they brought young children to him that he should touch them: and his disoinlcs rnhuirnS ~ , .
them. But when Jesus saw it he was much displeased, and said unto them Suffer th Junlo , l \ o3e brought
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. Verily I saw unto vou C ? me Unt ° ma
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. And he took them un in hia nrm „ S^a . not receive the
them, and blessed them.”—Mark x. 13 18. 0 c t lem U P m bis arms, put his hands upon
In my previous lecture, I considered the subject
of “Believers’ Baptism,” and showed, from an
examination of the baptisms recorded in the New
Testament that, whatever was the duty of the
baptised, or whatever they professed, the admin-
istrator did not mean, by baptising them, to cer-
tify them as, in his judgment, true believers,
really regenerated by the Spirit, but merely dis-
ciples of the new religion, scholars to be taught
the way of God more perfectly, who might or
might not be subsequently members of the
churches that were, or were about to be formed.
The class of baptised persons, as such, was not
identical with the class of recognised believers and
saints, as such; church-membership being the
only external badge of the latter. And hence there
were an inner and an outer court in the spiritual
temple the one including acknowledged be-
lievers, the other baptised disciples from
whose ranks the churches were to be re-
cruited from time to time, Adi this referred
to adults, among whom, of necessity, the first
converts were to be gathered. But it follows, if
there be baptised discipies outside the churches
of the faithful—disciples who are not church
members that there is a place among them for
children, who, being dedicated to God by ban-
tism, may be trained up for church membership
m due time. Whether this was the case in the
times of the apostles remains now to be considered.
There has been much said in this controversy"
on the one hand, respecting positive evidence as
necessary to establish a positive institute ; and
on the other, on reasons from analogy as suf-
ficient to lead to a sound conclusion. The narrow
bounds necessarily imposed by a single lecture on
this subject compel me to pass this over, I shall
limit myself to the question of fact, and endeavour
to ascertain whether the apostles did or did not
baptise infants ; and if we can satisfy ourselves
will not’be’d'isputedf’’ owin 8l* le “’ example


It is necessary, in order to a right solution of
this or any other question relating to Christian
ordinances, Christian worship, or even Christian
doctrine, to consider carefully the real character
of the documents which are our only guide.
I. Christianity was agreat fact, and baptism was
extensively in use, sometime before the New Testa-
ment was written. Jesus had lived, taught, suffered
and died, had risen again, given his commission
and ascended to heaven, and had sent down his
Spirit from on high, before any instructions were
recorded. The Apostles heard the Word from
his lips ; they saw his life exemplified before
their eyes; the Spirit was given to them to
bring all things to their remembrance,—
whatsoever they had heard him say or seen him
do. The same Spirit led them into all truth in
respect to the genuine meaning of all that had
taken place ; and thus armed and furnished, they
went forth to execute their great commission.
God does not appear to have dealt with them as
he did with Moses. He did not show them a
pattern in the Mount, which they were to copy
to a hair’s breadth. He did not hand to them a
formal document, which they were themselves
strictly to follow in preaching the Gospel, admin-
isteringbaptism, forming and governing churches,
and regulating worship, and then to hand that
document down for the guidance of posterity.
In this respect there is a strong contrast between
the Mosaic and Christian dispensations. Whether
any private instructions, beyond what we find
recorded in the Gospel and Epistles, were given to
the Apostles by Christ, we have no means of
knowing. They seem, judging by what we read,
to have been themselves left with a measure of
freedom, to meet circumstances as they arose,
and adapt their plans accordingly. For a time the
twelve acted together in Jerusalem, the centre of
operations ; then they got dispersed, and by de-
grees traversed the civilised world. A large part
of Western Asia, of Northern Africa, and the
prime portions of Europe, the seats of intelli-
gence, of commerce, of wealth, and of arts, were
visited, and evangelised. By the time the last
of the companions and personal friends of the
Lord Jesus had finished his course, Christian
churches were planted over all these regions.
During this long period of 60 or 70 years,
Christians and churches had—leaving out of
view the Old Testament—no compact volume of
written instructions as we have in the New Tes-
tament, and for a considerable part of that time
no written guide at all. The doctrines of the
Gospel, and the modes of worship, of administer-
ing ordinances, and of governing the churches,
they had learnt entirely by word of mouth from
the apostles and their coadjutors, and retained
simply in their memory, and these were, when
no apostle was present, a tradition, and nothing
more. The probability is that, as the same
Divine Spirit prompted all the apostles, the
churches would, in the main, very much resem-
ble one another in their constitution and wor-
ship. This, however, is a matter of inference.
By-and-bye, various writings, composed by the
apostles and evangelists, made their appear-
ance. Their number is twenty-seven. They
came out at intervals, extending over a period
of fifty or sixty years. They were not written
in concert, or according to any pre-arranged
plan, but were produced by their several
authors to meet, for the most part, some special
emergencies and temporary circumstances.
They consist, as you know, of, first, four short
biographies of Jesus ; three very much resembling
each other and one supplementary; a brief re-
cord of the acts of a few of the Apostles of
Jesus, comprising an account of the foundation
of the Church at Jerusalem, and a few details of
a portion of the labours of Peter and Paul; and
next, of a collection of miscellaneous letters
written, some to individuals, some to particular
churches, and others to Christians generally.
All the Epistles appear to have been dictated to
suit the then existing state of things. They
would severally be, to the parties to whom they
were addressed and into whose hands they fell,
a precious and sacred guide ; but the last of the
Apostles had passed away from earth before they
were collected into a volume and became, as a
whole, a directory to the churches.
When we come to examine these writings, we
find that there was no formal scheme pursued in
them, no regular catechism or creed of theology
laid down ; and, in particular, that there are no
complete directions about church government,
Christian worship, and the mode of administering
ordinances, minutely given. References to
matters of this description, some direct, others
incidental, occur, and all these imply, on the
part of the persons written to, a knowledge of
-previous teachings and usages, which rendered
further explanation unnecessary.
We believe the Divine Spirit inspired these
apostolic authors to write such a number and
variety of tracts, as, when collected together into a
volume and viewed as a whole, would be a
sufficient and safe guide to the Church of God in
all future ages, when apostolic traditions could
be no longer identified with certainty, and when
living infallible instructors should have passed
away.
In ascertaining,"then, what the apostles really
taught and did, what the churches they planted
believed and practised, taken as a whole, we are
much in the same condition as a historian writing
the history of a king’s reign, who—collecting the
letters and papers of the actors themselves, and
comparing together these contemporary docu-
ments, and taking into account the known
opinions of the actors on matters which are
incidentally alluded to but not explained,—•
gathers, by inference and reasoning, what
actually did take place. I have been thus par-
ticular and full in showing the real character of
the evidence we have to guide us in all matters
ecclesiastical, because there has been, in regard
to the question now before us, what I deem an
unreasonable and impracticable demand for
positive and specific proofs, in this one in-
stance, which are not required in others, and
which neither party in this controversy can pro-
duce. We must take such evidence as we have,
and use our best endeavours, under Divine
guidance, to ascertain its import.
11. Let us then, in a fair and unprejudiced
spirit, examine the evidence thus set before us,
and try to learn what was done by the apostles
and primitive churches in relation to our present
question.
1. We must bear in mind that the Saviour


entirely, and the apostles also to a large extent,
laboured among Jews, and that the apostles and
evangelists were all of that nation. Now, the
Jewish people had notions and views of a con-
nection in religious matters between parents and
children, not derived from human tradition, like
many other of their usages, but of a clear Divine
origin. They lived under the Abrahamic cove-
nant, which embraced the seed within its provi-
sions, as well as the fathers. They, themselves,
and their children, had received the seal of the
covenant in their infancy. If proselytes came
over from heathenism to them, they circumcised
the unconscious children as well as the fathers,
who, from personal conviction, adopted the Jewish
religion. This rite, the circumcising of infants, had
been the custom of their nation from the time
of Abraham, 430 years anterior to the Mosaic
Law. The usage was engrained into the Jewish
mind, as if it were a part of its nature, and could
not be separated from it. I refer to this matter
just now, not to insist upon the Abrahamic cove-
nant as being virtually the Gospel covenant, and
upon circumcision as being a seal of the righteous-
ness which comes by faith ; and, as the one em-
braced children, so must the other also; but
simply as a matter of fact, to see bow certain
things, about to be named, must have been under-
stood and interpreted by Jews, when their minds
were possessed with these ideas and preconcep-
tions. It would have required something very
specific and strong on the opposite side to dislodge
these notions from a Jew’s habit of thought, and
to reconcile him to a different mode of bringing
men over to a new dispensation of religion.
2. We have next to notice the previous existence
of baptism among the Jews, and the notion they
attached to that ceremony. I refer to baptism
as a rite of initiation into a new religion. I know
this is disputed by some learned men, while it is
as strongly maintained by others who are of
equal if not higher authority. But I do not
appeal to that quarter for proof. I refer you at
once to Scripture.
On opening the New Testament baptism bursts
upon us all at once, without description or expla-
nation, as if the reader were familiar with it, and
knew what it meant; and doubtless the persons
for whose use the Gospels were first written did
know what it meant, and needed no explanation.
But as these were Christians, and had become
familiar with Christian Baptism, it may be asked,
did the Jewish people, when John and Christ first
appeared among them, know anything previously
about baptism ? We infer that they did, from a
passage in John’s Gospel. When the priests and
Levites came as a deputation from Jerusalem to
inquire of John into the nature of his mission,
he gave certain answers, which elicited from
them this further question, “ Why baptisest thou,
then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither
that prophet ?” Now, it will be observed that
their question is not, “What dost thou mean by
baptising ? What is the import of this new and
unheard-of ceremony ?” But— “ Why dost thou '
baptise, if thou art not either of these personages?” 1
They clearly knew what baptism was, and that it
would be all proper for the Messiah to baptise on 1
inaugurating his kingdom. They must, there- i
fore, have known something about it, and have <
associated it with a new religious economy, and 1
, looked upon it as an appropriate rite of initiation
1 into it. It is known as an undoubted fact, that
3 the baptism of proselytes was practised by the
- Jews two centuries after Christ ; and it is the
I opinion of learned men that the Jews, with the
i hostile and bitter feelings they cherished against
> the Christians, would never have copied from
them a ceremony, which they had not before ob-
served, but must have received it as a usage
handed down from their fathers. Indeed, it is
not difficult to account for its origin. The Jews
themselves, if they came in contact with unclean
things or unclean persons, such as the Gentiles,
had to be purified with water; and much
more would the Gentiles, when they desired
to adopt the religion of the seed of Abra-
ham, have to be thus purified, or, in other words,
baptised, as well as circumcised ; and as the
children had to submit to the one rite, so must
they also have had to submit to the other. Not
otherwise could they have been considered clean
according to Jewish ideas, and this confirms the
impression, that the same would take place with
baptism when it became a Christian ordinance,
if nothing were said to the contrary.
3. I have next to notice our Saviour’s reception
of little children. “And they brought young
children to him, that he should touch them, and
his disciples rebuked those that brought them.
But when Jesus saw it he was much displeased,
and said unto them, Suffer the little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the kingdom of heaven. Yerily,
I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive
the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. And ho took them
up in his arms, put his hands upon them and
blessed them.” It was a natural impulse in the
mothers’ hearts to bring their little ones to the
Great Teacher to receive his kindly notice, and,
still more, his availing benediction. The dis-
ciples, however, rebuked the parties who did
this, thinking the group of little ones would be
troublesome to their Master, whom they would
save from any needless annoyance which they
could ward off. But this circumstance was
overruled to call forth from Jesus the important
declaration, that children were welcome to him,
and should not be kept back, since “ of such
was the kingdom of heaven.” Whatever be the
meaning of the phrase “the kingdom of heaven,”
whether it mean the reign or kingdom of heaven
upon earth— i. e., the setting up of Christ’s
visible dominion over a body of disciples, for
which John came to prepare the way, and which
became a reality when Jesus began his ministry,
or, whether it mean heaven itself, where Jesus
now reigns, in either sense, if children are fit for
the kingdom of heaven, they are fit to receive
that baptism which is the mark and sign of those
who visibly belong to it. And no doubt this
important declaration of their Master would con-
firm the disciples, if they needed any confirma-
tion, in their previous Jewish belief, that chil-
dren did belong to the kingdom of God, and
ought to receive any mark which was peculiar to
its subjects; and they could not but interpret
his words as denoting that he intended no change
in this respect in that new form of the reign of
God among men, which he had come on purpose
to set up.


4. The next thing I would notice is the Great
Commission which the Saviour gave to his
apostles, to propagate his religion, when he was
on the point of leaving this world and returning
to heaven : “ And he came and spake unto
them, saying, all power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth ; go ye, therefore, and
teach all nations, baptising them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things what-
soever I have commanded you: and, lo ! I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world.”
It is useless to conjecture what explanation of
this commission the Master added, if he added
any; we must judge of it as it is, and endeavour
to conceive of the manner in which the disciples
would understand it, with their Jewish notions
and associations not only uncorrected, but
actually confirmed, as we have seen, by the
language of Jesus respecting little children.
The words would be more literally rendered
thus—“ Go ye and disciple all nations, baptising
them into, or unto, the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and, lo !
I am with you alway, even unto the end of
the world.”
A world of criticism has been expended upon
these words. The Baptist interpretation is
that the nations must be taught Christ’s religion
before they are baptised, and as infants are
incapable of receiving instruction they must be
excluded from the commission. The other inter-
pretation is, that the nations are discipled by
being baptised, and that the infants among them,
regarded as catechumens, may be taught all
Christ’s commandments afterwards as they grow
up to maturity. It would be unseasonable and
unprofitable to go into the critical discussion
here, and to range authority against authority in
this war of words. Nor is it needful for my
present purpose; only let me say that where
learned doctors differ it does not become
unlearned people on either side to be very
dogmatic. Without then, aiming at critical
nicety, I remark upon this commission :
(1.) That it is the only thing strictly positive
and direct that we have on the subject of bap-
tism in the New Testament, as addressed to bap-
tism. There is no other command and injunc-
tion given by Christ to baptise. In respect to
all the other passages where baptism is named,
something else is the main subject of the propo-
sition, and the duty to baptise is only an infer-
ence and conclusion. And this single positive
direction is not so clear as to be free from doubt
as to its meaning, and to make the person who
is trying to fulfil it, sure he is doing so rightly ;
that is, if he discards all inferential reasons, and
clings solely to what is literal, positive, and un-
mistakeable.
(2.) But supposing it were so—that the Apos-
tles were to understand that to * ‘ disciple the
nations baptising them,” meant that they were to
disciple them first and baptise them afterwards,
instead of doing both at the same time, would
they naturally infer that they were not to bap-
tise the children of those adults who became dis-
ciples? With their Jewish notions of prose-
lytising, whether by circumcision or baptism or
both, and with the remembrance of the never-
to-be-forgotten incident, when Jesus set the ex-
ample of receiving and recognising little
children as fit subjects of the kingdom he
was come to set up, and was sore dis-
pleased with them, and frowned upon and
rebuked them, for forbidding the children to
come to him, and sternly said, 4 4 Suffer them to
to come to me and forbid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of heaven;” I say, with this in
their minds is it likely they would interpret this
wide commission in a narrow sense, and, in car-
rying it into execution, exclude the children
when the parents were received ? It appears to
me that, in the circumstances and with their
views, the apostles would have required some
statements very explicit and clear on the other
side to restrain them from baptising the children
when they were required to baptise the nations.
(3.) The term nation is a very general and
wide one, and in almost any other connection
would include the children with the parents. If
any commission were given to destroy a nation,
to spare a nation, to heal a nation, to civilise
a nation, to lead a nation into captivity, the
children would obviously be included; and
why not when the command is to introduce all
the nations of the world into the new kingdom
which had been set up, and, in order to this, to
disciple, baptising them; and when the menreceiv-
ing these instructions would, with their national
notions of proselytism, most certainly receive
the children along with the parents, unless ex-
pressly told the contrary ?
5. We come now to notice the practice of the
apostles in carrying their master’s instructions
into effect. We have no means of learning this
but from the history in the Acts, together with
any occasional references that may be found in
the epistles. The history in the Acts is very brief,
arranged apparently upon the principle of furnish-
ing a few specimens of individual conversion in
full, and an outline of the manner in which
the apostles generally executed their commission,
as exemplified in the case of four of them, Peter
and John, James and Paul, and especially Paul.
No account is given of the labours of any of the
other apostles. The few references to baptism
are all incidental, and often when conversions are
recorded it is not even mentioned. When it is
mentioned, scarcely any circumstance about it is
adverted to, it being taken for granted that the
readers of the history were well informed upon all
the matters which are only glanced at in passing.
We are therefore necessitated to learn, if. we can,
their notions and opinions respecting any subject
now in dispute, in order to see how they viewed
it. I would further remark that it is no
matter of surprise that the bulk of the baptisms
recorded should be those of adults. It was a new
form of religion that was to be introduced, and
the adults must first be gained over, and with
them the missionaries of the cross had wholly, in
the first instance, to do. It is the same now in
heathen lands where our missionaries go to preach
the Gospel. The baptisms we hear of, for some
time, are those of grown-up people, with occasional
references to their families when any of the con-
verts happen to have them.
At the Day of Pentecost the 3000 that were
baptised were necessarily baptised without their
families, for the baptism took place immediately,
before they could go to their homes, and many of


them Were strangers who had come from distant
lands, probably without their families. But Peter
said to them : * 4 Repent and be baptised every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you and
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call.” What-
ever be the precise meaning of this declaration,
the apostle’s hearers at all events would not gather
from it that any change of the relation between
parents and children, in respect to religious ordi-
nances was about to be introduced, but with
their prepossessions they would undoubtedly
conclude, had any previous uncertainty existed,
that such relation would be perpetuated.
Then come the household baptisms. When
the brief record relates the apostles’ coming in
contact with families, then it is mentioned in
passing that not only the heads of the households
but the households themselves were baptised.
There are only two instances of this in the Acts.
One is that of Lydia. It is thus narrated :—•
“And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of
purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped
God heard us, whose heart the Lord opened that
she attended unto the things which were spoken
of Paul. And when she was baptised and her
household, she besought us, saying, ‘lf ye have
judged me to be faithful to the Lord come into
my house and abide there ; and she constrained
us.’ ” The other is that of the jailer in the same
city, Philippi;— “ What must Idoto be saved ?”
he exclaimed. The records adds, “And they said
4 4 Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved and thy house; and they spake
unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that
were in his house. And he took them the same
hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and
was baptised, he and all his straightway. And
when he had brought them into his house, he
set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in
God with all his house.” In writing to the
Corinthians, the Apostle Paul reproves them for
their factions and divisions, and in doing so,
incidentally mentions a third instance of house-
hold baptism. He exclaims, “ Is Christ divided ?
Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptised
in the name of Paul ? I thank God I baptised
none of you but Crispus and Gains, lest any
should say I baptised in mine own name. And
I baptised also the household of Stephanas ; be-
sides, I know not whether I baptised any other ;
for Christ sent me not to baptise, but to preach
the Gospel.”
Now, it has been objected to the conclusion
we draw from these notices, that there were be-
lievers in some of these households, and that we
cannot prove that there were any infants at all
in them. That some, in a large family, were
capable of instruction and of acting for them-
selves, Ido not call in question; for children in
a family are not all infants at one and the same
time ; but the onus of proving there were no
children in them rests with the objectors. It is
the phraseology and mode of speech that I rely
upon. It is just such as writers holding the
ordinary opinions, and familiar with the practice
of the J ews would have adopted if no change had
taken place —no innovation had been intro-
duced. They write ha this way quite innocently
and naturally as if they expected to be easily
understood by their readers without entering
into detail or giving any explanatory cautions.
No explanation was necessary as to what they
meant by households —no need to sj ecify the
ages of the several members of the family. But
if young children were not received into the com-
munity along with the head of the household,
it would have been necessary in mentioning that
a household was baptised to have expressly stated
that no infants were among them, or that they
were intentionally excluded from the ordinance.
C. If so great a change had been introduced
in the mode of making disciples for the kingdom
of the Messiah as our Baptist friends allege, it
is inconceivable that no objection should have
been started to it from any quarter whatever.
The New Testament documents are full of proofs
of the tenacity with which the Jew's adhered to
their old principles and even their prejudices
and traditions. When convinced that Jesus was
the Messiah they still struggled to preserve the
Mosaic system along with the Christian. When
no longer able to resist the admission of the
Gentiles into the Christian church, they wanted
to impose upon them the observance of the
Mosaic law ; and w'ent so far as to say that
unless these converted heathen were circumcised
they could not be saved. Certainly, if they had
succeeded in carrying out their wishes in
having them circumcised, they would have
extended that rite to the children as well as the
parents. Almost all the troubles of the
primitive churches (of the Scripture period)
sprung from the obstinacy of the J udaicaf party
in respect to their peculiarities: and I repeat, if
the apostles had insisted upon breaking off the
connection between parents and their children
in entering upon the new economy, a connection
which was not one of the vain traditions of men,
but for which they had so good and substantial
a reason—it being part, an explicit and prominent
part, of the grand Abrahamic covenant, which
was to embrace all nations—it is utterly incon-
conceivable that they would have submitted to
so great an innovation, without even a whisper
of complaint: rather we might expect there
would have been a mightier commotion about this
great innovation, than about the abolition of
circumcision itself.
7. To this may be added the conclusion to
which my last lecture led me. The grand objection
to infant baptism has been, that baptism is be-
lievers’ baptism; that it belongs to an age capa-
ble of believing, and to such of that age as have
believed, and that it is the external sign of those
that are such. I showed that the apostles did
not confine baptism to those concerning whom
they had certain evidence that they were be-
lievers, but bestowed it at once upon all prose-
lytes who were willing to be baptised and taught.
The consequence was, there were two classes in
the primitive period—the baptised who were
members of the churches, and the baptised who
were not members. The catechumens and the
lapsed, those who were under training and those
under discipline ; and baptised children, might
well be put in this outside class, to be taught the
way of God, and trained up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, in order to be fitted in
due time for full communion.


Such are the conclusions to which we are led
from a fair and impartial view of the little that
is said in the New Testament on the subject of
baptism. We may next inquire, what are the
teachings of ecclesiastical history in respect to
this matter. The baptism of infants is prevalent
in Christendom. Is it a novelty ? If not, when
and how did it arise ? Let us appeal to such tes-
timonies as we have.
Ecclesiastical writers are scarce for some time
after the close of the New Testament period.
The Apostolical Fathers, as they are called, that
is, those ministers and Christians who were con-
temporary with some of the apostles, and frag-
ments of whose writings have reached our times,
are few, and there is nothing in their writings
specially bearing upon this controversy.
Justin Martyr is the first witness after the
apostolic times. He was bom in Palestine, and
was converted to Christianity about 30 years
after the Apostle John’s death (a.d;, 132). He
wrote able apologies for Christianity, which are
still extant. There is only one brief reference to
the subject of infant baptism in his writings,
which is this:—“Many men and women amongst
us, sixty and seventy years old, were discipled to
Christ in their childhood, and have con-
tinued uncorrupted.” This is generally supposed
to be a reference to baptism. The most natural
meaning of “discipled to Christ in childhood,”
is, being made disciples while children by being
baptised, as discipling and baptising are associa-
ted in the Saviour’s commission.
Irenajus, pastor at Lyons, in Gaul, was a dis-
ciple of Poly carp, who had been a disciple of
John the Apostle. He wrote about seventy
years after John’s death. The following words
occur in his writings :—“ Jesus came to save all
persons by himself,—all, I say, who by him are
regenerated to God ; infants and little ones, and
children, and young, and old.” The term re-
generated, or born again, is, synonymous, accord-
to the usage of that day, with baptism, and
it is admitted by ecclesiastical historians that
Ircnoaus refers to baptism in this passage.
Tertullian was a little later. He was bom at
Carthage in a.d. 160, and died in a.d. 220. He
was a learned, an able, but singular man ; a
leader among the Montanists, who constituted
one of the great heretical sects of the day, or,
what at least were so deemed. Among other
things he wrote a tract on baptism, and in that
tract he recommends the delay of baptism in
respect to children and others. His words are :
—“The delaying of baptism is more advan-
tageous according to the condition, the disposi-
tion, and the age of every person, especially
with regard to children. For why is it needful,
if the case be not extremely urgent, that tlieir
sponsors should be brought into danger? The
Lord, indeed, saith, Forbid them not to come
rinto me. Let them come when they are
advancing in youth ; let them come when
they learn whither they are going ; let them
be made Christians when they can know Christ.
Why does this innocent age hasten to the
remission of sin ? With no less reason un-
married persons should be induced to delay, who
are exposed to temptation. Those who under-
stand the weight of baptism would rather fear
the reception than the postponement of it. Faith
uninjured is sure of salvation.”
Terfcullian is claimed as a sort of baptist,
because he opposed the baptism of infants. But
he is a singular one. He had no objection to the
baptism of infants if there was a necessity ; that
is, if they were going to die. But he objected if
they were likely to live. And why ? Because
they afterwards might fall into sin, and then
their baptism would avail them little. And for
the same reason he objected to adults being bap-
tised if they were exposed to peculiar tempta-
tions. All this arose from a notion, very current
in early times, that baptism washed away all
sin up to the time of its administration, but that
it was extremely difficult to purge away sin com-
mitted after baptism, the method generally
recommended for this being abundance of
almsgiving, and ascetic observances. While
caring nothing for Tertullian’s absurd opin-
ions, or his reason for objecting to the bap-
tism of children, his testimony to the fact of the
custom of infant baptism in his day, a custom
which he wished to alter, is valuable. This was
only 80 or 90 years after the death of John.
Descending the stream of time, Origen, a
voluminous writer, comes next. He was born
of Christian parents only 80 or 100 years after
John’s death. He travelled extensively through
Italy, Greece, Asia Minor, Palestine, Arabia,
&c., in pursuit of knowledge, and returned to
settle in his native city, Alexandria, the church
of which had been founded by the Evangelist
Mark. He, if any one, was correctly informed
of the usage of the Church at that early period:
and his words respecting baptism are, that
“Little children are baptised agreeably to the
usage of the church,” and that “the Church re-
ceived it as a tradition from the apostles, that
baptism be administered to children.”
Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, was partly con-
temporary with Origen, but somewhat later, and
we learn from his writings that a council was
held at Carthage in a.d. 253, — i.e. , only 150
years after the death of the Apostle John—con-
sisting of 66 bishops or pastors, to consider a
question about baptism: and what do you think
that question was? Whether infants should be
baptised or not? No! but whether they might
be baptised before the eighth day. There was no
question raised by a single person about the pro-
priety of baptising them at all. None doubted
that. The question was only a superstitious one
about the proper time of baptising; and the de-
cision was unanimous that no delay was neces-
sary.
The historic evidence of this the earliest period
of the Christian era is simply then to this effect,
that for the first 150 years after the last of
the apostles had closed his career, that is, to the
time of Cyprian’s Council in a.d. 253, the writers
were few and their writings scanty, but those of
their productions which survive to our day, and
which happen to touch upon the subject of bap-
tism, all testify to the fact of infant baptism
being the custom of that time, or the fact is
obviously deducible from the words they em-
ploy ; and there is not a shred of evidence on
the other side to show that it had arisen as a
novelty or innovation.
From the end of the third and the beginning of
the fourth century downwards there is no ques-
tion whatever as to the universality of the prac-
tice of infant baptism. It was observed in every


church, by every sect, in every age close up to the
time of the Reformation. A prolific crop of here-
sies and strange opinions sprung up from time to
time, in different countries, produced by different
circumstances. Judaism, with its ritualism—
heathenism, with its idolatrous mythologies—
philosophy, with its strange conceits and specu-
lations—national usuages and traditionary pre-
judices of peoples far apart, all mixed up with
Christianity, corrupted not a little the church
as a whole, and led to a multiplicity of sects and
divisions, but none of these sects ever questioned
the propriety or obligation of infant baptism.
So entirely was this the case, that Dr. Halley
asks the rejectors of infant baptism to produce a
single case for a thousand years after Christ, of
a man or woman, boy or girl, born of Christian
parents, remaining unbaptised; or, to change
the form of the challenge, a single instance of
such baptisms as are practised by the Baptists of
the present day, namely, the baptism of adult
persons whose parents were Christians when they
were children.
About 1500 years after Christ the great era of
the Reformation commenced. The leaders of
that movement accused the Church of their day
of corruption in doctrine, superstition in worship,
and tyranny in government. The learned men
among them searched church history, and brought
out to view the gradual process by which inno-
vations crept in, and human traditions had over-
laid the simple religion of apostolic times. All
this they learnt from the Bible, which had re-
cently been thrown upon the world by the inven-
tion of printing. Making such serious allegations
against their fellow-Christians throughout the
world, they were bound to substantiate them; the
burden of proof lay with the accusers and fault-
finders, and they accepted the responsibility,
and boldly and at once appealed to the Bible.
The Bible, and the Bible alone, became the
religion of Protestants. Tried by that test,
Christianity, as embodied in ecclesiastical organ-
isations and expressed in theological creeds, was
proved to have very far departed from the sim-
plicity of the apostolic model; and they restored
the original, lopped off the additions which had
been made, removed the rubbish which time
had accumulated, and set forth the structure
in something like its formersimplicity and beauty.
Now, when these reformers began their work
of excision and purification, they found infant
baptism universally prevalent in the Latin
church, the Greek church, and all the oriental
churches, every communion indeed throughout
Christendom. But did these stern enemies of
innovation and honest restorers of the ancient
landmarks, sweep away infant baptism as a
human tradition unwarranted by the Bible?
They, one and all, retained this usage. They
cleansed its administration, indeed, from the
popish corruptions which had gathered around
it, and which had spoiled its primitive simplicity, i
but the institute itself they recognised as having ;
come down from the apostolic age, and therefore :
to be perpetuated to the end of time. This is '
certainly a significant fact when we consider the ]
character of the men and their unanimity upon 1
this point. ]
It is well known that at this period the 1
Anabaptists first made their appearance. Though ;
3 that name was generally affixed to them, they
- seem more properly to have been a species of mil-
) lennarians who sought to establish Christ’s visible
t monarchy upon earth, making baptism a sign of
subjection to its sway. In the course of time
- the baptism, by immersion, of adult believers,
■ eliminated from all other peculiarities, became
■ the characteristic tenet of the body of Christians
i who are now well-known by the designation of
i Baptists. These brethren regard infant baptism
■ as a mere superstition and human tradition. This
■ we deny, affirming that till their opinions made
their appearance in their modern form, infant
baptism was universal throughout Christendom,
; and had been from the beginning, and we call
upon them to show us its origin, and account for
so great an innovation, j ust as the Reformers were
; required to do when they denounced the super-
titions of popery.
The mere circumstance of the corruptions of
the church, which were cleared away by the
reformation, having been so numerous and so
gross will not account for so great and so peculiar
an innovation as infant baptism must have been,
if it had no existence in apostolic times. Nearly
every one of the corruptions of popery was an
aggregation of error around a nucleus of truth, a
morbid development of a germ itself pure and
healthy when first planted. With this disposition in
the public mind of the olden period, we can account
for the superstitious additions made to the simple
rite of water baptism, such as anointing, salting,
and crossing, but this does not account for the
origin of the practice itself.
We further affirm that the corrupt tendencies
of the primitive ages in relation to baptism
did not lie in the direction of extending the rite
from adults to children. The tide bent its course
in an opposite direction, as we see in the case of
Tertullian. The tendency was to delay and not
to hasten baptism.
There cannot be a greater contrast than we
find between the practice of the apostles and
that of the following ages in this respect. The
apostles baptised, in every recorded case, imme-
diately ; their successors subjected the catechu-
mens or candidates for baptism to years of delay.
Some even, as the Emperor Constantine, put
off their baptism till near death, that they might
have, at their decease, the full benefit of the
remission of all their sins, supposed to flow from
that ordinance. The universal prevalence of
infant baptism amidst such a state of things
cannot, we conceive, be accounted for except
on the principle of its having come down from
the apostles, and in consequence maintained
its ground against the pressure of these inno-
vations.
I have thus, in the brief space allowed me,
presented a succinct view of some of the evidence
in support of the practice of baptising infants.
There are other important points which are in-
sisted upon at large by numerous authors, but,
limited by space, I have confined myself to the
mere question of fact, and, in my judgment,
whether you trace the evidence up from the
present time to the Scripture period, or down
from that period to our day, there is hardly a
historic fact more satisfactorily proven than the
baptism of infants as an institution possessed of
apostolic authority.


111. THE MODE OE BAPTISM.
Simon Peter saifh unto Jesus, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that is
washed naedeth not save to wash his feet, but
I approach this branch of the baptismal theme
with extreme reluctance, as I consider it of less
importance than the general design and use of
the ordinance, and the class of persons who are
its proper subjects. It seems to me to jar with
the genial, free, and spiritual character of the
Gospel, that its professors, and those who
acknowledge each other as genuine believers,
should dispute about the mere mode and manner
of performing a ritual observance. It is very like
going back in spirit to the Judaising times,
when the tithing of mint, and anise, and cummin
was thought more of than the weightier matters of
the law. If there be blame in this, it does not
rest with us : for, while we think our mode of bap-
_ tising is scriptural, we do not think another mode,
conscientiously used, vitiates and destroys the
ordinance. We concede to others the right which
we would ourselves assume, of ascertaining what
is true in such matters, and of practically carrying
out, in a spirit of faith and obedience, the convic-
tion arrived at, without repudiating, as null and
void, other acts and observances adopted with equal
conscientiousness, because they differ from our
own in outward form and manner. We allow
baptism by dipping adults to be baptism, when
those who adopt that mode think it is the right
way, and we claim from them, as Christian breth-
ren, to admit the same of ours, if they believe
that we conscientiously endeavour to ascertain
and do the will of Christ. To maintain this
spirit of mutual charity, and recognition of each
others religious services as conscientious and
acceptable, and therefore valid, is of far more
consequence to the interests of true religion than
the strictest uniformity in a mere ritual ceremony.
Even a Pharisee could see and acknowledge this
principle: “Well, master, thou hast said the
truth, for there is one God, and there is none
other but he : and to love him with all the heart,
and with all the understanding, and with all the
soul, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt
offerings and sacrifices.” And the Apostle Paul
is very express upon the point. He lays down
the great principle : ‘ ‘ The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these
things serveth Christ is acceptable to God and
approved of men.” There was a right and a
wrong in the questions then in dispute—the
lawfulness of partaking of certain meats and ob-
serving certain days—and the apostle could have
settled this at once by an authoritative decision :
but he refrained from doing so, deeming it of
more importance to the interests of religion
that Christians should bear with one another in
these outward things, in a spirit of love and sacred
regard to conscientious convictions, than that
they should all think alike : ‘ ‘ Let not him that
eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not
him that eateth not judge him that eateth, for
God hath received him.” “Let every one be
fully persuaded in his own mind.” Let us,
therefore, follow after the things that make for
peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another.” The man that penned these noble
is clean every whit.—John xiii. 9, 10.
words penned also the following on the subject
of baptism: “I thank God I baptised none of
you t Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say I
had baptised in my own name ; and I baptised
also the household of Stephanas : besides, I
know not whether I baptised any other. For
Christ sent me not to baptise but to preach the
Gospel.” If the apostle, who wrote thus, were
to return to this worfd, would he think it worth
while authoritatively to settle the question-at
issue between immersionists and affusionists,
baptisers of infants and baptisers of adults ?
Methinks he hardly would : more probably he
would counsel peace, mutual forbearance, mutual
recognition, cordial co-operation, “ receiving one
another as Christ also hath received us to tho
glory of God, ” and would condemn the spliting up
of the church|into sects and separate denomina-
tions, upon a mere misunderstanding about an
external ceremony. Why, then, it may be asked,
do I meddle with the question at all ? Ido not
think I should, if it were not that our baptisms,
even when administered to adults, are ignored as
no baptisms at all, merely because they are ad-
ministered in a different manner, as if an unin-
tentional mistake in that respect affected the
essence of the ordinance; or, the case were so
clear that a mistake is inexcusable ; or, as if we
really believed with our Baptist friends, in our
inmost hearts, and only lacked moral courage to
avow and act upon our convictions.
The question may be thus stated :—Both par-
ties agree that baptism is a standing ordinance
of the Christian religion ; that it must be admin-
istered in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and that water is
the element to be employed as a symbol of the
truth exhibited. But they differ in respect to
the manner in which the ceremony is to be per-
formed—the one maintaining that the only valid
mode is by immersion, or rather dipping the
baptised person overhead ; and the other, that
affusion, sprinkling, or pouring, is equally valid,
and constitutes a true baptism ; and both con-
tend that the Apostolic practice sanctions their
respective methods. Our Baptist brethren assert,
that all the baptisms were immersions. We do
not say that none of them were, but believe that
the general, if not the universal method was, by
affusion or sprinkling. They maintain that the
mode, by dipping the entire person, is so essen-
tial to the ordinance, that there is no baptism
without it. We, while maintaining the perfect
validity of our method, do not ignore theirs.
They re-baptise those whom we have already
baptised. We should not re-baptise those whom
they have baptised.
Now it is obvious that, to justify the lofty
position thus assumed by the Baptists, their case
ought to be very clear; the evidence ought to be
very strong, so strong that not to see it almost
amounts to wilful blindness.
Now, on examining the New Testament, to
learn the will of the Master, on this point, we
find no sharp definition of the ordinance, no full
and minute description of it, no directions how
to perform it, no instructions whatever as to the


mode. We are left to infer what that mode Was
by searching into the meaning of a doubtful
word, a word at least whose meaning has, as a
matter of fact, been extensively doubted, and
made the theme of everlasting disputation; and,
by comparing carefully the circumstances in which
the several baptisms took place, to endeavour to
deduce thence some conclusions respecting the
mode that was actually adopted.
Baptism is introduced abruptly as a thing
well known and requiring no explanation,
and no explanation is given, just because
the parties , for whose use the Scriptures were
originally written, required none, as they
were familiar with the usages which marked
its celebration; and we, living so long after
them, have no way left to find out the facts
of the case and to explain the oracle, but
to place ourselves, as nearly as we can, in the
position of those readers, to see with their eyes
and hear with their ears.
This want of definiteness in ritual details,
minute and careful description of the externals
of Christianity, is characteristic of the dispensa-
tion, and puts it in strong contrast with the
Mosaic, which preceded it. The Israelites of
old were instructed by Moses, from the very
beginning, in all the minutiae of the economy
that bears his name, and there was no excuse for
them if they missed their way, when the finger-
posts were so numerous and so plain. Not so
the disciples of Christ; at least, if such instruc-
tions were given to them orally, they have not
committed them to writing for our guidance.
This is well known to be the case in respect to
the details of church government; the mode and
form of public worship ; the manner of keeping
the Sabbath; the method of ordaining ministers,
and other matters. There is a strong tendency in
the human mind to adhere to uniformity on these
points. Most churches insist upon it, as the
Greek, the Koman, and the English, who allow
no deviation from their standards. But the
Apostles drew up no rubric, and left no liturgy.
This is very significant of the free genius of our
economy, and should teach us modesty in main-
taining the Scriptural accuracy of our methods of
procedure, and induce us to allow not a little
latitude to others who may differ from us in
forming their opinions.
My difficulty in handling the theme announced
is in condensing into the small space of a single
lecture the multitudinous materials which have
accumulated in this controversy. Those of you
who are not familiar with the dispute would be
astonishedat the volumes upon volumes which have
been written with a view to settle it, volumes filled
with elaborate criticisms upon Greek and Hebrew
words, and passages from ancient Greek writers
of the heathen period, and Greek fathers of the
Christian era. Surely, you will say, this cannot
be necessary to enable plain people to learn their
duty from their Bibles. Nor do I think it is :
to the Law and to the Testimony we must, after
all, come, and by its decisions we must abide.
A general and popular view of the subject is all
my time will allow.
The reason of all this learned investigation is
the desire to ascertain the meaning of the word
baptise. The word is Greek, and the Greek
writers are searched to see in what sense or
senses they used it. We may of course obtain
assistance from various sources in finding out the
meaning of obscure passages in any author, and
it is lawful to obtain light from any quarter
whatever, if only it be light. But, after all, as
words vary in their signification at different
periods and as used by different writers, the
true way to learn the meaning of an author is to
see in what sense he uses his words, especially
if they be of frequent occurrence in his writings,
and hence, after examining the Greek writers on
this question, we have to come back to the Bible,
and, comparing passage with passage, and look-
ing at the whole context and circumstances in
each case, learn what meaning the sacred writers
attach to baptism.
Before leaving this part of the subject I would
say, that there are two words the meaning of
which has been deeply gone into in this con-
troversy,—the root word bapto, and its derivative
baptiso. After reading a mass of criticism upon
the subject, I may say, In brief, that the
result is, to my mind, that bapto, the root word,
means to dip, to dye, and to stain ; and when
applied to dyeing, it may be by dipping the
material in the dye, or by applying the dye to
the material. This is the word used in the
Septuagint version to denote the wetting of
Nebuchadnezzar by the dews of heaven when
he ate grass as oxen; and its use here.
shows that even the root-word does not
necessarily define the manner of the action
to be, to dip, but may express the effect,
however brought about. The king was
saturated, not by dipping, but by superfusion.
The general classical meaning of baptiso, the
word used to denote the baptismal act, seems to
be,to cause one thing to be in, or under, or affected
by, another, without limiting the manner by
which that may be done. This baptised state
may be induced by dipping or immersing the
thing to be baptised in the element, or by bring-
ing the element upon it, by overwhelming, or
pouring, or aspersion. Thus, a person is said,
in the classics, to be baptised with calamities,
and baptised with debts ; that is, overwhelmed
with them. So far is dipping essential to its
meaning, that a thing baptised is sometimes
contrasted with its being dipped; as a bladder
floating on the sea may be said to be baptised
when dashed over by the waves, but not dipped
by being put into the sea. This is the kind of
discussion that occupies our learned men on this
matter.
We contend that the use of baptise in pro-
fane authors, especially the more ancient of them,
does not denote that the thing baptised must be
put into the element, so that it would not be
baptised if the element came upon it; it means,
either way indifferently ; so that a ship may be
baptised if it be sunk in the depths of the ocean
and all the people are drowned, and a shore may be
baptised when the tide comes up to it and covers
it at high-water.
But supposing the Baptist sense of the word
to dip, that is to bring the person to the element,
to put him in and take him out again, were the
true and only use of it in classic authors, would
that determine its import in the sacred writers?
Do words never change their meaning? Tracing
words to their roots may be entertaining and in-


structive, as showing the singular way in which
changes of meaning are brought about, till at
length it may be difficult to see any resemblance
between the parent and the child ; but it is of
little value in settling the current use of words,
especially as to modes and manners of action.
Trench, in his little book on “The Study of
Words,” mentions many instances of singular
change. We all know what “calculation”means.
According to its etymology it denotes to count by
pebbles, as people in their primitive state did:
calculus , from which it comes, meaning a stone.
But we now count without the aid of pebbles,—
that is, we “calculate” without a “calculus.”
“Subscription” means something written under;
then it came to be used for a name put down on
paper with a promise of a gift of money attached.
How, we call a gift, without any literal subscrib-
ing at all, a subscription. “Ecclesia,” the
Greek word rendered “church” in scripture,
originally meant a legislative assembly in Greece,
collected together by a public crier; “ ecclesias-
tical,” what related to such an assembly. Now,
the first word, in scripture, and both words in
ordinary use, have a specific sacred sense, with-
out any relation to a legislature or to a conven-
tion collected by a crier.
But the illustrations are endless hand 1 would
not have adverted to such an obvious subject
w r ere it not that the immersionists first fix the
meaning of the word from extra-Scriptural
sources, and fix it to mean, to dip and nothing
hut to dip, uniformly and always (though even
that they cannot sustain), and then leap over
difficulties and laugh at improbabilities. Where-
as we think that all the circumstances where
the word occurs must be taken into account in
order to ascertain in what sense the Scripture
writers use the word.
The passages of Scripture, besides [the word
itself, most relied on by our friends on the other
side, are the following :
“And John was baptising in Enon, near to
Salim, because there was much water there.”—
John iii. 23.
“ They were baptised of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins.”—Matt. iii. 6.
“Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and
was baptised of John in Jordan: and straightway
coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens
opened and the Spirit like a dove descending
upon him.”—Mark i. 9.
“ And as they went on their way they came
to a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See,
here is water, what doth hinder me to be
baptised ? And he caused the chariot to stand
still, and they both went down into the water,
Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptised him.
And when they came up out of the water the
Spirit caught away Philip.”—Acts viii. 36.
1. With respect to Enon, it is generally known
that, in the original, what is rendered in our
version, “ much water,” is “many waters,” that
is, many wells, or more probably, streams or
running waters. From all that we know of that
desert region, there is no river there (besides the
Jordan which John had come away from), nor
any deep water-holes such as we have in this
country, sufficient for people to be dipped in ;
but there are occasionally springs and
rivulets flowing out of the rocky sides of
the hills or settling in low swampy spots.
In such a dry country, it is not necessary
to suppose that baptism must have been
by immersion in order to account for the selec-
tion of this place; the inducement would have
been sufficiently strong if baptism were by affu-
sion, when such multitudes of people were to be
baptised. Besides, John’s selecting Enon where
these many waters were, for the sake of having
water enough to baptise with, is a mere assump-
tion without proof. He had removed from the
banks of the Jordan to Enon. Surely there was
water enough in the Jordan, a river that never
fails! Why, then, should he remove to Enon be-
cause there were many waters there ? To remove
a difficulty which presses upon any theory, it
has been supposed that the waters of the Jordan,
being at certain times turbid and hardly fit to
drink, the removal took place in order to furnish
the vast crowd in the arid wilderness with
spring-water for drinking purposes.
2. With respect to the statements that John
baptised the people “in” Jordan; that Jesus
“came up out of the water ;” that Philip and
the Eunuch “ went down into the water;” and
that they “ came up out of the water ;” were I
to go into the dispute about the meaning of these
prepositions I might occupy the time of two or
three lectures. I could bring forward an array
of passages where the Greek preposition rendered
“in” here, is rendered “at” and “by,” where
that which is rendered “ into” means simply
“to” or “at;” and where “out of” means
“ from.” But I forbear. I would just say that
the precise force of these words depends upon
the circumstances and connection, and instead
of determining the point at issue, they must
themselves be determined by the circumstances.
But after all, supposing we grant that the
people were baptised in Jordan, and the Eunuch
in the water, what then ? Was it strange that
people who wore sandals without stockings, who
took off their sandals and had their feet washed
whenever they paid a visit to a friend’s
house, should do the same at the river’s
brink ? that they should walk a short way
into the stream, and lave their feet, in that
sultry clime ? And after they were in,
what was done ? They were baptised; but
what does that mean? To say that they were
dipped is to assume the question in dispute.
Might not water be poured upon their heads in
that position ? These texts manifestly do not
settle the question. It is not said of John, as it
is said of Philip, that he went into the water.
Might he not have stood on the brink, on some
convenient elevated place, and then have poured
water upon the persons as they presented them-
selves for baptism ?
There are two other texts of a different cast
often adduced and confidently relied on in this
controversy in proof of baptism being by
dipping. They are the following :
“Know ye not that so many of us as were
baptised into Jesus Christ, were baptised into
his death ? Therefore we are buried with him
by baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even we also shall walk in newness of life. For
if we have been planted together in the likeness
of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of


his resurrection ; knowing this that our old man
is crucified with him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin.”—Rom. vi. 3. And, “In whom also
ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ.
Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are
risen with him through the faith of the operation
of God who hath raised him from the dead. And
you being dead in your sins and in the uncircum-
cision of your flesh, hath he quickened together
with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.”—
Col. ii. 11-13. I should have been astonished to
see these passages brought forward for such a
purpose had not the interpretation originated
with the Fathers when all sorts of fanciful analogies
were in vogue. Here we have a great variety
of figures to express the believer’s union to Christ,
and participation in the benefits of all he did and
suffered for them. So close is this identity that
they may be said to have been circumcised with
him, to be crucified with him, to have died with
him, been buried with him, quickened and raised
again with him, and then to walk with hi rn in
newness of life. All this is clearly figurative to
represent a certain state of the Christian’s mind in
relation to Christ. But what a confusion is in-
troduced into the whole passage by supposing
that the rite of baptism, by which we are sym-
bolically introduced into all Christian privileges,
is referred to to show, by the manner of its cele-
bration, our likeness to Christ in two of many
points here mentioned, viz., his burial and resur-
rection, and not of the others. If a literal
resemblance is insisted on, it is more strongly
expressed in the phrase, ‘ 1 planted together in
the likeness of his death, and in the likeness of
his resurrection. ” But what ordinance or rite
represents this planting ? Nor must we necessarily
concede that the baptism here spoken of is water
baptism at all, it is more in harmony with the
high spiritual meaning which pervades the
whole passage to regard it, not as the washing of
the body,—“ not the putting away of the filth of
the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God,” that baptism of the Holy Ghost,
which truly unites the soul to Jesus, and secures
all the glorious results of his death and passion.
No other congruous sense can be got out of the
words. Even, however, the resemblance be-
tween Christ’s burial and the ceremony of
dipping is a mere fancy. This illusion is aided
by the accidental correspodence between an
English grave and a modern baptistry. The
interment of the Savioui’’s body had little re-
semblance to an English funeral. The body was
washed and partially strewed with perfumes,
and then hastily put aside in the tomb till the
Sabbath was past, after which the usual ceremo-
nies were to be completed, and the definite inter-
ment to take place. What resemblance is there
between this and submerging a person in water ?
Nor was the tomb like an English grave, an ex-
cavation in the ground into which the body was
lowered, to be covered over with earth. It was
a tomb and not a grave; cut out of the solid rock
on a level with the ground, entered sideways by |
a low door, so that a person stooping down could I
walk in and out again, as John and Peter did:
and the body was placed upon the floor, or on a
raised biei*, or in a recess. Surely nothing could
be more unlike the process of immersion. It
should be remembered, moreover, that one of
these passages was addressed to the Church in
Home, the larger portion of its members being
converted heathen. If they were dipped when
they were baptised, would they be reminded of
one of their funerals by such a service? It is well
known that they disposed of their dead by burning
them upon the funereal pyre; then collecting
the ashes and putting them into an urn, and finally
placing the urn in a columbarium, a large cham-
ber, which had small recesses in its walls, like
those in a pigeon-cote (hence its name), where
the urns stood in rows. I saw one in the neigh-
bourhood of Home which had nine such rows,
from the floor to the ceiling, in each of the
walls.
After these few remarks upon the texts most
frequently brought forward to prove that immer-
sion must have been the primitive method of
baptising, I proceed to give my reasons for a
contrary opinion.
1. The word baptise has acquired a specific
technical sense. It is an ecclesiastical term
denoting a religious ceremony. The authors of
our version have not attempted to translate it
into English, nor is it translatable, at least not
fully and satisfactorily. Neither sprinkling nor
pouring would suit it in every place ; and I am
sure immersion or dipping would not. It would
never do to say,. “ The dipping of John
“John the Dipper “ One Lord, one faith, one
dipping;” “Ye shall be dipped in the Holy
Ghost not many days hence.” The incongruity
of such phraseology is apparent at once, and
would be so if almost any other word expressive
of mode were substituted for baptism. There is,
manifestly, something besides the water and the
way of applying it, included in the term,—a
sacred, a religious idea. We have something
closely analogous to this in many words, such
as worship and sacrament. “ Worship ” denoted
respect paid to worthy men ; now it specifically
denotes homage paid to the Deity. “Sacrament ”
was a military oath among the Romans; now it
is exclusively applied to a religious symbolical
ordinance, and by Protestants is confined to
Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Many attempts
have been made to find a suitable English word
for the Greek word baptise. Purify, cleanse,
consecrate, have all been suggested. Any
one of them would be a very fair substi-
tute, but no one of them is perfect and
unexceptionable. If we could find a term
which combines all three, we should have
just what we want. “Purify” points to that
moral change of which baptism is the emblem, and
which is sometimes the only thing the word de-
notes. ‘ ‘ Cleanse ” suggests the watery element
by which the purification is symbolically effected.
And “Consecrate” conveys the religious idea,
the idea of separation to the service of God.
Any one of these words would give a fair sense to
those passages where baptism occurs, without
water baptism being meant, as, “ purified with
fire,” instead of “baptised with fire.” “ Conse-
cration,” in my opinion, comes nearest to the
scriptural conception, because it conveys the
sense of religious devotement to God. Ido not,
however, make these remarks to advocate any


change—which would he now impossible—but
only to remind you that you cannot get at the
real and full meaning of the word “ baptise,”
as used in Scripture, by regarding as essential to
it, and always indicated by it, some notion of
mere mode and manner.
2, The thing signified by Christian baptism
should certainly not be kept out of sight in deter-
mining the meaning of the word itself. John
said, “ I indeed baptise you with water unto re-
pentance, but he that cometh after me is
mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy
to bear; he shall baptise you with the Holy
Ghost and with fire.” And Jesus himself said,
“John truly baptised you with water, but ye
shall be baptised with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence.” John’s baptism was unto, or for re-
pentance ; i. e. , with a view to it—to promote and
produce it; Christ’s denoted the same thing in
a fuller and richer sense, the inward purification
resulting from the abundant communication of
the Holy Spirit’s influences, by which the souls
of the recipients were to be cleansed from igno-
rance, and sin, and carnality, and elevated into
fellowship with all that is holy and godlike.
The notion of separation, cleansing, sanctifica-
tion, was essentially conveyed by it, and was
meant to be so conveyed; and the use of the
element water, as a symbol and sign of this indis-
pensable purification, was in entire accordance
with Jewish notions and usages. Be it remem-
bered that to the Jews this doctrine of baptisms
was first preached, and that all we have recorded
about it is written by Jews and in the dialect
peculiar to that people when they used Greek.
Rightly, therefore, to understand the subject—
that is, to understand what the writers themselves
meant, and what construction their readers
would put upon their words,it is necessary to glance
at the state of the Jewish mind on this subject.
3. The Jews were familiar with baptisms.
Several of the words rendered “wash” in our
version, are “baptise” in the original. Such is the
case in the following passages:— “ When they (the
Pharisees) come from market, except they wash
(baptise) they eat not; and many other things
there be which they have received to hold, as
the washing (baptism) of cups and pots, brazen
vessels and of tables.” “And Jesus went in
and sat down to meat; and when the Pharisee
saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed
(been baptised) before dinner.” The “doctrine
of baptisms,” from which the apostle exhorts the
Christian Hebrews to advance, is supposed to
allude to these Jewish baptisms. Clearly that
other passage in the same Epistle does, where the
apostle speaks of the Jewish tabernacle service as
consisting only in “ meats and drinks, and divers
washings (baptisms), and carnal ordinances im-
posed on them until the time of Reformation. ”
How, what were the washings here referred to
under the name of baptisms ? They were ob-
viously the purifications enjoined in the law of
Moses. The Mosaic law regarded many things
as unclean, such as leprosy, dead bodies, certain
animals, and contact with these induced a state
of impurity. Whenever defilement was con-
tracted, the unclean person had to submit to
ceremonial purifications before he could join
again in the worship of God. These are minutely
prescribed in the Mosaic law ; and it is remark-
able that there is not oneoi them which prescribes
I immersion', they are chiefly sprinklings, and some
of them washings; and these “sprinklings” “sanc-
tified to the purifying of the flesh. ’’Eveninthedeep
defilement of leprosy, sprinkling was sufißcient to
render the person clean; and for the purification
of the priests for the sacred service, no dipping in
water was enjoined. Washing at the door of the
tabernacle, pouring the anointing oil upon the
head, touching various parts of the body, and
sprinkling the garments with sacrificial blood,
were purifications sufficient.
Now I say that these purifications, required of
the Jews by the law of Moses and daily going
on at their temple as well as in their houses, are
called “ Baptisms,” and are not immersions, but
sprinklings, pourings, suffusions; and thus the
people among whom John and Christ exercised
their ministry, and the Apostles preached the
gospel at first, would not associate with Baptism—
certainly not necessarily—the idea of immersing
the whole body in water, unless there were
special statements to the effect that immersion
was to be the new form, and the only new form
of purification under the Christian dispensation.
Affusion or sprinklings would be sufficiently
suggestive to them of purification, being in full
harmony with the institutes of Moses and their
daily usages,
4. The current style which characterises the
narratives of the New Testament Baptisms
strongly corroborates our view, that the Baptisms
were administered for the most part, if not
always, by aspersion or affusion, and not by sub-
mersion. I stated, in a former lecture, that the
short tracts which compose the New Testament
are not of the of the nature of scientific treatises
giving an elaborate and formal description of the
matters on which they treat, nor of legislative
enactments expressed in legal phrase; but,
rather, familiar sketches and notices of a portion
of the things which came under the observation
of the writers, or which they had heard from
others, (being guided in the whole of this by the
Holy Spirit who led them into all truth), and
that their notices of Baptism as a rite are inci-
dental and passing, and none of them direct and
formal, and descriptive of the ceremony. In
detailing an event in a simple narrative manner,
any little incident which may occur from a
peculiar custom, or a sudden difficulty
arising, or any other illustrative circumstance, the
narrator often notices in passing, without inter-
rupting the thread of his main story. The Gos-
pels abound with illustrations of this principle;
such as the necessity for Joseph and Mary to
repair to a stable from the inn being full; the
letting the sick man down through the roof to
bring him into the presence of Jesus in con-
sequence of the crowd around the door ; the
woman who washed the Saviour’s feet with her
tears Coming behind him to do it; and John’s
leaning on the bosom of Jesus as they ate their
food ; and so of numerous other things. These
little circumstances, incidentally noticed, throw
light upon the customs and modes of doing
things of the people and the times. Now, all the
baptisms of Scripture are related in a very
natural, easy way, as taking place immediately
the parties were impressed and desired the rite,
in all sorts of places and in very different circum-
stances, and no hint or allusion is ever made to
any difficulty, or delay, or inconvenience having


occurred in administering the rite. Multitudes
were baptised at Bethabara, at the Jordan, at
Enon, in the wilderness, in the midst of Jeru-
salem ; baptisms were administered at a public
river, in an officer’s house, in a prison, in the
night-time, in a stream by the road-side, and in no
one case is there the slightest reference to any im-
pediment, inconvenience, or delay having arisen
from want of sufficient water, or of changes of
clothes, or opportunities of decently dressing and
undressing, or insufficiency of time to immerse so
many candidates. According to our view, the
whole narrative is quite natural and intelligible,
the process of baptising being so easy and simple,
and no undressing being required; but, accord-
ing to the practice of our Baptist friends, con-
sidering the impediments and delays andawkward
incidents which must have presented themselves
where such multitudes were concerned and no
previous preparation whatever was made, it is
certainly most wonderful that not the slightest
occasion should have ever arisen to notice any
single one of them. And, if all these things
were adjusted by a special providence so
that the work proceeded with as much or
greater facilility than if the most elaborate
preparation had been made, _it is perhaps
still more wonderful that that supernatural
intervention was never even glanced at, and
gratefully acknowledged. Had any Baptist his-
torian the task of detailing a similar career of
Baptist missionaries, and did he adopt a like
easy and familiar style of narrating, without a
special object to bias him, it would be next to a
miracle if he did not allude to some circum-
stances that would indicate the mode of the
ceremony, the difficulty and toil of performing
it in such circumstances, and the incidents to
which it would certainly give rise. I refer to
this peculiarity in the narratives in this connec-
tion, because it is all natural and easy, according
to the current customs and notions of the Jews
of that day on the subject of baptisms, so far as
we can learn them from the injunctions of
Moses.
5. I now come to look at the special circum-
stances of some of the baptisms recorded in the
New Testament, to show the extreme improba-
bility—to use the mildest term—of their having
been administered by dipping. I know this is a
hackneyed theme, which occurs to every writer
on baptism; nevertheless, it is necessary, in
order to take a fair view of the question.
(1.) I adverted in a former lecture to the vast
multitude attending John’s baptisms, to show
the impossibility of his being able by personal
examination, into the past history and character
and present experience of the several individuals
composing the numerous candidates for his bap-
tism, to satisfy himself of the genuineness of
their repentance in each case. A similar objection
arises to the baptisms having been adminis-
tered by the submersion of the entire person, in
the manner practised by the Baptists of
the present day. Various estimates have
been made of the numbers John must have
baptised, judging from the terms employed
in describing the wonderful sensation he created.
“Jerusalem,’’ “all Judea,” “all the region round
about J ordan, ” ‘ ‘ all the people, ” are the phrases
employed to denote the multitudes who were
baptised by him “confessing their sins.” At-
tempts have been made to reduce these general
terms to definite calculations. Some make out
from data furnished by Josephus that there could
not be less than two millions, others, to be
within the mark, take a 20th of that number,
and suppose there could not be less than 100,000.
The ministry of John is estimated at six months
in duration, which would give 550 for each day,
supposing six hours were occupied in baptising,
and this would be 90 for each hour. I leave you
to judge whether it is likely, whether even it is
possible, that the great preacher should be thus
engaged, standing in the water for so many
hours, continually immersing men and women,
for the long period of six months together.
Besides all this, there would be the time and toil
of lifting up his voice as a field preacher, and
fulfilling his mission by pressing home the
doctrine of repentence, and, according to the
Baptist theory, examining each individual as to
his experience and change of heart. Then what
shall I say of the confusion, the undressing, the
procuring baptismal attire, the dripping, the re-
dressing, of men and women, all in the open
desert, surrounded by crowds of spectators, and
with no previous preparation made ?We have a
right to take these difficulties into account when
the mode of baptising is the point we are en-
quiring into. On our principle all is easy, on
the immersion theory the difficulties are “such
that I see no way of getting over them but by
refusing fairly to look at them.
(2.) The baptisms on the day of Pentecost are
encumbered with similar and other difficulties.
The historian merely says, “Then those that
gladly received his word were baptised, and the
same day there were added unto them about
three thousand souls.” He narrates the transac-
tion as if it were a matter of course, and there
was no difficulty in the way to take notice of,
which would be the case according to our prac-
tice but not according to the other. Besides the
labour and the toil of dipping so many as three
thousand people during only a part of one day,
where the people, totally unprovided as
they were for such an event, find change of
clothes, and where places in which they might
decently undress and dress again ? and where con-
venient places for going through the ceremony
of immersion? That there might possibly be
water sufficient for such a purpose within and
outside the walls of Jerusalem may be true
enough; but would the authorities or the people
have allowed the public reservoirs or pools,
where their store of water was laid up for drink-
ing, and culinary, and sacred purposes, to be
defiled by the submersion of three thousand per-
sons in them in one day? Would not all the
notions of a people who considered water defiled
when once used for purification, and who there-
fore sought running streams to wash in, and
poured water on the hands and feet to cleanse
them rather than put them into the water, have
been shocked by so many persons all being
dipped in the same still tank ? Has any attempt
ever been made to realise the scene that must
have occurred on the immersion theory?—the
people adjourning from the place of preaching,
and going in detachments to the several pools;
searching among their friends for baptismal
dresses; looking out for private recesses where
they might change their attire, and then, when


immersed, returning from the water to dress
again ? What careful preparation is necessary in
Baptist sanctuaries to have all things done de-
decently and in order! Imagine such an occur-
rence taking place in the city of Melbourne,
where the supply of water is abundant enough,
as that, after an out-of-door sermon, three thou-
sand people should have to be immersed in
one day, unexpectedly and without any provision.
Could it be done? Or if, by something like a
miracle it were done, would a narrator, recording
the extraordinary event, simply say, “and they
were baptized ?” Though it may seem a degra-
datiion of a sacred subject to descend to these
particulars, it is, I repeat, necessary to do so
when the thing we enquire into is how the
ceremony was performed.
(3.) The baptism of the Samaritans by Philip
is thus recorded ; “ Then Philip went down to the
city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them ;
and the people gave heed with one accord to the
things which Philip spake hearing and seeing the
miracles which he did, and there was great joy
in that city.” “And they were baptised both
men and women.” Here the particulars are less
definite tbanin the previous case. The localityis
not certainly known, and we cannot tell with accu-
racy what facilities there were for obtaining water
conveniently. If however this city were on or
near the site of Sychar (ns most commentators
suppose), we know, from the narrative of our
Saviour’s interview with the woman of Samaria,
that the citizens were dependent for their sup-
plies on a deep well outside the city from which
they had to draw the water. The exact number
of the converts is not stated, nor the length of
time Philip was engaged in preaching to them
and baptising the people of the town. With these
uncertainties nothing definite can be determined.
I refer to it merely to show that the style of narrative
is the same as before: the writer, in recording
the sudden conversion of a whole town and their
immediate baptism, says, as usual “ they were bap-
tised,” as if it were easily done and no perplexing
embarrassments occurred to require notice.
(4.) The baptism of Cornelius in his house and
of all that heard Peter; and of the “ Jailer and
all his ” family, took place at once. Cornelius
might have had private baths in the house, but it
is scarcely likely that everything should have
been ready for the dipping of so many adults
suddenly, nor do I see how the baths in a private
family would be of such a construction as to
allow the haptiser to go into the bath along with
the baptized and dip him : for while the public
baths of the Piomans were upon a most elaborate
scale, the specimens of the Roman family baths
which have been found are very like modern
foot-baths, 100 shallow for immersion. Still
greater is the difficulty of supposing that the
jailor and his family, should be all immersed in
the middle of the night, without any pre-
paration. What kind of baths they had in
prisons in those days I know not; but certainly
the ancients were not remarkable for attending
to sanatory measures in order to mitigate
the sufferings of criminals, and it is hardly pro-
bable they would provide such costly luxuries for
the officials in a prison. I rest, however, more
upon the same style of narrative of the Evan-
gelist Luke—his so naively stating that these
family groups were baptised without delay in
such peculiar circumstances, as if it were a matter
of course, aud pi'esented no difficulty whatever ;
which it does not, if they were baptised by
pouring or sprinkling; but which it certainly
does if they were all immersed. We should all
find it so if such an event were to occur in any of
our houses in the night time. We have a right,
therefore, in trying to find out the Scriptural use
of the word “ baptise,” to take all the difficulties
of these several baptisms into account. A candid
view of the circumstances referred to, and which
I am sure are not exaggerated, affords a strong
presumption against the supposition that these
baptisms took place by the process of entire sub-
mersion.
6. There is a class of passages where we think
there is more than a presumption against immer-
sion, where the idea of it seems to be excluded by
the nature of the case, or by the language
employed.
(1.) One of these is the passage in Mark, vii. 41
already referred to for another purpose—“ The
washing of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and
tables.” “ Washing” should be rendered “baptis-
ing,” and “tables” “couches” or “beds.” It is
clear these couches could not have been baptised by
dipping, but may easily have been purified by
sprinkling, according to Jewish usages, and this is
called a baptism.
(2.) “ A certain Pharisee besought Jesus to dine
with him, and he went in and sat down to meat.
And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he
had not first washed before dinner.” “ Washed”
should be translated “baptised.” Now, this omission
of the Saviour’s must have been obvious to the
Pharisees at the time. It could not be that Jesus
had not dipped himself at home, because the Pharisee
could not have known that; nor can we suppose that
there was provision made for every guest invited to
the dinner to retire and take a full immersion bath
before dining at the Pharisee’s table. But there was
provision of water jars, as at the marriage feast at
Cana, for washing the hands, as an act of purification
before eating; and that ceremony was expected from
all, and it was the neglect of this, doubtless, that
excited the Pharisee’s surprise, so that, according to
this passage, a person who purifies himself in some
slight way, by having water poured upon his bands,
or by partially washing or sprinkling himself in some
ceremonial manner, is baptised.
(3.) There is a text (1 Cor., x. 1) where baptism
is mentioned, and the meaning is a matter of much
difference of opinion—“ Moreover, brethren, I would
not that ye should be ignorant how that all our fathers
were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
and were all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in
the sea.” My time will not permit me to attempt
an exposition of this passage, but this is clear, and
pertinent to my present object, that whatever may
be the meaning of being “ baptised into (or for)
Moses,” and of the Israelites being “ baptised in (or
by) the sea,” and “ in (or by) the cloud,” they were
not dipped into either. The cloud was above them,
and if they touched it it must have come down upon
them ; and as for the sea, it was their glory that they
were not plunged in it, while their enemies the
Egyptians were overwhelmed and drowned ; so that
baptism here cannot mean dipping into any element
whatever.
(4.) A similarly difficult and obscure passage is
that in 1 Peter iii, 20 21 While the ark
was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls


were saved by water. The like figure whereunto you ; and I will take away the stony heart out of
even baptism doth also now save us (not the putting your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh ;
. -Li J-T A Tk,,4. ,1 T *ll ± ... • M • -i
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience toward God), by the resurrection of
Christ.” Here, that purification which baptism
symbolises is said to have been prefigured by Noah’s
escape from the flood. The precise import of this
is difficult satisfactorily to ascertain, but whatever
the meaning be, this is obvious, that Noah and his
family, though they were “saved by water,” were
not saved by immersion in it, so that baptism here
again cannot mean immersion.
(5.) The following texts also bear on this branch of
the subject:—John i, 33. John said “He that
sent me to baptise with water, the same said unto
me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending,
and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptiseth with the Holy Ghost.” And Jesus said to
his disciples “ John truly baptised with water ; but
ye shall be baptised with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence. ” These declarations were fulfilled at the
day of Pentecost. And how were they baptised ?
Did the the disciples move to the emblems of this
influence and plunge themselves or each other into
them ? Did not the rushing wind descend from
heaven and come upon them, and did not the cloven
tongues of fire alight upon their heads ? This is
called a baptism, and it is a baptism without dipping.
These several texts of scripture show the use of
the word baptise in a sense in which dipping is
excluded, so that the word cannot mean dipping and
nothing else ; if it mean it sometimes, it does not
mean it always, and what it means must be ascer-
tained by the context and by the probabilities of the
case, as I have already attempted to do.
A candid and careful consideration of all the cir-
cumstances connected with the administration of
these various baptisms, produce in my mind the
conviction that to baptise, in Scripture usage, does
not signify to immerse the whole person in water,
but, for the most part, to purify religiously by water;
and, as the Jews were instructed to purify by
sprinkling and washing, and as such ablutions are
called baptisms, the natural conclusion is that this
simple and easy mode of applying the water of
baptism, defended in this lecture, was the one adopted.
7. These conclusions are confirmed by considering
the manner in which the Scriptures speak of the
gieat spiritual blessing, of which baptism is the
symbol, is said to come to us and become ours.
Baptism with water is a symbol of the baptism of
the Holy Ghost. 1 have just quoted two texts in
which it is stated that Jesus would baptise with the
Holy Ghost, and Pentecost was the special fulfilment
of the promise so far as the apostles were concerned.
Baptism symbolises the influence from God which
cleanses our defiled nature from sin; and we know
that the Ploly Spirit, the Comforter, is the Divine
agent in accomplishing this. What is the current
phraseology of Scripture in regard to the communi-
cation of this influence ? “I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground;
I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed and my blessing
upon thy offspring.” “I will pour upon the house
of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the
spirit of grace and of supplication.” Of Christ it
is said, “So shall he sprinkle many nations and
the promise of the new covenant is in these terms :
—“Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean ; from all your filthiness and from
all your idols will I cleanse you ; a new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judg-
ments and do them.” Peter says of the gift of the
Holy Spirit, “Jesus Christ hath shed forth this
which ye now see and hear.” Paul says “He
saved us by the washing of regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly and John says, speaking of what
occurred at the baptism of Jesus, “I saw the
Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it
abode upon him.”
Now, if baptism be the symbol of this gracious
influence, which thus is sent from heaven, and this
be the current language employed to denote how it
comes to us ; surely the mode of applying the sym-
bolic water, by pouring, affusion, or sprinkling ; by
bringing the element to the person to be cleansed,
rather than by taking the person to the element and
immersing or dipping him in it, is most in harmony
with the Scripture representations upon this subject.
Great stress is laid upon the Saviour’s commission
as containing a positive command to do one and the
same thing, always and everywhere in baptising the
nations. This may be granted ; but to assert that
that thing is to immerse the nations, and nothing
else, is to assume the question in dispute. If
“baptise,” in the usus loquendi of Scripture, does
not mean to dip exclusively or generally, but more
commonly to apply water by pouring or sprinkling,
then the Saviour’s command is obeyed if the nations
are baptised by affusion. Supposing the meaning of
the commission should be, as it probably is, “Purify
the nations by the symbolical application of water, ’
without defining the mode; the use of cmymode would
then be obedience. Jesus does not himself define the
term, nor describe the mode, and liberty of construction
is manifestly allowed. Even .if we knew precisely
and certainly the way in which Jesus himself was
baptised, and we deviated somewhat from that
mode, would that invalidate the service, if the heart
and intention were right ? Nothing can be more ex-
press and positive in relation to the other sacrament
than these words, “Jesus took bread, and when he
had given thanks he brake it and said, take, eat,
this is my body which is broken for you ; this do in
remembrance of me.” Here, what the Saviour did
was to break the bread; and he says plainly “Do
this.” Now, it is well-known that sometimes the
bread is cut beforehand, and not literally broken at
all. Would this deviation in manner vitiate the
ordinance ? Could we say of such an administration,
“ This is not to eat the Lord’s Supper,” when there
was no intentional disobedience ? Such ritual pre-
cision is little in harmony with a dispensation whose
essence is “spiritand life.”
The argument, then, in brief, is that the word
baptise in classic usage does not denote a precise
manner in applying water, but rather a condition of
the person or thing affected by it, and that this con-
dition may be induced indifferently by dipping, over-
whelming, pouring, or aspersion.
That whatever be its classical usage—the usus
loquendi of Scripture—the sense in which it is used
there, is, after all, the point to be inquired into.
That coming to the New Testament, where neces-
sarily, from the language being Greek, the word first
occurs, we find it used and appropriated to religious
observances, denoting r cleansing from ceremonial
pollution, and to an ordinance symbolising the im-
partation of a sanctifying influence sent from God.


That, further, it is applied to denote those Jewish
purifications which we know were effected by washing
and sprinkling.
That it is applied to several cases where immer-
sions did not occur.
That the style of narrative adopted in relating the
various baptisms administered by John, Jesus, and the
apostles, is such as cannot be reconciled, in the majority
of the instances specified, with the theory of immer-
sion, but is natural and easy in the theory of affusion.
That the purifying an unclean person and making
him holy, is symbolised better, according to the
Mosaic law and Jewish notions and usages, by
aspersion and pouring, than by immersion;
and, as the language is used in the New Testa-
ment by Jewish men, writing for brother Jews,
in reference to Christian baptism, and is used with-
out comment or explanation, and wdth no intimation
of change of meaning, the natural inference is, that
no change of meaning or practice took place.
And finally, that when the Holy Spirit’s influences,
which are symbolised in baptism, are spoken of, they
are invariably spoken of as descending, coming down
upon, being shed; and never as being something into
which we are immersed.
My conclusion is, therefore, that the primitive
baptisms were, in all probability for the most part,
if not altogether, administered by affusion.
I have not mentioned a reason in favour of our
mode deduced from the genius of a religion
designed to be the religion of the whole world,
because I wished to keep close to the cases of
baptism actually recorded in Scripture. The ar-
gument, however, simply is this : The Gospel com-
mission is to disciple all nations, to preach the
Gospel to every creature ; and it is not likely that
any rite should be enjoined, as imperative in respect
to its mode, which would not be suitable to all
climes, all seasons of the year, all ages, and all
states of health. Immersion in some cases would
be impracticable, or dangerous. Sprinkling may
be applied in all cases, with no delay, with no in-
convenience and no injury.
Against this Scriptural evidence the testimony of
Ecclesiastical History is brought. I can have no
objection to this reference, having myself appealed
to it in support of the custom of infant baptism.
I admit then at once the general prevalence of im-
mersion a few centuries after Christ. But it may
be easily accounted for. I stated that the direction
of the current of corrupt practices which set in
after the death of the apostles, was, supposing
Infant Baptism not in use, clearly contrary to
its introduction and in favour of protracted
delay; and yet that infant baptism did exist
and stood its ground against a pressure which
threatened to sweep it away. Now the case is just
the reverse with respect to the mode of baptism.
The simplicity of the worship of the New Testament
times was overpowered by the multifarious inven-
tions of men. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper
were magnified into the deepest mysteries, and were
guarded by hosts of ceremonies. As Peter felt and
said, when Jesus offered to wash his feet, “Lord,
not my feet only, but also my hand's and my head,”
So the Christians of another age seemed to think
that they could not have enough of the water of
baptism, and of many other things besides. They
not only had immersion, but immersion three times
over, and previous fastings and exorcisms, veiling and
dressing in white robes for a period of eight days
together ; the baptismal water was consecrated, and
hands were imposed upon the baptised ; annointing
oil was applied, the sign of the cross was made upon
the forehead ; the eyes were besmeared with clay
and then washed ; the ears were touched, and the
word “Ephphatha” uttered, the Lord’s prayer and
creed were said, the devil and all his works re-
nounced, the kiss of peace was given, honey and
milk put to the mouth, and lighted tapers carried in
the hands of the baptised. Such were the baptisms
at the period when immersions became general.
Everything was overdone, and the simple and ex-
pressive rite of the apostolic age smothered with
ceremony and superstition.
And yet, overlaid as the baptismal service was, by
these corrupt additions, the traces of the simple
original rite were never quite lost. The essence of the
ordinance was never considered to consist in mere sub-
mersion, but in the use of the name of the Trinity.
Clinical baptisms, i.e., baptism of the sick and
weakly by sprinkling, were allowed to be valid ; the
Church of Rome and the Church of England always
acknowledged the sufficiency of sprinkling; the
Greek Church, which practises trine or threefold
immersion, concludes the ceremony by affusion upon
the head ; the Abyssinian Church has the ceremony
of immersion performed at one font, and the affusion
with the baptismal formula afterwards, at another.
The editor of Calmet’s Dictionary, in his “ Facts and
Evidences on Baptism,” has published twelve
prints, copied from Cialdini’s Italian work
on ancient churches, containing engravings of sculp-
tures and mosaics, and other representations of
ecclesiastical usages found upon the oldest ecclesias-
tical structures of Italy, some of them as old as the
fifth century, and these are representations of bap-
tisms. Nearly all the baptised are quite naked, most
of them standing in shallow baths scarcely so deep as
the knee, in which they appear to have been washed,
and the baptiser stands outside with a small vessel
in his hand, a shell, a patera, or a jug, and from it
is pouring water upon the person who is being bap-
tised. Some of the prints represent the baptism of
Jesus. He is standing in the Jordan, near the brink,
and John is on an elevated bank on the shore, pouring
water on the Saviour’s head. These prints are inte-
resting, as showing the practice of pouring coincident
with that of washing. The fact seems to be that the
immersion or washing was not properly the baptism,
but a preparatory ablution to take away the impurity
of Heathenism and acquired sin, and then came the
baptismal pouring, emblematical of the gift of the
Holy Spirit. In all these instances, I say, we see
the simple primitive method of baptising by affusion
cropping out through the cumbrous strata of cere-
mony which ages of superstition had laid upon it.
If I have not succeeded in convincing any of those
who hold views contrary to mine of the Scriptural
mode of baptising, I hope I may have made it
obvious that there is no such clear case against our
method, and in favour of the other, as to warrant
any to assume that their’s is the the only valid
baptism, and that baptisms otherwise administered
are no baptisms at all, simply because of a differ-
ence of manner. In a case like this, where there
are no express directions, but where we are left to
ascertain the Scripture practice by a comparison of
various circumstances, dogmatism and assumption
of infallibility are unseemly, and mutual charity
and mutual recognition are more becoming. Let
every one be fully persuaded in his own mind.
“ Follow the things that make for peace, and things
whereby one may edify another.”
William Goodhugh & Co., Printers. iS Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
