

RULES, BYE-LAWS,
LIST OF ORIGINAL MEMBERS
OF THE
Wtdamx Institute nf Urdjitcds.
•——-
ESTABLISHED AUGUST, 1856.
—•
Utoltomnw:
PRINTED BY GOODHUGH AND 4B FLINDERS LANE.




©fatoipan rrf
ESTABLISHED AUGUST, 1856.
fatam.
The Honorable CAPTAIN PASLEY, E.E.
Ijrtaibttrf.
J. G. KNIGHT, Esq.
Vkmwnt.
C. R. SWTEE, Esq.
Honomg Setttiatg.
T. J. CROUCH, Esq. •
Connal.
Messrs. KERR, P.
„ PURCHAS, A.
„ SMITH, A. L.
„ WATTS, THOS.
WHITE, F. M.


Dldarhit Institute of 4 i
ESTABLISHED AUGUST, 1856. ?
—i!
i A
OBJECT. 'A -*
The cultivation of friendly intercourse between the Members of the I j
Profession, —the protection and advancements of its interests, and the J
elevation of Architecture as an Art.
HM^s.
I.— Designation. .
That this Association shall be designated The Victorian Institute of r \
Architects. I
ll.— Constitution. • J 1
1. That the Institute shall consist of Members, Honorary Members,
and Associates who shall he elected as hereinafter mentioned.
2. Members shall be Architects practising in Victoria, at least
months prior to election.
3. Honorary Members shall be gentlemen distinguished by Scientific or
Literary attainments, and Architects not practising in Victoria. '
4. Associates shall be the pupils of Members, Architectural Draughtsmen,
and Architects who have" not been in practice twelve mouths in Victoria.
lll.— Election or Membees, &c.
Gentlemen eligible to enter the Institute shall be proposed at an i,
Ordinary Meeting and ballotted for at the next, and in the event of election
shall subscribe their assent to the Rules of the Institute—a majority of three-
fourths of the votes of those present shall be required to sanction admission.
IV.—Management.
1. The affairs of the Institute shall be regulated by a Patron, President,
Treasurer, Honorary Secretary,* and Council consisting of five Members.
2. The Patron shall he an Honorary Member and shall hold office during
the pleasure of the Institute.
3. The President, Treasurer, Honorary Secretary, and Council, shall be
Members of the Institute, chosen at ths first General or at an Annual
Meeting, who shall retire from office yearly, and be eligible for re-election.
4. The President shall take the chair at all Meetings of the Institute, and
give a casting vote when required.


6. The Treasurer shall receive and pay all moneys on account of the
Institute, —shall keep a current account at such Bank as the Council shall
direct, and furnish a properly audited account to accompany each Annual
Keport.
6. The Honorary Secretary shall keep all minutes of Meetings and con-
duct all correspondence.
7. All the officers of the Institute shall he ex officio Members of the
Council.
8. The Council shall assemble half-an-hour before the time appointed for the
ordinary Meeting of Members, and oftener if occasion requires. Any three
members to form a quorum.
9. In the event of the absence of the President from any Meeting at the
hour appointed, the Chairman shall at once be chosen from among those
present, who shall retain office throughout the Meeting, and perform all
duties devolving upon the President thereof.
10. The President or Honorary Secretary shall have power at any time to
convene a Meeting of the Council, and by order of the Council or upon the
requisition of five Members, stating the object, shall convene a Special
Meeting of the Institute within eight days.
Y.— Entrance Fee and SußsoniriioN.
1. That the Entrance Fee for Members shall be as follows: —During the
first year of the existence of the Institute the sum of Two Guineas; and
afterwards the sum of Five Guineas.
2. Each Member, in addition to his Entrance Fee, shall subscribe
to the funds of the Institute the sum of One Guinea per annum, payable in
advance, and all Subscriptions shall become due at the Annual Meeting.
3. Each Associate shall be chargeable with an Entrance Fee of Two
Guineas, and an annual subscription of Half-a-Guinea; and in the event of
being elected a Member shall pay an additional fee of Three Guineas.
4. Any Member or Associate ceasing to pay his subscription during a period
of six months, after the same shall have become due, shall forfeit his connec-
tion with the Institute, and all claims thereon, and if wishing again to become
a Member shall enter de novo, except in such special cases as shall be
exempted by the Council.
VI. — Auditors.
At the Ordinary Meeting next preceding the Annual Meeting, the Members
shall appoint two Auditors to examine the Treasurer’s accounts and certify as
to their state.
VH.—Meetings.
1. The Annual Meeting of the Institute shall be held on the 2nd Thursdayjin
the month of August in each year, at Seven o’clock in the evening, to receive
the Keport, and appoint the Officers and Council for the ensuing year. .
2. The Ordinary Meetings of the Institute shall beheld on the 2nd Thurs-
day in every month, at Seven o’clock in the evening, when after the usual routine
of business, any Member or Associate, having given previous intimation
thereof to the Honorary Secretary, shall be at liberty to read a paper or
papers on subjects kindred to the object of the Institute.
3. Any Member or Associate shall be allowed to introduce a friend at the
ordinary Meetings, but no one but Members, Associates, and Honorary
Members, shall take part in the discussion except upon special request from
the chair.


4. The Council shall from time to time determine upon the place of
meeting, and Seven Members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business at any Ordinary, Annual, or Special Meeting.
VIII.— Bye-Laws.
1. The Council shall transact the ordinary business of the Institute, and
have power to appoint Committees and pass bye-laws for the regulation of its
affairs, provided such bye-laws are not repugnant to any of the General
Buies.
3. All bye-laws affecting professional charges or professional conduct, shall
be submitted to the consideration of a Special Meeting of the Institute, and
must be carried by a majority of at least three-fourths of the Meeting, to
become binding upon the Members and Associates
3. Notice to rescind, alter, or add a bye-law such as referrred to in clause
2, must be given through the Secretary to all the Members at least seven days
previous to the Meeting at which it is proposed to be discussed.
IX.— Peony.
That when Members are at a distance of five miles and upwards from
the place of meeting, any Member or Associate shall be allowed to vote on his
behalf, having first presented to the Chairman his authority to do so.
X.— Peofessional Maxtees.
No Honorary Member shall be allowed to vote in matters relating
exclusively to the profession.
Xl.— Ballot.
Any Member, Honorary Member, or Associate, may require a ballot in all
cases where it is not expressly provided.
Xll.— Expulsion.
1. All charges against Members, Associates, or Honorary Members,
shall in the first instance be investigated before the Council, specially
called for that purpose, the accuser and accused having notice thereof.
2. Any Member, Associate, or Honorary Member, summoned as a witness
in such inquiry, failing to attend without reasonable excuse, may be fined in
any sum not exceeding five guineas, as the Council deem expedient.
3. All enquiries of this land shall be decided by ballot and a majority
of votes.
4. Any Member, Associate, or Honorary .Member, or infringing these
Buies, or whose conduct, in or out of th£ Institute, shall be proved to be
unprofessional or dishonourable, shall be suspended or expelled, as circum-
stances call for, and forfeit all claim to any moneys he may have paid into the
funds.
5. Any Member, Associate, or Honorary Member, feeling himself aggrieved
by the Council, may before the expiration of fourteen days from the deci-
sion of the Council, appeal to a Special Meeting of the Institute, to be
called within eight days from the delivery of his notice of appeal to the
President or Honorary Secretary, and at such special Meeting clauses 2 and 3
shall equally apply.
XHl.— Payments.
No payment shall be made from the funds of the Institute except upon an
order of the Council and by a cheque drawn by the Treasurer, and counter-
signed by the Honorary Secretary.


XlV.—Alteration of Eules.
No alteration, of whatever kind, shall be made in the foregoing Eules, with-
out previous notice being given through the Secretary to all the Members and
Associates, at least one month previous to the discussion of such alteration,
and such alteration must be confirmed at the ensuing Annual Meeting.
BYE-LAW, No. X.
Scale of Professional Charges.
I. That for Plans, Specification, Working Drawings, and Superintendence
of New Buildings costing more than £5OO, a commission of 0 per cent, be
charged. For the same costing less than £5OO, 7 per cent.
3. That for Plans and Specifications (without superintendence) of New
Buildings, costing more than .£5OO, a commission of 2i per cent, be charged.
For the same,"costing less than £5OO, 3J- per cent.
3. That for Superintendence of New Buildings costing more than £5OO
a commission of 2$ per cent, be charged. For the same costing less than
£5OO, 3J per cent.
4. That for carrying out Alterations and Eepairs above £5OO, a commis-
sion of 5 per cent, be charged. For the same under £5OO, 7 per cent., and
under £3OO as per agreement. The value of all old materials used in
repairs to be added to the cost, in order to calculate the commission.
5. One half the commission shall be considered due to the Architect from
the employer when the Plans and Specifications are prepared: the remaining
half being paid on the amount of work certified from time to time.
G. That for Measuring Works, a commission of 2 per cent, shall be charged
for Labor and Material, and 0 per cent, for Labor or Materials only.
7. That for supplying copies of Drawings and Specifications fut-nished to
the Contractor, office time shall be charged.
8. That the fees and charges for measuring works be always chargeable—
half to the Proprietor, and half to the Contractor, when the Architect acts
for both parties; but if acting for one only, then the employer to pay the
whole charge.
9. That for the Valuation of Land or Buildings, or for inspecting and re-
porting on Buildings, or both, for Mortgage or otherwise, a charge shall be
made of not less’ than £3 35., within three miles of the Post Office,
Melbourne, to be afterwards increased according to distance, and other
circumstances.
10. That a fair charge shall be r.i“_de for travelling expenses beyond three
miles from the Post Office, and also for time consumed in travelling, and
absence from Melbourne, at the rate of £5 ss. per day.
11. That for attendance as Arbitrator or on Arbitrations, the sum of £1 Is.
per hour, £5 ss. for any sitting not exceeding five hours, shall be charged.
12. It is to he understood that Melbourne is mentioned in the foregoing
rules, as being the metropolis of Victoria, but that the place of business of
any Architect may be substituted for the word Melbourne, according to
circumstances.
13. Fees paid by Insurance Companies, Banks, and Building Societies, for
Surveys of Property, are excepted from the foregoing rules.


BYE-LAW, No. 11.
Code of Holes fob Regulating Public Abchitecioeal Competition.
1. Competitors to be at liberty to submit one or more designs, as they
may they think fit, but each design to comprehend no more than the follow,
ing drawings. All drawings, otherwise executed than as below described,
and all printed particulars, except such as may be absolutely necessary, and
all letters, circulars, testimonials, address cards, or other papers, be at once
set aside, so as not to be laid before the adjudicators.
Deawings.
2. The designs in every competition to be drawn to an uniform scale
regulated according to circumstances.
3. The walls and sectional parts to be filled in black or sepia, and all floors
to be tinted with a light neutral tint or sepia.
4. Elevations in outline only, save that metal work roof and apertures
shall have a light neutral tint, and non-sectional parts to be executed as
elevations.
0. External perspective views in outline only or tinted as elevations.
6. Internal perspective views in outline only or tinted as elevations.
7. All drawings are to be executed on sheets of white paper or card-
board; transmitted, attached or not, at discretion, to strainers or other
backings, but without varnishing, glazed or other frames, coloured, embossed
or.other ornamental borders, margins or mountings whatever, except the
views, which may have a mount of plain tinted paper or cardbdard, should
the competitor desire one.
Mode of Teansmission.
i
8. Each design to be distinguished by a device or motto only, marked on
the right hand low'er comer of each respective drawing, and accompanied by
a letter with the motto or device endorsed on the envelope, containing
the author’s name and address. The letter not to be opened until the
decision on the plans has been arrived at, and then only in the presence of
the adjudicators.
Peemiums.
9. That (2) two premiums be awarded, and that three sets of designs be
selected, the (Ist) first to receive no premium if called on to carry out the
works, beyond the usual commission, (exclusive of salary of clerk of works),
and in the event of his not being so called on, he be paid 1J per cent, on the
sum proposed to be expended; and the second best design to be awarded the
first premium; and the third the second premium; and that the amount of
the premiums be regulated by the sum proposed to be expended, according to
the following scale, viz. :
1 per cent on the amount for the first premium,
J „ on the „ „ second ditto.
10. That whenever it becomes known to the Institute that competition
plans are about to be invited, a special meeting of the members may be
convened for the purpose of forming such,regulations as are applicable to
the case.
11. That all competitors shall be allowed to inspect the designs sent in,
for fourteen days after the making known of the decision thereon.


ORIGINAL MEMBERS.
Mr. Bagge, Ohlfsen
„ Blackburn, J.
„ Crouch, T. J.
„ George,
„ Hale,
„ Kerr, P.
„ Knight, J. G.
„ Matthews, F. S.
„ Purchas, A. ..
Robertson, —
„ Rogers, R. R...
„ Ross, D.
„ Scanlon,
„ Schneider, J.
„ Smith, A. L.
„ Snow, A. T.
„ Swyer, C. R. ..
„ Tayler, L.
„ Walker, J.
„ Watts, Thos.
„ White, F. M.
50 Collins Street.
Melbourne.
51 Swanston Street.
Victoria Parade.
Elizabeth Street.
Nicholson Street.
Nicholson Street.
Market Street.
Temple Court.
Elizabeth Street.
Collins Street.
McKenzie Street.
41 Swanston Street.
Victoria Parade.
Temple Court.
Melbourne.
Melbourne.
Swanston Street.
Queen Street.
Hall of Commerce.
Queen Street.
Goodhugh & Hough, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
