

‘ ■ ■■ .. jnr- . ,




CHAOS & OEDEH;
OH THE
ORTHODOX PRACTICE OF MEDICINE
UNVEILED,
VERSUS
THE MEDICAL HERESY!
DE. TH. BEEIGNY,
HOMCEOrATIIIC PHYSICIAN, 119, COLLINS ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.
®Bllinuruß:
W. FAIRFAX & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
78, Collins Street East.
1858.




f ■’O'? !l
■ S 5
PKEFACE.
We tliink it necessary to lay before the public the two following
letters, which appeared in the Melbourne Morning Herald of the
4th and sth March, 1858, as having accidentally originated the
publication of the remarks which follow :
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
To the Editor of the 'Herald.
Dear Sir, —Owing to the great importance of the subject, 1
trust you will not consider this too lengthy for inseidion. In
reading the particulars of an inquest held upon the body of a
child tliirteen months old, which appeared in the Argus of the 22nd
of last month, and who died of congestion of the brain, one is much
struck with the peculiar treatment of infants ; and when facts are
brought statistically forward, showing the alarming mortality
amongst young children, it should teach us to think whether
medical science, like every other science, is not capable of being
improved, or whether the debilitating practice of the old school
should go on unceasingly; whether in a new colony, where the
the temperature is sucli as to encourage and favor all inflam-
matory affections, there should be no means of subduing but
“by blood-letting,” Well may the uninitiated sometimes feel
astonished at the practical science, which at the same time will
give and take away. How can we reconcile with common sense
a system of medicine which permits the leeching, cupping, or
blistering of an infant, with the administering of brandy and
water ? Surely we cannot properly call this science. The first
of these methods of treatment is in daily use all over the world,
and in cases of croup I have witnessed the most painful and
disgusting torture —I call it torture, because it is not necessary
to draw blisters upon the throat of an infant; it is not necessary
under such circumstances to cut with cupping knives, or frighten
them with leeches, to excoriate with liniment, or aggi'avate them
by an emetic. I maintain that neither of these are necessary,
because I bave seen hundreds' of acute cases of inflammation
treated differently, and with far greater success. My experience
has been amongst children, where the imagination could have
no influence, and with whom the profession are mostly at fault.
It is almost an acknowledged fact that amongst the young a
nurse is better than a doctor —and why ? The medical profession


says impossible! but reason tells us differently, and argues alone
from facts. Is it not monsti’ous that more than one half of the
deaths for the colony of Victoria for the year ending the 30th
June, 1857, should be children under five years of age? The
total number of deaths was 6521; of these 3267 were under five
years of age, 2313 of whom died within twelve months of their
birth.
What a fearful Government report! Will any reasonable
person believe that of necessity children must die in this whole-
sale manner, and that nothing could he done to save them ; no
science brought to hear successfully upon the saving of infant
life ? I think not.
I am not a professional man, neither have I any personal
interest in forwarding a particnlar system of medicine, further
than its becoming an universal benefit; but I have seen so many
diseases cured under homceopathic treatment, and such imme-
diate relief given to children suffering acutely, that I am led
strongly to ui’ge its adoption.
Homoeopathy has led to the development and use of medicines
previously unknown. The tincture of arnica montana is exten-
sively used in our London hospitals. Fourteen years ago homoe-
opathy was a science in London, struggling for existence under
the fiercest opposition ; it was abused, ridiculed, and those who
practised it persecuted. It triumphantly passed through a severe
ordeal, and is now fully established. Thousands live this day to
bless the result, and I amongst the many seek to extend the
wonderful results of a system of medicine which, from its sim-
plicity is sometimes called into question, as we all know was the
efficacy of vaccination, which is purely homoeopathic. With
every apology,
I remain, dear Mr. Editor, your obedient servant,
GEORGE BROWN.
Bourke-street, west, Tuesday morning.
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
“Audi alteram partem."
To the mUor of the Herald.
Sir, — My attention was attracted this morning by the above
portentous heading to a letter in your columns. Turning to it
with eager curiosity, its perusal afforded me—
-Ist. An alleged high mortality amongst children.
2nd. A tirade against the “ Practice of Physic,” especially in
croup; and,
3rd. A recommendation of homoeopathy as a panacea for in-
fantile suffering.
I am not in a position to quarrel with the first of these
premises, and will, therefore take your correspondent’s ipse dixit
on that head. With the second I may be more discursive, and
IV


tins on account of my being able to endorse Mr. Brown’s state-
ments as to the frequency of the diseases of infancy and
childhood—their fatality, and also their many peculiarities—
circumstances which do not pertain to this colony alone. In
medical practice children form, at least, one-third of the patients
entrusted to our care ; and so seriotis are the diseases to which
they are liable, that one child in five dies within the first year
after birth, and one in three before the completion of the fifth
year.
Children differ from adults, inasmuch as, in the former, the
body is daily growing in size, increasing in strength, and the
organs are successively developing new functions ; whilst in the
latter its structure is complete, and the functions of the respec-
tive organs remain the same. In the child, too, during the
periods of the first and second dentition, all dangers are con-
siderably increased from the great changes which are taking
place in the organism. In treating the diseases of children, we
have to deal not only with the interruption to the present
function of an organ, but also to calculate its future effects on
the economy; nor is it always easy to determine which organ is
originally affected, as local disease soon extends to the whole
system. Also our means of investigating disease in the adult
fail us with respect to the child. We have to study a new
semeiology, learn a new pathology, and- acquire a new system of
therapeutics. To many practitioners the diseases of children
are a sealed book, because, having no real love for children, they
cannot acquire the tact necessary for examining into their ail-
ments. The ordinary modes of interrogation fail; we have a
language not of words, but of signs to interpret, and this can
only be effected by the most untiring patience, the most unruffled
temper. Children and dogs are the finest physiognomists in the
world, and little children soon make up their minds as to who
loves them, and express themselves accordingly by words or
signs, or both.
It is necessary to receive with great caution Mr. Brown’s ob-
servations with respect to that jumble of medical treatment, —
blood-letting, blisters, and brandy-and-water. Their alliteration
is euphonius, and their due sequence might be beneficial.
Croup is the disease specially adverted to ; and whilst I illustrate
the utility of the three remedial measures above-named, it is
also my duty to warn your readers against adopting the dolcefar
niente of homoeopathy, and relying upon it to arrest the progress
of such dangerous malady. The nature of croup has been
investigated by many able physicians, and we are indebted for a
number of most valuable works on this disease to the first
Napoleon, who offered a prize for the best essay on the subject,
on the death of his nephew, the Crown Prince of Holland, who
died from this disorder, 1806-6. Croup is a disease of early life.
In fact, it is extremely rare after five years of age. It is


influenced by peculiarities of climate and locality more than any
other disease of the respiratory organs ; is almost entirely con-
fined to northern climates; and has periods of epidemic pre-
valence. It consists in inflammation, generally, of a highly
acute character of the larynx (voice-box), or the brachea (wind-
pipe), or both. It terminates, in most cases, in the exudation of
a false membrane, more or less abundantly, on the affected
surface. It is attended by formidable symptoms, and rapidly
tends to a fatal issue. There is no disease that requires more
pi’ompt and energetic employment of appropriate remedies.
The disease may be divided into three stages, and to arrest it in
the first, our main reliance must be placed on bleeding (and that
lai’gely), antimony in emetic doses, and calomel. If we have to
combat the disease in the second stage, a totally different plan of
treatment must be adopted: hot mustard baths, emetics of sul-
phate of copper, blisters, and the child must be brought under
the influence of mercury. Still unable to arrest the disease, we
must have recourse to stimulant expectorants, ammonia, beef tea,
wine, and even brandy-and-water. So bleeding, blisters, and
brandy-and-water may each in turn be indispensable.
Lastly, homoeopathy is to furnish a safe and pleasant means of
treating disease. Homoeopathy is one of those popular delusions
against Avhich reason is of little avail; and for years past the
pseudo-physicians who practise it, have held up to the lay public
all the best acknowledged principles of our medical philosophy
and practice,—principles that have stood the test of thousands
of years,—as delusions and errors.
Homoeopathy, Mr. Brown asserts, is extending. I could
supply him with data to the contrary; but lam content to grant
him its extension. Heresies extend; but is that any evidence
of their value. Hahnemann and Joe Smith, Homoeopathy and
Mormonism —they have many points in common. In the one,
as in the other, the dogmas and doctrines are a tissue of the
strangest contradictions and wildest absurdities. The one, be-
longing to medical, can only be judged of by physicians ; the
other, pertaining to theology, by clerical men. A grown-up man
seriously asserts that he can cure this or that disease by a
billionth or decillionth of this or that common, and probably
even inert, drug—sulphur, chamomile, belladonna, &c. Is
there any poison, ever so powerful, which in such quantity could
hurt a fly ? And yet they allege this infinitesimal division
invests them with such “tremendous pow'er.” The mode of pre-
paring homoeopathic medicines is to dip globules of sugar of
milk into solutions of supposed billionths, quadrillionths, quin-
tillionths, &c., &c., of some drug, and, thus medicated, they bear
its name.
Professor Simpson has humorously put the question, “ What
is a billionth of a gi’ain? ’ He has, Avith equal humor,
it. “ That if a single grain of sulphur Avere divided, as the


liomoeopathists use it, and other drags, into billionths, and our
common parent (Adam) when called into existence some 6,000
years ago, had then begun a billionth every second,
and if he had been permitted to live up to the present time,
doing nothing but swallowing night and day sixty billionths
every minute, he would have as yet completed only a small part
of Ills task. It would require him to work and swallow at the
same rate for 2 4,000 years yet to come, in order to finish one
grain of a drug, which has little or no effect on his present
descendants in doses of many grains. Yet the liomoeopathists
believe that a few of the sulphur billionths which Adam would
have swallowed during these 30,000 years would cure, forsooth,
an attack of jaundice.”
I am. Sir, your obedient servant.
31, Kussell-street, south. E. BOWMAN, M.D.
As soon as the above Letter appeared in the Herald, we
addressed to the Editor a communication as a refutation of the
charges uttered against homoeopathy. More than a week after
we were informed that our communication had not obtained a
place in the open column, as about forty correspondences of the
same nature had been received, and it was impossible to satisfy
every one. The disappointment of many friends of Homoe-
opathy has induced us to issue the following pages, which we
publish by their special request.
Our imperfect knowledge of the English language, and the
necessity of vindicating our principles, grossly calumniated, art
the apologies we offer for the imperfections in the performance o;
the task devolving upon us.
TIL




OETHODOX PEACTICE OF MEDICINE.
“ There is more difficulty in overcoming old errors than in establishing
new truths.”— Sir Humphry Davy.
As reason and logic afford powerful means of contradicting
slanders, we cannot allow Dr. Bowman’s letter to pass unnoticed ;
for, no doubt, it has made some impression upon the community,
always faithful to tradition in applauding at the persecution of
the friends of humanity. Mankind has not changed from tlie
time of Socrates ; and we owe to the progress of civilization that
the word humbug has been substituted for a decoction of hemlock.
As a champion of the old school of medicine, and a true dis-
ciple of the decrepid errors in which he was professionally
trained, Mr. Bowman first wisely and prudently adorns himself
with the useful garments of medical knowledge, and, with the
help of this darling prestige, he next unconsciously blows upon
the rising generation the dreadful recommendation of a treat-
ment in ci'oup more destructive sui generis than the malady itself;
and, as every error is a two-edged weapon—i.e., inflicting misery
and evil on one side, and exercising its venomous attacks
against improving reforms on the other —this eager promoter of
mischievous trangressions of the organic law's, not contented
with “ largely” and barbarously extracting blood from a lym-
phatic constitution, and thoroughly but cruelly impregnating the
absorbing tissue with mercury, ultimately opposes to the just
claim of a medical reform, assertions of his own, and the con-
demnations already passed upon the system by others who are
known to be by esgrit de parti the most virulent opponents of
homoeopathy, as being a therapeutical reform disturbing their
long established opinions.
However wrong and prejudiced Dr. Bowman may be, w'e grant
him a spirit of moderation unknown to his patrun The Lancet.
The epithets of “ quackish,” “ half-ci’acked,” “ brutal,” “ rene-
gade,” “ dishonest,” “ criminal,” “ dupers,” “ knaves,” “ fools,”
“ madmen,” &c., are poured upon duly qualified practitioners, who
have honestly and forcibly been converted to homoeopathy, the
number being about 2,000 on the European continent and 3,000
in America, out of which there ai’e foi’ty-two professors attached
to universities and seventeen court physicians, most of whom


]iave been in full practice under the old system from twenty to
thirty years previous to their conversion.
In Mr. Bowman’s estimation, first, “ Homoeopathy is one of those
popular delusions against which reason is of little avail; and,
secondly, like Mormonism, a tissue of the strongest contradictions and
wildest absurdities." For the first part of these assertions, we
challenge him to a public discussion ; and, for the second, as we
consider the assertion a patent falsehood, we defy him to point
out a contradiction ; and, as to being an absurdity, we confess
that it ought to appear so to him d, priori, and to every one else
wlio does not understand the principles of this reform of thera-
peutics, or believe in the misrepresentation given. The “ absur-
dities” of Homoeopatby are a true reflection of the faculties of
those who look upon the bright plate of science from a far
distance ; if they were to examine closely they would lose sight
of their own image, and discover some interesting facts and most
useful truths, which truths are of an increasing ratio in the esti-
mation of practitioners advancing in its study and practice.
Thereupon the American philosopher, A. J. Davis, remarks
with great propriety, that “ The profoundness and interior ten-
dencies of many of Hahnemann’s revealments constitute the prin-
cipal cause of their obscurity: and those physicians who have
been educated from their youth to the period of graduation from
college, in the sensuous mode of reasoning and argumentation so
common to this era of the age, are not qualified to see in
Homoeopathy anything but ridiculous propositions and incom-
prebensible corollaries.”
With his characteristic presumption, Mr. Bowman asserts that
he could give data to the contrary that Homoeopathy is progressing.
We challenge him to do so, even if he invokes the calumnies of
the The following facts, on the contrary, boldly chal-
lenge his contradictions.
Several charters of corporation have been granted by different
governments, both in Europe and America, as well as the esta-
blishment of about forty homoeopathic hospitals sanctioned by
government, in those countries. In Paris, the establishment of
a chair of Homoeopathy has lately been ordered at the Faculty
of Medicine, by the Emperor Napoleon III.; several wards of
hospitals are granted to homoeopathic physicians and surgeons;
and the comparative success obtained is a subject of desperate
aversion on the part of the orthodox practitioners. Although
the bitterest hostility against homoeopathy is to be found in
England, yet there are upwards of 200 qualified practitioners
openly practising homoeopathy. One of the late converted was
Dr. Horner, ex-president and honorary perpetual vice-president
of the British Medical Association, who renounced the old prac-
tice of medicine after twenty-seven years of extensive practice in
Hull, &c.
In London a sum of £IO,OOO has been subscribed for the
10


■erection of a liomoeopathic hospital, and an equal sum is already
collected for the establishment of a homoeopathic college of
medicine. The supporters of the system invariably belong to
the most liberal and intelligent class of the community, more
than one half of all the aristocracy of England and the continent
are the friends of homoeopathy, and' not the “weak-minded
and “ silly” people, as its detractors try to infer, with more
malice than ignorance. Without referring to the names of
emperors, kings, and queens, who have all homoeopathic
medical advisers, and who do not acknowledge it openly in order
to spare the feelings of the medical and scientific bodies known
to persecute homoeopathy most bitterly, we shall give a few names
■of the English friends of this great cause, truly adequate to that
of Christianity in a natural point of view ; —His Royal Highness
the Duke of Cambridge, His Grace the Duke of Beaufort, the
Right Hon. the Earl of Wilton, the Lord Archbishop of Dublin,
the Earl of Essex, Lord Robert Grosvenor, many members of
the houses of lords and commons, generals, admirals, and a great
number of the clergy. Such are the patrons of homoeopathy.
The success of homoeopathy in cholera and yellow fever is
such that many honest and most eminent adherents of the old
school have acknowledged its superiority.* In some states of
North and South America, where the deplorable establishment of
slavery continues, several life insurance companies are known to
have realised great profit by a compulsory condition to have the
insured slaves treated homoeopathically in case of ailments,
although their charges were inferior to those of the other life
insurance companies. In Europe, there are several Insurance
companies who so far have determined the relative value of the
two modes of treatment, that they reduce the rate of premiurn,
in the case of those persons who are subjected to homoeopathic
treatment only, during illness.
Thousands of most positive cux'es speak in favor of this medical
reform, whilst its misrepresentation by the interested profession,
dangerously disturbed by the attempt of reform, successfully pre-
judice a credulous community whose belief is unfortunately
* Extract of an editorial article from the Herald, South American (Lima) paper,
February, 1854:
“ Notice to those who are unwilling to die with Tellow Fever. the ravages
of yellow fever hold us in that terror which naturally spreads the most violent death,
the comforting Providence, in her immutable decrees, has sent us the celebrated prac-
titioner, Dr. Th. Berigny. This learned French gentleman lately an-ived from the
United States, faithful observer of the nature ot the epidemic which made such
fearful ravages in New Orleans last year, and now reaches this country, is the one we
wish to make known to the public. We ocularly witness the infallibility of his mode
of treatment, hitherto unknown in this country : we who for the first time have been
made acquainted with this medical gentleman, whose kind manners and charity will
gain the sympathy of all those who will know him. We believe it to be our duW to
publish this notice, not to favor his private views, but rather for the interest of the
afflicted and needy, and confidently assert that his presence in the country has been a
source of blessing to many Limanian families.”


bound to a supposed authority. Homoeopathy either courts fair
enquiry or appeals to statistical reports such as those which have
been embodied in a return made to the medical council of the
English hoard of health, which reports show a mortality of six-
teen per cent, in all cases of simple cholera, thirty-three in cases of
collapse treated in the London homoeopathic hospital, whilst the
mortality of the same disease treated allopathicaly (the regular
treatment) gives a mortality of no less than thirty-seven per cent,
in simple cases, and sixty per cent, in cases of collapse. A medical
inspector. Dr. M'Laughlin, an opponent and confirmed enemy
to Homoeopathy, had been carefully watching the cases received
in the wards of the London homoeopathic hospital, and has since
expressed his opinion of the superior results obtained in cases of
the most malignant form of cholera, in the following terms :
“ I went to the London Homceopathic Hospital prepossessed against
the homoeopathic system —as an enemy rather than a friend —and I
must, therefore, have seen some cogent reason there, the first day I
went, to come away so favorably disposed as to advise a friend to send
a subscription to the charitable fund of the Institution; and I need
not tell you that I have taken some pains to make myself acquainted
with the rise, progress, and medical treatment of cholera, and that I
claim for myself some right to be able to recognise the disease, and to
know something of u'hat the medical treatment ought to be; and that
there may be, therefore, no misapprehension about the cases I saw in
the homoeopathic hospital, 1 will add that all 1 saw were true cases of
cholera, in the various stages of the disease; and that 1 satv several
cases which did well under the treatment, which I have no hesitation
in sagging woidd have sunk under any other. In conclusion, I must
repeat what I have already told every one with whom I have conversed,
that although an allopath by principle, education, and practice, yet
tvas it the will of Providence to afflict me with cholera, and to be
deprived of the power of prescribing for myself , I would rather he in
the hands of a homoeopathic than an allopathic adviser." *
With such a host of facts. Homoeopathy, as being among the
scientific topics of the age, is in the judgment of many looked
upon as the greatest humbug of all the medical fallacies ; and
this opinion is backed by the condemnation of eminent practi-
tioners, universities, and royal colleges of physicians. But, “as
the Creator of the Universe has endoiced man with reason, and
assigned him a noble and intelligent rank in the scale of intellectual
and moral being, and as he has commanded him to use this faculty—
so, he who cannot reason is a fool, he who ivill not reason is a bigot,
but he who will reason is a man.” The friends of Homoeopatliy will
reason about the validity of authorities in pronouncing against
Homoeopathy, without a due, calm, and methodical examination of
its principles. The unpardonable offence of this medical reform
* For further particulars the reader is referred to the petition of the HomcEopathic
Association, addressed to the House of Parliament.


is to prefer administering small doses of medicines, instead of the
large doses commonly used, the destructive tendency of which
can be proved to constitute a great calamity to mankind.
The greatest obstacle to Homoeopathy being in the public
taking for granted the condemnation of the Faculty against it, it
is therefore proposed to examine in a few words the value of their
verdict. We humbly solicit the attention of those who consider
their health as an affair of importance, and feel interested in the
progress of medical science, for the noble perfection of the heal-
ing art. People have always fought the battle of truth as well as
of abuses; and, as the history of the past teaches us that every
improvement of a political, religious, or scientific character, has
been vehemently opposed by an ignorant and bigotted majority,
and that every opposition, however wrong and lamentable, has
had men of talent, genius, and of high standing at their head,
we become now enabled by analogy to form a correct estimate of
the opposition of the ignorant masses misled by high “ autho-
rities.”
The question of the infallibility of judgment of the medical
authorities, scientific societies, royal colleges of physicians and
surgeons, universities, &c., is to be answered by history. When
the immortal Jenner discovered the prophylactic properties of
vaccination against small pox, he was opposed by the same heinous
proceedings which still characterise the scientific universities now
at war against Homoeopathy, hydropathy, and animal magnetism
(the latter would be better called vital electricity). In their
attempt to retard the progress of vaccine inoculation, it was
reported by some members, in the scientific papers read before
these learned savans, that several children after inoculation were
heard to cough like cows, others had hairs growing upon the body,
others were affected with diseases common to cattle, and other
children had died with a prolongation of the vertebrse assuming
the form of a tail. Dr. Squirel supplicated publicly his majesty
George 111. to suppress this “destructive vaccine inoculation
throughout his dominions.” “It ought,” added a Professor
Monro, of Edinburgh, “ to be prohibited by act of parliament.”
While these learned faculties of medicine were so ineffectually
struggling against the progress of truth, they were publishing
and recommending a pharmacopea of which we give an extract in
regard only to mercury, which was and is still a remedy of great
predilection in the English school of medicine. “It is,” speaking
of mercury, “ almost a divine remedy ; it easeth pain and giveth
rest; it is one of the most noble medicines yet known in the
world, and will do as much as any whatsoever; it will easily,
safely, and speedily cure any old, malign, and deplorable disease;
it purges gently, without vomiting, except the stomach be foul.
It is a wonderful arcanum in dropsies and gout, and also in
jaundice, all manner of deductions, scurvy, leprosies, scab, itch,
plagues, poisons, all fevers whether continual or intermitting, the


colic, dysentery, and all obstractions in any part of tlie body. It
begins, continues, and perfects the cure alone, thoroughly and
substantially rooting out all maladies and the seeds of every
disease.”
Ye credulous people, who believe in the authorities of learned
men, see the result of your lamentable credulity ! Very few of
you are free from being affected with toothache, therefore to
satisfy yourselves of your ignorance, or that of your parents who
administered your physic, crush this useful instrument of masti-
cation when out of your jaw bones, and you will find some mercury,
as evidence of the destructive errors of the orthodox profession.
But this is the smallest sample of the mischief of error: take an
amputated limb, which the pathological disorganization of tissue
compel the operator to sever from the trunk of some victim of
physic, put it in a boiler, crush the bones, and wash out the whole
contents ; —you will find minerals, which the Creator has cer-
tainly not introduced by inadvertence in the wholesome food
which abounds around him. Learn that rheumatism, gout, neu-
ralgia, ophthalmia, paralysis, liver complaints, heart diseases,
pulmonary consumption, and insanity, which all baffle the skill
of every system of medicine, are now curable, since we possess
the means to extract from the sufferer, mercury, lead, steel, and
other metallic substances, which the old school of medicine has
administered, and disguised under the form of “mild aperients,”
“ family pills,” “ the gentle course of mercury,” “ the tonic,” and
“ strengthening pills of steel,” &c.; learn that you have to suffer
in your old age from this bai’barous presumption of your medical
advisers to improve upon your constitution by transgressing the
organic laws through which the Creator governs, maintains in
health, and restores to functional equilibrium every organic
body. No ! the laws of causation are not capricious: Igno-
rance has drawn upon you the punishment that tortures your
existence : and in attempting to escape it your folly complicates
the mischief, until the discreet grave buries the whole in oblivion
—discreet grave ? No ! it will still be a receptacle—of quick
silver—when ages shall have converted the remains into earthy
dust.
To Mr. Bowman’s saying, that, “ the Pseudo Physicians who
practise homoeopathy have held up to the lay public all the best acknow-
ledged principles of our medical philosophy and practice—principles
which have stood the test of a thousand years—as delusions and
errors," —we beg to answer that this proposition is inexact.
Homoeopathy is a medical doctrine, sui generis, which is inde-
pendent of other systems, and it is not incumbent upon it to
prove that others are wrong; but that the principles which it
develops, although they appear new and strange to all, are
nevertheless true and sound, and constitute the most rational
system of medicine. To the incident pi’oposition of Mr. Bowman,
that of “ acknowledged principles of medical philosophy tchich have


stood the test of thousands of years, we will shew to the satisfaction
of everyone that he is just fresh out from the school, and that
these alleged principles of medicine are a chaos of discrepancies
and confusion, from which many practitioners are gradually dis-
senting, while their personal experience dictates a more successful
method of treatment than the one they used to follow in their
early practice.
The following opinions are from eminent practitioners
of the old school, and not one of them can be said to be par-
tial to homoeopathy:—they are from Paris, Bichat, Magendie,
Girtanner, Boerhave, Kieser, Sir G. Blanc, Bush, Cowan, The
Lancet, Searle, Billing, McLeod, Andral, Ferguson, Simpson,
M. Hall, James Johnson, A. Combe, Louis, Forbes, Brera,
Cheyne, Sir Ch. Aldis, Alley, Beech, Kaspail, and other scien-
tific celebrities.
“ In tracing the history of the materia medica to its earliest
periods, we shall find that its progress has been very slow and un-
equal, very unlike the steady and successive improvements which
have attended other branches of natural knowledge ; we shall per-
ceive even that its advancement has been continually arrested
and often entirely subverted by the caprice, prejudices, supersti-
tion, and knavery of mankind : unlike, too, the other branches of
science, it is incapable of successful generalisation.”— Paris.
“ There is not in the materia medica, that is, in the history of
remedies, any general system ; but this science has been by turns
influenced by those who have ruled in medicine, the incoherent
assemblage of opinions, themselves incoherent. It is, perhaps,
of all the sciences the best representation of the caprices of the
human mind. What do I say ?It is not a science for the methodic
mind ; it is a shapeless assemblage of inexact ideas, of observations
often puerile, of deceitful means, of formulas as absurdly conceived
as they are fastidiously collected. It is said, the practice of
medicine is disheartening. I say more— it is not in any respect
that of reasoning men." — Bichat.
“ The apparatus medicaminum is nothing else than a careful
collection of all t\iQ fallacies that physicians have ever fallen into.
Some just opinions, founded on experience, are mingled with
them; but who will waste his time in searching out the little
grains of gold from this vast dunghill, which physicians have
been heaping up for two thousand years?”— Girtanner.
“ If we compare the good, which a half-dozen true sons of
Escfulapius have accomplished since the origin of their art, with
the evil the innumerable multitude of doctors of this trade have


done, we shall not hesitate to conclude, that it would have been
far better if there had never been physicians in the world.” —
Boerhaave.
“ The history of medicine, especially, teaches this, for it shows
that every separate, and, thence, one-sided theory of medicine, has
required a number of victims greater than the most destructive
plagues or the longest war.” — Kieser.
“ When it is further considered what a mass of credxdity and
error has actually accumulated in medicine, when we cast our
eyes upon our shelves loaded with volumes, few of them contain-
ing any genuine profitable knowledge, the greater part of them
composed chiefly of statements either nugatory, erroneous, inap-
plicable, or mischievous, in which the dear-bought grain is to be
sought in the bushels of chaff, may it not be questioned whether
such researches have not tended more to retard and corrupt, than
to advance and improve practical medicine ? ” — Sir G. Blane.
“ It seems to be one of the rules of faith in our art, that every
truth must be helped into belief by some persuasive fiction of the
schools. And I here owe it to the general reader to confess, that
as far as I know, the medical profession can scarcely produce a
single volume in its practical department, from the works of
Hippocrates down to the last-made text book, which by the
requisitions of an exact philosophy, will not be found to contain
nearly as much fiction as truth. Upon these points, and bearing
in mind that we have now in medicine the recorded practice of
more than two thousand years, let the reader refer to the proceed-
ings of the medical profession, during the prevalence of the so-
called ‘Asiatic Cholera,’ and he will find their history every where
exhibiting an extraordinary picture of prefatory panic, vulgar
wonder, doubt, ignorance, obtrusion, variety, plans for profit and
popularity, fatal blunders, distracting contradictions, and egregious
empiricisms.'' — Rush.
VIII.
“ Medicine for many very evident I’easons, has been and con-
tinues to be, the victim of varied and contradictory hypotheses :
the minds of all who have attempted to trace its deviatory course,
have wearied in the vague conflict of opinions, and have either
sheltered themselves under the authority of a name, or satisfied
their doubts by the creation of a principle quite as hypothetical and
uncertain as any by which they were previously bewildered.”—
Cowan.
“ The want of certainty in the old system of medicine is
exhibited in the fact, that the old system of medicine has no fixed
rules in the use of remedies.


*' We want, to know of what our remedies consist, and what
changes they pass through in their uses; the part they take as
compounds, or what functions their components severally perform
in the innumerable chemical processes, the decompositions and
recompositions of organic substances incessantly going on within
a living organism. All this is almost if not altogether unknown.
It is, perhaps, not saying too much to aver, that there is not a
single agent employed in medicine, about which there is not at
present some point to be decided by a more elaborate chemistry.
Scarcely is there one remedy known to be such, save empirically,
the effects of which upon the chemical constitution of the fluids,
of the solids, of the secretories, are not almost if not altogether
unknown."—Lancet.
“ Their mysterious agency has not yet become in the slightest
degree developed ; not only does the entire operation of a medicine
remain unknown, but that of each of its elements remains a
problem yet to be solved. It is a disputed point whether medicines
directly influence the secretory functions through the medium of
the nervous system, or whether their properties are conveyed by
the blood to the organ to be acted upon; it is not known whether
the circulation in the organ be increased, diminished, or un-
altered, or whether the agency of medicine be chemical, physical,
or otherwise.” — Searle.
“ Upon commencing the study of medicine and surgery, after
having become acquainted with the more precise physical sciences
in the university, I was appalled to find it a complete chaos. Our
family physician, really a man of great talent, and one of our pro-
fessors, disheartened me by his answers. I inquired ‘ what is
fever?’ Answer, of course, Cullen’s definition. ‘ But what pro-
duces it ? ’ Sometimes one thing, sometimes another; excessive
cold or heat, or the effluvia from a person who has fever. ‘ But
what is the cause of the phenomena in the body ? ’ Spasmodic
contraction of the extreme vessels.’ I could understand that cold
might contract the extreme vessels ; but I had been taught by the
professor of chemistry that caloric expanded everything. And,
again, I did not see how effluvia produced spasm, nor how the
spasm, if it were produced, could make the skin extremely hot as
well as cold. I was advised to I’ead Cullen, and did so, but with-
out finding the information I sought. Again, I asked, ‘ when you
give a dose of rhubarb or castor oil to stop a diarrhoea of several
days’ standing, how does it effect its object? ’ ‘ By clearing away
the peccant matters.’ ‘ But would not the diarrhoea scour away the
peccant matter itself?’ ‘ Not so well.’ This did not satisfy me.
Neither could the surgeon clear up these points. ‘For his part he
did not understand physic.' I ‘ walked ’ the hospital at his elbow,
as dresser, and inquired, ‘ why do you apply a cold lotion to that


inflammation ? ’ ‘To moderate the action of the vessels.’ ‘ In-
flammation, then, is over-action of the vessels.’ ‘ Yes.’ ‘ Why-
do you apply that astringent to that other inflammation? ’ ‘To
diminish the action of the vessels.’ Now the action of the vessels
being contraction, my logic did not enable me to understand
him.” — Billing.
“ There were several wards in the Edinburgh Eoyal Infirmary,
of which the Fellows of the Royal College of Physicians had the
charge. One physician had the top ward, another the middle
ward, and a third the lower ward. It happened that the same
day three young persons of nearly the same age, ill of typhus
fever, were admitted into the hospital. The disease was of equal
severity in each, and the stage of complaint the same in all.
What was the treatment, think you, pursued in these cases by the
Fellows of the College ? Of course it should have been the same,
had the system been correct, for the physicians in question would
choose the best. But, sir, it was not the same. He in the top
ward bled his patient with lancet and with leeches. He in the mid-
dle ward physicked his patient with drastic purgatives; and if he saw
a large comfortable effect, he gave praise and was content. He
in the lower ward gave whiskey, wine, and spirits. What was the
result of such deplorable freaks ? I refer you to the statistic book;
I have no doubt you will find it there." — Dr. Macleod to Dr.
Simpson.
XIII.
“ In the university two professors lectured, on alternate days,
on clinical medicine. It happened that each had under his care
at the same time, an acute case of pericarditis. The professor
who lectured on Monday night said in syjbstance as follows :
Gentlemen, as to the treatment of this disease, it has been the
practice to give large doses of mercury, so as to bring the con-
stitution under its action; and to effect this as rapidly as possible,
small quantities of opium are usually combined with it. This
practice, however, I believe to be erroneous, for I have observed the
progress of the disease unchecked, even during profuse salivation.
The most efficient remedy, in fact our sheet-anchor, in this disease
is tartar emetic. You will have noticed the large doses of this
remedy I have given, and yet the patient seems not to suffer from
it. In fact the constitution in this disease, as in some others, has
a remai’kable tolerance for tartar emetic.' When the lecture was
finished I left the hall, fancying I had learned some great truth,
and knew better than an hour before how to save life. On Wed-
nesday evening during the same week, in the same hall, and to
the students, the other professor lectured. The lecture was
devoted to the acute case of pericarditis, under his care in the
hospital. He spoke in substance as follows : ‘ Gentlemen, it is a
remarkable thing that there should be any difference in regard to


the mode of treatment to be pursued in a disease such as this.
I believe it is the Italian and French schools which advocate so
very strongly the employment of tartar emetic; but I would
strongly urge you to put no confidence in this remedy; for if you
do you will lean on a broken reed. Our sheet-anchor in this
disease is mercury, under the action of which you must bring the
patient as soon and as freely as you possibly can; even bleeding
is of little importance in comparison with the use of mercury, and
never trust to tartar emetic !'
“ What effect,” Dr. Macleod says “ was produced upon the
minds of the students, by such opposite teachings I cannot say.
I can, however speak for one. He walked down into the noble
quadrangle in bitterness, and gave involuntary utterance to the
words ‘ No wonder that Sir James Mackintosh forsook the study
of medicine.’ ” — lhid.
“We have had patients at the Hopital de la Pitie, subjected to the
most different modes of treatment. Some took during the entire
progress of the disease nothing but simple diluents, of an acidu-
lous or mucilaginous nature, observed strict regimen and repose,
and no active treatment was employed ; others took no other
medicines internally, but these same diluents, but bloodletting
to a greater or less extent was employed. In several the skin
was covered with sinapisms, or blisters, or irritated by stimulant
friction. In some, cold applications were made to the head, and
baths of various temperatures were employed. Purgatives, and
more frequently emetics, were employed in a considerable number
of cases ; and lastly, with others a tonic and stimulant treatment
was adopted. Several, either at the same period or at different
stages of their illness, were treated at one and the same time,
or successively, by two, three, or four of these methods. In en-
deavouring to estimate the influence of these different modes of
treatment we shall find the most serious difficulties. Whatever
the treatment employed there is a certain number of cases in
which Nature conducts the affection to a favourable issue, or
fatal termination, without the treatment having any share in the
result.”— AndraVs Medical Clinique.
“ If the perfection of the medical aid consists in supplying a
remedy for every disease, or, in other words, in employing medi-
cines which will correct every morbid function of the body,
our present knowledge of medicine is truly humiliating.”— Searle .
“ The term Fever is as mysterious as it is comprehensive. It
is in a great degree peculiar to the human race, and never, as an
idiopathic disease, affects the lower animals. The uncivilised
man appears to possess, to a certain extent, an exemption; for the
Negro tribes feel litte of malarious fever, and the Indian races are
far less subject to it than the Europeans. Have we any safe-
B 2


guard ? None, but in the good-keeping, good-condition, physical
and moral, of the troops. No remedy after the disease is es-
tablished? N'one whatever, in the way of physic ; for the best phy-
sicians that ever existed will lose more patients than the most ignorant
hospital mate, if he neglects the precautions of discipline and
cleanliness : and if both be on a par in this respect, the event will, in
nine cases out of ten, be precisely the same. Hence it appears that
physic does nothing, and has done nothing, towards establishing
a better order of ti’eatment since the days of Hippocrates.”—Fer-
gusson.
“ Having seen a great number of cases of the worst kind of
typhus fever, in Belfast, Dublin, Edinburgh, and London, and
having seen all kinds of treatment tried with nearly the same
average success, I was at a loss to account for such contradictory
results. I had always heard the subject reasoned on in a mathe-
matical manner, and, of course, expected precise consequences to
given premises ; namely if (as one party say) you have ten cases
of typhus fever and don’t bleed, you are sure to lose half of them ;
but if you do bleed you will to a certainty save nine of them.
The advocates of the other system make the calculations with the
same confidence as to the results. To my surprise I found the
one party nearly as successful as the other." — Simpson.
XVII.
“ I declare my conscientious opinion, founded upon long obser-
vation and reflection, that if there was not a single physician,
surgeon, apothecary, man-midwife, chemist, druggist, or drug on
the face of the earth, there would be less sickness and less mor-
tality than now obtains. When we recollect that physic is a
conjectural art; that the best physicians make mistakes ; that
medicine is administered by hosts of quacks; that it is swallowed
by multitudes of people, without any professional advice at all;
and that the world would be infinitely more careful of themselves
were they conscious that they had no remedy from drugs : these
and many other facts will shew that the proposition I have made
is more startling than untrue. But as it is, drugs will be swal-
lowed by all classes, rich and poor, -with the hope of regaining
health and prolonging life, and also with the expectation of being
able to counteract the culpable indulgence of the appetite and
passions, &c.”— James Johnson, Editor of the Medical Chirurgical
Review.
XVIII.
“ I witnessed the treatment of fever in the Royal Infirmary,
Edinburgh, by two of its most talented physicians. One adopted
the ultra stimulating method, the other the most rigid antiphlo-
gistic measures ; yet their success was about equal, and would
perhaps have not been much less had medical aid been withheld
altogether.”— Hastings.


“ The first question in reference to fever is this —Can fever
exist without some topical inflammation as its immediate or
proximate cause ? In other words, can fever be idiopathic or
pi’imary ? or is it always and necessarily sympathetic? Recently
two attempts have been made, one in this country, the other in
France, to establish a localisation of fever. Dr. Clutterbuck has
conteiided that continuous fever is, in fact, a peculiar inflam-
mation of the brain ; —M. Broussais, that it is a gastro-enterite.
On the other hand, M. Louis has demonstrated, that morbid
changes in the brain, the mucous coat of the stomach and intes-
tines, are equally frequent in other diseases, and typhus fever ;
and M. Andrai and M. Louis have proved that the cerebral
symptoms bear no relation to the morbid appearances either of
the brain or the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal, and
after many reasons advanced, M. Louis quite decides against the
opinions of M. Broussais.”— Dr. M. Hall.
“ Look at the history of inflammation ; on that, also, the phy-
sical sciences throw an immense light. They commence by
showing the absurdity of a term which beai’s the stamp of a bar-
barous age in which it was adopted. ‘ Inflammation !’ In the
pathological change which this word designates, do we discover
jfire or fiame, or anything analagous to it ? In inflammation there
are phenomena which we must study rather as natural philoso-
phers than as physiologists or pathologists, and upon which we
have still many researches to make before we can discover its
true nature. Neaidy all the authors who have written on
inflammation tell us, that an exaltation of the nervous power or
influence is one of the first determining causes of the inflam-
matory action of vessels, but my experiments completely demon-
strate the error of this theory.”— Magendie.
“ It does not appear to me that I used too strong an expression
formerly, in speaking of the confusion which has existed in
medicine ; and, as an example, I need only refer to the striking
fact noticed in this work, that the two words, Inflammation and
Irritation, which are most frequently in the mouths of medical
men, are up to this day perpetually used in a double or equivocal
sense.”— Billing.
XXII.
“ Inflammation, for example, has its immediate seat in the
minute or capillary blood-vessels.” —Professor Sharpy.
“ It is very common to say that, in inflammation, there is an
increase of arterial action ; but a consideration of the phenomena,
and of the nature of arterial action, will show that, in inflamed
parts, the capillary arteries ai*e weaker in their action, that there


is diminished arterial action, for the action of the arteries is con-
traction.
“ Some capillaries are too small to admit many of the red
particles, unless when they are enlarged by inflammation.”—
J 5 illing.
“ Who knows anything about ‘ debility,’ or ‘ increased action
of the capillary vessels, when it is not even known whether these
vessels have any tissues, or any action at all ? If you wish to
become acquainted with the theories, as they are improperly
called, of inflammation, you may read the works of Dr. Wilson
Phillips, Dr. Hastings, and especially the work of Dr. J.
Thomson ; but if you wish to become acquainted with the true
theory of inflammation, read the book of nature. Accordingly
we find two sets of philosophers disputing whether thei-e be
increased or diminished action of these vessels (the capillaries),
and two other sets disputing whether these very vessels be really
vessels at all, or only mere canals.
“ In inflammation the red globules get into vessels that do not
carry such in their natural state.” —Hume Weatherhead.
“ There are writers who suppose that there is a series of blood-
vessels so minute as not to admit the blood-globules; this is
mere unfounded hypothesis. There are no such serous globule-
less vessels.” — Dr. M. Hall.
XXIII.
The Lancet, in speaking of a joint work, by Dr. Bright and
Dr. Addison, “ The Elements of the Practice of Medicine,” says,
“ Their theory of fever is derived from others, whose principles
require no exertion of ours to hurry into oblivion.” Again, “ The
two doctors are evidently bitten with the Hamiltonian mania, and
cry out with pertinancy, to purge! purge! purge! It might have
been expected that the reductio ad absurdum demonstration
respecting the universal employment of calomel, which the late
Dr. James Currie afforded, would have deterred his successors
from riding the same velocipede; but the air of our hospitals is
thoroughly antiseptic in its influence over error and prejudice.”
XXIV,
“ Medicine, considered as a system, or body of doctrine, is still,
at the best, in a very defective state. Every page of medical
reviews admits and laments this unfortunate truth.” —Andrew
Combe.
XXV.
“ Medicine can only exist, but inasmuch as patients have faith
in it, and claims its assistance, it is not by theories that it lives,
but by clients. Listen to those whom you meet with in society,
and you will be surprised to hear of the wonderful cures which
homoeopathy has performed. Moreover, we must not deny that
many patients have recovered their health in a most unhoped-for


manner while under homoeopathic treatment. This brings back
to a question which I have often raised, and which I have
endeavoured to elucidate by experiments for the last forty years,
namely, what is the influence of treatment on the progress of
disease ? ” — Magendie.
Dr. Louis, a physician of large practice in France, has pub-
lished a work on phthisis, which was translated into English,
owing to the celebrity of the author. Some few years after the
treatment had been put to practical test in England, the same
author published a second edition, in which he says that his first
researches are more than doubled in extent, and there the doctrines
professed in regard to the most important subjects, curability and treat-
ment, are almost diametrically opposed in the two editions !
XXVI.
Dr. Forbes, one of Her Majesty’s physicians, after saying that
medicine has never improved, from the time of its earliest practice
to the present day, admitting that it has caused more evil to
society than good, and detailing the defects, makes the following
stateftients in view to reform:—
“ To endeavour to substitute for the monstrous system of poly-
pharmacy, now universally prevalent, one that is at least vastly
more simple, more intelligible, more agreeable, and it may be
hoped, more rational, more scientific, more certain, and more
beneficial.
“ To inculcate generally a milder and less energetic mode of
practice both in acute and chronic diseases; to encourage the
expectant preferably to the heroic system, at least where the indi-
cations of treatment are not manifest.
“ To discountenance all active and powerful medication in the
acute exarithemata, and eschew the habitual use of certain
powerful medicines in large doses, in a multitude of different
diseases, a practice now generally prevalent, and fx’aught with the
most baneful consequences.
“ This is one of the besetting sins of English practice, and
originates partly in false theory, and partly in the desire to see
manifest and strong effects resulting from the action of remedies.
Mercury, iodine, colchicum, antimony, also purgatives in general,
and blood-letting, are frightfully misused in this manner. To
encourage the administration of simple, feeble, or altogether
powerless, non-perturbing medicines, in all cases in which drugs
are prescribed, pro forma, for the satisfaction of the patient s
mind, and not with the view of producing any direct remedial
effect.
“ One Avould hardly think such a caution necessary, were it
not that every day observation proves it to be so. The system of
giving and also of taking drugs capable of producing some
obvious effect, on the sensations at least, if not on the functions,


lias become so inveterate in this country, that even our ‘ placebos’
have, in the hands of our modern doctors, lost their original
quality of harmlessness, and often please their very patients
more by being made unpleasant.
“To make every effort not merely to destroy the prevalent
system of giving a vast quantity of unnecessary and useless
drugs (to say the least of them), but to encourage extreme sim-
plicity in the prescription of medicines that seem to be requisite.
“ To endeavour to break through the routine habit universally
prevalent of prescribing certain determinate remediesfor certain
determinate diseases or symptoms, merely because the prescriber
has been taught to do so, and on no better grounds than con-
ventional tradition.
XXVII.
“ But so completely at variance with each other are even the
greatest medical authorities on every subject in medicine, that I
do not know a single disease in which you will find any two of
them agreeing. Take the subject of pulmonary consumption
for example. The celebrated Stohl attributed the frequency of
consumption to the introduction of Peruvian bark ; the equally
celebrated Morton considered the bark an effectual cure; Pieid
ascribed its frequency to the use of mercury; Brillonet asserted
that it is only curable by mercury ; Rush says, that consumption
is an inflammatory disease, and should be treated by bleeding,
purging, cooling medicines, and starvations; Salvadori main-
tained the disease to be one of debility, and that it should be
treated by tonics, stimulating remedies, and generous diet.”—
Dickson’s Fallacies of the Faculty.
Out of the profession many celebrated writers and philoso-
phers have also exercised their wit, and shown their contempt of
the profession.
XXVIII.
Read, for instance, the following extracts :
“ Call in a doctor, and if you do not like his physic, I will
soon find another who will condemn it.” — Moliere.
“ Death has two wings; on one are painted war, plague,
famine, fire, shipwreck ; on the other wing you behold a crowd
of young physicians. Death proceeds to dub them doctors,
having first made them swear never in any way to alter the
established practice of medicine.” —Le Sage.
“ I have got well by the blessings of barley-water, and refusing
to see my physician.” —Lord Byron.
“ I consider that the medical profession in our country is in a
state of absolute barbarism.” —Joseph Hume, M.P.
“ Medical men seldom get time to practise on the rich till
they have maltreated and murdered the poor; or have got what
is called experience. At least eighteen out of twenty British


licentiates are not tit to practise with safety until they have
gained experience in this shameful way; the poor themselves
must be massacred to make doctors for the rich.”— Dr.
M'Cullouch.
What has Mr. Bowman to say to this ? Where are these
much-vaunted “principles of medical philosophy that have stood the
test of thousands of years Perhaps he possesses the thread of
Ariana to penetrate safely into the dark labyrinth of human
miseries ! But the fact is', that these principles have only stood
THE Test of Thousands of Years, just like boiling pitch had
stood the test in stanching blood after an amputation.
Ambroise Pare, who was the first surgeon who introduced the
ligature as a substitute for this barbarous application of boiling
pitch, met Avith the same arguments in opposition that homce-
opathy does in our days. Pie was hushed down and ridiculed by
the faculty, college of surgeons, and other would-be learned
doctors. It was considered preposterous to hang human life
upon a thread when boiling pitch had stood the Test of
Thousands of Years.”
Altliough it is, perhaps, superfluous to adduce so many
quotations, I cannot refrain from giving one more extract taken
from an American philosopher :
XXIX.
“ The antiquity of a science or doctrine has but little to
do with its truthfulness, importance, or improvements; indeed,
the ancientness or oldness of doctrine is almost positive
evidence that it originated in ignorance, superstition, and
error. Human testimony is ever varying; but the teachings
and manifestations of nature and pure reason are simple
and unchangeable. If, therefore, physicians of learning, ex-
perience, and influence had consulted these unmistakable
authorities, instead of the mere superficial experience and false
principles of men and books, and practised accordingly, truth
would at this day diffuse her golden rays over the science of
medicine and pathology. But what are the facts ? They are
these —physicians and pathological writers have been, and are
now, educated in certain fixed and orthodox paths, and every-
thing—position, education, public opinion, pride, ignorance,
prejudice, fear —yes, everything conspires and combines to pre-
vent them from making the least advancement.”— A. J. Davis.
In reference to the treatment of croup, Mr. Bowman says,
“ That our main reliance in this disease must he placed on bleeding,
and that largely, antimony in emetic doses, and calomel. If
the disease goes on the second stage, a totally different
treatment must be adopted: hot mustard bath, emetics of
sulphate of copper, blister, and the child must be brought
under the influence of mercury. Still tmable to arrest


the disease, we must have recourse to stimulants, expectorants,
ammonia, heef-tea, wine, and even hrandy-and-water. So bleeding,
blisters, and brandy-and-water may each in turn be INDISPEN-
SABLE.”
No wonder that children are said to die in a wholesale manner
hy Mr. Brown, whose honorable initiative gave origin to the
attack upon homoeopathy, and, consequently, to this answer.
The machine invented by Dr. Guillotin in the Age of Terror,
was not more destructive than this infamous treatment. Where
are the poor innocent children that have resisted this storm of
medcial skill? Mr. Bowman should be condemned to undergo
this treatment once in his life, and he would know better after.
Mr. Bowman is ignorant that blood is the greatest prerogative
of life, and that depletion is acknowledged by eminent pi’acti-
tioners to have been the most destructive error lately inculcated
in the practice of medicine.
Dr. Brera, a most celebrated continental physician, referring
to the treatment of pneumonia, notes :
100 cases treated without bleeding - - 14 died.
„ „ with 2or 3 bleedings - 19 „
„ „ with 3to 9 bleedings - 22 „
~ „ with more than 9 bleedings 68 „
The learned and honest Professor Searle remarks —“ The anti-
phlogistic system in inflammation often desti'oys life when the
disease would not; and even when life is preserved, a serious injury
is often inflicted upon the constitution. Why are such severe
means employed on such slender grounds ? Because inflamma-
tion, like fever, is a bugbear. If Hippocrates were to revisit the
earth, and see the myriads at this time in England under the
antiphlogistic treatment, he would, in witnessing its effects, natu-
rally inquire, ‘ What are the rules of treatment in inflammatory
diseases ?’ and when he heard of nothing but the antiphlogistic
system, what a lament would he offer for mankind; that twenty
centuries should have produced in the chief department of
medical practice, nothing better than a rule without a reason.”
What are “ the principles of medical philosophy ” which Mr. Bow-
man invokes, when in the same disease he uses depletion (directly
with bleeding, and indirectly with antimony and mercury), and
the opposite treatment that is to follow the non-success of this,
i.e., stimulants, beef tea, wine and brandy-and-water? It seems
to us that as far as principles of medicines go, depletion is
opposed to stimulants, and the one as a principle is a condemna-
tion of the other. What a different light homoeopathy thi’ows
upon this disease, and what a different result is obtained !
Mr. Bowman speaks of putting an infant under the influence
of mercury. How it makes one’s blood shudder, that in the nine-
neenth century there should be such practitioners of the noble
art of healing, who use their professional influence in perfecting


crimes against humanity ; and people are so infatuated with the
professional prestige that they will have their health ruined,
their children slaughtered in the name of science, sooner than
to trench upon habit and deviate from routine and tradition.
Mercuiy, the medical agent of lamentable predilection to
Mr. Bowman has been so much in use in the orthodox school,
that many honest practitioners and chemists have studied and
noticed the dreadful consequences that follow its use even years
after.
XXX.
“ Mineral poisons,” says the celebrated Dr. Cheyne, are “ the
most destructive to animal bodies that malice can invent, beyond
gunpowder itself, or even spirituous liquors ; for nature has pro-
vided none such, but as poisons in venomous creatui’es to kill
their enemies. They become iron bristles, nails, and lancets
darting perpendicularly into the solids of the body, so as to
quickly tear, rend, and destroy, and therefore can never be proper
for food or physic.”
Sir Charles Aldis thus sums up his views upon the matter: —
XXXI.
“ Mercury used in scrofulous glands generally increases them,
by exciting into action the irritability of the constitution. It
also quickens the pulse, occasions purgings even to the evacua-
tion of blood, and has even been known to produce mortification
by an inflammation in the mouth. Its most general effects are
a prostration of strength, attended with cold rigors, profuse per-
spiration, a trembling of the limbs, loss of appetite, paleness of
the countenance, violent headache, cramp in the stomach, and
vomiting, and dismal climax, ending in eruptions of the leprous
kind, which sometimes spread over the whole body. * *
There is haidly a constitution which has been at all subject to
its influence, that does not suffer in the end from the noxious
properties of this poisonous mineral.”
Dr. Alley records a case in which “ an eruption appeared over
the entire body of a boy about seven years old, for whom but
three grains of calomel had been prescribed ineffectually as a
purgative.”
XXXII.
The learned Dr. Beach says—“ Mercury appears to destroy
the energy of the nervous system ; producing weakness, ti’emors,
palsies, fatuity, epilepsy, and mania, the most dreadful of all
its bad consequences; and, indeed, no part of the body is
exempt from its deleterious effects. The patient becomes
hectical, has a small quick pulse, and there is often a tendency
to a colliquation on the skin and bowels, and a wasting atrophy
of the flesh j his countenance is pale and wan ; his nights are
27


bad : his appetite is impaired ; his strength much reduced ; and
he complains of general irritability with headache, and flying
pains in his bones, especially on the approach of bad weather,
rain, or frost.”
XXXIII.
The late Sir Astley Cooper, lecturing to the students of Guy’s
Hospital, said :
“ It is lamentable to reflect on the number of lives that must
have been destroyed by phthisis and otherwise, in consequence of
the imprudent exhibition of mercury. Look, gentlemen, at one
hundred patients who come into the hospitals. What is the
miserable treatment of these patients ? You are aware that I
scarcely ever enter these wards of the hospital. I will tell you
why Ido not enter them. I abstain from entering them because
patients are compelled to undergo so infamous a system of treat-
ment, that I cannot bear to witness it. To compel an unfortunate
patient to undergo a course of mercury for disease which does not
require it, is a proceeding that reflects disgrace and dishonor on
the character of medicine. No consideration shall induce me to
repress my feelings, and I do say that the present treatment of
patients is infamous and disgraceful; for their health is irreme-
diably destroyed.”
XXXIV.
Easpail, a celebrated chemist of France, has bestowed great
attention upon the source of chronic ailments, which he found
to have been pi'oduced by the use of the vai’ious metallic pre-
parations which the orthodox school advocates.
“ Metallic poisons,” says this eminent man, “have all a
character which permit us often to distinguish them by the
difference of their effects. Lead causes the tanning of the
mucous membrane, producing the most severe colic of the intes-
tines ; copper produces analogous effects, but not with the same
intensity; zinc is characterised by diarrhoea, dysentery, and
weight in the head; the nitrate of silver by the superficial dis-
organisation of the mucous or the skin, and the purple discolo-
ration of the tissue ; alkalies, soda and potassa, by dissolving
or carbonising the tissue. Like other insolubles, alkalies, soda
and potassa run more deeply into the tissue than lime, baryta,
tfec.; arsenic, when it does not cause death immediately, causes
pustular eruptions on the skin, and sometimes sanguine
tumors, much resembling cancer; mercury is so various in its
effects, that it is not possible to describe its symptoms —exostoses,
strumous tumours, decay of the bones, ulcerations, running
sores, discoloration of the skin, cutaneous diseases, herpetris,
phlytenoid cancers, loosening of the teeth, ulceration of the
vocal cords, disease of the genital organs, excrescences on the
arms, gouty affections, ancylosis, induration of .the glands.


engorgements of the lymphatic ganglions, and a fearful range of
disasters, which spoil the futui’e generation and horribly afflict
the present.
“ Mercury,” continues the same author, “being so often
employed in the laboratories and manufactories, it often happens
that people are infected with it without being aware of it, or even
suspecting it possible. Children of the working classes, playing
in the neighborhood of the workshop of some gilder, may, by
putting their little hands or feet in clear limpid water, while
amusing themselves as children do, get a malady which disor-
ganises the skin and attacks the very bones. When I think of
the numerous cases of paraplegy to which scientific men who
manipulated mercury are subject, I cannot refrain from thinking
that they must be the result of imprudence during the opera-
tions.”
The noxious properties of steel are not less fatal in the disor-
ganisation of healthy tissue, although less common, because in
less' use by the profession. Next to steel, arsenic, iodine, and
antimony are productive of a peculiar catalogue of diseases, in the
study of which the orthodox practice of medicine present a large
scope. Other great medical agents of the old school are narcotics
and intoxicating stimulants, the use of which has been accurately
examined by the same author. “ Stupifying poisons,” he says,
“ suspend the intellectual relation of man with the external world,
paralyse his faculties, and keep him in a dreamy state. Some-
times he preserves sight and hearing where he loses voice and
locomotion; he is dead to the world, and sees himself as it were
buried alive. In fact, he suffers for the time a terrible nightmare,
and is thrown into a state of apathy for everything around him.
Intoxicating poisons disturb the circulation of the blood by
sanguine congestions, determined by their specific action, and
thus cause disorders of the muscular system, in consequence of
the circulation being interrupted in the sanguineus channels.
* * * Stupifying poisons suspend the circulation of the blood,
intoxicating poisons congest it; the first class have ammonia for
their-basis—they liquify the blood without altering it; the second
are alcoholic, and coagulate it; the other poisons commence their
disorder in the tissues before acting on the circulatory liquids.
As soon as the circulation is suspended, the nervous system loses
its action and becomes paralysed. When the circulation is con-
gested, the influence of the nervous system is irregular; the har-
mony of the movement and sensibilities is impaired; disorders
are manifested in both body and mind; the animal economy is
the passive instrument of the chemical reactions, instead of being
master of the will and actions. An individual never recovers
completely by poisoning by a large dose, he is sure to be injui’ed ;
but the nature and extent of the mischief will vary according to
the organs on which the medicines have transmitted the violence
of the poison. If poison is given in small doses it acts without


the patient being conscious of it, because it does not react except
on decayed and endermic sui’faces of the affected organs.”
The collection of the above opinions of learned men forms no part
of the truth of homoeopathy ; they are only adduced here to show
the state of medicine, the importance of reform, and the lament-
able bigotry of the profession to condemn homoeopathy without
examination. “ Let us scout quacks and pretenders as we may,”
says Dr. Combe, “ homoeopathy presents too strong a primdfacie
case to warrant our dismissing it with mere ridicule and con-
tempt. * * * Kidicule and declamation may be rightfully
employed to explode eri'ors after they shall have been proved to be
so ; but they are most unfit instruments for the primary investi-
gation of truth, and as such ought to be banished for ever from
scientific discussion, and a candid spirit of philosophical inquiry
he substituted in their room.”
Mr. Bowman finds it very easy to call homoeopathy the dolce
far niente, or the doing nothing system, in which many old
sinners of the profession are at last trusting, while lamentably
condemning the energetic and perturbing methods of their early
practice. As nature always restores health and overcomes disease,
even in the most dangerous forms, where no treatment has been
observed, or where two opposite courses of treatment were fol-
lowed, it becomes a difficult matter to establish a medical fact, —
namely, a cure positively due to the adviser. It is not enough
that a system should adduce its success, it must also stand the
test of sound reasoning. As it is within the scope of man to
understand what is true, simple, and in accordance with the laws
of nature, people need not have been brought up to the medical
profession to understand the truth and fallacies of medicine,
when they exercise their faculties and judgment in a right
direction, nor do they require taking degrees of divinity to discri-
minate between true religion and fanaticism. Mr. Bowman’s
idea on the subject is degrading to those by whom it is taken
for granted, the truth is quite the contrary of his proposition.
Peruvian bark, the acknowledged specific of ague, was in
popular use a long time before the faculty admitted .it in
its Phai’macopea, and in 1609 the French Academy expelled
one of its members for curing his patients with that remedy.
When Louis XV. was suffering from this malady, and his
learned advisers were unable to cure him, an English quack
w'as sent for, who before proceeding to prescribe for his august
majesty, had to undergo an examination from the “ high priest”
of science. The question was first ironically put to him, “ What
is intermittent fever ?” “It is a disease,” he answei'ed, “ which
YOU CANNOT CURE, AND WHICH I CAN.” His majesty having reco-
vered, the wonderful agent was acknowledged. The same learned
body, which had been opposed to inoculation for fifty years,
seeing that people would be vaccinated, and that three princes of
the royal blood had been inoculated, contrary to their permis-


sioii, at last acknowledged its value. In 1642, this assembly of
learned men, who had declared that, the blood did not circulate
in the body, and thirty years after that it was impossible, did not
admit this phenomenon before they discovered it to be a publicly
acknowledged truth.
In the sixteenth century the discoverer of the curative pro-
perties of cantharides was committed to Newgate by warrant of
the President of the College of Physicians, for the gross
OFFENCE of curing his patients with a treatment opposed to
“ THE Principles of the School !” Since the faculty have
acknowledged the medicinal value of antimony, Peruvian bark,
cantharides, the judicial use of the same remedies have become
converted into such abuse, that, in their turn, they now become
the elements of complicating the evils to which flesh is
subjected to.
Mr. Bowman establishes a comparison between liomceopatluj and
Mormonism; “ both,” he says, “ are a tissue of contradictions and ab-
surdities." But what are they ? How true it is that a fool can deny
more with one proposition than a learned philosopher can prove
during his whole life? What study has he bestowed on the
subject? What does he know beyond the misrepresentation of
an interested clique ? How unfair and mean it is for a scientific
opponent to invoke religious feelings and prejudices against a
dissention in therapeutics. If Mr. Bowman were writing in
Rome, he would draw a comparison between Hahnemann and
Luther; if in Constantinople, between Homoeopathy and Chris-
tianity.
Dr. Bowman says “ Homoeopathy is a popular delusion against
which reason is of little avail /” This mode of arguing does not
reveal a champion of the highest order in science. What a dif-
ference with Dr. Routh, a London practitioner of merit, who in
writing against homoeopathy, enters the arena with some courteous
regard towards his adversaries. “ The system of homoeopathy,”
says Dr. Routh, “ has unfortunately lately made, and continues
to make such a progress in this country (England), and the
metropolis in particular, and is daily extending its influence,
even amongst the most learned, and those whose high position in
society gives them no little moral power over the opinions of the
multitude, that our profession is, I think, bound to make it the
subject of inquiry and investigation. * * * Violent opposi-
tion to homoeopathy can do no good. Abuse and intolerance
cannot be accepted by the world as a fair and philosophical
inquiry.”
Dr. Bowman terminates his diatribe against homoeopathy by
borrowing arguments from Professor Simpson’s work, “ The Tenets
and Tendencies of Homoeopathy." The celebrated obstetrician
denies that any effect whatever can be produced in the system by
that which has neither length, breadth, nor thickness, neither
chemical nor sensible properties. Dr. Henderson, not less cele-


bi’ated as professor of patliology in the same university, has
answered the professor of midwifery in his “ Homoeopathy fairly
represented, in reply to Dr. Simpson’s ‘ Homoeopathy misrepresented,' ”
a work which Mr. Bowman has certainly not taken the trouble
to read. In that work Dr. Henderson adduces allopathic testi-
mony to the efficacy of small doses ; he cites M. Boudin’s method
of curing ague, which had resisted quinine, with a single dose of
the hundredth of a grain of arsenic: “ What an infinitesimal
quantity of medicine to affect so powerfully so vast and dispro-
portionate a quantity of matter ! But allopathy affords a still
more remarkable fact, a fact, indeed, which deprives her of all
right to quaiTel with any system on the score of its minute
doses. Mr. Hunt, an allopathic physician, apparently of
long standing, and much experience published, in 1817,
an interesting little volume on the treatment of certain
intractable chronic skin diseases. At page 14 of that
work he says : ‘ A fourth part of a minim of Fowler’s solution,
taken thrice a day, has in a few weeks effected the permanent
cure of psoriasis guttata in a female of delicate habit, intolerant
alike, in a high degree, of all mineral substances.’ Fowler’s
solution is a solution of arsenite of potass, in which the arsenious
acid and the potass are present in about equal quantities. The
great allopathic review—the British and Foreign —in 1847, accepts
Mr. Hunt’s case as genuine and true, and remarks that each of
his doses contained only the four hundred and eightieth part of a
grain of white arsenic, or arsenious acid. Now, as susceptibility
to arsenic or to any other medicine does not depend on, and has
no connection with, the weight of an individual, there is no reason
whatever why our already-selected fifteen-stone patient should not
be sensitive to the same dose. The 480th pai’t of a grain is to
fifteen stone, as one is to seven hundred and five millions six
hundred thousand ; or as a mile to a line that might pass above
seven times between the earth and the sun ; or that might pass
twenty-eight thousand two hundred times round the earth ! In
short, nearly as one pound is to the whole national debt, or as
one man to all the inhabitants of the world. Since doses of
medicine do not i-equire to be increased in proportion to the
weight of the person who takes them, and if in the proportion of
one to about seven hundred millions they are unquestionably
effectual as remedies, why may they not when in the proportion
of one to seven thousand millions, or seven hundred thousand
millions ?”
But taking another view of Dr. Simpson’s objection, different
from that of his more talented adversary. Dr. Henderson, we
maintain against Dr. Simpson that there does not exist in nature
anything which has neither length, breadth, or thickness ; and
we can show to the naked eyes of the detractors of homoe-
opathy if they are not physically as blind as they are
mentally, the 100,000 th part of a drop of sulphuric acid.


An experiment of Newton has shown to the naked eye the
1,757,600,000,000,000,000,000 th part of a cubic inch of soap.
Dr. Thompson has shown that the 888,492,000,000,000 th of a
cubic incli of lead may be rendered visible. Electro-gilding and
photographic processes furnish instances of the divisibility of
matter, and the I’emarks of Dr. John Epps, of London, imply a
great trutli: —“ Indeed, it is a truth that the mass of rock is a
mass not because of any power in the rock as a mass, but on
account of the innumerable attractions between infinitesimal
particles of which the mass is composed. It is not wonderful
that the vulgar should doubt tbe action and the power of infi-
nitesimal quantities, but that writers who profess to be scientific
should exhibit wonder thereat, is exhibitive of the to-be-lamented
fact, that many profess to be the votaries of science who have
never paid the requisite dues at her shrine.”
All the opponents of homoeopathy, anxious of securing the
aj)probation of an ignorant public, adopt invariably as a last
resounce the subject of infinitesimal doses. But have we not
many facts which show the wonderful results of infinitesimal
atoms. Take, for instance, cholera, the poison of snakes, vaccine,
a morbid virus, in the material substance of which no chemist
is able to detect the pi'esence of a principle inimical to life,
although the perfection of modern chemistry is able to detect
a quantity of silver equal to the billionth of a cubic line. To
bestow ridicule and contempt upon the least atom of creation
appears to us a blasphemy of nature. No one knows what is
small or large; the Almighty alone knows the extreme difference
which exists between the largest of the innumerable spheres
which fill up the universe and the smallest atom of creation.
In short, the book of Dr. Simpson, which is the authority of
Mr. Bowman, can be proved to be a gross misrepresentation of
homceopathy ; the most disgraceful falsehoods are the weapons
used when arguments are wanted, as the following illustrates :
Dr. Simpson cites Mr. Edwin Lee, the medical traveller for
Bradshaw's Guide, as his authority for certain trials of homoe-
opathy, by order of the Neapolitan government, which trials
resulted in the signal discomfiture of homoeopathists. Ac-
cording to Mr. Lee, the condemnatory resolutions of the com-
mittee appointed to investigate the homoeopathic practice are thus
worded:—lst. The homoeopathic treatment produced no effect.
2nd. It had the serious inconvenience for several of the patients
of preventing the employment of remedies by which they might
be cured ; while the correct facts are the following, which we
quote from the sixth and seventh volumes of the Bih. Ho. de
Geneve :—
“ The late King Francis the First w’-as very partial to the homoe-
opathic method. He showed this partiality by appointing, in 1828,
to the service of the Military Hospital of the Trinity, the homoe-
opathist, Dr. de Horatiis, his own physician in ordinary. In course of


time, Dr. de Horatiis published a small volume, giving the details of
the cases he had treated at this hospital. This little work created a
great sensation in Naples, the opponents of homoeopathy denying the
truth of the cures said to have been effected by the author. The
king determined on bringing the question to an issue by causing
arrangements to be made whereby the homoeopathic treatment should
be put to the most rigorous test. With this view a royal decree was
promulgated on the 28th February, 1829, of which the following is
a literal translation ;
“ ‘ A homoeopathic clinique shall be opened and subjected to regu-
lations, the strictness and sagacious arrangement of which shall serve
to remove all doubt and prejudice, to prevent all fraud and partiality.
The necessary precautions shall be taken to establish the diagnosis of
the diseases, to determine the choice of the remedies, their potency,
and their dose. Finally, a register shall be kept of the different
phases of the diseases and of their termination.
“‘Article Ist. —A commission, composed of upright and learned
men, shall be present in the ward of the clinique during the prepara-
tion of the remedies, and their distribution to the patients affected
with acute or chronic diseases. This commission shall be composed
(1) of four members of the University, two of whom must be
physicians; (2) of two members of the Koyal Academy of ]\ledicine
and Surgery ; and (3) of all the medical officers of the Hospital of
Trinity.
“ ‘ Article 2nd.—The commissioners having met together, shall
satisfy themselves of the degrees of dynamization of the homoe-
opathic medicines. These medicines shall be shut up in a box with a
double lock and a double key in the presence of the commissioners ;
one of the keys shall remain in the hands of the members of the
commission, and the other shall be confided to the director of the
clinique. This box shall be shut up in a cupboard, to be erected by
the superior officer in command of the grand hospital in the ward of
the clinique, the key of which he shall retain, and only give it to the
director of the clinique in the presence of the commissioners. The
director must return the key to the commandant immediately after
the conclusion of his visit.
“ ‘ Article 3rd.—The ward of the clinique shall only have one
door, which shall be guarded by a sentinel. This ward shall be
large, light, well situated, and capable of containing from thirteen to
twenty beds, which shall be entrusted to two assistant physicians,
one of whom shall be chosen by the director, the other by the
members of the commission. These physicians shall keep a journal,
in which shall be entered exactly all that may happen in the absence
of the director and of the commissioners. They shall maintain a
constant watch over the patients, shall take care that the regimen
is exactly followed, shall not allow any one to enter the ward, except
those persons who only come to see it, and shall in no case alloAv them
to read the cards placed over the beds, to look at the journals, nor
question the patients.


“ ‘Article 4th.—The admission of the patients shall be agreed upon
in common by the commissioners and the director. The latter shall
never be forced to admit patients whose diseases are not perfectly
definite. Patients who are aifected with diseases which allopathists
consider to be incurable shall be admitted in preference.
‘“Article 5. —The commissioners and the director should be always
present at the visit, which shall take place at a fixed hour. As soon
as a patient is admitted, the medical commissioners shall make the
diagnosis of the disease j their opinion shall be immediately regis-
tered and signed by all the commissioners present, by all the directors
of the clinique, and the other assistant physicians.
“ ‘ Article 6. —Every day at the visit, the commissioners, as well as
the directors, shall investigate the state of the patients, shall insert
it in the journal, and shall give their advice respecting the medicines
that ought to be given.
“ ‘ Article 7.—A report shall be made of the cures effected, and of
the diseases that have not been cured. This report shall state exactly
the order of the treatment and the remedies given, during all the
time the patient has been under treatment. This report, signed by
the commissioners, the director, and the assistant physician, shall be
preserved in the archives of the clinique, and a copy of it shall be
delivered to the director, who may publish it.
“ ‘ Article B.—ln case of the absence of one of the commissioners,
or of the director, their deputies shall be authorised to sign for their
chiefs.’
“ The following is a list of the medical commissioners and their
deputies :
“ Dr. Macry, Professor of the Faculty of Medicine ; Dr. Marche-
sani, his deputy.
“ Dr. Jolinea, Member of the University; Dr. Alessi, his deputy.
“ Dr. Eonchi, physician to the king ; Dr. Albanese, his deputy.
“ Dr. Delforno ; Dr. Araneo, his deputy.
“ Dr. Lanza; Dr. Curti, his deputy.
“ Dr. LucareUi; Dr. Panvini, his deputy.
“ Dr. de Horatiis was the homoeopathic physician appointed to
treat the cases, and he had for his deputy Dr. Eomani. The treat-
ment was commenced on the 13th April, 1829.
“ The number of times each of the commissioners attended the
clinique was duly registered, and so we are able to see what amount
of attention they paid to the treatment pursued. Thus we find that
Dr. Macry never went near the hospital ; his deputy, however. Dr.
•Marchesani, was very assiduous in his attendance, and, from what he
witnessed, became so firmly convinced of the truth of the system,
that he published a little pamphlet, declaring his belief in homoeo-
pathy, and exposing the absurdities of its detractors.
“Dr. Jolinea only attended the hospital on Dr. de Horatiis’ first
visit, and, from what he then saw, he considered himself fully entitled
to sign the report condemning homoeopathy as a useless and per-
nicious system. His deputy, however. Dr. Alessi, was very diligent
c 2


in his attendance, was converted to homoeopathy, and made a report
on his own hook, favorable to the treatment, and directly opposed to
the report of the other commissioners.
“ Dr. Delforno was present three or four times. Having predicted
the speedy death of some patients, who had the good fortune to
survive his sinister auguries, apparently disgusted that patients should
get well in spite of his prognosis, which, probably, never occurred in
his own practice, he ceased to attend, and allowed his deputy. Dr.
Araneo, to take his place. This gentleman made himself very
offensive by trying to persuade the patients that experiments were
being made iipon them, and that they would be allowed to die without
any proper remedies being given.
“ Dr. Lanza went to the hospital seven or eight times, but appa-
rently unwilling to compromise his reputation, he never pronounced
any opinion on the trial. His deputy. Dr. Curti, seems to have been
a very unpleasant individual, for he made a point of quarrelling with
his colleagues, for which he was called to order by his chief. Dr,
Lanza.
“ Dr. I.ucarelli only came once to the hospital, and then only to
demand that a stop should be put to the homoeopatMc treatment.
Possibly he may have thought that if it were allowed to go on
much longer, it would do no good to allopathy. His deputy. Dr.
Panvini, published a book against Dr. de Horatiis, entitled ‘ Forty
Days of Homoeopathic Hospital Treatment,’ in which he exerted his
utmost ingenuity to get up a case against the system, by denying
in toto the results obtained.
“ Dr. Ronchi only came to the hospital five or six times, and then
only to make the most sinister predictions. His deputy. Dr.
Albanese, it would seem, tried to realise the unfavorable auguries of
his chief, for he was publicly accused of attempting to poison the
patients in order to prevent their recovery under homoeopathy. This
accusation —which might have been attended with serious eonse-
quences to Dr. Albanese, had not Drs. de Horatiis and Romani
generously interfered—was occasioned by the fact that Dr. Albanese
was detected distributing figs to the patients without the knowledge
of the physicians who were charged with the treatment. One patient
who ate of these figs had aU the symptoms of poisoning. What
made the matter more suspicious was, that Dr. Albanese had pre-
dicted the death of this patient in the presence of several other
medical men who were visiting the ward at the time, but who
expressed it as their opinion that the patient was convalescent. An
investigation was held on the demand of the director of the clinique
to investigate the affair, and it was proved by numerous witnesses
that Dr. Albanese had distributed to some of the patients these figs,
enjoining them not to mention the circumstance to the visiting medical
officers.
“ After the homoeopathic treatment had been carried on for two or
three weeks, a report was industriously circulated that two of the
patients had died. The rumour reached the king’s ears, who forth-


witli despatched his royal relative the Duke of Calabria, accompanied
by two general officers, to inquire into its truth. His Royal Highness
was charmed to find that the report had no foundation, and that no
fatal case had occurred, so that the homoeopathic treatment was
ordered to be continued.
“ On the fortieth day of the treatment, the six commissioners and
their deputies unexpectedly invited the homoeopaths to render an
account of their treatment. A long and stormy discussion ensued,
which only had this effect, that the allopathic commissioners retired
altogether from attendance at the hospital, and addressed a secret
report to the President of Public Instruction, containing the damna-
tory resolutions so triumphantly paraded by Mr. Edwin Lee and his
followers.
This report was, in due course, transmitted to the Minister of the
Interior, by whom it was read in the Council of State. The king
was astonished to find the conclusion of the commissioners so
different from what he had anticipated. It would seem that His
Majesty innocently supposed that the report would contain the
logical conclusions from the results obtained from the homoeopathic
treatment, in place of the concentrated essence of the prejudices of
the commissioners, and of their disgust at the part they had been
compelled to play. However that may be, the king commanded to
be shewn the documents on which the report was professedly founded.
Accordingly, on the 9th of June his aide-de-camp, the Duke de San
Valentino, accompanied by Lieut.-General la Gona, Inspector-General
of Military Hospitals, proceeded to the hospital, sealed up all the
papers relating to the treatment, and conveyed them to the king.
His Majesty scrutinised them attentively. He was perfectly satisfied,
and in place of ordering the immediate cessation of the homoeopathic
treatment, as the allopaths hoped he would have done, he recom-
mended that it should be continued.
“ But the commissioners had taken the sulks, and would no longer
consent to be the witnesses of a system they detested. Some of
their deputies continued to attend and to sign the day-book. The
chief physician and surgeon of the hospital, also, who were com-
missioners de jure, and who had taken no part in the report above
alluded to, continued fiuthfully to visit the ward, and signed the
histories of the cases regularly every day.
“The homoeopathic treatment was continued for 155 days, viz.,
until the 17th of September. The reason of its cessation then was
this. The king set out for Spain, and as he could not travel without
his physician in ordinary. Dr. de Horatiis was obliged to give up his
successful treatment in the hospital in order to accompany His
Majesty. Dr. Romani seems to have been unwilling to encounter
the whole labor and responsibility of conducting the homoeopathic
treatment in the midst of a host of foes, so he gave in his resigna-
tion when his colleague was thus summoned away.
“ The results of the 155 days of treatment were as follow : —The
number of patients admitted for treatment was 68 ; of these, 52


were perfectly cured, 6 remained in hospital convalescent, and 2 died,
who had been brought to the hospital in a moribund state, having
already received extreme unction.
“ A State paper was issued by the Government, commenting upon
the results obtained from the homoeopathic treatment in the hospital.
In this paper the report of the commissioners is very severely cen-
sured in the following passages. Here are its exact words : ‘ The
report of the commissioners to the President of Public Instruction
differs much from the tenor of the papers of the clinique. In the
former, where the result of the treatment is favorable, it is attributed
to nature, and the diseases are represented as having been of little
importance, or else the patients are stated not to have been cured,
whereas in the diary of the clinique, on the contrary, the success is
attributed to the homoeopathic system, and aU the patients are repre-
sented as having been cured of their maladies. That this is the true
state of the case is clearly shewn by the attestations affixed to the
history of each case.’ It will be remembered that, by articles sth
and 9th, the allopathic commissioners, or their deputies, as well as
the homoeopathic practitioners, had to attest by their signatures both
the diagnosis of the disease and the result of the treatment. Ho
patient could be dismissed as cured without the consent of the allo-
paths. The State paper goes on to say, ‘ The report of the commis-
sioners is destitute of foundation, because they have not followed and
watched the course of the diseases, as is evident from the absence of
their signatures, nor have they taken care that their deputies shoidd
attend regularly. Hence, their opinion is not founded on certain and
positive documents.’ ”
So much for one of Dr. Simpson’s false statements.
Now, as all the conflicting opinions of medical authorities and dis-
crepancies of the old school satisfactorily establish the deplorable
uncertainty of the authorised practice of medicine, every honest and
impartial man will, therefore, admit the necessity of a reform in
therapeutics ; and as bleeding, leeching, bhstering, purging, stimu-
lants, narcotics, mercury, and various metallic preparations, are
engines of destruction in the hands of the many petty practitioners
of the old school, they must, therefore, be banished from thera-
peutics, and thus end the age of medical terror. It further becomes
the object of a scientific philanthropist to examine what homoeopathy
is, and what its claims are to the great desideratum of humanity,
medical reform.


HOMCEOPATHY.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF DISEASE.
The source of error in all the various medical systems promulgated
to mankind ever since the days of Gallon is, that the most important
object of medical science has been altogether the most disregarded ,
i. e., disease, its nature and- tendencies. The following aphorisms
have been suggested by the study and practice of homoeopathy for
the last six years, and although opposed to the admitted opinions
of the old school, still they wholly coincide with that of several
eminent practitioners of the same school, who truly deserve the name
of medical philosophers.
Although the arcana of principles, causes, effects, and consequences,
is an obscure labyrinth of nature, in which the philosopher cannot
penetrate deeply, the following facts are easily demonstrated by
the evidence which knowledge brings forth.
All organic bodies are subjected to physiological laws, the trans-
gression of which tends to derange the human machinery.
The principle of life being of an immaterial nature, admits of no
definition in the language of men ; in reference to it, synonymous
expressions are used to convey the most adequate idea possible, i.e.,
nature, vitality, vital force, vis medicatrix naturae, occult agent,
healing power, &c. We adopt the first word.
The primary evils inimical to life are, ignorance, vice, intempe-
rance, excess, transgression of hygiene, violation of organic laws,
miasma, morbid principles, hereditary predispositions, and accident.
From every primary evil originates sufferings, disease, disorganisa-
tion of tissue, and ultimately unnatural death.
Disease is a discord of the most wonderfully complicated piece of
machinery of the creation known to man ; it is not, sui an
evil, but the remedy of nature to restore the deranged equibbrium ;
in a plainer language, evils are the injurious actions exercised upon
life, and disease the reaction ; or, again, disease constitutes the
efforts of nature. If nature triumphs, the subject recovers 3 it


in her atternpts disorganisation reaches a certain extent, life returns
to her original abode; for she is not the result of the perfect
human apparatus (mens agitat molem.— Virgil).
Nature, exercising an occult power to resist injury, certain evils
may be gradually put up with to an extent which varies according to
the constitution, age, and circumstances of the individual. °
If disease be the natural reaction against evil, through the healing
power (nature), the purpose of the healing art is to come in to help
nature, and facilitate her triumphs.
As these principles are entertained by eminent men in science,
we cannot refrain from quoting a few of their sentiments on the
subject.
“ The art of healing, it is very generally admitted, is one of those
branches of medical knowledge in which there exists the greatest
amount of errors, defects, and prejudices ; and w'here experience is
alike most difficult and deceptive. The mistakes that are daily
made are often far greater than we are willing to admit. And then,
how little do we know of the extent of nature’s own curative
resources, and how much she will often effect, unaided by, or perhaps
even in spite of, the interference of art. In the practice of our pro-
fession, it should ever be borne in mind that we have to do, not only
with the existing disease, but also with the conservative and reparatory
efforts of nature, which, by itself, is often sufficient to produce a
cure. Hence those reputations of medicine and modes of treatment,
which so rapidly start up and are as quickly forgotten; and hence
those false gods of Therapeutics, that to-day are adored, and to-
morrow are despised.”— Bulletin de Therapeutique.
‘‘ Certain writers (amongst whom is Gideon Harvey, physician to
William III.) have advocated systematic deception and chicane in
the practice of medicine. Harvey’s book was a refined satire on the
therapeutics of his day. He knew what all men of ordinary pene-
tration now know, that the conflicting theories and modes of treat-
ment adopted in the profession have nearly similar results;
that nature cures : and that the triumphant pseans of the pretender
are raised for a victory not his own.”— British and Foreign Medical
Review.
“ What is to be done ? Shall we up the attempt [to achieve
a reformation in medicine] in despair ? Surely not. That course
would be equally cowardly and impolitic. Impolitic, because the
intelligent public is treading fast upon our heels. People already
begin to say, ‘ When we send fur a doctor, he can only tell us what
we know already / or they slily hint to you, how they would attain
to successful practice— ‘ I would always let nature cure the disease.’”
— Dr. Lay cock, British and Foreign Medical Review.
“ Is it not presumable that they [diseases in general] have a


certain nature, and course, and termination, which it would be well
for us to promote 1 * >:<
“ The one great principle, then, to which a comprehensive review
of homoeopathy, ‘ allopathy,’ hydropathy, and all other systems of
medicine seems irresistibly to lead is, that in all cases and on all
occasions, nature is truly the agent in the cure of disease; and that,
as she acts in accordance with fixed and invariable laws, the aim of
the 'physician ought always to he to facilitate her efforts, by acting in
harmony with, and not in opposition to those laws. Disease, as
already remarked, is a mode of action of a living organism, and not
an entity apart from it. In accordance with this view, experience
shows that when we favor the return to a normal action by simply
natural means, recovery will ensue in most cases, without the use of
drugs at all. So far from being always necessary to a cure, drugs
are required only where the power of nature to resume her normal
action proves inadequate, or is impeded by a removable obstruction.
Even 'then it is still nature acting in accordance with her own laws
that brings about the cure. She may be aided, but she ought never
to be thwarted ; and medicine will advance towards the certainty of
other sciences only in proportion as we become saturated with this
guiding principle.”— Dr. Andrew Combe.
“ There can be no treatment of fever by physic but in studying
the juvantia and the laedantia of the case—cultivating the hrst,
eschewing the last, and never forgetting that there is a mighty
power always operating in your favor—the vis medicatrix naturae.
Do not thwart her beyond the mark, and she will get you through
difficulties, with which, without her aid, you could not cope; but
the physician who believes that he possesses beyoiid these, medicines
of specific power in fever, really should have his own license sus-
pended, and himself be put under cure until the monomania
subsides.”— W. Fergusson.
Help to nature may be afforded to her in several ways, but always
in accordance with the organic laws, otherwise it is opposing nature.
The help to nature consists first, in removing the evil if still present
and known; second, in opposing or annihilating the evd (cause of
disease, if present, though immaterial to our senses, and lurking
in the system) and, third, in increasing nature’s natural efforts to
overcome the action produced upon the human organism by evil;
or, in plainer language, to secure her triumph. Such is the noble
mission of the practice of medicine.
Unfortunately the three different ways above pointed out to help
nature do not always afford prompt relief to the sufferer nor
immediate credit to the practitioner, who sacrifices the present for
the future; therefore, the improvement of medical science depends
upon the moral improvement of the patient. The people have to be
made morally healthy before they become bodily so ; hence the


double difficulty of liomceopatliy to teach people the philosophy
of health and cure their disease. An appeal to reason becomes
indispensable to secure perseverance when requisite.
In regard to the first mode of helping nature by removing the
cause of disease, the theory is so simple that it requires no demon-
stration ; but as regards the second “principle, i. e., of opposing or
annihilating evil, if immaterial and lurking in the system, it is only
within the domain of therapeutics to solve the question. The laws
of morbid derangement repose on a primitive germ ; annihilate this
germ, and pathological modification dies away. The third principle,
i.e., of helping nature by increasing her forces, consists simply in
using with discrimination the natural medium that maintains life,
such as food, beverage, exercise, occupation, water, dress, atmosphere,
electricity, &c. ; this not being a matter of dispute, we shall not
enter into its mode of application, although it is an object of indis-
pensable consideration in the practice of homoeopathy.
Now that every clear-minded man is capable of comprehending the
philosophy of disease, without being licensed to do so by a college
of medicine, the folly of an allopathic treatment opposed to nature’s
own efforts becomes also obvious, i.e., that the relief and comfort
afforded to the sufferer through depletion, salivation, purgatives, &c.,
is lamentably delusive, because such processes diminish the reactive
forces of nature, and not the injury complained of. But this treat-
ment has generally the following advantages over homceopathy :
First, that by a prompt and immediate relief the patient is gratified,
and confidently abandons himself to his doctor. Second, that a
treatment which is, sui generis, a violation of the physiological laws,
is a source of necessity for further advice and physics. As fhe
natural course of causes and effects would lead us to the very grave,
we are obliged to stop short for the purpose of investigating the
fundamental principles of homoeopathy.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDICINAL PROPEETIES.
Relatively to the wants of the human fabric, aU the elements of
the creation are either nutricious or poisonous. The nutricious
elements are the appropriate materials indispensable to life, for the
maintenance of healthy tissues ; while the poisons differ from the
former in their peculiar properties, to alter these necessary materials,
so that when absorbed in the system, they produce morbid or
unhealthy tissues.
11.
The impression produced by poisons when introduced in the
human economy varies infinitely, but always according to some fixed
laws of nature.


Such a small dose of poison which is ineffectual to produce death,
and manifests nevertheless a derangement in the functions or structure
of the system, is said to possess medicinal 'pro'perties, and, instead
of it being called poisonous, it is called a drug—a remedy, &c.
Every drug produces two opposite effects, a primitive and a
secondary effect. The primitive action of a remedy is the impres-
sion generally agreeable and momentarily remedial, such as is admi-
nistered by the old school; the secondary, which is the reverse, is
the reaction of nature to restore the harmony of functions, momenta-
rily deranged by its artificial and unnatural influence.*
The- knowledge of homoeopathy is based upon—First, the accu-
rate knowledge of a given disease. Second, on the knowledge of
the medicinal properties of poisonous agents in nature, either simple
or combined. And, lastly, on the relationship or similitude between
disease and the properties of drugs.
But as these properties of drugs are hidden to every scientific test,
we have but one mode of ascertaining and establishing these pro-
perties ; and this mode consists in determining their action upon the
healthy subject. Thus, no science would demonstrate that some
poisons of snakes are inimical to life, if it were not known by
facts ; and so with every drug.
Homoeopathy, leaving the domain of theories and entering that of
facts, interrogates nature ; the answer is on the impressions mani-
fested after the introduction of drugs into the alimentary canal of a
healthy individual, and continued until vital derangement is manifest.
VIII.
These derangements are accurately collected, and form the new
science called pathogenesis, or homoeopathic materia medica; and it
is not susceptible of fluctuation with the opinions of men and
learned bodies, but remains susceptible of progression through
more accurate experiments upon healthy individuals and clinical
observations.
The new science of pathogenesis is actually composed of about
260 remedies, but 60 alone are in daily use, because they were
better experimented upon, and are better known.
* For instance, a purgative produces an artificial function, but on the days follow-
ing, the obstruction and inertia of the bowels are worse.


The importance of such science will become obvious, and it will be
acknowledged to be the sanctuary of sound therapeutics when it is
demonstrated that there is a law of cure which enables the physician
to proceed in the treatment of disease from the knowledge of facts,
and to abandon the path of conjectures followed by the old school.
THE LAW OF CURE.
All positive sciences which have gradually improved, such as
mathematics, natural philosophy, astronomy, navigation, hydrostatics,
mechanics, and chemistry, are susceptible of infinite progression,
because they possess the prerogative of established laws.
The practice of medicine, which, in its early history, was confined
to priests, and was merely superstitious, became gradually empirical,
and ultimately fell into the vague domain of Rationalism, where it
still remains on the level of a trade, most profitable to a kind of
partner in the profession, the druggist.
Rationalism, being founded upon hypothesis, sophistry, and con-
tradiction, has no established laws, and, therefore, unlike positive
sciences, it is deprived of the prerogative of extensive progression,
which would so fortunately enable practical medicine to keep pace
with other progressive sciences.
Homoeopathy is the scientific endeavour to establish a law in thera-
peutics, which law has been revealed by the invariable result of
experiments, and is confirmed by new facts which are taking place
every day. It has no connection with any favorite mode of treat-
ment ever promulgated, and is independent of human authority.
As similar or different causes have never been known to produce
the same effects, and that a disease is the result of a cause either
known or unknown, visible or ocult, any cause which can produce a
similar form of disease, will also check this disorder, if cautiously
and properly applied ; in other words, like cubes like.
For instance:
1. If some substance inimical to the process of digestion finds its
way into the stomach, nausea and vomiting follow. As a remedy,
you have to choose the one which produces nausea and vomiting,
such as hot water, emetic, ipecacuanha, which are known to produce
the same. The remedy being 'properly administered, vomiting is
induced, and experience has taught mankind that a cure is the result.


2. In the case of ague, take that which produces the symptoms
characteristic of the case. Select either arsenic, bark, quinine, cap-
sicum, or any other medicinal substance which homoeopathic science
found out by experiments ; take only such a dose in solution with
water as will not create new morbid symptoms (a dose that will not
hurt a fly, to please the detractors of medical reform), and then judge
for yourself. When the cure is accomplished,reverse the experiment;
take either hot water, emetic, or ipecacuanha, nausea and vomiting
will follow; take a properly increased dose of the remedy which has
cured you of the ague, and similar symptoms will be induced,
whether you believe it or not.
The above facts explain that the contradiction of medical autho-
rities about consumption (see quotation xxvii., page 24), were all
founded upon observation.
A flash of lightning, or a sudden mental emotion, has often pro-
duced palsy ; the same accidents have acted as an efficacious remedy
in many instances. Persons poisoned by strychnine die in convul-
sions ; many practitioners of the old school have cured convulsions
with strychnine. Life is the primary cause of heat in the organic
body; every organic body, while alive, can support a degree of heat
which would burn it thoroughly if dead.
Among the various nervous derangements, opium produces spasms,
convulsions of an epileptic form, lethargy, and coma. The same
remedy has oftentimes cured lethargy ; and the late Sir Charles
Hotham, who was “ cured ” of the dysentery by mixtures having
opium for their basis, died a few days after of epilepsy, to which he
had never been subject in his life.* The same law could demonstrate
whether the lamentable death of Lady Barkly was the result of an
accident or of malpractice, for it is not ordered by Providence that
we are to enjoy an ephemeral existence on earth. For the sake of the
progress of homoeopathy, we would wish that the dead could be
interrogated upon the subject of the cause of their premature
departure from this life. W'e confidently believe that if the late Sir
Charles Hotham had trusted to homoeopathy, as his Excellency the
Governor-General of Hew South Wales has for several years, he
would still be alive.
The reason why the English, more than any other people suffer from
bilious and liver complaints, premature decayed teeth, and debility,
is explained by their frequent use of antibilious and blue pills, as
well as quinine.t In short mercury, sulphur, iodine, nux vomica.
* See in the number of the Age newspaper, subsequent to the funeral of Sir
Charles Hotham (1855), a communication headed “ The Choleeaic Diaeehcea.”
f In a very valuable paper by Dr. Mackenna, on the mortality of children, con-
tained in the last number of the Australian Medical Journal, we find the following
illustration of the law of cure :—“ The ‘ blue pill ’at night and the ‘ black draught ’
in the morning, to cure the bile, are as flourishing parts of our free institutions as
they were thirty years ago. Indeed of the many eminent peculiarities by which
Providence has distinguished the British nation, the most remarkable is that she
alone on earth is permitted to be bilious.” The paper referred to is certainly indi-
cative of progress in the profession, and reflects some credit upon its author, and the


opium, bark, etc., have revealed some of their medicinal properties
to the old school through empiricism. The homoeopaths in tiying
the same remedies upon the healthy, have received the explanation
of their healing properties. But what is empiricism but the conjec-
tural experience of a drug upon patients ? How many thousand are
to be victims of experiments in the old school before its efficacy
becomes established 1, Homoeopathic experiments on the contrary
determine the efficacy of a remedy before the practitioner meets the
case to which it is appropriate. In the old school numerous trials
proceed valuable observations, while in the new one observations
previously made determine the remedy to be administered.
Although a fact need not be commented upon to be admitted, it
is probable that the mode of action is as follows : the symptoms of
a disease being the efforts of nature to get rid of the cause of it, a
remedy appropriate to the case, and acting in the same direction,
will aid nature and thus abriges the duration of the disorder ; and
it also happens that a medicinal disease resembling the natural one
will be produced by an homoeopatic remedy, and as two different
causes productive of similar results cannot possibly exist at the same
time in the human body, the morbid symptoms give place to the
medicinal ones, and nature overcomes easily the action of the latter
if discontinued ; and the same for all diseases treated by medicinal
substances. But this explanation does not constitute any part of the
doctrine properly called Homoeopathy, they are hypothesis, and
homoeopathy disclaims hypothesis—the process of healing is yet a
secret of nature.
There are several degrees of efficacity in a remedy. If partially
homoeopathic to the case, the remedy is only beneficial, if homoe-
opathic to most of the symptoms, it is effectiial, and if to the whole it
is most efficacious or specific.
In many common cases, the selection of a homoeopathic remedy is
very simple and easy, but in other cases it is attended with many
difficulties. A very scrupulous investigation of the complicated
ailments is indispensable on one hand, and the discovery of an
appropriate remedy a more arduous task, one demanding deep study.
Homoeopathy has this character of certainty over the old school, that
several homoeopathic practitioners being called upon to prescribe for
a given case, must and wiU inevitably agree as to the selection of
the remedy indicated ; the most experienced, talented, and skilful,
wiU point out the best remedy and the others will yield to his sug-
gestions, the same as a mariner will acknowledge his error in the
reckoning of his latitude and longitude, whenever he finds superior
instruments. The practice of Homoeopathy however, is not alto-
iournal. As a medical new chum in this colony, Mr. Bowman will soon discover that
liis scientific notions are behind the age. After honestly stating that “it is his humble
opinion that the authorised system of medicination in children up to twelve or
eighteen months is in some cases perfectly monstrous,” Dr. Mackenna almost dared
to assert “ that physicians know absolutely nothing of the action of drugs, and are
most uncertain of their resuXty With a little more courage he would have told the
truth and expressed his candid opinion.—{Note by the Author.)


getlier a course of invariable success, for the following difficulties
constantly present themselves :
1. Inevitable death to which we are all subject by the laws of
nature will always be an argument effectual in retarding the progress
of homoeopathy.
2. Many patients who are labouring under chronic complicated dis-
orders, produced by the presence of noxious remedies in the system,
are under the impression that they must be relieved immediately, and
soon cured; as they meet sometimes mth disappointment, they then
exercise their vengeance by calling it a “ humbug.”
3. Some other patients describe their case as very slight, expecting
by such disguise to be sooner cured, and thus give an incomplete
description of their disorder, which misleads a skilful practitioner.
4. But the worst is, that in some forms of very acute cases, the
symptoms are not always promptly arrested. Distrust follows;
medicine is said to have been a powerful poison; the old-school prac-
titioner is called upoh, and soon blood-letting, purgatives, and nar-
cotics, repulse the salutary efforts of nature, and paralyse her
reactive forces. Odium is thrown upon the homoeopath, praise upon
the allopath, until prostration, chronic dirorders, or an untimely end,
terminates the contest.
5. It is also evident that a homoeopathic remedy, however appro-
priate and properly prepared, wUI fail in all cases where there is no
vital force susceptible of being put in activity. For medicines
always cure indirectly through the power of nature, which alone
restores to health; hence, when homoeopathic medicines fail, allo-
pathic remedies may give momentary relief, but they never will cure
patients given up by the homoeopaths, while the contrary has been
often the case, to the great shame, be it said of the old school prac-
titioner. Inde lachrymos ! ”
All the charges alleged against homoeopathy in general and prac-
titioners in particular, have been originated through some of these
circumstances only, these unjust charges degenerate promptly into
falsehood, apparently discreditable to this cause, but in fact to its
bitter enemies that misrepresent the truth ; the consequences of such
calumnies are most prejudicial to all individuals taking such for
granted, in forming an opinion without learning both sides of the
question, and thereby retard its progress. But upon the whole in
no place in the world is homoeopathy declining.
HOMOEOPATHIC DOSES.
“ Truth is in a well; few are deep-sighted enough to tind it out.”
“A GROWN-UP MAN SERIOUSLY ASSERTS THAT HE CAN CURE
THIS OR THAT DISEASE BY A BILLIONTH OR DECILLIONTH OP THIS OR
THAT PROBABLY INERT DRUG,” &c., &c., &c. We acknowledge
willingly that Dr. Bowman is honest in his objections, and that to
many the same quoted assertion must, d appear absurd. But


we wish to reason upon the subject for the sake of demonstratin'g
that absurdity in this case is as delusive as a probable truth may be
fallacious.
Although the homoeopathic law of cure is independent from the
mode of administering the appropriate remedy, it is, nevertheless,
obvious that if a dose of a remedy is more injurious than the cause of
disease, a new medicinal disorder will be induced, and, in consequence,
the patient will fall from bad into Worse. How then to determine
the proper magnitude of a dose which will not create new disorders,
and at the same time will exhibit its whole efficacy? Here, again,
men have to keep silent, and interrogate nature. Instead of denying,
they have to observe ; instead of talking and discussing, they merely
have to open their eyes, for we gain our knowledge from nature
through our senses only.
Dr. Routh, already referred to as a champion of the old school
says, “It is certainly true that small doses, and specially,
IN LARGE DILUTIONS (as the homoeopath's administer them),
WILL OFTENTIMES ACT VERY SATISFACTORILY, FOR I HAVE SEEN THIS
REPEATEDLY.” Now, Dr. Routh believes in the power of small
doses, BECAUSE HE HAS SEEN THEM REPEATEDLY ACT SATISFAC-
TORILY. Mr. Bowman not having seen the fact is certainly justified
in disbelieving it; but is he justified, also, in denying and refusing
to put the “ ABSURDITY ” to practical test ?
Until our readers see positive and repeated facts, we wish them to
follow our argument in favor of the possibility of medicinal action
being produced by the absorption in the system of a given remedy,
administered in such imponderable doses, that often no human test
can determine the size and number of its atoms.
Are we acquainted with any facts which make it probable that
infinitesimal atoms act upon an organic body, and thus produce
material and functional derangement, conducive ultimately to com-
plete disorganization ? What are cholera, miasma, fever, contagion,
hydrophobia, light, heat, electricity, etc., etc. ? Will Mr. Bowman
tell the sizes of the atoms of the morbid principle of cholera, the
weight of those of contagious diseases, the quantity of venomous
poison of snakes which produce almost instantaneous death ? Will
he detect the vitality still inherent in a grain, however small, found
in the stomach of an Egyptian mummy ? In fact, how does he know
better than any body else what is large and what is small ? Does he
understand what is the maximum or minimum of creative power 1
Can he imagine nothingness, or anything useless in creation ? What
is the weight, breadth, and length of the atoms of musk which are
emitted by one single grain, kept in the same place for several years,
and still weighing the same at the end of that period ?
As all the disciples of materialism, Mr. Bowman is in the most
deplorable ignorance of all that is not to be found in his books, or
that which he has not picked up in the dissecting room. The old
school practitioner is ignorant that there is an ocult agent in the
organic body called vitality, and that this principle is susceptible of


being strongly acted upon by various infinite causes, which will
neither be perceptible to any of our senses, nor to any scientific test.
Mr. Bowman, when speaking of inert drugs, has, indeed, a very
inadequate idea of the works of creation. He quotes, as an instance
of inert substances, sulphur. Very well; add to it the equally
“ inert ” substances, charcoal and saltpetre, and a single spark of fire
will demonstrate that a combination of “ inet't ” substances may
produce very powerful results. In fact, we maintain, there exists
nothing in nature which does not possess some visible or ocult
chemical property, if brought into certain combinations ; the inertia
of a substance is a mere fiction, the same as the existence of nothing.
The oxygen and hydrogen gases which man inhales in large quantities,
when mixed together, and put in contact with an electric spark, will
produce an explosion like gunpowder. What a tremendous result
from a trifling cause !
It can be easily demonstrated by facts that the billionth part of a
grain of sulphur, or other appropriate drug, when its numberless
atoms are rendered susceptible of penetrating every part of the
human body, will as satisfactorily counteract the imponderable cause
of a disorder, as twenty grains of ipecacuanha will remove the mate-
rial cause of an indigestion. We are ready to make the experiment
upon patients who are victims of a well-known virus, and we most
solemnly declare that we have never failed (during a practice of several
years) to cure the same in a few days by the employment of mercury
in infinitesimal doses. Now the atoms of this remedy were probably
in excess of magnitude when compared to the atoms of the morbid
virus. If the principle germ or cause of a disease be of an impon-
derable nature, why should not be the remedy ? What should be the
quantity of a drop of water required to annihilate the primary spark
of fire so as to prevent the destruction of a whole city by fire 1
It is not true that homoeopathists have ever alleged that the infi-
nitesimal doses they administer possess “ tremendous powerthis
is a gratuitous assertion of Mr. Bowman. The efficacy of a billionth
part of a drop of water in annihilating a spark of fire and then
prevent most tremendous consequences, does not involve the neces-
sity of being capable of inundating a whole city. The small dose
of copper or white heUeborus requisite to check the material
ravages of the imponderable morbid principles of cholera, when
introduced into the stomach of a healthy man, will then exhibit a
power as tremendous as a spark of fire falling in the Yarra-Yarra.
But put the right thing in the right place, and then judge from the
evidence of facts. The difference between the action of a morbid
principle inimical to life, when in the human organism, and the
destructive spark in contact with combustible substances, lies on its
capability of spreading quickly or slowly.
It is, nevertheless, true, that the homoeopaths maintain that the
properties inherent in every drug are wonderfully developed by a
mechanical preparation which disturb the cohesion of its atoms.
These facts again require the evidence of experiments. For in-


stance, five grains of corrosive sublimate, wlien in the stomach of A
rabbit, will generally produce death in twenty-four hours, half this
quantity in solution with water will produce the same result in a
much shorter time. It is also asserted and proved, that when an
organ or some organs in the human body are the seat of natural
efforts to restore its or their proper equilibrium, a similar cause to
that of its morbid action will so strongly act upon it (or them) that
great caution will be required in administering the appropriate or
homoeopathic remedy. For instance, patients suffering from opth-
talmia will not stand the glare of light, as they would otherwise
do. People suffering from asthma will experience a fresh attack by
inhaling an extra quantity of carbon which would not hurt a fly.
The heat of a poultice, by being homoeopathic, to the effects of
inflammation, produces relief; but the heat is much more sensible
when applied upon the inflamed tissue than if applied upon healthy
tissue. The least touch upon a highly inflamed and lacerated
wound produces intense pain, whilst the same touch would not be
sufficient “ to hurt a fly.'’’
The necessity of employing infinitesimal doses- is dictated by
experience, because a remedy, the action of which is sympathising
Muth that of nature, does not require to be employed in the same
quantity as if its action was antipathetic to the efforts of nature.
An old school practitioner denies the curative power of a drug
administered in infinitesimal doses, he is supported by the whole
faculty of medicine, and approved by the great majority of men;
whilst nature tells us by innumerable faets, that such doses are.
sufficient to give her salutary help,—which shall we believe, nature
or prejudices ?
The only safe escape for the orthodox professional gentlemen is
to continue to maintain as they do, that in some cases diseases may
be better cured without any remedy at all, and that the homoe-
opathic success after their failure are attributable only to the total
absence of injurious treatment. By saying so they only expeet to
throw discredit individually upon some compeers, and save the
endangered craft. But they have yet to prove their assertion, and
if they succeed in doing so, still discredit and shame will remain
upon those who depend wholly upon drugs, energetic against the
efforts of nature, but powerless against the cause of disease.
In reference to this futile mode of scientific controversy, I read in
an address of the retiring President of the Medical Society of
Victoria in the last number of the Australian Medical Journal the
following libel against homoeopathy : —“ And may we not safely
aclcijkowledge that we have learned a lesson in this respect from the
quaclceries of our day ? Have we not seen that the homoeopath has
hem able to cure cases which had resisted the inffuence of drtigs,
BY SIMPLY LETTING THEM ALONE AND ATTENDING TO EeGIMEN.
Thus, ive may learn much from those systems ivhich have been so
HURTFUL TO HUMANITY and to true medicine, when carried to an
extreme, and vaunted as PANACEA.”


As a proof that homoeopathy is not one of those systems hurtful
to humanity, we invoke the testimony of all the distinguished
patients who have been treated homoeopathically for several years,
to confirm the following facts. Ever since their conversion the
patients who have been treated and cured by homoeopathy continue
to trust to it in the most acute cases, and become its warm advocates.
For fear of falling again into the hands of an old school practitioner,
they purchase a family case of homoeopathic medicine with a prac-
tical book to meet the emergency of disease themselves, if no
homoeopathic adviser is to be found.
In concluding his address, the same medical gentleman attempts
to cast a last stigma upon this great cause of humanity by calling
it a 'panacea." Everybody knows that this word conveys not only
its intrinsic meaning, namely, a medicine that cures all diseases, but
also a scientific presumption characteristic of quackery. Such being
the case, we wish an impartial public to understand that it is
treating homoeopathy with vague and unmerited abuses, to compare
it to a panacea. Homoeopathy is a condemnation of such absurd
presumption; for nothing is done according to routine and caprice
by the homoeopath. Instead of having a favorite remedy for all
forms of diseases, he has a great many remedies for a single one.
Ten cases of different dysenteries may be cured by ten different
remedies, but he will not try various remedies one after the other,
until he hits upon the right one, as is generally done by the old
school practitioner. But on the contrary, all is done according to a
natural law, and the right remedy must be found, if its medical
properties are laid down in the homoeopathic materia medica.
When homoeopathy was beginning to make its way in Scotland,
one of the leading Edinburgh reviews introduced the subject to its
readers in the following impai’tial manner :
“ True or false, homoeopathy is, at least, not to be confounded
with empiricism. It has some of the outward signs, but it has
none of the inward and essential characteristics of quackery. It is
not a mystery concocted and retained for the sake of money-getting;
but it is fairly and openly given to the world. It is not a resort
and refuge for the ignorant, but requires extensive knowledge of the
parts and functions of the human frame, of pathology, too, as well
as of physiology, of botany and of chemistry, and the practical use
of both. It is not an insidious delusion, converting the hopes of
the valetudinarian into instruments of death ; a chalice, sparkling
on the brim, but fatal on the draught, seducing by the first feeling
of transient amendment, in order to destroy by the slow and sure
result of repeated application; on the contrary, homoeopathy
enforces abstinence and self-denial; it tampers not vfith the fine
springs of life, and by the confession even of its enemies, if in some
cases it should do no good, in scarcely any case can it do any
harm.”
Strange as homoeopathy may appear to the present generation, the
actual opposition to that great boon conferred upon mankind will
D 2


appear no less wonderful to a more enligMened generation than the
credulity of our forefathers respecting the cause of diseases. Evil
spirits were by them believed to be engaged in tormenting the poor
afflicted portion of mankind, and priests took good care to maintain
their monopoly of public confidence. All the painful and debilitating
applications actually practised and robbing the human body of its rich
elements of life, will be adduced as specimens of the ignorance of the
nineteenth century, when a more enlightened generation acknowledges
that the so-caUed rational system of medicine, as promulgated by the
established medical schools, have been a gross violation of the
organic laws. How inconsistent it will appear that while the same
schools were successfully developing the useful sciences of anatomy,
surgery, and physiology, they were at the same time exercising a
dreadful calamity in advocating a system of therapeutics and practical
medicine opposed to the laws of physiology, thereby producing dis-
orders unknown to mankind from the various accidents of life.
The light of homoeopathy can reach the intellect of every clear-
minded inquirer ; it will open to him the ways of escaping the
torments of physic, and of enjoying health, the greatest prerogative
of human happiness. We can afford to allow the ignorant to sneer
at the claims and pretentions of this medical reform, and the medical
profession to continue its inquisitorial war against it, for to every
right cause the future belongs, and that future is ours. The heart of
the most humble consciencious homcEopath is filled up with the in-
ward happiness of being a benefactor to mankind, a treasure which
he would not exchange for the riches and honors enjoyed by the
detractors of this great human blessing. Life is short, eternity is
long, and we believe that practical philanthropy will have its place
in the scale of divine justice and make up for the religious errors
unconsciously entertained, probably by all men.


AN APPEAL TO THE IMPARTIAL AND INTELLIGENT PUBLIC
Parliamentary Return of the Somoeopathic Treatment of Cholera.
Return to an Address of tlie Honorable The House of Commons
dated 17th. May, 1855 ; —for,
COPIES of any Letters which have been addressed to the General
Board of Health, complaining of the omission of any Notice
of certain Returns in relation to the treatment of Cholera, which
Returns were sent to the General Board of Health, in pursuance
of a Circular dated September last, and issued by the Board ;
and of any Correspondence which has passed between the
President of the Board and the Medical Council; together with
Copies of the Returns which have been rejected by the Medical
Council”
London Homoeopathic Hospital, Golden Square,
20th April, 1855.
Sir, —The Committee of Management of the London Homoeopathic
Hospital who were actively engaged in the reception of the poor
suffering from the cholera epidemic of last year, have observed with
much pain and surprise, that in the Report furnished by you to Her
Majesty’s Secretary of State, and recently presented to Parliament,
on the results of the different methods of treatment in epidemic cho-
lera, the Returns prepared and delivered to your Board in the month
of November last by them, are not included in the analysis prepared
under your sanction.
In the Report issued from the Board of Health it is stated that
the whole of the Returns made to that Board have been carefuUy
analysed ; but as this statement is completely at variance with the
fact that the returns from this hospital were delivei-ed at your office
and yet remained unnoticed, the Committee of Management conceive
that they have just cause of complaint that their labors in the cause
of the indigent sick in that district of the metropolis which was the
most severely affected by the epidemic, have been thus entirely
ignored.
Again, in the execution of the duty assigned to those charged by
yourself with the preparation of the above-mentioned Report, it could
not be forgotten that the object contemplated by yourself and
declared, was the commencement of a system by which national
medical statistics could be procured, a system not intended to
produce opinions, but facts and materials on which opinions and
practical deductions might hereafter be based ; therefore the suppres-
sion of any duly authenticated Returns which afforded positive infor-
mation to the pubhc relating to the cholera was not to have been
expected ; and the omission of which the Committee of Management
complain, is one which they feel convinced you, as President of the


Board of Health, will admit requires explanation, inasmuch as it not
only affects the conduct of those officers of your Board to whose care
the returns were entrusted, but it is at the same time calculated to
throw doubt on the value of that Council which, under other circum-
stances, could not but impart additional confidence to the recommen-
dations emanating from the Board of Health.
The Committee of Management, m addressing this complaint to
you solely on public grounds, cannot at the same time refrain froip
bringing under your notice the circumstances connected with their
proceedings in the crisis adverted to.
It may not be irrelevant to state, for your information, that the
London Homoeopathic Hospital numbers amongst its office-bearers
and supporters Members of both Houses of the Legislature, officers
of the army and navy, clergymen of the Established Church, and
other ministers of religion, lawyers and merchants, and many indivi-
duals distinguished for their attainments in the different branches of
science, literature, and art, whilst its medical staff is composed of
graduates of universities, and members of recognised licensing schools
of surgery and medicine, as you will perceive by the foUowing list of
the staff of the hospital :
Patroness. —Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge,
Vice-Patron. —His Grace the Duke of Beaufort.
president. —Right Hon the Earl of Wilton.
Vice-Presidents.- —His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin ; Right
Hon. the Earl of Essex ; Right Hon. the Earl of Albemarle ; Right
Hon. the Viscount Sydney; the Viscount Maldon ; Lord Francis
Gordon ; Captain Lord C. Paget, R.N, M.P. ; Captain Lord M.
Paget, M.P.; Colonel Lord G. Paget, M.P.; Right Hon. the Lord
Robert Grosvenor, M.P. ; Right Hon. the Lord Gray; Sir Charles
Isham, Bart.; Charles Powell Leslie, Esq., M.P. ; Colonel Wyndham;
F. Foster Quinn, Esq., M.D. ; Marmaduke B. Sampson, Esq.
Chairman. —Right Hon. the Lord Robert Grosvenor, M.P.
Board of Management. —Nathaniel Barton, Esq.; Captain Bran-
ford, R.N.; John Broadhurst, Esq. ; Ralph Buchan, Esq. Captain
William Caldwell; J. B. Crampern, Esq. ; W. C. Dutton, Esq.;
Edward Esdaile, Esq.; George Hallett, Esq. ; Philip Hughes, Esq. ;
J. P. Knight, Esq., R.A. ; Wilham Pritchard, Esq. ; R. T. Reep,
Esq.; H. C. Robinson, Esq.; H. Rosher, Esq.; Sir John Smith,
Bart.; Charles Snewin, Esq. ;J. W. Tottie, Esq.; Thomas Uwins,
Esq., R.A.; William Watkins, Esq.
Trustees. —George Hallett, Esq.; Philip Hughes, Esq.; William
Watkins, Esq. ; D. W. Witton, Esq.
Medical Council. —Frederick Foster Quinn, M.D., President of the
British Homoeopathic Society; Edward Plamilton, M.D., Treasurer
to the British Homoeopathic Society ; T. R. Leadam, M.R.C.S., Hon.
Secretary to the British Homoeopathic Society; S. T. Partridge,
M.D. ; Hugh Cameron, M.R.C.S.; Victor Massol, M.D. ;J. Ruther-


furd Russell, M.D,; George Newman, M.R.C.S. ; George Hilbers,
M.D.; D. Wielobycki, M.D. ; F. W. Irvine, M.D.; George Dunn,
M.D. jJ. Ozanne, M. D. ;J. B. Metcalf, M.R.C.S.; Joseph Kidd,
M.D., M.R.C.S.; W. Mayne, M.D. ; R. D. Hale, M.D.; G. C. Hol-
land, M.D. ; John Moore, M.R.C.S. ; Stephen Yeldham, M.R.C.S.;
Henry Reynolds, M.R.C.S. ; W. Watson, M.R.C.S. j T. Mackern,
M.R.C.S. ;W. Roche, M.D.; J. G. Young, M.R.C.S. ; R. T. Massy,
M.D. ;J. L. Vardy, L.A.C. ; Professor Macdonald, M.D.; S. Wielo-
bycki, M.D. ; J. Hutton HUI, L.R.C.P., M.P.C.S. ; A. C. Edwards,
M.R.C.S. j G. Wyld, M.D. j 11. Bailee, M.D., M.R.C.S.; D. Smith,
M.R.C.S. ; W. Morgan, M.R.C.S.
Medical Ojficers. —Dr. Quinn, Consulting Physician ; Dr. Hamilton;
Dr. Partridge, Physician Accoucheur ; Dr. J. Rutherfurd Russell; Dr.
Wielobycki; Dr. HiU ; Dr. Wyld ; Dr. Baike, Assistant Physician ;
Mr. Yeldham; Mr. Leadam, Surgeon Accoucheur; Mr. Mackern;
Mr. Cameron ; Mr. D. Smith ; Mr. Edwards ; Mr. Morgan, Assis-
tant Surgeons.
During the five years of its existence, the London Plomoeopathic
Hospital has received as in and out patients fully 14,000 of the
poor, afflicted with nearly every variety of acute and chronic disease.
In the early part of last September, the Committeee of Manage-
ment of the London Homoeopathic Hospital, from a desire to con-
tribute, to the best of their ability, to the measures adopted by the
parochial authorities of St. James’s, Westminster, for the purpose of
checking the ravages of the cholera in the Golden Square and neigh-
bouring districts, gave directions for appropriating the wards of the
hospital to the sole use of the poor attacked by the epidemic, the
usual letters of recommendation being dispensed with. A visiting
staff of medical oflicers was also organised for service amongst those
who could not be received as in-patients, and supplies of medicines,
preventative as well as remedial, were gratuitously dispensed at all
hours of the day and night to the poor who applied.
To give as much publicity as was practicable to the proceedings of
the Committee of Management, handbills containing directions to be
followed for the prevention or arrest of the disorder in its earlier
stages were extensively circulated, and notices were from time to
time inserted in the daily journals, announcing that the hospital was
ready to receive patients laboring under cholera.
The Committee of Management also forwarded an official intima-
tion of their arrangements to the Board of Guardians of the parish,
to whom application was likevrise made for the use of any litter or
means of conveyance the authorities might have provided in pur-
suance of the directions issued by yourself; but the application for
assistance to remove cases of cholera to or from the hospital was
refused, on the ground that they had no means of complying with
the request.
Although the medical inspector appointed by the Board of Health
for the Golden Square district could not be ignorant that many of
the poor of the neighbourhood were received and treated in this


hospital, the only medical institution in the district exclusively'
devoted to the reception of cholera patients, he never once visited
the hospital, to examine into the nature of the cases received here,
nor sought to enter the wards where their treatment was carried out.
But the medical officers of the London Homoeopathic Hospital,
desirous that the severity and character of the cases received by
them, as well as the treatment pursued, should be witnessed and
recorded by a medical inspector appointed by the Board of Health,
invited Dr. Macloughlin (who has always been strongly opposed to
homoeopathic treatment), the medical inspector of the districts of
Stepney, Poplar, St. Andrew’s, St. Giles’ and St. George’s Blooms-
bury to inspect the wards ; and to him the Committee of Manage-
ment can refer for corroborative evidence in support of the value of
the results obtained and witnessed by him in his visits to this
hospital.
A copy of a letter addressed by Dr. Macloughlin to one of the
officers of the medical staff of this hospital is, by permission, en-
closed herewith, and your attention is particularly directed to that
passage in which it is stated by him, “ That there may therefore be
no misapprehension about the cases I saw in your hospital, I will
add, that all I saw were true cases of cholera, in the various
stages of the disease, and that I saw several cases which did well
under your treatment, which I have no hesitation in saying would
have sunk under any other.”
The care of the Committee of Management was not confined to
the merely medical treatment of the poor who sought relief in the
hospital. Through the liberality of some of the supporters of the
institution, and of others anxious to assist in this charitable work,
a fund was raised and placed at the disposal of the visiting staff, who
humanely engaged at Hampstead and other places, to which
several of the poor were removed during the period of their convales-
cence, and by this means, as well as by gifts of money and clothing
distributed to those who were reduced to extreme poverty by their
own illness, or death by cholera of their parents, the parish was
relieved of any charge on their account.
The operations of this hospital, directed exclusively to cholera
patients, were continued during the whole period of the epidemic in
the district, and the results obtained in 61 cases of pure cholera,
and in 331 cases of choleraic and simple diarrhoea, were recorded in
the forms issued by the General Board of Health, and, as already
stated, delivered by an officer of the institution at your office in the
month of November following.
The utmost care was taken in adding the names, occupations, and
addresses of the cases, the symptoms observed at the different stages
of the attacks, and the remedies employed in accordance with the
prominent symptoms detailed, as well as the names and degrees of
the respective medical officers of the institution responsible for the
accuracy of the returns.


The following is a summary of the returns thus furnished
Admit-
ted.
Discon-
tinued.
Cases op Cholera treated.
Collapse!
eutive
Fever.
Death.
As In-patients.
7
3
By the Visiting Staff
Amongst the Out-patients
Total
Passed
No. of
Cases.
Discon-
tinued.
Cases of Diarrhcea treated.
Un-
known.
Death.
Jnolera.
As In-patients (Choleraic) ...
By the Visiting Staff (Choleraic)
As Out-patients {
6
6
4
1
5
Total
From the circumstance that of these 61 cases of clearly ascer-
tained cholera, including the three cases removed from the hospital
by the friends of the patients before any result could be obtained,
the cases of collapse equal 59 per cent., it will be observed that a
very large proportion of the cases recorded presented features of the
most severe and serious character.
And in further proof of the violence of the cases treated, it may
be mentioned that one of the ten whose deaths are recorded expired
whilst being removed from the conveyance in which he was brouo-ht
to the hospital, and before any treatment could be commenced •
whilst, in another case, the treatment was begun by the visitino-
staff of this hospital after the parish surgeons had pronounced
recovery to be hopeless.
It forms no part of the immediate object of this letter to institute
a comparison between the results obtained at this hospital and those
recorded in your report, but as the returns of this hospital prove that
in an institution ill adapted from its want of space and the
ments of its wards for the purposes of a cholera hospital the deaSis
do not exceed 16-4 per cent, in an epidemic in which, as the report
issued by you shows, the deaths in severe cases under the Tnost
successful treatment pursued in other metropolitan hospitals, were at
the rate of 36'2 per cent., the Committee of Management must
lament that the public, for whose benefit the Board of Health was
instituted, is left, by the report of that Board, in total ignorance of
the results obtained by the treatment pursued in the London
Homoeopathic Hospital, and of the medicinal means by which these
results were obtained; and they deem it their duty respectfully to


request an investigation into the truth of the above statement, and
into the cause of the suppression of their returns in the report made
by the Board over which you preside.
By order of the Committee of ]\lanagement of the London
Homoeopathic Hospital, Golden Square. I have, &c.
(Signed) Kalph Buchan,
The Eight Hon. Sir Benjamin Hall, Hon. Sec.
Bart., M.P., &c.. President of the
General Board of Health.
Extract from a letter dated 22nd February, 1855, from Dr. Mac-
loughlin, one of the Medical Inspectors of the Board of Health,
to Hugh Cameron, Esq., M.K.C.S., and one of the Surgeons to
the London Homoeopathic Hospital.
You are right. I did tell you that I would report to the General
Board of Health the opinion I had formed of the manner the poor
cholera patients were cared for in your hospital, and the success of
your treatment; hut finding that I could not enter into details relative
to your hospital without entering also into details relative to the
Allopathic Hospitals, which would lead me into considerations foreign
to the sanitary question before me, 1 therefore merely give the
residt arrived at in yours, along with the result arrived at in other
establishments, reserving to myself the liberty to say more in detail
what is the impi'ession on my mind as to your treatment of cholera
cases, ivhen I publish a monograph on cholera.
You are aware that I went to your hospital prepossessed against
the homoeopathic system; that you had in me, in your camp, an
enemy rather than a friend, and that I must therefore have seen
some cogent reason there, the first day I went, to come away so
favorably disposed as to advise a friend to send a subscription to
your charitable fund, and I need not tell you that I have taken some
pains to make myself acquainted with the rise, progress, and medical
treatment of cholera, and that I claim for myself some right to be
able to recognise the disease, and to know something of what the
medical treatment ought to be ; and,
That there may therefore be no misapprehension about the cases I
saw in your hospital, I will add, that all I saw were true cases of
cholera, in the various stages of the disease ; and that I saw several
cases which did well under your treatment, wiiich I have no hesita-
tion in saying would have sunk under any other.
In conclusion, I must repeat to you, what I have already told you,
and wLat I have already told every one with whom I have con-
versed, that although an allopath by principle, education, and prac-
tice, yet it the will of Providence to afflict me with cholera, and
to deprive me of the power of prescribing for myself, I would rather
be in the hands of a homoeopathic than an allopathic adviser.
I cannot suppose that anything I have said above can be of value
to the homoeopathic system, but such as it is, you are at full liberty
to make what use you please of this letter.


The General Board of Health, Whitehall,
26, April, 1855.
I am directed by the President of the General Board of Health to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20fch instant.
I am to forward copies of the correspondence which has passed between
this office and the Committee of the Medical Council, to whom the
preparation of the report on the treatment of cholera has been entrusted.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) J. F. Campbell,
C. Buchan, Esq., Assistant Secretary.
Homoeopathic Hospital.
Enclosure, No. 1.
The General Board of Health, Whitehall,
Sir, 11 [g-M. 21 ? ] April 1855.
I am directed by the President of the General Board of Health to
inform you that inquiries have been made with regard to the course pur-
sued by the Treatment Committee of the Medical Council, in dealing with
the cholera returns sent in by homoeopathic practitioners. It appears that
the Medical Directory was followed in circulating the forms of return
from this office, and that this directory does not distinguish homoeopathic
from other practitioners.
As the president finds on inquiry, that forms of return were sent to
homoeopathic practitioners, and as these forms appear in several cases to
have been filled up and returned to this office, and as a return was also
made from the Homoeopathic Hospital, I am to inquire why no notice
has been taken of these returns by the Treatment Committee, their
report containing no reference to them.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) J. F. Campbell,
John A. Paris, Esq., M.D., Secretary.
Chairman of the Treatment Committee of the
Council, 27, Dover Street.
Enclosure, No. 2.
Sir, Dover Street, 21st April 1855.
For the information of Sir Benjamin Hall, I beg to enclose a resolution
unanimously passed by the Treatment Committee of the Medical Council
of the General Board of Health, which I trust will be a satisfactory
answer to the enquiry addressed to me regarding the reasons which
induced the Committee to pass over without notice the homceopathic
returns of their treatment of cholera.
“ Resolved, That by introducing the returns of hommopathic practi-
tioners, they would not only compromise the value and utility of their
averages of cure, as deduced from the operation of known remedies, but
they would give an unjustifiable sanction to an empirical practice alike
opposed to the maintenance of truth, and to the progress of science.”
I have, &c.,
(Signed) John Ayrton Paris,
T. Taylor, Esq., President.
Secretary to the Board of Health.


Enclosiare, No. 3.
The General Board of Health, Whitehall,
Sir, 24th April, 1855.
I am directed by the General Board of Health to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 21st instant, and of the resolution of the
Treatment Committee as to the returns of cholera cases treated in the
Homoeopathic Hospital.
I am to state that your letter will be laid before the President for his
consideration. I have, &c..
J. A. Paris, Esq., M.D., &c. (Signed) J. F. Campbell,
Dover Street. Assistant Secretary.
From E. Buchan, Honorary Secretary, London Homoeopathic Hospital,
11th May, 1855, to the Eight Hon. Sir Benjamin Hall, Bart. M.P.
Sir,
The Committee of Management of this Hospital have instructed me to
acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Campbell’s communication of 26th
ult,} in reply to their letter of the 21st April, requesting an explanation of
the omissinn in your Eeport of the Cholera Eeturns sent from this hospital
in November last, in pursuance of your instructions, and which were
prepared in the tabular forms furnished by your department.
The Committee of Management are fully sensible of the promptitude
with which you have directed an inquiry to be made into the cause of the
omission complained of. They deem it their duty, however, to protest
against the injustice which has been done to a charitable institution over
which they preside, and to express their surprise that the reason assigned
for such omission is an abstract resolution of a body of gentlemen who,
in violation of the objects set forth in your circular, have under the appa-
rent sanction of your authority, arbitrarily and without any examination,
suppressed the returns of this hospital; not because they have been
proved to be untrue, but because they are at variance with the precon-
ceived opinions of those to whom the preparation of the Eeport was
entrusted.
The Committee of Management feel confident that you, the appointed
guardian of the public health, will still give practical effect to the decla-
rations contained in your circular, dated September 1854, an J not permit
the benefits to the public therein anticipated by you, from the collection
and systematic record of the results of treatment of choleraic disease pur-
sued by all qualified practitioners, to be neutralized by any body of me-
dical gentlemen limiting the field of inquiry to those retxirns only which
. communicate results obtained by what are termed “ known remedies.”
The Committee therefore again solicit your consideration of the state-
ments contained in their letter of the 20th ultimo, and are desirous of
impressing upon you the importance to the public, for whose benefit
your Board was formed, of including in your forthcoming Eeport on the
Golden Square District the results embodied in the returns furnished by
the officers of this hospital in November last.
By order of the Committee of Management of the London Homoeopathic
Hospital. I have &c.,
(Signed) E. Buchan, Hon. Sec.
W. FAIRFAX AND CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHBPuS, MELBOURNE.


61


