



THE
Art of Painting,
WITH THE
LIVES and CHARACTERS
Of above 300 of the most Eminent
PAINTERS:
Containing a Complete Treatise of
PAINTING, DESIGNING,
AND
The USE of PRINTS.
WITH
REFLEXIONS on the WORKS of the most
Celebrated MASTERS, and of the feveral
Schools of Europe , as well ancient as modern.
Being the most perfect Work of the Kind extant.
Translated from the French of Monsieur De PILES.
To which is added,
An ESSAY towards an ENGLISH SCHOOL.
The SECOND EDITION.
Ego nec STudium Sine divite Venâ,
Nec rude quid prosit video Ingenium : Horat. de Arte Poet.
LONDON:
Printed for CHARLES MARSH, at Cicero's Head
in Round-Court in the Strand,
MDCCXIY .


TO
ROBERT Efq;
S IR ,
a IS one of the greateft encouragements
to mod writers, that they generally
addrefs to pcrfons who knowing little
of the fubjeCt they treat of, it gives
them an opportunity to fay as many kind things
as they pleafe of their own productions, with-
out fear of reprehenfion: But this advantage I
have entirely loft j for in fpeaking of Painting to
you. Sir, I fpeak to one of the beft judges of
that noble art, which is not to be undei flood
without penetration, delicacy, good fenfe, a re-
fin’d tafte, and a portion of that genius which
infpired the Painter in his performance. If I
fhould fay things boldly to you, and as of my
own knowledge, you would eaftly deteCl the
deceit, and my preemption would be more un-
pardonable than my ignorance. Yet, though I
muft be very cautious how I go out of my
depth, left 1 link when I attempt to fwim, I
may venture farther on your candour and hu-
manity than on my own judgment, were it to
the full as good as I could wifti it.
A 2 ; Tis


’Tis the happinefs, Sir, of men of your for-
tune, that they can read and fee what they think
fit for their pleafure or inftruClion ; but this be-
nefit rather expofes than improves many, who
have not a true relilh of the things about which
they are curious. Vaft libraries ill-chofen, are
rather rubbilh than curiofities; and numerous
collections of pictures injudicioufly made, are
the fport and contempt of the fpeCtator, and a
reflection on the owner. But when fuch libra-
ries and collections excel alike in number and va-
lue, they are treafures of which the greateft
princes are proud. There’s no gentleman in
England who has any thing of this kind in
greater perfection than yourfelf, who poflefs
Ibmething of feveral of the belt matters that are
fpoken of in the following treatife; and every
day in your own houfe (the ornament of the
fined fquare in Europe) you behold fome of the
wonders that the hands of Paolo Veronefe, Gui-
do, Nicholas Pouflin, Carlo Maratt, and other
excellent artifts have produced. By the nicety
of your choice, the world admires that of your
tafte, and are furprifed to fee fo many rare things
together in a country where Painting and the
politer arts are not lb much encouraged as in
thofe places, where, perhaps, the nobility and
gentry are not fo well qualified to judge of
merit, nor fo well able to reward it as in
England. Yet there are even here fome few il-
luftrious perfons, and men of worth and ho-
nour, who are folicitous for the profperity of
the arts, and contribute, by their ftudies and
bounty, towards making them flourish and pre-
vail among us. Paimt-
The DEDICATION.


Painting is fifter to Poetry, the mufe’s
darling: and though the latter is more talka-
O ; O /it
tive, and confequently more able to puui her
fortune j yet Painting, by the language of the
eyes, and the beauty of a more fenfible imita-
tion of nature, makes as fhong an impreftion
on the foul, and deferves, as well as poetry, im-
mortal honours.
Consuls, Emperors and Kings, have en-
tertain’d themfelves with the exercifes of poe-
try, and exalted the mufe by the homage they
paid her: As much is to be faid for Painting.
One of the four houfes of the Fabii, as eminent
as any in Rome, alTumed the name of Pidlor ;
for that Fabius, their ancestor, painted the
temple of Health, and was efteem’d the foun-
der of the old Roman fchool. More than one
of the Emperors in the Bas Empire, fpent many
hours with a pallet and pencil; and, in the laffc
century, LewisXlll. learn’d to defign of Vouet.
The late Queen Mary, of glorious memory, and
her lifter, our prefent gracious fovereign, Queen
Anne, were both inftruded in this art by Gib-
fon the dwarf. All the children of the Queen
of Bohemia, daughter to King James I. were
taught to paint by Hontorft; and, among the
reft, the princefs Sophia, who, with her lifter
the abbefs of Mabuiftbn, fays Monfieur de Piles,
fe diftinguerent par I’habilete de leur
Alexander the Great was not fo fond of his mi-
ftrefs as of his Painter, for he parted with her
to pleafe him; and our own King Charles I.
delighted more in Painting than in all the other
A 3 fciences.
The DEDICATION.


fciences, as much a matter as he was of all. Bat
you. Sir, are too well acquainted with the hi-
ttory of the a'rt to be plcaled with any informa-
tion from me, nor does it want any other re-
commendation than the delight it at once affords
the mod fublime faculty of the foul, the judg-
ment, and the moll delicate fenfe of the body,
the fight, to engage the prote&ion of the curious;
And as you are fo in a very high degree, I hope,
Sir, this will be no ungrateful offering, lince,as far
as our author is concern’d, ’tis the mod com-
pleat and exacStdifcourfe of the kind that ever was
publiflfd in fo fmall a compafs.
The differtation before his lives of the
Painters has been thought admirable by fevere
criticks, and the rules he lays down for Paint-
ing, fo jutt, that they might ferve alfo for Poe-
try. Ido not fay this, Sir, to biafs your opini-
on in his favour, that would be equally vain and
arrogant; you are fo well acquainted with our
author in his own language, that it will be eafy
for you to judge whether he deferves the charac-
ter which is given of him or not. He calls his
account of the Painters lives an abridgment, and
that with good rcafon, for you will immediate-
ly perceive that he induttrioutty avoids entering
into the detail of their actions. Indeed, the
greateft of them, Leonardo da Vinci, Michael
Angelo, and Sir Peter Paul Rubens only ex-
cepted, did nothing of confcquence enough,
otherwife than as Painters, to give occafion for
any thing to be laid of them worthy the notice
of the publick. In their private capacities, then-
lives were like the rett of the bulk of mankind,
too
The DEDICATION .


too mean for the pen of an hittorian, and Mon-
fieur de Piles has thought fit to let his fhort hi-
ftory of them contain only fuch of their actions
as ferved to give the world the beft idea of em
as Painters. He has inferted none but what had
fome relation or other to their art, and that was
ealily done in a few pages, and fometimes in a
few lines, unlefs he had defign’d to write a hi-
ftory of pictures, and not of Painters. I believe
gentlemen’s curiofity, in this cafe, will go no
farther than to know where the Painter was
born, whole difciple he was, what was his man-
ner, how he executed it, which were his bell
pieces, and when he died. Our author tells us
in his Preface, that he had Teen all the lemark-
able books of this kind j and after he had exa-
min’d Vafari, Ridolfi, Carlo Dati, Baglioni,
Soprani, the Count Malvafia, Pietio Bclloii,
Van-Mandre, Cornelius de Brie, Felibien, San-
drart and others, thought his abridgment ne-
cettary as well as his differtation ; for large vo-
lumes on the lives of private men, mull ceitain-
ly contain many trivial things, and confequent-
ly prove tirefom. There are few who have lei-
fureor application enough to run through ten
or twenty books on an art which was intended
chiefly for pleafure, though it has alfo its oppor-
tunities of inftrufting, as is made appear, we
hope, in the following tranflation.
His reafons had the fame weight with me in
the cflay towards an Englifh School. I have
written of the Englifh 'matters more as they
were Painters than as they were men: And yet
I have with much pains and trouble, gather’d
A 4 together.
The DEDICATION.


together, from the heft authorities, material
enough to make fome of the lives larger than
Monfieur de Piles has done his. I would not
meddle with thofe mailers that are living, as
well knowing that’s a tender affair, and not to
be touch’d without running therifque of giving
general offence. If difcretion would have per-
mitted me to do it, I might have enlarged and
adorned our fchool fo much, that neither the
Roman nor the Venetian would have had caufe
to be afhamed of its company. As it is, ’tis more
than a match for the French j and the German
and Flemilh fchools, only excel it by the perfor-
mances of thofe mailers whom we claim as our
own. Hans Holbein and Vandyckare as much
ours as Sebaflian of Venice belongs to the Ro-
man fchool, Spagnoletto to the Lombard, or Ellis
and De Champagne to the French : Nor have
we a fmall title to Sir Peter Paul Rubens, for
'twas the protection and friendfhip of the duke
of Buckingham that procured him the opportu-
nities he had of diflinguifhing himfelf above
others of his contemporaries and countrymen
of the fame profeffion. ’Twas the duke of
Buckingham that recommended him to the go-
vernor of the Netherlands, as a proper perfon
to refide at the court of England, as the King
of Spain’s minilfer. ’Twas here that he per-
form’d fome of his heft pieces, and here that he
acquired the character of a flatefman, which,
no doubt, was a considerable advantage to his
reputation as a Painter. %
But why fhould we be fo unjufl to our-
felves, as to think we fland in need of an ex-
cufe.
The DEDICATION.


cufe, for pretending to the honour of a fchool
of Painters as well as the French, who have
been in pofleffion of it almoft as long as the Ita-
lians. You know, Sir, by the many beautiful
pieces you have feen of the principal matters of
both nations, that if they have had their Vouets,
their Pouffins, and le Bruns, we have had oui
Fullers, our Dob ions, and our Coopers; and have
not only infinitely outdone them in Portraits, but
have produced more matters in that kind than
all the reft of Europe. .
We may alfo affirm, that the art is indebted
to us for the invention of Mezzo-tinto, and the
perfection of crayon-painting. By our author s
account of Paftils, a name formerly given to
Crayons, one may fee that the Italians had a
very flight notion of a manner that is praCtifed
here with fo much fuccefs. They made their
drawings on a grey paper, with black and white
chalk, and left the paper to ferve for the middle
tint. Their colours were like ours, dry, with-
out any mixture of oil or water. Our country-
man, Mr. Afhfield, multiplied the number and
variety of tints, and painted various complexi-
ons in imitation of oil ; and this manner has been
fo much improved among us, that there s no
fubjeCt which can be exprefs’d by oil, but the
Crayons can effect it with equal force and beauty.
You, Sir, who are fo good a critick, and io
generous a patron of the art, cannot but wifh
we had the fame advantage as other fchools
have in an academy. ’Tis true, we have fevc-
ral admirable collections, and your own in par-
ticular, whofc pieces are enough to inform the
mott
The D E D I C A T 1 0 N.


mott induttrious difciple, and infpirc his genius
to arrive at a mattery in the art. 1 have heard a
famous Painter alfert,that our Englifh nobility and
gentry may boatt of as many good pictures, of the
bed; Italian matters, as Rome itfelf, churches
only excepted; and yet ’tis fo difficult to have ac-
cefs to any of thefe collections, unlefs it be to
yours. Sir, who feem to have made your ex-
cellent collection, as much for the publick in-
IlruCtion, as for your own private fatisfaCtion,
that they are, in a great meafure, rendered ufe-
lefs, like gold in mifers coffers. Had we an aca-
demy, we might fee how high the Engliffi ge-
nius would foar; and as it excels all other nations
in Poetry, fo, no doubt, it would equal, if not
excel, the greateft of them all in Painting, were
her wings as well imp’d as thole of Italy, Flan-
ders and France. As for Italy, her academies
have kept her genius alive, or it would have
expired with her matters, who firft fhew’d flic
had one, as her genius in poetry died withTalfo
and his contemporaries. The French indeed
are a forward people, who pretend to rival all
nations of the world in their feveral excellencies;
yet confidering they value themfelves fo much
on their own academy, ’tis a matter of wonder
to fee fo little improvement in them by it: And
if we are equal only to them now, how much
fhould we outfhine them, had the Englilh dif-
ciples in this art as many helps and encourage-
ments as theirs.
Sir, ’tis with all polhble refpeCt that I otter
you a treatife, which has been linifh’d w T ith fo
many difficulties. The art was new to us, tho’
the
The DEDICATION.


the language of the original was not; but we
wanted the advice of thofe gentlemen whom
Mr. Dryden confulted in his tranflation of Fref-
noy. If we have err’d in terms, you’ll, I hope,
confider us as the world has been favourable to
that immortal poet for the fame fault. Could
lhave fo far prefumed on your readinefs to oblige
all mankind, as to have defired to be enlighten’d
by you when I was in the dark, I had commit-
ted fewer errors on my part, but I had no war-
rant for that freedom; and tho’ we communi-
cated the whole work to all that we believed
could affift us in it, yet ’tis certain, with all our
caution, we are far from being infallible.
Several matters, whom I have applied to, have
differ’d about the interpretation of fome terms ■,
and even French Painters have allured me, that
our author has ufed fome which were unknown
before. I took the fenfe of thofe words from
them, and it agreeing with that of the author,
I hope we have no where miftaken him, at leaft
confiderably. Pie is excufable for his innovations,
on account of his great knowledge in the art.
’Twas this gentleman who tranflated Monfieur
Frefnoy’s Latin poem, De arte Graphica , and
wrote the reflexions upon it; but yet not think-
ing them fufficient to explain it as clearly as he
would have it, he publish’d this book twenty
years afterwards. Pie is dill living in Paris, and
deflgns and paints very well himfelf tor his diver-
lion, being not of the profeflion; however, I
doubt, from the character of the French fchool,
whether his practice comes up to his theory,
1 am
The DEDICATION.


I am confcious to myfelf, that our tranflation
of him, as to the flile, falls fhort of Mr. Dry-
den’s verfion of Frefnoy’s poem. The original
will, in fome meafure, make amends for that;
and it had been happy for our author, and the
whole art of Painting, if the gentleman, who
added the lives of the Painters to Mr. Dryden’s
tranflation, had had leifure or inclination to have
done for us what he was fo kind as to do for him,
and have fet out the Englifh fchool with the or-
naments that his judgment and elegance could
have given it. I had his work before me in the
execution of my own, and endeavour’d to imitate
him in the account of thofe Englifh Painters,
whom he thought worthy his pen. They had
all been immortal in his name and works, where-
as I can only exped to have mine preferved by
thofe of the Mailers of whom I have written.
Sir, I beg your pardon for troubling with fo
long a flate of my cafe. I wifli the tranflation
and additions flood lefs in need of your protecti-
on, and that I had fome better way of fhewing
to the world with what zeal and refped I am,
SIR,
Tour mojl humble , and
mofi obedient Servant,
The DEDICATION.


THE
CONTENTS.
Bo O K I. Rules for forming a right Judgment on the
Works of the Painters. Page I
Remarks and Infractions on the preceding Idea . 9
Chap. I. Of Genius.
Chap. 11. That a Man may, without any Scruple, make
ufe of another Man’s Studies.
Chap. 111. Of Nature ; Of the Actions of Nature ; Of
the Actions of Habit , and of Education. 13
Chap. IV, In what Senfe one may fay Art is above Na-
ture. 1 4
Chap. V. Of the Antique. v '<■ *5
Chap. VI. Of the Grand Guflo. *7
Chap. VII. Of the Effence of Painting. 18
Chap. VIII. Whether Truth of Hijiory be ejfential in
Painting . i *9
Chap. IX. Of the imperfect Ideas of Painting. 22
Chap. X. How the Remains of the imperfeCi Idea of Paint-
ing have been preferved in the Minds of many ever fmce
its Re-ejiablijhment. _ 2 3
Chap. XI. Of Compofition , the firf part of Painting. 27
Chap. XII. Of Deftgn , the fecond pari of Painting. 28
Chap. XIII. Of the Attitudes.
Chap. XIV. Of the Exprejfions. 29
Chap. XV. Of the Extremities.
Chap XVI. Of the Draperies. 3°
Chap. XVII. Of Landjkips. 3 2
Chap. XVIII. Of Perspective . _ t 33
Chap. XIX. Of Colouring , the third part of
Chap. XX. Of the Harmony of Colours• ih.
Chap. XXI. Of the Pencil. 35
Chap.


Chap. XXII. Of the Licences.
Chap. XXIII. By what Authority the Painters have repre-
Jented, under human Figures, Things divine, fpiritual
and inanimate .
Chap XXIV. Of naked Figures, and how they may be
made ufe of
Chap. XXV. Of Grace. jl
Chap. XXVI. Of Defigns. **
Chap. XXVII. Of the Ufefulnefs and Ufe of Prints, ao
Chap. XXVIII. Of the Knowledge of Pictures. 60
I. To know what is good, and what is bad % in a
Picture. * £
11. To know who is the Author of a Picture. 62
111. To know if a Picture be an Original or a
c °py- 7I
Book 11. The Lives of the Painters, and of the Origin of
Painting. 6 A
The Lives of the fix principal Painters of Greece. 72
Book 111. The Lives of the Roman and Florentine Pain-
ters. g
Book IV. The Lives of the Venetian Painters. jr.
Book V. The Liyes of the Lombard Painters. 187
Book VI. The Lives of the German and Flemi/h Pain-
ters. . 2jm
Book VII. The Lives of the French Painters. 206
Of the Tafle of feveral Nations. ~ ._
Book VIII. An EJfay towards an Englijh School of
Painters. 35 {
An
The CONTENTS.


An ALPHABETICAL INDEX of the Painter's Name ,
in De PILES.
A. P*S e
ALbani, Francefco 209
Alberti, Leone Battifta 92
Albert Durer 2 19
Aldegraef, Albert 229
Andrea del Sarto I*9
Angelico, Giovanni 93
Antonio da Meflina 95
Apelles ' 76
B.
Baccio Eandinelli 122
Balthazar Peruzzi 136
Bamboccio 275
Barent, Ditteric 240
Barocci, Frederico 152
Eaffan, and his Sons 182 to 186
Baftiano del Piombo 142
Baur, William 273
Beccafiumi, Domenico 135
Bellino, Giacomo 157
Bellino, Gentile ib.
Bellino, Giovanni 15 8
Blanchard, Jacques 300
Blomaert, Abraham 261
801, John 240
Booth, John and Henry 276
Berettini, Pietro 155
Bottenhamer, John 250
Bourdon, Seballian 326
Brower, Adrian 270
Brendel, Frederic. 272
De Breuil 298
Bril, Matthew 247
Bril, Paul ib.
Brueghel, Peter 237
Brun, Charles le 336
Bufalmaco, Bonamico 8 8
Burch, Cornelius Poelen 271
C.
Cagliari, Paolo 174
Cagliari, Benedetto 178
Cagliari, Carolo ib.
Cagliari, Gabriele ib.
Calcar, John of 227
Candito, Pietro 223
7 he Caracci 189
Cavallino, Pietro 90
Page
Champagne, Philip de 330
Champagne, Jean Baptifte de
334-
Charmois, Martin de 316
Ghirlandaio, Domenico 97
Cimabue 85
Correggio, Antonio da 1 87
Cornelius, Cornelius 247
Cornelius, Peter 250
Cofimo, Pietro 102
Cofimo, Andrea 126
Couffin, Jean 297
Coxis, Michael 324
D.
Daniele da Volterra 144
Derick, Peter Cornelius 250
Dipembeck, Abraham 279
Domenichino 205
Dorigni, Michael 3 19
The Dofib’s 160
E.
Engelbert, Cornelius 223
Ellheimer, Adam 262
F.
Ferdinando EUe 259
Fouquier, Jacques 274
Frans Floris 238
Francefca, Pietro della 92
Francia, Francefco 101
Francois, Simon 328
Friminet, Martin 298
Frefnoy,Charles Alfbnfe du 319
G.
Gaddo Gaddi S 6
Gaddo Gaddi, Taddeo di 90
Gaud, Henry Count Palatine 273
Geldorp 2 78
Gelee, Claude 343
Genga, Girolamo 115
George Pens 223
Gerbier, Sir Balthazar 277
Ghirlandaio, Domenico 97
Giorgione 1 6 1
Giottino, Thomafo 91
Giotto ' 87
Girard Dou 283
Gio-


INDEX.
Giovanni d’Udine 133
, Giofeppino 15 3
Goltius, Henry 245
. Goltius, Hubert 239
Guercino da Cento 211
Guido Reni 199
H.
Hains or Heints, Jofeph 247
Hanneman 286
Hemskirk, Martin 240
Hire, Liurens de la 219
Holbein, Hans 233
Hun tor ft, Gerrard 206
f.
Johnlbn, Abraham 264
Jordans, James 286
J ulio Romano 1 j c
K.
Kay, William 238
Kouc, Peter 228
L.
Lambert Lombard 232
L infranco, Giovanni 206
Laurati, Pietro 89
Leonardo da Vinci 103
Lippo 9 1
Lippi, Filippo 93
Lippi, Filippo, the Son 98
Loir, Nicholas 334
Lorenzetti, Ambrogio 90
Lucas of Leyden 225
M.
Mabufe, John of 229
Manfredi, Bartolomeo 216
Mantegna, Andrea 99
Margaritone 87
Martin dc Vos 242
Mazzuolo, Francefco 127
Memmi, Simone 90
Micarino da Siena 133
Michael Angelo Buonaroti 137
Michael Angelo da Carravagio
21 3
Mignard, Nicholas 324
Mirevelt, Michael 265
Mieris, Francis 283
More, Anthony 236
Mortuo da Feltro 126
Mutiano, Girolamo 180
Murillo, Bartolomeo 34^
Mudo, Hernandez cl 346
N.
Netfcher, Gafpar 292
O.
Oliver '27S
Qrgagna, Andrea 91
Otho Venius 248
P.
Palma Vecchio 181
Pamphilus <75
Parmegiano 127
Parrhafms 74
Pafqualino della Marca 154
Paolo Vcronefe ' 174
Pellegrino di Bologna 146
Pellegrino da Modena * 135
Penni, Francefco 11 8
Pehni, Luca x 19
Perrier, Francis 3x2
Pierino del Vaga 1 30
Pietro da Cortona 1 5 -
Pietro Perugino 107
Pinturricchio, Bernardino 98
Polidoro da Caravaggio 12 2
Pantormo, Giacomo da izi
Pordenone il Vecchio /ye
Pordenone, Julio Licinio 185
Pourbus, Peter and Francis 239
Pouflin, Nicholas 304
Primaticcio, Francefco 144
Protogenes 8 x
Quillinus, Erahnus 287
Quintin Matiis 226
R.
Raphael Sanzio 109
Raphael del Rhegio 15 c
Rembrant 279
Ribera, Giofeppe 216
Richard I r 2
Rolfo j 26
Rubens, Sir Peter Paul 250


S.
Salviati, Francefco 147
Sandrart, Joachim 287
Sandro Botticelli 99
Savery, Rowland 271
Schouar ts, Chriftopher 238
Schut, Cornelias 266
Scorel, John 23 1
Segre, Gerrard 265
Segre, Daniel 277
Signorelli, Luca 102
Sprangher, Bartholomew 243
Stephano of Florence 89
Stella, James 314
Stenvick, Henry 264
Stimner, Tobias 235
Strada, John 243
Swanevelt, Harman 277
Sueur,* Eattache le 317
T.
Taffi, Andrea 86
Teniers, David, the Elder 274
Teniers, David, the Younger 279
Telia, Pietro 154
Timanthes 75
Tintoretto Giacomo Robufti
*7°
Tintoretta, Maria 175
Titiano Vecelli 163
Torrentius, John 372
V.
VanAch, John » 246
Van-dyck, Sir Anthony 267
Van-Heem, Cornelius 279
Van-Eyk, Hubert2i 7
Van-Houk, John 274
Van-Orlay, Bernard 224
Van-Noort, Adam 248
Vanni, Francefco 153
Varin 300
Vafari, Giorgio 149
Vecelli, Francefco 170
Vecelli, Horatio ib.
Van-Mandre, Charles 241
Ver-Meyen,John Cornelius 23 6
Verrochio, Andrea 97
Verfchure, Henry 290
Vignon, Claude 326
Vouet, Simon 301
Z.
Zeuxis 7 2
Zucchero, Taddeo 148
Zucchero, Frederico 150
An INDEX of the Painters Names in the Essay to-
wards an English School.
A.
AGgas, Mr. Robert 354
Anderton,Mr. Henry 3 5 5
Alhfield, Mr. Edmund ib.
B.
Baptift Gafpars 3 >
Baptift Monnoyer ib.
Barlow, Mr. Francis 357
Beal, Mrs. Mary 358
Du Bois, Edward 359
Boon, Daniel ib.
Bucklhorn, Jofeph ib,
Buftler 360
Byer, Nicholas ib.
C.
Carings, Mr. John 361
Carliile, Mrs. Anne ib.
a
Caufabon, Frederic 361
DeCleyn, Francis 362
Coloni, Adam ib.
Coloni, Henry 363
Cook, Mr. Henry ib.
Cooper, Mr. Alexander 364
Cooper, Samuel, Efq; ib.
Crofs, (Mr.) the Copier 366
D.
Dankers, John and Henry 367
Deryke, William 3^B
Digby, Lord Bi/hop' ib.
Dobfon, Mr. William ib.
E.
Edema, Gerrard 370
F.
Faithorn. Mr. William 371
Flat-
INDEX.


Flatman, Mr.’ Thomas 372
Le Fevre de Venife 373
Freeman, Mr. John ib.
Fuller, Mr. Ifaac ib.
G.
Garrard, Mark 374
Gafcar, Henry 375
Gentilefchi, Horatio ib.
Gentilefchi, Artemifia 376
Gibfon, Mr. Richard 377
Gibfon, Mr. William 378
Gibfon, Mr. Edward ib.
Greenhill, Mr. John ib.
H.
Hanneman, Adrian 382
Hayles, Mr. John ib.
Hemskirk, Egbert 383
Hilliard, Mr. Nicholas ib.
Holbein, Hans 385
Hollar, Wencellaus 388
Hondius, Abraham 389
Hoskins, Mr. John ib.
Houfeman, James 390
Johnfon, Cornelias 39 1
Johnfon, Martin ib.
K.
De Keifar,Henry 392
Killigrew, Mrs. Anne ib.
Kneller, Mr. John Zachary ib.
L.
Lambert, Major-General 393
Lanier, Mr. ib.
Lankrink.Profper Henricus 395
Lauron or Laroon, Marcelius
Lely, Sir Peter 396
Lemens, Balthazar van 399
Lightfoot, Mr. William 400
Loten, John ib.
M.
Manby, Mr. Thomas 401
Mytens, Daniel ib.
O.
Oliver, Mr, Ifaac ib.
Oliver, Mr. Peter 40a
P.
Paert, Mr. Henry ib,
Pembroke, Mr. Thomas 403
Pen, Jacob ib.
Pierce, Mr. Edward ib.
Le Piper, Mr. Francis 404
R.
Remee 408
Riley, John, Ejq; 409
Roeltraten, Peter 410
Rofe, Mrs. Sufan ib.
Roufleau, James 41 1
8.
Smitz, Gafpar 412
Stephenfon, Mr. Thomas 413
Stone, Mr. Henry ib.
Stoop, Peter 414
Streater, Mr. Robert ib.
Sybrecht, John 416
T.
Tilfon, Mr. Henry ib.
V.
Vatiderborcht, Henry 417
Vander-Heydon, John ib.
Van-Died, Adrian 418
Vandyck, Sir Anthony 419
Vandervelde, William 422
Van-Zoon, Francis 423
Varelft. Harman ib.
Vergazoon, Henry ib.
Vorlterman, F. de 424
W.
Walker, Mr. Robert ib.
Walton, Mr. Parrey 425
Willing, Mr. William 426
Wouters, Francis 428
Wright, Mr. Michael ib.
Wyke, Thomas van 440
Wykc, John van ib.
Z.
Zoud or Soeft ib.
THE
INDEX.


THE
IDEA
Of a Perfect
PAINTER:
OR,
RULES for forming a right judgment
on the works of the PAINTERS.
BOOK I.
E NIU Sis the firft thing we muft
fuppofe in a painter j *tis a part of
n him that cannot be acquired by ftudy
or labour. It fhould be great to an-
fwer the Greatnefs of an art, which,
includes fo many fciences, and re-
quires fo much time and application to be mafter of,
as painting does. Allow then a man born with this
ahppy talent, the painter muft regard VifibleNa-
B ture


ture as his objed. He muft have an image of her
in his mind, not only as he happens to fee her in
particular fubjcds, but as (he ought to be in herfelf,
and as Ihe wou'd be, were fhe not hindered by cer-
tain accidents.
Now it being very difficult to meet with this
perfed ftate of nature, *tis neceflary the painter
fhould improve himfelf by the fame fearch the an-
cients made after it, with a great deal of care and
capacity, of which they have left us examples in
fculptures, that in fpight of the fury of time and
barbarians,, have been preferved, and are even yet
to be feen. He ought, I fay, to have a fufficient
knowledge of Antiquity, and to learn by that how
to follow nature ; for the Antique has always been
the rule of beauty to the belt judges. He muft
not content himfelf with being exad and regular,
he Ihould, in every Thing he does, fhew a grand
Gufto, and above all things avoid what is mean and
infipid.
This grand Gufto in the works of the painters, is a
life of the choiceft effects of nature, fuch as are
great, extraordinary, and probable. Great, becaufe
things are fo much the Id's fenfible to us, by how
much they are little or divided. Extraordinary,
becaufe what is ordinary does not ftrike us, nor
draw our attention. Probable, becaufe it is requi-
fite that thefe great and extraordinary things fhould
appear to be poffible, and not chimerical. The
perfed painter muft have a juft idea of his profef-
iion, which may be thus defin'd : “ Painting is an
“ art, that by means of dcfign and colouring, imi-
“ tates all vifible objeds on a fiat
Three things fhould be comprehended in this defi-
nition, Defign, Colouring, and Compofition ; and
tho’ the latter docs not feem to be very clearly
expreft, yet it may be underftood by thefe words
Vifible Objeds, which imply the matter of the
fubjed


fubjed the painter propofes to himfelf to reprefent.
He ought to know, and to pradice thefe three
parts of his art, in as much perfedion as poflible:
We (hall therefore further explain them, in fpeak-
ing of the other parts that depend on them/
D Compofition contains two things. Invention and
Difpofition. By invention, the painter fhould find
out thole fubjeds to work upon, that are moft pro-
per to be exprefs’d and adorn’d. And by Difpo-
lition he ought to place them in the moil advanta-
geous fituation, and where they will have the great-
eft effed, the eye being pleafed with viewing the
faireft parts of the things reprefented, which fhould
be well contrafted, well diverfify’d, and well
group’d.
The painter, to be perfed, muft defign cor red-
ly, with a good Gufto, and a different Stile, fome-
times heroic, fometimes paftoral, according to the
charader of the figures he introduces. He muft
know, for example, that the Out-lines, which
would agree with divinities, would in no wife be
fuitable to common people; heroes and private
foldiers, the ftrong and the weak, the young and
the old, ought each to have their feveral forms.
Befides, nature differing in all her produdions, re-
quires that the painter fhould have an anfwerable
variety in his; and he muft never forget, that of
all the various manners of defigning, there is none
good, but that which is compos’d of beautiful na-
ture, and the antique together.
The Attitudes, or poftures of the figures,
fhould be natural, expreftive, vary’d in their adions,
and contrafted in their members. They fhould be
fimple or noble, animated or temperate, according
to the fubjed of the pidure, and the diferetion of
the painter.
The Exprefllon muft be juft to the fubjed,
what relates to the principal figure fhould be noble,
B 2 elevated


elevated and fublime; and a medium ought to be
obferved between what is exaggerated, and what
infipid.
The Extremities, I mean the head, feet, and
hands, muft be drawn with more nicety and exadt-
nefs, than the other parts of the figures, and muft
together help to render their adlion more ex-
preftivc.
The Draperies Ihould be well let, the foldings
large, as few as may be, and well contrafted. The
fluff ought to be heavy or light, according to the
quality and convenience of the fubjedt: Sometimes
it fhould be wrought, and of a different kind, and
fometimes plain, agreeable to the figure and irs fitua-
tion, which requires more or left lultre for the orna-
ment of the pidture, and for the oeconomy of the
whole.
Animals are chiefly charadleriz’d by a lively and
particular ftroke of the pencil.
Landfkips fhould not be encumber’d with too
many objedb, and the few that are there ought to
be well chofen. If a great quantity of objedfs are
reprelented together, they muft be ingenioufly
group’d with lights and fhadows; the placing of
them muft be well connedled, and yet free. The
trees muft be of different forms, colour, and touch,
as prudence and the variety of nature require.
This touch ought always to be light, as it were in
motion ; the Fore-ground fhould be rich, either
by the objedls themfelves, or, at leaft, by nicety
of work, which renders things true or palpable.
The fky muft be light, and no objedt on the
earth have any of its aerial character, except fmooth
waters, and polifh’d bodies, which are fufceptible
of the oppofite colours, as well celeftial as terreft
trial. The clouds fhould be well chofen, well
touch’d, and well plac’d.
The


The Perfpedlive fhould be very regular, and yet
with a feeming negligence.
In Colouring, which comprehends two things,
the Local colour, and the Claro Obicuro, the paint-
er fhould inform himfelf very well of both the
one and the other. This only will diftingaifh him
from thofe artifls, who underftand meai'ure and
proportion as well as he; and this will render hina
the more faithful, and more perfect imitator of
nature. _ ,
The Local colour is nothing elfe but that which
is natural to each objedl, in whatever place tis
found; which diftinguilhes it from others, and
which perfe&ly marks its charadter.
The Claro Obfcuro is the art of diftributing
lights and fhadows advantageoufty, as well on par-
ticular objedts, as on a pidlure in general. On par-
ticular objedls, to give them a convenient Relievo
and roupdnefs, and, in the pidlure in general, to
expofe the objedls with pleafure to the view ot the
fpedlators, by giving the eye an occalion to reft ;
which is done by an ingenious diftribution of great
lights, and great fhadows, which lend each other
mutual aftiftance by their oppofition. T. hus great
lights are a repofe for great fhadows, as great fha-
dows are for great lights. Tho’, as has been faid,
the Claro Obfcuro comprehends the art of placing
all lights and fhadows well, yet ’tis more particu-
larly underftood to be the knowledge of rightly
difpofing great lights, and great fhadows.
Their diftribution, in this laft fenfe, may oe
made four ways, Firft, by the natural fhadows of
the Body. Secondly, by Groupes, that is, by dif-
pofing the objedls in fuch manner, that the Lights
may be join’d all together, and the fhadows the
fame, as one may imperfedlly perceive in a grape,
whofe grains on the fide of the light make a mafs
of brightnefs, and on the oppofue fide a mafs of
B 3 darknefs j


darkncfs; yet all together form but one Groupe,
and are as one object. This muft be done fo arti-
ficially, that no affedlation may appear in it: The
objedts muft feem fo fituated naturally, and as by
chance. Thirdly, by the accidents of a fuppofcd
Light: And fourthly, by the nature and the body
of the colours which the painter may give to his
objects, without altering their character. This part
of painting is the beft and fureft way for a painter
to add force to his works, and to render his objects
fenfible, as well in general, as in particular. I
don’t find that the way of the Claro Obfcuro was
known in the Roman fchool, before Polidoro da
Caravagio’s time, who difcovered it, and made it
one of the principles of the art of painting ; and I
wonder the painters who came after him, did not
perceive that the great effedl of his works, on the
fpedators, proceeded from the reft, which he gave
the fight in grouping his lights on -one fide, and
his fhadows on another, which he did, only by the
knowledge of the Claro Obfcuro: I wonder, I fay,
how they could let fo neceflary a part of their
art efcape, without taking notice of it. However,
the Claro Obfcuro is to be found among fome of the
Roman painters; yet ’tis not to be efteem’d as any
thing more than a happy effedft of genius or chance,
and not as proceeding from an eftablifh’d principle
of the art,
Andrew Bofcoli, a Florentine Painter, had a right
potion of the Claro Obfcuro, as may be feen by
his works, but the re-eftablifiiment of this principle
is owing to Giorgione, whofe competitor, Titian,
perceiving it, made ufe of it ever after.
In Flanders, Otho Venius laid it down as a funda-
mental in painting, and communicated it to Rubens,
his pupil. The latter rendered it more fenfible to
the fpeeftator, and fhew’d the neceflity of it fo ap-
parently, that the beft Flemilh painters follow’d him
in


in it, and have recommended their paintings by
this part of perfection ; for without it all the care
they have taken to imitate the particular objeCls of
nature, with the utmoft faithfulnefs, had not been
worth our confideration.
In the diftribution of colours there ought to
be an agreement or harmony, which has the fame
effeCt on the eye, as mulick has on the Ear. II
there arefeveral Groupes of the Ciaro Obfcuro in a
picture, one of them ftiould be more fenfible than
the reft, and be predominant over the others ; that
there may be unity of objeCt, as in the compofi-
tion there ftiould be unity of fubjeCt
The Pencilling, if poftible, muft be bold and
light; but whether it feems all of a piece, like
that of Corregio, or unequal and uneven,, like that
of Rembrant, it ought always to be foft and
eafy.
If a painter be forc’d to make ufe of the Licen-
ces, they fhould be imperceptible, judicious, ad-
vantageous and juftifiable: The three firft lorts
belong to the painters art, and the laft to hiftory.
Whatever painter is mafter of his art in all the
parts we have mentioned, he may depend upon it
he is arrived to a great degree of perfection, and
his pictures will infallibly be fine; yet not entirely
perfeCt, if beauty be not accompanied with Grace.
Grace muft feafon the parts we have fpoken of,
and every where follow Genius : Grace fupports
and perfects it; but it is not to be fo thoroughly
acquired, as by any rules to be demonftrated.
A painter has it from nature only, and does not
know that he has it, nor in what degree, nor how
he communicates it to his works. It furprifes the
fpeCtator, who feels the effeCt without penetrating
into the true caufe of it; but this grace does not
touch him otherwife, than according to the difpo-
B 4 fttion


fition wherein he finds it. We may define it thus:
lis what pleafes, and gains the heart, without
concerning itfcifwith the underftanding.” Grace
and beauty are two different things; beauty pleafes
by the rules only, and grace without them. What
is beautiful, is not always graceful ; but grace join’d
with beauty is the heighth of perfection.
We have given this idea of a perfeCt painter
m as few words as we could, that we miaht not
be tedious to thofe who are in no doubt about the
t ings it contains; but for thole that defiie proofs
ot it, we have endeavoured to fatisfy them in the
to lowing remarks; in which both the one and the
other will find, we have treated of fuch things as
naturally prefented themfelves to us, and perhaps
will not be indifferent to them. *
ihe following remarks anfwer in chapters to the
fevcral parts of the idea of a perieft painter, of
which we have fpoken in the foregoing treatife;
and the reader, ,n al] the chapters, Ihould by his
memoiy fupply the parts where we have treated of
them, to explain them.
R E-


CHAP. I.
REMARKS and INSTRUCTIONS
on the preceding INDEA.
Of GENIUS.
}rTMS in vain for men to endeavour, with all
their might to reach the point of perfection,
in the art of painting, or any other art, if they
are not born with a particular talent for the fcience
they profefs. They will always be uncertain of at-
taining the end they propofe to themfelves ; rules
and examples may fhew them the means of reach-
ing it, but that is not fufficient: If thefe examples
and rules are not eafy and agreeable to them, they
will never befure.
This facility is only found in thofe, who before
they learn the rules of art, or fee the works of
other men, have confulted their own inclination,
and examin*d whether they were put upon the
choice of their profeflion by fome inward Light,
which is indeed Genius, and is what guides them
by the neared and eafied way to perfection, render-
ing them infallibly happy, both in the means, and
in the end.
Genius therefore is that light of the mind, which
conducts us to the end by the mod eafy means.
*Tis a prefent which nature makes to a man at
the hour of his birth; and tho’ fhe commonly gives
it for one thing only, fhe is fometimes fo liberal as
to make it general in one perfon. There have been
feveral men, on whom fhe has bellowed this pleni-
tude of influences, who have with eafe perform’d
what


whatever they attempted, and always fucceeded in
what they undertook : A particular genius, ’tis true,
does not extend its force to all forts of knowledge
as a general one does, but then it penetrates far-
ther into that, over which ’tis predominant.
. A Painter, in the firft place, fhould have a Ge-
nius, but that genius muft be correCfed by rules,
reflections and induftry. He muft have feen much,
read much, and ftudy’d much, to direft his genius,
that it may produce things worthy pofterity. But
fince he cannot fee or ftudy every thing he would
defire to know, in the way to the perfeftion he
aims at, he may, without fcruple, make ufe of ano-
ther man’s ftudies.
CHAP. II.
That a man may, without scruple , make use of
another man's studies.
3HpIS impoffible for a Painter to reprefent well,
JL not only all the objeds he has not Teen, but
alfo thofe he has not defign’d. If he has not feen
a lion, he can never paint one; and if he has feen
one, he will always paint it imperfectly, unlefs he
firft defigns it after nature, or after another man’s
works.
For this reafon we ought not to blame a Painter,
who having never feen or ftudy’d the objed he is to
reprefent, makes ufe of another man’s ftudies, ra-
ther than draw fomething falfe out of his own
head. *Tis neceffary he Ibould have his examples
in his memory, or his Table-book ; his own, I fay,
or thofe of another man.
When a Painter has furnifh’d his mind with ima-
ges of the beautiful things he has feen, he adds to,
or


or diminiflies them according to his Gout, or as his
judgment direfts. This change arifes by compa-
ring the ideas of what he has feen one with the
other, and chuflng that which he thinks beft. For
example, Raphael in his youth, while he lived with
his mafter Perugino, had only the ideas of the works
of that Painter in his mind ; but afterwards com-
paring them with thofe of Michael Angelo, and
with the Antique, he chofe that which feem d bell
to him, and out of it form’d a refin’d Gufto, fuch
as we fee now in all his productions.
Thus genius makes ufe of the memory, as a
veflel wherein it keeps all the ideas that prefent
themfelves to it. The Painter chufes thofe that are
for his purpofe, by the help of his judgment, and
treafures them up in a magazine, out of which he
takes them as occaflon requires. *1 was out of
fuch a magazine (if I may lb exprefs myfelf) that
Raphael took all thofe high ideas, which he had
drawn from the Antique; and thus Albert Durer,
and Lucas van Leyden drew from theirs, thofe
Gothic ideas, with which the practice or their
time, and the nature of their country, furnifh’d
them. .
A perfon that has a genius may invent a fubjedl
in general, but if he has not ftudy’d particular ob-
jects, he will be embarafs’d in the execution of his
work, unlefs he has recourfe to the works of
another.
If a Painter has neither time nor opportunity to
fee nature, yet has a fine genius, he may ftudy af-
ter the pictures, the defigns, and the prints of thofe
matters, who knew how to choofe their fubjedls
well, and to draw them with judgment. He
who would draw a landfkip, and never faw, or
never made fufiicient obfervations on the countries
proper to be painted, for the oddnefs or agreeable-
nefs of the profpeft, will do well to make his ad-
vantage


vantage of the works of thofe, who have ftudy’d
thofe countries, or who, in their landfkips, have
reprefented the extraordinary effefts of nature. He
may look on the productions of thofe able painters
as fafely as on nature herfelf, and by them affift his
invention in fome future production. To ftudy, at
firft, the works of the belt matters will be two
ways ufeful to him; one is, he will fee nature free
from many things, which a man is oblig’d to throw
afide when he copies after her. The other is, he
will by this method learn to make a good choice of
nature, to take nothing from her that is not beauti-
ful, and to mend what’s defective in her.
Thus a genius well regulated and fupported by
the theory of an art, not only makes ufe of its
own ftudies, but alfo turns thofe of other men to
its own advantage.
Leonardo da Vinci writes, that the fpots which
are to be feen on an old wall, forming confus’d
ideas of different objeCts, may excite genius, and
help it to produce fomething. Some perfons fancy
this affertion is an injury to genius, without giving
any good reafons for their objecting to it; for ’tis
certain, that on fuch a wall, or fome other fuch like
fpotted thing, there’s not only room to form out
of it ideas in general, but each painter may con-
ceive different ideas, according to the difference of
his genius •, and that which is feen in a confus’d
manner only may produce fomething clear, and
form an image in the mind of the artift who fees
it according to his particular tafte. By this means
one man (hall fee a fine and rich compofition, be-
caufe his genius is fruitful, and his tafte good ; and
another, on the contrary, (hall fee nothing but
what is poor, and of an ill tafte, becaufe his ge-
nius is barren, and his tafte bad.
Let the minds of the painters be of what cha-
racter they will, each may difcover enough in
luch


fuch an objed to excite his imagination, and help
him to produce fomething of his own. The imagi-
nation growing warm by degrees, becomes at laft
capable, by the fight of a few Figures, to conceive
a great number, and to enrich the fcene of his
fabjed with certain objeds of his own. Thus he
may, as it were, beget extraordinary ideas, which
otherwife he had never thought of.
We have fhewn that the faying of Leonardo da
Vinci, concerning genius, does it no injury; on
the contrary, that ’cis often of great fervice to it,
as well to thofe who have much, as to thofe who
have little of it. I fhall only add to what he faid,
that the more a man has of genius, the more things
he will perceive in thole forts of fpots, or confus’d
lines.
CHAP. III.
Of Nature ; of the actions of Nature; of the
actions of Habit, and of Education .
NAture is as much alter’d by the accidents fhe
meets with, as by the habit fhe contrads by
feveral adions, which may be confidered two ways,
when fhe ads of herfelf, or by habit to pleafe others.
The adions that are purely natural are thofe which
men would do, if from their infancy they had been
left to themfelves, and the adions, which are the
produd of habit, and education, are fuch as men do
by the inftrudion or example of others. Of the lat-
ter kind there are as many different forts, as there
are nations, and they are fo mingled with the adi-
ons, purely natural, that in my opinion *tis very
hard to difcern the difference. Yet this is what the
Painter ought to aim at; for he mull often treat of
2, fubjeds.


fubjeds, where he ought to copy pure nature In
the whole, or in part, and ’tis neceffary there to
know the different adions in which nature isfet out
by the chief nations of the world. But becaufe the
differences of them proceeds from affedation, a veil
which difguifes truth, it fhould be the fludy of a
painter to diftinguifh one from the other, and to
know wherein the fidelity, the beauty, and the fim-
plicity of nature confifts, whofe graces are all owing
to her purity.
*Tis vifible the ancient fculptors fought after this
natural fimplicity, and that Raphael borrow’d from
them thofe natural ftrokes, which he has every
where fpread over his pieces with a good Gufto.
Yet tho* nature is the fource of beauty, ’tis com-
monly faid, that art excels her. Several authors
have talk’d thus, and dis a Problem which wants
very much to be folv’d.
CHAP. IV.
In what Senfe one may say , ART is above
NSYUTR.
WE fhould con fide r nature either as we find
her in particular objeds, or in objeds in
general, and as ftie is in herfelf. She is generally
defedivc in particular objeds, in the forming of
which fhe is, as we have faid, alter’d by accidents
againft her intention, which is always willing to
produce her works in perfedion ; wherefore, if we
confider her according to her intention, and in her
produdions in general, we fhall find her perfed.
’Tis from thefe her works in general, that the
ancient fculptors took the perfedion of their figures,
from whence Polycletes drew the beautiful propor-
-2 tions


tlons of the ftatue, which he made for pofterity*
and which is called the RULE.
*Tis the fame with Painters, the advantageous
effects of nature gave them a defire to imitate them,
and a happy experience, by little and little, reduc’d
thofe effeds into precepts. Thus is was not from
one objed, but from feveral, that the rules of this
art were eftablifil’d.
If we compare the art of Painting, which has
been form’d out of nature in general, with any one
of her particular produdions, we fliall find it comes
Ihort of her, and perceive it to be true. That Art is
above Nature; but if we compare it with nature her-
felf, who is the model of art, this propofition will
prefently be found to be falfe. Indeed, to confider
things aright, whatever care the Painters have taken
to imitate this miftrefs of their art, they have not
hitherto been able to reach her ; flie has an inex-
hauftible ftore of beauties, and for this reafon ’tis
laid, that in the arts we are always learning : By
experience and reflexion we are continually difeo-
vering fomething new in the effeds of nature, which
are without number, and always different one from
the other.
CHAP. V.
Of the ANTIQUE.
BY the word Antique are meant all the pieces
ofPainting, fculpture and architedure, which
were made as well in iEgypt, as in Greece, from
the time of Alexander the Great to the irruption of
the Goths, who, out of rage or ignorance, deftroy’d
all the Fine Arts. The term Antique is (till more
particularly us’d, to denote the Iculptures of that
time.


time, as well ftatues and Baflb Relievo’s as medals
and * ftones engrav’d. All thofe pieces of antiquity
are not of an equal goodnefs, yet even in thofe that
are indifferent, there is a certain beauty which di-
ftinguifhes them from the works of the moderns.
*Tis not of thofe indifferent pieces that we are
fpeaking here, but of the moft perfeft produftions
of the ancients, fuch as we cannot now look on
without wonder. An ancient author has put them
above nature, and praifes the beauty of mankind but
as it has an agreement with the beautiful ftatues.
Ufa ah Ungulo ad Capillum Summum eft feftiviffma.
Ejine? Confidera: VideSignumpitiumpulchre videris.
Plauti Epidic. Att. 5.
I might quote an infinite number of ancient au-
thorities to prove this affertion, if I did not fear to
tire the reader with repetitions: I refer
him therefore to my Comment on f i by
Monfieur Frefnoy’s Art of Painting, M • D y *
and fhall content my felt with relating
what a modern Painter, who had penetrated far
into the knowledge of the Antique, faid on the
fame occafion. *Tis the famous Monfieur Pouffm
of whom lam fpeaking. Raphael, faid he, is an
compar’d with other Painters •, but in com-
parhbn of the Ancients he’s an Afs. The Phrafe is
a little too ftrong, and 1 think *tis enough to fay
Raphael is as much below the ancients, as the mo-
derns are below him.
I fhall examine this thought more at large when
I come to write his Life.
s Tis certain there are few who are able to difcern
all the delicacy that is to be found in the ancient
fculptures, becaufe, to do it, the artifts fhou’d have
* Intaglio’/.
a mind
16
I The Art


a mind proportionable to thole of the fculptors that
made them. They IhouM have a fublimc Gufto,
a quick conception, and an exa£t and lively per-
formance. They gave their figures proportions
conformable to their character, and defign’d their
divinities by Contours more eafy, more elegant,
and with a greater Gout than thofe of ordinary
men.
They made a refin’d choice of beautiful nature,
and found out excellent remedies for the impotence
of the matter they work’d with hind ring them to
imitate all things.
A Painter therefore cannot do better than en-
deavour to find out the excellence of thefe pieces,
that he may know the purity of nature the better,
and defign the more learnedly, and the more ele-
gantly. Neverthelefs, fmee there are in fculpture
feveral things that do not agree with Painting, and
fince the painter has, befidcs, the means to imitate
nature more perfe&ly; he ought to regard the
Antique, as a book which is to be tranflated into
another language, wherein *tis fufficient he keeps to
the fenfe and meaning of the author, without tying
himfdf fervilely to his words.
CHAP. VI.
Of the grand GUSTO.
IT has been ftiewn by the definition I have given
of the grand Gufto, as it relates to the works
of the Painters, that ’tis not to be accommodated
to ordinary things. A mediocrity is not allowable
but in the arts which are neceflary for common ufe,
and by no means in thofe that are invented only for
orpament and pleafure, wherefore in Painting there
C muft


muft be fomething great and extraordinary to fur-
prife, pi cafe and inftruct, which is what we call the
grand Gufto. ’Tis by this that ordinary things are
made beautiful, and the beautiful, fublime and
wonderful; for in Painting, the grand Gufto, the
Sublime, and the Marvellous are one and the fame
thing. Language indeed is wanting, but every thing
fpeaks in a good Pifhire.
CHAP. VII.
Of ESSENCE of PAINTING.
WE have faid, that Painting is an art which
by means of defign and colours, imitates
all vifible obje&s on a flat fuperficies. ’Tis thus
or very near it, that all who have fpoken of this
art have defin’d it, and no body has yet had any
thing to fay againft the definition. It contains
three parts, compofition, defign and colouring,
which are the eflfence of Painting, as the body, the
foul and reafon are that of a man ; and as man, by
thefe three parts of him only, ftiews feveral pro-
prieties and agreements that are not part of his ef-
fence, but the ornament, for example, the fciences
and virtues j fo ’tis only by the eflential parts of
his art, that a Painter ftiews an infinity of things
which heighten the worth of his pidlures, tho* they
are not of the eflfence of Painting. Such are the
proprieties of inftrusting and diverting *, upon which
one may afk this confiderable queftion.
CHAP,


CHAP. VIII.
Whether TRUTH of HISTORY be essential in
PAINTING.
plain that compofltion, which is an effen-
X tial part of Painting, comprehends the ob-
jects that are to be met with in hiftory, of which
truth is the effence, and by confequence this liue-
lity ought to be effential in Painting, and the
painter is, on all occalions, oblig’d to conform hifn-
lelf thereto.
To this it has been anfwer’d, that if truth of
hiftory be effential in painting, there could be no
pidlure in which it fhould not be found, whereas
there are fevcral which reprefent no hiftory at all,
fuch as allegorical pictures, landfhips, beafts, fifb,
fruits, flowers, and feveral other things, which arc
the pure effeeft of the painters fancy. Notwith-
ftanding all this, ’tis certainly true that the painter
ought to obferve an exad fidelity in the hiftory he
reprefents, and that by a curious fearch after the
circumftances which accompany it, he fhould en-
creafe the beauty, and the value of his pidure, yet
this is not an obligation on him which is of the
effence of Painting, *ds only an indifpenfible decency,
as virtue and fcience are in a man. Thus, as a man
is a man ftill, let him be never fo vicious and igno-
rant, fo a painter is ftill a painter, tho* he be igno-
rant of hiftory •, yet as the virtues and Iciences are
the ornaments of a man, fo ’tis undeniably true,
that all the works of the painters wherein hifto-
rical fubjeds are reprefented, are fo much the more
valuable, by how much the more the truth of
hiftory is preferv’d, fuppoflng that there is nothing
C 2 wanting


wanting as to the imitation of nature, which is e£
iential in Painting.
A Painter may be very fkilful in his art, and yet
know nothing of hiftory : There are almoft as
inany inftances of this, as there are pictures of Ti-
tian, Paolo Veronefe, Tintoret, the Baffan’s, and
icyeral other Venetians, whofe chiefeft eare was
about the cfTence of their art; that is, in the imita-
tion of nature, and who very little apply’d them-
lelves to things that might, or might not be with-
out altering its eflence. ’Tis in this fenfe the curi-
ous judge of the pictures of the painters I have men-
tion d, or they would not buy them by their weight
in gold, nor would their works be other wife among
thofe that have the firft place in their cabinets.
And yet ’tis not to be difputed, but that if this
offence of the art, in the pictures of the Venetian
painters, had been accompany’d with thofe orna-
ments that certainly render fuch things more valu-
able, I mean the truth of hiftory, and chronology,
they would have been much more eftimable even
than are now. We muft, however, confefs,
’tis by this eflence only that the painters ought to
inftrueft us, and that we ought to prefer the imita-
tion of nature in their pieces to all other excellencies
whatfoever. If they inftrudl us, fo much the bet-
ter ; if they don’t, we fhall (till have the pleafure
of viewing a kind of creation that will both divert
and move us.
When I would learn hiflory, I would not go to
a painter for it; he is an hiftorian meerly by acci-
dent. I would read thofe books that treat of it
exprefly, and inform my felf by thofe, whofe effen-
tial duty it is, not only to relate events, but to do
it truly.
Neverthelefs, after all I have faid on this rubjcift,
I will not pretend to excufe a painter, where he
ihews himfelf a bad hiftorian; for a man is always
blame


blame-worthy in ill performing what he undertakes.
If a Painter is about to treat of an hiftorical fubjeft,
and knows nothing of the objects which fhould
be a part of his compofnion to render it true, he
ought carefully to inform himfelf either by books,
or from men of learning, and if he is negligent in
this matter, he is without doubt inexcufable. I
except fuck as have painted pieces of devotion,
where they have introduced faints of different ages
and countries, not out of choice, but out of a
forc’d complaifance for the perfons that fet them
to work, whofe weaknefs incapacitated them to
reflect on thefe additional things, that might con-
tribute to the ornament of Painting.
Invention, which is an effential part of Painting,
confifts folely in finding out objects proper to enter
into the compofition of a picture, as the Painter’s
imagination guides him, whether in things true or
falfe, fabulous or hiftorical. Suppofe then a Painter
fhould imagine Alexander the Great was dreft as we
drefs at this day, and fhould reprefen t that Con-
queror with a hat and perriwig, he would doubt-
lefs do a very ridiculous thing, and be guilty of
an unpardonable error; but his crime would be
againft the truth ofhiftory, and not againft painting,
if the reft of the things he painted were according
to the rules of art.
But tho’ nature is the eifence of painting, and hi-
ftory only an accident, yet this accident is not lefs
worthy of the Painter’s conlideration than the ef-
fencc, in cafe he would pleafe every body, efpecially
the men of letters, and fuch as judge of a picture
more by their underftanding, than their eyes, and
whole opinion it is, that the perfection of thefe
fort of works confifts chiefly in reprefenting hiftory
faithfully, and expreffing the pafiions well.
C 3 C H A F.


CHAP. IX.
Of the imperfect IDEAS of PAINTING.
THERE are few perfons who have a clear
idea of Painting, even among the Painters
themfelves; feveral of whom place the whole ef-
fence of their art in defign ; and others think tis
in the colouring only.
The greater part of thofe bred to the prorelTion
of learning, have no notion of Painting, but as it
relates to the invention of the Painter, whole fancy
is the chief thing they look on. They examine this
invention narrowly, they difleCl it, and as it appears
more or lefs ingenious, they praife or difpraife the
pifture, without considering the effeCt, or to what
decree of perfection the Painter has carry’d his imi-
tation of nature. In this lenfe .it vyas, that St,
Auflin faid, the knowledge of painting, and the
fable is Superfluous -,** and at the fame time the
holy father commends the profane Sciences.
In vain did Titian, Giorgione, and Paolo
Veronefe, exert themfelves to excel in the eflence
of their art, the imitation of nature. _ In vain
were they at fo much pains to imitate her
fo perfectly as they did, and the criticks have in
vain regarded their pieces as the moft pcrfeCt copies
- of nature, if that is not in the firft place to be con-
sidered. They gave themfelves the trouble of
painting to no purpofe, fince correCt prints would
Suffice to exercife the judgment of fuch criticks,
and fill up the extent of their knowledge.
To return to St. Auflin, if he had had a true
idea of Painting, as it is only an imitation of truth,
and had reflefted that by this imitation the fouls of
the righteous may be a thoufand ways rais d up to
diyine loye, he would have written a panegyrick
/‘ ’ j on


on this fine art with To much the more warmth, by
how much the more he was himfelf fenfible of
every thing that might carry a man to heaven *
Another father had a jufter idea of painting, I
mean St. Gregory of Nice, who, after having
made a long and beautiful defcription of Abraham’s
lacrificing his fon Ifaac, has thcfe words, “ I have
“ often call my eyes upon a picture, which repre-
“ fents this moving objed, and could never with-
<{ draw them without tears, lo well did the picture
“ reprefent the thing itfelf, even as if the adion
“ were then palling before my fight.
CHAP. X.
How the remaim of the imperfect idea of paint-
ing have been preserved , in the minds of many ,
ever since its re-establishment.
I have in the former chapter Ihewn, that the efience
of Painting confifts in a faithful imitation, by
which means the Painter may both pleafe and in-
ftrud, according to the meafure of his genius. I
fhall now treat of the falfe ideas ot Painting, and
in this chapter Ihew how the remains of thole that
are impeded Hid down to us from our forefathers.
Painting, as well as other arts, came to be known
by the progrefs it made in the minds of men.
Thofe that began to revive it in Italy, and confe-
quently had but weak principles to go by, drew the
admiration of the fpedators by the novelty of their
works*, and as the number of Painters encreas’d,
and emulation gave them new lights in their art.
* Tis a Roman Catholic that faid it.
fo


fo the beauty and value of their pieces encreas’d
alfo, from whence arofe a great many lovers and
criticks in painting ; and things being come to a
certain point, the world believ’d it impoffible for
the pencil to produce any thing more perfect, than
what was in thofe days the objeCf of their wonder.
Men of the higheft quality vifited the painters,
poets fang their praifes, and in the year 1300,
Charles king of Naples, palling ' thro’ Florence,
call’d upon Cimabue, who was then in reputation,
and Cofmo di Medicis was fo charm’d with Filippo
Lippi’s pieces, that he try’d all manner of ways to
overcome the whimlicalnefs and lazinefs of that
painter, and to make him mind his work.
However, ’tis eafy to judge by the remains of
their firft productions, that Painting, at that time,
was a very indifferent bufinefs compar’d with what
is now to be feen from the hands of the beft matters,
who fucceeded them in their profeflion; for the
part that depends on competition and deign, was
not then fcafoned by the grand Gufto, which the
Painters have fines acquired. That of colouring
was entirely unknown to them, and in both the.
colouring of objefls in particular, which we call
the Local colour, and in the knowledge of the
Claro Obfcuro, they were abfolutely ignorant, and
knew nothing at all of the harmony of them both
together. They made ufe of colours, ’tis true, but
the way they took was trivial, and did not help
them fo much to reprefent the truth of objeCts, as
to call them to our remembrance.
They were bred up in fuch ignorance of colour-
ing, as to have no conception of the power of that
charming part of their art i nor to what degree of
height it could raife their works. They took their
matter’s words, which were oracles to them, and
having, as they thought, nothing to do but to
tread


tread in the paths in which they led them, all their
Itudy was about invention and defign.
At laft, after feveral years, the good genius of
Painting rais’d up fome great men in Tufcany, and
the dutchy of Urbin, who by the goodnefs of their
talent, the folidity of their underftanding, and the
affiduity of their ftudics, elevated the ideas of the
knowledge which they learnt of their matters, and
produc’d fome things fo perfect, that they will al-
ways be the admiration of pofterity.
Thofe to whom we owe this perfection mott, arc
Leonardo da Vinci, Michael Angelo, and Raphael;
but the latter, who excell’d all of them, acquir’d fo
many parts of his art, and carry’d them to fo high
a degree, that the great praifes which have been
given him, have made it to be believ’d he was
wanting in nothing, and have in his perfon center’d
all the perfection of Painting.
It being neceflary, in this art, to begin with De-
fign, and certain that the fource of a good Tafte,
and correCtnefs, is to be found in the ancient fculp-
tures, and the works of Raphael, who took out of
them what was mott: valuable, mott of the young
painters, in fucceeding times, never fail’d going to
Rome to ftudy, and continue fo to do now a-days,
from whence they bring the general etteem of
thofe pieces which are admir’d there, and tranfmic
it to all that hear them. Thus a great number of
the curious have preferv’d, on the faith of others,
or the authority of authors, the firft idea which
made an imprettion on their minds, to wit, that all
the perfection of painting is to be found in the
works of Raphael.
The Roman painters have alfo, for the mott
part, remain’d of this opinion, and have in Pinnated
it into ftrangers, either out of a love they bore their
country, or out of a negleCl of colouring which they
never underftood well ; or that they prefer’d the
1 other


other parts of painting before it, which, being a
great many in number, took up their whole lives
to ftudy and acquire.
For thefe reafons therefore they minded nothing
but what depends on invention and defign •, and
tho’ Raphael invented very ingenioudy, tho* he
defign’d mod corredly and elegantly, tho’ he ex-
preft the pattions of the mind with infinite force
and grace, tho* he drew his fubjeds with all pofliblc
decorum and noblenefs, and no painter has difputed
with him the advantage of fuperiority in the multi-
tude of the parts of his art, which he was matter of;
’tis, however, undeniable, that he did not penetrate
tar enough into colouring to render the objeds very
true, or very fenfible, nor to give an idea of a per-
fect imitation, and yet this perfed imitation and
fenfation make the offence of Painting, as I have
already prov’d. ’Tis compos’d of defign and co-
louring ; and if Raphael, and the painters of his time,
had but an imperfed notion of the latter, the idea
of the offence of Painting, which is produc’d by
their works, mutt: necettarily be imperfed, as well
as that which has been introduc’d into the minds of
fome perfons, fince thofe days, otherwife of good
judgment.
The works of Titian, and thofe other painters,
who have fhewn their thoughts with the advantage
of a faithful imitation, ought, one would think, to
have deftroy’d thofe evil remainders which we are
fpeaking of, and have fettled the ideas of the art as
nature and reafon require from an underftanding
that is juft. But the youth of the fucceeding limes
fince Raphael, going from Rome to Venice preju-
dic’d in their fight, and their judgment, and feldom
flaying there long, fee, as it were, en pajjant , the
beautiful pieces that might give them a juft idea,
and are very far from contrading a good habit of
colouring, which would make their ftudies at Rome
more


more valuable, and render them without reproach
in all the parts of their profefllon.
But what is moft altonifhing, is that fome cer-
tain curious perfons, who have the remainders of
this falfe idea, and are themfelves charm d with, the
Venetian Paintings, buy them up, with good realon,
at high prices, tho’ thole pi&ures have almoft
no other merit than their colouring, one part
of the effence of Painting, which I have here
eftablilh’d.
CHAP. XI.
Of COPOSITION, the first fart of
PAINTING.
Hitherto we have only us’d the word invention,
to the firft part of Painting. Several
have confounded it with Genius, others wit a
fruitfulnefs of thought, others with the difpofition
of objeds-, but all thefe things are from
one another •, wherefore I am of opinion, that to
give a clear idea of Painting, it fliould be call d
Compofition, divided into two parts, invention an
difpofition. Invention only finds out objeds tor a
pidure, difpofition places them a-right. 3 1 is true
thefe two parts are different, and yet they have lu-ch
a relation to each other, that they may be com-
prehended under the fame name.
Invention is form’d by reading hiftory, and the
fable. ’Tis the pure effed of the imagination in
metaphorical fubjeds. It contributes to the truti
of hiftory, as well as to the clearnefs of allegories,
and in what manner foever ’tis made ufe 01, it
ought not to keep the mind of the fpedator in
fufpence by any obfeurity ; And yet as faithfully an
mge


ingenioufly as a fubjed may be chofen, it will never
have a good effed, if it is not difpos’d of advan-
|ageoufly, as the oeconomy, and the rules of art
require, and the juft mixture of thefe two parts; is
what I call Compontion.
CHAP. XII.
Of DESIGN, the second part of PAINTING.
A Good Gufto, and corrcftnefs ofDefign, are
To neceflary in Painting, that a painter who
wants them muft do miracles to attraft the Icaft
sfteem, and the Defign being the Bafis and foun-
dation of all the other parts; being what termi-
nates the colours, and difentangles the objects, its
elegance, and correftnefs are no lefs neceflary in
Painting, than the purity of language is in elo-
quence.
CHAP. XIII.
Of the ATTITUDES.
IN the Attitudes, the Ponderation, and the Con-
traft are founded in nature; fhe does no adion,
but fhe (hews thofe two parts, and if fhe fails of it,
fhe muft be either depriv’d of motion, or conftrain’d
in her adion.
CHAP.


CHAP. XIV.
Of the EXPRESSIONS.
THE Exprcftions are the touchftone of the
Painter’s undemanding ; by the juftnefs of
his diftributing them he Ihews his penetration, and
his difcernment: But there is as much fenle requir’d
in the fpe&ator to perceive, as in the painter to
perform them.
A pidlure is like a fcenej, where each figure plays
its part. Figures well defign’d, and well colour’d
are admirable indeed ; yet moll people having not
a juft idea of Painting, are not fenfible of thofe
parts of it any farther, than they are accompany’d
with vivacity, juftnefs and delicacy of expreffion,
which is one of the mod rare talents of a Painter ;
and he that is fo happy as to manage his exprelfions
Well, will not only make them relate to the parts of
the face, but alfo to thofe of the whole body, and
will expofe them in fuch manner, that even the
mod inanimate objects fhall agree with the general
cxpreftlon of the fubjeft.
CHAP. XV.
Of the EXTREMITIES.
TH E Extremities, which are the head, feet
and hands, being the mod known and re-
markable parts of the body, and thole, which, if
one may fo fay, fpeak moll to us in a picture, they
ought to be more terminated than the others, it the
action of the piece expofes them much to view.
CHAP.


CHAP. XVI.
Of the DRAPERIES.
TO fee or caft a Drapery is a term in Painting,
by which is underftood to cloath and drefs a
figure. The word cafi feems to me to be fo much
the more expreflive, by how much the more the
draperies ought not to be adjufled as we put on
our cloaths. In following the character of nature,
who is far from all fort of affectation, the folds
fhould fall about the members, as by chance: They
fhould leave enough of them naked, to fhew what
they are, and by a careful artifice contraft them in
fhowing them, and, if I may fo exprefs it, carefs
them by their tender bindings, and foft touches.
The ancient fculptors, who had not the ufe of
different colours, becaufe they work’d the fame
thing on the fame matter, have avoided the large
fpreading of the folds, leaft forrounding the mem-
bers they fhould attraCl the eyes, and hinder its
feeing the naked of their figures, with as much cafe
as they would have had ’em. For their draperies,
they often made ufe of wet linnen to cloath their
figures, or elfe they multiply’d the fame folds, to
the end that this repetition might make a fort of
etching, which by its oblcurity renders the mem-
bers it furrounds the more fenfible. They have com-
monly obferv’d this method in their Bafib Relievo’s,
and which way foever they manag’d their drape-
ries, they plac’d their folds in wonderful order.
The Painter, who by the diveriity of his colours
and lights fhould diftinguifh the members from the
draperies, may govern himfelf by the good order
of the antique folds, without imitating their num-
ber ; and may vary his fluff according to the cha-
racter of his figures. Thofe Painters, who did not
know


know what liberties they are allow’d in this matter,
have been as much in the wrong in copying the
ancient fculptures, as the modern fculptors have
been in imitating the Painters.
The reafon why the folds ought to difcover
where the limbs of a picture are, is becaufc Painting
is on a flat fuperficies, and he muft annihilate feme
things, by deceiving the fight, and leave nothing
equivocal to be feen in his piece : Wherefore the
Painter is oblig’d to obferve this order in all his dra-
peries of what nature foever, either coarfe or fine,
rough or plain; and he muft always prefer the ma-
jefty of the folds, to the richnefs of the ftuftj which
muft be fuited to the age and fafhions of the hiftory
that is reprefented.
As the Painter ought to avoid all manner of ftift-
nels and hardnefs in his folds, and be careful that
they don’t fmell of the lay-man, as we commonly
fay, fo he fhould alfo ufe his flying draperies with
diferetion, for they can only be agitated by the wind
in a place where one may reafonably fuppofe it
blows, or by the compreffion of the air. When a
figure is fuppos’d to be in motion, fuch fort of dra-
peries are mod advantageous, becaufe they contri-
bute to the life of a figure by the contrail: Yet care
muft be taken, that the caufe of it may appear na-
tural and probable, and there fhould never be flying
draperies on different Aides in the fame pidure,
when they cannot naturally be agitated by any thing
but the wind, and when the figures are in repofe.
Several fkilful Painters have committed this fault
without thinking of it.
• A V‘ ' (ji D'flf' ; . t
C H A


CHAP. XVII.
Of L ANDSKIPS.
IF Painting be a fort of creation, *tis more fen-
fibly fo in Landfkips than in any other kind of
pictures. We fee there nature rifing out of her
Chaos, the elements feparated, the earth adorn’d
with her various productions, and the heavens with
their ftars. This fort of Painting contains ail the
others in little, and therefore the Painter, who exer-
dfes it, ought to have an univerfal knowledge of
the parts of his art *, if not in fo particular a manner
as thofe that are us’d to paint hiftory, yet, at Jeaft,
fpeculatively, and in general *, and if he does not
finifh all the objeCts that compofe his picture, or
accompany his Landfkip, he is, at lead, oblig’d to
fpecify livelily the Gufto, and the character, and by
how much the lefs his piece is unfinilh’d, to give it
the more vivacity.
However, I do not pretend to exclude exaCtnefs
of work from this talent •, on the contrary, ’twill be
rhe more admir’d, and the more valuable for it.
But let a Landfkip be never fo well finifh’d, if its
meric does not confilt in the comparifon of the ob-
jects one with another, and if their character be not
thereby preferv’d ; if the profpeCts are not well
chofcn, or not well fet off by a good intelligence of the
Claro Obfcuro •, if the ftrokes are not lively, and the
fcene animated by the figures, by animals, or other
objects, which are ufually in motion i and if to a
good Gufto of colouring, and to extraordinary fen-
fat ions, the genuinenefs and truth of nature are not
join’d, the picture will never be efteem’d, nor be
admitted into the cabinets of the true criticks.
CHAP.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of PERSPECTIVE.
A Certain author has laid, that Perfpedive and
Painting are the fame thing, becaufe there is
no Painting without Perfpedive. Tho’ the propo-
fition is falfe, abfolutely /peaking, in as much as a
body cannot be without fhadow, and yet it is not
the fame thing as the fhadow, neverthelefs ’tis true
in this fenfe, that a Painter cannot do any thing
without Perfpedive in all his operations, and that
he does not draw a line, nor ftrike a ftroke with his
pencil, which has not a fhare of this in it at leaf!:
habitually. It regulates the meafure of forms, and
the degradation of colours in all places of the pidure.
The Painter is forc’d to know the neceflity of it,
and tho* his pradice of it is, or fhould be confum-
mate ; yet he will often be expoled to make great
fau ts againft this knowledge, if out of lazinefs he
will not confult a-new, at leaft in the moft vifible
places, and take his rule and compaffes with him,
that he may put nothing to rifque, nor lie open to
cenfure. r
Michael Angelo has been blam’d for negledino-
pcrfpedive, and the greateft mafters of Italy have
been fo throughly convinc’d, that without it ’tis
impoliible for any compofition to be regular, that
they have endeavour’d to go to the bottom of it ;
3- n m fome Defigns of Raphael, there are to be
een even a fcale of degrees, fo exad was he in this
point.
D
CHAP.


CHAP. XIX.
Of COLOURING, the third part of
PAINTING.
SEveral Painters have talk’d of colours fo very
far from what they ought to have done, that I
was tempted to endeavour to fet them right, and
wrote a dialogue in defence of Colouring, which
was printed four and twenty years ago ; and having
nothing better to fay of it at this time, I muft refer
the reader to that treatife, wherein I have done my
utmoft to ftiew the merit and prerogative of colours,
with all poflible perfpicuity.
CHAP. XX.
Of the harmony of COLOURS.
THERE is a harmony, and diftbnance in the
kinds of Colours, as there is the tones or de-
grees of light, and in a compofition of mufick, the
notes mult not only be true, but in the performance
the inftruments mull alfo be agreeable : And as all
mufical inftruments do not agree one with another,
as for example, the lute, and the hautbois, the fpi-
net, and the bagpipe, fo there are colours that will
never appear together without offenfe to the fight j
as the vermilion with the green, the blew with the
yellow; and yet as the moft fliarp inftruments bear
a part with a good effed, among feveral others, fo
the moft oppofite colours being plac’d a propos*
among divers others which are in union, will render
feme parts of a pidurc the more fenfible, efpecially
thofe that (hould predominate, and draw the eyes
of the fpedator.
Titian,


Titian, as I have elfewhere obferv’d, has made
this ufe of them in his triumph of Bacchus, where
having plac’d Ariadne on the borders ol the pidture,
and for that rcafon not being able to make her re-
markable by the luftre of the light, which he pre-
ferv’d for the middle of his piece, he gave her a
vermilion fcarf on a blew drapery, as well to loofen
her from his ground, which was a blew lea, as be-
caufe fhe was one of the principal figures of his fub-
jedt, upon which he defir’d to attract the eye.
Paolo Veronefe, in his marriage of Cana, becaufe
Chrift, who is the principal figure of the fubjedt, is
carry’d fomewhat into the depth of the pidlure, and
that he could not make him be taken notice of by
the brillant of the claro obfeuro, has dreft him in
blew and vermilion, thereby to conduit the fight
to that figure.
CHAP. XXI.
Of the PENCIL.
THE term, Pencil, is fometimes taken for all
the parts of Painting, as when we fay, that
Raphael's transfiguration is the fineft: picture that
ever came from his Pencil, and fometimes ’tis to be
underftood of the work itfelf, for example when w T e
fay, of all the Painters of antiquity, Apelles’s Pencil
was the moll learned. In this place the word Pencil
fignifies fimply the exterior manner he obferv’d in
employing his colours, when thofe colours don’t
feem too much agitated, or, as one may fay, too
much tormented by the motion of a heavy hand ;
but on the contrary, when the movement appears
free, ready and light, we fay, the piece is of a good
Pencil, yet this freedom of the Pencil is of little
D 2 worth.


worth, if ’tis not guided by the head, and if it does
not ferve to fhew us that the Painter underftands
his art. In a word, a fine Pencil in Painting, is
like a fine voice in mufic; both the one, and the
other, are valu’d according to the proportion of the
great effedf, and the harmony that accompanies
them.
CHAP. XXII.
Of the LICENCES.
THE Licences are fo neceffary, that all arts
admit of them ; they are literally againfl the
rules, but when we come to explain ourfelves, we
fhall fhew they affift them, if they are made ufe of
a propos. Every man of fenfe thinks they are to
the purpofe, when the piece in which they are
employ’d, has the greater effeft by them, and when,
by their means, the Painter reaches the end he aims
at, which is to impofe on the fight; but ’cis not
every Painter that can make an advantageous ufe
of them. There are none but great Genius’s who
are above rules, and who know when to make ufe
ingenioufly of the licences, either in the effencc of
the art, or in hiftory. The latter is the more diffi-
cult work, and requires our attention. We fhall
fpeak further of it in the following chapter.
CHAP.


CHAP. XXIII.
By what authority the PAINTERS have repre-
sented under human figures , things Divine ,
Spiritual and Inanimate.
SCripture tells us, in feveral places, of God’s ap-
pearing to man, either by the miniftry of his
angels, or in dreams and vifions. There is a fine
defcription of God, under the form of an old man,
in the feventh chapter of Daniel, and the ninth
verfe. The fame holy writ informs us of feveral
apparitions of angels under human forms. For
this reafon, the church in the council of Nice,
made no fcruple to allow Painters to reprefent God
the Father, under the figure of a venerable old man,
and angels under human figures.
Painters are alfo juftify’d, on the fame account,
to give life to inanimate things, when they follow
exadlly the idea the fcripture give us of them. The
fpedlator fhould not prefently be fcandaliz’d, if he fees
facred things mixt with poetical fictions, as if fiction
and poetry were indilpenfably profane. The book
of Job, the pfalms of David, the Apocalypfe are
all poetical, and full of figurative exprefllons, with-
out reckoning all the parables which are in the other
parts of the fcripture. ’Twas in copying the facred
text, that Raphael painting the paflage of Jordan,
gave that river a human figure, and drew him
pulhing back his waters to their fource. He was
warranted to do this by holy writ, which to pro-
portion its exprefllons to man’s underflanding, often
reprefents divine things in the fliape of human,
and for the inftrudtion of the faithful, makes ufe
of the moft palpable and fenfible comparifons and
ideas. We have a paflage, relating to the fubjedt
D 3 of


of rivers, in the 97th Pfalm, where it is laid, * let
the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful
together. The Painter, who has the fame intention
to inftruft, and to edify, cannot follow a better
pattern.
Pouflin, in his picture of the finding of Moles,
has obferv’d the fame conduit, in reprefenting the
river Nile, for which he has been blam’d by fome
perfons, who alledge thefe reafons againft him.
They fay that Painters fhould not mingle falfe gods
with things relating to our religion; that rivers are
falfe divinities whom the Heathens worfhip’d, and
whom we ought not to introduce in facred hiftory;
And further, that a Painter may well enough repre-
fent a river, as a river, but not do it under a hu-
man figure. To all this one may eafily anfwer,
that as the holy fcripture, when it introduces rivers
under human figures, had no intention tofpeakof
thofe the Pagans ador’d, and tho* it might have
exprefs’d itfelf fimply and naturally, yet it makes
ufe of a figurative ftile, without fearing to feduce
the faithful •, fo alfo a chriflian Painter, who ought
to imitate the fcripture, is very far from endea-
vouring to alter the truth of hiftory : He rather
ftrives, conforming himfelf to his original, to Ihew
it more livelily and elegantly, not to an infidel, but
to a chriflian as he is, who being prejudic’d againft
the falfe divinities, ought not to find out another
meaning than that of the holy fcripture.
But with refpeCl to pagan divinities, which are
introduced as Inch, and with the characters that
Ihew what they are, ’cis more difficult to admit
them in fuch kind of compofitions. The learned
have handled that matter by its relation to poefy,
and the caufe remains ftdl to be decided : However,
the Painter, who has no other way to exprefs him-
* Pfal. xcvii. 8.
felf
2


felf than by thefe forts of figures, inftead of being
blam’d, will always be commended by the belt
judges, when they find them brought in prudently
and ingenioufly. For the falfe divinities may be
confider’d two ways, either as gods, or as fymbo-
lical figures. As gods, the Painters mu ft never re-
prefent them, except it is in fubjedts entirely pro-
fane; and as fymbolical figures, he may introduce
them with difcretion on all occafions, where he
thinks them necdfary.
Rubens, who of all Painters made ufe of thefe
Symbols the mod ingenioufly, and the moll learn-
edly, as may be feen in the book of the cardinal
Infant’s entrance into Antwerp, and by the pictures
of the gallery of Luxemburg, has been cenfur’d for
it: He fhould not, fay they, have brought allego-
rical figures into his compositions, nor have mix’d
fable with truth.
To which we may anfwer, that as Rubens has
manag’d it, he has not confounded fable with
truth ; he rather has employ’d the Symbols of the
fable to exprefs the fame truth. In the pidfture of
the birth of Lewis XHlth, on the top of it in clouds,
at a diftance he has reprefented Caftor on his wing’d
horfe, and on the fide Apollo in his chariot mount-
ing on high, to fhew that the prince was born in the
morning, and that his mother’s delivery was happy.
From whence we may infer, that the Painter had
no thoughts of reprefenting the gods, as gods, but
Caftor only as a conftellation that render’d events
fortunate, and the chariot of Apollo mounting up-
wards, to mark the time of the morning.
If the Painter, with an intention to exprefs himfelf
the better, has thought it necelfary or convenient
to reprefent the divinities of the fable among hifto-
rical figures, thofe fymbols mult be look’d upon
as invifible, and as not there any otherwife, than
by their fignification,
D 4 *Tis


’Tis in this fenfe the fecond council of Nice,
authoriz’d in what they did by the fcripture, allow’d
the reprefentations of God the Father, and the angels
under human figures •, for there would have been
a greater inconvenience in painting the Perfons of
the Holy Trinity, and the angels, than in intro-
ducing pagan divinities in a pi6ture, if the fenfe,
that the former fhould be taken in, were not
explain’d. Chriftians being fufficiently prepofTefb
againft thefe falfe appearances, which are intended
only for their inftrudtion, to profit by them, fhould
have the fame notion of’em as the Painter, and
look upon them as not there.
The authority for Painting the angels with wings,
is taken from the ark of the covenant *, and from
the 9th chapter of Daniel, the 21ft verfe •, however,
thefe paffages do not indifpenfibly oblige Painters to
draw angels always with wings, they may do it, or
not do it, as their art, good fenfe, and the inftruc-*
tion of the faithful require.
The reader will eafily perceive *tis a Papijl that
argues thus for the idolatrous cufiom of reprefenting the
Holy 'Trinity , and the angels under human figures ;
the argument is fo mean it deferves no anfwer , and the
poifon fo weak , it needs no antidote , or we might quote
againjl him , the 71b verfe of the 97th Pfalm y the
fame he has quoted above , where are thefe words.
Confounded he all they that ferve graven images ,
that boafi themfelves of idols ; worfhip him all ye
Gods .
* Exod. xxv.
CHAP.


CHAP. XXIV.
Of naked Figures, and how they may be made
use of.
TH E Painters and fculptors, who underftand
defigning very well, commonly feck after oc-
calions to fhew the naked, to gain efteem and di-
ftindion, for which they are certainly praife-worthy,,
provided they keep themfelves within the bounds
of the truth of hiftory, of verifimility and modefty.
There are fome fubjeds, in which a man may more
reafonably reprefent nakednefs than in others; as for
example, in fables, when the fcene lies in hot coun-
tries, and we know nothing of the modes of the
people, or when the labourers of the firft ages are
reprefented. Cato the Cenfor, as Plutarch relates,
work’d naked among his labourers, when he came
from the fenate; and St. Peter was naked when our
Saviour appear’d to him after his refurredion, and
found him fifhing with the other apoftles. Nakednefs
may alfo be made ufe of in the rep re fen tat ion of
Allegorical fubjeds, the Pagan Gods or Hero’s: in
fhort on all occafionss, where we may fuppofe we
look upon fimple nature, where cold or impudence
is not predominant, for deaths were only invented
to keep men from cold and fhame.
There are, at this day, a great many people, in
feveral parts of the world, who go ftark naked,
either becaufe they dwell in hot countries, or that
cuftom has taken away the indecency and fhame of
nakednefs. In a word, the general rule, which
fhould be obferv’d in this cafe, is, as we have al-
ready Paid, that there be nothing againft modefty or
The Painters draw moft of their figures
with and feet naked, wherein they follow
2 the


the didates of fimple nature, which eafily accudoms
thole two parts to nakedncf;: We fee examples of
this kind, not only in hot countries, but in the
inidft of the cold mountains of the Alps, where
even the children go with their feed naked, in hum-
mer, among the ftones and flints, and in winter
over the ice and fnow. But with regard to the
truth of hidory, tho’ nakednefs be a Licence which
I amters are poflefs’d of, and ufe to the advantage
of their art, yet they often abufe it. I won’t ex-
cept either Raphael or Pouflin : They have repre-
sented the apoftles with their feet naked, contrary
to what is pofitively laid in the gofpel, where our
Saviour ordering them to take no care for what they
mould put on, commands them to be content with
the fhoes they have on their feet, without carrying
ethers with them. And in the Ads of the apoftles,
when the angel delivers St. Peter, he bids him put
on his girdle, and tye his fhoes; from whence we
may conclude they were commonly worn.
Pis the fame with Mofes, who in the viflon of
the burning bufh, was warn’d to leave his fhoes,
and yet Raphael paints his feet naked, in all the
other adions of his life, as if Mofes had never any
moes on, but when he was keeping his father-in-
Jaw s fheep. I might here give many more in-
itances, wherein Raphael, and feveral other Painters
after him, have drawn their figures without fhoes
and dockings, againfl hiflory and verifimility, did
not I think what I havefaid diffident.
s Tis obferv’d that the Grecian fculptors more
commonly made their figures naked than the Roman,
but I know no other reafon for it, than that the
Greeks chofe fubjeds more agreeable to the defire
they had, to have the depths of their art admir’d,
in their representing the conftrudion and union of
the parts of man’s body. In their datues they re-
prefented gods, rather than men, and in their Baflb
Re-


Relievo’s, Bacchanals and facrifices, rather than
hiftories. The Romans, on the contrary, who by
their ftatues and Baflb Relievo s, aim d at tranfmit-
tins the memory of their emperors to pofterity,
were neceflarily oblig’d to do nothing again ft the
truth of hiftory i but to drefs their figures according
to the mode then in fafhion.
CHAP. XXV.
Of GRACE.
THE neceffity of Grace in Painting, generally
fpeaking, is a thing that needs no proof.
There’s only one difficulty in the to wit,
if this Grace be necefiary in all forts of fubjedls; in
battels, as well as feftivalsj in foldiers, as well as
women. . .
I grant it is, and my reafon for it is, that tho
Grace ffiews itfelf firft in the face, yet tis not in
that part only that it refldes; it confifts chiefly in
the turn the Painter gives his objedts to render them
agreeable, even fuch as are inanimate *, from whence
it follows, that there may be Grace in the fiercenels
of a foldier, by the turn which may be given to his
air, and his pofture *, and even in drapery, or any
thing elfe, by the manner in which it may be
difpos’d. . ,
Having given this idea of a perfect Painter, and
proofs of the feveral parts that go to the forming
one, there only remains an application to the works
of the Painters, and to put them as it were in the
fcale, not to rejedt entirely thofe that have not aa
the qualities which we have eftabliffi’d, but to value
the-m according to their weight. .
This


This idea may help us to judge of the defigns of
different mafters, I mean of the degree of their
goodnefs; for ’tis almoft impoffible to write with
juftnefs of the originality of a defign, or the name
of the author ; or to lay down rules how he may be
known.
CHAP. XXVI.
Of DESIGNS.
THE Defigns, of which we intend to fpeak
are thofe thoughts that Painters com-
monly exprefs on paper, for the execution of fome
work they are going about. Wefhould place among
Defigns the ftudies of great matters, that is, thofe
parts which they have defign’d after nature, as
heads, feet, and entire figures; draperies, animals,
plants, flowers, and in fhort, every thing
that may enter into the compofition of a pifture-,
for whether you confider a good defign by its rela-
tion to the picture of which it is an idea, or by rela-
tion to fome part of which it is the ftudy, it always
deferves the attention of the curious.
Tho* the knowledge of defigns be not fo etti-
mable, nor of fo large extent as that of pictures;
’tis however delicate and pleafant, becaufe the great
number of them gives thofe that love ’em, more
opportunity to exercife their criticifms, and the
work is all the produ&ion of the mind. Defio-ns
denote beft the character of the matter, and fhew if
his genius be lively or heavy, if his thoughts are
elevated or common ; in fhort, if he has a good
mannei and a good Gout of all the parts which may
be expreft upon paper. A Painter who wou’d finifh
a picture endeavours, if one may fo fay, to go out
of


of himfelf, that he may acquire praife for fome parts
of his art, which he knows very well he is not pof-
feft of. But in making a defign, he gives a loofe
to his genius, and Ihews what he is. For this reafoa
it is, that in the collections of the great, we find
the defigns of the belt mailers preferv’d, as well as
the pictures.
And yet there are few perfons, who are curious
about defigns, and among thole few, if fome know
the manner, fcarce any one knows the end. The
half criticks have no inclination towards this curio-
fity, becaufe, having no fufficient notion of the
meaning of defigns, they have no relilh of the per-
formance, and take more pleafure in prints carefully
engrav’d from good pictures, which may be occafion*d
fometimes thro* fear of being deceiv’d, and of
taking, as it often happens, copies for originals, for
want of experience. There are three things in ge-
neral to be obferv’d in Defigns, learning, fpirit and
freedom. By Learning I underltand a good compo-
fition, a defign correCt, and of a good Gout, with
a laudable knowledge of the Claro Obfcuro. By the
word Spirit I comprehend a lively and natural ex-
preflion thro* the whole work, of the fubjeCt in ge-
neral, and the objeCts in particular. Freedom is no
more than a habit, which the hand has contracted,
to exprefs readily and boldly the idea in the Painter’s
mind ; and as there is more or lefs of thefe three
things in a defign, ’tis the more or lefs valuable,
tho* free defigns are generally accompany’d with
a good deal of fpirit, yet all the defigns that are
made with freedom, are not, for all that, fenfibly
touch’d ; and, if the learned defigns are not always
free, they are thofe generally which have the moll
fpirit in them.
I might here name abundance of Painters, whofe
defigns have a great deal of freedom without any
fpirit, whofe bold hands produce nothing but ramb-
ling


ling performances. I might alfo name feveral able
men, whofe defigns appear ftiff, tho’ otherwife
learned and fenfible, becaufe their hand was re-
(train’d by their judgment, and they ftudy’d, above
all things, to make their out-lines correct, and their
exprefiion juft. I avoid naming them not to offend
any body : Let every one judge as he thinks fit.
This muft be Laid of freedom, ’tis fo agreeable
that it hides, and often excufes a great many faults,
which, in fuch cafe, are rather attributed to an
impetuofity of genius, than to infufficiency ; but,
we muft own alfo, that freedom of hand does not
feem to be freedom when ’tis confin’d within the
bounds of a great regularity. Thus in the moft
correct defigns of Raphael, there is a delicate free-
dom which is only vifible to the eyes of the learn’d.
In a word, there are fome defigns which are not
over corred, and which yet are not without their
merit, having a good deal of fenfe and charader.
Of this fort are the defigns of William Baur, Rem-
brant, Benedetti, and fome others.
Defigns that are but juft touch’d, and not finifh’d,
have more fpirit, and pleafe more, than thofe that
are perfeded, provided their charader be good, and
they put the idea of the fpedator in a good way.
The reafon is, that the imagination fupplies all
the parts which are wanting, or are not finifti’d, and
each man fees it according to his own Gout. The
defigns of thofe matters, who have more genius
than learning, often give occafion to experience the
truth of this affertion, but the defigns of excellent
matters, who join folidity to a fine genius, lofe no-
thing by being finifh’d, and fuppofing every thing
elfe is anfwerablc. Defigns are to be efteem’d ac-
cording as they are finilh’d.
Tho* we ought to value moft thofe defigns,
wherein moft parts are found, yet fhou’d we not re-
ied thofe where there is no more than one, pro-
vided


vided ’tis of fuch a manner, that it fhews fome prin-
ciple of the art, or carries with it any fenfible fin-
gulariry, which pleafes or indrucls. Neither ought
we to rejeft thole that are but fketches, by which
one fees a very faint idea only, and but an effay
of the fancy, fince ’tis curious to remark how fkil-
ful Painters at firft conceiv’d their thoughts before
they digeded them, and fketches fhew us further
what touches great maders make life of to charac-
terife things with a few drokes. To fatisfy one’s
curiofity therefore, ’twou’d be well if one had de-
figns of all kinds of the fame mader, to wit, not
only of his firlt, fecond or lad manner, but even his
lighted fketches, as well as his mod fin idl’d defigns.
I confefs however, the curious who are purely fpe-
culative, don’t fo much find their account in it, as
thofe who knowing how to practice, are more capa-
ble of relifhing this curiofity. There is one thing,
which is as the fait of a Defign that feafons it, and
gives it its relifh, without which ’tis worth little or
nothing, and which I can’t exprefs better than by
the word character. This cnarafter confids then in
the manner in which the Painter thinks things.
’Tis the feal that didinguifhes his works from thofe
of ocher men, and which imprints on them the li-
vely image of his mind. ’Tis this character that
agitates our imagination, and ’tis by this thatfkilful
Painters, after having dudy’d under good maders,
or after the works of others, feel themfelves con-
drain’d by a fweet violence, to let their genius loofe,
and fly with their proper wings.
I exclude out of the number of good defigns
all that are infipid, of which there are three forts.
Fird, thofe of Painters, who, tho’ they produce
great compofitions, and are exact and correft, yet
fpread over their works a certain coldnefs, which
freezes the fpedlator. Secondly, thofe of Painters,
who having more memory than genius, are always
playing


playing the plagiaries, and working by the ideas
they have ftor’d up from other mens productions
which they have feen •, or elfe make life of fuch as
are before them with too little induftry, and too
much fervility. And thirdly, thofe of Painters,
who tye themlelves up to their mailer’s manner,
without ever quitting or enriching it.
The knowledge of defigns, as well as of pictures,
confifts in two things, viz. to find out the name of
the mafter, and the goodnefs of the defign.
To know that a defign is of fuch a mailer, a
man mufl have view’d with attention, a great many
others of the fame hand, and have had in his mind
a juft idea of the character of his genius, and of the
character of his practice. The knowledge of the
character of genius requires a great extent, and a
great clearnefs of mind, to keep the ideas without
confounding them, and the knowledge of the cha-
racter of practice depends more on a great habitude,
than a great capacity ; and for this reafon ’tis that
the moil fkilful Painters do not always decide this
point the moil juftly. To know if a defign be fine,
if it be an original or a copy, a great deal of deli-
cacy and penetration is requifite, together with much
exercife that way, and I queftion whether it can be
done without fome knowledge of manual pradice;
and yet, after all, a man may be deceiv’d.
It feems to me, ’tis eafy to infer from what has
been laid, that the companion of the works of the
Painters, with the idea we have eftablifh’d of a per-
fect Painter, is the belt way to know what efteem
is due to them. But fmee a man has not always a
great number of pidures at hisdifpofal, nor enough
finifh’d defigns to exercife his judgment, and fo to
acquire in a lliort time a habit of judging well, good
prints may ferve inftead of pidures; for excepting
the local colour, they are fufceptible of all the parts
of painting *, and befides that, they will fhorten the
time,


time, and are very proper to fill the mind with/the
knowledge of an infinity of things. Tiie reader, I
hope, will not be difpleas’d to find here what I have
difeover’d in this matter.
CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Usefulness and Use of PRINTS.
MAN is born with a define to know, and
nothing fo much hinders his informing him
as the trouble of learning, and the eafinefs of for-
getting, two things of which the greareft part of
mankind complain with a great deal of reafon; for
fmce the arts of fciences have been fought after, and
to penetrate far into them an infinity of volumes have
been publilh’d, at the fame time was brought to light
an objed terrible enough to frighten us from looking
into them, and capable to fhock our minds, and
difhearten our memories. However, we have more
reafon than ever to excrcife both the one and the
other, or at lead to find out means to help them in
their feveral functions. That which we are about
to treat of (the invention of prints) is a very power-
ful one, and one of the happieft productions of
latter ages.
They are in our age arriv’d to fo high a degree
of perfection,. and good gravers have given us fo
many on all forts of matters, that it may truly be
faid, they are the dcpofitories of all that is fine and
curious in the world.
Their origin was in the year .1460. and arofe
from one Mufo Finiguerra, a goldfmith of Florence,
who grav’d his plate, when calling fome of it in
melted fulphur, he perceiv’d that what came out of
the mold was mark’d with the fame prints as his
E plate.


plate, by the black which the falpher had taken
from his graving: He try’d to do as much on filver
plates with wet paper, by rouling it fmoothly with
aronler, which alfo fucceeded.
This novelty tempted Baccio Baldini, a goldfmith
of the fame city, to try whether he could do the
fame, and his fuccefs occafion’d him to engrave
feveral plates of Sandro Boticello’s invention and
defio-n; and upon this Andrew Mantegna, who was
at Rome at that time, fet about engraving fome
of his ovm pieces.
The knowledge of this invention getting into
Flanders, Martin of Antwerp, then a Pain-
ter, engrav’d abundance of plates of his own inven-
tion, and fent feveral prints into Italy, which were
mark'd thus, M. C. Vafari in the life of Marco
Antonio, a Painter, gives an account of the greateit
part of his fubjedts, of which there was one among
the reft, (the vifion of St. Anthony) that pleas’d
Michael Angelo, then very young, fo well, for the
invention of it, that he colour’d it. After Martin
of Antwerp, Albert Durer began to appear, and
o-ave the world an infinite number of fine prints, as
well in wood as in copper, all which he fent to
Venice to be fold,
Marco Antonio, who happen'd at that time to
be there, was fo ravifh’d with the beauty of thefe
prints, that he copy’d fix and thirty of them,
which reprefented our Saviour’s paffion, and thefe
copies were receiv’d at Rome with fo much the
more admiration, by how much the more they were
finer than the originals. At the fame time Hugo
du Carpi, an Italian Painter of a mean capacity, but
of a wit apt for invention, found out, by means of
feveral plates of wood, the way how to make prints
refemble defigns of Claro Obfcuro, andfomeyears
after the invention of etching was difcover’d, which
Parmeggiano foon made ufe of, Thefe


Thefe firff Prints drew the admiration of all that
faw them for their novelty, and the fkilful Painters,
who work’d for glory, were w’dhng to ufe them
to fpread their works over the world. Raphael,
among others, employ’d the famous Marco An-
tonio to engrave feveral of his pictures and defigns,
and thofe admirable prints were fo renown’d, that
they carry’d the name of Raphael through the
world. A vaft number of gravers have made them-
felves famous, fmce Marco Antonio, in Germany,
Italy, France, and the Low-Countries, and havepu-
blifh’d as well by graving as etching, an infinite
number of prints on all forts of fubjedts, as well
hiftories, fables, emblems, devifes, medals, animals,
landfkips, flowers, fruits, as in general all the vifible
produdlions of art and nature.
There’s no body, of what condition or profeflion
foever, but may profit very much by them. Di-
vines, monks, devout men, philofophers, foldiers,
travellers, geographers, painters, fculptors, archi-
tedls, gravers, lovers of the fine arts, all that are
curious in hiftory or antiquity, and, in fhort, all
who having no particular profeflion, but that of
men of honour, would adorn their minds with the
knowledge of thofe things, that might render them
the more worthy of efteem.
’Tis not pretended that perfons are oblig’d to fee
all the prints that have been publifh’d, to know'
how to profit by them ; the infinite number of
them prefenting at once fo many different idea’s to
a man’s view, will rather confound than inform
him : Thofe only, who are born with a great and
clear genius, who’ve been us’d, for fome tim,e, to
the fight of fo many different things, can make
’em profitable to them, and fee ’em all without
confufion.
Every particular man may chufe thofe fubjedfs
that are mod: proper for him, that may either re-
E 2 frefh


frefh his memory or ftrengthen his judgment*, in
which he fhould be direded by the inclination he
has for things of his own Gout and profeftion.
As for example, nothing is more fuitable to di-
vines than prints which relate to religion, our holy
myfteries, the facred hiftories, and every thing
which difcovers the exercife, or the perfecution ot
the primitive chriftians : The Antique Baflfo Re-
lievo’s, which in many places inform us of the cere-
mony of the heathen worlhip: In fhort, any thing
that has relation to our own, whether it be facred
or profane.
For thofe devout fubjeds are moft proper, which
raife the foul to heaven, and continue it in the Love
of God.
For monks, the facred hiftories in general, and
what concerns their order in particular.
For Philofophers, all the demonftrative figures,
which relate not only to the experiments of phy-
fick, but all that may encreafe their knowledge in
natural things.
For thofe that are bred up to war, the plan and
elevation of fortify’d cities, the order of battles
and books of fortification, of which the demonftra-
tive figures are the greateft part.
For Travellers, the particular views of palaces, of
cities, and confiderable places, to prepare them for
the things they are to fee, or to preferve the ideas
of thofe they have feen.
For Geographers, the maps and carts neceffary in
their profefiion.
For Painters, every thing that may ftrengthen
them in the feveral parts ot their art, as the Antique
pieces, and thofe of Raphael and Caracci for the
good Gout, corrednefs of defign, the dignity of
manner, for the choice of the airs of the head, the
pafllons of the mind, and the attitudes; thofe of
Corregio for grace and delicacy of the expreffions;
thofe


thofe of Titian, Baffano, and the Lombards for th e
charader of truth, for the fimple expreffions of na-
ture, and, above all, for the Gout of Landfkips:
Thofe of Rubens, for the grandeur and magnifi-
cence of his invention, and the artifice of Claro
Obfcuro: In fhort, thole that, tho’ they may be de-
fedive in fomc particular part of them, may yet
have fomething in them fingular and extraordinary,
for the Painters may draw a confiderable advantage
from all the different manners of thofe that have gone
before them, who are, as fo many flowers, from
whence, like the bees, they may fuck a juice, which,
incorporating with their proper fubftance, will bring
forth fuch works as are ufeful and agreeable.
For Sculptors, flatties, Baffo Relievo s, medals,
and other Antique works, thofe of Raphael, Poli-
doro, and the whole Roman fchool.
For Architeds, the books that concern their prc-
feflaon, and that are full of demonltrative figures
of the invention of their authors, or copy’d from the
Antique.
For Gravers, a colledion of pieces of different
manners, as well grav’d as etch’d. This colledion
fhould alfo ferve to fhew them the progrefs of
graving, from Albert Durer to tth gravers of
our own times, which will include the works of
Marco Antonio, Cornelius Cort, the Caracci, Sa-
delers, Pontius, Bolfvert, Goltius, Muler, Vofter-
man, Vifcher, and a great many more that I have
not named, who had a particular charader, and
who by different ways ftrove all of them to imitate
either nature, when they did fomething of their own
invention, or pidures of different manners, when
they only aim’d at the faithfulnefs of imitation. In
comparing thus the works of all thefe matters, they
may judge which of them underftood belt the ma-
nagement of their tools, of light, and the ufefulnefs
of tones, as it relates to the Claro Obfcuro; which
E 3 of


of them in their operations reconcil’d delicacy and
force bell, and in their productions were molt fen-
fible and exaft, that making a good life of thefe
lights, they may have the laudable ambition to equal
or furpafs thefe fkilful mailers.
For the curious in hiftory and antiquity, every
thing that has been engrav’d belonging to facred or
profane hiftory, the fable, the Antique Baflb Re-
lievo, the Trajan and Antonine pillars, the books of
medals and ftones engrav’d, and feveral prints that
may help them in the knowledge of thofe things
they would know, or to keep thofe they know al-
ready in their memories.
In ihort, for thofe that to be more happy, and
more gentleman-like, would form their Gout by
the ftudy of good things, and have a reafonable
tinefture of the fine arts, nothing is more neceffary
than good prints: Their fight, with a little reflec-
tion, will readily and agreeably inform them of
every thing that may exercife their reafon, and
ftrengthen their judgment. They may fill their
memory with the molt carious things of all times,
and all countries, and in learning the different hi-
ftories, learn the feveral manners of painting: They
will judge readily, by the facility with which they
may open a few leaves, and fo compare the pro-
ductions of one mafter with thofe of another, and
by this means, in fparing their time, they will
fpare their expence alfoj for *tiS almoft impofljble
to put the pictures of as many mafters together in a
room, as will fuffice to form a perfed idea of the
work of each mafter, and when at a vaft charge a
man has fill’d a large chamber with pictures of dif-
ferent manners, he cannot have above two or three
of each, which is not enough to enable him to
make a nice judgment of the character of the pain-
ter, or the extent of his capacity ; whereas, by
means of prints, one may eafily fee the works of
r feveral


feveral matters on a table, one may form an idea of
them, judge by comparing them one with another,
know which to chufe, and by pradifing it often,
contrad a habit of a good tafte, and a good manner,
efpecially if we do it in the company of any body,
that has difcernment in thefe things, and can diftin-
guifh what's good, from what is but indifferent.
But as for the criticks in, and lovers of the fine
arts, we muft prefcribe them no rules; all things, if
we may ufe the phrafe, are fubjeded to the empire
of their knowledge: They entertain themfelves by
their fight, fometimes in looking on one thing, and
fometimes on another, becaufe they reap profit by
it, and take pleafure in it. Among other things, in
feeing what has been engrav’d from the moft famous
matters of painting, they perceive the origin, progrefs,
and perfedion of their works; they follow them from
Giotto, and Andrea Mantegna, down to Raphael,
Titian and the Caracci, they examine the different
fchools of thofe times ; they fee into how many
branches they have been divided by the multiplier
of difciples, and how many ways the mind of man
is capable of conceiving the fame thing; what imi-
tation is, and that as many different manners have
come from her as countries, ages, minds or nature
by their diverfity have produc’d. Among all the
good effeds that may arife from the ufe of prints,
we fhall content ourfelves to name fix, by which we
may eafily judge of the rett.
The firft is to divert us by imitation, in repre-
fenting vifible things to us by their painting.
The fecond is to inftrud by a more forcible and
ready manner than by fpeech : Things , fays Horace ,
that enter at the ear , go more about to come at us 9
and touch us lefs than thofe that enter by the eyes , which
are the more fure and more faithful witnejfes.
The third is to fhorten the time we employ in
recolleding thofe things that have efcap’d our
E 4 me


memory, and to refreffi it with a glance of the
eye.
The fourth is to reprefent abfent and diftant
things, as if they were before our eyes, which other-
wife we cou’d not fee without troublefom voyages,
and great expence.
The fifth is, to afford us by this means an eafy
way of comparing feveral things together, prints
taking up fb little room, and we may make ufe of
fo great a number and fo different.
And the fixth is to give one a tafte of good things,
and a tindlure of the fine arts, which no gentleman
fhou’d be ignorant of.
Thefe effects are general, but every one may ima-
gine the particular ufes and benefits of them accord-
ing to his underftanding, and his inclination, and
by thefe particular benefits or effedts he may make
his collection ; for *tis eafy to guefs, that in the va-
riety of conditions of which we have been fpeaking,
the curiofity of prints, the order and choice that is
to be obferv’d, depend on every man’s Gout and
views.
Thole, for example, that Jove hiflory feek after
thofe fubjedfs only that belong to it: And that no-
thing may efcape their curiofity, they follow this,
method, which cannot be enough commended; all
that relate to particular countries and ages are put
into one or more covers, where they may be readily
come at.
Firff, the pidlures of the fovereigns that have go-
vern’d a country, the princes and princeffes de-
feended from them, thofe that have held any con-
fiderable office in the (fate, in the church, in the
army or courts of juffice, thofe that have diftin-
guifh’d themfelves in different profeffions, and par-
ticular perfons who have had any ffiare in hiflorical
events. Thofe pidhires are accompany’d with
fome lines in writing, which denote the charadber of
2 the


the perfon, his birth, his remarkable a&ions, and
the time of his death.
Secondly, the general and particular maps or this
country, the plans and elevations of cities, caftles,
palaces, and other places worthy the knowledge of
the publick.
Thirdly, Every thing that has any relation to
hiftory, as entries into cities and feftivals, funeral
proceffions and pompous, ceremonies, modes and
cuftoms ; In fhort, all particular prints which are
hiftorical. . . •
The Collection thus made for one country, is m
the fame manner done for all the reft, ihe inven-
tion of this order is very ingenious, and we are
indebted for it to a * gentleman, otherwife well
enough known by his extraordinary merit, and the
number of his friends.
Such as have any paflion for the fine arts take
another method in their collections; they do it by
the Painters and their difciples. In the Roman
fchool they place Raphael, Michael Angelo, their
difciples, and their contemporaries. _ln that of Ve-
nice, Giorgione, Titian, the Baflani, Paolo Vero-
nefe, Tintoret, and other Venetians. In that of
Parma, Correggio, Parmegiano, and thofe that fol-
low’d their Gout, In that of Bologna, the Caracci,
Guido Dominichino, Albani, Lantranco and Guer-
chino. In that of Germany, Albert Durer, Holben,
the little mafters, William Baur, and others. In that
of Flanders, Otho Venius, Rubens, Vandike, and
thofe that practifed their rules. In the fame man-
ner they put the mafters of the French fchool, and
thofe of other countries, in their feveral clafles.
Others collect their prints by the gravers, with-
out refpedl to the Painters : Others, by fuch and
fuch fubjects •, and others, by other falhions, and.
* Monfieur de Ganicres.
indeed,


indeed, *tis reafonable that every one fhou’d have,
liberty to do in this what Teems to him to be ufeful
and agreeable.
Tho’ one may at any time, and in any age, be-
nefit ones felf by the fight of prints, yet youth is
more proper for it than any other part of man’s
life, becaufe memory is the gift of childhood, and
while perfons are young, they ought to make ufe of
it as of a magazine, to lay up things, that can con-
tribute towards forming their judgment.
But if the ufe of prints be profitable to youth,
*tis a pleafant and agreeable entertainment to old
age, which is the proper time for repofe and re-
flection, and in which our thoughts being no longer
diflipated by the amufements of our firft years, we
may with the greater leifure relifh the pleafure that
is to be receiv’d by prints, whether it be by their
informing us of fomething new, or bringing fome-
thing to our minds that we knew before ; whether
it be, that having a guflo for the arts, we judge by
them of the different productions which the Painters
and gravers have left us, or having no knowledge
of thofe things, we flatter ourfelves, that we fhall
acquire it; or, in fhort, if w r e aim at nothing by it
but to pleafe ourfelves by agreeably exciting our
attention in obferving the beauty and Angularity
of the prints that we meet with, for there we fee
countries, towns, and all the confiderable places that
we have read of in hiftory, or have feen in our
travels, in fuch fort that the great variety, and the
great number of rare things which we find there
may ferve inftead of travelling, and this may be
done with cafe by the curious, who have no ftrength,
leifure or convenience to travel.
’Tis certain therefore from what we have faid,
that the fight of fine prints by which youth is in-
truded, and the knowledge of old perfons reviv’d
and confirm’d, muft be ufeful to all the world.
We


We don’t think it neceffary to enter into a detail
of all the feveral things that might recommend t e
ufe of prints, we believe we have faid enough to in-
duce the reader to draw consequences from it, con-
formable to his views, and his occafions.
If the ancients had had the fame advantage in this
as we have, and if they had, by the means of prints
tranfmitted what they had done, that was fine and
curious, to pofterity, we fhould have diftmdtly known
abundance of things, of which we have but confusit
ideas in hiftoryj we fhould fee the (lately monuments
of Memphis and Babylon, and the temple ot Jeru-
falem which Solomon built with fo much magni -
cence •, we fhould make a judgment of the buildings
of Athens, Corinth, and old Rome, with more
ground, and with more certainty than we can now
by the poor remains that are left of theim . au a
nias, who has made fuch an exad defcnption of
Greece, and who leads us through all places, as it
were by the hand, would have accompany d his
difeourfes with demonftrative figures, which might
have been handed down to us, and we might have
feen with pleafure not only the temples and palaces
as they were in their perfeftion, but we fhould alio
have inherited from the ancient workmen the art ot
good building. Vitruvius, whofe demonftrations
are loft, would not have fuffer’d us to be ignorant ot
ail the inftruments and machines which he has de-
ferib’d, and we fhould not find in his book fo many
obfeure places, if the figures had been preferv d by
prints ♦, for in arts thofe figures are the light ot dil-
courfe, and the true means by which an author can
communicate his meaning. ’Tis for want o t ee
means that the machines of Archimedes e ."
der Hiero are loft, and the knowledge of Uiolcori-
des’s plants, as alfo, of feveral animals, an c a
great many of the curious produdtions of nature,
which the ftudies and meditations of the antients
2 CUf


difcover’d : But not to trouble ourfelves any longer
in grieving for the Jols of things which we can’t re-
cover, let us profit ourfelves by prints that we have
amongft us.
¥he idea which I have given the world of a per-
feui Painter, may in my opinion ajffl the curious in
making a judgment of painting : However, fine e to know
pictures perfectly requires fame thing more , I thought
myfelf oblig'd to add what has appear'd to me necejfary
in that matter.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the knowledge of PICTURES.
THERE are three feveral forts of knowledge
relating to pictures. The firft confifts in dif-
covering what is good, and what is bad in the fame
piffture : The fecond has refpefl to the name of the
author: And the third is to know whether ’tis an
original or a copy.
I.
To know what is good , and what is bad in a
PICTURE.
THE firft of thefe two forts of knowledge is,
without doubt, the moft difficult to be ac-
quir’d ; it fuppofes a penetration and finenefs of wit,
with the principles of painting, and on the meafure
of thefe things the knowledge of the art depends.
Penetration and finenefs of wit ferve to make a judg-
ment of the invention, of the expreffion of the fub-
jedf in general, of the paffions of the foul in parti-
cular.


cular, of allegories, and of what depends on * Cof-
tume and poefy. The knowledge of principles helps
one to find times and places out, the caufe of the
effeCts that we admire, whether they proceed from
a good relifh, from the correCtnefs or elegance of
defign, or whether the objects appear advantageoufly
difpos’d, or the colouring, lights and lhadows be
happily manag’d. Thofe that have not cultivated
their minds by the knowledge of principles, or at
leak have fome {peculation of ’em, may however
be fenfible of the effects of a fine picture, but car*
never give a reafon for the judgment they make.
I have endeavour’d, by my idea of a perfect Painter,
to aflik the natural light of the lovers of painting ;
however, I don’t pretend to make them penetrate
into the detail of the parts of the art, that’s rather
the bufinefs of the Painters than of the curious: I
would only put their minds in a good way towards
knowledge, that they may, in general, be able to
know what is good, and what bad in a picture.
The lovers of the art only, who have genius and
inclination, are permitted, if we may fo fay, to en-
ter into the fanCluary, and acquire the knowledge
of this whole detail by the lights which they infen-
fibly gain by ferious reflection.
The Gout of the arts wasfo much in fafhion in the
time of Alexander the Great, that to know the bot-
tom of them a little, young gentlemen were taught
to defign: By this means thofe that had a talertf, cul-
tivated it by exercife, they made ufe of it upon oc-
cafion, and dikinguifh’d themfelves by the fuperio-
rity of their knowledge. I refer thofe, at leak, who
have not any experience of this manual praClice, to
the idea I have given of its perfection.
* A term of art which fignifies manners.
to


II.
To know who is the author of a PICTURE.
TH E knowledge of the names of the authors is
got by long pradfice, and .the fight of a great
many pictures of all the fchools, and of the principal
matters that compofe them : There are fix of thefe
fchools to which we may give a particular name, as
the Roman, the Venetian, the Lombard, the Ger-
man, the Flemiffi, and the French. And, after
having by much application acquir’d a diftindt idea
of each of thefe Ichools, if we would find put to
which of them a pidlure belongs, we mutt compare
it with that to which we think it has the neareft affi-
nity, and when we have found out the fchool, we
mutt apply the pidture to that Painter, whofe man-
ner agrees moft with that work ; but to know this
particular manner is, in my opinion, the greateft
part of the difficulty.
There are fome curious men who form an idea of
a matter, by the fight of three or four of his pidtures;
and who, after this, believe they have a fufficient
authority to decide what his manner is, without
coafidering what care the Painter took about them,
ans what age he was of when he drew them.
’Tis not from particular pidtures of a Painter, but
from his works in general that we judge of his me-
rit ; for there is no Painter that has not made fome
good, and fome bad pidtures, according to his care,
or the motion of his genius.
There is none alfo that had not his. beginning,
his progrefs, and his end, that is to fay, three man-
ners. The firft he took from his matter ; the fecond
he form’d by his Gout, in which his capacity and
genius are to be found j and the third commonly
degc


degenerates into what we call manner . For a I ain
ter, who has a long time ftudy d after natuie, is
willing, without any more trouble, to make ufeonly
of the experience he has got.
When a curious perfon has well confider’d the
different pidures of a matter, and has form’d a per-
fed idea of his ftile, he may then judge who is the
author of a pidure, without being condemn’d for
raflmefs ; tho* a critick, who has a talent, and has
ftudy’d and pradis’d the art, may fometimes be
deceiv’d in the name of an author, yet he will, at
leaft, never be deceiv’d in the juftnefs and folidity
of his fentiments.
There are pidures made by difciples, who have
copy’d their matters very exadly in their judgment
and their manner. Some Painters have follow d
the Gout of another country, and not their own;
and there are fbme who leave one manner for ano-
ther, and who have, by this means, made fome
pidures which will puzzle the beft judges to guels
the name of their author.
Neverthelefs this inconvenience is not without a
remedy for fuch, as not fatisfying themfelves in
knowing a matter’s hand, have penetration enough
difeover the charader of his mind. A fkilful man
may eafily communicate the manner in which he
executes his defigns, but not the delicacy of his
thoughts. ’Tis not, to find out the author of a
pidure, enough therefore to know the motion of
the pencil, if the curious cannon penetrate that of
the mind ; and tho* ’tis very much to have a jutt
idea of a Painter’s Gout in his defign, yet ’tis ne-
ceflary to enter into the charader of his genius, and
the turn which he is capable of giving to his con-
ceptions. I don’t pretend, however, to flop the
mouths of thofe lovers of painting, who have not
feen nor examin’d this great number of pidures.
By talking of it they may acquire and encreafe
know


knowledge. I wou’d only, that every one fhou’d
give us the fenfe in which he fpeaks, by the mea-
fure of his experience. Modefty, which is fo be-
coming in beginners, agrees alfo with the moft ex-
perienc’d, efpecmlly in difficult cafes.
III.
If a picture he an original or a copy.
?rrMS not my intention to difcourfe here of in-
H different copies, which the curious will find
out as firft fight, much lefs of bad ones, which are
thought fo by all the world. I fuppofe then a copy
made by a good matter, which deferves a ferious
reflection, and makes one doubt, for fome time at
leaft, whether ’tis a copy or an original. There
are three forts of fuch copies.
The firft is done faithfully, but fervilely.
The fecond is light, eafy, and not faithful.
The third faithful and eafy.
The firtt, which is fervile and faithful, includes
the defign, the colouring, and the touches of
the original*, but the fear of patting beyond the
bounds of this exaClnefs, and to err againtt fide-
lity, makes the hand of. the copift ttiff, and if
it is never fo little examin’d, ffiews it to be what
it is. .
The fecond is more likely to jmpofe on the Ipec-
tator, becaufe of the lightnefs of the pencil, but the
unfaithfulnefs of the contours, or outlines, unde-
ceive the beft judges.
And the third, which is faithful and ealy, made
by a learn’d and light hand, and above all, in the
time of the original, puzzles the greateft criticks,
and often hazards their pronouncing againtt the
truth, tho’ it may be agreeable to verifimility. As
there


there are fomethings which feem to favour the ori*
ginality of a piece, fo there are others that feem to
deftroy it, as the repetition of the fame pidlure, its
having been forgotten a long time, or coiling a little
money : But, tho* thefe confiderations may have
weight, they are fometimes very trivial, for want
of being well examin'd.
That a pidlure is forgot, proceeds often from the
hands into which it falls, the place where it is put,
the perfons that fee it, or the little value that the
owner has for painting.
The cheapnefs of it proceeds commonly from the
neceffity or ignorance of the feller.
The repetition of apidlure, which is a more fpe-
cious caufe, is not always a fubftantial reafon. There
is fcarce a painter but has repeated fome one of his
works, either becaufe he was pleafed with it, or be-
caufe he was delired to draw one like it. I have
feen two Madonna’s of Raphael, which being, out
of curiofity, plac’d by one another, would perfuade
the criticks that they were both originals. Titian
has repeated the fame picture feven or eight times,
as a play that fucceeds is play’d a great many nights
together-, and we fee feveral pictures of the belt
mailers of Italy repeated, which difpute with their
other pieces for goodnefs and originality. There
have been fome that have deceived the molt fkilful
painters: among many examples of this kind I /hall
think it fufficient to relate one, which is, that of
Julio Romano, and is taken from Vafari.
Frederic 11. duke of Mantua, going through Flo-
rence towards Rome, where he went to pay a vifit
to pope Clement Vllth, in the palace uau Medici,
over one of the doors faw the pidlure of *£eo Xth.
between the cardinal of Medici, and cardinal di
Roffi. The heads were of Raphael, the drapery
of Julio Romano, and all together admirable. The
duke look’d upon it earned!/, and became fo in
F love


love with it, that he could not forbear begging it of
the Pope when he came to Rome. His holinels very
gracioufly gave it him, and order’d his fecretary to
write to Odavian di Medici to put the picture up
in a cafe, and fend it to Mantua. Odavian, who
was a great lover of painting, and loath to deprive
Florence of fuch a rarity, invented an excufe to de-
fer fending it, pretending that the frame was not
rich enough, and he would get one fitted up for it.
This delay gave Odavian time to have it copy’d,
which was done by Andrea del Sarto, who imitated
even the little fpots that were upon it. This piece
was fo like the original, that Odavian himfelf could
hardly diftinguifh the one from the other, and that
he might not be deceiv’d, he put a private mark
upon the copy, and a few days after fent it to Man-
tua. The duke receiv’d it with all poffible fatis-
fadion, not doubting but ’twas the work ot Raphael,
and Julio Romano. The latter, who was then in
the lervice of that prince, had nofufpicion that what
was his part of the pidure was not done by him-
felf, and had thought it his own doing as long as he
liv’d, if Vafari, who had feen the copy while it
was drawing, had not difabus’d him •, for coming
to Mantua he was mighty well entertain’d by Julio
Romano, who fhew’d him all the duke’s rarities,
faying, ‘ That the fineft thing was ftill to be feen,’
naming the picture of Leo Xth, done by Raphael,
and (hewing it him, Vafari laid, ‘ *Tis very fine,
4 but *cis not Raphael’s.’ Julio Romano looking
on it more attentively, reply’d, 4 How, is’c not
* Raphael’s ? Don’t I know my own work in it?
4 Don’t 1 fee the ftrokes of my pencil, and remem-
* ber the ftriking them ?’ Vafari anfwer’d, 4 You
‘ don’t obferve it clofely enough ; I allure you, I
4 faw Andrea del Sarto draw this very pidure ; be-
-4 hind the canvas you will fee a mark which was
4 put upon it to diltinguilh it from the original.*
Julio


Julio Romano turning about the pifture, and per-
ceiving it was matter of fad, held up his hands
with aftonilhment, faying, c I value it as much as
< if it was Raphael’s, and even more, for ns very
‘ furprizing to fee fo excellent a mafter lo well imi-
* tated as to deceive one.*
Now, fmce Julio Romano, with all his Ikill,
after having had notice given him, and examined
the picture, palfionately per filled in the deceit of his
judgment, as his proper work, we muft not think
it Itrange that otlier Painters lefs fkiiful, mould
fometimes be miftaken about the works ol otneis:
For the truth may be thus hidden to the profoundelt
knowledge, and tho’ a man may be out as to the
fad, he may not always be out in his judgment*
However, let a picture be never fo well copy d a
good critick will perceive exterior tokens enough
upon it to juftify his laying boldly what he thinks,
without running the rifque of a cenfure of rafhnefs,
if he does not lay it down in a politive tone *, but as
an opinion founded on folid knowledge. It remains
for me to fay fomething of thole pictures that are
neither original nor copies, which the Italians .call
Pallid, from Pafte, becaufe, as the feveral things
that feafon a pally, are reduc’d to one tafte, fo coun-
terfeits that compofe a pallid tend only to effcd one
truth. A Painter that would deceive in this way,
ought to have, in his mind, the manner and prin-
ciples of the mailer, of whom he would give an
idea, whether he takes any part of a picture which
that mailer has made and puts it in his own worK,
or whether the invention is his own, and he imitates
lightly, not only his touches, but even his Gout of
defign and colouring. It olten happens that thefc
Painters who propole the counterfeiting another s
manner, aiming to imitate luch as are more fkiiful
than themfelves, they make better pictures of this
F 2 kind.


kind, than if they were to do fomething of their
own.
Among thole who took delight in counterfeiting
the manner of other Painters, I fhall content my-
felf with naming David Teniers only, who has de-
ceiv’d, and ever will deceive the curious, who are
not prepoflfeft of his dexterity in transforming him-
felf into Balfano and Paolo Veronefe. There are
fome of his Pallid made with fo much cunning, that
the eyes of the molt judicious are furpriz’d by them
at firft fight; but after having examined them nearer,
they foon diltinguifh the one’s colouring, and the
one’s pencil, from the other’s.
For example, David Teniers had a particular ta-
lent in imitating the Baflans; but the light and eafy
pencil which he employ’d in this artifice, is the very
proof of his deceit, for his pencil, tho’ eafy and
light, is not fo lively nor fo proper to charaderife
objeds, as that of the Balfan’s, efpecially as to
animals.
’Tis true, Teniers underftood the union of co-
lours ; but there was a certain grey, predominant in
his, and his colouring had not the vigour and fweet-
ncls of Giacomo Balfano’s. ’Tis the fame with all
Pallid, and if we would not be deceiv’d by them,
we fnould examine their Gout of defign, their
colouring, and the charader of their pencils, with
the originals from whence they were taken.
THE


THE
LIVES
OF EMINENT
PAINTERS.
BOOK II.
Of the origin of PAINTING.
THO* the authors, who have faid any
thing of the origin of painting have
differ’d among themfelves, they agree,
however, in this, that lhadow gave the
firft occafion to the birth of this art. Upon which
Pliny tell us a ftory of one Corinthia, a girl of Sicy-
one, who being in love with a certain youth, and
finding him a-fleep near a lamp that was burning, the
fhadow of his face, which appear’d on the wall,
feem’d fo like him that (he was incited to draw the
extremities of it, and thus made a portrait of her
lover. If, as ’tis likely, fhadow was the rife of the
invention of painting, imitation is fo natural to
mankind, that they would not have ftay’d till the
F 3 time


time of Corinthia, without drawing figures after
fhadow, which is as old as man himfclf.
But not to enlarge on this thought, or feek after
fo uncertain a fource, as is that of painting, we may
with good grounds aver, that this art and fculpture
had their birth at one and the fame time, the one
and the other having the fame principle, which is
defign, and ever fmce the days of Abraham, when
fculpture was in ufe, painting was confequently
practis’d in the fame degree. It has appear’d and
difappear’d according to the revolutions of ages.
War is an art that dettroys all others, and painting
is fo much the more expos’d to it, by how much
the more ’tis done forpleafure. However, the fine
arts are like the Phenix, they revive out of their
afhes: Wherefore we have reafon to believe, that
painting was feveral times extinguifh’d, and renew’d
again in the firft ages, tho’ ’twas in a very poor de-
gree j and that thofe to whom we attribute the in-
vention of that art, were only the renewers of it.
But to fpeak like other authors, after having
compar’d them one with another, we fhall in the
main find, that Gyges the Lydian invented painting
in iEgypt, Euchir in Greece, and Bularchus brought
it out of Greece in Italy in the reign of Romulus.
This Painter reprefented the battle of the Magne-
fians fo well in one of his pictures, that Candaulus
king of Lydia thought it worth a prodigious fum,
and to purchafe it cover’d it with gold, by which
we may conclude, that painting was highly in efteem
in thofe days.
It were needlefs to relate, in this abridgment, the
little that has been faid by the antient authors of the
firft Painters, who liv’d before the declenfion of the
empire: There being none of their works left, no
man has much curiofity to know any thing of them,
or to trouble himfelf to remember their names. We
muft, however, except fome of them who are cele-
brated


brated by fame, and of whom it would be fcan-
dalous not to know fomething. Six of them, Zeuxis,
Parrhafius, Pamphilus, Timanthes, Apelles and Pro-
togenes, liv’d at the fame time with Alexander the
Great, when the fine arts were in their vigour; and
tho* we have none of their productions, we may,
notwithftanding, judge of the perfections of them,
by the fculptures of the lame age, which are pre-
ferv’d to this day, and by the price that thofe anci-
ent Painters had for their pieces. Tamanthes, and
after him Apelles, having had 100 talents, near
20000 pounds of Englifli money, for one picture.
*Tis true there are fome fmall remains of the old
painting (till to be feen, but we know not when
they were done, or who did them. The moll con-
fiderable is at Rome in the vineyard of Aldobran-
dino, and reprefents a marriage. This work fhews
a great Gout of defign, and much of the Grecian
fculprure and Balfo Relievo. Yet it is dry, and
there appears in it no knowledge of Groupes, or the
ClaroObfcuro : But we mult not believe that all the
pieces painted in Greece were of this fort, becaufe
what we read of Zeuxis and Parrhafius, that by their
pencil they deceiv’d even animals and painters them-
lelves, is enough to convince us that they penetrated
farther into the principles of their art, than the au-
thor of that picture. We confcfs they did not ufe
oil, yet, perhaps, they might have fome other fe-
cret of which we are .ignorant, that gave fo much
ftrength to their colours, as is reported of Apelles’s.
Pliny tells us, he made ufe of a certain vernifh,
which invigorated his colouring, and preferv’d it.
Be it as it will, we cannot reafonably Hand out againll
the evidence of all the ancient authors, who have
fpoken of the Painters of thofe times, from whofe
writings we ought to infer, that painting was in a
high degree of perfection, and that the number of
F 4 the


the matters was great. I fhall here mention only fome
of the chief of them.
An abridgment of the lives of the six principal
PAINTERS of GREECE.
ZEUXIS
WA S a native Heraclea in Macedonia, and
learnt the firft elements of painting in the
LXXXVth Olympiad, 400 years before the birth
of Chnft: He followed his (Indies very aftiduoufly,
and his fuccefs being anfwerable to his induftry, he
was enabled to undertake feveral bold things that
got him reputation. He was (kilful in defigning,
and underftood colouring better than any painter of
h:s time. Pliny lays, Apollodorus who firft found
out the principles of the Claro Obfcuro, and of
colours, ■ open’d the doors of painting to Zeuxis,
and that thef fame Apollodorus complaining of
that Painter, faid: 6 He had enter’d fo far within
* them, that he had carry’d out with him the whole
‘ art of painting.* The confiderable works which
he was employ’d about, brought him in vaft fums
of money, and having got riches enough, he gave
away his pictures, becaufe, as he faid, he did not
lee how they could be rated at their full value. The
Agrigentines defiring him to make apifture of Hel-
Icn naked, to be fet up in their temple, fent him,
at his requeft, fome of their moft beautiful maids,
of whom he kept five, and having well examin’d
them, form’d an idea of their fineft parts, to com-
pofe the body he was to reprefent. He painted it
after them ; and this figure, when he had carefully
finifh’d it, appear’d fo perfedl in his Own eyes, that
he could not forbear telling the Painters who came
to


to admire it, that they might praife it, but could
not imitate it.
Neverthelefs, Parrhafius difputed with him the
honour of being the beft Painter of the age. To
decide the controverfy they agreed, that each of
them fhould make a pidture, and let the world judge
whofe performance was beft: Zeuxis painted fome
grapes, and Parrhafius a curtain ; Zeuxis’s work
being expos’d to fight, invited the birds to come
and peck at it, believing the grapes to be real •, and
Zeuxis, proud of the judgment the birds had given
in his favour, bad Parrhafius draw the curtain, and
fliew his pidure i but finding himfelf cheated by the
curtain, he ingenuoufly confeft he was overcome,
for he had only deceiv’d birds, whereas Parrhafius
had deceiv’d him himfelf, as great a Painter as he
was. Zeuxis fometime after painted a boy carrying
a bafket of grapes, and feeing the birds come and
peck at them, he confeft, that if the grapes were
v/ell painted, the boy muft be ill, fince the birds
were not afraid of him.
Agatharchus, being impatient to lee Zeuxis take
up fo much time in finiftiing his pieces, told him
one day : For my part I foon difpatch my pidures.
You are a happy man, replies Zeuxis, I do mine
with time and application, becaufe I would have
them good, and I am fatisfy’d, that what is foon
done, will foon be forgotten.
Tho’ Zeuxis was generally admir’d in his life-
time, yet he had his enemies. Ariftotle cenfures
him for not having a talent of cxprefling juftly the
pafllons of the foul •, and Quintilian fays he made
the extremities of his figures tocv powerful, imi-
tating Homer, who delighted, in defcribing bodies,
to give them ftrong and robuft members, even to
thofe of women. Pliny mentions Zeuxis’s works,
and Lucian carefully defcribes his pidure of the
centaur, and his family. Feftus writes, his laft piece
was


the picture of an old woman, which when he had
finilh’d, he was fo pleas’d with, that he laugh’d
himfelf to death at the fight of her comical figure;
but tho’ one can hardly believe this, yet the event
is not without example.
Zeuxis’s competitors were, Timanthes, Andro-
cides, Eupompus and Parrhafius.
PARRHASIUS
WA S born at Ephefus, was the fon and dif-
ciple of Evenor, and the contemporary of
Zeuxis. We have feen in the life of the latter,
that they painted pictures as a trial of (kill between
them : They were both look’d upon as the greatell
mailers of their age, which was the age of mailers;
and Quintilian informs us, they rais’d the art of
painting to a very high degree of perfection, Par-
rhafius in defigning, and Zeuxis in colouring.
All authors who mention the former, agree in
giving him the glory of defigning very correctly
and very elegantly, and in reprefenting bodies, not
as nature had produc’d, but as fhe might have pro-
duc’d them ; and it was according to this great idea
that he wrote of the fymmetry of the body.
Among other things, he was excellent in expref-
fing the pafiions of the foul, a quality that cannot
be enough commended ; in adjulting the head-
drefifes, in diftributing the hair, and in the graces
of the mouth.
He had a great genius and elevation of mind, but
the praifes which were given him, and which he
thought he deferv’d, made him extremely proud.
He talk’d contemptibly of all others, and of himfelf
as if he had brought the art to the laft perfection :
He very frankly lliled himfelf the mailer and prince
of painting, and was magnificent in every thing about
him, yet it was without affectation or conllrainr.
There


There was fomcthing of enthufiafm in his pro-
fusions ; He never went to work but he expected
to find pleafure in it, and when, he was at it, he
us’d to fing to himfelf to fweeten his labour; He
made a great many pictures, of which like moft
celebrated are nam’d in the 35th book ot Pliny,
where the curious may find a catalogue ot them.
PAMPHILUS
WAS a Macedonian, born in the reign of
king Philip : He was Eupompus’s difciple
and Apelles’s matter: He had fo high an idea of his
art, that he believ’d no man could be Ikilful in it
without ftudying polite learning and geometry, ot
which he was himfelf a matter. His reputation got
him confiderable difciples, of whom he had a talent
a-piece, near 200 /. fterling, for ten years tea.ching,
and fo long, they were with him to learn painting.
Apelles and Melanthus gave him that fum,^ which
Bede fays was fo much a year, and not for the whole
time. It was by his advice and credit with Alex-
ander the Great, that the young men of quality of
Sicyone, and afterwards ot all Greece, were com-
manded to learn firtl to defign ; and by his means
painting was reckon’d luch an honourable profefiion,
that all who were not noble were, by an edibt,
forbidden to exercife that art ; whence we may
infer, that if painting was fo much efteem’d by
the poiiteft people of antiquity, s tis not without
reafon that the moft judicious princes, at this time,
love and protedl it, and men of wit value themfelves
upon underftanding it.
TIMANTHES.
Tlmanthes was contemporary with Pamphilus,
The place of his birth is not known, but he
was one of the moft learned and moft judicious Pain-
ters


ters of the age he liv’d in. The moft celebrated of
all his works, and that of which feveral authors
have fpoken with the higheft Eulogies, was the
facrifice of Iphigenia. The young virgin appears
wonderfully charming as to her beauty, and feems
voluntarily to devote herfelf to death for the good
of her country. The Painter, in reprefenting Cal-
chas, Ulyffes, Ajax and Menelaus, having drain’d
himfelf to give each of them a different character of
fofrow, painted Agamemnon, father of Iphigenia,
with his face hid in the drapery of the figure, not
being able otherwife to exprefs his fentiments of
forrow as they deferv’d : And the exprefiions which
appear in the faces of the Victim’s brother and
uncle, make one guefs at the forrowful condition
of the father.
Timanthes, at another time, having drawn a
Cyclops afleep in a little picture, to give an image
of his bignefs painted fome fatyrs near him, who
meafured his thumb by a Thyrfe. Pliny mentions
the chief pieces of Timanthes, and fays, that in all
his works, he gave the fpeCtator to underftand a
great many more things than he painted.
APELLES .
APelles, whom fame has put above all Painters,
was born in the ifle of Coos, in the Archi-
pelago, being the fon of Pithius, and the difciple of
Pamphilus whom we have fpoken of. Great Pain-
ters, as well as great poets, have in all ages gain’d
the favour of fovereigns. Apelles was particularly
valu’d by Alexander the Great, who not only
honour’d him with his effeem, becaufe of his great
capacity, but lov’d him for the candour of his
manners.
Apelles was born with fuch a difpofition and in-
clination to painting, that in order to arrive at per-
fection


feftion in his art, he made no fcruple of giving
Pamphilus, his matter, a talent a year, and fee it
down as a rule, that a day fhould never go over his
head without defigning ; from whence came the
proverb. Nulla Dies fine Linea , no Day without
drawing a Line , that is, without exercifmg himfelf
in defigning. The force of his genius, and the
afliduity of his ftudies, did not give him fo good an
opinion of himfelf, as the matters are apt to have :
He never made a judgment of his own capacity but
by comparing it with that of others whom he vi-
fited. Every body knows what happen’d between
him and Protogenes. The latter Jiv’d in the ifle of
Rhodes, whither Apelles went on purpofe to fee his
works, of which he knew nothing but by their re-
putation. When he arrived there, he found only an
old woman in Protogcnes’s houfe, whoafking him
his name, he anfwer’d, I am going to write it on
this canvas, and taking his pencil with colour on it,
he defign’d fomething with extreme delicacy. Pro-
togenes coming home, the old woman told him
what had paft fince he had been gone, and fhew’d
him the canvas; who then obferving attentively the
beauty of the lines, faid, it was certainly Apelles
that had been there, believing no one elfe could
draw any thing fo fine: Then taking another colour,
he drew on thofe lines an outline more correttt and
more delicate, after which he went out again, bid-
ding the old woman fhew that to the perfon who
had been there, if he return’d, and tell him, that
was the man he fought after. Apelles returning,
and being afham’d to fee himfelf outdone, takes a
third colour, and among the Lines that had been
drawn, lays forne with lo much judgment, and fo
wonderfully fine, that it took in ail the fubtlety of
the art. Protogenes faw them in his turn, and con-
fdfing that he could not do better, gave over the
difpute, and ran in haft to find out Apelles.
l Pliny


Pliny, who tells this ftory, fays he faw this piece
of canvas before it was confum’d in the fire that
burnt down the emperor’s palace ; that there was
nothing upon it but fome lines which could fcarce
be diftinguifh’d, and yet this fragment was more
valu’d than any of the piftures among which it was
plac’d.
It is very near in this fenfe, that we muft under-
ftand this place of Pliny ; for to think it was a
fimple line divided from another in its whole ex-
tent, would be ridiculous, and fhock every one
that has the leaft knowledge of Painting, there being
in that no fign of capacity to be Ihewn, nor fkill in
the art.
What has giv’n rife to this interpretation is, in
my opinion, the ill conftruflion of the word Linea;
for by Linea in that place is to be underftood, either
Delign or Outlines. Pliny himfelf make ufe of it in
this fignification elfewhere, when he fays of Apelles,
that he never let a day go over his head without
defigning. Nulla Dies fine Lined , which was not
drawing fimple lines, but to accuftom himfelf to
correft defigning.
In the fame manner we fhould underftand the
word Subtiltas, not to give an idea of a very de-
licate line, but of the exaftnefs and finenefs ol de-
fign. Thus the Subtlety is not in the line, con-
fider’d fimply as a line, but in the intelligence of
the art, which is Ihewn in the lines of a defign.
I confefs, however, that the word Tenuitas, which
is in the fame place of Pliny, may create fome diffi-
culty in this explication, which I believe is not unan-
fwerable, for by that word the finenefs and exaftnefs
of an outline may very well be underftood : Befides,
PJI maintain it would be nonfenfe to think, that the
viftory, in the difpute between Apelles and Proto-
genes, depended only on ftriking a line, one more
delicately than another; and if Pliny, who is ill
i con


conftru’d in this place, meant it as thofe who fo con-
ftrue him would have him, he knew little of the
fine arts, tho* one may eafily perceive elfewhere,
that he was a pafllonate admirer of them.
Envy, which is lb often met with among perfons
of the lame profeflion, never enter’d into the foul of
Apelles, and if he endeavour’d to raife himfelf, it
was wholly by the afliftance of his art, which he
knew to be of great extent, and was fond of the
glory of poffelTing it. He was as felicitous about
the advantage of his emulators, as about his own,
and being fenfible of the capacity of Protogenes, he
recommended him to the Rhodians, who, upon
his charadler of him, gave him a price for his works
incomparably greater than that Painter was us’d to
receive for them before.
Apelles was circumfpeft, but eafy in his produc-
tions: The elegance and grace which is everywhere
to be feen in his pictures, was no obftacle to the
truth which a Painter owes to nature, and he drew
his pieces with fo much likenefs, that fome Aftro-
logers made ufe of them to draw the horofeope of
the perfons he had painted.
Alexander, who often vifited Apelles, delighting
in his converfation and manners, commanded him
to talk to him freely, and had a very great kindnefs
for him; an inftance of which was fhewn upon the
occafion of his drawing the picture of Campafpe,
which he had drawn by his order. Campafpe was
very handfom, and the moft belov’d of all Alexan-
der’s concubines, who perceiving that Apelles was
in love with her, gave her to him *, by which, fays
Pliny, he not only Ihew’d the affedtion he had for
his Painter, but that after having overcome many
nations, he knew Hill how to overcome himfelf:
Great, continues the fame author, by his courage,
but more great by the dominion he had over his
paffions,
Apelles


Apelles often drew the picture of Alexander; and
this monarch not thinking it convenient that his
image (hould be profan’d by the hands of the igno-
rant” publifh’d an edid, forbidding all Painters
whatfoever to make his portrait, except Apelles ;
and by the fame edid he permitted Pyrgoteles only
to engrave his image on gems and precious ftones,
and Lyfippus only to caft his ftatue inbrals.
Tho* Apelles was very exad in his works, he
knew how far to carry his exadnefs, without fa-
tiguing his mind : One day talking of Protogenes,
he Paid, ‘ He was a great matter, but he often
4 fpoil’d his pieces, by endeavouring to make them
4 perfed; that he did not known when he had
c done well that a man may do too much as well
4 as too little; and that he was truly (kilful, who
4 knew what was fufficient.’
One of his difciples (hewing him a pidure to
have his opinion of it, and telling him he had done
it in a little time, Apelles reply’d, 6 I fee it plain
4 enough, and I wonder that in the time you have
4 not made a great many fuch pidures.’
Another Painter (hewing him the pidure of an
Hellen, which he had drawn with care, and adorn d
with abundance of jewels, Apelles told him, ‘ Since
4 you could not make her handfome, I perceive,
4 friend, you have made her rich.*
As he (poke his mind freely, fo he took in good
part what was faid to him ; and to avoid flattery, he
expos’d his works to the publick, and hid himfelf
behind them, to hear what paflengers faid of them,
with an intent to turn their obfervations to his
advantage. A (hoemaker coming by one day,
took the liberty to criticife on a (andal which
he had painted, and it was immediately alter’d;
but patting by the fame place the next day, and
being proud to fee that his criticifm was taken
notice of, he paft his cenfure on a leg, which had
nothing


nothing faulty in it; upon which Apelles came
from behind the canvas, and told the fhoe-maker,
his judgment went no higher than a fandal, which
afterwards grew into a proverb. I don’t know
whether there are many Apelles’s in our days, but I’m
confident there are more ihoe-makers than ever.
Another fign of the ingenuity of Apelles, was his
acknowledging that Amphion underftood difpofition
better, and Alclepiodorus the regularity of defign ;
but he gave place to no body lor grace, which was
his particular talent. When he view’d the works of
the great painters, he admir’d the beauties of them,
yet he frankly faid, he did not perceive that grace
in them, which no body was fo much maftcr of as
himfelf, for without vanity he might lay it was his
own peculiar excellence.
Apelles never painted on walls, nor on any thing
that could not be fav’d in a fire. He would have
had the works of the bell maffers carried from one
country to another, and could not endure that a
picture fhould not be capable of having more than
one mailer, bccaufe painting, he laid, was a com-
mon good to all the world.
Pliny has given us a defeription of Apelles’s fined:
pieces, and one may judge ol their excellence by the
price that was paid for them, lometimesone hundred
talents, iometimes a fum without counting, and
with profufion.
PROTOGENES.
PRotogenes was a native of Caunus, a city of
Caria, fubjebl to the Rhodians : We know not
who was his father or his matter; it is likely enough
he had no other mailer than the publick pieces that
ne faw, and probably his parents being poor, could
not be at any luch expence, for his education in the
art, as was given at that time. Himfelf was forc’d
G at


at firft to paint fhips for his livelihood: his ambi-
tion was not to be rich, but to be a mafter of his
profefiion, for this reafon he liv’d a retir’d life, that
he might not be difturb’d in thofe ftudies, which he
thought neceffary for the perfedion of his art.
He finifh’d his pictures with too great care:
Apelles faid of him, he knew not when he had done
well, or how to get away his work •, and by dint of
labour leften’d its beauty, and fatigued his mind.
He was more for truth than verifimility in painting,
by which in exading more of his art than he ought
to have done, he drew lefs from her than he might
have done. . _
The fineft of his pieces is the pidure of Jalifus *,
feveral authors have mention’d it without giving any
defcription of it, or telling who this Jalifus was:
fome perfons fuppofe him to have been a famous
hunter.
For feven years that Protogenes work’d on this
pidure, all his food was lupines mix’d with a little
water, which ferv’d him both for meat an drink.
He was of opinion, that this fimple and light nou-
rifbment would leave him the freedom of his fancy.
Apelles feeing this piece, was fo ftruck with admi-
miration, that he could not fpeak a word, having
no expreftion to anfwer the idea of the beauty of the
pidure, which he had form’d in his mind. It was
this fame pidure that lav’d the city of Rhodes,
when king Demetrius befieg’d it; for not being able
to attack it, but on that fide where Protogenes
work’d, which he intended to burn that it might
fet fire to the reft of the town, he chofe rather to
abandon his hopes of conqueft, than to deftroy fo
fine a piece as was that of Jalifus.
Protogenes’s work-houfe wasin a garden inthe fu-
burbs of Rhodes, near the camp of the enemy, yet
the noife of arms could not diftrad him in his labours.
The king fending for him, and afking him, ‘ with
° 4 what


* what affurance he could work in the fbbuibs of a
* city that was befieg’d ? He reply’d, That he under-
‘ l\ood, the war he had undertaken was againft the
‘ Rhodians, and not againft the arts. The king
was fo pleas’d with this anfwer, that he ordered fome
foldiers to be his guard, and was glad that by this
means he could fave fo fkilful a hand.
Aulus Gellius reports, that the Rhodians, during
the fiege. Tent ambafladors to Demetrius, to pray
him to fave the picture of Jalifus, reprefenting, that
if he was vidtorious, it might lerve to adorn his
triumph, and if he was forc’d to raife the liege, he
might be blam’d for turning his arms againft Pro-
togenes, when he could not conquer the town. The
king hearing them out, lik’d the mefifage fo well,
that he drew off his army, and by this means fav’d
both the pidture of Jalifus and the city of Rhodes.
I will not here relate the memorable conteft be-
tween Apelles and Protogenes, the reader may lee it
in the life of Apelles. I lhall only add, that the latter
afking Protogenes what price he had for his pidlures,
and Protogenes naming an incotifiderable fum, ac-
cording to the fad fortune of thofe who are obiig d
to work for their bread, Apelles, concern’d at the
injuftice done to the beauty of his produdbions, gave
him fifty talents for one pidbureonly, telling it abroad
that he would make it pafs, and fell it for his own.
This generofity open’d the eyes of the Rhodians, as
to the merit of Protogenes, and made them to get the
pidbure Apelles had bought, out of his hand', paying
down a much greater price for it than he had given,
Pliny fays. Protogenes was a Iculptor, as well as a
Painter: Confult this author if you would know more
of his works, of which he fpeaks as well as of thole
of other fkilful Painters. I lhall only relate here a
paffage out of Quintilian, which (hews the particular
talents of fix famous Painters, Protogencs, fays he,
excell’d in exadbnels, Pamphilus and Melanthus in
G 2 the


the difpofition, Antiphilus in eafinefs, Theon, the
Samian, in fruitfalnefs of ideas, and Apelles in grace
and ingenious conceptions.
Pliny writes, that the mailers of the art of painting,
in his time, made ufe but of four capital colours, out
of which they compos’d all the others. This is not
a place to argue on that, nor to make a companion
between the ancient and modern painting: I lhall
content myfelf with faying, that if painting in oil,
which has been in ufe about 250 years, has a great
advantage over the dillemper for the facility of
painting, and union of colours, the ancients had a
vernifh which gave force to their brown colours, and
their white was more light and fhining than ours; by
which means, having a greater extent of the degrees
of the Claro Obfcuro, they could imitate certain ob-
jeds with more force and truth, than we can in oil.
Titian knew this advantage, and try’d it in fome
pidures, where he made ufe of white in dillemper,
but the diverfity of thofe two falhions in ufmg
colours was a flavery which foon dilgulled 1 itian,
and took him off of the pradice of it.
I lhall conclude with one word more of the Pain-
ters and fculptors of thofe days, who knowing there
was no work fo compleat to which fome perfedion
might not be added, obferv’d always, in putting
their names to their works, to exprefs that they
were not finilh’d, tho’ they had done what they
could do to them : We fee examples of this upon
the Greek llatues, on which we find vtritten, Glicon
of Athens would have made this work ; Praxiteles
would have made this work ; Athenodorus, Lifip-
pus, &c. would have made this work , and not did
make it. A great many in our days are not fo
fcrupulous, and are very far from believing, that
any thing which comes from their hands is not
perfed.
AN


THE
LIVES
OF THE
Roman and Florentine
PAINTERS.
BOOK III.
C I M A B U E.'
T E fine arts having been extinft in
Italy ever fince the irruption of the Bar-
barians, the fenate of Florence fent for
-fIL Painters out of Greece to reftore painting
in I'ufcany, and Cimabue was their firft difciple:
He was of a noble family in Florence, and his pa-
rents finding he had a difpofition for the faiences,
made him apply to them. He exercis’d himfelf
about them fometime, but the arrival of thefe Gre-
cian Painters rous’d his inclination, and determin’d
it entirely to painting. The confiderable progrefs
that he made in that art, encourag’d him in the
ftudy of it, and got him fuch a reputation, that
■when Charles of Naples paft through Florence, he
G 3 vifited


vifited Cimabue, and thought himfelf very well en-
tertain’d by the Tight of his works. He painted,
according to the cuftom of thole times, in frefco,
and in diftemper, painting in oil being not then
found out. He underftood architecture, and dy d
in the 70th year of his age. Anno Dom. 1 3°°*
Giotto was his difciple.
ANDREA TAF F 1
OF Florence, made himfelf taken notice of by
a new fort of painting. He left Florence, and
went to Venice, whither fome Greek Painters were
come as well as to Florence. They were doing
Mofaique work in St. Mark’s church. Andrea be-
came acquainted with them, efpecially with Apol-
lonius, whom he carry’d with him to Florence, and
learn’d of him the method and fecrcts of this fort ot
painting, which had the charm of novelty, and
was the more curious, becaufe it was fo lafhng. 1 ney
did together feveral ftories out of the Biole in
John’s church, by which they acquir’d a great deal
of reputation i but he did one himfelf, that was
very much to his honour and advantage: It was the
picture of Chrift, feven cubits long, about which
he took much pains and care. The prailes that were
given him did him a mifchief; for finding himfelf
efteem’d by all the world, he negleCted his ftudies,
and minded nothing but getting of money of which
he was very greedy. His works rais d emulation
in Gaddo Gaddi and Giotto, and were as fo much
feed that brought forth feveral Painters in Tufcany.
He dy’d at 81 years of age, A. D. 1294.
GADDO GADDI
OF Florence, apply’d himfelfalfo to Mofaick
work, which got him efteem in Rome and
Florence, becaufe he defign’d better than all the
pthet


other Painters of his time. After having made fe-
veral great pieces in divers places, he retir’d to
Florence, where he did fome little ones, as it were
to reft himfclf after his greater labours. _ To this
end he made ufe of egg-lhells, which he ftain’d with
feveral colours, and bufy’d himfelf about it with
much patience: He dy’d at 73 years old, in the
year 1312.
MARGARITONE
WAS born at Arezzo in Tufcany, and was
both a Painter and Sculptor. Pope Urban
IV. commanded him to draw fome pictures for Sr.
Peter’s church, and Gregory X. dying in the city of
Arezzo, the citizens employ’d him to do the fculp-
ture for that pope’s tomb. This opportunity help’d
Margaritone to ftiew, in the fame place, his capa-
city in the one and the other profeflion, for he
enrich’d the chappel, where the marble ftatue which
he had made was fet up, with feveral pictures; He
was 77 years old when he dy’d.
GIOTTO
WAS born in a village near Florence, and
contributed very much to the progrefs of
painting. His memory is preferv’d not only by the
great pidture of Mofaique work, which is over the
gate of St. Peter’s church in Rome, and was done
at the command of pope Benedict IX. but alfo by
the praifes given him by the poets of his time, and
the ftatue of marble which the Florentines erected
for him, and which is over his tomb. The Italian
proverb, Tu fei piu rondo che I*o di Giotto , which
is us’d to exprefs little wit, is founded on an acci-
dent which happen’d to him. Benedict IX. being
willing to try the capacity of the Florentine Painters,
G 4 . fent


fent a pcrfon thither to bring him a defign from
each of them. This perfon addrefilng himfelf to
Giotto, the latter drew a perfect circle on paper,
with the point of his pencil, and one ftroke of his
hand, There, fays he, cany that to the pope, and
‘ tell him you law me do it.* The man reply’d, I
alk for a defign. Giotto anfwer’d, ‘Go Sir, I tell
£ you his holinefs afks nothing elfe of me.’ Upon
this the pope gave him the preference, and fent for
him to Rome, where, among other things, he drew
the picture of Mofaic work which we mention’d
before, as alio St, Peter’s bark toll by the temped,
which piece is known to all Painters by the name of
Giotto’s vefTel. The llory of the circle (hews us,
that boldnefs of hand was, in thole days, molt part
of a Painter’s merit, and that the true principles of
colouring were little or not at all known. Giotto
work’d in feveral places, at Florence, Pifa, Rome,
Avignon, Naples, and other cities of Italy ; He
dy’d at 60 years old. Anno 1336. and had feveral
dlfciples, as we fhall fee in the following pages.
BON AMIGO BUFALMACO
WAS ingenious in his compofitions, and plea-
fant in his converl’ation.
As he was painting the life of Chrift in a convent
of nuns, he came in one day very ill drelt, and the
filters afking him why his mailer did not come? He
anfwer’d, he would be there prefently. In the mean
rime he fet two chairs together with a pot upon
them, and cover’d them with a cloak, and a hat,
turning the figure towards the work. The nuns
coming again to fee it a little while after, and being
lurpriz’d at the fight of this new workman ; he told
them, this is my mailer: When they knew the jell
they were diverted with it, and inform’d at the fame
time, that cloaths do not make a man the more
fkilful. . Another


Another time as he was painting for the bifhop
of Arezzo, when he came to his work, he often
found his pencils out of order, and his picture blot-
ted: He us’d to be in a rage about it, and all the
fervants of the houfe difowning the fault, he re-
folv’d to watch, and fee who it was that plaid him
fuch a trick: Wherefore leaving his work early one
evening, he was no fooner gone from his place but
he faw a monkey take his pencils, and would have
dawb’d what he had been doing, if Bufalmaco had
not hinder’d him.
A friend of his, whofe name was Bruno, con-
fulting him how he might give more expreifion to
his fubjeft, Bufalmaco told him he had nothing to
do but to make the words come out of the mouth
of his figures by labels, on which they might ble
written : Bruno thought him in earneft, and did fo,
as feveral foolifh Painters did after him, who re-
fining on Bruno, added anfwers to queftions, and
made their figures enter into a fort of converfation.
Bufalmaco dy’d in the year 1340.
S.T E F A N 0 of FLORENCE,
AND-
PIETRO L AURATI of SIENA. ,
WERE difciples of Giotto, and the firft Pain-
ters that took care to fhew the naked under
the draperies; and to obferve perfpedlive more re-
gularly, than any other of their predecefifors in the
art. Stefano work’d at Florence, Pifa and Affifi;
Laurati at Siena and Arezzo. Stefano dy’d in the
year 1350. in the 49th year of his age.
AM


AMBROGIO LORENZETTI of SIENA
AND
PIETRO CAVALLINO
OF Rome, were dlfciples of Giotto. Loren*
zetti join’d the ftudy of polite learning and
philofophy to painting, and was the firft that painted
rain, {forms, and the effeft of the winds. He dy’d
at 83 years of age. Cavallino, who was both Pain-
ter and Sculptor, among other works, did a crucifix,
which is in St. Paul’s church at Rome; and which
talk’d to St. Bridget, if one may believe the legend.
This Painter was look’d upon as a faint, on account
of his humility and piety : He dy’d at 85 years old,
and was bury’d in the church of St. Paul.
SIMONE M E MMI
i ■ v V . . .
OF Siena, confiderably augmented the progrefs
of defign: He had a great deal of genius, and
drew portraits well: He was Petrarch’s particular
friend, and painted the fair Laura for him : He
dy’d in the 60th year of his age. Anno 1345. He
had a brother, whofe name was Lippo, who fur-
viv’d him twelve years.
T.ADDEO di CADDO GADDI ,
AND
ANGELO GADDI, his Son,
WERE difciples of Giotto, and painted after
his manner. Angelo apply’d himfelf very
ftrenuoufly to exprefs the pafllons of the foul well,
and was ingenious in his inventions: He was a good
architect, he built the tower of Santa Maria del
Fiore,


Fiore, and the bridge over the Arno in Florence:
He dy’d in the year 1350. being about 50 years old.
TOMASO GJOffINO
WA S the Ton and difciple of Stefano, of whom
we have fpoken, and having been alio the
difciple of Giotto, he was firnam d Giottino. He
was more fkilful than his matters, but the too great
vivacity of his wit weakning his conftitution, hin-
der’d his following the flight he had taken. He
work’d much at Florence, and dy d of a confump-
tion in the 32d year of his age.
ANDREA 0 R G A G N A
OF Florence, learn’d fculpture in his youth, and
was befides a poet and architect. Fiis genius
was fruitful, and his manner much the fame with
that of the other Painters of his time. The greateft
part of his works are at Pifa *, and in his picture of
the univerfal judgment, he painted his friends in
heaven, and his enemies in hell. He dy’d in 1389*
at 60 years old.
LIP P 0
OF Florence apply’d himfelf late to painting, yet
by his fenfe and ftudy he came to be a good
Painter. He was the firft that fhew’d an intelligence
of colours: He had a law-fuit in which he was very
obftinate, and having given his adverfary very bad
words one day, he waited for him at night at the
corner of a ftreet, and ran him through the body,
of which he dy’d in the year 1415.
LEONE


.LEONE B ATT IST A ALBERTI ,
OF a noble family in Florence, had a foul of a
great extent, which he cultivated by the
knowledge of the Belles Lettrcs, and the Mathe-
maticks. He was very well acquainted with the fine
arts, and underftood painting, fculpture, and archi-
tecture perfectly well, having wrote of all three in
latin. His ftudies did not permit him to leave any
thing confiderable behind him in painting; but being
pope Nicholas Vth’s friend, he was very much em-
ploy’d in his buildings, of which fome are ftill to be
feen with admiration. He wrote alfo of arithme-
tick, and fome treatifes of morality.
PIETRO della FRANCESCA,
OF the republick of Florence, delighted in re-
prefenting night-pieces and battels. Pope Ni-
cholas fct him at work to paint the Vatican : He
made, among other pieces, two pictures which were
taken down by command of pope Julius 11. to make
room for two others, which Raphael had painted,
the miracle of the Sacrament that happen’d at Bol-
fena, and of St. Peter in prifon. He drew feveral
portraits, and wrote of arithmetick and geometry.
Lorentino d’Angelo d’Arezzo, and Lucas Signo-
relli were his difciples. Under the pontificat of the
fame pope Nicholas, there work’d at Rome, and
other places in Italy, feveral Painters of reputation
in thofe days, viz. Giovanni da Ponte, Agnolo
Gaddi, Berna da Siena, Ducio, Jacopo Caffentino,
Spinello, Antonio Venetiano, Gerardo Stamina, who
went into Spain, Lorenzo, a monk of Cmaldoli,.
Taddeo Bartolo, Lorenzo Bicci, Paolo firnam’d
Uccello, becaufe he painted birds well: Mafaccio, who
diftinguifh’d himfdf by the good Gout he fhew’d
in


in his painting, and tho* he dy’d at twenty two years
of age, the works that he left behind him ferv’d to
open the eyes of the men of art who came after him
in his profeffion. He dy’d in 1443. Lorentino
d’Angelo, as we have faid, was his difciple, and
feveral others, among whom
GIOVANNI ANGELICO
WAS a fryar of the order of St. Dominic,
and rendered himfelf confiderable by his
paintings, but more by his piety, and fo profound
a humility, that he refus’d the archbifhoprick of
Florence which Nicholas V. offer’d him. That
pope employ’d him to paint his chappel, and oblig’d
him to do fomething in miniature in the books of
the church. There are fome grofs faults in his beft
pictures, which leffen the praife that otherwife they
might have deferv’d : He never went to work be-
fore he had done all the duties of his office; He
did a great many things in Rome and Florence ; the
fubjeds of his pieces are always divine ; whenever he
painted a crucifix, he could not refrain weeping.
His fkill and his good nature got him many dif-
ciples. He dy’d in 1455* aged 68 years, and was
buried at Santa Maria della Minerva, where his
tomb and his portrait are to be feen.
FILIPPO LIPPI
OF Florence, mode a quite different ufe of a
monaftick life than Giovanni Angelico, of
whom we have been treating; for after he had been
bred up in a convent of Carmelites from the age of
eighteen, and having been a monk at fixteen, it
happen’d that Mafaccio painted the chapel of that
convent, and Lippi feeing him at work, conceiv’d
a violent paffion for painting ;He apply*d himfelf
induftri


induftrioufly to defigning. The great facility he
found in it awaken’d the talent he had for the art,
which hindred his ftudy of the Belles Lettres, and
the cxercifes of his convent. Mafaccio’s praifes,who
was furpriz’d at the progrefs of this novice, encreas’d
his temptation to quit his habit, and being no longer
able to refill it, he left his monaftery, and went in-
to Marca d’Ancona, where he found fome of his
friends, with whom he took boat to divert them-
felves on the water. A rover of Barbary bearing
near the fhore, faw the boat, and took them. Lippi
liv’d in extreme mifery for 18 months together,
when, to amufe himfelf one day, having defign’d
on the wall the picture of his mailer, with charcoal,
of whom he had a full idea in his head, he did it fo
well, that the likenefs of if, to the original, was
mightily admir’d. This foften’d the heart of his
patron, who, after having oblig’d him to draw fe-
veral portraits, gave him his liberty. From Bar-
bary, Lippi pall over to Naples, where king Al-
phonlo employ’d him *, but the love of his country
drew him back to Florence. He work’d there for
duke Cofmo diMedicis, whofe affedlion he gain’d,
and who made him abundance of prefents. The
love of women taking him off from his work, and
making him lofe his time, the duke, being im-
patient to have a pidlure he had fet him about
finilh’d, lock’d him up in a chamber to force him
to mind his bulinels, allowing him plenty of every
thing that was neceffary. Lippi, after two or three
days, cut his fheets, and ty’d the pieces together,
by the help of which, he made his way down out at
the window, and fo got his liberty
A citizen of Florence engag’d him afterwards to
draw a pidlure of the virgin Mary for a monaftery,
where a daughter of his, a very beautiful young
woman, was a nun. Her father, and the nuns of
the convent, were willing to permit him to take this
i S irl


girl for his model. As he was drawing her pidure,
having the opportunity of being alone with her, he
debauch’d her by his lafcivious talk, and when the
pidure was finilh’d, carry’d her off with her own
confent. He had a Ton by her call’d Philip, who
was alfo a Painter.
Some time after, as he was at work in a church
of Spoleto, he again fell in love with a woman, and
being obftinately bent to gain her, contrary to the
advice that had been given him, her friends poifon’d
him in the year 1488. and in 57th of his age.
The great duke order’d a marble tomb to be fet
up for him, and Angelus Politianus wrote his epi-
taph in Latin verfes.
All the foregoing Painters did not know the fe-
cret of painting in oil; they painted in frefco, or
in diftemper, and for this laft fort they temper’d
their colours with the white of eggs, or with water
mixt with gum, or melted glue.
ANTONIO da MESSINA ,
SO call’d from the place of his birth, was the firfl
of the Italian Painters that underftood painting
in oil. He had fome bufinefs at Naples, where he
faw a pidure king Alphonfo had fent him out of
Flanders. He was furpris’d with the vivacity, the
force and the fweetnefs of the colouring, and per-
ceiving it might be wip’d over with water without
rubbing out any part of it, he left all his bufinefs to
go to Bruges to find out John Van Eik, who was the
author of that piece. He prefented him with a
great many Italian defigns, and gain’d his good
graces fo far by his complaifance, that he got out of
him the fecret of painting in oil. Antonio thought
himfelf fo much oblig’d to him for it, that he would
not leave Bruges, as long as John Van Eik liv’d*,
but after the death of that Painter he refolv’d to
make


make a tour into his own country, and went to fettle
at Venice, where he dy’d, and where an epitaph is
to be feen very much in his commendation.
A perlbn, nam’d Dominico, was, among others,
one of his difciples, to whom, out of gratitude for
the love he bore him, he communicated his fecret.
Some bufmefs in his art call’d this Dominico to Flo-
rence, where he found Andrea del Caftagno, who,
from a peafant, was turn’d Painter, and who feeing
in what efteem this new fafhion painting was, made
i/e of all forts of flattery and complaifance to gain
the good graces of Dominico, and by that means
got out of him this new invention . He obtain’d
his end. Dominico lov’d him, liv’d with him,
told him what he knew, and took him into his
bufmefs. Covetoufnefs foon made Andrea uneafy :
He began to imagine, if no body elfe knew the fe-
cret, he fhould get prodigioufly by it, and all Do-
minico’s gains would come into his pocket; where-
fore, not confidering that he wanted his benefadtor’s
capacity, he refolv’d to make away with him. To
this end he waited for him one night at the corner
of a freer, and having aflaflinated him, went home
to his lodgings, and fet himfelf to work, as if he
had not itirr’d out: He wounded him lb privately,
that Dominico not fufpedling who was his murderer,
order’d himfelf to be carry’d to the houfeof his cruel
friend to be reliev’d ; and dy’d in his arms. The
murther had been buried with Andrea, had he not
confefs’d it on his death-bed. It was the fame
Andrea, who, by the command of the republic of
Florence, painted on the walls of the hall of juftice,
the execution of the confpirators who had confpir’d
to deftroy the Medici, which got him the name of
Andrea degl* Impiccati. At the fame time Vitto-
rio Pifano was famous in Italy for linking medals.
Alfo contemporary with Antonio, were Gentile da
Fabriano, whom pope Martin V. employ’d at
St,


Sr. John di Lateran. He liv’d till he was 88 years
of age. Lorenzo Cofta, who painted at Bologna
and Ferrara, and whole difciples were Dolle and
Hercules of Ferrara, and Cofmoßoflelli, who painted
in the Vatican for pope Sixtus IV. and dy’d in the
year 1484. aged 68 years.
DOMENICO GHIRLANDAIO
OF Florence, was at firfta goldfmith, but bufy-
ing himfelf more in defigning than in working
at his trade, he at length gave himfelf up entirely
to painting. He was a great mailer; however, his
reputation is not lb much fix’d by his own works,
as by his having Michael Angelo for his difciple. He
dy’d at 44 years of age, anno 1493. He had three
lons, and they were all of them Painters, viz. Da-
vid, Benedid and Rhodolph.
ANDREA VERROCHIO
OF Florence, was a good goldfmith, a graver,
a mulician, a geometrician, a Painter, and a
fculptor. It is true his pictures are painted very
drily, and his colouring is not artificial, but he un-
derftood deligning well, and gave his heads, parti-
cularly womens, a graceful air. He defign’d very
much with his pen, which he manag’d well, and
was the firft that found out the arc of taking and
preferving the likenefs of any face, by moulding off
the features in plaifler, after which it became very
much in ufe. He was not fatisfy’d with the refem-
blance of a thing, he would go to the bottom of it,
and to that end often made ufe of mathematical ex-
periments, being famous for drawing of horfes v and
underllanding calling. The Venetians would have
employ'd him to have made allatue in brafs of Bar-
tolomeo di Bergamo on horfeback: He drew a mo-
del of it in wax i but another being prefer’d before
H him


him to caft the ftatue, he was fo mad, that out
of fpite he broke off the head and legs of his ftatue,
and fled away. The fenate, in vain, fent out or-
ders to flop him, and giving out that they would
have his head cut off if they could catch him, he
anfwer’d, ‘ if they fhould cut off his head, it would
« be impoflible to make another, whereas he could
« eafily make a head, and a finer one for the model
« ofhishorfe.’ This witty anfwer made his peace,
but he had not the pleafure to put the horfe in its
place; for, overheating himfelf in cafting it, he
fell ill of a pleurify, anddy’d in the year 1488, aged
56 years. Leonardo da Vinci and Pietro Perugino
were his difciples.
FILIPPO LIPPI
OF Florence, was the fon of Filippo Lippi, of
whom we have fpoken, and the difciple of
Sandro Boticelli. He had a great deal of vivacity
and genius. He manag’d the ornaments of the
ClaroObfcuro after the manner of the Antique, fuch
as is to be feen in the Frifes of architedure, and
elfewhere. He painted feveral things at Rome, and
among the reft, a chapel in the church of the Mi-
nerva, for cardinal Caraffa. He drew fome pidures
alfo for Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary. Lippi
was a very honeft man, and his life a great- reproach
to his father’s. Fie died in the year 1505. aged 45
years.
BERNARDINO PINtURRICH 10
WOuld have diftinguifh’d himfelf by a new
kind of painting, for befides the living co-
lours he made ufe of, he brought the Baffo Relievo
of architedure into his pieces, which is contrary to
the art of painting, that always fuppofes a flat
fuperficies, tor this reafon no body follow’d his
example. In the library at Siena is fhewn, as a fine
thing,


thing, the life of pope Pius 11. which he painted.
Raphael coming out of the fchool of Pietro Peru-
gino, help’d him in this piece. Pinturrichio painted
Several things in the Vatican for pope Innocent VIII.
and Alexander VI. The caufe of his death is worth
knowing. When he was at Siena the monks of the
order of St. Francis, who were fond of having a
picture from him, gave him a chamber, that he
might work with the more convenience, and that
the room might not be encumbred with any thing
that had not relation to his art, thty took away all
the furniture, except an old fuit of armour, which
feem’d too troublefom to remove. Pinturrichio
being naturally quick and impatient, would have
it taken away immediately, but in removing of it
a piece happen’d to break off, in which were hid
500 ducats of gold. This furpriz’d Pinturrichio fo
much, and vex’d him fo heartily for letting the
fryars have the advantage of the treafurc, that he
dy’d a little after of mere forrow in the 59th year of
his age, anno 1513.
SANDRO B OTICE LLI
A Florentine, was difciple of Filippo Lippi, who
was Domenico Ghirlandaio’s competitor: He
was learned, and writ notes upon Dante, to which
he added figures. This work took up a great deal
of his time, and he dy’d without the fatisfaftion of
feeing it printed : He departed this life in the fe-
venty-eighth year of his age, anno 1515.
ANDREA MANTEGNA
WAS born in a village near Padua, and in his
youth kept fheep; but it being obferv’d,
that inftead of looking after his flock he amus’d
himfelf with defigning, he was put to a Painter,
Giacomo Squarcione, who took fuch a fancy to
H 2 him.


him, that he adopted him for his fon, and made
him his heir. He became fo good a matter in fo
little time, that he got a great reputation, and
abundance of work: He was fcarce feventeen years
old, when he was fet about painting the picture of
the altar in St. Sophia’s church in Padua, and the
four evangelifts. Giacomo Bellini was fo touch’d
with the picture, that he gave him his daughter in
marriage. Squarcione, who was always jealous of
Bellini, and who befides, refented that his adopted
fon fhould marry his rival’s daughter without con-
fulting him, was fo far from continuing his praifes
and protection of Mantegna’s works, that he cry d
them down for their drinefs, and tor the too great
liking which hisdilciple fhew’d for the Antique fta-
tues, inftead of following nature in his imitation.
This reproach was of fervice to Mantegna, he cor-
rected that fault ; however, he never quitted the
commendable inclination he had for the Antique,
faying, ‘ It was to the fine tilings he found there
c that he ow’d his advancement, and that they had
6 drawn him at once out of the poverty of nature.
It is true, inftead of adding to his Gout of Antique
the truth and tendernefs of nature, he contented
himfelf to mingle fome portraits among his figures.
He painted for the duke of Mantua, and made that
fine * piece of the triumphs of Julius Cadar, which
are engrav’d in the Claro Obfcuro in nine fheets,
and which for their beauty may be call d the triumphs
of Mantegna. Pope Innocent VIII. having invited
him into his fervice •, before he went to Rome, the
duke of Mantua made him a knight of his order.
Mantegna engrav’d feveral of his defigns on tin-
plates,°and the Italians fay, he was the inventor of
the art of graving. He dy’d at Mantua in the year
1517. aged 66.
* This pi&urc is at Hampton-court.
FRAN


FRANCESCO FRANCIA
%
OF Bologna, was born with fo many rare qua-
lities, of body and mind, that he was efteem’d
and belov’d by perfons of the higheft rank. At fir ft
he was a goldfmith, afterv/ards a graver of coins and
medals, in which he was excellent; but his genius
finding itfelf too much confin’d in that exercife,
turn’d to that of painting, to which his inclination
led him. The facility he found in it, gave him fo
much courage, and fo much application to ftudy,
that he became one of the greareft mafters of the
art in his time. He drew feveral pieces for feveral
places in Italy, chiefly for the duke of Urbin.
Raphael’s reputation made him deflrous to fee his
works, but his age would not fufler him to take a
journey to Rome, wherefore he contented himfelf
to write his mind to his friends, who telling Ra-
phael of it, it began a friendly correfpondence be-
tween thefe two Painters, the latter having heard
talk of Francia’s merit and fkill. Raphael was then
painting the pidure of St. Cecilia for a church in
Bologna ; when he had finilh’d it he fent it to
Francia, and by letter pray’d him to place it for
him, and to be fo kind as to corred its faults.
Francia was tranfported at the opening of the Let-
ter ; he took the pidure out of the cafe, admir’d
it, and was fenfibly touch’d with it; yet, at the
fame time, his heart fail’d him fo much upon the
fight of a piece fo far above his own, that he grew
melancholy, and fell into a confumption, of which
he died fometime after, in the fixty-eighth year of
his age, Anno 1518.
H 3
LUCA


LUCA SIGNORELLI
OF Cortona, was difciple of Pietro della Fran-
cefca, and imitated his manner fo exadly,
that their works are often taken the one for the o-
ther. Luca was an artful defigner, and Michael
Angelo efteem’d him fo much, that he made no
fcrnple in his piece of the day of judgment, to
borrow fome things from that of Luca, which he
painted at Orvieto with a great deal of fancy and
capacity. He painted alfo at Loretto, Cortona and
Rome.
His fon, who was a handfom young man, and
one of whom he had great hopes, was kill’d at
Cortona. The news of his death was a terrible
affli&ion to him, but arming himfelf with con-
(lancy, he order’d his corps to be carry’d into his
work-houfe, and without fhedding a tear, drew his
pifture to preferve the memory of him, finding no
confolation but in his art, which gave him what
death had ravifh’d from him. He went afterwards
to Rome, whither pope Sixtus IV. had fent for him,
and having painted feveral (lories out of Genefis for
his holinefs, he return’d to Cortona ; and being
very rich, work’d only for his pleafure : He died
in the year 1521. at 82 years of age.
F IE T R 0 C 0 SIM O,
SO call’d from Cofimo Rofelli, whofe pupil he
was, and for whom he work’d a long time,
chiefly in the Vatican, where Rofelli was employ’d
by Sixtus IV. and it was obferv’d that the fcholars
painting was better than the matters. His ability
got him many difciples, and among others, Andrea
del Sarto and Francefco da Sangalla. He lov’d fo-
litude, and his way of living was very extraordi-
nary. He was fo eager about his bufinefs, that he
would


would often forget to eat or drink. He was fo
fearful of thunder, that a great while after the clap
was over, he would be found fhrunk up in a corner,
and wrapt up in his cloak. Nothing was more
uneafy to him than the noife of children crying. He
hated alfo to hear thofe cough that had a cold, the
ringing of bells, and monks finging pfalms. He
delighted in rain above all things, and diea delirious
of a Paralepfy, in the eightieth year ot his age.
Anno 1521.
LEONARDO da VINCI
WAS of a noble family in Tufcany, and did
not degenerate from the honour of his an-
ceftors. His morals were good, and his body and
mind beautiful. He had fo many talents for all
the arts, that he knew the very bottom of them,
and pradis’d them with care and exadnefs. His
great variety of knowledge, inftead of wcakning
that which he had of painting, ftrengthen’d it to
fuch a degree, that there never was a Painter before
him that came near him, and there never will come
any after him, who will not look on him as a foun-
tain, from whence feveral good things are to be
drawn. He and Pietro Perugino were difciples to-
gether of Andrea Vcrrochio, who gave him an op-
portunity to awaken his talent j for the mailer and
the fcholar were both born with the fame genius,
except that Leonardo’s was the more extenfive. He
painted at Florence, at Rome, and at Milan, and a
great many of hispiduresare difperfed up and down
throughout all Europe. Among other things, he
drew a pidure of our Saviour’s laft fupper, for the
Refectory of the Dominicans at Milan, which is of
exquifite beauty. He did not finifh the head of
Chrift, becaufe he could not find out a model
anfwerable to the image he had form’d in his mind,
H 4 before


before the war broke out in that dutchy, and
obhg d him to leave Milan. He did the fame by
Judas alfb, but the Prior of the convent beino- im-
patient to fee the piece finifh’d, preffed Leonardo fo
carneftly to have it done, that he drew the head of
the importunate fryar, and put it upon Judas’s
moulders. He was mceflantly bufy’d in reflections
about his art, and fpar’d for no cafe or ftudy to
arrive at perfection in it, which he at laft attain’d.
He was chiefly felicitous to exprefs the paflions of
the foul, which he believ’d the moft neceflary thing
in his profeflion, efpecially for thole who would
have the approbation of men of fenfe. The duke
of Milan made him director of an academy of
painting erected by him in the capital of his dutchy
it was in that city he wrote the book of painting
which was printed at Paris in 1651. and for which
I ouflin made the figures. He wrote feveral other
treatifes that were lolf. When Francis I. took Mi-
lan, Leonardo retir’d to Florence, where he painted
the great hall of the council, and found Michael
Angelo’s reputation very well eftablifh’d, which rais’d
a mighty emulation between them. Leonardo o- o i n cr
to Rome at the eledion of pope Leo X. Michael
Angelo did the fame, and their jealoufy grew to
inch a height, that Leonardo left Italy, and went
to Paris, where he was very well receiv’d by
Francis I. By his prefence and works he fupported
the reputation he had acquir’d, and the French
king gave him all pofllble tokens of efteem and
friend fh ip. The king had fuch a particular kind-
nefs for him, that going to vifit him in his laft
ficknefs, Leonardo would have rais’d himfclf up to
thank his majefty for the honour done him, and the
king embracing him to oblige him to lye down in
his bed again, he was taken fpeechlefs in the very
moment, and expir’d in the arms of that monarch,
in the 75th year of his age, Anno 1520.
Re-


Reflections on the works of LEONARDO
da VINCI.
THE pictures of this Painter, which are to be
feen in the cabinets of princes and private
men, contain but very few figures, and I confefs,
that I have not feen clearly enough into what re-
mains of his great compofitions to judge of the ex-
tent of his genius. However, what hiltorians have
written of his works, which are now almoft entirely
ruin’d, is fufficient to inform us, that his vein was
rich, his movements lively, his fenfe folid, adorn’d,
with variety of knowledge, and his inventions very
beautiful : We may fee that by his defigns, which
are ftill in the hands of the curious, and what we
have left of his productions ffiews that he was a great
Painter.
His defigns were very correCt, and of a great
Gout, tho’ he feems to have form’d it rather from
nature, than the Antique; yet fo as the antient
fculptors did, that is, by judicious enquiries into the
effeCls of nature, and attributing to her, not fo
much her common productions, as the perfections
of which flie is capable.
Leonardo da Vinci’s exprefllons are vefy lively 1
and fenfible. I have in my cuftody a defign of his
own hand, of the famous fupper which he painted
at Milan ; which defign only is a fufficient proof of
his having penetrated tar into the heart of man; of
his vivacity, and with what variety and juftnefs he
reprefented all kinds of aCtions: But rather than
fpeak my own opinion in this matter, it will be
more to the purpofe to give the reader Ruben’s on
the merit of this great man.
He


He write*' thus of him in a Latin Manufcripf y
the ' Original of which 1 have by me y and
which I havefaithjully tranfated as Jollows:
LEonardo da Vinci began by examining all
things according to the rules of an exact
theory, and then apply *d them to nature as it
‘ was . J for his purpofe. He obferv’d Decorum, and
‘ avol ded all affedlation. He know how to give
‘ e r er 7 ob J the mod proper, the mod fpecula-
tive, and the mod agreeable character that was
poffible, and exalted that of majedy even to di-
-6 Vlnit y. The order and meafure of his exprefllons
# wer f manag’d fo as to fet the imagination at
6 w L ork > an .d t 0 ra ife it by the eflential parts, rather
‘ man fill it by the minute ; -in which, however,
4 he was neither prodigal nor covetous. He was fo
careful to avoid the confulion of objects, that he
chofe rather to leave fomething in his works to be
‘ defir’d, than to furfeit the eyes with a fcrupulous
4 cxaftnefs. But his chiefed excellence was, as we
‘ have faid, to give every thing its proper character,
and to didinguilb them one from another. He
‘ began by confulting feveral authors, out of whofe
writings he made a common-place of what was
4 mod remarkable, and nothing efcap’d him that
4 related to the expredion of his fubjeft: And by
4 the heat of his fancy, as well as by the folidity of
his judgment, he rais’d divine things by human,
and underdood how to give men thofe different
4 degrees, that elevate them to the character of
Heroes. The bed of the examples which he has
left us, is our Lord’s Supper, which he painted
at Milan, wherein he has reprefented the apodles
in places that fuit with them, and our Saviour in
4 the mod honourable the midd of all, having no
4 body near enough to prefs or incommode him.
His


e His attitude is grave, his arms are in a loofe and
4 free pofhire to fhew the greater grandeur, while
* the apoftles appear agitated from one fide to the
4 other by the vehemence of their inquietude, and
4 in which there is, however, no meannefs, nor
4 any indecent aCtion to be feen. In fhort, by his
4 profound fpeculations he arriv’d to fuch a degree
4 of perfection, that it feems to me impofilble to
4 fpeak fo well of him as he defcrves, and much
4 more to imitate him.*
Rubens, after this, enlarges on Leonardo’s fkill
in Anatomy. He adds a particular relation of his
fludies, and of all the defigns that he made, which
Rubens had feen among the curiofities of Pompeio
Leoni at Arezzo. He talks of the Anatomy of
horfes, and the obfervation that Leonardo had made
on Phifiognomy, of which Rubens had alfo feen his
defigns *, and ends his difcourfe by the method which
this Painter took in meafuring a human body.
If I may be allow’d to add any thing to what
Rubens has faid, I would take notice, that he has
not fpoken of Leonardo’s colouring, becaule having
carry’d his remarks no farther than to things relating
to the perfection of his profefllon, and finding
nothing good in Leonardo’s colours, he pad by
that part of painting. Leonardo’s carnations have
too much of the lees-colour in them, and the union
in his pictures is too much tinCtured with the violet,
which is there predominant: This, in my opinion,
proceeded from the Painters of his time, not know-
ing well enough the ufe of oil, and from the ne-
gligence of the Florentines in the part of colouring.
PIETRO PERUGINO ,
BORN at Peroufa. His parents were poor, and
put him at firft to a Painter of that town, who
taught him very little, and us’d him very ill. His
poverty


poverty made him patient, and his defire to get
fomething to bring him out of his mifery, put him
upon defigning night and day to advance himfelf.
As loon as he found he was able to get his living, he
went to Florence to find out a better mafter, and
plac’d himfelf with Andrea Verrocchio. Leonardo
da Vinci was his difciple at the fame time. Peru-
gino became fkilful, and acquir’d a graceful man-
ner in the airs of his heads, which his mafter
pradis’d, efpecially the heads of women. He drew
a great many pidlures, and almoft all of them for
churches and convents. One day as he was working
m Frefto for the monks at Florence, whofe mo-
naftery is near the Pindane gate, the prior who fup-
ply’d him with Azure or Ultra-marine, would give
him no more than he us’d in his prefence. Peru-
gino feeing him fo miftruftful, dip’d his pencil in a
pot of water, even before the prior himfelf, and
wafh’d off the- Ultra-marine, which funk to the
bottom. The prior wonder’d to fee his azure go
away fo faft, and fearing he had not enough to hold
out, was going to get more, but Perugina empty-
ing the water.out of the pot, and drying the Ultra-
marine that was at the bottom, gave it to the prior,
faying, 4 He Ihould not another time miftruft a
man of honour.’ Neverthelefs he was himfelf very
covetous and miftruftful, and being alfo very labori-
ous, he got money at Florence and Rome, where
he work’d for pope Sixtus IV. and retired to Pe-
roufa, in which city he made abundance of piftures
by the help of Raphael and his other difciples. Pe-
rugino had a very handfom wife, by whom he drew
all his pictures of the virgin Mary i he lov’d her
paffionately, but he lov’d his money no lefs, and
when he us’d to walk in fome fields which he had
purchas’d near Peroufa, he always carry’d the box
with him in which he kept his gold. A rogue
perceiving it, robb’d him of his treafure, and Pe-
ru gi no


rugino was fo grieved at if, that he died of forrow
in the 78th year of his age. Anno 1524,
RAPHAEL S A N Z IO
WA S born at Urbin on Good Friday, in the
year 1483. His father was an ordinary pain-
ter, and Pietro Perugino his matter. His chief works
are in Frefco in the hall of the Vatican, and his
Eafel-pieces are difpers’d up and down in feverai
parts of Europe. Having an excellent underftand-
ing, he knew that the perfection of painting was
not confin’d to Perugino’s capacity, and therefore
he went to Siena to leek out Ibme other means of
advancing himfclf. Here his friend Pinturrichio
got him to be employ’d to make the cartoons for
the pictures of the library j but he had fcarce done
one before he was tempted to remove to Florence
by the great noife which Leonardo da Vinci, and
and Michael Angelo’s works made at that time. As
foon as he had confider’d the manner of thofe two
illuftrious Painters, he refolv’d to alter his own
which he had learnt of Perugino. He return’d to
Peroufa, where he had opportunity enough to exer-
cife his pencil j but the remembrance of Leonardo
da Vinci’s works put him upon a fecond journey to
Florence, and after having work’d there fome time
to (Lengthen his hand, he went to Rome, where
Bramante, his kinfman, prepar’d the pope by a
good opinion of his merit, for his favourable recep-
tion, and he was fet at work to paint the Vatican.
Raphael began by the picture, which is called the
fchool of Athens, the difpute of the holy Sacra-
ment, and the other pieces which are in the cham-
ber of the apottolick fignature. His pains and care
were incredible, and they were fuccefsful anfvverable
to his induftry, for the reputation of his work car-
ries the name of Raphael throughout the world. He
2 form’d


form’d the delicacy of his Gout after the ancient
fiatues, and Baha Relievo’s, which he defign’d a
long time with extreme application. To this de-
licacy he added a grandeur of manner, with which
the fight of Michael Angelo’s * chapel at once'in-
Ipir’d him. It was his friend Bramante who brought
him into the chapel contrary to the general order
Michael Angelo had given him when he trufled him
with the keys. Befides the pains that Raphael was
at in working after the antient fculptures he hir’d
people in Greece and Italy to defign for him all the
Antique pieces that could be found, which, as op-
portunity offer’d, he made ufe of. It is obfervable,
that he has not left many, if any at all of his works,
imperfedt, and that he linifh’d his pidtures to a ni-
cety, tho’ he did them very quick. He was extremely
careful to give them fuch perfection, that there
might be nothing to be faid againfl them, and on
this account it is that we fee (till fome drawings of
pieces of pictures, as hands, feet, and bits of dra-
pery, which he has defign’d three or four times for
the fame fubjedt, and out of which he chofe that for
his purpofe which was mod perfedl. Tho* he was
very laborious, yet there are few pidtures to be feen
done by his own hand. He Ipenr mod of his time
in defigning, that he might find bufinefs for the
* Pietro Eellori, in his book intituled, Defcrittione dclle Imagi-
ne. da Rifaeh nelle Camere del Vaticano, denies this Story with
all his might, and pretends that Raphael did not owe his great
Gout to any thing bat his fludy of the Antique ; yet Vafari,
who knew Michael Angelo and Raphael, and was never con-
tradicted by any author of thofe timeson the contrary three
other authors, who have particularly writ the life of Michael
Angelo, have confirm’d what he fays, affirms that he learnt it
of Michael Angelo : and what renders it very probable, that
Raphael made his advantage of Michael Angelo's works, is a
defign that I have of his own hand, on the back of which is a
drawing of his defign'd after one of the figures which Michael
Angelo painted in the pope’s chapel.
2
great


great number of difciples that executed his defigns
in feveral places, chiefly in the lodgings and apart-
ments of the Vatican, in the church of our Lady of
Peace, and in the palace of Chigi, which were all
done by his pupils after his defigns, except the gal-
lery and one angle only, where the three goddeffes
are painted, which was done by himfelf. His good
nature got him the love of all people, efpecially of
the popes his contemporaries. Cardinal Bibiano of-
fer’d him his niece in marriage, and Raphael was
engag’d to her. But pope Leo X. having given
him hopes of a cardinal’s cap, he made no hafte to
marry her.
His paflion for the fair fex deftroy’d him in the
flower of his age, for one day after he had aban-
don’d himfelf to women with excefs, he was taken
very ill of a burning fever, and the phyflcians,
from whom he conceal’d the true caufe of his dif-
temper, having dealt by him as if he had a pleu-
rify, quite extinguilh’d the little fire that was left in
his body. He dy’d on the fame day that he was
born. Good Friday, Anno 1520. in the thirty fe-
venth year of his age. Cardinal Bembo wrote his
epitaph, which is to be feen upon his tomb in the
church of the Rotunda at Rome, where he was
buried. I will mention only two verfes of it which
are admirable.
Ills hie eft Raphael, timuit , quo fofpite , vinci.
Rerum Magna Parens , moriente mori.
His difciples were Julio Romano, Giovanni Fran-
cko Penni, firnam’d il Fattore, Pellegrino di
Modena, Pierino del Vaga, Polidoro, Caravaggio,
Matturini, Bartolomeo da Bagna-cavallo, Timo-
theo d’Urbino, Vincente di San Gemmiano, Gio-
vanni d’TJdinne, and others. Several fkilful Flem-
ings alfo were his difciples, and help’d him in the
execu


execution of his great works, viz. Bernard vanOrlay
ofßruflels, Michael Coxis of Mechlin, and others,
who going back into their own country, had the
care of executing his defigns for tapeftry : Befides
his difciples, he had a vaft number of ftudents and
friends who frequented his houfe, and often waited
upon him abroad. Michael Angelo meeting him
one day thus attended, told him, en pafljant, ‘That
t he march’d like a provoft with his ferjeants about
‘ him i* Raphael anfwer’d, ‘ And you alone like a
» Hangman :* Thefe two great Painters were always
jealous of each other, as it is ufual among perfons
of the fame profefllon, when modefty is not miftrefs
of their femiments.
Reflections on R A P HA E L’s Works.
THERE has been no Painter fmee the Reflau-
ration of the art in Italy, who acquir’d fuch
a reputation as Raphael: His genius was fublimc,
his thoughts fine, his vein fruitful, and would have
appear’d much more fo, had it not been moderated
by the nicety with which he finifh’d his pieces.
Hq was rich in his inventions, and his manner of
difpofmg of the things he invented was very deli-
cate. If his figures were not group’d by lights and
fhadows, they were fo ingenioufly done by their
actions, that the groups were always view’d with
pleafure. His attitudes are noble according to their
condition, contrafled without affeClation, expreflive,
natural, and fuch as always expofe the beautiful
parts. His defigns were very correCt*, to the juft-
nefs, the grandeur and elegance of the Antique, he
added the fimplicity of nature without affeCting a
particular manner. There is a great deal of variety
to be feen in his figures, and more in the airs of his
heads, which he copy’d from nature, the mother of
diversity, and always accompany’d with a noble
character in defign. Elis


His exprcfllons are juft, ingenious, elevated and
touching, they are moderate without coldnefs, and
lively without exaggeration The manner of his
draperies was poor at fird, but had a great Gout at
laft, and were let with beauty and artifice-, the order
of his folds are fine, and (hews the naked where it
appears to the bed advantage, and chiefly about the
joints. - .
However, he may be blam’d for drefling almod
all his figures in the fame (luffs, whereas he might
have chang’d them with reafon, and for the orna-
ment of his fubjcds : I Apeak of hiftorical ones, for
as to fabulous and allegorical, in which divinities arc
introduc’d, the Painter ought to have more regard
to the majefty of the folds, than to the richnefs of
the (luffs.
Raphael being nicely careful to defign corredly,
and if we may fo fay, jealous of his outlines, he has
mark’d them fomewhat too hard. His pencil tho*
light and united, is however dry. His landfkips
are neither handfom, nor of a great Gout.
His locah colours are neither (hining nor (hock-
ing-, are neither very true, nor very falfe, but
his (hadows are a little too black : Pie never had a
clear underffanding of the Claro Obfcuro, tho* it
appears by his lad pieces, that he fought after it,
and endeavour’d to acquire it, as may be feen in his
tapedries of the ads of the apodles, and in his
pidures of the Transfiguration : But whatever Ra-
phael wanted in colouring, was over-look’d in the
abundance of the other parts of painting of which
he was mader; and he has even done fome portraits
with refped to lights and colours fo well, that they
may enter into the comparifon with Titian’s, as well
as the Sr. John in Monfieur the Prefident’s cabiner,
which for all the parts of painting, deferves to be
reckon’d the author’s mader-piece.
}
Pouflin


Poufiin faid of Raphael, 4 That he was an angel
‘ compar’d with the modern Painters, but an afs in
« compaiifon of the ancients.’ His judgment of'him
relates only to his thoughts, his Gout, his juftnefs
of defign, and his efcpreflions : The thoughts of the
ancients are fimple, fublime and natural, fo are Ra-
phael’s: The Antique defign is corred, vary’d ac-
cording to decency, and of a great Gout; Raphael’s
is the lame. The Antique way of the collocation
of the mufcles is learned and exad, and delicate in
their offices. Raphael was not ignorant of this part,
yet we muft confefs, that thofe who have ftudy d
anatomy, as it relates to painting, may obferve more
exadnefs in the Antique, and more delicacy in the
adions of the mufcles in the ancient pidures than
in, not only Raphael’s, but in any other modern
Painters whatfoever.
I allow that this great juftnefs, and great deli-
cacy in the adion of the mufcles, regulate the ex-
adnefs of the out-hnes, but I don’t lee that Raphael
was fo much out of the way as to be reckoned an
afs in comparifon of the Antiques. It is true, Ra-
phael form’d the grandeur of his Gout from the
line ftatues of antiquity, and that when he came
from his mafter Perugino, they put him into a right
way; he follow’d them implicitely at firft, but at
laft perceiving that the road of painting was dif-
ferent from that of fculpture, he took from them
no more than was juft proper for his art, and as
j ie grew older and wifer, he left off the reft. This
difference is eafily to be perceiv’d in the pidures
which he painted at different times, the latter of
which came neareft the charader of nature.
On the contrary, Pouffin and Annibal Caracci,
quitted their charader of nature according as they
grew more and more fond of the Antique; they
fhould have done as Raphael did, do one, and not
omit the other ; for this excellent man not only
retain’d


retain’d the good Gout of the Antique* its grandeur
and beauty* but aifo fpy’d out one thing which
neither Pouffin nor the Caracci ever faw •, and that
was grace, which gift of nature was given him fo
plentifully, that he ipread it over every thing that
came out of his hands* and no body can dilpute the
preference, with him, in it, except Correggio, who
wanted his regularity of defign. Raphael made ufe
of grace to fet off all the other parts of painting
which he poffeft, the polfeflion of which acquit d
him the reputation of the bell painter in the world*
GIROLOMO G E N G A
OF Urbin, was a difciple of Pietro Perugino
at the fame time with Raphael. He parti-
cularly apply’d himfelf to architecture, and died in
the year 1551, aged 75.
JULIO ROMANO
TT T AS the favourite difciple of Raphael, as well
W on account of his fkill in painting, as for
the agreement there was in their manners. He en-
tirely follow’d his mafter’s Gout, not only in the
execution of the defigns he gave him, but alfo in
thofe he made himfelf. Raphael treated him like
a father, and left him his heir jointly with Gio-
vanni Francefco Penni il Fattore. After Raphael’s
death thefe two Painters finifh’d feveral pictures
which their mafter had left imperfeCl. Julio Ro-
mano was not only an excellent Painter, but alfo un-
derftood architecture perfectly well. The cardinal
di Medicis, who was afterwards pope Clement VII.
employ’d him to build the palace which is at this
day call’d la Vigne Madame, and when he had
finifh’d the architecture he did the painting and
other decorations.
I 2
The


The death of Leo X. was a blow to Julio Ro-
mano, for had his fucceflfor Adrian VI. reign’d a-
bove a year, the fine arts in Rome would have been
extinguifh’d, and all the artifts had ftarv’d •, but
Clement VII. fucceedirrg him, Painting and Painters
began to revive. As foon as he was chofcn pope,
he fet Julio Romano at work to paint the hall of
Conftantine, where Raphael had begun the hiftory
of that emperor, which he had defign’d. This work
being finifli’d, he drew feveral pictures for churches
and private perfons: His manner began to change
at laft, his colouring into black and red, and his
defign into the fevere.
Frederico di Gonzaga, marquifs of Mantua, hear-
ing of Julio’s capacity, invited him to that city:
His good fortune directed him thither, for having
made the defigns of twenty lewd prints, which
Marc Antonio engrav’d, and for which Aretine
made the infcriptions in verfe, he had been feverely
punifh’d for it had he ftay’d in Rome, as the treat-
ment Marc Antonio met with fufficiently proves.
He was thrown into goal where he fuffer’d a great
deal, and it had coft him his life if the intereft of
the cardinal di Medicis, and Baccio Bandinelli, had
not fav’d him. In the mean time Julio Romano
follow’d his bufinefs at Mantua, where he has left
eternal proofs of his great ability. He built the
palace T. and made the city of Mantua finer,
Itronger, and healthier than before. As to his
painting we may affirm, it was at Mantua chiefly
that Julio Romano’s genius took wing, and he
fhew’d himfelf to be what he was. He died there
in the fifty fourth year ot his age. Anno 1546. to
the great grief of the marquifs, who lov’d him as
his brother. He had a fon and daughter, who fur-
viv’d him i the fon’s name was Raphael, the daugh-
ter married Hercules Malatefta. Among his dil-
ciples the befl: are Primaticcio, who came into
France,


France, and one of Mantua, nam’d Rinaldi, who
died young.
Reflections on the works of JULIO
ROMANO.
JUlio Romano was the firft, the mod learned and
the mod perfevering difciple of Raphael. His
imagination, which was, as it were, buried in the
execution of the defigns of his mader, as long as he
was his difciple, when die law herfelf free, took
wing at once ; or rather, as a torrent, that being
penn’d up breaks over its banks, and runs with an
impetuous courfe, fo Julio Romano, after having pro-
duc’d feveral eafel-pieces, and painted great works
in the Vatican-hall from Raphael’s defigns, before
and after the death of his illudrious mader, pre-
fently chang’d his manner when his genius was at
liberty, and differ’d it to take its rapid courfc, as is
to beleen in his paintings at Mantua: However, it
was not that graceful vein, nor that Toft fire of fancy
which, tho’ borrow’d before, yet made it doubtful
to decide, whether fome of the pictures were his, or
his maders. When he was entirely free, and the
piece all his own, he animated it with ideas more
fevere, more extraordinary, and even more expref-
five, but lefs natural than the works of Raphael.
His inventions were adorn’d by poefy, and his dif-
pofitions uncommon and of a good Gout.
His dudies of polite learning were of great fervice
to him in his painting, for in defigning the Antique
fculprures, he drew thole proofs of learning which
we obferve in his pidures.
It feems, by his works, that his thoughts were
wholly taken up with the grandeur of his poetical
ideas, and that to execute them with the fame fire
that he conceiv’d them, he contented himfclf with
the practice of delign, which he had chofen, wdth-
l 3 out


out varying the airs of his heads, or his draperies.
It is vifible alfo, that his colouring, which was
never very good, became worfe at laft; for his local
colours, which were compos’d of brick-colour and
black, were not fupported by any intelligence oi‘
the Claro Obfcuro. His fierce way ot defigning,
£nd his terrible expreflions, became fo to
him, that his works are eaiy to be known. 1 his
manner is very great, it is true, being form’d after
the Antique BafTo Relievo’s, which he had care-
fully ftudied, and efpecially the Trajan and Anto-
nine pillars which he defigned throughout j yet thefe
fine things, which are fufficient of themlelves to
make a fkilful fculptor, mult be accompanied with
the verities of nature to form a great Painter. The
draperies, which commonly contribute to the ma-
jefty of figures, are the fhame of his, being poor,
and of an ill Gout,
There is little variety to be feen in the airs of
his heads •, that which is to be found in his works,
confifts only in the different kinds of objedls, of
which his competitions are full, and in the adjuft-
ments which enrich them, and proceeds from the
univerfality of his genius for all forts ot painting ;
he did all well alike, landfkips and animals, by
which means his productions, for what they contain,
will always be admired by the judicious.
GIOVANNI FRANCISCO PENNI
Surnamed
11 F A TT O R E.
This lad name was given him for his good
hufbandry in managing Raphael’s expences,
when he liv’d with him, which was to the time ot
his death, Julio Romano being his fellow difliple.
He was very fkilful, efpecially in defigning. He has
sone a great many things from Raphael’s thoughts,
which


which pals for Raphael’s own doing, particularly in
the palace of Chigi, as one may obferve by examin-
ing them with attention. He had a particular in-
clination for landfkips, which he painted very well,
and enrich’d them with fair buildings.
After his matter’s death, he alfociated himfelf
with Julio Romano, and Pierino del Vaga. 1 hele
three together finifh’d what Raphael left imperfect,
as well the hiftory of Conftantine, as other works in
the palace of Belvedere. ’They feparated on occa-
fion of a copy that the pope would have done of
the picture of the Transfiguration, which was de-
fign’d for the court of France, and Fattore went to
Naples, intending to work for the marquifs del
Vafto, but his conltitution was fo delicate, that he
did not live long, for he died in the fortieth year of
his age, anno 1328.
LUCA PENNI
WAS Giovanni Francifco’s brother, whom wc
have been fpeaking or : He work’d a while
with Pierino del Vaga, his brother-in-law, at Ge-
noa, and other places of Italy. He went thence into
England, where he did feveral things for king
Henry VIII. and for fome merchants. He was alfo
employ’d by Francis I. at and at Jalt
applied himfelf to graving.
ANDREA del SARTO
OF Florence, was a taylor’s fon : His father put
him to a goldfmith, with whom he liv’d feven
years, during which time he minded defigning moie
than his own trade. From the goldfmith he re-
mov’d to an ordinary Painter call’d Giovanni Ba-
rile, whom he foon left to go to Florence, and enter
himfelf with Pietro Cofimo. While he liv d with
him he fet a-part all Sundays and Holidays to defign
14 after


after the befb mailers, efpecially Leonardo da Vinci,
and Michael Angelo, which, in a few years, taught
him his art. He thought his own mailer too flow in
the execution of his works, for which reafon he left
him, and became acquainted with Francifco Bigio.
They lived together, and painted feveral things in
Florence, and thereabouts, for the monalleries. He
drew a great many Madonnas’s. He is cenfur’d for
making ufe of Albert Durcr’s prints in a piece
which he did for the Carmelites, Baccio Bandinelli
would have learnt to paint of him, but Andrea
putting him upon difficult works at firfl, it difgufled
Bandinelli, lb that he apply’d himfelf wholly to
Iculpture, Andrea’s reputation increafing, he made
pictures for feveral places, and among others, one
which got him the praifes of the judicious, and is
one of the bell things he ever did, I mean, a St.
Sebaftian, for the church of St. Gal.
He came into France upon the invitation of Fran-
cis I. He painted feveral things there, and tho* he
had begun the pidure of St. Jerome for the queen,
he left that work, and got leave of the king to re-
turn to Florence, pretending to fetch his wife, from
whom, he faid, he had receiv’d a very prefling
letter to come to her; but inftead of returning at
the time appointed, he fpent the money he brought
out of France, and even that he had receiv’d of the
king to buy pidures, At laft having work’d fome
time with Francifco Bigio for fubfiftance, he died of
the plague at Florence, abandon’d even by his wife
and his friends, in the year 1530, aged 42 years.
He left feveral pupils, viz. Giacomo da Pantormo,
Andrea Squazzella, who work’d in France, Giacomo
Sandro, Francefco Salviati and Giorgio Vafari. The
fame Vafari reports, that * Andrea del Sarto copied
* The author has told this dory more at large, and in another
manner, in the zyth chapter of the firil book.
lb


fo perfectly, that Frederic inarquifs of Mantua,
having on a time, made him copy the pifture of
Leo X. with Tome cardinals, became Clement VII.
had defired that prince to give him the original,
he did it with fo much juftnefs, that Julio Romano,
who drew the drapery of that piece under Raphael,
took his copy for the original, and told Vafari who
difabus’d him, “ Don’t I fee the ftrokes that I (truck
“ with my own hand?” but Vafari (hewing him del
Sarto’s mark, he was convinc’d of his miftake.
GIACOMO da P A NTO R MO,
OF Tufcany, was at thirteen years of age put to
learn the art of painting of Leonardo da Vinci:
He was afterwards remov’d to Mariotto Alberti-
nelli, from him to Pietro di Cofimo, with whom
he ftay’d not long, leaving him to place himfelf
with Andrea del Sarto.
At nineteen years old he fet up for himfelf, and
follow’d his ftudies fo fuccefsfully, that upon feeing
fome of his firft works, Michael Angelo faid of
him. He would raife painting to the (kies. Pan-
tormo was never fatisfied with what he did, but the
praifes that were given him kept him in heart. He
did feveral things at Florence that got him reputa-
tion. Having undertaken to paint the chapel of
St. Laurence for the duke of Florence, and aiming
in that work, which Jafted twelve years, to excel all
others, he on the contrary came (hort of himfelf. He
was a man of honour, and very humble; he had
one quality, and the mod commendable one in the
world, which is rarely to be met with in his pro-
feflion, which was that he would never differ any
one to fpeak againd thofe that were abfent. All his
pieces were done in Florence, where he died of a
clropfy, anno 1556. aged 63 years,
BACCIO


BACCIO BANDINELLI
WA S born at Florence •, his name was Barto-
lomeo, which was turn’d into the diminu-
tive Baccio. His father was a goldfmith, and his
matter, Giovanni FranciTco Ruttico, a good fculp-
tor, whom Leonardo da Vinci us’d often to vifit,
for Ruttico was bred up by Andrea Verrocchio as
well as Leonardo •, Verrocchio being a fculptor.
Painter and architect, and underftanding the mathe-
maticks very well. Tho* Baccio Bandinelli had
gone through all the ftudies neceflary for an excel-
lent Painter, his pictures were not lik’d, on account
of the colouring, which was worth nothing. His ill
fuccefsoccafion’d his abandoning painting, and follow-
ing fculpture, in which he became very fkilful. He
had fo great an efteem for his own works, that he
compar’d them with Michael Angelo’s, whofe repu-
tation was a great grief to him. His produdions
are at Rome and Florence, where he died in the
62d year of his age. Anno 1559.
PO LIDO RO da CAR AV AG 10,
SO call’d from the place of his birth, a village of
that name, in the dutchy of Milan. He came
to Rome at the time when pope Leo X. was raifing
fome new edifices in the Vatican, and knowing not
how to get his bread otherwife, for he was very
young, he hir’d himfelf to carry (tones and mortar
for the mafons, who were at work about that build-
ing. He did this till he was eighteen years of age.
At the fame time Raphael employ’d feveral young
Painters in the fame place to execute his defigns.
Polidoro, who often carried them the mortar, with
which they made their frefco, was touch’d with the
fight of the paintings, and folicited by his genius to
turn Painter. He at firft tied himfelf to the works
of Giovanni d’Udine, and the pleafure he took to
2 fee


fee that Painter work, llir’d up the talent which he
had for painting. He was very officious and complai-
fant to the young Painters, and made an acquaintance
with them, to whom communicating his intention,
they gave him leffons, which embolden’d him to pro-
ceed. He heartily let himfelf to defigning, and
advanc’d fo prodigioufly that Raphael wasallonifh’d,
and Ibmetime after fet him to work with the other
young Painters-, but hediftinguiffi’d himfelf fo much
from all of them, that as he had the greateft ffiare in
executing his defigns in the Vatican, fo he had the
greateft glory. The care which he had feen his mailer
take in defigning the Antique fculptures, fhew’d him
the way to do the like. He fpent whole days and
nights in defigning thofe beautiful things, and ftu-
dy’d antiquity to a nicety. The works with which
he has enrich’d the frontifpieces of feveral buildings at
Rome, ffiew the pains he took in lludying the An-
tique.
He did very few eafel-pieces 5 moll of his pro-
ductions are in frefco, and of the lame colour in
imitation of the BalTo Relievo’s. In this fort of
painting he made ufe of the manner, call’d fcratch’d,
confilting in a preparation of a black ground, on
which is plac’d a white plaifter, and taking off this
white with an iron bodkin, we difcover through the
holes the black which ferves for lhadows. Scratch’d
work lafts longell, but being very rough is unplea-
fant to the fight. He affociared himfelf at firlt with
Maturino, and the conformity of their genius’s
made them companions in their lludies and bu-
finefs: They liv’d together like brothers, and their
friendlhip latled till the death of Maturino, who
died of the plague, anno 1526. Polidoro, after
having, by Maturino’s affillance, fill’d Rome with
his pieces, thought to have enjoy’d his eafe, and
the fruit of his labours, when the Spaniards, in the
year 1527. befieg’d that city, and all the men of
art


art were forc’d to fly, or elfe were ruin’d by the
miferies of war. Polidoro refolv’d to retire to Na-
ples, where he was oblig’d to work for ordinary
Painters, and had no opportunity to make himfeJf
taken notice of; for the Neapolitan nobility were in
thofe days more felicitous to get good horfes than
good pictures. Seeing himfelf therefore without
bufinds, and forc’d to fpend what he had got at
Rome, he went to Sicily, and undemanding archi-
tecture as well as painting, the citizens of Meflina
employ’d him to prepare the triumphal arches, for
the reception of Charles V. coming from Tunis,
which work being finifh’d, Polidoro finding nothing
to be done there anfwerable to the grandeur of his
genius, and having no temptation to flay, but the
carefles of a woman he lov’d, he thought of return-
ing to Rome. To that end he drew his money out
of the bank of Meflina, which his man underflanding
the night before his intended departure, he confe-
derated himfelf with other rogues, feiz’d him in
his bed, ftrangled him, and ftabb’d him. After
they had committed this murder, they carry’d the
body to the door of his miftrefs, that it might be
thought he was kill’d there by fome rival, yet God
in his providence fo order’d it, that the murder was
difeover’d. The aflaflins fled, and every body
pity’d Polidoro’s untimely fate; his man, who did
not fear any ones miftrufting he had a hand in his
mafter’s death, came to make his lamentations over
him as well as the reft. A Sicilian count, one of
Polidoro’s friends, obferv’d his grief was not all na-
tural, and fufpedfing him to be concern’d in the
crime, had him apprehended. He defended him-
felf very ill: He was put to the torture, confeft all,
and was condemn’d to be drawn to pieces by four
horfes. The citizens of Meflina were mighty forry
for Polidoro’s death, and honourably buried him
in


in their cathedral church. He was in his eight and
fortieth year when this fate befel him, anno 1543.
Reflections on the works of P OLIDORO.
POlidoro, as defirous as he was to learn, thought
he could not do better than tread in his matter’s
heps, and knowing Raphael had form’d his Gout of
defign after the Antique ftatues, he attiduoufly ap-
plied himfeif to ftudy them, and the principal buti-
nefs of his life was to imitate them, as may be feen
by fome beautiful remains of his works on the fron-
tifpieces of feverai houfes in Rome, where he has
painted fome Bafib Relievo’s of his own invention.
His genius, which was extraordinary lively and
fruitful, and his ttudying the Antique Baflb Re-
lievo’s, made him incline to reprefent battles, facri-
hces, vafes, trophies, and thofe ornaments which
are moft remarkable in antiquities.
But, what is altogether furprizing, is, that not-
withftanding his great application to Antique fculp-
tures, he perceiv’d the necettity of the Claro Obfcuro
in Painting, and was almoft the only Painter of the
Roman fchool, who made it a principle of the art,
and put it in practice: Indeed the great mattes of
lights and fhadows which are in his pictures, fhevv
he was convinc’d, that the eyes of the fpedator
wanted repofe to view a pidure witheafe.
It is from this principle, that in the Fraezes which
he painted with white and black, his objeds are
group’d fo artfully, that it is impottible for any to
be more beautiful.
. love of the Antique did not hinder his ttudy-
ing nature, and his Gout of defign, which was very
great, and very corred, was a mixture of the one
and the other. His hand was eafy and excellent,
and the airs of his heads bold, noble and exprefiive.
2 Mis


His thoughts were fublime ; his difpofitions full
of Attitudes well chofen ; his draperies well fet, and
his landfkips of a good Gout. His pencil was
light and foft •, but after the death of Raphael, who
employ’d him in the paintings of the Vatican, he
very leldom colour’d his pieces, applying himfelf
altogether to work in Frefco with the Claro Ob-
feuro.
Polidoro’s genius was very much like Julio Ro-
mano’s, their conceptions were lively, and form’d
after the Gout of the Antique. Their defign was
great and fevere, and their way new and extraor-
dinary : The difference between them was, that
Julio Romano animated his poetical compofitions by
the impetuolity of his vein only, and Polidoro al-
ways made ufe of the contrail, as the molt powerful
means to give life and motion to his works. Poli-
doro’s genius appears alfo to be more natural, more
pure, and more regulated than Julio Romano’s.
ANDREA C 0 S 1 M 0
And
MO RfU 0 da FELT: RO
WERE the firlt that brought ornaments in ufe
in the modern painting: They were both
very fkilful, and work’d in the Claro Obfcuro,
in the manner which the Italians terms Sgrahtti,
fcratcht-work. Andrea lived 64 years, and Mor-
tuo for want of bufmefs turn’d foldier. He was
kill’d in a battle between the Venetians and the
Turks at 45 years of age.
ROSSO
WA S born at Florence, and had no mailer to
teach him the art of painting. He ap-
ply’d himfelf to the lludy of Michael Angelo’s
works.


works, but form’d to himfelf a particular ftile. His
genius was fervile, and his manner of defigning,
tho* learned, was a little wild. He did feveral
things at Rome and Peroufa in Raphael’s time.
His misfortunes brought him into France, where
Francis I. gave him a penfion, and the fuperinten-
dency of the buildings at Fontainbleau. He was
alfo made a canon of the chapel-royal, and by the
king’s favour, and his own merit, acquir’d a great
reputation. We may fee what a matter he was by
his performances in the gallery of Fontainbleau.
Roffo was handfome, and had improv’d himfelf
by the knowledge of the fciences : but he fully’d all
his rare qualities by his death, which he fhamefully
brought on himfelf; for having caus’d his intimate
friend Francefco Pellegrino to be apprehended on
fufpicion of having robb’d him of a confiderable
fum, he was deliver’d over to the magittrates, who
put him to the rack, which Pellegrino endur’d, and
was declar’d innocent. Being clear’d, he publifh’d
a pamphlet againft Roffo, who thinking he could
never appear afterwards with honour, lent to Melun
for poifon, pretending to want vernifh, and taking
the dofe it kill’d him at Fontainbleau, in the year
1640, in the forty fifth year of his age.
FRANCESCO MAZZUOLO
Sornam’d
FARM E GIAN O,
FROM the place of his birth. He was born in
the city of Parma, anno 1504. He learnt
painting of two of his coufins, and by the vivacity
and readinefs of his wit, in a little while advanc’d
greatly in the art. The character of Raphael and
Michael Angelo’s works, incited him to go to Rome
at twenty years of age. He ftudy’d the beft things,
and


and particularly Raphael’s painting with great ear-
neftnefs: He drew feveral pieces which got him re-
putation, and the favour of pope Clement VII. He
minded his bufinefs fo ftrenuoufiy, that the very
day on which the Spaniards enter’d Rome, and
pillag’d it, the foldiers found Parmegiano working
quietly, as Protogenes was of old at the fiege of
Rhodes. 1 his fecurity furpriz’d the Spaniards who
firft enter’d his houle, and they were fo touch’d
with the beauty of his painting, that they left him
without doing him any harm ; but fbme of their
comrades came afterwards, and took away all he
had. Upon this he return’d into his own country,
and pafling through Bologna was ftop’d there a good
while by bufinefs that fell in his way, which having
finilh’d, he went to Parma, and painted there very
much.. He play’d well on the lute, and often fpent
more time on it than on his painting. He was
juftly blam’d for giving himfelf over fo much to
chymiflry, that he not only left off his profeftion,
but alfo the care of his perfon, and became a perfedt
lavage. He engrav’d fome of his defigns in wood
with'the Claro Obfcuro; and fome he etch’d, being
the firft that pradlis’d that fort of graving, at leaft
in Italy. He kept one Antonio Frontano, a graver,
in his houfe, who rob’d him of all his plates, as well
of copper as of wood, and alfo of all his defigns,
which made Parmegiano run almoft mad, tho’ the
beft parr of them were recover’d. At laft he fo
abandon’d himfelf to chymiftry, that he wafted his
time, his money, and his health, and died in a
miferable condition of a Diarrhoea, accompany’d
with a fever, in the thirty-fixth year of his age,
anno 1540.
Re-


Reflections on the works of P ARM EG IA NO.
PArmegiano’s genius was altogether gay and
elegant, and tho 1 he invented things with eafe,
yet he did not ftrive fo much to fill his compofitb-
ons with agreeable objeCts, as to defign his figures
with a graceful air, and to give them attitudes
which might fhow the beautiful parts* and infufe
life and aClion into the whole. But his underftanding
being of no great extent, his intentivenefs to finifii
every particular figure, leflfenM very much the
beauty of his expreffion in general. His thoughts
were befides too common, and we don’t find that
he had penetrated very far into the heart of man, or
underflood the paffions; however, tho* the grace of
his works is but fuperficial, yet it is, neverthelefs,
lurprifing and charming.
His invention was ready : His attitudes were very
graceful, fo were his heads *, and it is vifible that he
endeavour’d more to pleafe this way, than by the
juft expreffion of his fubjeCl. He did not confulc*
nature much, who is the mother of variety. He
reduc’d her to a habit which he contracted •, grace-
ful, it is true, but it was his own, and funk into
what we call manner. The painter, who looks
upon nature as his objeCt, ought to confider her in
the variety, as well as in the number of her effeCts;
and if we forgive him any reiteration in the fame
piece, it muft be only in his defigns, for which
there is no need of confulting nature fo exaCtly, nor
to take the fame care as in a picture. I know alfb,
that whatever drafts the painters in their ftudies
make after nature, their particular Gout confines
them to certain things, which they fall upon infen-
fiblyj it cannot be deny’d, but Parmegiano has
often reiterated the fame airs, and the fame pro-
portions, yet his choice is fo fine, that what has
K pleas’d


pleas’d us in any one of his works, will always
pleafe us whereever we meet with it. -
His Gout of defign is loofe and learned, but has
too much of Idea and manner in it. He affeded
to make the extremities of his members delicate, and
fomewhat lean. His Attitudes are noble, lively
and agreeably contrafted. His airs of the head
rather graceful, than of a great gufto. His expref-
fions general, and without charader. His draperies
light, and well contrafted. It is true theftuff isal-
moft always the fame, and the folds are very carelefs,
yet being but a few they give a Gout of grandeur
to the parts they cover. They are often loofe and
flowing, which adds a great deal of motion to his
figures, but the caufe of it is not always juft.
Notwithftanding the vivacity of his wit, and the
acility of his pencil, he drew very few pidures,
fpending moft of his time in making defigns, and
engraving them upon plates. The little I have
feen of his painting, gives me a clear idea of a tole-
rable Claro Obfcuro, but his local colour is very or-
dinary and common. It was this Parmegiano, who
by the means of two copper plates found out the
fccret of Printing on Mezzo Tinto paper, the black
and white, and thus to give more roundefs to his
prints. Yet he did not continue the ufe of this in-
vention long, it requiring too much care i beftdes,
his ordinary prints were fo much valu’d by every
body, and even by feveral able matters of painting,
that he did not think it worth his while to be at the.
trouble of making others.
PIE R INO del VA G A
WAS born in Tufcany, where he was poorly
bred, and was hardly two years old when
his mother died. His father was a foldicr, and his
nurfe a fhe-goar. He came young to Florence, and
was


was put to a, grocer, who us’d to lend him to the
Painters with colours and pencils. He learnt of
them, at times, to defign, and in a little while be-
came the moft Ikilful of all the young Painters in
Florence. An ordinary Painter, whofe name was
Vaga, took him with him to Rome, and from his
living with him, he was call’d del Vaga, for his
right name was Buonacorfi. At Rome he work’d
half the week for Painters, and the other half, to-
gether with all Sundays and Holidays, he fpent in
ftudy and defigning. He had fomething of every
thing that was good, in his compofitions *, fome-
times he might have been found among the ruins,
feeking after the Antique ornaments, or defigning
the Balfo Relievo’s, fometimes in Michael Angelo’s
chapel, and fometimes in the halls of the Vatican.
He alfo ftudy’d anatomy, and other feiences necef-
fary to his profeflion. He got fo much knowledge
by his indultry, that he was foon known to the bell
tnafters; and Raphael employ’d him jointly with
Giovanni d’Udine and others, to help him in the
execution of his defigns. Of all his contemporary
artifts, none underftood the ornaments and decorati-
ons of painting fo well as he, nor more boldly fol-
low’d Raphael’s Gufto, as is to be feen by the pic-
tures in the Vatican lodgings, which were per-
form’d by him, viz. The paflageof the river Jor-
dan •, the fall of the walls of Jericho j the battel in
which Jofiiua commanded the Sun to Hand ftill;
our Saviour’s nativity, baptifm and Lift flipper. Ra-
phael’s friendfhip for him procur’d him other con-
fiderable works in the Vatican, and Pierino fhew’d
his gratitude by his particular affedlion to him *, but
the plague driving him out of Rome, he return’d
to Florence, where having painted fome pieces he
went back to Rome. Raphael being dead, he join’d
with Julio Romano, and Francefco il Fattore to
hnifh the works in the Vatican, which were left
,K 2 ;mper


imperfed: by their matter: And to confirm their
friendfhip, he marry’d Francefco’s fitter in the year
1 525 •» yet they were feparated two years afterwards 5
when the Spaniards befieg’d Rome. Pierino was
taken prifoner, and forc’d to pay a large fum for
his ranfom. He went to Genoa, where he was
employ’d by prince Doria to paint a palace which he
was then building. In this work he made ufe of
Cartoons, the convenience of which he difeover’d
to one Geronimo Trevilano, a Painter who had
laught at them, and to others who came to him to
learn the advantage of them. From thence he re-
mov’d to Pifa, intending at his wife’s requett to
fettle there, but after he had drawn fome pidlurcs,
he return’d to Genoa, and work’d again for prince
Doria. lie then went a fecond time to Pifa, and
from thence to Rome, where pope Paul 111. and
cardinal Farnefe gave him fo much work, that he
was forc’d to commit the execution of it to others,
and content himfelf with making the defigns.
At the fame time the pope fent for Titian to
Rome, which made Pierino fo jealous, and griev’d
him fo much, that he did what he could to oblige
him not to ttay there Jong, and to hatten back to
Venice, in which he fucceeded. The multiplicity
of Pierino’s bufinefs, and his vivacity in his perfor-
mances, drain’d his fpirits in the Dower of his age.
At two and forty years old he fpent his time wholly
in vifiting his friends, and liv’d pleafantly till his
Ibrty-feventh year, when he died of an apoplexy,
Anno 1547.
Reflections on the works of PIERINO
del VAG A.
OF all Raphael’s difciples, Pierino del Vaga kept
the character of his matter longett* 1 mean
Jus exterior charadcr, and as we lay, his manner oi
de


designing, for he wanted very much of the finenefs
qf Raphael’s thinking. He had a particular genius
for the decoration of places, according to their
cufloms. His invention in this kind of painting
was very ingenious ; grace and order are every
where to be met with, and his difpofitions, which
are ordinary in his pictures, are wonderful in his
ornaments: Some of them he has made little, and
fome great, and plac’d them both with fo much
art, that they fet off one another by comparifon,
and by the contrail. His figures are difpos’d and
defign’d, according to Raphael’s Guflo; and if
Raphael gave him, at fir ft, lome light fketches of
ornaments, as he did to Giovanni d’Udine, he exe-
cuted them to admiration, and by the habit he con-r
traded, and by the vivacity of his wit he acquir’d,
in this fort of painting, an univerfal reputation.
The tapftries of the feven planets in feven pieces,
which Pieri.no defign’d for Diana de Poitiers, and
which are now at Monfieur the firft Prefidcnt’s, is
$ fufficient confirmation of what I have faid.
GlO V ANN! d’ 1/ DIN E x
WA S fo called from Udine in Friuli, where
he was born, anno 149 b. When he was
very young he went to Venice, and his
leading him to painting, he put himfelf to Gior-
gione, whofe dilciple he was ieveral years. From
thence he went to Rome, where Balthazar Qafti-
glioni, fecretary to the duke of Mantua, prefented
him to Raphael. Giovanni d’Udine did figures
very well, yet his mailer-piece was animals, efpe-
cially birds, to the lludy of which he particularly,
apply’d himfelf, and wrote a treatife of the latter.
He carefully examin’d the Antique ornaments, and
took delight in painting after nature, thofe inani-
mate objeds that ferve for the decoration of pidurcs;
K 3 whicU


which was the eafieft and readied way to glory. For
this reafon, Raphael employ’d him about the orna-
ments of his pictures; efpecially thofe in Stucco,
which he underftood very well. The mufical in-
ftruments in Raphael’s picture, of St. Cecilia at
Bologna, were done by d’Udine as alfo all the de-
corations of the paintings of the pope’s lodgings,
and thofe of la Vigne Madame. We are indebted
to him for reviving the art of Stucco, and the way
of ufing it. He found out the true matter which
the ancients made ufe of in this fort of work, being
a compofition of lime and marble powder, very
fine, which the modern artilts have ever fince put
in practice. Fie was in hopes that pope Leo X,
who was very well pleafed with his labours, would
have rewarded him, but feeing himfelf difappointed
by his holinefs’s death, he took adi/tafte to painting
and retir’d to Udine. Sometime after he quitted
his profeflion, he had a mind to go to Rome out of
devotion, and tho* he was difguis’d like a pilgrim,
and mingled among the rabble, Vafari meeting him
by chance at the Pauline gate, knew him, and per-
fwaded him to paint for pope Pius IV. for whom
Giovanni d’Udine afterwards did the decorations of
feveral pieces. He lov’d fports fo w'ell, that he is
thought fo have been the inventor of the (talking-
horfe, which poachers now ufe to come at birds
with. He died anno 1564. aged threefcore and
ten, and was buried, according to his defire, in the
Rotunda, near Raphael his matter.
PELLEGRINO da MODENA
WOrk’d with Raphael’s other difciples in the
paintings of the Vatican, and made feveral
pictures of his own at Rome. After his ma(ter*s
death he return’d to Modena, and follow’d his bu-
fmefs with induftry and fuccefs. He died of fome
wounds


Wounds he receiv’d in endeavouring to refcue his
fon, who had committed a murder in one of the
publick flreets of that city.
DOMENICO B EC CAFIUMI
Otherwife called
MICARINO da SIENA.
WA S a peafant’s fon, and born in a village
near Siena. His father’s name was Pacio,
and he us’d to call his fon Micarino. His firft em-
ployment was keeping of flieep, and it happen’d
that a citizen of Siena, whofe name was Beccafiumi,
coming by one day as he was fitting by a river, his
flocks erazingr about him, obferv’d that he drew
u O # ,
figures on the fand with a flick, which gave him a
good opinion of him, and he refolv’d to improve
the talent which he difeovered in him. He took
him into his fervice, and had him taught to defign,
Domenico’s genius affifting him in his ftudies,
he foon became a mafter. He at firft copy’d fome
pieces of Perugino, and then went to Rome, where
he encreas’d in the knowledge of his art, but flu-
dying Raphael and Michael Angelo’s works. Be-
lieving he was now able to fland by himfelf, he re-
turn’d to Siena, did feveral pictures in oil and di-
ftemper, and fome confiderable pieces in Prefix),
which brought him into credit. But what fupported
his reputation a long time, was his work of the
pavement of the great church in Siena. This per-
formance was of the kind of Claro Obfcuro, and was
done by means of two forts of ftones, the one white
for the lights, and the other brown for the lhadows ;
and thefe ftones being thus join’d in the dimenfions,
agreeable to the Claro Obfcuro of the objeds which
were to be reprefented, the artift, by making deep
holes, and filling them up with black pitch, cou’d
K 4 draw


draw lines, and give union, roundnefs and force to
his figures. One Duccio, a painter in Siena, in-
vented this fort of work in the 1356; but Becca-
fiumi brought it to perfection. He engrav’d feveral
of his defigns in wood, was a good fculptor and foun-
der, of which he gave fufficient proofs in Genoa,
whither he went towards the latter end of his life,
and having left many proofs of his induftry and
capacity, dy’d there in the 65th year of his age.
Anno 1549.
BALTHAZAR P E RU Z Z I
OF the fame city of Siena, was famous at the
fame time. He painted in the palace of
Ghigi, in the churches, and on the frontifpieces of
feveral houfes in Rome. He underftood perfectly
the mathematics and architecture, and reviv’d the
ancient decorations of the ftage, as be fhew’d in
the reign of Leo X.
When cardinal Bernardo da Bibiena had the play
call d La Callandra, one of the belt Italian dramatic
pieces, reprefented for the entertainment of the
Pope, Balthazar made the feenes, and adorn’d them
with fo many places, fireets, and feveral forts of
buildings, that they were admir’d by all the world ;
and, indeed, twas he that fhew’d the way to all
the engineers, and makers of machines that came
after him in this bufinefs. He was employ’d about
divers things, as well at St. Peter’s as tlfewhere,
and prepar’d the magnificent ornaments for the
coronation of Pope Clement VII. Lie had the
misfortune to be at Rome when Charles Vth’sarmy
fack’d that city. The foldiers plunder’d him, us’d
him ill, and to get out of their hands he was forc’d
to draw the picture of Charles duke of Bourbon,
the imperial general, after he was dead. As foon
as he got his liberty, he took Ihipping at Port
Hercules,


Hercules, and went to Siena, whither he came,
after having been robb’d by the way. The citi-
zens of Siena fet him at work to fortify their city,
which he did, and then return’d to Rome, where
he drew defigns.for fome palaces. He there began
his book of the Antiquities of Rome, and a com-
ment on Vitruvius, for which he made the cuts,
according as he proceeded in the work, which death
put a flop to in the year 1536. being fcarce thirty
fix years of age. It is thought he was poifon’d by
his competitors. Sebaftian Serli had his writings
and defigns, which he made great ufe of in the
treatife of architecture that he publifh’d.
Michael angelo buonarolj ,
SON of Lodovico Buonaroti Simoni, of the an-
cient family of the counts of Canofes, was born
in the year 1474. in the callle of Chiufi, in the ter-
ritory of Arezzo in Tufcany, where his father and
mother then liv’d. He was put to nurfe in the vil-
lage of Settiniano, a place noted for the refort of
fculptors, of whom his nurfe’s hufband was one,
which gave rife to the faying of him, that Michael
Angelo fuck’d in fculpture with his milk. His vi-
olent inclination todefigning, oblig’d his parents to
place him with Domenico Ghirlandaio. The pro-
grefs he made rais’d the jealoufy of his fellow-dif-
ciples lb much, that Torrigiano, one of them, gave
him a blow on the nofe, the marks of which he
carry’d to his grave. He thought the beft way to
be reveng’d on him was to overcome him in hispro-
feftion, and by his fludies and productions, to put
an end to the competition of his companions, and
acquire the efteem of perfons of the beft quality and
intereft, which he did effectually.
He ereCted an academy of painting and fculpture
at Florence, under the Protection of Lorenzo de
Me-


Medicis, who was a lover of the fine arts. He was
bellowing his care and application upon it when the
troubles of the houfe of Medicis obliged him to
remove to Bologna, from whence he went to Ve-
nice, and from thence returned, in a little while,
to Florence. *Twas about this time he made an
image of Cupid, carried it to Rome, broke off*
one of its arms, and bury’d it, keeping the arm by
him. He bury’d it in a place where he knew was
to be dug up, and the Cupid being found, was fold
to the cardinal of St, Gregory for Antique: Micha-
el Angelo difcovered the fallacy to him, by fhewing
him the arm he had preferved for that purpofe. °
The works he perform’d at Rome, and Braman-
te*s advice, whom Raphael had inffigated to it, put
tne pope on painting his chapel, and employing Mi-
chael Angelo about it. Michael fent for feveral
I'loientine painters to affift him, among whom were
Graunachio Bugiardino, and Giuliano di San Gallo,
the latter underffanding Frefoo very well, which
Michael Angelo knew little of. The painting beincr
finifh d, moll of the Painters, and particularly
phael s expectation was bauPd, for he had never
defired his friend Bramante to procure that em-
ployment for his competitor, had he not thought
the talk greater than he could go thro* with. Bra-
mante, as we have faid in the life of Raphael, was
entrufted by Michael Angelo with the key of the
chapel, and an order to let nobody whofoever foe
his work ; however, he once admitted Raphael, who
found the painting to be of fo great a Gufto of defum,
that he refolv’d to make his advantage of it, and,
indeed, in the firft picture which Raphael produced
afterwards, and that was the prophet Ifaiah for the
church of St. Auffin, Michael Angelo immediately
dilcovered Bramante’s treachery. This paflage is
the greateft praife that can be given to MichaeIDAn-
gelo s works, and is, at the lame time, a proof of
Rapha-


Raphael’s love of his art *, that he would make ufe
of what was good, even in the works of his ene-
mies, not fo much for his own glory, as for the glo-
ry of his profefllon.
Upon the death of Julius 11. Michael Angelo
went to Florence, where he made that admirable
piece of fculpture, the tomb of the duke of Flo-
rence. He was interrupted by the wars, the citi-
zens obliging him to work on the fortifications of
the city *, but forefeeing that their precautions wouM
be ufelefs, he removed from Florence to Ferrara,
and thence to Venice. The Doge Gritti wou’d fain
have entertained him in his fervice, but all he could
get out of him was a defign of the bridge Rialto:
for Michael Angelo was an excellent architcft, as
one may fee by the palace of harnefie, by his own
houfe, and by the capitol, which is an edifice of a
great Gout.
When he returned to Florence, he painted the
fable of Heda, with Jupiter turn’d into a fwan,
for the duke of Ferrara, which piece being not e-
nough efteemed, he fent it by Minio his difciple into
France, together with two boxes of defigns, the befb
and greateft part of his thoughts. Francis I. bought
the Lfeda, and put it up at Fontaine-bleau, and the
defigns were difperft up and down by the hidden
death of Minio. The amorous paffion of thisLas-
da was reprefented fo livelily, and fo lafcivioufly, that
Monfieur de Noyers, minifter of hate, order’d it
to be burnt out of a Temple of confidence.
By the command of Paul 111. Michael Angelo
painted his famous piece of the laft Judgment,
which is an inexhauftible ftore of fcience, for all
thofe that would dive to the bottom of it. The
defign is of a great Gufto. He took an incredible
deal of pains to reach the perfection of his art. He
lov’d fiolitude, and ufied to fay, “ that painting
« was iealous, and required the whole Man to her-
J 3 “ felf,”


ftlf.”- Being afk’d, why he did not marry ? H<*
anfwer d, tc Painting was his wife, and his works
children. ** Michael Angelo had great ideas,
which he did not borrow from his mailers. His
fludying after the antique, and the elevation of his
genius infpired him with them. His defagns were
Jearn’d and corred, and the Gufto, if I may uf e
the phrafe, terrible, and if fome perfons cannot find
in them the elegance of the antique, they mu ft al-
low* that his Gufto is rich, and tha,t common nature
in companion with it is poor.
Raphael, as we have obferv‘d, was obliged to him,
for the alteration of his manner, which he learned
at the fight of pope Sixtus’s chapel, for before that
he had ft ill too much of Perugino's in his compo-
fitions. There are feveral perfons, who tho’ they
confefs Michael Angelo’s thoughts are great, yet
will not allow them to be natural, and think they
are fometimes extravagant. They fay alfo, that
though his defigns are learned, they are over-
charged ; that he has taken too many licences a-
gainlt the rules of perfpedive, and that he did not
underftand colouring, of which we ftiall fay more,
in our reflections on his works. *Tis enough to let
the world know that this great man was belov’d and
efteem’d by all the foyereign princes of his time,
and that he will be Hill. the admiration of pofterity.
He died at Rome, anno 1564. at 90 years old.
Cofmo di Med ids ordered his body to be fecretly
unbury’d, and brought to Florence, where he was
interr’d in the church of Santa Croce, in which
magnificent obfequies were performed for him,
and his tomb is to be leen in marble, confiding of
three figures, painting, fculpture and architecture*
all of his own hand.
Reflect


Reflections on the Works of MICHAEL
ANGELO.
MICHAEL ANGELO was one of the
firft that banilhed the little manner, and the
remainders of the gothic out of Italy. His genius
was of a vaft extent, and his temper made his Gufto
incline to feverity and caprice; yet among his capri-
cious imaginations, if there are fome things extra-
vagant, there are others fingularly beautiful, and
of what kind foever his thoughts were, they were
always great. ■ . ..
The critics of that age preferring the excellence
of defign to all the other parts of painting, Mi-
chael Angelo ftudy’d it with incredible afllduity,
and arrived to a great knowledge of that art, as
may be Teen by his pidures and fculptures; yet he
did not join the purity and elegance of the contours
or out-lines, to his grand Gufto, for having made
his obfervations on the body of a man, as it is in
its greateft force, he drew the members of his fi-
gures too powerful, and, as we fay, loaded his de-
fign ; not that he neglected the antique, but he was
not willing to be indebted for his art to any thing
but himfelf. He alfo examin'd nature, whom he
look'd upon as his objed more than the antique fta-
tues, which he did not think fit to copy. He un-
derftood perfectly well the knitting of the bones,
the joining of the members, the origin, infertions
and offices of the mufclesj and, indeed, he was fo
confcious of his own fkill, that he took too much
care to Jet the fpedator fee it, for he expreft the
parts of the body fo ftrongly, that he teem’d to
forget that there was a fkin above the mufcles which
foften’d them : however, he has oblerv’d this more
in his fculpture, than in his paintings.
His


His attitudes are, for thq mod part, dilaorce-
abie, the airs of his heads fierce, his draperie? not
open enough, and his expreftions not very natural;
yet, as wild as his productions are, there’s elevation
in his thoughts, and noblenefs in his figures: in
Ihort, the grandeur of his Gufto is a proper remedy
for the meannefs of the Flemifh. It was even of
ufe to Raphael, as we have laid already, to cure
him of that drynefs which he learnt of Peicro Pe-
rugino.
Michael Angelo knew very little of colouring;
his carnations have too much of the brick-colour
for the lights, and of black lor the lhadows; tho*
*“s not certain whether he colour’d his pictures
himfelf, or whether he employ’d fome Florentine
Painters, whom he fent for to help him in his great
undertakings. The pictures which Fra. Balliano drew
alter Michael Angelo’s defigns, are not like the ci-
thers* the colouring is better, and has fomethino-
of the Venetian Gufto. To return to the defigns of
Michael Angelo, which are the moft valuable part
of his productions, if they are not entirely perfeCt,
there is lb much fcience in them, that his works
will contribute a great deal towards making Un-
dents matters, il they have diicernmcnc enough to
ufe them as they ought; nevertheless it woifd be
matter of wonder if Michael Angelo’s reputation
had liv d till now, in cafe his knowledge of Iculp-
ture, and of civil and military architecture, had
not been more celebrated than his tkill m painting.
S EBA STIANO da VENETIA
commonly called
Fra BASTIANO del PIOMBO,
TOOK his name from an office given him by
pope Clement VJI. in the lead mines. He
was born at Venice, and his firft mailer was Gio-
vanni


vanni Bellino, whom he left on account of his age
to place himfelf with Giorgione, of whom he learnt
a Gufto of colouring, which he never quitted. He
had got a good reputation at Venice, when Auguftini
Chigi carry’d him to Rome, where he apply’d him-
felf to Michael Angelo, who lik’d him fo well,
that he took extraordinary care to teach him de-
fign, that he might juftify the choice Fra. Baftiano
had made of him for his mafter, rather than Ra-
phael •, for the Painters of Rome were at that time
divided, fome were for Raphael, and fome for Mi-
chael Angelo. Fra. Baftiano wou’d not only not
make choice of Raphael for his mafter, but he fee
up for his competitor, to which end he drew the
picture of the Transfiguration at the fame time that
Raphael made his for Francis I. In this picture he
reprefents the refurreCtion of Lazarus. The piece
is at Narbonne.
After Raphael’s death, Fra. Baftiano, by his own
merit, and the protection of Michael Angelo, be-
came the chief painter in Rome. Julio Romano
only difputed that title with him. Certain it is.
Fra. Baftiano’s manner was grand, and his enough
to fay, that his works were like Michael Angelo’s
for the defign, and like Giorgione’s for the colour-
ing. He was a long time about his pictures, which
was the reafon he left many of them imperfeCt.
There is a very fine one of his, The \ ifitation of
the Virgin, in the chapel royal at Fontainbleau.
Fra. Baftiano, notwithftanding his preference of
Michael Angelo to Raphael, quarrell’d with the
former, who was angry with him for attempting to
paint a picture in oil, contrary to his opinion. His
mafter laid that fort of painting was proper for
women, and that Frefco was really the work of a
man. His office in the lead mines bringing him in
Efficient to lubfift him handfomely, and being na-
turally a lover of cafe, he bent his. thoughts only
to


to make his life cafy, fometimes exercifing himfeir
with poetry, and fometimes with mufic, for he
play’d very well on the lute. He found out the
way of painting oil upon walls, fo thit the colours
fhou’d not change, which was by a plaifter
compos’d of pitch, maftic and quick-lime. He
died in the year 1547. aged 6 2 years.
DANIELS RICCIARELLI
da VOLT ERR A,
THis Jail name, by which he commonly was
call’d, was given him from the place of his
birth, Volterra in Tufcany. He was difciple firft
to Antony de Verceil, and afterwards to Balthazar
of Siena: but in the end he apply’d himfelf wholly
to Michael Angelo’s manner, who, on feveral occa-
fions, was his protector. His lined: pieces are at
Rome, in the church of the Trinity on the Mount,
He left painting to follow fculpture, and made the
horfe in brafs which is in Place Royale at Paris.
This horfe was intended for the ftatue of Henry IL
but Daniel had not time to finifh it. His extraor-
dinary application to his bufinefs, and his melan-
choly humour haften’d his death, which put an end
to his labours in the 57th year of his age, an-
no 1566.
FRANCESCO PRIMATICCIO
WAS of a noble family in Bologna. His
friends:, perceiving he had a violent inclina-
tion to defign, permitted him to go to Mantua,
where he was fix years a difciple to Julio Romano.
He became fo fkilful in that time, that he made
battles in Stucco, and Baflb Relievo, better than
any of the young Painters of Mantua, who were
Julio Romano’s pupils.
3 He


He aflifted Julio Romano in executing his de-
figns, and Francis I. fending to Rome for a man
that underftood pieces in Stucco, Primaticcio was
the perfon chofen for this fervice. The king put
fuch a confidence in him, that he fent him to Rome
in the year 1540. to buy Antiques. He brought
back with him one hundred and fourfeore flatties,
with a great number of Bullo’s. He had moulds
made by Giacomo Baroccio di Vignola, of the fla-
tues of Venus, Laocoon, Commodus, the Tiber,
the Nile, the Cleopatra at Belvidere, and Trajan’s
pillar, in order to have them call in Brafs.
After Roffo’s death he had the place of fuper-
intendant of the buildings given him, and in a little
time fmifh’d the gallery which his predecefior had
begun. He brought fo many flatues of marble and
brafs to Fontainbleau, that it feem’d another Rome,
as well for the number of the Antiques, as for his
own works in painting and Stucco. Roger of Bo-
logna, Profpero Fontana, Giovanni Battifla, Bag-
nacavallo, and Nicholas of Modena, were thefe he
employ’d mod under him. The fkill and diligence
of the latter were very extraordinary.
Primaticcio was fo elleem’d in France, that no-
thing of any confequence was done without him,
that had relation to painting or building. He di-
rected the preparations for all Feftivals, Turna-
ments, and Mafquerades. He was made abbot or
St. Martins at Troyes, and liv’d fo great, that he
was refpecled as a courtier, as well as a Painter. He
and Roflb taught the French a good Guflo; for
before their time, what they had done in the arts
was very inconfiderable, and had fomething of the
Gothick in it. Primaticcio died in a good old age,
having been favour’d and carefs’d in four reigns.
L
PEL*


PELLEGRINO TIFALDI
Call’d otherwlfe
PELEGRINO da BOLOGNA ,
WHere he was born. He was the Ton of an
architect of Milan, and had Inch a Genius
for the faiences, that of himfelf he defign’d feveral
things at Rome and Bologna, and became one of
the beft matters of his time in the arts of painting
and architecture both civil and military. He firlt
fhew’d his capacity at Rome, and acquir’d a repu-
tation there: But whatever fuccefs his works had,
the workman was very unfortunate, either for that
he did not know what price to let on his pieces, or
that he could never be contented. He was fo cha-
grin’d at his ill fortune, that he would often be-
moan it; and one day pope Gregory XIII. going
out at the gate Angelica to take the air, and hap-
pening to leave the common road, heard a com-
plaining voice, which Teem’d to come from behind
a bufh ; he follow’d it by little and little, till he
faw a man lying on the ground under a hedge. The
pope came up to him, and finding it was Pellegrino,
alkcd him why he complain’d fo ? c You fee, fays
‘ Pellegrino, a man in defpair; I love my profef-
‘ fion, I fpare no pains to underfbnd it •, I work
‘ with affiduity, and endeavour to finilb my pieces
* fo much, that I am never fatisfy’d with what I
* have done; yet all my pains is to no purpofe, I
« am fo little rewarded for it, I have fcarce where-
* withal to live. Not being able therefore to bear
‘ this hard hap, I wander’d hither with a full refo-
* lution to ftarve myfelf rather than endure fo great
* mifery any longer.’ The pope chid him feverely,
and having at length brought him to himfelf, pro-
mi fed


mifed him his affiftance in all things. And paint-
ing not turning to account with him, his holinefs
advis’d him to apply himfelf to architecture, in which
he had already fhewn his fkill, giving him aflurances
he would employ him in his buildings. Pellegrino
follow’d his advice, and became a great architect,
a great engineer, and built feveral ftately palaces
which might have contented him, had he been
more out of love with the world than he was.
Returning into his own country, cardinal Borro-
meo fent for him to Pavia, where he built the palace
da Sapienza, and was chofen by the citizens of Mi-
lan to be fuperintendant of the building they were
about to add to their cathedral church. From
thence Philip 11. invited him to Spain, to direCt
the painting and architecture of the Efcurial. He
painted very much there, and fo pleas’d the king,
that he gave him one hundred thoufand crowns,
and honour’d him with the title of marquis. Pel-
legrino, loaden with riches and honour, return’d to
Milan, and died there in the beginning of the pon-
tificate of Clement VIII. being about threefcore and
ten years old.
FRANCESCO SALVIATI ,
A Florentine, was at firfta difciple of Andrea del
Sarto, in whofe houfe he became acquainted
with Vafari, who was alfo Andrea del Sarto’s dif-
ciple. They both of them left Andrea to place
themfelves with Baccio Bandinelli, where they learnt
more in two months, than they had done before in
two years. Francefco being grown a mailer, car-
dinal Salviati took him into his fervice, and it is on
that account that he had the name of Salviati given
him. His manner of defigning came very near
Raphael’s, and he perform’d well in frefco, diftem-
per and oil. He went to Paris in the year 1554.
L 2 and


and did feveral things for the cardinal of Lorrain,
who was not over well pleafed with them, which
diiguiled Salviati as much as the favour and reputa-
tion of Kofib, at whofe works he had, it Teems,
rail'd plentifully, when fearing the confluences of
ft, he return'd to Italy, where having finifh’d fe-
veral piblures at Rome, Florence and Venice, his
reftlefs fplenecic ineon flant humour threw him in-
to a diftemper, of which he died in the fifty third
year of his age, anno 1563.
TADDEO ZUCCHERO ,
BORN at Agnolo, in Vado, in the dutchy of
Urbin, was the fon of an ordinary Painter,
who knowing his own weaknefs, aud preferring the
reputation of his fon to his own profit, at fourteen
years old, carry’d him to Rome, to learn of the beft
Painters. But he was ill recommended ; for he
placed him with Giovanni Pietro Calabro, whofe
wife almoil flarv’d Taddeo, and by her covctouf-
nefs, forced him to look out for another mailer.
However, he went to no other, contenting himfelf
with iludying Raphael’s works, and the Antique
fculptures, which, added to his own genius, foon
render’d him a mailer of his art. He was eafy,
abounding, and graceful in every thing he did, and
tempered the vivacity of his wit by great prudence.
He never work’d out of Italy, living moil part of
his time in Rome and Capraiola, where he left
many things unfinifh’d, being taken away in his
prime, the thirty-feventh year of his age, anno 1566.
II is brother Frederic perfected his pieces after his
death.
CIOR


GIORGIO VASARI,
BORN at Arezzo in Tufcany; was at firft a dis-
ciple of William of Marfeilles, who painted
upon glafs, afterwards of Andrea del Sarto, and at
lad of Michael Angelo. One can’t fay of him as
of Some other Painters, that he was hurry’d on to
painting by a violent inclination, for it is mod; li-
kely that he made choice of that profeffion, thro’
good fenfe and reflection, which led him to it more
than his genius. When the troubles of Florence
were over, he return’d into his own country, where
he found bis father and mother dead of the plague,
and two brothers and three fillers left upon him,
whom he was forc’d to maintain by the profits of
his labour. He painted in Frdco in the towns
about Florence; but fearing he fhould not get
enough by painting to maintain his family, he quit-
ted his profeffion and turn’d goldfmith, which was
no more beneficial to him than his own art.
For this reafon he again apply’d himfelf to paint-
ing, with an earned: defire to become a matter. He
was indefatigably diligent in defigning the Antique
fculptures, and dudying the bed: pieces of the mod:
noted matters ; and tho’ he very much improv’d his
defign, by copying entirely Michael Angelo’s cha-
pel, yet he join’d with Salviati, in defigning all
Raphael’s and Balthazar da Siena’s works. And
not thinking the day time enough for him, he fpent
a good part of the night in copying what he and
Salviati had defign’d. He thought, after all this
pains and care, he was qualify’d to undertake any
thing, and to perform it with fucccfs. He did not
mind colouring, having no true idea of itand tho*
he was an artful defigner, his works were never in
the reputation he expected they would be, which
proceeded from his not underdanding colours, or
L 3 dc


ncgleding the foftnefs of the pencil. But his great
ufe of defigning made it very eafy to him, and by
this means his performances were very numerous
He was a good archited, and underllood ornaments
very well. The works which he finifh’d at Flo-
rence, as well in architecture as painting, procur’d
him the favour of the houfe of Medicis, by which
he got money, and marry’d off two of his fillers.
He was a very moral man, and had fuch polite qua-
lities, as acquir’d him the elleem of perfons of the
higheft rank. The cardinal of Medicis was his par-
ticular patron, and engag’d him to write the Lives
of the Painters, which he publifh’d at Florence in
three volumes, about the year 1551, a work, in the
opinion of Hannibal Caro, written with great ex-
adneis and judgment. He is tax’d with, flattering
the mailers of his own country, the Florentine Pain-
ters. But be it as it will, painting is indebted to
him for an eternal monument, in having tranfmitted
to poflerity, the memory of fo many fkilful men,
whofe names would have been forgotten, had he
not taken fuch pains to eternize them. Bcfides his
lives of the Painters, he publifhki refledions on his
own pidures, of which the chief are at Rome, Flo-
rence and Bologna. He died at Florence in the
year 1578. being fixty four years old. His body
was carried to Arezzo, where he \vas buried in a
chapel adorn’d with architedure, which he had
built in his life-time.
FREDERIC Q ZUCC HE RQ
WA $ born in the dutchy of Urbin, in a village
called Agnolo in Vado. His parents car-
ry a mm to the jubilee at Rome, in the year 1550.
and put him o his brother Taddeo, who was then
pne of the molt famous Painters in Italy. Frede-
fjeo, hot liking his brother’s corrections, and finding
¥


he was ftrong enough in his art to Hand by himlelf,
fet up for a Mailer-Painter. They did both a great
deal of work at Capraiola, and Frederico hniffi’d the
pieces which his brother, who died in his thirty- fe-
venth year, had left imperfect. Pope Gregory XIII.
employ’d him about his paintings, in whofe fervice
having a difference with fome of his holinefs’s offi-
cers, to be reveng’d on them, he drew the picture
of Slander, engrav’d afterwards by Cornelius Cort,
wherein he reprefented all thofe that had offended
him, with affes ears. He expos’d it publickly over
the door of St. Luke’s church, on St. Luke’s Day,
and left Rome to avoid the pope’s wrath. Fie
work’d in France for the cardinal of Lorrain, and
in the Efcurial for Philip 11. without giving content
to either the one or the other. He was more for-
tunate in England, where he drew the picture of
queen Elizabeth, and did fome other pieces that
were very much commended. At lad, returning
into Italy, and having work’d fometime at Venice,
pope Gregory re-call’cl and pardon’d him. Soon
after, making his advantage of the pope’s protection,
he fet up the academy of painting, for which his
holinefs had given him a brief. He was chofen
prince of the Painters, and out of love to his art,
was at the charge of building a houfe tor them to
meet in. He went afterwards to Venice, to print
fome books he had written on painting. From
thence he paft on to Savoy ; and in a journey to
Loretto, died at Ancona, at fixty-fix years old,
anno 1602.
RAPHAEL da RHEGIO
WAS the fon of a peafant, who put him to
look after his geefe, but he ran away from
his father, and went to Rome, where he follow’d
the mptions of the extraordinary genius he had for
L 4 painting.


painting, and plac’d himfelf with Frederico ZuC-
diero, under whofe difcipline he was fcarce a year
before he made fiich a wonderful progrefs in his art,
that he was almoft equal to his mafter. He did fe-
veral fine things in the Vatican, at Santa Maria
Maggiore, and other places of Rome. He was fair
and handfome ; and it is faid, that falling in love
with a young woman, his pafllon was fo violent, that
it kill’d him. He had a companion whofe name
was Paris, whofe aflifted him in his works.
RICHARD. •
A Native of La Breftc, was one of the Painters
whom Raphael employ’d under him in the
Vatican, and who was not much talk’d of for any
thing elfe. Having on a time made a pidure for
the Florentines church, wherein he reprefented Pon-
tius Pilate fhewing Jefus Chrift to the people, he
afked of Raphael, which of the heads he liked bed,
fuppofing he would have anfwer’d that of Chrift;
but Raphael reply’d, it was one that was in the
hindmolt part of the pidure, by which he meant,
that all his expreffions were not proper to the fubjed
be reprefented, tho’ his heads were otherwife good.
FREDERICO B AROCC I,
BORN at Urbin, went to'Rome in his youth,
where he painted fcveral things in Trefco for
pope Paul HI. and then return’d to Urbin, living
there the reft of his days. He was one of the molt
graceful, judicious, and fkilful Painters that ever
was. He drew a vaft number of portraits and
hiftory pieces, and his genius was particularly for
religious fubjeds. One may in his works perceive
i great inclination towards Correggio’s manner;
and tho* he defign’d more corredly, his out-lines are
not of fo grand a Quito, nor fo natural as Cor-
reggio’s,


feggio’s. He expreft the parts of the body too
much, and defign’d the feet of a child after the fame
manner as he would have done thofe of a man. He
made his firft drawings generally in Paftello, and
with the fame ftile that he drew his pictures.
He drew his Madonna’s after a filter of his, and
the infant Chrift after a child of hers. He etch’d
feveral of his pieces himfelf, and died at Urbin in
the year 1612. at 84 years old. Vanni was his dil-
ciple.
FRANCESCO VANNI
OF Siena, was difciple, and not inferior to
Barocci. He had an extraordinary talent for
religious fubjeds, and died in the 47th year of his
age, anno 1615.
GIOSEPPINO ,
SO called, by contradion, from Giofeppe d’Ar-
pino, a caftle of that name in the kingdom of
Naples, where he was born in the year 1570. His
father, Mutio Polidoro, was fo ordinary a Painter,
that he had nothing to do but to paint Ex Vote’s
of the village for the country people. Giofeppino
went to Rome, where he learnt a light and agreeable
manner of defigning, which in practice degenerated
into fomething that neither border’d on the An-
tique, nor on refin’d nature. Having a great deal of
wit and genius, he became in favour with the popes
and cardinals, from whom he had bufmefs enough.
But he had a warm competitor in Caravagio, whole
manner was quite oppofite- to his. His battles, in
the Capitol, are the moll clleem’d of all his pieces.
In his other pidures he is luperficial, and has not
div’d to the bottom of his art. Pie died in the year
1640. at fourfeore years old. Mod of the Painters
of his time follow’d his manner, the reft imitated
Caravagio’s,


PASCH4LINO della MARC A
IS only nam’d here, becaufe he made fuch a pro-
grefs in painting in one year, that he is look’d
upon as a prodigy. There are fome of his pic-
tures in the Carthufian church near Dioclefian’s
baths,
T. he example of this man may encourage thofe
who, tho’ advanced in years, yet find they have
genius, right underttanding and health enough to
run the race of painting in a little time.
PIETRO TESTA ,
A Native of Sacca, was, from his youth, can-
ty’d away by a violent inclination to defign;
The renown of the Roman Painters tempted him to
vifit Rome, he went thither in a pilgrim’s habit,
and not being well enough vers’d in the profcfiion
he vyas defirous to follow, he liv’d miferable to the
laft degree, fpending his time in defigning the ruins,
flatues and pictures at Rome. Sandrart tells us, that
meeting him one day defigning the ruins about
Rome in a wretched condition, having fcarce where-
withal to cover his nakednefs, he took pity of him,
carry’d him to his houfe, cloath’d him, fed him,
and employ’d him to defign feveral things in the
gallery of Juttiniano - y after which he recommended
him to other matters, who let him to work. He
was fuch a man-hater, and fo wild, that Sandrar;
could hardly have any of his company. He had
defign’d the Antiques fo often, that he had them by
heart; but his genius was fo fiery and licentious,
that all the pains he took ferved him to little pur-
pofe and the trouble he gave himfelf about his pic-
tures fucceeded as ill, as may be feen by the few
pieces that are left of his, by tfie little value that is,
fet on them thro’ his bad colouring, and the hard?
nef*


hefs of his pencil. Indeed he was only commen-
dable for his defigns and prints, of which he en-
graved part himfelf ; part was done by Cefarc
Tefta, and the reft by other gravers. There is a
great deal of fancy, gayety and praftice m them,
but little intelligence of the Claro Obfeuro, httlc
reafon, and little juftnefs. Being on the banks of
the Tyber defigning a profpea, the wind blew oft
his hat into the river, and as he was endeavouring
to regain it, he accidentally fell in, and wasdrown d
about the year 1648.
PIETRO B E R E TTIN I,
OF Cortona in Tufcany, was bred up in the
houfe of Sachetti at Rome, and provM to be
one of the moft agreeable Painters that ever was.
His genius was fruitful, his thoughts full of flowers
and graces, and his execution ealy. ilis talent being
for grand compofitions, and his imagination lively,
he could not put that conftraint upon himfelf as to
Anifh a pifture entirely 5 for which reafon his little
pieces, when they are examin d neatly, leem to
want Very much of the merit ot his great produc-
tions. rr •
He was not corredl in his defigns, expremve in
the paftions, or regular in the folds of his drapeiy,
but every where a Manncrift : Yet there is gran-
deur, noblenefs and grace in all his works ; not that
grace which was the portion of Raphael and Cor-
reggio, which touches the minds of men of lenle to
the quick. His was a' general grace that pleas d
every body, and that conflfted rather in a ha it o
making the airs of his heads always agreeaole, than
in a Angular choice of expreflions fuitable to each
■fubject; for as I havefaid, he did not caie to 00 v
back upon what he had done, nor to entei into a
detail of each thing in his pieces. He endeavour d
v, \ , 0 * only


only to make them fine all together, and was highly
applauded for the magnificence of his works in the
churches and palaces of Rome and Florence. He
has given undoubted proofs of his capacity in the
new church of the fathers of the oratory at Rome,
in the palaces of Barberini and Pamphilio, and in
other places.
, There was nothing ill in his colouring, elpedally
his carnations, which would have been better had
they been more vary’d, and more ftudyU As for
his local colours he never went out of the Roman
fchool, but in giving them a union among them-
felves, and that agreement which the Italians call
Uagezza. The ornaments of his works were ad-
mirable, his landfkips of a good Gufto, and he un-
derftood painting in frefco better than any one
who went before him.
His temper was mild, his converfation agreeable,
and his manners fincere. He was charitable offi-
cious, a good friend, and fpoke well of every body.
He was lb laborious, that the Gout, with which he
was very'much troubled, could not hinder his
painting ; but his fedentary life, and too much ap-
plication to his bufinefs, cncreasM the diftemper fo
far, that it kill’d him in the both year of his
anno 1669. ' 0 *
AN


THE
LIVES
OF THE
VENETIAN
PAINTERS.
BOOK IV.
GIACOMO BELLINO ,
OF Venice, was difciple of Gentile Fabri-
ano, and competitor with that Dome-
nico, who was aflaffinated by Andrea del
Caftagno. He is not fo famous by his
works, as by the good education which he gave to
his two Tons Gentile and Giovanni Bellino, who
were the founders of the Venetian fchool. He died
about the year 1 704.
GENT IL E BELLINO ,
OF Venice, eldeft fon of Giacomo, of whom we
have been fpeaking, was the moft fkilful of
all the Venetian Painters, his contemporaries. Gen-
tile


tile painted the hall of the great council, and did
fame other pieces at Venice, molt part of them in
diftemper, for painting in oil was not then much in
ufe. Mahomet 11. Emperor of the Turks, having
feen one of his pictures* mightily admir’d it, and
defir’d to entertain the author in his fervice. He
wrote to the fenate tor him, and thy accordingly
lent him to Conltantinople, where Gentile was very
well, receiv’d by the Grand Signior. He painted
feveral things for his highnefs, which were extremely
lik’d, efpecially his portraits; and as the Turks
have a great veneration for St. John Baptift, Gen-
tile painted the Decollation, and fhew’d it to the
Emperor to have his approbation of it: But the
Grand Signior found fault that the fkin of the neck,
which was feparated from the body, was too high,
and to convince him that his criticifm was juft,°he
order’d a Have to be brought to him, and com-
manded his head to be immediately ftruck off in
the prefence of Bellino, that he might fee, that pre-
fen tly after the head is feparated from the body ?
the fkin of the neck fhrinks back. The Painter
was fo frighted at this demon ft ration, that he could
not be at reft while he was at Conftantinople; where-
fore inventing fome excufe, he defir’d leave to re-
turn home, which the emperor granted. The Grand
Signior made him feveral noble prefents, put a gold
chain about his neck, wrote recommendatory let-
ters to the fenate in his favour, and on this account
Jie had the order of St. Mark conferr’don him with
a conftderable pcnfion for life. Ele died at four-
fcore years of age, anno 1501.
GIOVANNI BELLINO ,
G Entile I ’s brother and difciplc, laid the foun-
dation of the Venetian fchool by the ufe of
91], and the care he took to paint every thing after
3 nature.


nature. There are feveral of his pieces to be feen
at Venice : His laft work was a Bacchanal for
Alphonfo I. duke of Ferrara *, but dying before he
had finifh’d it, Titian did it for him, and added a
fine landfkip to it. As Ikilful at this his difciple
was, he had fuch a refped for his matter, that to
give him all the glory of the pifture, he wrote on
it thefe words: JOHANNES BELLINUS
MCCCCC XIV.
Giorgione was his difciple at the fame time with
Titian. Bcllino died in the year 1512. aged 90
years. His and his brother’s portraits are in the
king’s cabinet.
Reflections on the Works of GIOVANNI
BELLING.
GIOVANNI and Gentile Bellino had an ill
Gufto in defigning, and painted very dryly 5
but Giovanni having learnt the fecret of painting in
oil, manag’d his pencil with more foftnefs, and tho*
there appears a great deal of drynefs in his produc-
tions, yet he did better than his predeceflbrs of his
profettion, and dcferved to be diftinguifh’d from
them, not only becaufe he tranfmitted freely to the
Painters that fucceeded him, the ufe of oil in
painting, but alfo becaufe he was the firft who en-
deavour’d to join union to the vivacity of colours,
the latter being till his time the greatettpart of the
merit of the Venetian Painters *, but in Giovanni’s
we fee at once a propriety of colours, and the be-
ginning of an harmony, which was enough to rouze
the talent of Giorgione fo famous for his co-
louring.
The wonderful progrefs of this difciple, as well
as Titian, open’d even the eyes of their matter;
for


for Bellino’s manner, in his firft pieces, was too
dry, and that of his latter pidures is good enough,
both for defign and colouring, for which they are
admitted into the cabinets of the curious; and there
are fome at Vienna, among the emperor’s collec-
tions, which have fomething of the boldnefs of
Giorgione’s lights and colouring.
The Gufto of Bellino’s defigns is a little gothic:
his attitudes are not well chofen, but the airs of his
heads are noble.
There are no lively exprefllons in his pieces, and
the fubjeds of which he treated, being, for the
moft part. Madonna’s, gave him no occafion for
them. However, he did his utmoft to copy nature
exadly, and finifh’d his pidures fo fervilely, that
he had not time to apply himfelf to give them a
great charader.
<The D O S S O’s
OF Ferrara, made themfclves famous by the
good Gufto of their colouring, and efpecially
by their landfkips, which are very fine. Alphonfo,
duke of Ferrara, employ’d them very much, and
honour’d them with his favour. They were notfo
happy in the court of Francefco Maria, duke of
Urbin, who fet them to work in Frefco in the new
Palace, which the archited Genga had built for
him ; but that prince not being fatisfy’d with their
painting, deftroy’d it. ’Tis true it deferv’d the
leaft commendation of all their productions, what-
ever care they took about it, fo certain it is, that
let a man be at never fo much pains in the execu-
tion of his work, he fhall not fucceed, if the firft
conception of it was bad. They kept up their re-
putation, notwithftanding this difgrace, and pro-
duced feveral beautiful pieces. The elder of them
being grown old, and his eyes bad, was not fit for
bufmels, wherefore the duke of Ferrara allow’d him
3 ' a


a penfion for his fubfiftance. He dy’d at a great
age, and his younger brother, whofe name was
Battifta, furviving him, perform’d many goo 4
pieces after the death of his elder brother.
GIORGIONE ,
SO called by reafon of his courage and noble af-
peCt, was born at Caftel-Franco, in Trevifano,
a province in the ftate of Venice, anno 1478. and
tho’ he was but of indifferent parentage, yet he
had a great foul. He was gallant, lov’d mufic,
had an agreeable voice, and play’d well on feveral
inftruments. At firft he apply’d himfelf induftri-
oufly to defign the works of Leonardo da Vinci, and
then plac’d himfelf with Giovanni Bellino to learn
to paint. But his genius having form’d a Gufto
fuperior to that of his mafter Giovanni, he culti-
vated it by the fight and ftudy of nature, whom
he afterwards faithfully imitated in all his produc-
tions. Titian was extremely pleas’d with his bold
and terrible Gufto, and intending to make his ad-
vantage of it, frequently vifited him, under pre-
tence of keeping up the friendfbip they had con-
tracted at their mafter Bellino’s. But Giorgione be-
ing jealous of the new manner he had found out,
contriv’d an excufe to forbid Titian his houfe as
handfomely as he could •, upon which Titian became
his rival in his art, and was fo careful to copy the
life exaftly, that by his care and reflections he ex-
cell’d Giorgione, in difeovering the delicacies of
nature: however, Giorgione was ftill in reputation
for a Gufto, to which no-body had hitherto arriv’d.
The moft part of his performances are at Venice ;
and having painted very much in frefco, and not
living long enough to do many other pictures, his
cabinet-pieces are extremely rare. He died in the year
1511. when he was fcarae thirty-two years of age.
M 1 Reflec-


Reflections on the Works of GIORGIONE,
# .
GIORGIONE being but thirty-two years
old when he died, and having done few grand
compofitions, one cannot well judge of the great-
nefs of his genius. The beft of his performances is
at Venice, on the front of the houfe wherein the
German merchants have their meetings, on that
fide which looks towards the grand canal. He did
this piece of painting in competition with Titian, who
painted another fide of that building: but both of
thefe two pieces being almoft entirely ruin’d by age,
’tis difficult to make a right judgment of them, or of
Gorgione’s talent by that performance, fo we muft
reft /atisfy’d with a few eafal-pieces, and lb me por-
traits, that he drew. Every man painting himfelf
in what kind of picture (bever he employs his pen-
cil about, we may perceive by thofe of Giorgione,
that he had a facility of underftanding, and a viva-
city of imagination.
His Gufto of defign is delicate, and has fome-
thing in it like the Roman fchool, tho* *tis not fo
much exprefs’d as is neceflary for the protection of
his art, he always being more careful to give a
roundnefs to his figures, than to make them corred.
His Gufto was grand, picquant, and his hand
eafy. He was the firft who found out the admi-
rable effeds of ftrong lights and ffiadows, and made
life of bold colours; and ’tis a matter of wonder to
confider how, all of a hidden, he foar’d from the low
manner of Beilino’s colouring, to the fupreme
height to which he rais’d colours in his art, by join-
ing an extreme force with an extreme fweetnefs.
He undernood the Claro Ofcuro very well, and the
harmony of the Tout Enfemble, or the whole to-
gether of a pidure. For his carnations he us’d four
capital colours only, the judicious mixture of which
3 made


made all the difference of ages and fexcs in his
pieces. But in thefe four colours we ought not to
comprehend neither the white, which ferves inftead
of light, nor the black, which is the privation of it.
It appears by his works, that the principles of the
art which he had found out, were fimple, that he
was perfedl mafter of them, and that his greateft
artifice was to fhew the value of things by compa-
rifon.
The guft of his landfkips is exquifite, both for
the colours and the oppofitions; and befides, giving
a force to his colours, unknown before his time, he
had a way to keep them frefh, efpecially his greens.
Titian obferving to what degree of elevation Gior-
gione had carry’d his art, thought he had pafs’d
beyond the bounds of truth, and tho* he imitated,
in fome things, the boldnefs of his colouring, yet,
as one may fay, he tam’d the fiercenefs of his co-
lours, which were too falvage. He temper’d them
by the variety of tints, to the end that he might
render his objedls the more natural, and the more
palpable: but notwithftanding all his efforts to excel
his rival, Giorgione ftill maintain’d his poft, of
which no-body has hitherto been able to difpoffefs
him, and ’tis certain, that if Titian has made fe-
veral Painters good colourifis, Giorgione firfl fhew’d
them the way to be fo.
TIT IA N 0 VECE L I I
WAS born at Cadore, in Friuli, a province in
the ftate of Venice, anno 1477. He was of
noble extradtion, being defeended from the ancient
family of the Vecelli. At about ten years old his
parents fent him to one of his uncles that liv’d at
Venice, who taking notice of his inclination to paint-
ing, put him to Giovanni Bellino. He ftudy’d
irioftly after nature, whom he copy’d fervilely,
M 2 without


without adding to her, or taking from her : but in
the year 1507. obferving the great eftedt of Giorgi-
one’s works, he follow’d his manner fo far, that
without making lines, he imitated the living beau-
ties of nature, whom he look’d on with other eyes
than before, and ftudy’d her with extraordinary ap-
plication: yet this did not hinder his defigning
carefully at other times, by which he alfo became
an able defigner,
Giorgione perceiving what progrefs Titian had
made in his profelfion, by following his manner,
broke off all correfpondence with him, and ever
after they were profefs’d rivals: their jealoufy of
each other lafted till death took oft Giorgione at
thirty-two years of age, and left the ftage clear to
Titian. In his eight and twentieth year he publifh-
ed his print of the Triumph of Faith in wood,
wherein are reprefented the patriarchs, the prophets,
the apoftles, the evangelifts and martyrs. This
piece gave vaft hopes of him, and ’twas faid upon it,
that if he had feen the antiquities he would have
furpaft Raphael and Michael Angelo.
He painted a portico at Vicenza in frefco, repre-
fenting the Hiftory of Solomon. He painted alfo
the palace of Grimani at Venice, and fome paflages
of the ftory of St. Anthony at Padua. The three
bacchanals, which are in the cuftody of cardinal Al-
dobrandino, were drawn for the duke of Ferrara.
She of the three bacchanals, that has a naked wo-
man afleep near her on the forepart of die picture,
was begun by Giovanni Bellino. When Titian
painted thefe three bacchanals, his miftrefs Violenta
ferv’d him for a model. Befides this, he drew the
portraits of the Duke Alphonfo, and his duchefs,
which were grav’d by Giles Sadder.
In the year 1546. cardinal Farnefe fent for him
to Rome, to draw the pope’s pidlure. He made
fome other pictures and pieces of painting, which
were


were admir’d by Michael Angelo, and Vafari, who
fays he pity’d the Venetian Painters, in that they
minded defigning no more than they did. 1 itian
perform’d a great number of pieces, both public
and private, as well in oil as in frefco; befides an in-
numerable quantity of portraits. Pie drew the em-
peror Charles V’s pidure three times; and that
monarch us’d to lay on this occafion, “ that he had
“ thrice been made immortal by the hands of Ti-
“ tian.’’ To reward him, he knighted him, cre-
ated him a count palatine, and affign’d him a con-
fiderable penfion. Plenry 111. coming from Poland
to France, cou’d not go thro’ Venice, without vi-
fiting Titian •, and all the poets of his time fung
his praifes. His eafel-pieces are fcattered up and
down throughout Europe. The fined of them are
at Venice, in France and Spain. There never was
a Painter who liv’d fo long as Titian, nor fo eafily
and happily, excepting only his jealoufy of Porde-
none, which neverthelefs turn’d to his advantage.
He was univerfally belov’d and efteem’d, and full
of years, honours and wealth. He dy’d at laft of
the plague, anno 1576. being fourfeore and nine-
teen years of age.
He had a great many difciples; the chief of ’em
were his brother Francefco Vecelli, his fon Horatio
Vecelli, Tintoret, and other Venetians; befides
whom he had three Flemifh difciples, that he valu-
ed, viz. John Calcar, Diteric Barent, and Lambert
Zuftrus, who all dy’d young.
Reflections on the Works of TITIAN,
THO’ Titian’s genius was not brilliant and
lofty, ’twas, however, fruitful enough to treat
of great Subjects of all kinds. There never was a
more univerfal Painter, nor one who knew better
how to give each objed its true charader. He was
M 3 bred


bred up in the fchool of Giovanni Bellino, where hi«
education, his frequenting Giorgione’s company,
his refolute iludy of Nature for ten years together ;
and above all, the folidity of his underilanding and
reflections, difcover’d to him the myfteries of his
art, and made him penetrate farther than any other
Painter, into the eflence of painting. If Giorgione
fhew’d him the end that he ought to aim at, he laid
the way to it on a folid bails, wherein all that have
follow’d him have acquired efteem, and are indebt-
ed to him for their fcience and reputation. Had
there never been a Titian, there had never been a
BaiTan, a Tintorct, a Paolo Veronefe, nor abun-
dance of Painters, who have given glorious marks
of their capacity, in all parts of chriftcndom.
Yet, tho’ Titian was very faithful in his imitation
of nature, he wanted fidelity in his reprefentations
of hiilory, having hardly done any thing of that
kind, wherein he has not committed fome fault or
other.
There is not, *tis true, much fire in his difpofiti-
ons, yet they are well fill’d and very regular. He
was very exact in giving thofe attitudes to his fi-
gures, which might fhew the moil beautiful parts of
the body.
He was fo careful to have the whole together of
his pieces judicioufly concerted, that he often re-
peated them, to lave himfelf the trouble of think-
ing again. Thus there are feveral Magdalens of his,
feveral Venus’s and Adonis’s, wherein he has only
chang’d the Ground to have it believ’d that they
were all originals. We may fuppofe that he was
helpt fometimes by his difciples, efpecially the three
Flamands, who were excellent Painters, and of
whom Diteric Barent was his favourite. After thefe
difciples had done their bed to make their copies
like the originals, and their mailer had touch’d
them over again with freih views, why ihould not
they


they be valu’d as much, as if they had been ali of
Titian's hand ? And why are not the copies as efti-
mable as the originals ? Titian formed his guft of
defigning after nature. He did, as Polycletus of
old, fearch after what was fine in her •, and he Suc-
ceeded in women and children. He defign'd them
with a delicate gufto. He imprinted on them a no-
ble air, accompany’d with a certain pleafing negli-
gence of the head-dreffes, the draperies and orna-
ments of habits, that are wholly peculiar to him.
He was not fo happy in the figures of men, which
he did not always defign with correCtnefs or elegance.
However, in this he did like Michael Angelo. He
propos’d in his guft of defigning them, to imitate
nature in her greateft vigour, and made the muf-
celling ftrong, to give the greater character to his
figures. The difference between him and Michael
Angelo, is, the latter was more profound in his de-
figns, and mingled a fenfible expreftion of the muf-
cles, with a guft of the antique, whereas Titian neg-
lected the antique, and in his works, rather increas-
ed than diminifhed the tendernefs of nature, whom
he only imitated.
There is no exaggeration in his attitudes •, they
are Simple and natural; and in his heads he Seems
to buSy him Self rather in a faithful imitation of ex-
terior nature, if I may be allow'd the phraSe, than
in a lively expreftion of the paffions.
His draperies are Sometimes mean, and Savour of
a little gufto; and if he has imitated the fluffs per-
fectly, he has often difpos’d of them ill. The folds
Seem rather to fall by chance than to be Set by
a good order and a good principle of art. All the
Painters allow, that none of their profeftlon ever
came up to Titian for landfkips: His figures are
compoScd of few objeCts, but thoSe are admirably
well chofen, the forms of his trees are vary'd, their
touches light, mellow, and without manner. But
M 4 he


he carefully obferves in all his landfkips, to fhew
ibme extraordinary effed of nature, and moves one
by its fenfiblenefs, fmgularity and truth. His co-
louring in all parts of it is wonderful; and tho* he
is not quite fo bold in it as Giorgione, he is more
exad and more delicate. He was very faithful in
his local colours, and plac’d them always fo, as to
raife the merit of one objed, by comparing it with
another; and thus he, in fome meafurc, by the
force of his art, fupply’d the defed of colours,
which of themfelves cannot anfwer to all the effcds
of nature. The truth that is to be found in his lo-
cal colours is fo great, that they leave no idea of the
colours which are on the pallet, and when we look
on his pieces, we ought not to fay his carnations
are made of fuch and fuch colours, but rather that
they are really flefh, and that his draperies are the
real huff: fo nicely does every thing maintain its
charader, and not one of the colours in the com po-
rtion of them all, is to be diflinguifh’d from the
other.
We cannot deny, but that Titian underftood the
Claro Ofcuro, and when he did not fhew it by
groupes of light and fhadows, he did it fufficiently
by the nature of the colours of his draperies, and the
diflribution of his objeds, whofe natural colour al-
ways agreed with the place where it was laid, whe-
ther forward or backward, or wherever he thought
it molt advantageous to place it.
His oppofitions are at once bold and fweet, and
he learnt of nature the harmony of his colours, ra-
ther than from the participation of the claro, and)
the brown as Paolo Veronefe did.
He finifh’d his pieces extremely, and had no very
particular manner in the managing of his pencil, be,
caufe his ftudies and the care he took to temper one
colour by another, took away the’appearance of a
free hand, tho’ his hand was really free. *Tis cer-
tain


tain the fenfible marks of that freedom have their
merit; they are gay and pleafant to the fight, when
they are the refult of a refin’d habit, and a warm
imagination. But there are in Titian’s works fuch
lively touches, fo agreeable to the charader of the
objeds, that they flatter the tafte of the true critics,
much more than the fenfible ftrokcsof a bold hand,
Titian had in his time four manners ; the nrfl
that of Giovanni Bellino, his mafter ; the fecond
that of Giorgione, his competitor ; a third, which
was very much ftudy’d, and was properly his own j
and a fourth which degenerated into a habit, and was
always folid. His firft manner was a little dry, his
fecond very bold, as is to be feen by his pidure of
St. Mark, which is at Venice in the veflry of the
La Salute; by that of the five Saints in St. Nicho-
las’s church, and by others. His third manner con-
fifted in a jult and beautiful imitation of nature,
and was very much labour’d by his exadnefs in
touching his pieces over again here and there, and
fometimes with virgin tints, in the lights, and
fometimes with glazing in the fhadows. His manner,
on account of thefe things, as trivial as they are,
feem’d the lefs free, but ’twas the more ftrong, and
the more finifhed.
The fourth was a free manner, which he prac-
tis’d towards the latter part of his life, either not
being able to fatigue himfelf fo much as he could
before, or believing he knew a way how to Ipare
himfelf the trouble, and do as well without it. Of
this lafb manner are his pidures of the Annunciati-
on, and the Transfiguration, which arc at ,San Sal-
vador ; the St. James of San Lio, the St. Laurence
at the Jefuits church, the Sr. Jerome of Santa Ma-
ria Nova, the Pentecoft of La Salute, and feveral
others. There are fifty pidures to be feen in public
at Venice, in which Titian has fhewn all the man-
ners I have fpoken of.
To


1 a conclude, if the Painters of the Roman fcboot
uir paled Titian in vivacity of genius, in grand com-
petitions, and in a gufto of defign, no-body will
difpute with him the excellence of colouring; and
he has been always in that part of painting a guide
to all true Painters.
FRANC ESCO VEC ELL I, Titian's Brother ,
WA S at firft a foldier in the Italian wars, but
peace being reftor’d to Italy, he went to. his
Brother Titian at Venice, where, applying himfelf
to painting, he became fo great a mailer of defign,
that Titian grew jealous of him, and fearing he
might in time eclipfe his reputation, he fet him a-
gaintl his profefllon, and put him upon taking up
another. lie fell to making of ebony cabinets, a-
dorn\l with figures and archite&ure, which, how-
cver drd not hinder his painting a portrait now
and then for a friend. His firft pictures, and thofe
which alarm'd his brother Titian, are of Giorgi-
one s Gufto, and pafs for his, even with feveral men
or lenfe.
HORATIO V E C E L L 7,
TITIAN'S fon, painted portraits after his
father's manner. He did very little, being,
more taken up with Chemiftry than painting. He
dy’d of the plague in the flower of his age, and in
the lame year with his father, anno 1576.
GIACOMO R Q B U S T /,
Call'd
TINTORETTO,
BEcaufc a dyer’s fon. The quicknefs of his wit-
was vifible in his youth, by his performances
m painting and mufic; but painting being what he
took


took moft delight in, he refolv’d to apply himfelf
wholly to it. Michael Angelo was his guide for
defign, and he learnt colouring of Titian. He
did not lofe his time whilff he was with his mafter,
for he penetrated fo far into Titian’s principles,
that he rais’d his jealoufy. His difciple perceiv’d
it, and left him. He got a particular manner by
his continual exercife in his profefiion, which had
very much of Michael Angelo’s guff of defigning,
and Titian’s way of colouring. Tintoretto conti-
nuing, with a great deal of warmth and applicati-
on, the ftudy and exercife of painting, became as
it were a prodigy in his art, as well for his extraor-
dinary thoughts, as for his good tafte, and for dif-
patch in his bufmefs. He did his pieces fo faff,
and folicited work fo much, that there was little for
any one elfe to do. He work’d very cheap, taking
what was given him for pictures, without making
words about the price. By this means Venice was
fill’d with his produ&ions; and as there are fome
among them, which mult needs be in fuch a num-
ber, that are but indifferent, there are alfo others
that are excellent. His pieces are finifh’d or unfi-
nifh’d, according to the price that he had for them.
The fine crucifix of his, which is in the chamber of
the fchool of St. Roque, was made on this occafion.
The brotherhood of St. Roque being willing to
have a crucifix of the beft mafter’s hand, Gioleppe
Salviati, Frederico Zucchero, Paolo Veronefe, and
Tintoretto, were each to give them a defign in con-
currence. A day was appointed by the brother-
hood for receiving their defigns; but Tintoretto,
inftead of a defign brought the picture quite done,
and very frankly hung it up in the place where it
was to hang. *Twas to no purpofe for the other
Painters to complain of this, or to fay they were
not requir’d to bring a picture, but a defign. The
picture was in its place, and there was no more for
them


them to do but to be fatisfied with it. The bro-
therhood of St. Roque were willing to have a piece
of another manner than that of Tintoretto’s, and
told him, 4 That if he did not take it down,
they would never pay him for ir. Very well, re-
ply’d Tintoretto, then I prefent it to you ;* fo the
piftum remains there to this day. It is a wonder,
that Tintoret, who work’d fo hard, fhould live fo
long as fourfeore and two years, for he was of that
age when he died, anno 1594. The diftemper which
at laft carried him to his grave, was a pain in his
ftomach, occafion’d by his over-great application to
his bufinefs. He was buried in the church of Ma-
donna del Horto at Venice.
works of T.INTO R E TTO.
NONE of the Venetian Painters can be com-
par’d to Tintoretto, for fruitfulnefs and fa-
cility of genius. He had penetration enough to
comprehend all Titian’s principles, which he°prac-
tis d induftriouOy, but had too much fire to do it
exaflly : From the inequality of his mind came the
inequality of his productions, upon which Hannibal
Carrach writing to his brother Lodovico at Venice,
fays of Tintoret, that he is fometimes equal to Ti-
tian, and at other times inferior even to himfelf.
Out of love to his profeflion, he ffudied every
thing that could help to make him a mafter of it.
His carefulnefs to defign after the beft things, and
particularly Michael Angelo’s works, taught him a
good Gufto of defigning, but through the vivacity
of his imagination, he is often incorreft. His atti-
tudes are almoft all contrafted to excefs, and fome-
times extravagant, thofe of his women excepted,
whofe attitudes he always painted graceful.
In the difpolition of his figures, he rather minded
to give motion to every thing, than to follow nature -
and


and verifimility, which he on certain occafions prac-
tis’d with fuccefs. His fubjeds are for the moft part
well enough charaderized. His heads are defign’d
with a great gufto, but his expreffions are feldom
fine and picquant. . t
He underftood the neceflity of the Claro Ofcuro,
which he ufually perform’d by great gleams of lights
and lhadows, that difentangled themfeives by op-
pofing one another, the caufe of which is fuppos’d
to be out of the pidure. This is a great help in
grand compofitions, provided the tranfition of the
oppofites are managed with underftanding, and their
extremities are fharp.
His local colours are good, and his carnations.
In his bell pieces, come up very near to Titian’s : In
my opinion, they are of a better charader than
thofe of £aolo Veronefe, I mean, more true and
more fanguine.
He drew abundance of pidures of different merit,
according to the time he fpent about them, or the
money he receiv’d for them. The bell of them do
not fall very fhort of Titian’s. His penciling is
very firm and very vigorous, his work eafy, and
his touches lively. In a word, Tintoretto is a pat-
tern for thofe young Painters, who would have a
good Guft of colouring, and expeditious manner.
MARIA TINfOREfT A y
I’inlorefs Daughter,
WAS taught to paint by her father, and drew
a great number of portraits, both of men
and women. She delighted in rnufick, and played
well on feveral inilruments. Her lather married
her to a German, yet he loved her lb tenderly, that
he would not let her leave his houfe, but had the
afflidion to lofe her in the thirtieth year of her age,
when (he died, anno 1390.
PAOLO


PAOLO CAGLIARI VERONESE,
'
WAS born at Verona in 1537. Gabriel Cagli-
ari, a fculptor, was his father, and Anto-
nio Badile his uncle, his matter, whofe manner was
not bad. He drew his firft pieces at Mantua, and
ibme other cities of Italy, but meeting with more
employment at Venice, he fettled there.
He ftudied and imitated nature very much, and
did what he could to regard her with the eyes of
Titian.
. As he knew where to have patterns for his carna-
tions when he wanted them, fo he had ftuffs of dif-
ferent forts which he made ufe of on occatton. Mott
of his public pieces were painted in concurrence with
Tintoret, and the criticks were divided in their
opinion of the excellence of thefe two matters pro-
ductions : However, it was always allow’d, that
there was more force in Tintoretto’s, and more
grace and magnificence in Paolo Veronefe’s. His
pictures are to be feen all over Europe, there being
a vaft quantity of them. •' .. &
There is fcarce a church in Venice which has not
[°me piece or other of his. But the main proofs of
his capacity are in St. Mark’s palace at St. GeorseV
and at St. Sebartian’s.
The fenate fending Geronimo Grimani, procura-
tor of St. Mark, to Rome, to be their embaflador
m his holinels s court, Paolo waited on him thither,
but did not ftay long there, having left feveral
pictures at Venice unfinifh’d.
_ , was honett, pious, civil, friendly man,
faithful to his word, and careful in the education of
his children, magnificent in his mien, and his drefs;
and tho’ he had got a great deal of money, his only
ambition was to be matter of his art. Titian lov’d
and efteem’d him very much, Philip 11. King of
Spain,


Spain, lent for him to paint the Efcurial, but Paolo
excus’d himfelf on account of his employment in
the palace of St. Mark, and Frederico Zucchero was
fent to Spain in his place.
He had a great idea of his profefllon; he us’d to
lay it was a gift from heaven ; that to judge of it
well, a man ought to underltand abundance of
things; that no Painter would ever do any thing
perfectly, if he had not nature prefent before him j
that none but mailer’s pictures Ihould be placed in
churches, becaufe admiration only excites devotion 5
and that the fovereign quality of a true Painter is
probity and integrity of manners. He died of a
fever at 58 years old, anno 1588. His tomb and
llatue in brafs are in the church of St. Seballian.
Reflections on the works of P AO LQ
VERONESE .
LE T a Painter’s genius be never fo fine, and his
Vein never fo abounding ; let him execute his
thoughts with never fo much facility, if he does not
ferioully confider the fubjedl he is to treat of, and
warm his fancy by reading good authors, he will
often produce trivial things, and fometimes even
fuch as are impertinent. Paolo Veronefe is a lively
inllance of this alfertion: He had a marvellous talenr,
he work’d eafily, and his genius was fufficient to
have produced rare things, if it had been leconded
by care. He did an infinity of pieces, and according
to the places or perfons for-which he work’d, he
the more or the lefs fludy’d his compofltions. St.
Mark’s palace at Venice, the high altars of the prin-
cipal churches, and fome noble- houfes, pre-
ferve Itill what he did that was molt fine. But for
the altars of the common churches, and the pieces
he did for private perfons who were fond of having
foinething of his in their houfes, in Head of being
' careful


careful to maintain his reputation., by taking the ne-
ceflary pains about them, one would think he minded
only to get them out of his hands as foon as pof-
fible, by which means his inventions are fometimes
liar, and fometimes ingenious.
He had a particular talent for grand compofi-
tions. He performed them agreeably, and gave
them fpirit, truth and motion: Whatever his ima-
gination furnilhed him with that was grand, he
brought it into his performances, as alfo every
thing he could think of furprizing, new and extra-
ordinary : In fhort, he was more fludious to adorn
the icene of his picture, than to render it agreeable
to times, cufloms and places. He often introduc’d
architecture, which was painted by his brother Be-
nedetto, and the magnificence of thefe buildings
gave a grandeur to his works.
He does not fhew any great intelligence of the
Claro Ofcuro in his difpofitions. He did not un-
der (land it as a principle of his art, and fucceeded
well or ill in it, according to the different motions
of his genius. The fame thing might be faid of
his attitudes, which are, for the molt part, ill
chofen.
Nevertheless there is a great deal of fire and tu-
mult in his grand compofitions j but to examine
them nearly we fhall find little delicacy in his ex-
preffions, either of the fubjeCl in general, or of the
paffions in particular, and it is rare to lee any thing
very moving in his productions. He had the com-
mon fault of all the Venetian Painters, who wafted
their time and application in imitating the exterior
part of nature. His draperies are all modern, and
according to the fafhions in vogue in his time, or
tile according to the modes he faw in the eaftern
people, of whom there are great numbers always at
Venice, of whom he made ufe for the airs of feme
cf his heads, as well as for the drefles. His drape-
-3 ries


rles are generally of different forts of fluffs, and the
folds large and regular, and indeed, they are a good
part of the beauty of Paolo Yerone’s pictures. He
was fo careful to imitate the fluffs from the natural
cloth, filk or linnen, that he acquir’d fuch a habi-
tude in his draperies, as would make one believe he
drew all of them after the real fluffs.
Tho’ he lik’d Parmegiano’s defigning, and en-
deavour’d to fall into the fame manner, his own is
of an ill Gufto, excepting that of his heads only,
whofe airs are fometimes great, noble and graceful.
His figures look well enough together under their
cloaths, but the outlines of the naked have little
Gufto or corredlnefs, efpecially thofe of the feet ;
yet he feems to be careful to defign women ele-
gantly, according to his idea of beautiful nature, for
as to the Antique he never knew any thing of it.
I never flaw any confiderable landlkips of Paolo
Veronefe. He has painted the heavens in fome of
his grand Compofitions, and has done them admi-
rably well, but his diftances, and his earth, have an
air of diftemper.
He did not at all comprehend the art of the Ciaro
Ofcuro, and if it is fometimes to be found in his
pidlures, it is the happy effeft of his genius, and
not the product of any principle ; but as for the local
colours he underftood them well, and made them
valuable by the companion of one objedl with ano-
ther. Tho* his inclination led him to a loofe and
lightfom manner, tho* he often made ufe of ftrong
and dark colours, and his carnations arc natural,
they are, however, neither fo frefh as Titian’s, nor
fo vigorous and fanguine as Tintoretto’s, and it
feems to me that a great many of them have a
tincture of the lead : Yet, notwhhftanding all this,
there is in general a harmony in his colouring,
chiefly in his draperies, which are brillant, diversi-
fied, and magnificent. The harmony of his colours
N pro


proceeds commonly from glazing and broken co-
lours which he made ufe of, and which imparting
their mutual influence one to the other, infallibly
produces union *, yet there are fome pictures which
are laid to be his, wherein the colours are rough
and unharmonious, but I won’t warrant that all the
pieces which are attributed to Paolo Veronefe _ are
really his, for he had a brother and a fon who imi-
tated his ftilc.
We fee every where in his works a great capacity.
His execution is firm, his pencilling light, and his
reputation, in feveral parts of his art, fufficient to
maintain his rank among the firfl; order of Painters.
I muft not omit to relate here, that his picture
of the marriage at Cana, in the church of St. Gi-
orgio Maggiore at Venice is to be diftinguifh’d from
his other works, for it is not only the triumph of
Paolo Veronefe, but it wants very little of being the
triumph of painting itfelf.
BENEDETTO CAGLIARI ,
a Painter and Sculptor ,
TTTAS Paolo Veronefe’s brother, and help’d him
W confiderably in his works, for he was very
laborious. His ftile in painting was like his bro-
ther’s, and being not ambitious of fame, his pro-
ductions are confounded with Paolo’s. He died at
threcfcore years old, anno 1598.
CAROLO and GABRIELA CAGLIARI
WERE Paolo Veronefe’s fons: The elder had
a very fine genius for painting, and at 18
years of age had done fome rare pieces. It is
thought he would have excell’d his father had he
liv’d, but being of a tender conltitution, and ap-
plying himfelf to his profeflion with too much in-
tcntnefs, he contracted an impoltume in his breaft,
and died of it in his twenty fixth year, anno 1596,
His


His brother Gabriel exercis’d himfelf in painting,
but having no extraordinary talent, he quitted the
profeffion of a Painter, and turn’d merchant: How-
ever, in the intervals of his bufinefs, he made a
confiderable number of portraits. He died of the
plague, anno 1631, aged 6 1 years,
GIOVANNI ANTONIO REGILLO
da PORDENONE
WAS born at Pordenone in Friuli, 20 miles
from Udine. He was defeended from the
ancient family of the Sacchi, and his true name was
Licinio, but the emperor having knighted him, he
took the opportunity to change his name out of
hatred to one of his brothers, who would have affaf-
linated him, for which reafon he called himfelf Re-
gillo. His love of painting was his only matter,
and his genius, together with his ftudying the works
of Giorgione, his friend and competitor, guided
him to that perfe&ion in his art to which he arriv’d.
After he had learnt as much as he could from Gior-
gione’s works, he, like him, fet himfelf to imitate
the beautiful effefts of nature, which joyn’d to the
force of his genius, and his ambition to excel in his
profeffion, render’d him one of the mod celebrated
Painters in the world.
He difputed the fuperiority with Titian, and their
jealoufy of each other was fo great, that Pordenone
fearing to be infulted by his rival, was always upon
his guard, and when he painted the cloyfter of St.
Stephen in Venice, he work’d with a fword by his
fide, and a buckler tied about him, as was the
faffiion of the Bravo’s in his time. He had a fruit-
ful vein, a good guft of defigning, and a manner
of colouring not far inferior to Titian’s. He pro-
duced feveral pieces in Frefco. He work’d with
facility, and gave a great force to his productions.
N 2 • . His


His principal public pieces are at Venice, Udine,
Mantua, Vicenza, Genoa, and Friuli. He was fent
for to Ferrara by duke Hercules 11. to finilh fome
defigns for tapiftry, which he had begun at Venice,
but he was fcarce arrived at that city, before he fell
ill and died, leaving this work unfinifli’d, which
was the travels of Ulyffcs. He was in his fifty fixth
year when he departed this life: Some fay he was
poifon’d. The duke of Ferrara was at the charge
of his funeral, which was pompous and magnificent.
He had a nephew of his own name, Pordenone, who
was his difciple, and another difciple, Pomponio
Amalteo, who married his daughter.
GIROLAMO MUfIANOy
A Native of Brefcia in Lombardy, fludied fome
time under the difciple of Romanani, whom
he left to apply himfelf to Titian’s manner, but en-
deavouring to ftrengthen his knowledge of defign,
he went to Rome, and work’d with Taddeo Zuc-
chero. He there defign’d much after the Antique,
and good pictures, and made a confiderable num-
ber of portraits. He finifh’d the defigns of the BafTo
Relievo’s of Trajan’s column, which Julio Romano
began. He had them grav’d, and Ciaconius aflifted
him in it. Pope Gregory XIII. employ’d him,
and it was out of favour to him, that his holinefs
founded the academy of St. Luke at Rome, which
was confirm’d by a brief of pope Sixtus V.
Tho’ Mutiano underftood hiflorical painting, he
was more fond of landfkips, and was more a matter
of them. His manner had fomething of the Flemifh
in it, in the touches of his trees, which the Italians
have not ftudy’d fo much as the Flamands, tho*
they are very ornamental in landfkips. He accom-
pany *d the trunks of his trees with every thing
which he thought would render them agreeable. He
com


commonly imitated the chefnut tree, and was wont
to fay, that no trees were fo proper to be painted.
Cornelius Cort grav’d after his defigns feven great
landfkips, which are very fine. Mutiano died in
the year 1590, aged fixty two years. By his will
he left two houfcs to St. Luke’s academy in Rome,
and order’d, that if his heirs died without ifllie, all
his eftate fliould go to that academy to build an hof-
pital for the benefit of fuch young ftudents as camq
to Rome, and wanted relief.
GIACOMO PALMA.. .
Called
PALMA VECCHIO.
THE old Palma was born in the territory of
Bergamo, in the year 1548. In his paintings
he fhew’d a great ftrength of colouring, and a good
guftof defigning,' tho* he was born in Lombardy 5
yet having been Titian’s difciple, I thought it pro-
per, rather to place him in the Venetian than in
the Lombard fchool. His manner was fo like his
matter’s, that the latter leaving a defcent from, the
crofs unfinilh’d at his death, Palma was chofeii to.
put the laft hand to it, which he did out of refpeffc
to Titian’s memory, as he Ihew’d by the following
words that are ft ill to be read on the pi&ure.
Quod Titianus inchoatuni reliquit y
Palma r ever enter perfectly
Leoti ; dicavit Opus.
Among his works which are Ihewn at Venice , the
fineft is the St. Barbara in the church of Santa Maria
Formofa. He died in the forty eighth year of his
age, anno 1569. by which we may fee he was not
called old on .account of his age, but to diftinguilh
•v N 3 hirti


him from Palma the younger his nephew and Tin-
toretto’s difciple, whofe Itile very much refembled
that of his matter Tintoret. He painted a great
many pictures at Venice, and died in the year 1623.
GIACOMO da PONTE ,
da BASS A NO,
TH E fon of an indifferent Painter called Fran-
cefco da Ponte, who firft liv’d at Vicenza,
from whence he remov’d to Baffano, being charm’d
with the lituation of the place where he fettled, and
was very careful to give his fon Giacomo a good
education. The youth having learnt the rudiments
of painting of his father, went to Venice, and was
Bonefacio’s difciple. Here he copied Titian and Par-
megiano’s works, after which he return’d to Baf-
fano, and follow’d the natural bent of his genius,
that inclin’d him to draw every thing after nature.
Whom he had always before him in the execution of
his pieces. Tho* he defign’d figures very well, he
particularly applied himfelf to the imitation of beatts
and landfkips, becaufe thofe things were more com-
mon, and more advantageous for painting, in the
place of his abode, than others. Accordingly he
fucceeded in them to perfection, efpecially in fub-
jeCts that treated of the fields, and if there are not
fo much noblenefs and elegancy as one could wifh
in his hittory-pieces, there is at leaft, a great deal
of force, temper and fidelity. His love of his art,
and his facility in his performances, made him pro-
duce a vaft quantity of pictures which are difpers’d
upland down throughout all Europe. He work’d
dofnmonly for merchants, who exported his pieces
into feveral countries. He died in the year 1592.
at fdurfcore and two years old, and left four fons,
Francefco, Leandro, Giovanni Battifta, and Giro-
lamo.
* nm £ n FRAN


* FRANCESCO da BAS S A NO.
TH E deleft fettled at Venice, and excelled his
brothers in his profeffion. He was very thought-
ful, and his melancholy was fo great, that at Jalt it
craz’d him : he fancied often that bailiffs were at his
Heels to arreft him, and hearing fomebody knock
at his door when he had one of thefe mad freaks
upon him, he thought they were come to .take him,
and therefore leap’d out of the window to efcape
them, as he imagin’d. By the fall his brains .were
beat out againft the pavement, and he died in the'
forty fourth year of his age, anno 1594.
LEANDRO da BASS A N 0 9
HIS brother, follow’d his father Giacomo’s
manner, as well as Francefco, but he did not
give fo much force to his pieces as his elder brother.
He had an excellent talent for face-painting, and
made it his chiefeft bufmefs. He drew a portrait
of the Doge, Marini Grimani, for which he was
knighted. He lov’d to drefs well, to live freely,
and keep the beft company, but it was always run-
nincr in his head that fomebody or other would poi-
fonhim. It is faid, that all the four brothers, lons
of Giacomo da Ponte, were iubjeeff to fuch fancies,
their mother being fomewhat inclined to madnefs.
He died at Venice, anno 1623.
Giovanni Battifta and Girolamo, the two other
brothers, employed themfelves in copying their
father’s works ; Giovanni Battifta died in the year
1613. and Girolamo, who, from a phyfician had
turn’d painter, in the year 1627.
Rs*
N 4


Reflections qn the works of the BAS SANS,
Giacomo da Baflano, the father of the four bro-
thers, is the only perfon I fhall fpeak of, be-
cause I look on his Tons but as his copills, for they
imitated him in all their pidures i and if they did
any thing more, it was rather the effed of their
memory, than of their genius. In a word, if they
had merit, it was purely an emanation from their
fathers.
Giacomo da Baflano, was, without doubt, born
with a talent for painting, for of all the Painters
whofe produdions I have feen, I never met with
one who follow’d lefs their mailers manner, than
this Giacomo. He quitted it to give himfejf up
intirely to nature, who gave him what he had of
genius, in the place of his abode, the means
for him to cultivate it. Baflana confidered this
miflrefs of arts, by the charaders which make her
molt fenflble and moll to be known. He fludied
her with great application in particular objeds, and
then compos’d pidures of Angular worth. If his
talent was not for the heroic and hillorical kind,
wfnch require dignity, he has treated his paltoral
fubjeds well, and all fuch as was proportionable to
his genius; for of whatever manner his objeds were,
he knew how to difpofe of them advantageouQy, by
the good effed of the whole together; and if fome
particular things are ill adjufted and ill turn’d, he
has at kail rendered them like and probable. His
deflgns were not noble or elegant, neither did the
moll of his fubjeds require them to be fo, but
he was corred in his way. His draperies were dull,
and there was more of exercife than truth in the
execution of them.
His local colours maintain’d their charader very
well. His carnations are very frefh and very true.
His


His colours conform admirably well to thole of na-
ture. Hie landfkips are of a good gufto. His
profpe&s are well chofen. He fhews a good intelli-
gence of the Claro Ofcuro. His touches are lively,
and the colours of his diftances always true, but
fometimes a little too black in the neareft places*
into which fault he fell by endeavouring to preferve
the character of his luminious objects. He has
drawn a great many night-pieces, and the cuftom he
had acquir’d of making ftrong fhadows, perhaps
contributed to the ill ufe he fometimes made of ’em
in his day-pieces.
His pencil is firm and fteady, and guided with
fo much juftnefs, that no man ever touch’d animals
fo artfully and exactly. I don’t know whether there
are many of his pieces in France, but I am fure
thofe that I faw of his in the churches of Baflano,
have a frelhnefs and a brillanr, that appear’d to me
to be extraordinary, and fuch as I have not feen
dfewhere.
JULIO LIC IN 10 9
Call’d
PORDENONE the Younger,
»f> f- f >y _
OF Venice, was a difciple of the great Porde-
none. His uncle was a good defigner, and
underftood painting in frefcp to 'perfection, The
uncle’s and the nephew’s works are often confound-
ed thro’ the conformity of their names. Julio was
employ’d in feveral places. He painted the front of
a houfe in Auglburg, in frefco, wherein Monfieur
Chanterell now lives. This piece is very well pre-
ferv’d, and in honour of the author’s memory, the
magi (traces have plac’d this infeription on it.
“ Julius


“Julius Licirtius Civis Venetns &: Auguftanus,
“ hoc ZEdificium his Pifturis infigniyit, hicceque
“ ultimam manUm pofuit, anno 1561.“ That is to
fay : “ Julius Licinius, a citizen of Venice and Augf-
“ burg, made this houfe famous by this painting,
“ which he finilh’d in the year 1561/* He was
contemporary with Baflano, and we know no more
of him, neither Vafari nor Ridolfi having mention-
ed him, we fuppofe on account of the refemblancc
between his name and merit and his uncles.
We fhou’d have plac’d Giovanni d’Udine, of
whom we have fpoken, page 134. and Fra. Baftia-
no del Piombo, pi 142. in the Venetian Ichool,
but the lives of thofe two painters have fuch relati-
on to Raphael and Michael Angelo’s, that wc
thought we could not reafonably feparate them.
T H E


THE
LIVES
OF THE
LOMBARD
PAINTERS.
BOOK V.
ANTONIO da CORREGGIO,
SO call’d from the place where he was born,
a town in the dukedom of Modena, anno
1472. when painting reviv’d in Italy, in
the days of Cimabue; its beginning was
but weak, and it did not arrive at perfection on a
fudden ; it reach’d it by degrees. The difciples
always added fomething to the progrefs their mailers
made in it before them, and there’s nothing in this
which commonly does not happen to all arts. But
we muft here admire and refpeCl a genius, that a-
gainft the ordinary courfe of painting, without hav-
ing feen Rome, the antiquities or the works of the
moil able Painters, without favour or protection,
or going from home for it, in the midil of poverty,
and


and without any other helps than the contemplation
of nature, and the affedion he had for his bufinefs,
has produc'd works of a fublime kind, both for the
thoughts and the execution. His chief pidures are
at Parma and Modena, and his cabinet-pieces are
very rare.
Raphael’s fame tempted him to go to Rome. He
confider’d attentively the pidures of that great
painter, and after having look’d on them a Jong
time, without breaking filence, he faid, e Anch’ Jo
• fon Pittore, lam (till a painter.* Yet all the fine
pieces that he had made, cou*d not draw him out of
the extreme mifery he was in, his family being very
burthenfome, and his price fmall.
Going on a time to Parma to receive fifty crowns,
he was paid in a fort of copper-money called Qua-
drino’s. His joy that he had got it to carry home
to his wife, made him that he did not mind the
weight of his money, with which he loaded himfelf
in the heat of the fummer, and being to Jug it
twelves miles on foot, the burthen, the walk, and
the weather, threw him into a pleurify, of which
he died at forty years old, anpo 1513. .
Reflections on tbs JVerksof CO R R E GlO,
WE don’t find that Correggio borrow’d any
thing from other men’s works, every thing
is new in his pidures, his conceptions, his defign,
his colouring and his pencil; and this novelty has
nothing but what is good. His thoughts are fub-
lime, his colouring delicate and natural, and his
pencil eafy and delightful, as if he had been guided
by the hands of an Angel. His out-lines are not
corred, but their gufto is great. He found out cer-
tain natural and unaffeded graces for the airs of his
heads, for his Madpnna’s, his faints and little chil-
dren : add to this the union that appears in his
works.


works, and his talent of moving the heart by the
delicacy of his expreffions, and we lhall have no
difficulty to believe, that the knowledge which he
had of his art was a gift of heaven, rather than an
effedlof his ftudies.
Francefco Francia, who ought to have been plac’d
here, is put among the Roman Painters, page 102,
as alfo Polidoro Caravaggio, p. 114. Parmegiano,
p. 127. Pellegrino of Modena, p. 134. and Pri-
maticcio, p. 144. The reafon of our placing them
there, was becaufe we confider’d the manner they
follow’d more than the country where they were
born; and perhaps the reader will not be difpleas’d
to lee Raphael’s difciples coming after their mailer.
<lheC A R RA C H’ S, viz .
LODOVICO , AUGUST! NO , and ANNIBALE.
TH E three Carrach’s, who acquir’d fo much
reputation and glory by their pidhires, were
all born at Bologna.
Lodovico came into the world in the year 1555.
and was coufin-german to Auguftino and Annibale:
being elder than they, and a Painter before them ;
they were his difciples. His mailer was Profpero-
Fontana, who, difeovering but little fire in his
painting, would have difiuaded him from it, and
reproved him fo roughly, that Lodovico left his
feliool. His talent kept him in heart, and he re-
folved to have no other mailer but the works of the
great Painters. He went to Venice, where Tinto-
retto feeing fomething of his doing, encourag’d
him to proceed in his profeffion, and foretold he
Ihou’d in time be one of the top of it. This pro-
phetic applaufe animated him in his refolutions to
acquire the maftery of his art. He ftudy’d Titi-
an’s, Tintoret’s, and Paolo Veronefe’s works at Ve-
’ - nice;


nice; La Pafllgnano’s, and Andreo del Sarto’s at
Florence ; Parmeginao’s and Correggio’s at Parma,
and Julio Romano’s at Mantua ; but of all thefe
mafter’s, he who touch’d him moll fenfibly was Cor-
reggio, whofe manner he ever after followed.
Auguftino was born in the year 1557. An-
nibale in 1560. Their fathers name was Antonio,
a taylor by trade, yet he was very careful to give
his Tons a good education. He bred Auguftino a
fcholar, his inclination feeming to lead him to learn-
ing; but his genius afterwards carried him away
more violently to the arts, wherefore Antonio put
him to a goldfmith, whom Auguftino quitted in a
little while, and went home to his father, where he
bufy’d himfelf about the knowledge of feveral things
indifferently. He gave himfelf up to every thing
that pleas’d his fancy; to painting, graving, poe-
try, mufic, dancing, and the mathematics, with
other commendable excercifes, which adorn’d, but
divided his underftanding.
On the contrary, all Annibale’s thoughts ran upon
painting. He ftudy’d it in company with his Bro-
ther, but the difference of their tempers made ’em
quarrel perpetually, and hinder’d the fruit of their
ftudies. Auguftino was fearful and ftudious, Anni-
bale bold and venturous, Auguftino lov’d the com-
pany of men of fenfe and quality, Annibale was
always for converfing with his equals, and avoided
the fociety of thofe that were better born than him-
felf. Auguftino pretended to domineer by his right of
feniority, and the variety of his learning; Annibale
defpis’d it, and minded only defigning. Auguftino was
very felicitous to profit by his ftudies, and not to let
the punctilio of Icience efcapc him ; Annibale was
more lively, and made his way every where eafy.
Thus it being almoft impoffible to make them a-
gree, their father parted them, and fent the elder to
Lodovico Caracci, who wou’d alfo have his brother
2 Annibale


Annibale with him, when by the example of his
zeal to reach the perfection of his art, by infpiring
them with the fame love for his profeffion, by pro-
mifiing to communicate all he knew of it to them,
and his knowledge was now very well fpoken of;
and in fhort, by the fwectnefs of his deportment
and his prudence, he moderated the antipathy that
was naturally between them, and their ambition to
excel in the art encreafing every day, they all three
enter’d into a very ftridt friendfhip, forgetting every
thing but their care to become Matters.
However, Auguftino’s ftudies of painting were
often interrupted by thofe of graving, which he
learnt of Cornelius Cort, not being willing to quit
an exercife which he had fhewn a genius for, ever
lince he was fourteen years old : yet, tho* he acquir-
ed an excellence in graving, his love of and his ta-
lent for painting, recall’d him always to this art as
to his centre.
Annibale, whenever wander’d from his profeffion
to inform himfelf of all things neceflfary to it, went
thro* Lombardy to Venice. He cou’d not con-
tain his raptures at the fight of Correggio’s works in
Parma. He wrote to Lodovico, and pray’d him to
excite his brother Auguftino to come and fee the
wonders he had feen at Parma, faying, “ He cou’d
“ never find out a better fchool j that neither Ti-
<c baldi, Nicolini, nor even Raphael in his St. Cc-
“ cilia, had done any thing comparable to the ex-
u rraordinary things he faw in Correggio’s pi&ures;
“ that all was great and graceful \ that Auguftino
“ and he ffiou’d with pleafure ftudy thofe beautiful
“ pieces, and live lovingly together.”
From Lombardy Annibale went to Venice, where
the new charms which he found in the works of
Titian, Tintoret, and Paolo Veronefe put him up-
on copying the pictures of thofe great men with
care.'
At


At laff thefe three Painters having made the ut
moft advantage of their reflexions on the works of
others, united themfelves fo perfectly, that they
continu’d almoft always together. Lodovico com-
municated his difcoveries to his coufins, and they
receiv’d them with all pofllble eagernefs and grati-
tude. He propos’d to them to unite all their fen-
timents, and their manner; and upon their objeding
to him, ’twou’d be difficult to penetrate into all the
principles of fo profound an art, and to be enlight-
en’d in all the doubts arifing in fo copious a fcience,
he anfwer’d that there was no likelihood that three
perfons who fought after the truth, and had feen
and examin’d thoroughly fo many different manners,
ffiou’dbe deceiv’d.
They refolv’d therefore to purfue and augment
the method they had begun. They had perform’d
feveral things in feveral places, which, in fpite of the
open and under-hand dealing of rhofe that envy’d
them, got them reputation and friends: and thus
finding their credit to encreafe, they laid the foun-
dation of that celebrated fchool, which ever fincc
has gone by the name of the Carracci’s academy.
Hither all the young ftudents who gave great
hopes of their becoming maffers, reforted to be in-
ffruXed in the rudiments of painting. Here the
Carracci taught freely and kindly thofe thing* that
were proportionable to the qualifications of their
difciples. They effablilh’d certain models well-
chofen, for men and women. Lodovico’s charge
was to make a colleXion of antique ffatues, and Baf-
fo Relievo’s. They had defigns of the belt maffers,
and curious books on all fubjeXs relating to their
art. One Anthony de la Tour, a great anatomiff,
taught what belong’d to the knitting and motion of
the mufcles, with reference to painting. There
were often difputations in the academy, and not on-
ly painters but men of learning, propos’d difficult
2 queftions


queftions to be decided, and Lodovico’s judgment
was, in all cafes, their oracle. Every body was well
receiv’d, and youth being excited by emulation, the
young men fpent whole days and nights in ftudy
there : for tho* hours were allotted to treat of dif-
ferent matters, yet, at all times, they might im-
prove themfelves by the antiquities, and the defigns
which were to be feen there. The Conde di Mal-
vafia fays, ‘ that the principles of Lodovico, the
‘ cares of Auguftino, and the zeal of Annibale,
‘ fupported this academy.* The reputation of the
Carracci, reaching Rome, cardinal Edoardo Farnefe,
who was going to have the gallery of his palace
painted, fent for Annibale to Rome to execute his
defign. Annibale was the more willing to go thi-
ther, becaufe he had a great defire to fee Raphael’s
works, with the antique ftatutes, and Baflb Re-
lievo’s.
The gufto which he took there for the ancient
fculpture, made him change his Bolognian manner,
which had very much of Correggio’s in it, to fol-
low a method more learned, and more expreft, but
more dry, and lefs natural in the defign, and in
the colouring. He had occafion to put it in practice
in feveral works which he perform’d there, and, a-
mong others in the Farnefe gallery, whither Augufti-
no came to aftift him both in the difpofition, and in
the execution : but Annibale, either uneafy at Au-
guftino’s pretending to direft the work, or willing
to have all the glory of ir, cou’d not endure to have
his brother continue with him, or be further con-
cern’d in the performance of it, tho’ Auguftino was
very fubmiftive, and wou’d have done any thing to
bring him into a good humour.
Cardinal Farnefe perceiving the mifunderftand-
ing between them, lent Auguftino to Parma, in-
tending to have him employ’d by duke Ranuccio,
his brother. He painted one chamber in the duke’s
O palace.


palace, but had fuch frequent vexations given him
there, that he cou’d not bear them, fo he retir’d
into a monaftery of Capuchins, to prepare himfelf
for death, which he was fenfible was approaching,
and it happened in the year 1605. he being no more
than forty-five years old.
He left a natural fon call’d Antonio, of whom
Annibale took care, fet him to ftudy, and intruded
him in the art of painting. This Antonio has given
fo many proofs of his capacity, even in the few
pieces which he left behind him in Rome, that ’tis
thought he wou’d have furpaft his uncle if he had
Jiv’d longer. He dy’d at thirty-five years of age,
anno 1618.
The Conde di Malvafia writes, that Annibale had
a great deal of reafon to repent of his treating his
brother fo ill at Rome, for having fome pidures to
do afterwards, wherein his brother’s advice and
learning were neceffary for him, he wou’d have
been embarraft without the afliftance of his coufin
Lodovico Carracci. But this is not probable, for
Agucchi, who always affifted Annibale with his ad-
vice in all the compofitions he made, wou’d not
have fail’d him on this occafion, and the fruitfulnefs
and beauty of his genius, are to be feen elfewhere
by his defigns.
Auguftino was buried at Bologna with extraordi-
nary pomp, the particulars of which may be feen
in the Conde di Malvafia’s defeription of his funeral.
In the mean while Annibale continu’d working in
the Farnefe gallery. He took incredible pains and
care about it, and tho* he was a perfed mafter of his
art, he did not do the lead thing without confulting
nature, nor paint the lead: part of his figures, till
he had made a model of it on the fcaffold, and had
exadly defign’d all the attitudes.
Bonconti, one of his difciples, being adonifh’d
at his uncommon care, and the little notice that was
taken


taken of it, among other things, wrote to his fa-
her, that Annibale had but ten crowns a month,
notwithftanding his performances deferv’d a thou-
fand •, that he was at work from morning till night,
and almoft kill’d himfelf with working. His
words are, as I have taken them from the Conde.
“ Di Malvafia, voglio ch’ egli fappia che mefler
“ Annibale Caracci, non altro ha del fuo che fcudi
“ diecidi mafter il mefe, & parte per luie fervito-
“ re •, & una ftanzietta ne’ i tetti dove lavora & tira
“ la caretta tutto il di come un cavallo, e fa loge
“ camare e fale equadri & ancone & clavori da mille
“ feud eftenta c crepa & ha pocogullo ancora di tal
“ fervitu ma quefto, di gratia non fi dica ad alcu-
“ no.” At laft after inconceivable pains and care,
having finiflh’d the paintings of that Gallery, in the
perfedtion we now fee them, he hop’d cardinal
Farnefe woq-’d have rewarded him proportionably
to the excellence of the work, and to the time it
took him up, which was eight years •, but one Don
Juan de Caftro a Spaniard, who had a mighty in-
fluence over the cardinal, infinuated to him, that
according to his calculation, Annibale vrould be
well paid if he gave him 500 crowns of gold.
The money was brought him, and he was fo fur-
priz*d at the injuftice done him, that he cou’d not
fpeak a word to the perfon that brought it.
This ill ufage made a terrible impreflion on his
mind ; his chagrin threw him into a confumption,
and fhorten’d his days. His melancholy did not
hinder his amours; and his debauches at Naples,
whither he was retir’d for the recovery of his health,
helpt him forward to his grave in die fiftieth year
of his age, anno 1609.
While Annibale work’d at Rome, Lodovico was
courted from all parts of Lombardy, efpecidly by
the clergy, to make pictures for their churches;
♦and we may judge of his capacity, and his facility,
O 2 by


by the great numbers of piddures he made, and
by the preference that was given him to other
Painters.
In the midft of his occupations, Annibale folicit-
ed him to come to Rome and affift him with his
advice about his work in the Farnefe gallery, and
he entreated him fo carneftly, that Lodovico cou’d
not put off the journey. He arriv’d at Rome, and
after having corrected feveral things in that gallery,
and painted himfelf one of the naked figures, which
fupports the Medaillon of Sirinx, he returned to
Bologna, making a very fhort flay at Rome. When,
he had eftablilh’d and fupported the reputation of
the Carracci, and fix’d it to all pofterity, he dy’d at
fixty-three years of age, anno 1618.
Lodovico was born in 1555. and dy’d in 1618.
Auguftino was born in 1557. and dy’d in 1605,
Annibale was born in 1560. and dy’d in 1609-
The Carracci had abundance of difciples, the moft
famous of whom were Guido Domenichino, Lan-
franco, Sifto Badalocchi, Albani, Guercino, Anto-
nio Caracci, Mattel letta, Panico, Battifta, Cave-
done, Taccone, Sec. Had the Caracci had no re-
putation of their own, the merit of their difciples
wou’d have render’d their name illuftrious in fuc-
ceeding times.
Reflections on the Works of C A R A C CL
WHEN Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, and
II CaValiere Giofeppino were at the helm of
painting, when the former, who defign’d ill, got a
great many pupils on account of his being an ex-
cellent colouritt, and the latter fell into a manner
for expedition without gufto and exactnefs, the good
genius of painting rais’d the fchool of the Caracci
tor the fupport of fo fine an art, which was in.dan-
ger


ger of falling into decay, both in compofition and
defign.
Nature gave the Caracci a wonderful ardor for
their profefllon, as well as furnifh’d them with a
fine genius. They follow’d it by their talent, and
perfeded it by the affiduity of their ftudies, by the
indefatigablenefs of their labour, and by the doci-
lity of their undemanding. The fame principles,
on which they founded tne celebrated fchool we
have mention’d, were their guide in the execution
cf all their works. . Their manners refemble each
other, and all the difference that is to be found in
them, proceeds from the diverfity of their tempers :
Lodovico had lefs fire, but more grandeur, more
grace, more fweetnefs than Auguftino or Annibale.
Auguftino had more gaity, and Annibale more
boldnefs and fingularity of thought, than either of
the other two. His defigns were more profound,
his expreflions more lively, and his execution more
firm.
The Caracci took from the ancient fculptures,
and the beft matters of their art, as much as they
cou’d to form a good manner •, but they have not
drain’d the fountain dry, they have left more in the »
antiquities, in Raphael, in Titian and Correggio,
than they have taken from them.
Tho* Annibale’s character was more for profane
than pious fubjeds, he has, however, treated fome
of the latter kind very pathetickly, efpecially the
ftory of St. Francis. But Lodovico fucceeded in
thefe pidures better than Annibale, he gave grace-
ful airs to his Madonna’s after Correggio’s manner.
Annibale’s genius inclin’d him rather to fiercenefs
than delicacy, and more to gallantry than modefty.
As for Auguftino his ftudies of painting were often
interrupted by thofe of graving, of which he was
a perfed matter. He alfo diverted himfdf with
other exercifes, by which means he made few pieces
O 3 cf


of painting, and the greateft part of thofc he did
make, pal's for his brother’s.
Annibale having ftudy’d very little, and applying
himfelf wholly to painting, he in his grand compo-
fitions frequently made ufe of his brother Augufti-
no’s affiftance, and that of Monfignior Aguchi, by
the inftrudtions they gave him, informing and con-
firming his genius.
All the three Caracci defign’d with a good gufto.
Annibale’s gufto mended and encreas’d by his abode
at Rome, as one may fee by his performances in the
Farnefe gallery. The defign is loaden we- muft
confefs, but that load is fo fair, and fo learned, that
it pleafes even thofe who condemn it; for his guf-
to is a compofition of the antique of Michael An-
gelo’s manner and of Nature: his affeeftion for new
beauties making him forget the old ones, he quitted
the Bolognian manner for the Roman : the former
was foft and mellow, and according as he encreaf-
ed his guft of defigning, he diminiffi’d that of co-
louring : thus the defign of his laft works came to
be more expreft, but his penciling is not fo tender
and agreeable as in his firft. - >
This fault is commonn to almoft all the Painters
that defign’d corrcdly ; they imagin’d they loft the
the fruit of their labours, if they did not let the
world fee how far they were matters of that part of
their art, and that the fpeclators wou’d forgive
them for what they fell fhort in other parts, fatif-
fying themfdves with the regularity of their defign.
They were afraid it fhou’d be overlook’d, and to
prevent it, have made no fcruple to offend the fight
by the crudity of thir out-lines.
Annibale had an excellent genius for landfkips.
The forms of his trees are exquifite. The defigns
that he made of them with a pen, are wonderful
for their charafter and fenfe. Tiis touches are well
chofen j they confift of a few ftrokes; but thofe
that


that are there exprefs a great deal; and what I have
faid of the landfkips agrees with all his Hall
his vifible objects of nature there is a character which
diftinguiflies them, and makes them appear more
fenfibly to be what they are. Annibale knew how
to take his character, and has made uleot it in his
defigns with equal fenfe and judgment. Notwith-
ftanding he had a great elteem for T idan and Cor-
reggio’s works, his colouring is not extraordinary.
He did not underftand the dodtrine of the Claro
Ofcuro, and his local colours are not much to be
valu’d. Thus, if there is any thing good in the
colouring part of his pictures, ’tis not lb much the
effedt of the principles of art, as the happy move-
ment of his genius, or the remembrance of Titian
and Correggio’s works.
However, there never was a painter who was
more univerfal, more eafy, and more certain in e-
very thing he did *, nor that was more generally ap-
prov’d than Annibale.
GUIDO E N I
WAS born at Bologna in the year 1574. the
fon of Daniel Reni, an excellent mufician.
He learnt the rudiments of painting under Denis
Calvert, a Flemifh mailer, who had then a good
reputation •, but the academy of the Qtracci at Bo-
logna beginning to be talk’d of, Guido left his ma-
iler, and enter’d himfelf in that Ichool. In his firlt
pieces he follow’d entirely the manner of his new
mailers, and chiefly imitated Lodovico, becaufe he
found more grace and grandeur in his compoficions,
than in thofe of his kinfmen. He afterwards en-
deavour’d to find out a manner on which he might
fix. He went to Rome and copy’d all lorts of
things there. He was charm’d with Raphael’s pic-
tures, and pleas’d with the fpirit ol Caravaggio’s.
O 4 He


He try’d every ftile, and at laft hit upon one againft
which nobody had any thing to fay. Indeed, it
was great, eafy, graceful, and got him vaft riches,
and an equal reputation. Michael Angelo da Ca-
ravaggio, being angry that he had fuddenly chang’d
his manner, which was ftrong and brown, for one
quite oppofite to it, fpoke very contemptibly of
his pictures *, and his infolent expreffions might
have had ill confequences, had not Guido prudently
avoided difputing with a man of his impetuous
temper.
Guido returning to Bologna grew famous for the
care he took in finifhing his pieces, and perceiving
that the perfons of quality were eager to have them,
he fet a price upon them according to the number
of figures in each pidture, and every pidlure he
valu’d at one hundred Roman crowns.
By thefe high prices Guido found himfelf, in a
little while, very well at cafe, and Jiv’d nobly till
an immoderate Jove of gaming feiz’d him. He
was unfortunate, and his JclTes reduc’d him to ne-
ceflities that he could not go through. His friends
us’d all imaginable arguments to difluade him from
play, but he wou’d not give it over. He fent his
pictures to be fold under-hand at a lorry rate, and
took it for fuch as he had before refus’d large fums
for. As foon as he had got the little money he
had for them in his pocket, he immediately went
to look out for his gamefters to have his revenge.
At laft, as one pafiion weakens another, his love°of
gaming lelfen’d that of painting lb far, that ho
never thought of his reputation in what he did, but
only to rid his work, and get lubfiltence-money.
His chief pidtures are in the cabinets of the great.
He perform’d alike well in oil, and frefco. The
mofl: noted of his pieces is that which he painted in
concurrence with Domenichino in the church of St.
Gregory. Except his vice of gaming, he was a
man


man of good morals, and cou’d he have corrected
that fault, wou’d have been an accomplifh’d per-
fon. He dy’d at Bologna, anno 1640. in the 67th
year of his age.
Reflections on the Works of G U I D O.
TH O* there appears no great capacity in Gui-
do’s productions, yet one may fee by them,
that his making but few grand compofitions, was
rather for want of opportunity than genius: how-
ever, it muft be owned, that his talent was not e-
qualiy proper to treat of all forts of fubjedts, fuch
as were devout and pathetic fuited beft with his
temper; grandeur, noblenefs, fweetnefs and grace
were the character of his mind. He has fpread
them fo much over all his works, that they are the
principal marks which diftinguifh him from other
Pa inters.
His thoughts are delicate, and the difpontion of
his objects in general, and of his figures in particu-
lar, is good.
Guido being the firft and favourite difciple of the
Caracci, he, for a while, imitated their gufto of
defign, and their manner; but at laft he form’d
one of his own, which was neither fo firm, fo cx-
preft, nor fo learned as Annibale’s, yet it came
nearer to nature, efpecially in the extremities, be-
ing the head, feet and hands.
He had particular tender flrokes for certain parts
which he defign’d in a particular way, as the
eyes great, the mouth little, the noftrils fomewhat
clofe, the hands and feet rather plump than fen-
fibly articulated. He made his feet too fhort, and
the toes too clofe. ’Twas not that he did not know
what he did, which was the occafion of his not ex-
prefling exactly the articulation of the members*
but to avoid a kind of pedantry, which he faid
there


there was in fpecifying them too much: however,
there was a medium between the one and the other
extreme which he ought to have obferv’d.
As for his heads, they yield no manner of prece-
dence to thofe of Raphael, either for correcfnefs
of defign, or delicacy of expreflion, efpecially the
upper part of them, tho* he did not commonly
treat of fubjeCls that were capable of furnifhing
him with lb great variety of expreflions, as arc in
Raphael’s, His merit confided in that moving beau r
ty, which, in my opinion, did not proceed fo much
from a regularity of features, as from a lovely air
which he gave the mouth, that had fomething in
it between a linile and ferioufnels, and in the graces
of the mouth, with a certain modefty which he
put in the eyes.
His draperies are well fet, and of a grand gu-
flo. His folds are large, and fometimes broken.
He employ’d them ingenioufly to fill up the void
places, and to agroup the members and lights
of the figures, chiefly when they were alone. In a
word, nobody ever underftood how to adjuft the
draperies better than Guido, nor to drefs his figures
more nobly than he, without the leafl: affectation.
There are no landfkips of his $o be feen, and
when he treated of a fubjeCl which requir’d any ex-
tent, he made ufe of another hand.
His colouring is like that of the Caracci, in the
pictures he drew after his firlt manner. He has alfo
painted fome in the manner of Caravaggio •, but
finding there was too much labour in it, and befides,
that it did not pleafe every body, he took to ano-
ther manner, which the Italians call Vaga. Of
this kind he drew feveral agreeable pieces, in which
there is a great union of colours, tho* they are
weaker than in his other manners; for being by
little and little accuftom’d to his weaknefs, he neg-
lected his carnations, or, perhaps, endeavouring to
make


make them more delicate, he gave them a certain
grey call, which often fell into a livid colour.
He was abfolutely ignorant of the Claro Ofcuro, as
was all the fchool of theCaracci *, yet, like his chief
mafter Lodovico, he fometimes pra&is’d it more
thro* the greatnefs of his gufto, than any principles
of art, in retrenching from his objebls all thofe Mi-
nutiae which divide the fight.
His pencil was light and eafy, and he was fo well
fatisfy’d that a freedom of hand was neceffary to
pleafe, that he gave fome bold ftrokes to his work
after he had labour’d it, to take off all fufpicion of
what time and pains it coft him.
At the latter end of his life he was reduc’d to
fuch ftraits by gaming, that he had no need to ufe
this artifice, being oblig’d to difpatch his work as
fall as he cou’d to get him fubfiftancc; and this has
left a natural freedom on his laft pieces which are not
fo finifh’d as his former. In fhort, in whatever
manner or time he painted his pictures, his thoughts
are lb delicate, his figures fo noble, his cxpreffions
fo fweet, his drelies fo rich, and every thing fo
graceful, that he was, and ever will be univerfally
admir’d.
DOMENICO ZAMPIERR /,
commonly called
DOMENICH IN O,
TT7AS born at Bologna; anno 1551. of an ho-
VV nourable family, and was a long time adif-
ciple of the Caracci. His invention was flow, but
excellent. What he defign’d while he was in the
fchool of the Caracci for his exercifes, was done
with fo much pains and circumfpedlion, that his
fellow-difciples look’d upon him as a perfon that
loft his time. They were wont to call him the Ox,
and


and laid he labour’d as if he was at the plow. Bu£
Annibale, who knew his character better, told them,
4 This Ox, by dint of labour, wou’d in time make
4 his ground fo fruitful, that painting itfelf wou’d
4 be fed by what it produc’d j’ a prophecy which
prov’d very true, for there are many excellent
things to be learn’d from Domenichino’s pictures.
His works in Rome, Naples, and the Farnefian
grotto, are eternal proofs of his ability. His com-
munion of St. Jerome, in that faint’s church at
Rome, pleas’d Pouflin, the French painter fo well,
that he us’d to fay, 4 Raphael’s transfiguration, Da-
-4 niele di Volterra’s defeent from the crofs, and D-
o-4 menichino’sSt. Jerom, were the three belt pidlures
4 in Rome.’ He added, that for the expreflions Do-
menichino was the only painter he ever knew.
Having work’d in frefco very much, his pictures
in oil are painted fomewhat drily.
Fie was made chief architect of the apoftolical
palace, by pope Gregory XV. for his great fkill in
that art. He lov’d folitude, and ’twas obferv’d,
that as he went along the ftreets, he took notice of
the adtions of private perfons whom he met in his
way, and often defign’d fomething in his table-book.
He was of a mild temper and obliging carriage,
yet he had the misfortune to be cruelly perfecuted
by his enemies, who were only fo out of envy to
his perfedlions; particularly, he was fo ill treated at
Naples, that it griev’d him to death in the year
1648. being then about threefcore years of age.
Reflections on the works of DOMENICHINO.
I don’t know what to fay of Domenichino’s ge-
nius, or whether he had any or not *, or if the
goodnefs of his fenfe, and the folidity of his reflec-
tions, did not ferve him inftead of a talent, and en-
able him to produce things worthy pofterity. He
was


was born with a thoughtful temper, by no means
agreeable to the adlivity which painting requires.
The ftudies of his youth were obfcure, his firft
works contemptible, his perfeverance was condemn’d
for lofs of time, and his filence reckon’d ftupidity ;
yet this obftinacy of his in his ftudies, was the only
thing chat, fpite of the advice and laughter of his
fellow-difciples, heap’d him up a hidden treafure of
knowledge, which he in time laid open. In fhort,
his foul (hut up like a filk-worm in her cod, after
having for a long time work’d in a fort of folitude,
finding it had quite thrown off the ignorance that it
labour’d under, and warm’d by the aftivity of his
thoughts, took wing, and made itfelf admir’d, not
only by the Caracci, who had fupported him, but
by their difciples, who had endeavour’d to difheart-
en him and difluade him from a profefllon he wou’d,
they thought, never be mafter of.
His thoughts were judicious from the beginning;
they were afterwards elevated, and wanted but lit-
tle of reaching the fublime, if he did not reach it
in fome of his works •, as the Angles of the Dome
of St. Andrew’s church in Rome, the Communion
of St. Jerom, his David, Adam and Eve in the
King’s cabinet, our Saviour carrying his crofs, in
the cuftody of Monfieur L’Abbe de Camps, and
fome other pieces feem to teftify.
His attitudes were well enough chofen, but he
underftood very ill the placing of his figures, and
the difpofition of the whole together. In other
parts of his arc, as the correctnefs of defign, the
expreftion of his fubjeft in general, and the pafilons
in particular, and the variety and fimplicity of the
airs of his heads, he is not inferior even to Ra-
phael. Like him he was very jealous of his out-
lines, and has expreft them ftill more drily ; and
tho* he has not lb much noblenefs and grace, he
does not want either of thofe excellencies.
His


His draperies are very bad, very ill fet, and ex-
tremely ftiff. His landfkips are of the gufto of the
Caracci, but executed with a heavy hand. His car-
nations have a grey call, and have not the charac-
ter of truth •, and his Claro Ofcuro is worft of all.
His pencil is heavy, and his painting dry.
The progrefs he made in his art increafing only
by his labour and reflections, the merit of his works
advanc’d with his age, and his Jaft pieces are moft
commended : from which we may lawfully affirm,
that as much as Domenichino poflfefs’d of his art,
’twas rather the reward of his fatigue, than the ef-
fect of his genius. But whether ’twas fatigue or
genius, his pictures have been a pattern to all fuc-
ceeding painters.
GIOVANNI LANFRANCO,
WA S born at Parma, on the fame day with
Domenichino, in the year 1581. His
parents were poor; and to eafe themfelves of him,
carried him to Piacenza, to enter him in the fervice
of the count Horatio Scotti. While he was there,
he was always drawing with coal upon the walls,
paper being too fmall for him to fcrawl his ideas on.
The count obferving to what the lad’s difpofition
inclin’d, put him to Auguftino Caracci, after whole
death he went to Rome, and lludy’d under Anni-
bale, who fet him to work in the church of Sr.
Jago, belonging to the Spaniards, and found him
capable enough to trufl: him with the execution of
his defigns, in which Lanfranco has left it a doubt,
whether the work be his or his mailer’s.
His genius was for painting in frefco in fpacious
places, as we may perceive by his grand performan-
ces, cfpecially the cupolo of Sr. Andrea de Laval,
wherein he has fucceeded much better than in his
pieces of a lefs fize. The gull of his defigning he
took


took from Annibale Ciracci, and as long as he liv’d
under the difcipline of that illuftrious mafter, he
was always correCt •, but after his death, he gave a
loofe to the impetuofity of his genius, without
minding the rules of his art. He join’d with his
countryman Sifto Badalocchi, in etching the hifto-
ries of the bible, after Raphael’s painting in the
Vatican, which work he dedicated in conjunction
with Badalocchi, to their mafter Annibale. Lan-
franco painted the hiftory of St. Peter for Pope Ur-
ban VIII. which was grav’d by Pietro Santi. He
did other things to St. Peter’s Church, and pleas’d
the pope lb well, that he knighted him.
Lanfranco was happy in his family. His wife, who
was very handfome, brought him feveral children,
who being grown up, and delighting in poetry and
mufick, made a fort of a Parnaflus in his houfe. His
eldeft daughter fung finely and play’d well on feve-
ral inftruments. #ie dy’d at 66 years old, anno
i 647-
Reflections on the works of LANFRANCO,
LAnfranco’s sgenius, heated by his ftudying Cor-
reggio’s works, and above all the Cupolo at Par-
ma, carry’d him in his thoughts even to enthufiafm.
He earneftly endeavoured to find out the means of
producing the fame things; and that he was capable
of great enterprizes, we may fee by his perform-
ances at Rome and Naples. Nothing was too great
for him ; he made figures of above twenty foot
high, in the cupolo of Sr. Andrea da Laval, which
have a very good effeCt, and look below as if they
were of a natural proportion.
In his pictures one may perceive that he endea-
voured to join Annibale’s firmnefs of defign to Cor-
reggio’s gufto and fweetnefs. He aim’d alfo at
giving the whole grace to his imitation, not confi-
derlng


dering that nature, who is the difpenfer of it, had
given him but a fmall portion of it. His ideas in-
deed arc fometimes great enough for the greateft
performances, and his genius could not ftoop to cor-
red them, by which means they are often unfinifh-
ed. His eafel pieces are not fo much efteem’d as
what he painted in frefco, vivacity of wit and free-
dom of hand, being very proper for that kind of
painting.
Lanfranco’s guft of defigning refembled his ma-
ker’s, that is, ’twas always firm and grand, but he
loft ground at length in point of corrednefs. His
grand compofitions are full of tumult; examine the
particulars, and you’ll'find the expreffions neither e-
legant nor moving.
His colouring was not fo well ftudy’d as that of
Annibale. The tints of his carnations are trivial,
and his lhadows are a little too black. He was ig-
norant of the Claro Oleum, as*well as his mafter,
tho% as he did, he fometimes pradifed it by a good
motion of his underftanding, and not by a prin-
ciple of art.
Lanfranco’s works came from a vein quite oppo-
fite to thofe of Domenichino. The latter made him-
felf a painter in fpite of Minerva. The former
was born with a happy genius. Domenichino in-
vented with pain, and afterwards digefled his com-
pofitions with a folid judgment; and Lanfranco left
all to his genius, the fource from whence flow’d all
his produdions. Domenichino fludy’d to exprels
the particular paflions, Lanfranco contented himfelf
with a general exprefllon, and follow’d Annibale’s
guft of defigning. Domenichino, whofe ftudies
were always guided by reafon, encreas’d his capa-
city to his death, and Lanfranco, who was fupport-
cd by an exterior pradice of Annibale’s manner,
diminifh’d his every day after his mafter’s death.
Domenichino executed his works with a flow and
heavy


heavy hand, and Lanfranco’s was ready and light.
To dofe all, ’tis difficult to find two pupils bred up
in the fame fehool, and born under the fame planer,
more oppofite one to the other, and of fo contrary
tempers* yet this oppofition does not hinder, but
they are both to be admir'd for their bcft produc-
tions.
FRANCESCO ALBANI
WA S born at Bologna in the year 1578. His
father who was a mercer, wou’d fain have
had him follow his trade, but Albani’s inclination
leading wholly to painting, he was put at firft to
Denis Calvert, of whom Guido was then learning
the rudiments of the art, and being far advanc’d
in the knowledge of his profeffion, taught his com-
panion the principles of defigning. When he left
his matter Calvert, he took him with him to the
fehool of the Caracci. Having made a confiderable
progrefs there, Albani went to Rome, where, by
ftudying the bett things, he became one of the
moft learned and agreeable Painters of Italy.
Returning to Bologna, he married a fecond wife,
who brought for her portion a great deal of beauty
and good humour. By this means he had quiet ac
home, and a perfeft model for the women he was
to paint. She had very handfome children, by
whom he us’d to draw little Cupids playing and danc-
ing, in all the variety of poftures imaginable, and
by his wife he drew all his naked Venus’s and
nymphs. He made ufe of his knowledge of the Belles
Lettres ingenioutty to adorn the fubjedts he treat-
ed of, with the fictions of poetry. He is cenfurcd for
not varying his figures enough, and for giving al-
moft all of them the fame air and the fame Jikenefs,
occafion’d by his defigning them after the fame mo-
dels with the ideas of which his mind was fill’d,
P T here


There arc few great figures of his drawing extant;
and painting ufually in little, his pidures are dis-
pers'd all over Europe, and valu’d as fo many jew-
els, He was well paid for them, efpecially in his
latter days; they became very much in fafhion, and
being learned and agreeable, every one was taken
with them. He liv’d peaceably and happily four-
fcore and two years, and then chang’d his life for a
better, in the year 1660. His moft famous difci-
ples were Francefco Mola, and Giovanni Battifta his
brother.
Reflections on the Works of A L B A N I.
JO Y being pleafmg to the greateft part of man-
kind, and Albani’s pidures infpiring that pafli-
on, they were as well receiv’d on that account, as
for their ingenious thoughts. His talent, Support-
ed by the ftudy of polite learning, enabled him to
enrich his compositions with the ornaments of po-
etry. His vein was fruitful and eafy, and he has
done a great number of pidures full of figures. He
underftood defign well; and drawing always by the
fame patterns, he fell eafily into the fault of repeat-
ing, chiefly in the airs of his heads, which were
very graceful. By this means Albani’s manner is
the eafieft to be known of any maftcr’s.
The fubjeds he treated of, did not give him oc-
caflon to fhew how he cou’d exprefs different pad!-
ons; thofe that he has touch’d tend all to joy, and
his expreflions are not over-delicate. We may be
bold to fay, the grace which we meet with in his
pidures, is not fo much the efled of genius, as the
habit of his hand.
His attitudes and draperies are well enough chofen.
He was a univerfal painter, and his landfkips, which
are more agreeable than learned, are like the airs of
his heads of the fame delign, and the fame touch.*
His


His colouring is frefti, and his carnations of a
fanguine tint, but not very much ftudy’d. He was
very unequal in the force of his colours, having
drawn fome of his fubjeCls in the open field, fome
with a very ftrong colouring, and others with a very
weak. As for the Claro Ofcuro, and union of co-
lours, tho* he did not know them to be principles
of his art, yet good fenfe or chance, fometimes di-
rected him to the ufe of them.
His works feem to be finifh’d to the laft degree,
and tho’ his pictures were drawn with facility, yet
there are very few free touches to be Teen in them.
Francesco Barbieri da Cento,
Commonly call’d
GUERCINO,
WAS born near Bologna, anno 1597. and
learn’d the principles of his art of a Bolog-
nian painter, whole capacity was not extraordinary.
He left him and others afterwards, to enter into the
academy of the Caracci, where he defign’d with a
great manner, and great facility, but rather with a
natural than with an ideal guft. When he was about
to form to himfelf a manner of defigning, he ex-
amin’d thofe of the Painters of his time. Guido’s
and Albani’s feem’d to him to be too weak, and
without cenfuring theirs, he refolv’d to give his
pictures more force, and come nearer to Caravag-
gio’s ftile, with which he was more pleas’d, than either
with Albani’s or Guido’s. He thought a painter
cou’d not imitate the relievo of nature, without the
helps of ftrong fhadows and ftrong colours: never-
thelefs he was Guido’s very good friend, and wou’d
never live at Bologna as long as Guido liv’d, to pre-
vent their competition or rivallhip, for which rea-
fon he always refided at Cento, till the death of his
P 2 friend.


friend. He painted for a long time after this ftrong
manner, but in the declenlion of his age, he altered
his ftile, not out of his own judgment, but, as he
faid, to pleafe the ignorant and get money; for,
Guido’s and Albani’s reputation had drawn the mul-
titude after their manner. Indeed, of all the Carac-
ci’s difciples, he was the leaft agreeable in his ftile,
and ’tis to be wifh’d, that to the fiercenefs Of his
manner, he had join’d more noblenefs in the airs
of his heads, and more truth to his local colours.
His carnations have too much of the lead in them,
tho’ in general they do not want harmony; and
whatever there Teems to be wanting in his pictures,
he will always be reckon’d a great painter by the
critics. '
He was as much to be efteem’d for his moral vir-
tues, as for his fkill in* painting. He lov’d work
and folitude; he was true to his word, an enemy
to railing, humble, civil, charitable, pious, and
eminently chafte. When he went abroad he was
always accompanied with feveral Painters, who fol-
low’d him as their mafter, and refpe&ed him as
their father; for he affifted them with his advice,
his credit, and his purfe upon occafion. Tho’ he
was very humble, there was nothing mean in his
behaviour ; and join’d to the uprightnefs of his mo-
rals a noble boldnefs, which made him be belov’d
by the great. Being laborious, he got abundance
of money, which he laid out for the public ufe and
diverfion. He gave large Turns to build chapels,
and founded Teveral fair hofpitals at Bologna, and
elTewhere. He died at threefcore and ten years of
age, anno 1667. and made two of his nephews his
heirs, having liv’d a Tingle and a chafte life.
Reflec-


Reflections on the works of GUERCINO.
GU E R C I N O ftudy’d a while in the fchool
of the Garacci, yet it does not appear that he
has any thing of their charafter in his works. His
gufto was Angular, his genius eafy, but not elevat-
ed ; neither were his thoughts fine. *Tis rare to
meet with noblenefs in his figures, and his expref-
fions are not over moving.
His gufto of defign is grand and natural, but
not very elegant. His inclination led him always
to a ftrong colouring. At firft he was very willing
to follow his friend Guido’s ftile, but leeing that
painter quitted one which he had then, for another
more clear, and as the Italians fay, more loofe, he
immediately took to Caravaggio s manner, which
he temper’d as he thought tit.
He gave union to his colouring by the unifor-
mity of his red ftiadows, but his carnations were
not very frefh, and yet his gufto naturally inchn d
him to imitate life, which he has often done with
fuccefs, tho* fometimes too fervilely and without
choice. He drew his lights from above, and af-
fefted to make ftrong fhadows, to attra£t the eyes,
and give the greater force to his works. T. his is
more remarkable in his defigns than in his pictures,
which keep up their reputation by the ftrength of
the ftiadows, the harmony of the colours, by the
great guft of defign, by the foftnefs of the pencil,
and by a chara6ter of truth, which reigns every
where thro 5 all of ’em.
MICHAEL ANGELO MER IG /,
Commonly call’d
MICHAEL ANGELO DA CARAVAGGIO,
WA S born at Caravaggio, a village in the
Milanefe, in the year 1569. and made him-
Tdf famous by a manner in painting extremely
P 3 ftrong.


ftrong, true, and of a great eflfed, of which him-
felf was the author. He painted every thing he
did, in a room where the light defcended from on
high. He follow’d his models fp exadly, that he
imitated their defeds as well as their beauties, hav-
ing no other idea than the eflfed of nature prefent
before him. He us’d to fay, 4 That thofe pidures
4 which were not drawn after nature, were but as
4 fo many rags, and the figures of which they were
4 compos’d, but as painted cards.*
His manner being new, was follow’d by feveral
painters of his time, and among others by Manfredi,
and Valentine a Frenchman. We mutt own the
iikencfs of this manner is very furprizing, and has a
very powerful etfed on the moft judicious fpedators.
He drew after him almoft the whole fchool of the
Caracci:
For not to name Guercino, who never left his
manner, Guido and Domenichino were tempted to
follow it; but ’twas accompanied with fuch an ill
gout of defign, and the choice of his lights being
the fame in all forts of fubjeds, they fell off from
it in a very little time. His pieces are to be met
with in moft of the cabinets in Europe, There
are feveral of them at Rome and Naples, and one
pidure of his drawing is in the Dominican’s church
at Antwerp, which Rubens us’d to call his matter.
He often brought himfelf into danger by his con-
temptible difeourfe of his contemporaries, efpecially
of Giofeppino, whom he had made jeft of public-
ly. One day the difpute between them ran fo
high, that Michael Angelo drew his fword, and
kill’d a young man call’d Tomafino, who being
Giofepp’no’s friend, wou’d have parted them. Up-
on this Michael Angelo was forced to fly to the mar-
quis Juftiniani, to proted him. While he liv’d in
his houfc, he drew the pidure of St. Thomas’s un-
belief.


belief, and a Cupid, two admirable pieces, for the
marquis. , , ~ ~
Juftiniani obtain’d his pardon, and reprov d him
feverely for being fo outragious; but Michael An-
gelo, as foon as he was at liberty, being not able to
command his paffions, he went to Giofeppmo and
challeng’d him. The latter anfwer’d, ‘He was a
< knight, and wou’d not draw his fword again d his
«inferior.* Caravaggio, nettled at this anfwer,
haften’d to Malta, perform’d his vows and exer-
cifes and receiv’d the order of knighthood as a
ferving-brother. While he was there, he drew the
decollation of St. John Baptift for the great church,
and the portrait of the grand-mailer de Vigna-
Court, which is in the king’s cabinet.
Being dignified with the order of Malta he re-
turn’d to Rome, intending to force Giofeppmo to
fight him, but, happily for his competitor, a fe-
ver took him and put an end to the dangerous de-
pute with his life, anno 1609.
:Reflections on the works of MICHAEL
ANGELO da CARAVAGGIO.
CARAVAGGIO’S ideas were like his tem-
per, very unequal, and never lofty. His dif-
poiitions were good, and his defigns of an ill gout.
He had not undemanding enough to chufe well, or
to correft nature. All his application was to co-
louring, and he fucceeded wonderfully in it. His
local colours are very much- ftudy’d, and by the
great knowledge he had of lights, join d to the ex-
aft variety with which he mingled his colours on
his pallet, without breaking, or as we fay, tortur-
ing them with his pencil, the truth that appears 111
all his works is equally perfeft and furprizing.
His attitudes have no choice in them. His dra-
peries are like, but ill fer, and his figures are not a-
F 4 • greeably


greeably adjufted, nor as becomes their characters.
He knew nothing of grace or noblenefs, and if ei-
ther of them are to be met with in his pieces,
3 twas not done out of choice but by chance.
However, he drew feveral pictures which deferv’d
the name of grand compofitions, and he finifh’d
them with extraordinary nicety. If he was not ma-
fter of all the parts of painting, we mult own that
his portraits at leaft are not to be cenfur’d. His
expreffions are not very lively. By his works one
may eafily perceive he did not fo much confider what
wou d contribute to make his pictures agreeable,
as whatwou’d render his objeCts fen Able, in which he
was fuccefsful by the Claro Ofcuro, by an excellent
gulto in colouring, by a terrible force, an agreeable
Iweetnefs, and the mellowelt pencil chat ever was.
BARFHOLOMEO MANFRED I,
OF Mantua, was Caravaggio’s difciple, and
imitated his manner very exaCtly. The fub-
jedts of his pictures are generally perfons playing at
cards or dice. He died young.
GIOS. RIBERA , call’d SPAGNOLE TTO,
A Native of Valentia in Spain, was Caravaggio’s
difciple, and like his malter had a ftrong
manner, imitating nature very faithfully: But his
pencil was not fo mellow as Michael Angelo’s.
Spagnoletto delighted in painting melancholy fut>
jeCts. His works arc difpers’d over all Europe,
chiefly at Naples, where he liv’d a long time, and
drew abundance of fine pieces.
THS


THE
LIVES
OF THE
GERMAN and FLEMISH
PAINTERS.
BOOK VI.
HUBERT and JOHN VAN-ETK y
BRothers, natives of Mafleyk on the Meufe,
were the firffc Painters in the low-countries
that did any thing worth taking notice of\
for which reafon we may reckon them the
founders of the Flemifh fchool. Hubert was the
elder brother, he bred up John, and the latter ffu-r
died fo afliduoufly, that he equal’d his mailer and
elder brother Hubert. They had both of them
genius andfkilU they work’d together, and became
famous by their performances •, they drew feveral
pidlures for Philip the Good, duke of Burgunoy;
that which was fee up in Sr. John’s church at Gaunt
was univerfally admir’d. Philip I. king of Spain,
not


not being able to obtain the original, got a copy of
it, which he carry’d into Spain with him. The
fubjeCt of this piece was taken out of the revelati-
ons, where the old men adore the lamb. This
picture is, to this day, look’d upon as a wonder,
and there being a great deal of care taken to pre-
ferve it, *tis ftill very frefh. *Tis cover’d, and
never expos’4 to view but on holidays, or at the de-
fire of perfons of the hrft quality.
After Hubert’s death, which happened in the
year 1426. his brother John remov’d to Bruges,
and living altogether in that town, he was thence
call’d John of Bruges. ’Twas this John, who, in
fearching after a varnifh that might give more force
to his colouring, found out that Linfeed Oil mingled
with colours, had a very good effeCt without mak-
ing ufe of any varnifh at all. To him the art of
painting is indebted for the perfection to which it is
arriv’d by means of this new invention : and thus
John of Bruges’s works encreafing in beauty, were
bought up by the great, and had one of the firft
places in their cabinets.
The picture which he fent to Alphonfo, king of
Naples, was the occafion of the difcovery of the
fccret of painting in oil in Italy, as we have fliewn
in the life of Antonio da Medina. John of Bru-
ges was efteem’d as well for the folidity of his
judgment, as for his fkill in painting. The duke
of Burgundy had fo good an opinion of his merit,
that he made him a councellor of date. He died
in Bruges, anno 14.41. and was bury’d in St. Do-
natus’s church. His fitter Margaret wou’d never
marry, that fhe might be the more at liberty to ex-
ercife herfelf in painting, which Hie paflionately
lov’d.
ALBERT


ALBERT DURER
WA S born at Nuremberg on Good-friday,
anno 1471. the fame day of the year which
gave birth to Raphael Urbin. Albert Durer, a
curious jeweller and goldfmith of that town, was
father of Albert whole life we write, and taught
him his own art, and that of graving. At fifteen
years of age he put him to Michael Wolgemuth,
a good painter in Nuremberg, Van-Mander being
in an error when he fays he was Martin Schon’s
difciple. ’Tis true Albert wou’d very fain have
had him for his mailer, but Martin’s death pre-
vented it.
After having fpent three years with Michael Wol-
gemuth, he traveil’d to Flanders, and from thence
thro* Germany to Venice. At his return he mar-
ried, being then near three and twenty years of age ;
about that time he began to publifh fome of his
prints. He grav’d the three Graces, fome Deaths-
Heads, and other bones of dead men, and a Hell
with diabolical fpe&res, after the manner of Ifrael
of Mechlin. Above the three graces there is a
globe, on which thefe three letters are to be feen,
O. G. H. as much as to fay in the German tongue,
O Gott Hute! God defend us from enchantments!
He was then about 26 years old, for ’twas in the
year 1497. that he grav’d this piece. Having put
his genius in motion, he apply’d himfelf to the
ftudy of defign, and became fo great matter of ir,
that all his contemporary countrymen of the pro-
feflion made his works their rule, and even feveral
Italians benefited themfelves by his prints, as they
have done fince, tho’ with moreaddrefs and difguife.
He was careful in all his plates to put down the
year in which they were grav’d, a very commend-
able thing, for the curious may judge by that how
old


old he was when he did them. In the picture of
our Saviour’s paliion, he difpofes the Lord’s (upper
according to the opinion of Oecolainpadius. That
ot melancholy is his fineft piece, and the things
that enter into the competition of his fubjeCts, are
a proof of Albert’s fkilJ; his Madonna’s are Angu-
larly beautiful.
Albert put down alfo on his pictures the year in
which they were painted, and Sandrarr, who law
more of them than any one clfe, fays be did not fee
any one of an older date than the year 1504. by
which he gives us to underhand, that Albert did
nothing of that kind till he was thirty-three years
of age.
Maximilian the emperor, gave Durer for the
arms of painting three crowns, two In chief, and
one in point.
The character of a man of honour, which he
always maintain d, his good fenfe, and his eloquence,
gifts bellow’d on him by nature, procur’d him a feat
among the Councellors of the city of Nuremberg.
His genius was fo univerlal, that he follow’d the bur
Anefs of his profeffion, and, at the fame time, with
eafe minded the affairs of the public. He was labo-
rious, of a fwcet dilpofition, and his fortune fo good,
that he might have enjoy’d a pleafant repofe, if his
wife had not difturb’d his happinefs. She was of
luch a covetous, greedy temper, that tho* they had
no children, and were rich enough, yet fhe was al-
ways reazing him to get more. Her clamours were
fo troublefome to him, they diltraftcd him in his
labours, and made his life uneafy. To get rid of
her he went into the Low-countries, where he con-
tracted aclofe fricndlhip with Lucas of Leyden. His
wife’s trouble, her tears, and promifes to behave
herfelf better for the future, prevail’d on his friends
at Nuremberg to advife him how much fhe was al-
tei’d, and to invite him to return. He was perfuacb
ed


cd by them to try her once more, but fhe foon grew
as bad as ever, and tho’ he was one of the moft
prudent and beft natur’d men in the world, fhe
us’d him fo ill, that he broke his heart with forrow,
in the fifty-feventh year cf his age, anno 1528.
Albert himfelf wrote his father’s life four years
before he died ; Sandrart has given an account of k
after that of Albert the Son, who wrote moft of
the things himfelf which we have faid of him.
He talks very freely, and with a great deal of hu-
mility of his father’s poverty, how hard it was for
him to get his bread, and of the mifery he liv’d in
while he was young. The moft furprizing thing in
his whole life is, that he cou’d work fo much, and
finifh fuch a vaft number of pictures, when his
circumftances were fo low as they were at firft, and
his wife fo great a fhrew. He wrote a treatife of
geometry, perfpedtive, fortification, and the pro-
portion of human figures. Several authors have
Ipoken of him with honour, and among others,
Erafmus and Vafari.
Reflections on the ‘works of ALBERT TURNER,
NO man ever Ihew’d fo vaft and univerfal a
genius for the arts as Albert Durer. After
he had try’d almoft all of them, andexercifed him-
felf in them fome time, he at laft refolv’d to con-
fine himfelf to painting and graving, Tho* by di-
viding his time between the one and the other art,
one wou’d think it wou’d have hinder’d hisperfedfi-
on in either, yet he matter’d them both by an extraor-
dinary application, and became perfect in both
graving and painting. But example, and the firft
things that prefent themlelves to our eyes when we
apply to any profeffion, being apt to incline our
gout to the fame way, and to give the fame turn
to cur though :s, Albert luffer’d for want of being
put


put into a right method at firft, by the fight of the
moft beautiful pieces, by a good education, and by
the ftudy of the antique. His vein was fruitful,
his compofition grand, and tho’ the gothic gufto
prevail’d in his time and country, yet his producti-
ons afforded matter enough, not only for the Ger-
man Painters, but even for the Italians to learn by.
He was bold in the execution of his defigns.
He did whatever he fet himfelf about, and was fo
clean and fo exaCt in all his performances, that one
may perceive he was entirely mafter of the prin-
ciples of his art, which he had laid down as fuch in
his mind, and which related chiefly to defign: how-
ever, ’tis furprizing, that having been at fb much
pains to know the ftruCture of human bodies, he
Ihould make fo little of it; for in moft of his works,
except his virgins and virtues, which accompany
the emperor Maximilian’s triumph, his defign is
poor and of an ill gufto. He imitated nature on-
ly according to his own idea of her, and was fo far
from encreafing her beauty, or feeking out the
graces that may be found in her, that he very rarely
copy’d thofe beautiful places which fortune often
furnifhes a Painter with. He was more happy in
the choice of his landfkips, which are generally fet
off with agreeable and extraordinary profpeCls.
In fiiort, his performances, as much as they were
admir’d by his countrymen and contemporaries,
don’t deferve now to be examin’d according to the
rules of the feveral parts of Painting; for, if there
is one good property in them, there are a great
many bad ones. Ncverthelefs, we muft do that ju-
ftice to Albert’s memory, to own, that tho’ his de-
figns were of a Gothic gufto, they were learned,
and the novelty of his prints acquir’d him a great
deal of reputation; upon which Vafari fays of him,
“ If this excellent ancl exadf artift, whofe genius was
“ fo univerfal, had been born in Tufcany, as he was
“ in


u In Germany, and had had the opportunity of ftu-
« dying the beautiful pieces that arc at Rome, as the
“ reft of us have done, he would have been the belt
“ Painter of Italy, as now he is to be reckoned the
“ mod rare and moft celebrated genius of the Fle-
“ mifli fchool. **
GEORGE PENS ,
OF Nuremberg, ftudy’d Raphael’s works very
much, and underftood the art of graving on
copper, as well as that of Painting. He aflifted
Marc-Antonio in divers of his performances, and
when he return’d to his own country, he drew a
great many pidures, and grav’d feveral plates on
fubjeds of his own invention, which are fo many
proofs of the beauty of his genius and of his fkili.
He put down the letters of his name on his pieces
thus, G. P. and was an artift very famous in his
time.
PETER CA N D IT O ,
OF Munich, was a man of fkili *, he painted al-
moft all the palace of Munich, for Maximi-
lian, duke of Bavaria, who had taken him into his
fervice. He drew the defigns of the hermits of Ba-
varia, which were grav’d by Raphael and John
Sadder, as alfo feveral other things of hisdefigning.
The four dodors of the church, which he defign’d,
were engrav’d by Giles Sadder.
At the fame time flourifh’d Matthew Gruncwalt,
who painted after the manner of Albert Durer.
CORNELIUS ENGELBERT
-yr t,.. mv
OF Leyden, was contemporary with Candito
and Grunewa't. Several very good pieces of
his


his drawing are to be Teen at Leyden and Utrechr.'
He had two Tons, who imitated his manner very
exactly* Cornelias Cornelii, and Lucas Cornelli.
The latter finding there was nothing to be got by
Painting, fo little was it encouraged in his time and
country, was forced to turn cook; but his genius
would not let him abandon an art in which he might
eafily arrive to perfection, fo he return’d to his firft
profefllon, and became a mafter.
He went to England, and was employ’d by Hen-
ry VIII. who took him into his favour as well as into
his fervice.
BERNARD Van ORLAT,
OF Brufiels, was Painter to Margaret, gover-
nour of the Low-Countries, for whom he did
feveral fine pieces, as alfo for the churches in that
and other cities in Brabant and Flanders. When he
drew any picture of confequence, he laid fome leaf-
gold for his ground, and painted upon it, which
kept his colours frelh, and in certain places added a
luftrc to them, efpecialJy in a celeftial light, which
he painted in a picture of the day of judgment, that
is in the chapel of the alms-houfe at Antwerp. He
drew a great many defigns for tapiftries by order of
the emperor Charles V. and the chief of the tapiftry-
work which was done for the pope, and other princes
at that time, after Raphael’s defigns, was committed
to his care to fee them well executed. He was one
of Raphael Urbin’s difciples.
MIC HA EL C 0 XI S,
OF Mechlin, learnt the principles of his art of
Bernard van Orlay, after which he went into
Italy, was Raphael’s difciple, and generally made
ufc of his ideas io the pictures he drew, for his own
. invention


invention was barren and brought forth with difficul-
ty. His defign and colouring were of Raphael’s
gout. When he return’d to Flanders, he had the
management of the execution of fome of Raphael’s
defigns for tapiftry. He dy’d at Antwerp, anno
1592. being fourfcore and fifteen years of age.
LUCAS oj LEYDEN
WAS taught the firfl; principles of Painting
by his father, but nature had bellow’d on
him fo many advantageous qualities for the art, that
at nine years old he began to engrave, and at four-
teen publifh’d feveral plates, as confiderable for their
beauty as their number. His knowledge of Paint-
ing was as forward as that of graving, and his per-
formances in both were exadl and clean. He fol-
low’d the {lndies necclfary to his profeffion with ex-
treme diligence *, and if the time he fpent in look-
ing after the effedls of nature, had been employ’d in
ftudying the antique, what was laid of Albert Du-
rer on the like occafion, might have been faid of
him, viz. that his works would have been admir’d
in all ages. He was magnificent in his way of li-
ving, drefs’d well, and fpent his money freely.
Lucas and Albert carry’d on a friendly correfpon-
dence together, and were emulous of each others
works, without jealoufy. When Albert put forth a
plate, Lucas publifh’d another, and leaving it to the
world to judge of their merit, they were the firft that
didjullice to one another, praifingeach others per-
formance, without either envy or jealoufy > “ bafe
“ paffions in fome men of art, for which no excei-
“ lence can atone.” The friendlhip between Al-
bert and Lucas encreafed very much at their inter-
view in Holland, whither Albert went to vifit his
competitor and friend, two names which are very
feldorn to be reconcil’d. Some time after i\lbert’s
return


return to Nuremberg, Lucas made a tour to Zea-
land and Brabant, to vifit the Painters of thole pro-
vinces *, which journey not only cbft him a great
deal of money, but his life alfo, for’tis faid a flulh-
inger, of his profelfion, out of jealoufy of his me-
rit, poifon’d him at an entertainment to which he
had invited him. He liv’d in a languilhing con-
dition fix years after, during which time he almoft
always kept his bed. What troubled him moft was,
that he could not work at cafe; however, he
had fuch a love to his art, that, ill as he was,
he could not forbear working a bed; and being
told, that his application to it in the condition he
was in, would haften his end, he replied, “ Be it
fo ; I will have my bed to be a bed of honour,
“ and cannot die in a better pofture than with my
“ pencil in my hand.” He was fcarce forty years
old when he departed this life, anno 1533, and per-
haps the poifon that did him moft hurt, was fol-
lowing his bufmefs with too much earneftnefs in his
tender age, when nature would have form’d a better
conftitution for him, had flie not been prevented by
other employments, about which he let her to work.
INT 1 N MAT STS,
Otherwife call’d,
The FARRIER of ANTWERP.
AFTER having follow’d the trade of a farrier
or blackfmith, near twenty years, he fell lick
of a diftemper, which hinder’d his working fo much
that he could not get his bread, fo he was forc’d to
go home to his mother for fubfiftence, but Ihe being
both old and poor, had much ado to maintain her-
felf. While he was at his mother’s, a friend of his
coming to fee him, by chance fhew’d him a print,
which a friar had juft then given him. At the fight
of it, he felt within himfelf a violent inclination to
copy


copy it, which he did with Tome fort of fuccefs, and
this begot in him a defire to learn the art of Paint-
ing. He began to ftudy if, and finding himfelf, as
it were, in another element, both natural and plea-
fant, he grew well, and made a confiderable pro-
grcfs in his new profeffion. An accident happen’d
foon after, which quicken’d his zeal to arrive to a
perfection in the art. He fell in love with a Pain-
ter’s daughter, who was very handfomc, and belov-
ed by a Painter much more a matter than he was.
Love and emulation pulh’d him on in the profecu-
tion of his ftudies, and made him leave nothing un-
done that might contribute to render him more
Ikilful, in order to fupplant his rival.
This (lory is told in another manner by fome who
will have love to have been the foie agent in the
-matter, and that Cupid took the hammer out of his
hand, and put the pencil into ir. This is the com-
mon opinion, and his epitaph is much to the fame
purpofe, as alfo feveral epigrams written on the fame
fubjeft. There are a great many pictures of his
drawing at Antwerp, and among others a defeent
from the crofs, in our lady’s church. He generally
did half-figures and portraits, by which means his
works being to be remov’d with eafe from place to
place, are dil'pers’d throughout all Europe. His
manner was lingular, and had nothing in it like
that of other Painters. *Twas finilh’d, and his co-
louring ftrong. He liv’d a Jong time, and dy’d
anno 1529.
JOHN of CALCAR, or CALKER,
NAtive of Calcar , a town in the dutchy of
Cleves , was a very excellent man, but his un-
timely death hinder’d his (hewing himfelf to the
world, as otherwife he would have done. In the
year 1536, he enter’d the fchool of 1 itian, and
made


made Rich progrefs in it, that feveral of his pictures
and defigns have palVd for Titian’s, in which
many good judges have been deceiv’d, and ’tis pro-
bable many more will be fo. From Venice he went
to Rome, where, having made himfelf very well
acquainted with Raphael’s manner, he ftaid a while,
and then p oceeded to Naples, in which city he
dy’d, anno 1546. ’Twas this Calcar who defign’d
the anatomical figures for Andreas Vefalius’s book
of phyfic and anatomy, as alfo the portraits of the
Painters, that are before the lives written by Vafari,
which is enough to ferve for an encomium upon
him. Among other pieces he drew a nativity, re-
prefenting the angels around the infant Chrift, and
has fo order’d the difpofition of his pidure, that
the light proceeds all from the child. ’Tis an ad-
mirable piece. Rubens, who was owner of it,
wou’d not part with it as long as he liv’d, but af-
ter his death Sandrart bought it, and fold it again
to the emperor, who fet a high value upon it.
PETER KOUC
WA S born in the the town of Aloft, and
difciple to Bernard Van Orlay, who had
liv’d with Raphael. He went to Rome, and hav-
ing a happy difpofition of genius, improv’d him-
felf fo much by the fight of the beautiful things he
faw there, that he form’d an excellent gout, and
became a very correct defigner. When he returned
to his own country,he undertook the charge of direft-
"ing the executing of feme tapifiryvvork afterßaphaels
defigns,and burying his wife,after he had liv’d with
her ten years without having any children, he was
perfuaded by fome merchants of Brufiels, to under-
take a voyage to Conllantinople ; but when he ar-
riv’d there, finding there was nothing for him to
do but to draw defigns for tapiftry, the Mahomme-
dan


dan Religion not allowing the Turks to reprefent
any figure, he fpent his time in defigning the parti-
cular profpeds in theeighbour hood of Conftanti-
nople, and the manner of the Turks living, of
which he has left many wooden cuts, that may a-
Jone fuffice to give an idea of his merit. In one of
thefe pieces he has reprefented himfelf under the
figure of a Turk, {landing upright, and pointing
to another Turk who holds a pike. After his voy-
age to Conflantinople, he went and fettled at Ant-
werp, where he drew feveral pictures for Charles V.
and in the latter part of his life, he wrote a treatife
of fculpture, geometry and perfpe&ive. He alfo
tranfiated Vitruvius and Serlio into the Flem-
mifli language, being himfelf a very good archi-
teft. He dy’d in the year 1550.
ALBERT ALD EG RARE. ;
OF the city of Zouft in Weftphalia, where he
painted a great many fine things for the
churches, and among others, a nativity, worthy the
admiration of the curious. He did very little elfe-
where, bufying himfelf more about graving than
painting, as we may guefs by the vaft number of
prints which are every where to be feen of his, and
by which one may fee he was a corre£l dcfigner,
that his exprelfions were graceful, and that he
wou’d have made an excellent painter, had he tra-
veled into Italy.
JOHN of MABUSE ,
BORN in a village of Hungary call’d Mabufe,
was the contemporary of Lucas Van Leyden.
After having in his youth work’d very much, he
We nt to Italy, from whence he came to Flanders,
an d was the firft that fhew’d the Flemifh matters
3 how


how to treat of hiftorical fubjeds in their competi-
tions, and to expofe the naked, which had not till
his time been put in pradice. His pieces are very
common in the Low-countries and in England. He
was in his younger days fober and ftudious, but in
the latter part of his life, too much adided to
drinking. The marquis of Verens entertain’d him
in his fervice many years-, and this nobleman be-
ing inform’d that the emperor Charles V. intend-
ed to come and lodge with him, to receive him more
magnificently, order’d that all his domeftics fhould
be dreft in white damalk, and Mabufe among the
reft was to be fo array’d : but Mabufe, inftead of
giving meafure to have a fort of robe made for
him, that he might make his appearance with other
of the marquifles fervants, dcfired to have the da-
mafic, pretending he wou’d contrive a whimfical
lhape with it, for the diverfion of the fpedators v
whereas his true meaning was to fell it, to raile mo-
ney for the tavern, which he accordingly did ; for
knowing that the emperor was to come by night,
he thought hecou’d manage the matter well enough,
by the help of the dark ; wherefore when the day
appointed by the emperor for his vifit came, Ma-
bufe, inftead of filk, fewed white paper together,
and painted it like damafk, with great flowers, mak-
ing it up as a robe fhou’d be made, and fo took his
place in the train of the marquis. He was put be-
tween a poet and a mufician, whom the marquis
kept alfo in his houfe.
Tho* the emperor faw his train of domeftics by
flambeau-light only, he was fo pleas’d with it, that
the next day he wou’d have them march before him
again, to view them the more attentively. He
ftood at a window to fee them pafs by, the marquis
ftanding near him : when Mabufe appear’d between
his comrades, the emperor took particular notice of
the painter’s robe, faying he never faw fo fine a
damafk.


damafk. The marquefs fent for him, and the
cheat being difcover’d, the emperor laught heartily
at it: however, the marquis fearing ’twould be
thought he had drefs’d up his men in paper for the
emperor’s reception, was fo angry with Mabufe,
that he threw him into prifon, where he remain’d a
long while, minded his work very afiiduoufly, and
drew abundance of defigns. He dy’d in the year
1562.
JOHN SCHOREL,
WA S born at a village call’d Schorel near
Alkmaer in Holland. He was Mabufe’s
difciple, and work’d fome time with Albert Durer,
While he was travelling up and down Germany, he
met with a friar, who was a lover of painting, and
then going to Jerufalem, which made him defirous
to accompany him. He defign’d in Jerufalem, on
the banks of the river Jordan, and in feveral other
places fan&ify’d by the prefence of Jefus Chrift the
faviour of the world. His fubje6ts were fuch as
piety and curiofity fuggefted. In his way home
he Itopp’d at Venice, work’d there a while, and
having a defire to fee Raphael’s painting, went to
Rom e, where he defign’d his and Michael Angelo’s
wor ks, after the antique fculptures, and the ruins
of the ancient buildings. Pope Adrian the IV.
being about that time advanc’d to St. Peter’s chair,
he gave Schorel the change, of fuperintendant of
the buildings at Belvedere •, but after the death of
this pontiff, who reign’d little more than a year and
an half, Schorel return’d to the Low-countries. He
ftaid a while at Utrecht, and drew feveral rare
pieces there. He pafs’d thro* France as he return’d
h ome, and refus’d the offers which were made him
on the part of Francis I. out of his love to eafe and
a quiet life. He was endu’d with feveral virtues
4 and


and Lienees, being both a mufician, poet and orator.
Lie undcrftood tour languages well, the Latin,
trench, Italian and German. His good humour
and good qualities, got him the love and efteem of
all that knew him. He dy’d anno 1562, in the fixty-
levehfh year of his age. Two years beforchis de-
cile, Anthony More, his difciple, drew his picture.
LAMBERT LOMBARD ,
Oh Liege, was very induftrious to learn every
thing that related to his profefllon. He ftu-
died the antique very much, and was the firll that
brought into his country a method very far from
the gothic and barbarous gufto, which was then
predominant there. He let up a fort of academy
at his houfe, where, among many more, Llubert
Goltius, Prans Floris, and William Kay, were his
difciples, The prints which Were engrav’d after
his works fhew what his gout was. Sandrart and
others pretend that Suavius and Lombard were
the fame perfon, He fays that Lombard in his
youth was call’d Lambert Suterman, and that af-
terwards he chang’d his firname into Suavius, as
more harmonies than Suterman. Thus he put
down on his prints. L. Suavius Inventor. Sand-
rart adds, that Van-mander mi flakes in making
Lombard and Suavius two perfons. The curious
may excrcife their criticifms on this matter, by
comparing the prints mark’d with each of their
names one with another, which Sandrart allures us
were done by one man at different times. Domi-
nick Lampion, fecretary to the bifhop of Liege,
very well known to the learned world, wrote the
life of Lombard, who was his intimate friend.
The fame Lampion wrote a copy of verfes on
Lucas Gaffcl, a rare landlkip-painter at that time.
He was very idle, and liv’d and dy’d at Bruffels.
JOHN


JOHN HOLBEIN ,
BEtter known by his German name Hans Hol-
bein, was the fon of John Holbein, a Ikilful
painter, who liv’d at Augfburg, where he work d a
Jong time, and then remov’d to Bafil in Swifler-
land. Here Hans, or John his fon, was born in
the year 1498. He learnt of his father the firft
rudiments of the art, and follow’d his ftudies with
extreme eagernefs ; but the elevation of his genius
foon rais’d him above his mailer. His productions
had a great deal of force in them, and were of a
great charaCler. He painted our Saviout s paflion
in the town-houfe of Bafil, in a piClure confiding
of eight parts, and containing as many fubjeCls of
Chrid’s bufferings. He painted alfo in the fifh-
market of that town a dance of peaiants, and
death’s dance: thefe two pieces are engrav’d in
wood. >
Erafmus, who was his friend, and had had his
picture drawn by him feveral times, imagining that
Swifierland was a very improper country to do juf-
tice to Holbein’s merit, propos’d to him to go to
England, promifing, by means of Sir Thomas
More, to prepare the way for his favourable recep-
tion by the King. Holbein readily accepted the pro-
pofal, and the rather, becaufe his wife was fuch a ter-
magant, die wou’d never let him be at red. In Eng-
land he drew a vad number of admirable portraits;
among others thofe of Henry VIII. and his children,
prince^ Edward, the princefs Mary, and the prin-
cefs Elizabeth. He painted hidory-pieces in feveral
places, two of which are grand compofitions, viz,
the Triumph of Riches, and the Condition of Po-
verty. Frederick Zuchero, whom the king of
England fent for out of Italy, was mightily fur-
priz’d at the fight of Holbein’s works, faying they
were


were not inferior to either Raphael’s or Titian’s.
Holbein painted alike in every manner, in frefco,
in water-colours, in oil, and in miniature. He ds-
- with Crayons, or the Pen, with wonderful
facility, and the great quantity of his defigns are
without number.
There happen’d an accident in England which
would have been fatal to him, had not the king
protected him. On the report of Holbein’s cha-
ra<sler, a lord of the firfl quality came to fee him,
but it being at a time when he was drawing a fi-
gure after the life, he entreated his lordfhip to put
off the honour he intended him to fome other day.
The lord taking this for an affront, broke open the
door, and very rudely went up flairs. Holbein
hearing a noife, came out of his chamber, and
meeting the lord at the flair-head, fell into a vio-
lent paffion, pufh’d him backwards, and flung him
down flairs from top to bottom. The nobleman
was very much hurt, and the croud that came about
him being witnefles of his fall, it was a terrible
mortification to him. His men wou’d have reveng-
ed their mailer’s quarrel, but Holbein having bar-
ricadoed his door, had time to fave himfelf on the
top of the houfe, and making the beft of his way
to court, told the king what had happen’d to him,
before the lord could come to make his complaint.
His majefly promis’d to protedl him, and the lord
arriving fome time after, the king commanded him
not to attempt any thing again!? Holbein. This
painter dy’d of the plague at London in the year
1554. being about fifiy-lix years old. ’Tis amaz-
ing to think that a man born in Swifferland, and
who had never been in Italy, fhou’d have fuch a
guflo, and fo fine a genius for painting. Sandrart
relates, that Rubens having been to fee Hontorfl,
at Utretcht, and thence proceeding in his way to
Amfterdam, was accompany’d by feveral painters,
and


and by Sandrart among the reft. Their converfa-
tion running all on the works of the learned, and
of the painters in particular,, it fell at Jaft on Hol-
bein. Rubens fpoke much in his praife, and ad-
vifed thofe of his profefiion to obferve narrowly his
Death's Dance ; faying, he had learn’d a great deal
by it, as well as by Summer’s wooden prints, hav-
ing defigned feveral things himfelf in his youth.
Holbein had one good difciple, Chriftopher Am-
berger of Aufburg, who painted very much in
Frefco in divers places of Germany.
We fhall fay more of Hans Holbein, when we
come to treat of the Englifh fchool; in which clafs
he ought to be placed, having performed moft of
his beft pieces in England ; and to the encourage-
ment he met with in the court of Henry the Eighth,
the world owes all that this painter did in hiftory,
which acquired him the reputation, not only of a
fine, but of a fublime genius. We fhall alfo place
all thofe painters that fiourifhed in England, in the
Englifh fchool; and we may as reafonably do it, as
Monfieur de Piles has put Ribera, a Spaniard, in
that of Lombardy, and crouded Ferdinand Ellis,
Philip de Champaign, and his nephew, all Flamands,
in that of France.
rOBTSTIMMER *
OF Schaffhaufen, was a very good painter;
proofs of which he has given in his painting
in frefco on the frontifpieces of feveral houfes in
Frankfort, and in his own country ; as alfo in fe-
veral piftures which he drew at Strafburg, and for
the Marquis of Baden. Among a great number of
wooden prints which are extant of his, thofe of the
bible, that were publifhed in the year 1586, are
very much efteemed, and are the fame by which
Rubens told Sandrart he had profited more than by
any others. Sandrart himfelf calls this book a trea-
-1 ~ fury


hry of fcience for the art of Painting. Bernard
Jobms, a printer at Strafburg, has put forth a great
many of his prints. Stimmer died young. He
had two brothers; the eldeft painted on glafs, the
ether graved admirably well in wood. I know no
more of either of them.
JOHN CORNELIUS FERMETEN,
WAS born in a village near HaerJem. The
Emperor Charles V. took him into his Ter-
vice, and he attended him in divers expeditions, par-
ticularly that of Tunis. He painted feveral hiftori-.
cal events of that enterprize, the defigns of which
were afterwards executed in magnificent tapeftries,
for Philip 11. who left them in Portugal, where they
remain to this day. He work'd a long time in the
roonaftcry of St. Gervaife at Arras, in Bruffels, and
m other cities of the Low-Countries. The empe-
ror Charles V. loved to fee him •, for befides that he
was handfome and well-made, his beard was folono-,
that when he flood upright, it touched the ground’
for which he was called John the Bearded. He
died at Bruflels, Anno 1559, * n the fifty-ninth year
of his age. His tomb is in St. George’s church, as
allb his epitaph, which he wrote himlelf.
AN T H O N T MORE,
A Native of Utrecht, was difciple to John
Schorel, and a great imitator of nature. His
manner was ftrong, true and firm. He drew a
*afl number of portraits in the courts of Spain,
i ortugal, and that of Charles V. for which he was
paid very high prices, befides the prefents that were
made him ; by which means he got a good eftate
He travelled into Italy, and tho’ his chief bufinefs
was drawing of portraits, he has, however, done
feme hiflories very fine in their kind. There is one
ot thele in the Prince of Conde’s cabinet, in which
S our


our Saviour is reprefented rifen from the dead, be-
tween St. Peter and Sc. Paul. The merchant, who
fold this picture to the prince, got a great deal of
money by fhewing it at the fair of Sc. Germain.
There is an equal degree of force and truth in it.
Anthony More died at Antwerp, at fifty-fix years of
age.
PETER BRUEGHEL ,
Called
Old BRUEGHEL ,
TOOK his name from the place of his birth
Brueghel , near Breda. He was a peafant’s
fon, and Peter Kouc’s difciple, whofe daughter be
married. He work’d with Jeremy Kouc, after
whofe manner he did a great many tilings. He
went to France, and afterwards to Italy. Tho’ he
has treated of all forts of fubjedls, yet he delighted
moft in drawing fports, dances, marriages, and
meetings of country-people; among whom he often
mingled himfelf, to rake the more exad notice of
their adfions, and to fee what they did at thofe
times ; which obfervations made him the bell: pain-
ter of that kind that ever was. He ftudied land-
fkips in the mountains of Friuli, was very ftudious
and referved, minding nothing but what contri-
buted to his advancement in the knowledge of his
profeflion, wherein he became very famous. There
are feveral of his pictures in the Emperor’s cabinet,
and the refi of his works are difperfed up and down
Europe, efpecially in the Low-Countries, He en-
ter’d himfelf in the Academy of Painters at Ant-
werp,
FR 4 NS


FRANS F L O R IS
WAS the Ton of a good fculptor at Antwerp,
and followed his father’s profefllon till he
was twenty years old, when he went to Liege to
learn the art of Painting of Lambert Lombard, and
from thence travelled to Italy, where he applied him-
felf ftrenuoufly to defigning. Accordingly he de-
figned every thing that was to his gotit, and above
all, Michael Angelo’s works. When he returned
into his own country, he grew famous and rich, his
performances being good and numerous *, but tho’
he was a man of fenfe, and his converfation agree-
able to perfons of the beft condition, yet he aban-
doned himfelf fo to the love of wine, that he be-
came intolerable even to his moft intimate friends:
neverthelefs, he loved his bufinefs as much as he did
his bottle. He work’d feven hours a day with ap-
plication and pleafure, and the remaining part he
fpent with his drinking companions. He never
played unlefs he was forced to it, and ufed to fay,
My work keeps me alive, but play would kill me.
He was called the Raphael of Flanders. He died
Anno 1570, at 50 years old.
CHRISTOPHER SCHWARTS
WAS born at Ingolftadt, and painter to the
Duke of Bavaria. He did a vaft number
of pieces at Munich, as well in frefco as in oil.
Sandrart fpeaks much in his commendation, and as
if he was one of the moft fkilful painters of his age,
efpecially in frefco. He died anno 1594.
WILLIAM KA T,
OF Breda, ftudied the art of Painting at Liege
with Frans Floris, under Lambert Lombard.
Sandrart having commended him as a fkillful pain-
ter, praifes him alfo as a man of honour. He Jived
at


at Antwerp very fplendidly. He drew a great num-
ber of portraits, little inferior to thofe of Anthony
More.
As he was drawing the duke of Alva’s pidure,
an officer belonging to the courts of juftice came to
receive his excellency’s orders concerning the count
d’Egmont. Kay pretended he did not underftand
Spaniffi, fo the duke fpoke his mind freely in his
prefence, and bad the officer fee that the count was
executed without delay; wffich order made fuch an
impreffion on the mind of our Painter, who loved
the Nobility of his country, that he went home, fell
Tick, and died, anno 1568.
HUBERT G 0 L TIU S,
A Native of Venlo, was bred up at Wirtemburg,
where his parents lived, and learnt the firft
principles of his art of Lambert Lombard. He had
a particular genius for antiquity, and publiffi’d fe-
veral large and fine volumes on the hiltory of me-
dals. He did little in painting. He had two
wives, and the latter was fo ill-humour’d, that it
Ihorten’d his days.
FEVER and FRANCIS POURBUS,
FAther and Son, the former born at Goude, and
' the latter at Bruges. -Each of them in the
place of his birth did a great many fine pieces which
are yet in the churches, and remain fufficient proofs
of their capacity. Francis having been, for fome
time, his father’s difciple, remov’d to Frans Floris,
whom he excell’d in colouring. He was a better
Painter than his father, and there are admirable
pidures of his drawing in the town-houfe at Paris.
The father dy’d in the Year 1583, and the fon,
anno 1622.
DITERIC


DI T E R 1 C B A R E NT,
OF Amfterdam, was Ton of a very ordinary Pain-
ter, but the darling difciple of Titian, with
whom he liv’d a long while, and whofe picture he
drew, which is now in the hands of Peter Ifaac, a
Painter in Amfterdam. When he left Venice, he
return’d to that city and fettled there, where he
perform’d many'rare pieces, and died at forty-eight
years old, anno 1582.
JOHN ISOL,
OF Mechlin, was born in the year 1534, he was
a very fkilful man, and work’d almoft always
in little, as well in oil, as in miniature and diftem-
per. He was employ’d two years by the eleCtor
Palatine at Heidelberg, from whence he went to
Mons, and thence to Amfterdam, where he died,
anno 1593. Goltius engrav’d his epitaph, and his
picture with it. James and Rowland Savery were
his difciples. v
MA R TI N HEMS KIRK,
WAS a peafant’s fon. His father liv’d in a
village call’d Hemfkirk in Holland, where
Martin was born. In his youth he was fo dull, that
the mafter, with whom he was put, fent him back
to his father, despairing that he would ever be good
for any thing. Hemfkirk’s genius, like fruit that is
ripe late, fome time after ftirr’d him up to try once
more his fuccefs in the art. He went to another
mafter, and by indefatigable application arrived to a
great degree of perfection in his profefiion. He
was fome time under thedifcipline of Schorel, whofe
reputation made him defirous to learn of him. His
genius.


genius, by little and little, made its way thro* all
difficulties, and he became a correct Painter, eafy
and fruitful in his inventions. He went to Rome,
and intended to ftay there a long time; but after he
had been there about three years, an accident hap-
pen’d to him, which obliged him to return to his
own country. He fettled at Harlem, and liv’d
there the remainder of his days. Molt of his works
were cngrav’d. Vafari gives a particular account of
them, commends them, and fays, Michael Angelo
was fo pleas’d with one of the prints, that he had a
mind to colour it. However, one may fee by the prints
of Hemfkirk’s works, that he did not underhand
the Claro Ofcuro, and that his manner of defigning
was dry. He was threefcore and fixteen years old
when he died, anno 1574.
CHARLES Van MANNER
TTTASa gentleman born. His father was lord
VV t^ie manor Meulebrac in Flanders,
where hisfon Charles was bred, and a great deal of
care taken about his education. The youth fhewing
early an inclination to painting, his father put him
to Lucas de Heer, a famous Painter in thofe days,
and afterwards to Peter Udalric. While he was
under the difcipline of the latter, he drew feveral
hiftory-pieces, taking the fubjedts from the holy
feriptures: At the fame time he wrote plays, for he
was a poet as well as a Painter. When he was about
twenty-fix years old he went to Rome, where he
flay’d three years, and then remov’d to Germany.
At Vienna he made feveral triumphal arches for the
emperor Rodolphus’s publick entries, after which he
return’d to Meulebrac, the Place of his nativity.
The war breaking out about religion, he retir’d
to Courtray, where he painted feveral things for the
R churches.


churches, and particularly a Saint Catherine, wfych.
was very much commended. j
When he return’d to his eftate at Meulebrao, he
was robb’d of all he had, and having nothing left
for his fubfiflance, he went aboard a veffel bound
for Haerlem, where he foon recover’d the wealth he
had loft, and fpent his time in the exercifes of paint-
ing and poetry. Among other things, he drew the
hiftory of Chrift’s paffion, the prints of which were
grav’d by Geyen. Goltius, and the two Cornelius’s
joining with him, they form’d a fort of academy in
the city of Haerlem, to defign after nature, for the
inftrudion of young Painters. His works, in profe
and verfe, are fo numerous, we fhould tire the rea-
der to name them all here. Befides a treatife of
painting, he wrote the lives of the Flemifh Painters.
He was kill’d by an ignorant phyfician in the fixty-
eighth year of his age, anno 1607. His body lies
bury’d in. the old church at Amfterdam.
He had a Ton, whofe name was Charles, of his
father’s humour and profefTion : the king of Den-
mark invited him to Copenhagen, where he lived
with the reputation of a fkilful man.
MARTIN de VOS ,
OF Antwerp, travell’d all over Italy. He was
corred in his defigns, and eafy in his inven-
tion j but there is nothing that touches one in his
performances: However, they are very numerous,
moft of them are engrav’d, and the prints are to be
feen. ’Twas after his defigns that the Sadelers grav’d
their hermits. He alfo drew the defigns of the life
of Chrift, which Vierx engrav’d. He was very fat,
and very old when he died, which was in the year of
our Lord, 1604.
JOHN


JOHN Sf R AD A
WAS born at Bruges, anno 1527, and defen-
ded from the ancient and noble family of the
Strada’s, which, after the death of Charles de
Goude, the thirteenth earl of Flanders, who was
aflfafllnated for his tyranny in St. Dona’s church in
Bruges, was difpers’d up and down every where, and
became almoft extindl. The Painter we are fpeak-
ing of went to Italy, and remained fome time at
Florence, where he perform’d feveral pieces in fref-
co, and in oil, for the great duke. Vafari fet him
to work on the paintings which were drawing in
that prince’s cabinet. He defign’d horfes very well,
and his genius made him incline to paint huntings.
He died, anno 1604. in the 77th year of his age.
Tempefta was his difciplc.
BAR? HO to MEW SR RANCHER
WAS thefon of a merchant of Antwerp, where
he was born in the year 1546. He learnt
the principles of his art of feveral matters* and then
went to Rome, where cardinal Farnefe took him into
his fervice. This cardinal having undertaken to ad-
vance him, recommended him to pope Pius V. who
employ’d him at Belvedere, where Sprangher was
thirty-eight months drawing the picture of the day
of judgment, which pidlure is ftill over that pope’s
tomb. While he was working upon it, Vafari told
his holinels, that whatever Sprangher did, was fo
tntich time loft. Whether he Ipoke it out of envy*
0r out of dittike of Sprangher’s manner, we cannot
decide ; ’tis probable it might be from an ill opinion
°f his performances; for ’tis ft range that Sprangher,
w ho form’d his manner in Italy, fhould have im-
prov’d it no more by the beautiful things he faw
R 2r there.


there, and fliould give himfelf up entirely to the
■warmth of an irregular fancy. I fay this without
any intention to leflen the merit of his works, which
have a great deal of fpirit in them, and were eiteem’d
by many perfons of quality, efpecially by the pope,
who commanded him to go on, notwithftanding
whatVafari faid againft him: however, *twas on
condition he fliould fliew hisdefigns before he began
any piftures for his holinefs, to the end they might
be corrected where they wanted it. By this means
Spranghcrfinilh’dhis thoughts,which bcforewere little
more than {ketches ftruck out of the fire of his ima-
gination: Upon all which we may make this reflec-
tion, that ’twas not his gout of defign that pleas’d
the pope and the Romans, who approv’d his perfor-
mances, but that there was fome other part of the
art in the manner of this Painter, which was un-
known to Vafari, and which had fo good an effe<st
on the eyes of fuch as were not prejudic’d againft
him, that it fupported the character of his works, in
fpitc ofjealoufy or envy.
Sprangher, after having made abundance ot pic-
tures in feveral places of Rome, was chofen, by
John of Bologna, the duke of Florence’s fculptor,
t 0 be fent to the emperor Maximilian 11. who had
defired a fkilful Painter of him. Sprangher did a
areat quantity of pidfures for that emperor, and Ro-
dolphus who fucceeded him at Vienna and Prague.
He went afterwards into his own country, and tra-
veled from one city to another in the Netherlands,
having been abfent from thence thirty-feven years.
He was very much honour’d wherever he came,
and when he had feen all the places he intended to
fee and vifited all his friends, he returned to
Prague, where he fettled, and died in a very old
age.
HE NR T


H E N R r G 0 L r 1u s,
WA S the Ton of John Goltius, a famous
painter on glafs. He was born in the year
1558. in a village call’d Mulbrec, in the dutchy of
Juliers. He learnt his art at Hacrlem, and marry’d
there. His wife had had a former hufband, and
by him a fon, whole name was Matthew, whom
Goltius taught to engrave. His troubles, occafion’d
by fome croffes in his domeftic affairs, threw him
.into a diffemper which turn’d to a fhortnefs of
breath, and that to fpitting of blood, which con-
tinu’d three years, and he could find no remedy for
it: in defpair of life he refolv’d to travel to Italy.
His friends did what they cou’d to diffuade him
from a journey, which they thought none but a
mad-man wou’d undertake in his condition. They
fhew’d him what danger he was about to run, and
that his health was fo ill fettled it might coft him
his life. He anfwer’d, “He had rather die learn-
“ ing fomething, than live in fuch a languifhing
“ ffate as he was in •, and that fince his own country
“ agreed with him no better, he would try an-
“ other.” Acoordingly he went thro’ moft of the
chief cities of Germany, where he vifited the
Painters, and the curious. To prevent his being
known, he pafs’d for his man’s fervant, pretending
he was entertain’d by him for his fkill in painting.
By this means he heard what one and t’other faid
of his works, without knowing who he was, which
was a great pleafure to him. His difguife, his di-
verfion, the exercife of his journey, and the diffe-
rent air of the countries thro’ which he traveil’d,
had Inch an effeft upon his mind and body, that he
recover’d his former health and vigour.
Pie defign’d an infinite number of pieces at Rome
a nd Naples, as well after the antique, as after Ra-
R 3 phael,


phael, Polidoro, and other famous matters. He
painted very little himfelf, and his diftemper tak-
ing him again, he was forc’d to enter into a new
courle of phyfic. The phyficians cur’d him by 3
milk diet, and advis’d him to return to his native
air. He came back to Haerlem, where he grav’d
feveral things in fevcral manners, and at laft hav T
ing form’d a particular one, he put forth abun-
dance of fine prints, drawn after the defigns which
he brought out of Italy with him.
One may perceive, by the prints that were of
his invention, that his gout of defigning was not
very natural, and that his manner had fomethiug
in it that was wild : however, ’tis vifible alfo, that
he manag’d his graver with great fteadipefs, and
extraordinary lightnefs. He dy’d at Haerlem, an-
no 1617. at fifty-nine years of age.
JOHN VAN AC H,
SO call’d from the place of his father’s abode,
which was Ach la Chapelle. He he himfelf
was born at Cologn, in the year 1556. Having
been Sprangher’s difciple for fome time, he travel-
led from one city to another, all over Italy, feek-
ing after opportunities to improve himfelf in the
ttudy of his art. From Italy he went to Germany,
where the emperor Rodolphus took him into fa-
vour, and fent him to Rome to defign the an-
tiques. This prince was a paflionate lover of the
fine arts, a good critic in them, and a great en-
courager of merit in all artifts. John van Ach, at
his return, work’d a long while for the emperor.
His performances deferve praife, and got him the
charader of the greateft mailer of his time. The'
emperor valu’d him as well for his prudence, as
fkill j and he employ’d all his credit at the imperial
court, to oblige men of merit. He dy’d there
I loaden


Laden with riches and honour, and belov’d and
cdeem’d by ail that knew him.
JOSEPH H E I N TS,
OF Bern, was entertain’d in the emperor Ro-
dolphus’s fervice, at the fame time that John
van Ach, Sprangher, Hufnagle, Brueghel, Row-
land Savery, John and Giles Sadeler, and others
were employ’d by him. The emperor fent him
into Italy, to defign the fined datues and pidures,
and he fucceeded lb well therein, that he was par-
ticularly favour’d by that prince, for whom he did
a great many admirable pieces, which were engrav’d
by the Sadeler’s, Lucas Killan, and Ifaac Mayer of
Francfort. He dy’d at Prague, very much la-
mented by perfons of the bed quality, for he was
himfelf a man of honour. He had a lon, who
was a painter.
MATTHEW and PAUL BRIL , Brothers,
OF Antwerp, were good landfkip-painters,
and good topographers. Matthew being
employ’d on the works of the Vatican, his brother
Paul came to Rome, where they did each of them
feveral things in frefco. Matthew dy’d in the year
1584. Paul his younger brother, who liv’d to be
72 years old, left a vad number of rare pieces be-
hind him, when he departed this life, anno 1622.
His works are in mod of the cabinets of the curi-
ous, and very much edeem’d by them.
CORNELIUS CORNELIUS ,
OF Haerlem, was fon of Peter Cornelius, a
fkilful painter. He was born in the year
1562. and tho’ he had never been in Italy, drew a
R 4 great


great many very fine pieces, and bred up good dif-
ciples. He join’d with Charles van Mander, in
in erecting an academy of painting at Haerlem,
about the year of our Lord 1595.
ADAM van N 0 0 R T,
OF Antwerp, was Ton and difciple of Lambert
van Ncort. He painted in great, and had
the reputation of being a mafter. He was fo full
of bufinefs, he had not time to go out of his own
country. He was Ruben’s firft mafter, and dy’d
at Antwerp, anno 1641. being fourfcore and four
years old.
0 rHO V E Nlu s,
R Odtavio Venus, a Dutchman, was de-
fcended of a considerable family in the city
of Leyden, and born in the year 1556. He was
carefully educated by his parents in the ftudy of the
Belles Lettres. He learn’d at the fame time to de-
fign of Ifaac Nicholas. He was but fifteen years
old when the civil wars obliged him to leave
his country * he retir’d to Liege, finifh’d his ftu-
dies, and there gave the firft proofs of the beauty
of his mind. He was particularly known to Car-
dinal Groofbeck, who gave him Letters of Recom-
mendation when he went to Rome, where he was
entertain’d by Cardinal Maduccio. His genius was
fo adtive, that he at once apply’d himfelf to philo-
fophy, poetry, the mathematics and painting. He
became a great proficient in dcfigning under the
difcipline ol Frederico Zucchero. He acquir’d an
excellence in all the parts of painting, efpccially
in the knowledge of the Claro Ofcuro; by which
he was reckon’d in Italy, to be one of the moft in-
genious and moft univerfal men of his age. He
liv’d


liv’d at Rome feven years, during which time he
perform’d fevcral rare pieces, and then paffing into
Germany, was receiv’d into the emperor s fervice.
After this the duke of Bavaria and the eledlor of
Cologn employ’d him ; but all the advantages that
he got by his fervice in the courts of foreign
princes, cou’d not detain him there; he had a de-
fire to return into the low-countries, whereof Alex-
ander Farnefe, prince of Parma, was then gover-
nor. He drew his picture, arm’d cap-a-pe, which
confirm’d his reputation in the Netherlands. After
th: death of that prince, Venius retir’d to Antwerp,
where he adorn’d the principal churches with his
paintings. The arch-duke Albert, who fucceeded
the prince of Parma in the government of the Low-
countries, fent for him to BrufTels, made him ma-
iler of the mint, and tho’ it took up much time,
Otho found leifure to exercife himfelt in his profef-
fion. He drew the arch-duke, and his wife the
infanta Ifobella’s portraits in great, which were fent
to James I. king of Great-Britain ; and to ihew h s
knowledge of polite learning, as well as that of
painting, he publifb’d feveral treadles, embellifhing
them with cuts of his own defigning; as Horace s
emblems, the life of Thomas Aquinas, and the
emblems of love, all which I have feen, and in
which there is a great deal of art and grace. Ve-
nius dedicating the emblems of profane love to the
Infanta Ifabella, fhe oblig’d him to do the like by
divine love. Lewis XIII. made him very fair of-
fers to tempt him to enter into his fervice, but he
wou*d never leave his own country, fatisfying him-
felf with the character and employments he held
there. He was the firft fince Polidore Caravaggio,
who reduc’d the Claro Ofcuro, to a principle of the
art of painting. Rubens perfedled what he began,
and the whole Flemifh fchool learn’d it of him.
Venius dy’d at BrufTels, anno 1634* * n three-
fcore


fcore and eighteenth year of his age. He had two
brothers, Gilbert, who was a graver, and Peter, a
painter. He had alfo the honour to breed up the
famous Rubens in his art.
JOHN BO TT EN HAMER,
WA S born at Munich in Bavaria, in the
year 1564. He learnt the rudiments of
painting of his father ; but he form’d his manner in
Italy, under the difcipline of Tintoret, whofe dif-
ciple he was. He painted in frefco and in oil:
his invention was eal'y and agreeable: he work’d
very much in frefco at Munich and Augfburg,
where there are great proofs of his ability ftill re-
maining. He got money apace, but being extrava-
gant, fquander’d it away as fall as he got it.
PETER CORNELIUS DERICK ,
OF the city of Delft, imitated Baflano’s man-
ner fo naturally, that the curious are often
deceiv’d by if.
Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS ,
WHom, in fome fort, we may call the honour
of painting, was originally of Antwerp,
where his father John Rubens, of noble extraction,
held the office of counfellor in the fenate : when the
civil wars broke out, they oblig’d him to leave his
country, and retire to Cologn, in which city his fon
Peter Paul Rubens was born in the year 1577. The
care his parents took of his education, and the vi-
vacity of his wit made every thing cafy to him,
that he had a mind to learn. He was fo ingenious,
that ’twas thought his merit wou’d advance him to
his father’s poll: but he had not refolv’d upon any
profeffion


profeflion when his father dy’d, and the troubles
in the Netherlands abating, his family return’d to
Antwerp. He continu’d there his ftudies of the
Belles Lettres, and at his Icifure hours, diverted him-
felf with defigning, feeling in himfelf a ftrong incli-
nation to the exercife of that art, to which he was
carry’d away by a fecret impulfe of nature, who had
low’d the feeds of it deep in his mind. His mo-
ther, perceiving his defires to improve himfelf in
it grew Wronger every day, permitting him to learn
to defign of Adam Van Noort, who was a painter
of fome note; but when Rubens had been long
enough with him to fee that he was not for his
purpofe, he remov’d to Otho Venius, who was not
only a good painter, but a man of wit, mafter of
the principles of his art, and well vers’d in the Bel-
les Lettres. Thefe rare qualities agreeing with Ru-
bens’s genius, the mafter and difciple contracted an
intimate friendlhip, and this was the occafion of
his giving himfelf up entirely to his art, which
he at firft intended to learn only for his pleafure; to
which, the loffes his family fuffer’d in the civil wars,
were no fmall inducement.
He learn’d with fo much eafe, and work’d with
fo much application, that ’twas not long before he
equall’d his mafter. He only wanted to improve
his talent by travel: to that end he went to Venice,
and in the fchool of Titian, perfected his know-
ledge of the principles of colouring.
• In this city he became acquainted with one of the
duke of Mantua’s gentlemen, who propos’d to him,
on behalf of his mafter, to enter into that duke’s
fervice in the fame quality. The excellent paintings
which are at Mantua, and of which Rubens had
heard much talk, were the chief motives to his ac-
cepting this propofal. He foon grew in credit at
the court of Mantua, where having carefully ftu-
dy’d Julio Romano’s works, he made no long ftay.
Thence


Thence he went to Rome, and with the fame care
apply’d himfelf to the fludy of the antique, the
works of Raphael, and every thing that might con-
tribute to his perfection in his art. What was a-
greeable to his gout he made his own, either by
copying, or making reflections upon it, which he
prefently wrote down *, and he generally accompa-
ny’d thofe reflections with defigns, drawn with a
light ftroke of his pen, carrying always about him
two or three fheets of blank-paper for that purpofe.
While he was in Rome, he drew the pictures for
the altar of the church of Santa Croce, and others
for the Chiefa Nova, belonging to the fathers of
the oratory.
He had been feven years following his ftudies in
Italy, when he receiv’d advice that his mother was
dangeioufly ill. He took poft immediately and re-
turn d to Antwerp, but his mother dy’d before
his arrival. Soon after he marry’d Katherine de
Brents, with whom he liv’d four years. He loved
her extremely, and when fhe dy’d, was fo troubled
at her death, that he left Antwerp for fome time,
endeavouring to divert his forrow by a journey to
Holland. He went to Utrecht, to vifit Huntorft,
lor whom he had a great value: Sandrarr, who was
then Huntorfl s difciple, waited upon Rubens to all
the cities of Holland, and fays, that as they were
on their way from one town to another, Rubens,
fpeaking of the works of the painters, that he had
feen in his journey, preferred Huntorfl’s manner of
painting, and Blomaert’s compofltions, to any he
had feen; and that he was fo in love with Cornelius
Polemburgh’s pictures in Little, that he defired
him to draw fbme for him. Rubens’s fccond wife
was Helena Forman, who was indeed a Helen for
beauty, and help’d him very much in the figures of
women, which he painted.
Rubens’s


Rubens’s reputation fpreading over all Europe,
there was never a painter but coveted to have fome-
thing or other of his drawing ; and he was fo im-
portuned on this account, that he was forced to leave
his defigns to be executed by his difciples, whofe
pictures he touched over again with frefh views, a
lively underftanding, and a readinefs of hand, an-
fwerable to the quicknefs of his wit, which got him
a good eftatc in a fmall time. But there is a vaft
deal of difference between thefe pieces, and thofe
that were all of his own drawing. The former are
an injury to the reputation of the latter, for they
are generally ill defigned, and lightly painted.
Queen Mary of Medicis, wife of Henry IV. be-
ing defirous that Rubens fhould paint the Luxem-
burg galleries at Paris, invited him to come thither ;
whither he came, at her requeft, to take a view of
the places, and draw his defigns for two of thofe
galleries. The hiftory of that queen’s life, was in-
tended for the fubjed of one of his pieces, and the
life of Henry IV. for the other. Rubens began the
gallery firft, that was to be painted with the ftory
of the life of Mary of Medicis, which he finilh’d ;
but the king’s death happening prefently after,
hinder’d his compleating the hiftory of his reign,
towards which he had begun feveral pictures. The
queen, who loved painting, and defigned very
neatly herfelf, obliged Rubens to draw two of the
pidures that were part of her (lory, in her prefence,
that (he might have the pleafure to fee him paint.
While Rubens was at Paris, the Duke of Bucking-
ham happened to come there, and became acquain-
ted with him. He was taken with his good fenfe ;
and finding it to be equally folid and penetrating,
he recommended him to the Infanta Ifabella, who
made him her ambaffador in England, to negotiate
a peace with King Charles I. in the name of her
nephew Philip IV. king of Spain, and in her own.
The


The treaty took effeft, and King Charles, in ac-
knowledgment of the fervice he had done the
crown of England, prefented him, in full parlia-
ment, with a fword and garter, both of them en-
riched with diamonds, and together worth twelve
thoufand crowns.
[We muft dcfire the reader’s excufe for giving him
the trouble of reading the laft paragraph,which is as
falfe as ridiculous * but there fcarce ever was a French
hiftorian,who out of the inveterate hatred the French
bear naturally our nation, has not every where, when
hefpeaks of the affairs of England,done it with all
the difodvantage and falfhood that malice could fug-
ged:. Even this writer, otherwife fair and equal in
his report of things, cannot forbear refle&ing on the
honour of our country, and to do it is guilty of the
grcateft abfurdity in the world. He makes King
Charles prefent Rubens with gifts to the value of
three thoufand pounds, for concluding a peace be-
tween England and Spain, as if England was fo
fond of the friendfhip of the Spaniards, or fo a-
fraid of their power, that fhe thought (he could not
reward the man fufficiently, that had been a chief
inffrument in the treatywhich is as likely as that
the king fhould do him fo much honour in full par-
liament-, a falfity too obvious fo need confutation.
But fuch is the veracity of the French writers, when
they have any thing to fay of England, they will not
name thole of our nation, whom they cannot, with-
out more than common affurance, mention but with
honour and for that reafon the whole Englilh
fchool was funk by this hiftorian. We fhall fay more
of it hereafter. The truth of Rubens’s fuccefs in
the court of England, is: He concluded the treaty*
and painted the banquetting-houfe, for which the
king paid him fo much money; and as he was a
man of merit, knighted him. He fold the Duke
of


of Buckingham fo many pictures, ftatues, medals
and antiquities, that the Duke paid him ten thou-
fand pounds for the purchafe. He was his intimate
friend ; and Rubens’s charadler was fuch, that the
Duke got as much honour by Rubens’s friendfhip,
as Rubens did by his *, for if the one was great in fa-
vour, riches, power and dignities, the other was as
great in fame, merit, knowledge, and the glory of
being the prince of his profeflion. To return to
Monfieur de Pile’s hiftory of him.]
When he went to Spain, to give Philip an ac-
count of his negotiation, he had alfo the honour of
knighthood from him, befides many magnificent
prefents. He drew the portraits of the Royal Fa-
mily, and copied fome of Titian’s for his own
ufe.
While Rubens was in Spain, Don John, Duke
of Braganza, (who was afterwards king of Por-
tugal) being a lover of painting, and hearing
much talk of Rubens’s excellence in that art,
wrote to fome Lords that were his friends in
the court of Madrid, to defire they would fo
order the matter, that Rubens might vifit him at
Villa Vitiofa, the place of his refidence. Rubens
was well enough pleafed with the journey, and
let out with a great train, which fome of the
Duke’s friends giving him notice of, he was fo
frighted that he Tent a gentleman to meet him, and
tell him, the duke his mailer being obliged to go
from home about an extraordinary affair, defired
him not to come any farther, and that he would ac-
cept of fifty piftoles for the charge he had been at in
coming fo far. Rubens refufed the piftoles, faying,
he did not want any fuch fupply, having brought
two thoufand along with him, which he intended to
fpend in the duke’s court in fifteen days, the time
he had allotted for his flay there.
Sir


Sir Peter returning to Flanders, had the poft of
fecretary of ftate conferred on him; however, he
did not leave off his profeffion, the extent of his
underftanding being large enough to do the duties
of his office, and toexercife himfelf in his arc. Thus
loaden with riches and honour he lived feveral years.
At laft the gout, with which he had been a long
time afflicted, flew up to his ftomach, and killed
him, anno 1640, in the fixty-third year of his age.
He left two Tons by his fecond wife •, the eldeft fuc-
ceeded him in the office of fecretary of ftate, and
the other was very well provided for by the fhare of
his father’s eftate, which fell to him.
He was good-natur’d and obliging ; his genius
was full of fire, his fcnfe fblid and fublime. He
was univerfally learned; and for the policencfs of
his manners, and the perfection of his knowledge,
he was beloved and efteemed by perfons of the beft
rank. He fpoke fix languages; and when he wrote
to men of learning, or made any obfervations on
his art, he always did it in Latin.
Never painter produced fo many, and fo great
compofitions as Rubens. The palaces of feveral
princes, and the churches in Flanders, can give fub-
ftantial proofs of this affertion. *Tis difficult to
decide where his fineft pieces are. There is hardly
a place in Europe, but has fome token of his abi-
lity ; however, the cities of Antwerp and Paris,
feem to be the depofitories of his moft valuable
paintings. The good judges and fkilful painters,
who examine his works with care, will eafily be
convinced that Rubens not only carried the art of
painting to a very high degree, but that he opened
a way, which will lead thole that proceed in it, to
perfection.
He had a great many .good difciples, as David
Teniers, Van Dyck, Jordan, Jouft, Soutmans,
Diepembeck, Van Tulden, Van Mol, Van Houk,
Erafmus


Erafmus Quillinus, and others ; of all whom Van
Dyck diftinguiflied himfelf moft, and did his ma-
iler rnoft honour.
Rubens at firll propofed to himfelf to imitate
Michael Angelo da Caravaggio’s manner of paint-
ing; but finding it too laborious, he left it, and
form’d another more expeditious and agreeable to
his genius.
One Brendel, a painter, who was alfo a famous
chymift, coming to fee him, alked him if he would
join with him in feaiching after the philofopher’s-
flone, telling him to encourage him, he had little more
to do to come at it, and they might both of them
make their fortunes by it. Rubens anfwered. He
came too late by above twenty years, for he had
himfelf found out the philofopher’s Hone, by the
help of his pencil and colours.
Abraham Johnfon, a fkilful painter of Antwerp,
whofe only fault was lazinefs and debauchery, com-
plaining of fortune, and being jealous of Rubens,
challeng’d him, propofing to him to draw each a
picture, as a trial of (kill, and to leave it to certain
criticks, to determine whofe performance was beft.
Rubens did not think fit to accept of the challenge,
anfwering. That he willingly yielded the preference
to him ; that both of them fhould continue to do
their belt, which he intended to the utmoft of his
power, and no doubt the public would do them
both juftice.
s
REFLEXIONS


-REFLEXIONS on the WORKS
O F
Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS.
’HpIS very eafy to perceive by the works of this
JL painter, that his genius was of the firfb or-
der, which he cultivated by a profound knowledge
in all forts of literature, by a nice enquiry into every
thing that had relation to his profeflion, and by in-
defatigable labour. Thus his invention was inge-
nious, and accompanied with all thofe circumftances
that were worthy of a place in his fubjed. He pain-
ted in all kinds, often the fame things, but very
differently. No man ever treated allegorical fub-
jeds fo learnedly and clearly as Rubens ; and as al-
legories are a Tort of language which conftantly
ought to be authorized by ufe, and generally under-
ffood, he always introduced thofe fymbols in his
pieces, which medals, and other monuments of an-
tiquity, have rendered familiar, at lead, to the
learned.
As his invention was ingenious, fo his difpofition
was advantageous; every particular objed in his
pidures was feen with pleafure itlelf, and contributed
allb to the good effed of the whole together.
Tho* Rubens lived feven years in Italy ♦, tho* he
made a confiderable colledion of medals, ftatues,
and engraved ftones j tho* he examined, underftood,
and extolled the beauty of the Antique, as appears
by a manufeript of his, the original of which is in
my cuftody, yet, thro’ education, and the nature
of his country, he fell into a Flemifh charader, and
fometimes made ah ill choice, offending againft the
irregularity of defign : However, tho* this is a fault
that is blameable wherever it is found, and tho’ his
knitting ot the joints is a little too extravagant, yet
x the


the beft judges muft c'onfefs, that Rubens was very
far from being ignorant in defigning ; for in moft
of his pictures he has fhewn a great deal of pene-
tration in it. There is a piece of his drawing in the
city of Gaunt, a reprefentation of the fall of the
damned, in which there are near 200 figures de-
figned with a good gufto, and very corredlly. By
this we may perceive, that Rubens’s errors in de-
figning proceeded from the rapidity of his produc-
tions.
There are abundance of his pidlures at Paris, e-
fpecialiy in the Luxemburg galleries. I refer the
impartial cricicks to thofe pieces, and they will find
enough, in the divinities and principal figures at
lead, to fatisfy the nicety of their judgment.
He exprefied his fubjedls with equal energy and
perfpicuity, to which he added noblenefs and gran-
deur. His particular exprefiions are fuitable to the
fubjedt. The fpedtator is every where moved by
them, and there are Tome of them of a fublime cha-
racter.
His attitudes are fimple and natural without cold*
nefs, contrafted and animated without exaggeration,
and varied with prudence.
His figures are adjufted with a good gofst, and
his draperies are fet with art. They are diverfified
and agreeable to the fex, age and dignity of the
perfons rcprefcnted. The folds are large, well
placed, and expofe the naked' without afiedlation.
He has fhewn as much judgment in his landfkips
as in his figures •, and when he reprefents profpedts
naturally ungrateful and infipid as thofe of Flanders
are, he renders them picquant by the claro ofeuro,
and by the accidents which he introduces into his
compofition. The forms of his trees are not very
elegant. They refemble thofe of his own coun-
ty too much, and his touches are not fo fine as
Titian’s
S 2 Hs


His architecture is heavy, and has fomething of
the Gothic in it. He often makes ufe of the li-
cences *, but they are judicious, advantageous, and
imperceptible.
Every thing that depends on colouring is admi-
rable in Rubens. He advanced the knowledge of
the Claro Ofcuro more than any painter ever did,
and fliew’d the neceffity of it.
By his example, he made the method of pleating
the eyes a precept. Ele colleCled his objeCts after
the manner of a bunch of grapes, of which the
grapes that are in the light make altogether a mafs
of light, and thofe that are in the dark, a mafs of
darknefs. Thus all the grapes making one Tingle
objedt, the eyes behold them without diftraClion,
and may, at the fame time, diftinguilh them with-
out confufion.
[The reader will perceive we differ in the tranfla-
tion of this fimile, from the transition of the fame
comparifon in the firft chapter. As plain and fa-
miliar as it feemed to Monfieur de Piles, and the
painters, we wanted to be more enlightned in it to
make it clear to fuch as are not of the profefiion.
We have been literal in rendering ic into Englifh in
this place, and becaufe Monfieur de Piles has exa-
mined it better in his obfervations on Monfieur de
Frefnoy’s art of painting, we fhall add that expla-
nation to this here. His words are thefe:]
Titian, by this judicious and familiar comparifon ,
means that a painter ought to collctt the objects, and to
difpofe them in fuch a manner as to compofe one whole,
the fever al contiguous parts of which may be enlighten'd,
many floadowed, and others of broken colours , to he in
the turnings , as on a hunch of grapes , many grapes ,
which are the parts of it, are in the light, many in the
(hadow, and the refi faintly coloured , to make them go
farther hack. Titian once told Tint or et , that in his
greatefi


great eft works a bunch of grapes had been his principal
rule y and his fur eft guide.
This aflemblage of obje&s and light is called a
groupe, and let the number of the figures that en-
ter into a compofirion be never fo great, Rubens
never made above three groupes in one piece, that
the fight might not be fcattered by a multiplicity
of objeds, alike fenfiblc and expofed. He alfo in-
duftrioufly concealed the artifice as much as poflible,
and only thole that underftand its principles can dil-
cover it.
His carnations are very frefh, each in its charac-
ter. His tints are juft, and employed with a free
hand, without being jumbled by the mixture, for
fear they ifiould fully and lofe too much of their
luftre or truth, which appeared in them when the
work was firft done. Rubens obferved this maxim
with the more care, becaufc his performances are
grand, and confequently to be viewed at a diftance;
wherefore he endeavoured to preferve the character
of his objedls, and the freftmefs of his carnations.
To this end, he not only did his utmoft to keep
his tints pure, but he made ufe of the moft lively
colours to have the effed he intended. He fucceed -
cd in his endeavours, and is the only perfon who
underftood how to join a great luftre to a great cha-
rader of t-uth ; and, among fo much brilliant, to
maintain a harmony, and a furprifing force ; for
which reafon we may reckon the fupreme degree,
to which he railed colouring, to be one of the moft
valuable talents of this painter.
He was a man of univerfal genius, and excelled
as well in hiftory-painting as in portraits, Jandfldps,
animals, and every thing that was proper to be
painted.
His labour was light, his pencil mellow, and his
pidures finilhed, but not like fome painters, who
S S with


with overtraining and earneftnefs of finifhing their
pieces, do them more harm than good. He had
levcral difciples who executed his defigns •, on which
account many pi&ures are attributed to him that
were not of his doing. His own works, to which
he gave the laft hand, fhew that never painter was
more eafy in the execution of his defigns, and that
the wonderful eflfedt which they have on the eyes of
the fpedator, did not proceed fo much from his
confummate experience, as from the certainty of his
principles.
ADAM ELSHEIMER ,
BORN at Frankfort upon the Main, was a tay-
lor’s Ton, and at firft a difcipls of Philip Of-
fenbach, a man of fenfe, who aiming at a great
many things, had little experience of the pradical
part of the art, tho’ he was matter of the theory.
Adam having learned of him as much as he could
peach him, went to Rome, where he fpent the re-
mainder of his days. He was very ftudious, and
exercifed himfelf chiefly in little figures. He finished
every thing he did extremely: his colouring was
good, and hiscompofition ingenious. Count Gaude
of Utrecht graved feven pieces after him with equal
finenefs and force. There were feveral other prints
engraved after his works, part of which he etched
himfelf, and part were graved by Madelain du Pas,
and others.
His memory was fo good, that if he had feen
any thing, he would keep it in his mind for fome
time, and then paint it exa&ly without defigning it
when he firft faw it. Tho’ he lived in reputation
at Rome, and fold his pictures at high prices, yet he
took upfo much time in finifhing them, that he could
not fell enough to anfwer the expence of his houfe :
This made him fo melancholy, that he neglefted
his


his bufmefs, and lived only upon what he could bor-
row ; by which means he ran fo far in debt, that not
being able to get out of if, he was thrown into pri-
fon, where he fell fick; and tho* he was foon re r
leafed, his diftemper continued. He could not bear
the difgrace, nor furvive if. His difeafe and trou-
ble encreafing, carried him to his grave in the year
1610. The Italians themfeives, who had a parti-
cular efleem for him, lamented the Jofs of him.
James-Erneft-Thomas of Landau was his difciple,
and his piflures are fo like Adam’s, that they are
often taken the one for the others.
ABRAHAM BLOMAERT,
BORN at Gorcum, anno 1567, followed his
father to Utrechr, where he was educated, and
always lived. His father was an architect, his
matters fome ordinary painters, whom he met with
by chance ; and he looked upon the time he fpent
with them, as fo much thrown away. He formed
a manner to himfelf after Nature, and as his
genius direfled him. It was eafy, fruitful, grace-
ful, and univerfal. He underftood the Clam
Ofcuro, The folds of his draperies were large,
and had a good effeft j but his gout of defigning
had too much of his own country in it. There
were a vaft number of prints graved by the beft
gravers, after his works. He died at fourfeore
years of age, anno 1647. He had three fons,
of whom Cornelius, the excellent graver, was the
youngeft.
S 4
HEN R T


H E N R T S T E NV 1 C K.
S TEN VICK was the place of his nativity. He
learnt the rudiments of his art of John Uries.
He delighted in drawing the perfpedives of the in-
iides of churches, and did every thing in this way
that could be done. The wars of Flanders drove
him out of his own country to Frankfort, where he
fettled and followed his profcffion till he died, anno
1603. He had a fon who took a fancy to the fame
kind of painting. He was employed by Charles I.
King of England. He Jived very honourably at
London, and when he died, his widow removed to
Amfterdam, where (he got her living by painting
perfpedlives, as her hufband and father-in-law had
done before her.
ABRAHAM JOHNSON ,
/ r XF Antwerp, had a wonderful genius for paint-
ing, and in his youth did fome things that put
him above all the young painters of his time *, but
falling in love, he ncgleded his ftudies and bufi-
refs to follow his courtfhip. The. young woman
liv’d at Antwerp, and he was fo affiduous in his
addreffcs, that he gain’d, and marry’d her. Now,
as if he had no more to do, fince he had got a wife,
he minded nothing but his pleafures, and foon
ipent what he had laid by before he marry’d. Flis
circumftanccs growing low, inftead of blaming his
own lazinefs, he complained of the little juflice done
his merit. He grew jealous of Rubens, challeng-
ed him to draw a pidurc with him, and propos’d
feveral perfons to judge whofe performance was beft
when they had done them. Rubens reply’d, “He
“ willingly fubmitted to him in that point, and the
“ world wou’d do them both jufticc/* refufing to
accept


accept the challenge. There are fome of John-
fon’s works in the churches at Antwerp, and a de-
fcent from the crofs, which he drew for the great
church at Boifleduc, a piece fo admirably well per-
form’d, that it has been taken for Rubens’s, and
indeed, it is not inferior to the works of that
painter.
GERARD S E G R E,
OF Antwerp, went to Rome, and after having
ftudy’d the principles of his art lome time,
gave himfelf up entirely to Manfrede’s manner, and
at laft excell’d him in the force and union of his co-
louring, as one may fee by his painting at Antwerp,
and elfewhere. But Rubens and Vandyke’s manners
being generally approv’d of, Segre was forc’d to
change his, or his pictures wou’d have lain upon his
hands. His good fenfe, and the knowledge he had of
of his art, made the change eafy to him, and he fuc-
ceeded in his new ftyle. He died at Antwerp, in the
year 1651. leaving a fon of his own profeffion be-
hind him.
MICHAEL JOHNSON MIREVEL* ,
BOrn at Delft, anno 1568. was a goldfmith’s
fan, and the difciple of Anthony de Montforc
of Blocland. He learn’d his art very eafily, and tho*
he was fuccefsful in his hiftory-pieces, yet by little
and little he left off that fort of painting, and did
nothing but portraits, which he perform’d with
beauty and facility. His reputation was fo great,
that he drew a prodigious number of them, and
fold them at what price he pleas’d. He never
wou’d take lefs than 150 Florins a-piece. William
Jaques of Delft grav’d after him, and his prints
are both numerous and line.
COR


CORNELIUS S CHU T t
OF Antwerp, was born with a lively imagina-
tion, and a great talent for painting, which
is feen by his productions. He always feafon’d
them with poetical ideas. He had little bufinefs,
and imputing it to Ruben’s reputation, he was
very angry with that painter, railing at him as one
that was covetous; but Rubens took no other re-
venge of him, than to procure him work.
GERARD HUNTORST,
OF Utrecht, was born in the year 1592.
and pad for one of the bell painters of his
time. He was Blomaert’s difciple ; he afterwards
went to Rome, where having dudy’d defigning,
he exercis’d himfelf with fo much application and
iuccefs in drawing night-pieces, that nobody ever
did it fo well as he. When he return’d to Utrecht,
he drew feveral hi dory-pieces. He was fo fober,
and a man of fo much honour, that mod of the
young men of quality of Antwerp, were fent to *
him to learn to defign. He alfo taught the queen
of Bohemia’s children to defign ; the prince-pala-
tine, and the four princefles, their fillers, were his
difciples ; among whom, her highnefs the princefs
Sophia, and the abbefs Maubuillbn, diftinguifh’d
themfelves by their fkill in painting. Charles the
Firll, king of England, invited Huntorft to come
to London, where he did feveral grand perform-
ances for his Majedy: when he return’d to Hol-
land, he painted the prince of Orange’s houfes of
pleafure, in which he drew abundance of poetical
lubjeCls, as well in frefco, as in oil, particularly in
the palace call’d la Mailon du Bois, the boarded
houfe, half a league from the Flague,
Sir


Sir J N t H 0 N T VA N D T C K,
TT7 AS born at Antwerp, in the year 1599.
YY He had the happieft pencil that ever any
painter was bleft with, Correggio only excepted ;
befides whom none can difpute that excellence with
him. Vandyck was Ruben’s difciple, and aftifted
him in the performance of his moft confiderable
pieces. He went to Italy, (laid a fhort time at
Rome, and then remov’d to Venice where he fkim-
med the cream (if you will allow the phrafe) of
Titian’s works, and the works of the whole Ve-
netian fchool, to ftrengthen his own manner; proofs
of which appear’d in the pictures he drew at Ge-
noa, where he left behind him many excellent
pieces. When he return’d to Flanders, he did fe-
veral pieces of hiftory, that render’d his name fa-
mous all over Europe; but believing he fhou’d be
more employ’d in the courts of foreign princes, if
he apply’d himfelf to painting after the life, he
refolv’d, at lafr, to make it his chief bufinefs, know-
ing it not only to be the moft acceptable, but the
moft advantageous part of his profeftion. Befides,
he was willing to fignalize himfelf by a talent,
which nature had particularly favour’d him with.
Cardinal Richlieu invited him into France, where
not liking his entertainment, he ftaid a very little
while; and thence went to England, being fent for
by king Charles, who receiv’d him very gracioufly.
He was fo much employ’d in drawing the portraits
of the royal family, and the lords of the court,
that he had no time to do any hiftory-pieces. He
did a prodigious number of portraits, about which
he took a great deal of care at firft ; but at Jaft he
ran them over haftily, and painted them very (light-
ly. A friend of his afking him the reafon of it,
{de reply’d, “ I work’d a long time for my repu-
“ tationy*


“ tation, and Ido it now for my kitchen.” By
this method he got a good eftate, marry’d a woman
of quality, and kept a noble houfe. He died in
London in the year 1641. at forty-two years Of
age. ’Tis probable he fhortned his days by waft-
ing his fpirits, with too much application to his bu-
fmefs, without which he cou’d not have perform’d
the vaft number of piftures that came out of his
hands. Hanneman and Remy were his beft difciples.
Reflections on the Works of
Sir J N HO N T VAND T C K.
NEver did any difciple profit more by his ma-
fter’s leftbns, than Vandyck did by Ruben’s.
However, tho’ he was born with a fine genius ;tho*
his was folid, and his imagination lively;
tho he learn d with eafe, and practis’d betimes all
his mafter’s principles, yet his mind was not of fo
large an extent, as that of Rubens’s.
His compofitions were full, and conduced by
the fame maxims, as were thofe of Rubens’s; but
his invention was not fo learned, nor fb ingenious
as his mafter’s. Tho’ he was not very correCt, nor
very well grounded in the part of defigning, he
has neverthelefs done fomething in that kind, that
are worthy of efteem ; when with the delicacy of
his choice, he obferv’d nature faithfully and judi-
cioufly ; He drew feveral portraits of a fublime cha-
racter ; he difpos’d of them fo, that it gave them
an equal degree of life and grace. He always dref-
fed them according to the, fafliion of the times,
from which he drew what (vas molt for the advan-
tage of painting, and fhew’d by it, that nothing is
too hard for art and genius, which can make the
moft ungrateful things beautiful. He defign’d his
heads and hands with the utmoft perfection, and
acquir’d a habitude of making the latter exactly
1 beauti


beautiful and proportionable. He chofe his atti-
tudes agreeable to the perfons, and took his time
to draw a face when it had its belt looks on. He
obferv’d its charms and graces *, he kept them in
his mind, and not only imitated nature, but height-
ened her as far as he cou’d do ir, without altering
the likenefs. Thus, befides the truth in Vandyck’s
pictures, there is an art which the Painters before
him feldom made ufe of. ’Tis difficult to keep
within bounds in doing fo. A painter ought to fee
with Vandyck’s eyes, to find out what is to be found
in that matter, to make ufe of his difcoveries,
and not to tranfgrefs the limits which nature has
prefcrib’d him : nay, Vandyck himfelf, as admi-
rable a genius as he was, has not always put his ar-
tifice in practice without abufing ir, efpecially in
the latter part of his life. Indeed his lait portraits
want much of the beauty and correctnefs of his
firft.
His judgment was ripe betimes, for his moft va-
luable pieces were drawn while he was young, when
he did his beft to eftablifh his reputation. The
portraits he drew of the moft fkilful Painters, his
friends; his performances at Genoa, and thofe he
did in the firft fix and feven years of his abode
in England, are his fineft productions, and what
acquir’d him the character of the beft painter of
his time. Some of his laft works, which are alfo
in England, are (light things: the colouring Is weak,
and falls into the lead ; neverthelefs, his pencil is
happy every where; *tis light, flowing, mellow,
and does not contribute a little to the life, which
Vandyck put into every thing he painted.*. If his
performances are not alike perfect, all in the laft
degree, they carry with them, however, a great
character of fpirir, noblenefs, grace and truth, in-
fomuch chat one may fay of him, that excepting
Titian only, Vandyck furpafles all the painters that
went


went before him, or have come after him, in por-
traits, and that his hiftory-pieces, in the opinion
of good judges, deferve a place among the works
of the Painters of the firft rank.
“ We refer the reader to the Englifh fchool for
<c a further account of this great mafter, for as he
“ did the greateft number, and the moll valuable
“ of his performances in England, as the genius of
" our country, preferring portraits to hiftory-pieces,
“ inclin’d him to apply himfelf wholly to painting
“ after the life; as he receiv’d all the encourage-
cc ment in England which was due to his merit,
“ liv’d here, marry’d and dy’d here, fo he moft
“ delervedly ought to be plac’d in our fchool, of
“ which he is the honour, and indeed of the arc
“ itfelf.”
ADRIAN B R 0 JV E R,
OF Oudenarde, was born in the year 1608.
He painted in little, and delighted in repre-
fencing the addons of the peafantsof his own coun-
try. His fubjedls are generally low, but his expref-
lions are fo lively, and his colouring fo good, that
his pidlures are worth their weight in gold. His
fault was Totting; he was extravagant and carelefs,
and confequently always poor, which he made a
jeft of, being of a very pleafant humour, tho’ he
cou’d not hold it long. His debaucheries and irre-
gular way of living Ihorten’d his days, for he died
in the thirty-fixth year of his age, not leaving e-
nough behind him to bury him. He was at firft:
buried in the common church-yard, but his works
growing every day more and more in eftcem, the
magiftrates of Antwerp refolv’d to preferve his me-
mory by raiftng a noble tomb over him. His corps
was taken up again, and buried a fecond time in
the Carmelites church, a vaft croud of people at-
tending


tending it to the grave, over which a magnificent
tomb was eroded, being a lafting proof of the ve-
neration paid by the citizens of Antwerp to merit
in all ages.
CO RNELIUS POELEN BURCH ,
BOrn at Utrecht in the year 1586. was a dil-
ciple of Blort. He went to Rome, and for
fome time ftudy’d Raphael’s works, which he de-
fign’d. He afterwards apply’d himfelf wholly to
landfkips, taking Adam EHheimer’s manner for his
pattern: at laft having ftudy’d nature more, he
form’d a particular ftile, which was faithful and
agreeable-, and following his genius, he always
drew fmall figures. When he return dto Holland,
he work’d very afliduoufly to make himfelf known.
The king of England having feen fome of his
pieces, invited him to his court, and allow’d him a
yearly penfion. Returning to Utrecht he had fo
much bufinefs, he cou’d not go thro* with it. His
pidures being to be carry’d from place to place
with eafe, were fent for from all parts. Rubens
lik’d his manner fo well, that he defir’d fome of
his pieces, which Sandrart undertook to fend him.
His works are to this day known and efteem’d ail
over Europe. He dy’d at 74 years of age, anno
1660.
ROWLAND SAVE R T,
A Flemming, was the fon of an ordinary painter.
His firft exercife in his art was to imitate all
forts of animals after nature, and he became fo
ikilful, that the emperor Rodolph, who had a
good tafte, took him into his fervice, and fent
him to Friuli to fludy landfkips on the mountains,
in which he lucceeded. His defigns are generally
drawn


drawn with a pen, and are wafh’d over with diffe-
rent colours, as near as he could to nature, in the
obje£t he defign’d. He collefted all his drawings
into a book, which he carefully confulted. This
book is now in the emperor’s cudody. Giles Sade-
ler, and Ifaac his diiciple, grav’d feveral of his
landfkips: the fined of them all is the piece in which
St. Gerom is reprefented : *twas done by Ifaac.
Rowland dy’d at Utrecht in a good old age.
JOHN TORRENT IU S }
OF Amderdam, generally painted fmall figures,
and tho’ he was never out of his own coun-
try, he has done fomething with great force, and
great truth. He lov’d to paint nudities, and was
very extravagant in his lewd fancy. His friends
often reprov’d him for it to no purpofe. Indead
of growing better by their advice, to excufe his
wicked inclinations, he fell into a damnable herefy,
which he fpread about himfelf, and by which his
obfcene figures were not only judify’d, but com-
mended. He was taken up for his horrible tenets,
and denying what was fworn againd him, the ma-
gidrates put him to the torture. He dy’d in the
midd of his torments, and his lewd piftures were
burnt by the hands of the common hangman, an-,
no 1640.
FREDERIC B R E N D E L,
OF Strafburgh, painted in didemper with a
great deal of fpirit and facility. He was
William Baur’s mader.
JVIL


WILLIAM BAU Ry
OF Strafburgh, was Brendel’s difciple, had a
great genius, but the fury of his imagination
hinder’d his ftudying the antique, and beautiful na-
ture, and prevented his throwing off the barbarous
gout of his country. *Tis true he was fome time
at Rome, but his ftudies were wholly employ’d a-
bouc architecture and landfkip, and he took no care
to form a grand gufto, or learn how to fhew the
naked, which he defign’d very ill. He painted
fmall figures in diftemper on vellum : his pencil was
light, his general expreflions and compofitions beau-
tiful even to fublime. He lludy’d his trees at la
Vigne Madame, and the palaces in and about
Rome were his models for architecture. He etch’d
himfelf, Ovid’s Metamorphofes; the figures were
of his own invention, and make a volume by them-
felves. Several of his defigns, of fubjefts taken
out of the holy feriptures, and other hiftories, were
grav’d by Melchior Kufifd, and make another vo-
lume of prints. By thefe two books one may per-
ceive the extent of William Baur’s genius. He
dy’d at Vienna in a very little time after he marri-
ed, anno 1640.
HE NRT GAUD E Count-P ALA? IN E,
BOrn at Utrecht, and defeended from an illuf-
trious family in thofe parts. He took fuch a
fancy to defigning, that there was not a young
painter in his time, who defign’d fo well as he did
in his youth. He went to Rome, while Adam El-
fheimer was there, with whom he contracted a clofe
friendlhip, and not only bought of him what pic-
tures he had already finifh’d, but paid him before-
hand for as many as he fhould make in feveral
T years


years. Henry returning to Utrecht, grav’d thofe
feven pictures after Adam’s works, which the curi-
ous admire for their fingular beauty. A young wo-
man that wou’d have marry’d him, gave him a
Philtre, which, inftead of making him in love with
her, took away his fenfes. He grew a perfect for,
and talk’d like an idiot on any thing but painting,
on which he wou’d difcourfe very rationally and ju-
dicioufly as long as he liv’d.
DAVID TENIERS , the Elder,
■ |
/~\ F Antwerp* was one of Rubens’s difciples in
his own country, and Adam Elflieimer’s at
Rome, by which means, when he return’d to Ant-
werp, he made a mixture of Rubens’s and Elfhei-
mer’s manners. He drew only fmall figures, for
which he was famous. He dy’d in the year 1649.
JOHN VAN HOUC ,
OF Antwerp, was one of Rubens’s good dif-
ciples. He went to Rome, where his know-
ledge in colouring was admir’d. In his way back
to Flanders, palling thro’ Vienna, the Arch-Duke
Leopold took him into his fervice, which kept him
there till the year 1650. the laft of VanHouc’s life,
who died in the prime of his age.
JAMES FOUQUIER,
A Flemming, born of a good family, was de
Mompre’s difciple, and one of the mod ce-
lebrated and learned iandlkip painters that ever was.
"I he difference between his pidlures and Titian’s,
confift rather in the countries reprefented, than in
the goodnefs of the pieces. The principles of the
one and the other are the fame, and the colouring
2 alike


alike good and regular. He painted for Rubens,
of whom he learned the mod effential part of his
.art. The eledlor-palatine employ’d him at Heidel-
berg, and thence he went to Paris, where, tho* he
work’d a long time, and was well paid for what he
did, yet he grew poor thro* his want of conduct,
and died in the houfe of an ordinary painter call’d
Silvain, who Jiv’d in the fuburbs of St Jaques.
He had two pupils that follow’d his manner ; their
names were Rendu and Beilin.
PETER VAN LA E R,
Commonly call’d
BAMBOCCIO ,
WAS born in the city of Haerlem, He had
a wonderful genius for painting, and tho*
he minded chiefly the Itudy of fmall figures, yet he
was a univerfal man, and very induftrious in his
fearch after every thing that had relation to his
profeflion. He made a long flay at Rome, where
he was belov’d and efteem’d by the painters his
contemporaries. His manner was fweet and true.
The Italians gave him the name of Bamboccio, on
account of his extraordinary figure: his legs were
long, his body fhort, and his head funk into his
Ihoulders; but the beauty of his mind more than
made amends for the deformity of his body, and
his good nature and good manners hid the difa-
greeablenefs of his perfon. He dy’d at threefcore
years old by an accident, falling into a ditch near
the city of Haerlem, in which he was drown’d. It
appears by the manner of his death, that divine
vengeance purfu’d him for a crime he was guilty of
at Rome w'hile he liv’d there. He was one Lent
taken three or four times, with five Dutchmen of
T 2 hia


his acquaintance, eating flefh on the banks of the
Tiber, without having any occafion for it. A Di-
vine, who had advifed them often not to do fo, fur-
priz’d them at it once more, and feeing that fair
means would not do, threaten’d to put them into the
inquifition, and both the prieft and the Dutchmen
being very much exafperated, they threw him into
the river. ’Tis obfervable, that all thefe five Dutch-
men died by water.
[The reader will remember that the author is a
Frenchman and a catholick, and the offenders Hol-
landers and proteftants.]
JOHN BOOTH , and his Brother HENR T y
OF Utrecht, were both Blomaert’s difciples,
and both of them very ftudious and induftri-
ous in their profeflion. They went to Rome, where
Henry apply’d himfelf to landfkips, imitating the
manner of Claude de Lorrain, and John ftudy’d
the drawing of figures and animals in imitation of
Bamboccio’s manner. Both of them fucceeded in
their feveral kinds. They agreed to paint a pidlure
together •, John drew the figures and the animals,
and Henry the landfkips, reconciling their manner
fo well, that one would have thought the piece had
been all of one man’s doing. By this means they
finifh’d their piftures with fo much eafe, and fold
them fb faft, that they refolved to continue their
joint-labours. Henry's death broke off their part-
nerfhip. He fell into a canal at Venice one night
going home, and was drown’d. He was one of
Bamboccio’s accomplices in the death of the prieft.
John return’d to Utrecht, where he work’d and
liv’d with reputation.
"DANIEL


D AN I E S E G R E,
Antwerp, was a Jefuit, brother to Gerard
Segre, and delighted in painting flower-pieces.
He drew them with fo much frefhnefs and lightnefs,
that his performances were much efteem’d. He ob-
ferv’d this method in the difpofition of them, to
make them ferve for a border to fome little pidure,
which was placed according to his diredion.
Sir BALTHAZAR GE R BIE R,
Antwerp, born in the year 1592. He
painted fmall figures in diftempers ; and
Charles I. king of England, was fo well pleafed with
his performances, that he invited him to his court.
The duke of Buckingham perceiving he was a man
of very good fenfe, as well as a good Painter, re-
commended him fo zealoufly to his Majefty, that he
knighted him, and fcnt him to BruflTcls, where he
a long time refided in quality of agent for the king
of Great Britain.
HERMAN SIVANFI ELD,
Commonly call’d
The HERMIT at ROME,
NO T only becaufe he generally was alone
among the ruins in the neighbourhood of
Home, Tivoli, Frefcati, and other places; but be-
caufe he often left his companions to go into the
country, and ftudy Jandfkips after nature. He be-
catne a mafter of that fort of painting, and alfo de-
“Sn*d figures with a very good gufto.
T 3 ‘ GEL


GE LDOR P, or GELT'HQRP,
TT T AS a Painter of fo little merit, thathefhould
\\ not have been named here, had not his in-
duttry to get money been very extraordinary. He
underftood colours tolerably well, but had much ado
to defign any thing; fo he ufed to procure other
Painters to defign feveral heads, feveral feet, and fe-
veral hands upon paper, which was prick’d and
rubb’d over with coal-duft, to attift him in his
Drawing. Thus he maintain’d himfelf by the ig-
norance of his chapmen.
OLIVER ,
OF London, painted all forts of fubjefts in di-
ftemper, but was moft employed in painting
after the life. He drew abundance of portraits in
the courts of king James I. and king Charles I.
and nobody did better in that kind than himfelf.
He had a difciple, whofe name was Cooper,
whom queen Chriffina of Sweden entertained in her
fervice.
Lely, an Englifhrhan, drew very good portraits
after Vandyck’s manner, as well for the heads, as
the drefs and adjuftments.
[This is all the French hittorian thinks fit to fay of
the Englifh fchoo); tho* we fhall prove, thac.it has
been much more fruitful in matters than the French,
whofe genius in painting, like that in mufic, is vain
and trivial. The eternal red and yellow, that ma ke
the principal part of their colouring, is an inttance
how natural ’tis for them to love a glaring and falfe
luftre,‘even in the arts, as well as in their govern-
ment. In this fhort account- of the Englifh Pain-
ters he cannot help erring j for tho* Sir Peter Lely
was


Was entirely an English Painter, he was not an Eng-
lilhman.]
CORNELIUS Van HEE M,
OF Antwerp, was an excellent Painter of fiuit,
flowers, and other inanimate things.
abraham dipembeck ,
OF Boifleduc, was very much employ’d in his
youth, in painting upon glafs, and afterwards
entering the fchool of Rubens, became one of his
beft difciples. His invention was eafy and ingeni-
ous, The prints that were grav d after his works,
are proofs of it, and among others, thofe he made
for a book, intituled. The temple of the mufes;
which performance is alone fufficient to ferve for an
encomium on this Painter.
DAVID TENIERS, the Younger,
P Aimed generally fmall figures. He defigned
well; his manner was firm, and his pencil
light: As for copying of other men’s works, he
was a perfect Proteus. He transform d himiclf in-
to as many matters as he undertook to copy, all
whom he counterfeited fo exadtly, that to this day
’tis hard to diftinguifh the copy from the original in
all his pieces of that kind. T. he arch-duke Leopold
made him diredtor of his paintings, and by his
means the pidtures in his gallery were engrav’d.
REMBR A NT Van REIN.
HE took his firname from the place of his birth,
Van-Rein or Rhine, a village fituated on an
arm of that river, which runs thro* Leyden. Elis
X 4 father


fether was a miller, and his matter one Lefman, a
tolerable good Painter of Amfterdam j but he owed
all the knowledge he acquir’d in his profeflion, to
the goodnefs of his underttanding, and the folidity
of his reflexions. However, we mutt not think to
find correXnefs of deflgn, nor a gufto of the antique
in his works. He iifed to fay, he aim’d at nothing
more than to imitate living nature, making that na-
ture confift only in things created, fuch as they ap-
pear. He had old pieces of armour, old inftruments,
old head-dreffes, and abundances of old ftuff of di-
vers forts hanging up in his work-houfe, which he
faid were his antiques: Neverthelefs, tho’ he pre-
tended to defpiTe antiquity, and to form to himfelf a
new manner, he was very curious in getting the fine
defigns that came out of Italy, and had a great col-
lection of them *, as alfo of Italian prints, tho* he
made little or no ufe of them ; fo true it is, that
education and habit have a mighty power over the
minds of men. Notwithftanding he profited him-
felf fo little by the antiquities, he drew a great num-
ber of portraits, with force, fweetnefs, and truth
or likenefs, that furprize the fpeXator. His man-
ner in etching was very like that in painting: ’Twas
expreflive and lively, efpecially in his portraits, the
touches of which are fo a-propos, that they exprefs
both the flefli and the life. There are extant about
two hundred and fourfeore prints of his drawing.
His own portrait is drawn in feveral of them •, and
one may guefs by the year, which is put down on
thofe prints, that he was born in the beginning of
the laft century. There are none of the dates be-
fore the year 1628, and none after 1659. Three
or four of them fhew, that he was at Venice in
1635 I63X He marry’d in Holland. He grav’d
his own and his wife’s portrait together. He touch’d
his prints over again four or five times, to change
the Ciaro Ofcuro, and heighten the effect they had
2 on


on the fpeftator. It appears he did not always like
to have them work’d oft on white paper: feveral ot
his works are done on paper faintly flam’d, chiefly
on China paper, which is of a reddifh tint, and thele
proofs are very much fought after by the curious.
He had a way in his graving, that was never
heard of before, as I know of*, it had Something
a black manner in it. Tho’ he was a man of good
fenfe, and had got money, yet he loved to keep
mean company. Some of his friends told him o
it, to whom he anfwer’d, “ When I have a mind
“ to unbend and recreate my mind, I don’t care lo
« much for honour as Ido for liberty.” And being
once reprov’d by fome perfons who could be tree
with him, for the Angularity of his manner m the
ufe of colours, which made his pictures rugged and
uneven, he replied, “ I am a Painter, and not a
« dyer. ” He died at Amfterdam in the year
1668.
REFLEXIONS on the WORKS
o f
REMBR A N T.
THE example of Rembrant, is a very fen Able
dcmonflration of the power which habit and
education have over the mind of man i and that
o-enius is by fo much the more valuable, by how
much the more ’tis cultivated. This Painter was
born with a talent, and a happy difpofmon of foul.
He was a man of fenfe *, his vein was fruittm i his
thoughts Ane and Angular; his compositions expie -
five, and his fancy lively: but having, wit ais
milk, fuck’d in the gout of his country, being bred
up in the continual view of a heavy nature, and not
knowing till it was too late, a likenefs or truth^more


perfect than that which he had always practifed, his
productions have too much of his habitude in them,
notwithftanding the good feed that was Town in his
mind. Thus we cannot find in Rembranc, either
Raphael’s gout, or that of the antique, or any poeti-
cal thoughts, or elegance of defign. We meet with
nothing but what the nature of his country and a
lively fancy were capable of producing. He has
fometimes enrich’d the poverty of his fubjeds, by a
happy motion of his genius, but having no certain
knowledge of beautiful proportion, he eafily re-
lapfed into the ill gout, to which he had accuftom’d
himfelf.
For this reafon he painted very few hiftorical fub-
jeds, tho’ he defign’d an infinite number of thoughts
that were as fenfible and as piquant as the producti-
ons of the heft matters. I have enough of his de-
figns in my cuftody, to convince every impartial
judge of the truth of this afiertion ; and tho’ the in-
vention of his prints is not fo ingenious as that of
his defigns, yet the beauty of the Claro Ofcuro, and
of the expreffions, isfuch as is rarely to be met with
in other mailers performances. ’Tis true, he had
not a talent to chufe what was moll beautiful in na-
ture for his imitation, but had a wonderful genius
for reprefenting objeds that were prefent before
him. The portraits he drew were fufficient to ju-
ftify what I have' faid, and are fo far from being
below the works of any other matter, that there
are few which can (land the companion with his.
If his out-lines are not corred, the touches of his
defigns are full of life *, and we may perceive in the
portraits which he grav’d, that every ftroke of his
graver, like that of his pencil, gave life and likenefs
to his objects, and (hews the excellence of his ge-
nius.
He underftood the Claro Ofcuro in the higheft
degree. His local colours are a help to each other,
and


and are moft valuable by comparifon. His carna-
tions are as true, as frefh, and as perfedft in the fub-
jedls he has reprefented as Titian’s. Both of thele
Painters were convinced, that there were certain co-
lours which deftroy’d each other, if they were not
mixt to excefs, and that they Ihould be as little
fhaken as pofiible by the motion of the pencil. They
prepared their firft lay withcolours that kindly unit-
ed, and were as near to the life as pofiible. On
this they laid their virgin tints, with light ftrokes
of the pencil; and thus they imitated the force and
frefh nefs of nature. . .
The difference between thofe two Painters in this
matter, is, Titian managed his art fo ingenioufiy,
and withal fo profoundly, that *tis imperceptible;
whereas, to look clofly on Rembrant s works, one
may eafily diftinguifh his, though at a convenient
diftance his painting appears very well united, botn
by the exadfnefs of his ftrokes, and the harmony Oi
his colours. He was maftcr of his pencil, and or
the part of colouring, which is an undeniable proof
that his ability was above cenfure, for he poffeft the
beft parts of his art in a fovereign degree.
GERARD D OU,
OF Leyden, was a difciple of Rembrant•, and
though his manner ot working was quite diffe-
rent from his mafter’s, yet he ow’d his knowledge,
and the principal rules of colouring to Van Rein. He
painted little figures in oil, which though they are
not a foot high, are neverthelefs as much Hnifh d as
if they had been as bigas the life. He drew always
after nature, and view’d his originals in a convex
mirror. He did very few portraits of great lords or
ladies, becaufe perfons of their quality have not pa-
tience to fit fo long as he would have had them. Ihe
refident


refident of Denmark’s wife fitting to him for her
pJcW, he was no lefs than five days in drawing
her hand only, not to mention how much time he
took up about her head. By this method his works
feem almoft as .perfect as nature herfelf, without
Joking any thing of the frelhnefs, union, or force of
colouring, or of the CJaro Ofcuro.
The common height of his pictures did not ex-
ceed a foot, and his price was fometimes fix hun-
dred, fometimes eight hundred, and fometimes a
thoufand hvreseach picture, more or lefs, according
to the time he fpent about it, reckoning after the
rate of twenty lols an hour. His painting-room was
open a-top, for the light to enter, that he might
have the better opportunities for his fhadows, and it
was built on the fide of a canal to avoid dull. He
pounded his colours on cryftal. He lock’d up his
pahet and pencils when he had done work, and when
he began it he refted himfelf a little till the dull was
hud In fair weather he generally went abroad in the
fields to take the air, and repair the lofs of his fpi-
nts, tor he was fo indefatigable in his labour, that it
con fum’d him very much.
There are a great many reflexions to he made on'
his manner of painting, and I can’t tell whether ’tis
as imitable as ’tis admirable; for painting requires
an extraordinary fire, and that is inconfiftent with
and attention which are requifite in
fuc.i lort of productions. One would think, that
the mam fkill of a Painter is to do great things with
a little work, that a picture may feem finilh’d at a
proper diftance; but Gerard believed, that oreat
knowledge and great labour were compatible,’°and
tnat an artift ought to imitate every thing he difeo-
vers in his model at a nearer view. All that can be
Jaid of it is, that Gerard Dou’s pieces, confifting of
few figures, did not fatigue the fancy much, and that
he


he was born with a particular talent for fuch fort of
performances.
FRANCIS MI E R IS,
OF Leyden, was difciple of Gerard Dou, and
follow’d his mafter’s manner entirely. His
guflo of defigning was better, his compofuions
were more graceful, and his colouring more fweer.
He made ufe of a convex mirror, as well as Dou.
There are few of his pieces to be Teen, for, dying
young, he did not finifh many. There is one of his
of about fifteen inches long, in which he reprefents
a mercer’s fhop, the mercer fhewing his fluffs, and
the cuftomer cheapning of them. There are feveral
forts of fluffs unroll’d in the piece, and one may
very plainly perceive the difference between them.
The figures are good, and the compofition in every
part of it is admirable. He had two thoufand franks
for this piece, and all that have feen it, were forry
for the untimely death of fo great a mafter. He
liv’d as if he did not intend to trouble the world
long. He took no care of his affairs, he defpifed
order, osconomy, and was very extravagant. This
conduft brought him into debt, and his debts into
prifon. He was feveral times thrown into jail, and
once his creditors kept him there longer than ordi-
nary. ’Twas propofed to him to paint to pafs
away the time, and his creditors offered to take a
picture for their money. He anfwer’d, ’Twas im-
poffible to work in fuch a wretched place, for that
the fight of the grates, and the rattling of the chains
difturb’d his fancy. His irregular courfes fhorten’d
his life, and carried him off in the flower of his
anno 1683.
H ANNE


HAN N E MAN ,
OF the Hague, was Van Dyck’s difciplc, and
always followed his matter’s manner with fuc-
cefs. He drew abundance of portraits, which are
difperfed up and down in the United Provinces; and
thole he copy’d after Van Dyck are taken for ori-
ginals.
JAMES J 0 R D AN S f
OF Antwerp, was born in the year 1594, and
Icarn’d the principles of his art of Adam Van
Noort. He ftudied the works of the other famous
Painters of that city, and made fuch nice obferva-
tions on nature, that the manner he form’d to him-
felf acquir’d him the reputation of being one of the
greareft mailers of the Low Countries. He wanted
only to have been at Rome, as he Ihew’d himfelf by
his elleem of the Italian Painters, and by the pains
he took to copy Titian, Paolo Veronefe, the Balkans
and Caravaggio’s works, wherever he lit upon them.
He was hinder’d travelling thither by an early mar-
riage, which he contracted with his mailer Adam
Van Noon’s daughter. His talent was for large pic-
tures. His manner was llrong, fweet and faithful.
’Tis laid that Reubens, whole bell principles he had
made himfelf entirely mailer of, and for whom he
work’d, fearing he would excel him in colouring,
employ’d him a long time to make large cartoons
for tapidries, indillemper, after (ketches in colours,
of Rubens’s own doing. The tapillries were for the
king of Spain; and Jordans, by a contrary habitude,
weaken’d his knowledge in the principles of colour-
ing, which before was llrong, and reprefented the
truth of nature in a wonderful degree. He per-
formed many excellent pieces in Antwerp, and other
cities


cities of Flanders, as alfo for the kings of Denmark
and Sweden. He was indefatigable in his labours,
and all his recreation was the company of his friends,
whom he vifited in the evening, his pleafant humour
being a great relief to the fatigues of his profeflion.
He died at fourfcore and four years old, anno 1678,
ERASMUS QUIZ LINUS,
OF Antwerp, was born in the year 1607. He
at firft profefs’d himfelf a philofopher, but he
loved Painting fo much, that he was forced to give
way to his inclination, and change his profeflion.
He learn’d his art of Reubens, and became a very
good Painter. He did feveral grand performances
in Antwerp, and the places thereabouts, for churches
.and palaces; and tho* he aim’d at nothing more
than the pleafure he took in the exercife of Painting,
yet when he died, he left behind him a general efteem
of his fkill, and a wonderful character of merit in
his art.
JOACHIM SANDRART
WAS born at Franckfort the 12th of May,
1606, and was fon of Laurence Stand rart,
who, having educated him at the grarnmar-fchool,
and finding his inclination was to defigning and
graving, fuffer’d him to take his own courfe. Joa-
chim was fo eager to learn, that he went a-foot to
Prague, to put himfelf to Giles Sadeler, the famous
graver, who perfuaded him not to mind graving,
but apply his genius to Painting. He accordingly
went to Utrecht, and was fome time under the dif-
cipline of Gerard Huntorft, who took him into
England with him, where he ftaid till the year 1627,
in which the duke of Buckingham, the patron of
Painters and Painting, was aflaflinated by Felton at
Portf-


Portfmouth. Among the rare pieces which Sandrart
law in England, there is mention made in his life of
the twelve Caefars bigger than the life, drawn by Ti-
tian, and engrav’d by Giles Sadder. ’Tis faid alfo,
that after the duke of Buckingham’s death, the em-
peror Ferdinand Ill’s agents, bought the pieces that
were in that duke’s cabinet for their mailer, who
adorn’d his palace at Prague with them, where part
of them are to this day.
Sandrart being at Venice, copied Titian’s, and
Paolo Veronefe’s find! pidures. From Venice he
went to Rome with Blond the graver, his coufin-
german, where having Itaid fome years, he became
one of the mdft confiderable Painters of his time.
The king of Spain fending to Rome for twelve pic-
tures, of the molt Ikilful hands that were then in
that city, Guido Reni, Guercino de Cento, Giofcp-
pino, Mafllmi, Gentilefchi, Pietro da Cortona, Va-
lentino, Andrea Sacchi, Lanfranco, Domenichino,
Poufiln and Sandrart, were chofen to draw the
twelve pidures which were fent to that king. The
marquis Juftiniani coming to the knowledge of him,
defired to have him in hisfervice, and gave him the
diredion of the graving of the ftatues in his gal-
lery.
Sandrart, after a long flay at Rome, went to
Naples, from thence to Sicily and Malta, and at
length returned through Lombardy to Frankfort,
where he married. A great dearth happened foon
after, which made him leave Germany to go to Am-
fterdam, where he form’d a fociety of the curious.
The famine abating in Germany, he return’d to
Frankfort. Not long after, he took polTelTion of
the manor of Stokau, in the dutchy of Neuburg,
which was fallen to him ; and finding it very much
out of repair, he fold all his fine pidures, defigns,
and other curiofities, to raife money to put it in or-
der 5


cter i which he had fcarce done before the war broke
out between the Germans and French, when the
latter, the greateft incendiaries in the world, burnt
his hoiife entirely to the ground. He rebuilt it, and.
made it better than ever; but fearing a fecond inva-
fion 1 , he fold it, and fettled at Augfburg, where he
performed feveral fine pieces: Among others, he
did the twelve months of the year there, which were
grav’d in Holland, with a defcription of each piece
under it in Latin verfe.
His wife dying, he left Augfburg, and went to
where he fet up an academy of Paint-
ing. Here he publifh’d feveral volumes on fubjedls
relating to his profeffion, in which he work’d till he
was threefcore and feventeen years old.
The molt confiderable of his treatifes is, the lives
of the Painters, being an abridgment of Vafari and
Ridolfi for what concerns the Italian Painters, and of
Charles van Mander for the Flemmings of the laft
century. The reft hecollefted from memoirs of his
own, which he gathered from the report of others,
or his own knowledge, and from this work we have
taken the greateft part of what relates to theFJemifh
Painters of this century, in the account we have
given of them.
The life of Sandrart is written at large, at the
end of the book we have fpoken of in the former pa-
ragraph. The author of it has not put down the day
of this Painter’s death, and we have not been able to
learn it elfewhere. He mentions a great number of
pictures, very large and very full of work, as alfo
abundance of portraits drawn by Sandrart, of whom
he fpcaks as of an excellent Painter. Having Teen
nothing of his doing, we can make no judgment of
hislkillj however, if one may judge of it by the
prints in the lives of the Painters, to which his name
is put, he was no extraordinary artift. We may rea-
fonabjy commend him for the love of his profeffion,
U which


which appears every where through the whole trea-
dle, and for his intention to be ferviceable to the
young Painters of his nation, by fetting before
their eyes the fine ftatues and fair edifices in Rome.
HENRTVERSCHURE , a Dutch Painter.
NAture adorns the world by variety of genius’s,
as fhe cmbellifhes the earth by diverfity of
fruits; and though fhe produces both the one and the
other, fometimes fooner and fometimes later, fhe gives
to each its grace and its merit. Henry Verfchure,
born at Gorcum in the year 1627, was the fon of a
captain then in the fervice of the Rates of the United
Provinces. He was one of the fruits that are ripe
early, and his father was very careful to have him
well educated. Perceiving by the pleafure he took
in defigning, as foon as he had the ufe of his reafon,
that he had a violent inclination to painting, he put
him at eight years of age, to a Painter at Gorcum,
who did nothing but portraits. Henry fpent his
time in defigning till he was thirteen years old, when
he left his mafter, the Face-painter, at Gorcum, to
learn the greater principles of his art of John Bot at
Utrecht, who was then in reputation. He lived
with him fix years, at the end of which term, find-
ing he knew enough of painting, to benefit himfelf
by the fine things that are in Italy, he travell’d thi-
ther in the twentieth year of his age. Hewentfirft
to Rome, and employ’d himfelf in defigning the fi-
gures he faw there, and in frequenting the acade-
mies, but his genius inclining him to paint animals,
huntings and battles, he ftudy’d every thing that
might be ufeful to him in that way. He defign’d
landfkips, and the famous buildings, not only in the
neighbourhood of Rome, but all over Italy. This
employment gave him a relifh of architedure. He
became fkilful in it, and one may fee by his pidures
what


\vhat inclination he had for this art, and the good
gout he contra&ed in it. He made a long (lay at
Rome, Florence and Venice. In the latter city, he
grew into efteem with the perfons of the beft quali-
ty, by the excellence of his performances and the po-
litenefs of his manners. Ac laft, having Jived ten
years in Italy, he refolved to return to his own
country. He paft through Switzerland into France,
and while he was at Paris, met with the Burgo-ma-
iler Marfevin’s fon, who was going to make the
tour of Italy; A little perfuafion prevail’d with Ver-
fchure to accompany him. He return’d thither,
flaid there three years longer, and then came back to
Holland, arriving at Gorcum in the year 1662.
His talent for battles put him upon employing it
in that fort of painting. He gave himfelf up en-
tirely to the motions of his genius, and to exercife it
with fuccefs Itudy’d every thing that generally pafles
in an army. He made a campaign anno 1672, and
was particularly ftudious to obferve horfes of all
kinds and countries. He defign’d feveral encamp-
ments, the events in battles, routs and retreats;
what happens after a vidlory, in the place of battle
among the dead and the dying mingled with horfes,
and abandon’d arms. His genius was fine and fruit-
ful, and though there was a great deal of fire in his
thoughts, and in his work, yet having fludy’d much
after nature, he form’d a particular guflo, which ne-
ver degenerated into what we call manner, but com-
prehended a great variety of objects, and had more
of the Roman than the Flemifh gout in ir, with
allowance for his fubjefls, which are almoft all mo-
dern ; the feenes of his pi&ures are generally beauti-
ful, and the figures that compofe them full of fpirir.
His chief delight was in his profeflion. He had al-
ways a Crayon in his hand i and wherever he came,
defign’d fomething or other after nature, if he met
with any thing to his gout, or after a good piflure,
U 2 either


either figures, buildings, or animals. For this end
he always carried feme blank paper or book about
with him. I have Teen a (core full of his drawings.
His beft performances are at the Hague, Amfter-
dam, and Utrecht. He was a man of fo much
fenfe and honour, that he was chofen to be one of
the magiftrates of the city he lived in. He accepted
of the office, on condition he was not requir’d to
quit his profeffion, which he lov’d better than his
life. He fpent his time very happily, honour’d as a
magiftrate, efteem’d as an artift, and lov’d by every
body ; when happening to undertake a fmall voyage
by fea, he was call away two leagues from Dort, and
drown’d the 6th of April 1690, aged fixty-two years.
I have in my cuftody a large volume of his defigns,
the fight of which will fhew his merit more than all
I have faid of him.
GALP AR NETSCHER ,
BOrn at Prague, in Bohemia, was the fon of an
engineer, who died in the fervice of the re-
publick of Poland. His mother being a Roman
Catholick, was forced to leave Prague, when the
proteftants made themfelves mailers of that city.
She carried three fons with her, of whom Galpar
was the youngeft. A few leagues off from the town,
Ihe ftopt at a calllc, which, when Ihe lead expect-
ed it, was befieg’d, and making a vigorous refill*
ance, thofe that were within it were foon reduced to
extreme want. Galpar’s two brothers were, among
others, ftarv’d to death.
His mother fearing to lofe him in the fame man-
ner, found a way out of the callle, and made her
efcape with the only child that was left her. Every
thing fail’d her but courage. She travel’d on with
her ion in her arms, and chance guided her to
Arnheim


Arnheim in Gueldland, where flie met with Tome
relief for herfelf and her fon.
A dodlor of phyfick, whofe name was Tulkens,
a man of wealth and worth, took a fancy to young
Netfcher, and had him well educated, intending to
breed him a phyfician; but the force of his genius
carrying him to the ftudy of defigning, Tulkens
gave way to it, and fuffer’d him to follow his incli-
nation to painting. When he was at fchool, he
could not forbear fcrawling a defign on the fame
paper upon which he wrote his themes. By this his
patron law *twas in vain to think of making a dodtor
of him, fo he was put to a glafier (the only man in
Arnheim who knew any thing in painting) to learn
to defign.
Netfcher, in a very little while, finding he knew
more than his matter, went to Daventer, to place
himfelf with one Terburg, who was burgo-mafter of
the town, and a Ikilful Painter. He drew all his
pieces after nature, and had fuch a particular talent
for painting of fatting, that in all his compofitions
he contrived fome reafon or other to bring them into
his pidures, and to difpofe of them fo, that they
might receive the principal light.
Netfcher retain’d this aftcdfation a long time,
and though he did not introduce his fattins into all
forts of fubjedls, as his matter did, yet he made
ufe of them in feveral of his pieces: However, he
Was fo prudent as not to let the attestation appear.’
Having acquir’d a good hand at Terburg’s, he
went to Holland, where he work’d a long time for
pidlure-fellers, who impofing on hiseafinefs, paying
him fmali rates for his pieces, and felling them at
great ones, he refolv’d to deal no more with them,
but to go to Rome and improve himfelf farther in
his art. He embark’d on board a fhip bound for
Bourdeaux, where, when he arriv’d, he lodged at a
Merchant’s houfe, whofe kinfwoman he married ;
U 3 and


and being diverted by a flronger inclination than
that he had for painting, he gave over all thought*
of going to Italy, and return’d to Holland.
He fettled at the Hague, the good fuccefs of his
works inviting him to flay there, and experience
prov’d to him, that the bell way for him to main-
tain his family, which began to grow numerous, was
to apply wholly to drawing of portraits. He became
fo perfect, and lb famous in this fort of painting,
that there was fcarce any confiderable family in Hol-
land that had not portraits of his doing. The fo-
reign minifters feldom went from the Hague without
carrying fomething of his drawing with them. By
this means his pieces are to be met with in moll parts
of Europe. Don Francefc-o de Meios, the Portugal
ambaffador, had his own pidlure, and feveral others,
drawn by him. Moll of thofe pieces are now at
Lilbon, in the cuflody of the archbifhop.
Charles 11. king of England, being charm’d with
Netfcher’s performances, did his utmoft to tempt
him into his fervice, offering him a large penfion.
But Netfcher having got enough for his, and his fa-
mily’s fubfiftence, preferr’d the tranquillity of his
own way of living to the tumultuous life of a great
court. The pain he generally was in, dillurb’d the
happinefs of his condition. He had been troubled
with the gravel ever fmee he was twenty years old,
the gout taking him feveral years after, both
together brought him to his grave at {he Hague,
anno 1684, in the forty-eighth year of his age.
He was one of the bell Painters of the Low-
countries, at leaft of thofe that work’d in little. His
deligns were correbl, but hisgufto in that part of his
art never varied from that of his country. He unr
derftood the ClaroOfcuro very well, and among his
local colours, which were all good, he had a parti-
cular talent for painting of linnen. His manner of
painting


painting was very mellow; his touches were not ap-
parent ; however, they were finifh’d. When he
intended to give the laft hand to any piece, he rub’d
it over with a varnilh which did not dry in two or
three days, and during that time he had lei Cure to
manage his colours over and over to his liking; thole
efpecially that being neither too hard nor too liquid,
were the more eafily united to thole which he added
a-new, without loling any thing of their frelhnefs
or their firft quality.
U 4 THE


THE
LIVES
OF THE
FRENCH
PAINTERS.
B00K VII.
9nr IS difficult to affign any time to the
I beginning of Painting in France j for
I when Francis I. Tent for RofTo and Pri-
M maticcio, there were feveral Painters in
France, who were able to work under the diredlion
of thofe two mailers, and abundance of other Italian
Painters who came to Paris for employment. Thefe
French Painters were Simon le Roy, Charles and
Thomas Dorigny, Louis Francois, Jean Leramberf,
Charles Charmoy, Jean and Guillaume Rondeler,
Germain Munier, Jean de Breuil, Guillaume Hoey,
Euftache


Euftache du Bois, Antoine Fantofe, Michel Roche-
Ict, JeanSamfon, Gerard Michel, Jannet, Corneille
de Lion, du Moutier le Pere, and Jean Goufin.
Though fome of thefe Painters were greater mailers
than others, yet their works were not fo confiderabie
as to deferve the attention of the curious in our
days, unlefs we will except the performances of Jan-!
net, Corneille de Lion, du Moutier, and Jean Cou-
fin : Of thefe the three firft drew an infinity of por-
traits, among which three are fome that are tole-
rably fine.
JEAN COUSIN.
AS for Jean Coufin, he is worthy a particular
commendation. He was born at Sucey, near
Sens, and fludied the fine arts fo flrcnuoufly in his
youth, that he became profoundly learned, efpeci-
ally in the mathematicks, which is a great help to
the regularity of defign. By this means he was cor r
red enough in that part of painting, and has print-
ed a book on the fubjed that has born many impref-
ftons; and alone, as fmall as it is, and as little a fi-
gure as it makes, will fuffice to preferve Coufm’s
memory a long time. He wrote alio of geometry
and perfpedive. Painting on glafs being very much
in vogue in thofe days, he applied himfelf more to
that than to drawing of pidures. One may fee fe-
veral fine performances of his in the churches of the
neighbourhood of Sens, and fome in Paris, particu-
larly in St, Gervafe’s church, where, on the windows
of the quoir, he painted the martyrdom of St. Lau-
rence, the hiltory of the Samaritan woman, and that
of the Paralytick. There are feveral pidures of his
doing in the city of Sens, as alfo fome portraits:
but the chiefefl of his works, and that which is
molt efteemed, is his pidure of the laft judgment.
This


This piece is in the Sacrifty of the Minims at
Bois de Vincennes, and was grav’d by Peter de Jodc,
a Flemming, a good defigner. This picture fhews
the fruitfulnefs of Coufm’s genius, by the number of
the figures that enter into the compofition : How-
ever, one would wifh there had been a little more
elegance of dcfign in it.
He married the daughter of the lieutenant-general
of Sens. He carried her to Paris, and lived there
the reft of his days. His learning and agreeable hu-
mour acquir’d him the efteem of the great. He was
well receiv’d at court, and in favour with four kings
fucceflively, Henry 11. Francis 11. Charles IX. and
Henry 111.
He work’d alfo in fculpture, and made admiral
Chabot’s tomb, which is in the chapel of Orleans,
belonging to the Celeftines in Paris. We cannot
tell cxaCtly in what year Jean Coufin died. ’Tis
certain he was living anno 1689, and arrived to a
very great age.
Du B R E U I L and B U N E L.
THESE two Painters, after Primaticcjo’s death,
were employed to finifh the paintings he was
to have done himfelf, had he lived long enough.
The former painted fourteen pictures in one of the
chambers at Fontainbleau, call’d the Stoves, and in
conjunction with Bunel, did the little gallery in the
Louvre, that was burnt in j 660. They both died
in the reign of Henry IV.
MARVIN F R I M I N E T.
OF Paris, was the difciple of his father, a very
indifferent Painter; but emulating the youno-
men who followed the fame profefllon at that time*
he refolv’d to travel to Italy. His chief abode was
at


at Rome, where he lived feven years, ftudying Mi-
chael Angelo’s works more than any thing elfe. For
this reafon his manner, ever after, was not unlike
that great Painter’s, as one may fee by the chapel of
Fontainbleau, which is moftly of his doing. He be-
gan this work in the reign of Henry JV. who ho-
nour’d him with his efteem, and continu’d it in the
reign of Lewis XIII. who conferr’d the order of St.
Michael on him ; but he did not enjoy this honour,
nor the favours of the court long, for before he had
quite finifh’d his work, he fell Tick and died in the
year 1619, aged fifty-two years. Abundance of
Painters came after Friminet, but, inftead of im-
proving his manner, they fell into an infipid gout,
to the fcandal of the French Painting, This gout
lafted till Blanchard and Vouet arrived from Italy.
There were other Painters, whom, becaufe they
were employed in painting the king’s palaces, I
think fit to name, as du Perac, Jerome Baullery,
Henry Lerambert, Pafquier Tetelin, Jean de Brie,
Gabriel Hoqnoit, Ambroife du Bois, and Guillaume
du Mee.
FERDINAND E L L E,
fT>Hough he was born at Mechlin, ought to be
placed among the French Painters, for that
he work’d moft of his time at Paris, where he drew
a vaft number of portraits. However, becaufe he
was a foreigner, Louis, Henry, and Charles Bau-
brun, were better paid than he for their pidlures,
though they were inferior to him in their art. He
left two fons behind him, who followed the fame
profeflion.
VARIN X


VAR IN ,
BOrn at Amiens, painted at Paris with fuccefs.
The picture over the high altar of the barefoot-
ed Carmelites church, near the Hotel de Luxemburg,
is of his drawing. We mention him the rather,
becaufe he helped to put Pouflin in the way of pain-
ting. . j
JACQUES BLANC HART,
Paris, was born in the year 1600. He learnt
the rudiments of painting of Nicholas Bullery,
his uncle, whom he left at twenty years of age to
travel into Italy. When he came to Lyons, in his
way thither, he accidentally met with fome bufmefs
in his profefllon, which being both for his profit and
improvement, he accepted, and ftaid there four
years. Then he paft on to Rome, where he (laid
eighteen months: From thence he went to Venice,
and was fo charm’d with Titian’s colouring, and the
manner of the Venetian fchool, that he refolv’d to
follow it entirely. He ftudied it with fo much fuc-
cels, that a noble Venetian engaged him to work for
him; but being ill fatisfied with the Venetian’s fer-
vice, he foon left it, and Venice not long after, to
return to France. The novelty, the beauty, and
the force of his pencil, drew the eyes of all Paris
upon him, and his painting became fo much in fa„
fhion, that he was out of the mode who had not
fqmething or other of his drawing in his cultody.
Thus his Eafel-pieces became fo common as they are
at this day. He painted two galleries at Paris, the
firjft is in the houfe that belongs to monfieur the firfb
prefident Perrault, and the other, where he repre-
sented tfie twelve months of the year, belongs to
monfieur de Bullion, fuperintendant of the finances.
But


But that which got him the moft reputation of all
his performances, was the pifture he drew at No-
tre-Dame for the firft of May. He reprefented the
Defcent of the Holy Ghoft, and that church pre-
fervcs it with care, as one of the fineft pieces that
belongs to it.
Blanchart was in a likely way of making his for-
tune in the flower of his age, when a fever and an
impoftume in the lungs carry’d him off in his
38 th year. He had two wives, by the firft he had
a fon and two daughters. His fon follow’d his fa-
ther’s profeflion, and maintain’d his character with
honour. ’Tis eafy to imagine, that of all the
French painters, Blanchart was the beft colourift,
by his ftudying that part of painting in the Vene-
tian fchool. There are few grand compofitions of
his drawing, but his painting in the two galcries I
have mentioned, and his pifture in the church of
Notre-Dame, are fufficient proofs that he did not
want genius, and if he did little that was grav’d,
*twas becaufe he was moftly taken up with Madon-
nas, which hinder’d his exercifing himfelf about fub-
jcdts of greater extent.
SIMON V 0 U E r 9
BOrn at Paris, anno 1582. was fon and difciple
of Laurence Vouet, an ordinary painter. He
knew fo much of his art by the help of his fludies
clfewhere, that at twenty years old Monfieur dc
Sancy, who was going ambaflador to Conftanti-
nople, took him to be his painter. When he was
there, he drew the portrait of the Grand Signior,
and tho’ it was impoflible to do it otherwife than
by his memory, and by a view of him at the am-
baflador’s audience, yet it was very like. Having
drawn fome other portraits at Conftantinople, he
took Hupping and went to Italy, where he flaid
fourteen


fourteen years. He was chofen prince of the aca-
demy of St. Luke at Rome j and Lewis XIII. who*
in confideration of his capacity* had allowed him a
penfion during his abode at that city, fent for him
in the year 1627. to work in his royal palaces, and
above all at Luxemburg.
He drew portraits in Crayons and Paftel with
fuch facility, that the king admir’d and delighted
to fee him work. He alfo learnt of him to defign,
in which his majefty made a wonderful progrefs in
a little time, drawing feveral portraits, which very
much refembled fome of the molt confiderable per-
fons at court.
Vouet’s reputation encreafing daily* his bufinds
encreafed with it. I fhall not trouble the reader
with a particular account of his productions; the
palaces and chief houfes at Paris are full of them ;
befides he drew a great number of pictures for
churches and private men.
At Rome he imitated Caravaggio and Valentino’s
manner. But when he came to Paris, he had fo much
work that he form’d a manner to himfelf, more
expeditious, by great lhadows and by general tints,
which he made ufe of, and fucceeded in the better,
becaufe his pencil was brilk, lively and light. It
wou’d be a matter of wonder to think, what a pro-
digious number of pictures he drew, if we did not
know that he had a great many difciples whom he
bred up in his manner, who were Ikilful Painters,
and executed his defigns with cafe, tho* they were
not finilh’d fo well as they Ihou’d have been.
France is indebted to him for deltroying the in-
fipid and barbarous manner that reign’d then, and
for beginning to introduce a good gout. In this he
was affilted by Blanchart, or whom we have been
fpeaking. The novelty of Vouet’s manner, and
the kind reception he gave every body that came
to him, made the French Painters, his contempora-
ries,


ries, fall into it, and brought him difciples from all
parts, as well thole who made profefllon of the o-
ther arts depending on defign, as thofe who pro-
felt the art of painting only. Moll of the paint-
ers, who have fmce been any ways famous in their
profelfion, were bred up by him ; as le Brun, Per-
rier, P. Mignard, Chaperon, Perfon, Je Sueur,
Corneille, Dorigny, Tartebat, Belli, du Frefnoy,
and feveral others, whom he employ’d in making
the ornaments of his pieces, and defigns for tapi-
ftries, as Julie d’Egmont, Vandrifie, Scalberg, Pa-
tel, Beilin, Van Boucle, Bell-Ange, Cottelle, &c.
without reckoning a great number of young per-
fons, who learn’d to defign of him. Dorigny,
who was his fon-in-law, as well as his pupil, grav’d
his father-in-law’s works. Vouer, rather fpent with
labour than with years, died anno 1641. in the fif-
ty-ninth year of his age. He had a brother, whofe
name was Aubin Vouet, who painted after his man-
ner, and was a tolerable performer.
Vouet’s works were agreeable in comparifon with
thofe that had hitherto been made in France, but
he was every where a mannerill, as well in defign-
ing as in colouring, which was always bad. The
palfions of the foul are not at all exprefl in his fi-
gures, and he contented himfelf with giving a cer-
tain grace to his heads, which had no meaning in
it. His cielings are the finell part of his perform-
ances, and Ihew’d his difciples the way to make
finer than any France had Teen before.
Vouet had one advantage above other Painters:
there never was a mailer, whofe manner made fuch
an imprelfion on the minds of his difciples, and was
fo generally follow’d by them. But it mull be
own’d, that if this manner dellroy’d the infipid
gout in France, it introduc’d one fo unnatural, fo
"wild, and being eafy, ft univcrfal, that his difci-
ples, and mod of the French Painters, have been
3 debauch’d


(debauch’d by it. They can hardly get rid of it to
this day, and to {peak truth, I believe Vouet foF
low’d his imereft more than his judgment in form-
ing that expeditious manner, we have already men-
tioned.
NICHOLAS POUSSIN;
WA S born at Andel, a little city in Nor-
mandy, in the year 1594* His family;
however; were originally of Soiffons, in which city
there were (ome ot his relations officers in the Pre-
fidial Court. John Pouffin, his father, was of no-
ble extraction, but born to a very fmall eftate. His
fon Nicholas feeing the narrownefs of his circum-
ftances, determined to let up for himfelf as foon as
poffible, and chofe painting for his profeffion; hav-
ing naturally a ttrong inclination to that arti At
eighteen years old he went to Paris, to learn the
rudiments ot it. A PoiCtovin lord, who had taken
a liking to him, put him to Ferdinand, a face-
painter, whom Pouffin left in three months time;
10 place himfelf with Lallemant, with whom he
ttaid but a month; for perceiving he ffiou’d never
learn any thing of fuch matters, he refolv’d not to
loofe his time with them, believing he fhou’d pro-
fit himfelf more by ttudying the works of great
matters, than by the difeipline of ordinary Painters.
He work’d a while in diftemper, and did it with
extraordinary facility. The Cavalier Marino being
at that time in Paris, and knowing Pouffin’s genius
was above the fmall peformances he was employ’d
about, perfuaded him to go with him to Italy ;
but Pouffin having either fomc bufinefs that detain’d
him in Paris, or being difeouraged, by two vain at-
tempts he had made before, to undertake that
■journey, he did not accompany the Cavalier : how-
ever, he promis’d to follow him in a little time.
He


He was as good as his promife, tho’ not til] he had
drawn feveral other pictures in Paris, and among
the reft, the Death of the Virgin* for the church of
Notre-Dame. Having finifli’d his bufmefs, he fet
out for Rome, in the thirtieth year of his age.
He there met with his old friend, the Cavalier
Marino, who was mighty glad to fee him, and to
be as ferviceable as he eou’d to him, recommended
him to Cardinal Barberino, telling his eminence,'
‘ Verderete un Giovane che a una furia di diavolo.*
The Chevalier, on whole aftiftancc and protedion
Pouflln very much depended, dying foon after he
came to Rome, and Cardinal Barberino, who delirM
to be acquainted with him, having no opportuni-
ty for it, Pouflin had no body to affift and encou-
rage him. He could fcarce maintain himfelf. He
was forc’d to give away his works for fo little, as
wou’d hardly pay for his colours: this was his laft
fliift. However his Courage did not fail him. He
minded his ftudies afliduoufly, refolving, whatever
came of it, to make himfelf mafter of his pro-
feflion. He had little money to fpend, and that
hinder’d his converfing with any one, which gave
him an opportunity to retire by himfelf, and de-
fign the beautiful things that are in Rome, as well:
antiquities, as the works of the famous Roman
Painters. . . ~ q br;x:
Tho* he rcfolv’d when he went from France, to
copy the pidures of the greateft mafters, yet.,
he cxcercis’d himfelf very little that way. He
thought it enough to examine them well, to make
his retiedions upon them, and that what he fhou’d
do more, wou’d be fo much time loft; but he had
another opinion of the antique figures. He de-j
fign’d them with care, and form’d fiich an high,
dea of them in his mind, that they were his prin-
cipal objed, and he apply’d hirnfelflentirely to the )
X ftudy


ftudy of them. He was convinc’d, that the fource
of every beauty and every grace rofe from thofe
excellent pieces, and that the ancient fculptors had
drain’d nature to render their figures the admirati-
on of pofterity. His clofe friendfhip with two
ancient fculptors, I’Algarde and Francois Flamand,
in whofe houfe he lodg’d, ftrengthen’d, and per-
haps begat his inclination : be it as it will, he never
left it, and it encreas’d in him as he grew older,
which may be feen by his works.
’Tis laid, he at firft copied fome of Titian’s
pieces, with whofe colouring, and the touches of
his landlkips he was infinitely pleas’d, and endea-
vour’d to imitate them, to fet off the good gufto
of defign, which he had contracted by his ftudy of
the antique. Indeed, ’tis obfervable, that his firft:
pieces are painted with a better gout of colours than
his laft. But he foon fhew’d by his performances,
that generally fpeaking he did not much value the
part of colouring, or thought he knew enough of
it, to make his pictures as perfect as he intended.
He had ftudied the beauties of the antique, the ele-
gance, the grand gufto, the correctnefs, the vari-
ety of proportions, the adjuftments, the order of
the draperies, the noblenefs, the fine air, and bold-
nefs of the heads; the manners, cuftoms of times
and places, and every thing that was beautiful in
the remainder of the antique fculpture, to fuch a
degree that one can never enough admire the ex-
actnefs with which he has enrich’d his painting in
all thofe parts of it.
He-might, if he had fo pleas’d, have deceived
the judgment of the public, as well as Michael An-
gelo did, who, having made a ftatue of Cupid,
broke off an arm of it, kept it by him, and buried
the reft of the figure in a place which he knew was
to be dug up. The ftatue being found, every body
b::J: took


took it for till Michael Angelo, applying
the arm he had by him to the body of the figure,
convinc’d the critics that they were all miftaken,
tho* they are of all men the hardeft to be convinc’d
that they are in an error. We may with as much
reafon believe, that if Pouflin had painted in fref-
co on the ruins of an old wall, and kept any part
of it by him, the world might as eafily have been
perfuaded, that his painting had been the work of
fome famous antique painter, as they were fatisfy’d
that Michael Angelo’s Cupid was a piece of anti-
quity, there- was luch conformity between his paint-
ings and what have been really difcover’d in that
manner, and are certainly antiques.
PJe us’d frequently to examine the ancient fculp-
tures; in the vineyards about Rome, and this confirm-
ed him more and more in the love of thofe anti-
quities. He wou’d Ipend feveral days together in
making his reflections upon them by himfelf. It
was in thefe retirements that he confider’d the ex-
traordinary effects of nature, with refpeCt to land-
fkips, that he defign’d his ear, his diftances, his
trees, and every thing which was excellent and a-
greeable to his gufto.
Befldes that Pouflin ft tidied the antique exaCtly,
he alfo made curious obfervations on the works of
Raphael and Domenichino, who, of all Painters,
in his opinion, invented belt, defign’d mod cor-
reCtly, and expreft the paflions of the foul molt live-
ly ; three things which Pouflin look’d upon as the
moft efiential parts of painting.
He negleCted nothing, in fhort, that cou’d ren-
der his knowledge, of thefe three parts of his art,
perfect. He was altogether as curious about the o-e-
-neral expreflion of his fubjeCts, which he has adorn-
ed with every thing that he thought wou J d excite
attention of the learned.
x 2 H?


He has left no grand compofitions behind him,
and all the reafon we can give for it is, that he had
no opportunity to do them ; for we cannot ima-
gine, but ’twas chance only that made him apply
himfelf wholly to eafel-pieces, of a bignefs proper
for a cabinet, fuch as the curious requir’d of him.
Lewis XIII. and Monfieur de Noyers, mmi-
ftcr of (fate, and fuperintendant of the buildings,
wrote to him at Rome, to oblige him to return to
France : he confented to it with a great deal of
difficulty. He had a penfion affign’d him, and a
lodging ready furniffi’d at the Tuilleries. He drew
the picture of the Lord’s Supper for the chapel
of the cattle of St. Germain, and that which is in
thejefuits Novitiat at Paris. He began the Labours
of Hercules, in the gallery of the Louvre: but
the faction of Vouet’s fchool railing at him, and
his works, put him out of humour with his own
country. He was alfo weary of the tumultuous
way of living in Paris, which never agreed with
him; wherefore he fecretly refolv’d to return to
Rome, pretending he went to fettle his domeftic
affairs, and fetch his wife-, but when he got there,
whether or no he found himfelf as in his center,
or as quite put off from any thoughts of returning
to France, by the deaths of Cardinal Richlieu and
the king, which happen’d about that time, he ne-
ver left Italy afterward.
He continu’d working on his eafel-pieces, and
fent them from Rome to Paris, the French buying
them every where as faff as they laid hands on them,
if they were to be bought for money, valuing his
productions as much as Raphael’s. Felibien, who
has written the life of this painter very currently,
and at large, gives a-particular account of his pic-
tures, and a defeription of thofe that are molt e-
fteem’d. ' Ji 1 * _
Poa-


Pouflin, having liv’d happily to his threefcore and
eleventh year, dy’d paralytick, anno 1665. He
marry *d Gafper’s filter, by whom he had no chil-
dren. His eflate amounted to no more than fixty-
thoufand livres; but he valu’d his cafe above riches,
and preferr’d his abode at Rome, where he liv’d
without ambition, to making his fortune elfewhere.
Bifhop Maflimi, who was afterwards a cardinal,
vifiting him on a certain time, their converfation
Jailed infenfibly till ’twas night, and the prelate be-
ing about to take coach, Pouflin took the candle
in his hand, lighted him down Hairs, and waited
on him with it to his coach. The bifhop was for-
ty to fee him do it himfelf, and cou’d not help fay-
ing, “ I very much pity you, Monfieur Pouflin,
“ that you have not one fervant; and I pity you
« more, my lord, reply'd Pouflin, that you have
“fo many.** He never made words about the
price of his pi&ures •, he put down his rates on the
back of the canvas, and ’twas always given him.
He had no difciple. Molt Painters efteem with-
out imitating him. His manner is too inacceflible,
and when once they enter upon it, they can’t go
thro* with it.
Reflections on the. works of POUSSIN:
POUSSIN was born with a great and fine
genius for painting. His early love of the
antique figures put him upon ftudying them with
care, and by his ftudies he came to the knowledge
of all their beauties, and of the difference between
them, as to their goodnefs. He was an excellent
anatomift, and acquir’d a confummate habitude of
defign, after the antique gufio *, yet even in his de-
figns he did not confider nature, as the origin of
all beauty, fo. much as he fhou’d have done. He
thought fculpture was to be preferr’d before her,
X 3 tho*


tho* Ihe is the miftrcfs of all arts, and always va-
lu’d the imitation of the ancients more than the life.
By this means the naked of his figures, in molt
part of his pidlures, has fomething in it, refem-
bling painted ftone, and is rather like the hardnels
of marble, than the delicacy of flelh, full of blood
life.
His invention in hiflorical and fabulous fubjedts is
ingenious, as alfo his allegories. He chole them
well. He preferv’d decorum in all of them, efpe-
cially in his heroical fubjedts. He introduc’d every
thing that cou’d render them agreeable and inftruc-
tive. He exprefs’d them according to their real
character in joining the paflions of the foul in par-
ticular, to the exprefllons of the fubjedts in general.
His landfidps are admirable for their fites; the
novelty of the objedls of which they are compos’d ;
the naturalnefs of the earth ; the variety of the
trees, the lightnefs of his touches *, and in Ihorr,
the Angularity of the matters that enter into the
compofition. They wou’d have been every way
perfedb, if he had ftrengthen’d them a little more
by the local colours, and the artifice of the Claro
Ofcuro.
When occafion offer’d, he adorn’d his pidlures,
with archiredlure. He did it with a fine gout*, and
his perfpedtive, which he underftood to perfection,
was exadlly regular.
He was not always happy in the difpofition of
his figures; on the contrary, he is to be blam’d for
diffributing them in the generality of his compofi-
tions too much in Baflb Relievo’s, and on the fame
line; his attitudes are not vary’d enough, nor fo
well contrafted as they might be.
His draperies in all his pieces are commonly of
the fame Ituff, and the great number of his folds
hinders the fimplicity, which adds a grandeur to
the work. As fine as his genius was, and as exten-
fives


five, *twas not fufficient for all the parts of paint-
ing. He lov’d the antiquities fo entirely, and ap-
ply’d himfelf to them fo much, that he had not
time to confider his art in every branch of it. He
negleded colouring. We may perceive by his
works in general, that he knew nothing of local
colours and Claro Ofcuro : for which reafon almoft
all his pictures have a certain grey predominant in
them, that has neither force nor effed. Some of
the pieces of his firft manner, and fome of his fe-
cond, may however be excepted. Yet to examine
the matter narrowly, we fhall find, that where any
of his colouring is good, he is indebted for it to
what he remembred of that part of his art, in the
pictures he copied after Titian, and was not the ef-
fed of any intelligence of the Venetian Painters
principles: in a word, *tis plain Pouffin had a very
mean opinion of colours. In his life, written by
Bellori Felibien, there is a fincere confefiion that he
did not underftand them, and had as it were aban-
don’d them ; an undeniable proof that he never was
matter of the theory of colouring. Indeed, his co-
lours, as they appear to the fpedators, are nothing
but general tints, and not the imitation of nature,
which he feldom confulted about them. I fpeak
of his figures, and not of his landfkips. In the lat-
ter he feems to have confider M the natural colours
more, and ’tis not difficult to guefs at the reafon
of it: for not being able to find out landfkip in
the antique marble, he was forced to leek after it
in nature.
As for the Claro Ofcuro, he never had any know-
ledge of it, and if we meet with it in any ol his
pidures, it came there purely by chance. Had he
known that artifice to be one of the moft eflential
parts of painting, as well for the repofe of the fight,
as to give force and truth to the whole compofi-
tion of a pidure, he wou’d always certainly
X 4 have


have made ufe of it. He wou’d have fought after
a way to groupe his objects and his lights to the
bed advantage; whereas, they are fo difpers’d in
his pieces, that the eye knows not where to fix it-
felf. His chief aim was to pleafe the eyes of the
underftanding, tho’ without dilpute, every thing that
is inftrudlive in painting, ought to communicate
itfelf to the underftanding only, by the fatisfadlion
of the eyes, by a perfedt imitation of nature; and
this is the whole duty, and ought to be the whole
aim of painting.
Pouflin, by negledling to imitate nature, the
fountain of variety, fell often on very apparent re-
petitions, both in the airs of his heads, and his
expreflions. His genius was rather of a noble, mai-
culine and fevere charadler, than graceful, and one
may fee by the works of this very painter, that
there may be beauty fometimes where there is no
- grace.
His manner was new and fingular; he was the
author of it, and we rauft own, that in the parts
of his art, 'which he pofleft, his ftyle, as we have
faid elfewhere, was great and heroic, and that, take
him altogether, he was not only the beft painter
of his own nation, but equall’d the beft Painters
of Italy.
FRANCOIS PERRIER,
AGoldfmith’a fon of the Franche Compte, was
a debauch’d young man, and running away
from his parents, went to Rome. As he was on his
journey thither his money fell fhort, when a blind
man, who had alfo a mind to go to Rome, per-
fuaded him to lead him, offering him a ftiare of
the alms he got by begging on the road. Perrier
having no other way to Jublift, accepted of his ofr
fers, and in this equipage arriv’d Rome, where
he


he was again very much embarrafs’d to find out
means to maintain himfelf; for his blind beggar’s
afllftance either fail’d him, or was not fufficient to
fupport him. He was reduc’d to terrible flraits at
his firft coming, but the neceffity he was in, and
the facility of his genius, in a little time put him
in a way to get his living. He acquir’d an eafy
and agreeable manner of defigning, and his gufto
was fo good, that fevcral young men addrefs’d
themfelves to him to mend their defigns: fome fo-
reigners bought his of him to fend to their friends
to pleafe them, and engage them to fupply them
with money.
He became acquainted with Lanfranco, whofe
manner he endeavour’d to follow, and at laft he
could manage his pencil with the fame eafe as he
did his crayons. Finding that he could difpatch a
great deal of bufinefs, he refolv’d to return to
France, and flopping at Lyons he painted the Car-
thufians cloyfler there. From Lyons he proceed-
ed to Paris, and having work’d fome time for Vou-
et, who engrofs’d all the grand performances, he
took a fecond journey to Italy, where he flaid ten
years, and return’d to Paris, anno 1645. About
this time he painted the gallery of the Hotel de la
Vrilliere, and drew feveral eafel-pieces for private
perfons. He died profeffor of the academy.
He etch’d feveral things with a great deal of fpi-
rit, and, among others, the findt baffo relievo’s
that are in Rome, a hundred of the moft celebrated
antiquities, and fome of Raphael’s works.
He alfo grav’d in the Claro Qfcuro lome antiqui-
ties, after a manner, of which, ’twas faid, he was
the inventor; but Parmeggiano, as I have obferv’d
elfewhere, us’d it a long time before him. It con-
fids in two copper plates, whofe imprdfion is made
on paper feintly flain’d; the one plate is engrav’d
after


the ufual way, and that prints the black, and
the other, which is the fecret, prints the white.
J A E S STELLA,
BOrn in the year 1596. was the Ton of Francis
Stella, a Flemming by nation, who in his re-
turn from Italy, flopping at Lyons, fettled there,
and in that city, Jaques, of whom we are (peak-
ing, was born. He was but nine years old when
his father died, and having exercis’d himfelf fo long
in the art of painting that he thought he was ca-*
pable of improving by the fight of the rare pieces
that are in Italy, he went thither when he was a»
bout twenty years of age. Faffing thro* Florence,
the great duke Cofmo di Med ids, hearing of his
being there, employ’d him with other Painters, to
prepare the decorations of a pompous feftival, which
he. intended to hold at the celebration of his fon’s
marriage.
The duke perceiving that Stella was a man of ca-
pacity, affign’d him lodgings, and a penfion equal
to that of Callot, who was then at, Florence. He
Itaid in this city (even years, and perform’d feve-r
ral things in painting, defigning and graving.
From thence he went to Rome, where he liv’d
eleven years, which he fpent chiefly in ftudying
the antique fculptures and Raphael’s paintings.
When he had acquir’d a habitude of a good tafte,
drawn divers pidurcs that were engrav’d, and got
a great reputation in Rome, he refolv’d to return
to his own country, intending however to pafs from
thence into the fcrvice of the king of Spain, who
had order’d his agents to invite him more than
once to accept of that employment. He took Mi-
lan in his way to France. Cardinal Albornos of-
fer’d him the diredion of the academy of painting
in that city, but he refus’d it. When he came to
Paris,


Paris, and had feen his friends, he began to prepare
for his voyage to Spain ; but Cardinal Richlieu hear-
ing of it, (topp’d him, giving him hopes of a bet-
ter fortune at home. He prefented him to the
king, who aflign’d him a penfion of a thoufand
livres a year, and lodgings in the gallery at the
Louvre.
Stella foon (hew’d himfelf to he a matter, and the
king honour’d him with the order of St. Michael,
which encouraged him to do his beft. He painted
feveral large piftures for the king, by whofe com-
mand the greateft part of them were fent to Ma-
drid. He work’d alfo for churches and private
perfons.
Being very laborious, and the winter-days (hort,
he fpent the evenings in defigning the hiftories of
the holy fcriptures, country fports, and children’s
plays, which were engrav’d, and make a large vo-
lume. He alfo drew the defigns of the frontif-
pieces of feveral books of the Louvre impreffion,
and divers antique ornaments, together with a frife
of Julio Romano’s, which he brought out of Italy
with him. He work’d fo indefatigably, that it
wafted him extremely, and broke his conftitution.
He confum’d away for five or fix years before he
died, which was in the fixteenth year of his age,
anno 1647.
REFLEXIONS on the WORKS
O F
STELLA,
STELLA had a fine genius, his productions
came eafy out of his hands, and he treated,
with a like facility, all forts of fubje&s. His talent
was rather gay than terrible, his invention was no-
ble, his exprettions moderate, his attitudes eafy and
natural, his difpofition fomewhat cold, but the
whole


whole together agreeable. He acquir’d a good gout
of defign by his long (lay in Italy ; and by his ea-
gernefs to learn, became correct in his out-lines. His
application to work, made it eafy to him. His co-
louring is not well digefted, his local colours not
enough charaderiz’d, and his carnations have too
much vermillion in them, and are commonly the
fame. He at laft degenerated into what we call
manner, and very feldom conlulted nature. Take
him, with all. his good and bad qualities, as a Pain-
ter, the firft weigh down the laft. He had certain-
ly merit*, and had he ftudied the Venetian manner
more, his own had been more valuable.
MARTIN de C HA R M 0 IS.
Sleur de Laure, procured fo many advantages for
the French painting, that it would be ingrati-
tude not to make mention of Jaim in this account of
the French Painters. He loved the arts of fculpture
and painting fo paftionately, that he became a great
matter of the theory of both of them, and could per-
form in the one and the other with facility, to the
fatisfadion of the beft judges of his time. He was
neither painter nor fculptor by profeftion. The plea-
fqre his geniqs took in ederating itfelf, was the only
motive he had to handle fometimes the pencil and
ibmetimesthechizel. He had fuch an idea of pain-
ting, that he could not endure to fee able Painters
opprefs’d by the hard ufage of fome head-mafters,
and often took them from their oppreftbrs, that they
might with more freedom exercife thofe arts that are
of all others the moft free. He fhew’d them the
noblenefs of their profeftion, and employed all his
credit to deliver the art of painting out of the lan-
guilhing condition to which it was reduced by the
evil practices of fome mafters, who had render’d it
as fcandalous as a common trade; but monfieur de
: Charmoia


Charmois did his utmoft to reftore it to its place
among the liberal arts. He affemblcd the mod
fkilful of the profefllon, form d a lociefy, of whom
the twelve eldeft Painters were to be the governors,
and himfelf the director.
Thus he laid the foundation of the famous aca-
demy of painting, which the king afterwards form’d
into a corporation, gave them fevcral privileges, al-
low’d them a place to meet in, in his palace; made
officers, fettled profeffors, and affign’d penfions to
the mod confiderable of that body, to encourage
them in their performances, and to reward the me-
rit of fuch as were worthy the royal bounty.
De Charmois was fecretary to the marefchal de
Schomberg, colonel of the regiment of Swifs guards;
and though the duties of his employment took up
mod of his time, yet he found fome leifure hours to
divert himfelf with painting. I can’t tell pofitively
when he was born, when he died, or when he was
dire&or of the academy•, but ’tis certain he behaved
himfelf in that office with a prudence anfwerable to
his zeal and his merit.
EUSTACHE le SUEUR,'..
BOrn at Paris in the year 1617, was Vouet’s dif-
ciple, and had fo great a talent for painting,
that he wanted nothing but to have been bred up in
a better fchool than his matter’s, to render him an
accomplifh’d Painter. He invented with eafe, and
his execution was always worthy his defigns. He
Was ingenious, difcreet, and delicate in the choice of
his obje<sts. He imitated the antique gufto in his
defigns; but aiming to appear always delicate, his
proportions are fometimes too tender, and his figures
of an immoderate length. His attitudes are fimpie
and noble, his expreffions fine, fmgular, and very
'Well adapted to the fubieft. His draperies are fee
7 ■ ‘ ~ after


after'the gout of Raphael’s laft works. In his folds
he obferved the order of the antique* and generally
made ufe of the fame fluffs the ancients ufed.
His colouring is compofedof general tints, with-
out choice or lludy. He took fo little care to leave
off Vouet’s manner in his colours* that one would
think he did not believe it to be bad, nor that the
part of colouring was of fuch importance in his art*
as indeed it is j or perhaps he put off his enquiries
about it to feme other time; He contented himfelf
with a received cuftotn in the choice of his tolours*
which all the Painters in Paris* except BJanchartj
follow’d implicitely; Whatever was the reafon of
it, he knew nothing of the local colours* nor of the
Claro Ofcuro •, but he was fo much a mailer of the
other parts of painting, that there was a great likeli-
hood of his throwing off Vouet’s manner entirely*
had he lived longer, and had once relifh’d that of
the Venetian fchool* which he would certainly have
imitated in his colouring, as he imitated the manner
of the Roman fchool in his defigning.
For immediately after VoUet’s death* he perceiv'd
his mailer had led him out of the way, and by con-
fidering the antiquities that are in France, and by the
fight of the deligns and prints of the bell Italian ma-
ilers, particularly Raphael’s, he contra&ed a more
refin’d flile, and fhew’d that the rare pieces of the
antique, which are in France, are fufficient to give
a Painter a good tafle, without going to Italy for it*
provided the Painter is born with a happy genius for
his profeflion. Le Sueur’s works are a proof of
this pofition *, among others, his life of St. Bruno,
which is in the cloyller of the Carthufian monaflery
at Paris. This, in my opinion, is the mofl conli-
derable of all his performances*, and by this, as alfo
by many others of his productions, one may judge
that le Sueur may, with reafon, pretend to a place
among the bell Painters of his nation.
LAUREN


LAUREN de la HIRE
WA S in great reputation in his time, and the
only Painter of all his countrymen who did
not follow Vouet’s manner. His own was not much
better. His gufto was as bad, but it was more ftu-
dy’d, more finifh’d, and more natural; however,
’twas always infipid. His landfkipsare more valued
than his figures. He finifh’d them to a nicety, and
painted them very properly. He was fo in love with
the Aierien perfpedive, that he confounded his di-
ftances in a cloud, according to the method he had
learnt of Defargues. He did the fame in his fi-
gures, as well as in his diftances; for excepting thole
that are on the firft lines, all the reft are loft in a
mift, in proportion to their diftance. His fon left
the profeflion of painting to follow the mathema-
ticks, to which his genius inclin’d him, and be-
came one of the molt fkilful mathematicians of our
time.
MICHAEL D ORIG N T y
BOrn at St. Quintin in Picardy, was Vouet’s dis-
ciple and Ton-In-law. He follow’d his father-
in-law’s manner very fervilely. He etch’d molt of
his works, and preferv’d the true charafter of their
author. He died profefTor of the academy in the
year 1665, at forty-eight years old.
CHARLES ALFONSE du FRESNOT
WAS born in the year 1611. His father was
a famous apothecary in Paris, who bred him
up a fcholar, intending to make a phyfician of him.
In the firft two or three years of his ftudies at the
college, his father had hopes, by the progrefs he
made


made in learning, that he would anfwer his expefta*
tions; but fo foon as he got up into the upper forms,
and began to relifh poetry, his genius that way fhew’d
itfelf, and he carried away the prize from all his
competitors of his {landing. His inclinations grew
ftronger the more he exercifed in it* and ’twas
thought, by his beginning, he would in the end
make one of the greateft poets of his age ; but his
love of painting being equal to that of poetry, it di-
vided, and confequently weaken’d his talent.
At lad there were no more thoughts of his being
a doCtor, he declared openly for painting, notwith-
{landing the oppofition he met with from his pa-
rents, who omitted no fort of ufage which they
thought would oblige him to turn his dudies another
way. They had a mean idea of painting, looking
upon it as a pitiful trade, and not as the molt noble
of all arts.
The more he was oppofed in his inclination, the
more eager he was to be a Painter; and without lo-
fmg any time in deliberating what to do, he gave
himfelf over entirely to the follicitations of his geni-
us, and fell to ftudying the art. He was about
twenty years old when he began to defign, which
he learn’d of Perrier and Vouet: But he had fcarcc
been two years a fcholar to both of them, before he
went to Italy, 30001634. Mignard coming thither
in the following year, they contracted an intimate
friendfhip, which laded as long as they lived.
When du Frefnoy came fird to Rome, he could
not get his bread ; his parents, whofe advice in
the choice of his profedion he had defpifed, would
not fupply him, and what money he carried out
with him was foon fpent. Thus having neither
friends nor acquaintance, he was reduced fo low,
that he was forced to live upon bread and cheefe;
However, he bore all with patience, comforting
himfelf with the opportunities he had of improving
in


in the ftudy of painting, which he continued with
ardour, till Maynard came, and then he fared bet-
ter.
His foul was not fatisfied with common know-
ledge, he would go to the root of his arr, and ex-
traft all the quinteflcnce out of it. He ftudied Ra-
phael and the antique with application, and every
night he defign’d in the academies with extraordi-
nary afliduity. According as he made difcoveries
in his art, he wrote reflexions upon them in Latin
verfe. One light led him to another, and by de-
grees he acquir’d the knowledge of all things necef-
fary to his profeflion: He then form’d the defign
of writing his poem * when he had done it with
equal care and fuccefs, he communicated it to the
bcft judges, from whom he expected either informa-
tion or approbation.
He had a particular love for Titian’s works, pre-
ferring them to any other whatfoevcr, becaufe he
faid, ‘ Titian was of all Painters the mod perfect
‘ imitator of nature/ He copied all the pidtures
that were in Rome with incredible induftry.
He underftood the Greek and Latin poets very well,'
and fpent fo much time in reading and converfmg
with the curious about his arr, that he had little left
for painting. Befldes, he feem’d when he painted,
to do it with pain, which might proceed cither from
his profound knowledge of the theory which re-
ftrain’d his hand, or from his having never learnt of
any one how to handle his pencil. By this means he
was Very flow in his productions. Whatever was
the occafion of it, he did very little in the practical
part of painting. Having ftudied the elements of
Euclid, and his gufto in architecture being excellenry
he painted the remainders of the old Roman archi-
tecture that are in and about Rome. He fold his
pictures for fubfiftance, or rather gave them away
Y for


for little or nothing. All his works don’t exceed
fifty pieces, befides Ibme landfkips, which he drew
for private perfons, and his copies after Titian.
Of all his performances, that which he valued
molf, was his poem upon painting. He was very
defirous to have it printed, but knowing ’twould be
to no purpofe to do it without publifhing a French
verfion with it, and being himfelf incapable to tranf-
late ir, by his long abfence out of France, by which
he had almoft forgot his native tongue, he put off
his impreflion to a better opportunity.
At laft I tranllated it into French *, at his requeft,
and to his liking. He intended to write notes upon
if, to illuftrate his thoughts, but he was prevented
by a paralyfis, of which he died, at a houfe of one
of his brothers, four leagues from Paris, anno 1665,
in the fifty-fourth year of his age.
*From this French verjion Mr. Dry den tranflated Fref-
nofs poem, as is very plain hy the Gallicifms in his own ,
which that great majier of the Englijh tongue would
not have been guilty of had he not been forced to it by
the difficulty of translating a treatife written upon an
art which he profefjes he knew little of. He was obliged
to follow the author literally , for fear if he loft fight of
him never fo little, he fhould mifs his way, and what
were reafons for that immortal poet to make fo faithful
a verjion, to be fure were much more fo for us, who, be-
fides that, we were as much ftrangers to the terms of art,
as he was, wanted his copia verborum, and his fining
eloquence to adorn the fubjctt. But this we mud fay
for ourfelves, that our care, as became us, to do well
was greater, though our natural and acquired helps were
lefs. The author of this treatife tranflated Monfeur du
Frefnoy s de arte graphica, and wrote the notes upon it
in French ; but not thinking that treatife fufficient to in-
form the curious of every thing that relates to the art ,
he wrote this differtation thirty years afterwards, and
x
added


added the lives of the Painters to it. From his judg-
ment, and the excellence of his treatife on painting , we
were convinced that fomething was wanting in Monfieur
du Frefnoy'sy whofe merit no man knew better than
Monfieur de Piles ; and for the fatisfattion of all lovers
of the art , we refolved to render it into Enghjh.
REFLEXIONS on the WORKS
O F
Monfieur du F R E S N 0 T,
I Was intimately acquainted with duFrefnoy, was
his friend and confident, and he permitted me to
fee him paint, a favour he feldom did any body,
becaufe he took a great deal of pains in his paint*
ing. His mind was fo full of knowledge of all forts
of learning, and his memory fo great, furnifhing
him with matter of all kinds, whenever he wanted
it, that his converfation, though very profitable, was
too much interrupted by digreffions, by which means
he often forgot his principal fubjedt. This was oc-
cafion’d, as fome have faid, by the abundance of his
thoughts, and the-fire of his fancy. As for my
part, who knew him familiarly, and had made ob-
fervatiohs on his judgment, as alfo on the vivacity
of his imagination, I confcfs I always thought it to
be fine, but not at all lively; on the contrary, the
Warmth of his fancy was very temperate. His firffc
thoughts never pleafed him, he always confider’d a
thing twice, and digefted it in his mind with all ima-
ginable application, that he might embellifh it with
convenient graces, and thofe lights that he acquir’d
by his learning.
Purfuant to the principles he laid down in his
poem, he endeavoured to execute his thoughts.
Y 2 He


He work’d very (lowly, and I with his vivacity had
been as great as Tome imagin’d it, that there might
have been more fpiric in his pencil, and that his
ideas might have been put in the faireft light,
v However, by the theory of his art, he reach’d
the end he aim’d at; and ’tis to be wonder’d that
the fame theory that was fufficient to make him cer-
tain of the goodnefs of his works, had not em-
bolden’d his hand. All that can be laid of it is, that
great (peculation frauds in need of great practice,
and that Monfieur du Frefnoy’s was only what he
had got by the performance of a few pieces.
’Tis eafy to perceive he endeavour’d to imitate
the Caracci’s gout of defign, and Titian’s colouring,
in all his works, which he often confefs’d himfelf.
There never was any French Painter who came fo
near Titian as Frefnoy. One may fee a proof of it
in the picture he drew at Venice for Marco Paruta, a
noble Venetian, wherein he reprefen ted a Madonna
in a half-length, and alfo in another he made for the
fame nobleman, reprefenting a Venus lying along.
What he has painted in France is of the fame gufto,
chiefly his performance at Rinei for Monfieur Bor-
dier, comptroller of the finances, which is efteem’d
the fineft of his productions by the beft judges. But
if he did not draw pictures enough to make his name
known in ieveral parts of Europe, his poem upon
painting will Jive as long as the art, and his name be
preferv’d in it, while the world has any value for the
profeffion.
NICHOLAS MIG NA R D y
OF Troyes in Champagne, was elder brother to
Pierre Mignard, furnam’d the Roman. Tho*
his reputation was not equal to Pierre’s, yet he was
mafher of fo many of the parts of painting, that he
is by no means to be reckon’d among the ordinary
Painters.


Painters. Their father, whole name was Pierre,
was a foldier, and ftaid twenty years in the king’s
fervice. He gave his two Tons liberty to follow the
inclination they had to painting. Nicholas learn’d
the principles of the art, of the bed Painter that was
at Troyes; and to encreale his knowledge, went to
ftudy at Fontainbleau after the antique figures that
were there, and after Primaticcio’s paintings: Bat
feeing that the fountain of all the beauties he flu-
died was in Italy, he traveled thither. Being em-
ploy’d at Lyons, he ftaid there fome time, though
not fo long as at Avignon, where he fell in love with
a young woman, whom he married when he came
back from Italy, on which account he was called
Mignard of Avignon. He ftaid two years at Rome,
and feveral years at Avignon with his father-in-law.
He was lent for to court by the king, who had fome
knowledge of him while he was at Avignon, when
he went to meet the infanta of Spain, whom he
married, anno 1659.
Mignard arriving at Paris, was employed by the
court, and by private perfons, about divers works,
in which he fhew’d his ability. He drew abundance
of portraits; neverthelefs his talent was more for
hiftory-painting. His invention was ingenious, and
he delighted in treating of poetical fubjeds: How-
ever the fire of his imagination was very moderate,
for which he made amends by great corrednefs, and
the nicety of his work. His extraordinary applica-
tion to it threw him into a dropfy, of which he died,
anno 1668, very much lamented by all that knew
him; for he was equally a man of honour and a
good Painter. He was redor of the academy when
he died, and that whole body affifted at the folem-
nity of his funeral, which was performed in the church
of the Mendicant friars of the order of St. Bernard,
where he lies buried.
Y 3 CLAUDE


CLAUDE VI G N 0 N,
BOrn at Tours, follow’d at firft Michael Angelo
da Caravaggio’s manner, and Ibtne of his pic-
tures in that kind have a great deal of force in them.
He difpatch’d his work fo fall, that he did an in-
finite number of pieces. To go through with his
bufinefs, he form’d to himfclf a more expeditious
manner than that of Michael Angelo da Caravaggio,
but it was not fo ftrong as that which he tiled in imi-
tation of Caravaggio. His performances were done
with eafe, and he had a particular way of uling his
tints. He placed them on the canvafs, without
mixing them on his pallet, and as he painted, he
always added colours, not mingling them by the
motion of his pencil, as other Painters do. By this
means the fuperficies of his pictures are very rugged.
His manner, which is purely a manual pra&ice, is
eafy to be known. He feldom confulted nature, or
the antique. There is nothing extraordinary either
in his invention or cxpreflion, and therefore his pieces
were little fought after by the curious. His chief
excellence was in diflinguifhing the manner of feve-
ral mailers, and in fetcing a price on pi6lures. He
died in the year 1670, in a good old age.
SEBASTIEN BOURDON,
BOrn at Montpelier, had a genius fo fiery that it
would not Jet him refledl fufficiently, norfludy
the effential parts of his art fo much, as he ought to
have done to render him perfedl in it. When he
was in Italy, he 101 l his time by quarrels, and one of
them oblig’d him to leave Rome before he had half
finiih’d the courfe of his lludies. However, his ta-
lent was eafy, and he did fo many good things in
his youth, that the world had conceived great hopes
of


of his being a matter in his riper years. The fine
arts being interrupted by the civil wars in France, he
traveled to Sweden, whither he was tempted to go
by the reputation queen Chriftina had for patronizing
learning and the arts; but her Majefty employing
him only to draw her portrait, he did not ftay long
there. The warmth of his genius would not let him
live idle, fo he return’d to France to feek for em-
ployment. Though he did not altogether anfwer
the expedition of the curious in everything relating
to his profeffion, yet he kept up his charadter by
extraordinary compofitions, and by the livelinefs of
his exprettions; but his genius not being guided by
folid judgment, it evaporated often into extravagant
conceptions, which, though they might for a little
while pleafe the fpedhtor for their novelty and odd-
nefs, yet when he began to examine them, he foon
found they were wild and unreafonable. He fuc-
ceeded better in his landfkips than in his hiftory-
painting: He drew the former very well: I have
feen divers of them, that are the beautiful effedls of
his imagination, and the whimficalnefs of them ren-
ders them the more agreeable, becaufe there are
fome very extraordinary things in them, which he
ttudied after nature, and performed with a ready and
eafy hand. ’Tis true, his fites are not very regular,
though they are not very common, neither do they
always agree with their plan. His pieces are feldom
finifh’d, and thofe that are moft fo, are not always
the moft fine. He one time laid a wager with a
friend of his, that he would paint twelve heads after
the life, and as big as the life, in one day, and he got
it. Thefe heads are not the worft things he ever did.
He often made the ground of his canvas to ferve for
hair, not by leaving it uncovered, but by working
the colours again with the end of his pencil-ftick.
He did a vaft number of pictures. His moft con-
fiderable pieces are, the gallery of Monfieur de
Y 4 Ber-


Bretonvilliers, in the ifle of Notre-Dame, and the
feven works of mercy, which he etch’d by himfelf.
That which is the molt efteem’d of all his perfor-
mances is, the martyrdom of St. Peter, drawn by
him for the May *, for the church of Notre-Dame,
which is kept as one of the choiceft rarities in that
cathedral. He was a Calvin id ; however, his morals
and manners were good, and he was very much va-
lued and refpeded by the royal academy of painting
and fculpture, of which he was redor. He was at
work for the king, in the lower part of the Tuille-
ries when he died, anno 1662, being about fixty
years of age.
* A pifture which is every year painted for the church of
Notre-Dame, and is expofed on the frjl of May , from whence
? tis called the May.
SIMON FRANCOIS ,
BOrn at Tours, in the year 1606. In his youth
he was very devour, and declar’d for a religi-
ous life. He would fain have been a capuchin, but
his friends hindering him, he fought after a profef-
fion that might affift him in raifmg his foul to the
love of God ; and by chance looking on a picture of
our Saviour’s nativity, wirh which he was extreme-
ly touch’d, in hopes of being able to draw fome
pieces, whole effed on the fpedators might be as
lively, he refolv’d to turn Painter. Thus ’twas not
out of inclination that he took to painting, but a
call, which had fomething extraordinary in it; for
his genius was cold enough, though his fenfe was
otherwife folid, and fufficient to carry him through
all the difficulties in the way to perfedion in that
art.
We defire the Reader to believe , where he meets with
*ny fuch notable injiances of the bigotry and ridiculouf-
-1 nefs


nefs of the French papijis , when they have any thing to
fay of their religion , that we the tranflators are entirely
guiltlefs of the author’s weaknefs and fuperfiltion.
Francois had no other matters to teach him
but the good pictures he copied. He at firft drew
Tome portraits; and Monfieur de Bethunc, his
patron, going embafiador to Rome, took him with
him, having procured a penfion to be fettled on him,
to encourage him in his ftudies. He lived in Italy
till the year 1638, and in his return homewards he
paft through Bologna, where he contracted a friend-
ihip with Guido, who drew his pidure.
At his arrival in France, he was fo happy as to
be the firft Painter who had the honour to draw the
pidure of the Dauphin, of whom the Queen was
juft brought to bed. This his firft performance
fucceeded fo well, that he had reafon to hope the mi-
nifters, who were fatisfied with it, and had promifed
toproted him, would accordingly have procured him
fome greater employment, and have made his for-
tune; but falling into difgrace, tho’ he did not de-
ferve it, he took a difguft at the court, left it, and
rcfolved to lead a retir’d life, more conformable to
his firft intentions.
In this retirement he came to a refolution to paint
only fuch things as might be an attiftance to him in
his way to heaven: He meant pieces of devotion,
in which he employ’d himfelf fo much, that the reft,
of his life was a perfed pattern of Chriftian piety.
Among all the virtues which he lived in, the exer-
cife of his patience was moft confpicuous; for being
eight years together troubled with the ftone, he en-
dured that terrible afflidion with incredible conftan-
cy. He died in the year 1671, and the ftone that
was taken out of him after his death weighed a
pound.
There


There are none of his pidures in the cabinets of
the curious; there are fome in the churches in Paris,
and *tis not difficult to perceive by his
that the author was more devout than fkilful. How-
ever, his Hull is very much to be commended, in as
much as he knew how to make ufe of his art to carry
him to heaven, which is much to bepreferr’d before
the acquiring a vain reputation.
T’is new to an Englifh reader to hear , that painting
is the way to falvation *, but fuch is the blindnefs and
extravagance of the religion of our neighbours , who
pretend to be the tnoji fenfible and polite nation in the
univerfe.
PHILIP de CHAMPAGNE ,
BOrn at Bruflels, anno 1602. His parents were
of mean defeent, but honeft. In his youth he
ffiew’d an extraordinary inclination to painting. He
chang d his mailers, who were all of them ordinary
Painters, feveral times; at Jail he lighted on Fou-
quiere, of whom he learnt landfkip. As for the,
other kinds ol painting, he ow’d his excellence in
them wholly to his affiduity in working, and the de-
fire he had to advance himfelf in the knowledge of
his profeffion.
He was fo eager to learn, that he fpared no pains
in fecking after a perfon, whole leflbns might be fa-
tisfadory to him ; but finding none who could teach
him fo much as he wanted to be taught, he refolved
that nature only ffiould be his mailer, and he imi-
tated her afterwards in all his performances very re-
gularly, but his choice was none of the bell.
At nineteen years of age he thought it time to
travel into Italy, intending to take France in his
way, and to llay there as long as his occafions re-
quired. When he came to Paris, he plac’d himfelf
with


with Alleman, an ordinary painter, who, tho’ he
knew little of the matter, had moft of the bufmefs
of his profeffion at that time. He left him to be
private a while, and follow his ftudies. He lodg’d
in the college of Laon, where Pouffin allb dwelt,
after he return’d out of Italy the firft time. Thefe
two Painters meeting together there, became good
friends, and fo continu’d. One du Chefnc, a very
ignorant painter, who like the reft of the pretend-
ers in all arts, was forward and puffiing in his,
had by his impudence and intereft, procur’d to be
employ’d about the paintings of the palace of Lux-
emburg. This man fet Pouffin and de Champagne
at work under him. Pouffin did a few fmall pieces
in the deling, and Champagne drew fome fmall
pictures in the queen’s apartment. Her majefty
lik’d them fo well, that du Chefne was afraid he
wou’d get his employment from him i whereupon
de Champagne, who lov’d peace and quietnefs,
perceiving du Chefne’s jealoufy, to cure him of
it, returned to Bruflels, to take his leave of his
friends, and from thence he refolv’d to go through
Germany to Italy. He was fcarce got there, when
a letter came to him from the abbot of St. Am-
broife, who was furveyor of the buildings, to ad-
vife him of du Chefne’s death, and to invite him
to return to France, which he did. He was pre-
fently made director of the queen’s painting, and
file gave him a penfion of twelve hundred livres a
year, with lodgings in the palace of Luxemburg.
About that time the queen order’d him to work
at the Carmelites, and he marry’d du Chefne’s
daughter. Being a great lover of his buftnels, and
having a great deal of it, he went thro* all with
pleafure, as well as labour. There are a vaft num-
ber of his pieces at Paris, and other parts of the
kingdom. Among other places there are fome pic-
tures of his in the two monafteries of the Carme-
lites,


lites, in the fuburbs of St. Jaques, in la Rue Cha-
pon, at the Palais Royal, in the chapter-houfe of
Notre-Dame at Paris, and in feveral churches in
that city, without reckoning an infinity of por-
traits, which he drew, and are noted for their like-
nefs, as well as for their being finilh’d to a great
degree. Monfieur Poncel, Councellour in the court
of aids, who was one of his particular friends, de-
fir’d him, one Sunday, to draw his daughter’s pic-
ture, who the Monday following was to profefs
herfelf a filler of the Carmelites in la Rue Chapon,
and after that day fiie was not to be Teen by any
lay-men; but Champagne making it a fcruple of
confcience on account of the day, wou’d not touch
his pencil on the Sunday, whatever his friend faid
to him and offer’d him to prevail with him, to
make her portrait ; for he was very difinterelled as
well as a good chriftian, a proof of which I lhall
give in the following relation.
Cardinal Richlieu had offer’d to make his, and
his families fortune, in cafe he wou’d quit the
queen mother’s fervice. De Champagne always
refus’d to defert his millrefs, and the cardinal com-
mended his fidelity, and valu’d him the more, the
more he perfifled in his duty to the queen. The
cardinal’s chief valet de chambre, who propos’d his
entering into his eminency’s fervice, added, that
whatever he defir’d, the cardinal, he was fure,
wou’d grant him. Champagne reply’d, “If Mon-
“ figneur, the cardinal, could make me a better
te painter, the only thing I am ambitious of, it
tc wou’d be fomething, but fince that was impof-
-41 fible, he only begg’d the honour of the continu-
“ ance of his eminencies good graces.” The va-
let de chambre told the cardinal de Champagne’s
anfwer, which inflead of offending him, encreas’d
his elleem of this painter, who, tho* he refus’d to
enter into his fervice, did not however refufe to
work.


work"for him. Among other things, he drew his
picture for him at feveral fittings, and *tis one of
the beft pieces he ever painted in his life.
He had a long while been famous in his profef-
fion, when le Brun arriv’d at Paris from Italy:
the latter as well by means of his protestors, who
were powerful perfons, as thro* his ability, foon put
himfelf at the head of all the French Painters and
paintings, and was made principal painter to the
king. Champagne fhewing no difguft at the prefe-
rence which was given le Brun to his prejudice.
He had a fon and two daughters by his wife.
Two of thefe children dying, he lov’d the furvivor,
a daughter, with the more tendernefs and pafllon.
He permitted her to follow her inclination to a re-
ligious life, and fhe entred herfelf in the nunnery
at Port-Royal. For her fake he had a love for the
convent, and all that belong’d to it in any wife,
who, going under the name of Janfenifts in thofe
days. Champagne was thought to favour their opi-
nions. He died in the year 1674. being feventy-
two years old. He was belov’d by all that knew
him, both as a good painter and a good man.
REFLEXIONS on the WORKS
O F
Be CHAMPAGNE.
AS great a defire as Champagne had in his
youth to attain to perfection in the art of
painting, there appears no elevation in his perform-
ances ; however, he did abundance of pieces, and
had a facility of invention, but his genius was cold,
and his gout in a great meafurc Flemifh.
He apply’d himfelf always to nature, whom he
faithfully imitated. He did not know how to dif-
pofe of his objeCts, fo as to give them life and
motion.


motion. He was ignorant of the art of retrench-*
ing thofe things, in imitating nature, that hinder
the mellownefs, lightnefs, and good gufto of paint-
ing, and of adding that which makes the life of a
picture. All his knowledge confined in a fervile
imitation, in the performance of which he neither
follow’d his genius, nor the rules of his art. I
cannot fee by his productions, that he penetrated
into the bell principles of painting ; nor, except-
ing his defigns, which are regular enough, that
there is any thing picquant in any of his pictures.
I mult do him the jultice to confefs, I have
feen fome of his local colours that have been very
good, fome heads well imitated, and the colour-
ing very Itrong; yet they were Itill as it were in an
unmoveable polture, and feem’d as infenfible as e-
ven fome living models often appear to be.
To correCt nature in reprefenting her, to add to
her all the beauties the is fufceptible of, to difbri-
bute all the lights and lhadows that accompany her,
advantageoully, is the work of a perfeCt painter*,
and a good one to imitate her, as Ihe prefents her-
fe!f to him with facility to preferve a character of
truth, tho’ he adorns his fubjeCt only with the beau-
ties before his eyes, without penetrating all thofe that
would agree with it. On this account Champagne
deferved the reputation that he liv’d in, the rather,
becaufe he had a good method in drawing landlkips,
and underftood perfpeCtive very well. He alfo fi-
nilh’d his pictures to a nicety, and exercis’d the of-
fice of reCtor of the royal academy of painting
many years.
JEAN BAPTIS TE de CHAMPAGNE,
WA S Philip’s nephew, and born at Bruffels.
He was bred up in the profeflion of paint-
ing by his uncle. They liv’d fo lovingly together,
and


and had fuch a reciprocal efteem one for the other
that the nephew follow’d the uncle’s manner, tho*
there was not fo much force and likenefs in his
pictures as in Philip’s. As for other things, their
fentiments were the fame, both as to their art and
their morals. Jean Baptitte traveled to Italy, where
he ftaid but fifteen months, and while he was there,
he did not mend his gufto, keeping always to that
which he learnt of his uncle. He died profeflbr of
the academy, in the year 1688. the forty-third of
his age.
NICHOLAS LOIR ,
OF Paris, was the fon of a fkilful goldfmith.
He wanted neither genius to invent, nor fire
to perform, tho* there is nothing in either of thefe
qualities, that may not be found in an ordinary paint-
er. There was no delicacy nor elevation in his
thoughts. He had a good guft in defigning. His
pictures were drawn with facility, and his per-
formances clean; yet he did not give himfelf time
to digeft his thoughts. As fall as any thing came
into .his head, he executed it immediately, fome-
times while he was talking. He had acquir’d fuch
a habitude, and had fuch a happy memory, that
what he had feen in Italy, was always ferviceable
to him. He undertook alike all forts of fubjects,
and drew figures, landfkips, architecture and orna-
ments with equal fuccefs. There are abundance of
pictures of his drawing, both public and private, at
Paris. He painted feveral galleries and apartments
and among the ret, the palace of the Tuillieres
Was in part painted by him. He died anno 1679.
in the fifty-fifth year of his age, being then pro-
fefibr of the academy of painting.
CHARLES


CHARLES Le B R UN,
OF Paris, was born with all the difpofitions ne-*
ceflary to render him a great painter. He
made ufe of his talent, as foon as he could make
life of his reafon. He cultivated it by continual
ftudy; and fortune, who never left him, as well as
merit, put him in the way to fhew it to advantage.
He was the fon of an ordinary fculptor, who liv’d
in the Place Maubert. This fculptor was employ-
ed about fomething in the garden of the Hotel
Seguier. He ufed to carry his fon with him thi-
ther, and to make him copy fome defigns after
him. Monfieur the chancellor walking in the gar-
den one day, faw the young man defigning, and
took notice that he did it with eafe and applicati-
on for one of his years, from whence he conclud-
ed ’twas the effedt of no common genius. He was
pleas’d with the lad’s phyfiognomy, and liking his
good inclination to the art of painting, bid him
bring his defigns from time to time as he drew
them, which he did, and the chancellor afterwards
took care to advance him, fupplying him with money,
to encourage him in the profecution of his fttudies.
The young man, animated by Monfieur de Se-
guier’s favour, made fo wonderful a progrefs in his
profeflion, that the chancellor recommended him
to Vouet, who was then painting the library of the
Hotel Seguier, and was looked upon by all the
French Painters, as the Raphael of France.
Le Brun at fifteen years old, drew two pidlures
which furprized the Painters of thofe times. The
firft was the portrait of his grandfather, and the
other reprefented Hercules knocking down Diome-
des’s horfes. Monfieur the Chancellor Seguier fome
time after perceiving by Le Brun’s eagernefs to
learn, and the progrefs he had made in his art,
thal


that he was fir ro travel to Italy, fent him thither,
anno 1639. and maintain’d him there three years,
allowing him a large penfion. While Le Brun was
at Rome, he perfected himfelf in the knowledge
of thofe parts of his art, that got him univerfal
reputation. The young Painters, who return from
Rome, in their way home to the other parts of
Europe, generally flop at Venice, to learn, at leaft,
a tindure of colouring, but Le Brun had not that
curiofity.
The firfb pidure he drew when he came back to
France, was the Brazen Serpent, which is in the
convent of the monks of Picpus. Ide afterwards
did feveral other pieces for Monfieur the Chancel-
lor, his protedor.
When he compar’d his own works with thofe of
his contemporary Painters in France, he knew
what a value to put upon himfelf; and the defire
he had to make himfelf known, put him upon fo-
liating to have the drawing of thofe pieces, that
were to be expos'd to public view. To this end
he drew the pidure for the May, for the church of
Notre-Dame, two years fucccffively. The firft
year he painted the Martyrdom of St. Peter, and
the fecond that of Stephen. Le Sueur, of whom
we have fpoken, was the only painter, who difput-
ed the fuperiority in his art with him; but whe-
ther it was that Le Brun was thought more fkilful
than Le Sueur, or that his manner was more in
vogue ; or elfe that his friends were more numerous,
or more potent, he always had the advantage of
his competitor in opportunities ro fignahze himfelf
by grand compofitions.
Monfieur de Lambert’s gallery in the ifle of
Notre-dame, and the Seminary of Sr. Sulpitius, fet-
tled his reputation on fo fohd a bafis, that Mon-
fieur Foucquet, who was then fuperintendant of the
finances, employ’d him to paint his fine houfe of
Z Vaux


Vaux le Vicomte. Le Brim has fliewn there the
greatnels of his genius, and the depth of his know-
ledge, efpecially in the apartment call’d the Cham-
ber of the mules. One of the Ceilings in that houfe
is edeem’d the bed piece he ever did.
Monlieur Foucquet, to engage him wholly in
his fervice, allow’d him a penfion of twelve thou-
land livres a year, and paid him befides for his per-
formances. After Monfieur Foucquet’s imprifon-
ment, the king, who refolv’d to have the arts flou-
rifh in his kingdom, as well as the fciences, cad
his eyes on Le Brim, ennobled him, honour’d him
with the order of Sr. Michael, and made him his
principal painter.
In this poll he gave dill greater demondrations
of his merit to his majedy, than ever he had done
before. Monfieur Colbert, minider of date, and
fuperintendant of the royal buildings, valu’d him as.
the bed painter in the world. Le Brun laid the
prqjeft of confirming the foundation of the aca-
demy of painting, by his majedy’s authority. He
prefented it to Monfieur Colbert, and Colbert pro-
pos’d it to the king, not only to confirm it, but to
render it more illudrious than any of that kind
ever was. The revenues of the academy were en-
larged, new datutes were made, and that body was.
to confid of a protestor, a vice-protector, a direct-
or, a chancellor, four rectors, fourteen profedbrs,
of whom one was to be for anatomy, and another
for mathematics. There were alfo to be afliftants-
to the rectors and the profedbrs, feveral councel-
lors, a fecrctary, and two ferjeants.
He drew up another project for an academy at
Rome, to be founded by the king, for the ufe of
the French dudents, who travel thither, in which
there was a director to be maintain’d, to take charge
of the penfioners whom the king was to fend, from
time to time, to dudy at Rome, and who, by their
educa


education there, might be made capable of ferv-
ing his majefty in his paintings, Sculptures and
buildings.
Leßrun was very zealous to advance the fine artsin
France. In this he feconded the king’s good in-
tentions, who entrufted Monfieur Colbert with the
execution of his orders. That minifter did nothing
without confulting Le Brun, and this painter not
only undertook the charge of taking care of the
performances of things in general, but aHo was
very careful about his own in particular, finifhing
his pictures with the greateft induftry, and inform-
ing himfelf exactly of every thing that related to
his art, either by reading good authors, orconfult-
ing men of learning.
His works at Sceaux, and in feveral houfes in
Paris, fpread his fame all over Europe; but efpeci-
ally what he did for the king, the moft confiderable
of which are his large pictures, containing the hif-
tory of Alexander the Great, in the ceiling of the
gallery of Verfailles, and the great flair-cafe there.
When the king made Le Brun his principal
painter, he gave him alfo the direction of the manu-
factures at the Gobelins, which he minded with fuch
application, that there was nothing done there, that
was not after his defigns. He died in the year
1690. in his lodgings at the Gobelins. His tomb
is in a chapel he purchas’d in the church of St.
Nicholas du Chardonnet, where his widow erected
a magnificent maufoleum for him.
REFLECTIONS on the WORKS*/
CHARLES Le BRUN.
THE facility with which Le Brun follow’d his
fludies at Rome, and advanc’d himfelf in the
knowledge of his art; as alfo the firfl pictures he
drew after his return, gave the world a great opi-
Z 2 nion


nion of his ability: neither were they deceived in
their expeditions; and as the fig-tree produces fruit,
without bringing forth flowers firfl, fo he was ripe,
almoft as foon as he was green, and his firfl: pieces were
perfect, tho’ not in fo great a degree as thofe that
he drew afterwards. Every thing that came out
of his hands was maflerly, infomuch, that one may
in fome meafure fay of him, that the progrefs he
made in his art, was not to learn it, fincehe knew it
already, but to render him one of the greatefl
painters of his age.
He had a fine genius, his fenfe was penetrating
and folid, and his invention eafy, tho’ with reflec-
tion. He never admitted any thing into the com-
pofition of his pictures without coufidcring well of
it before. He confulted books and men of learn-
ing, that he might omit nothing, which was con-
venient for him to introduce into his piece. His
expreffions were ingenious, and there was nothing
outrageous in his fire. Upon the fight of his firfl;
profusions one wou*d have thought he wou’d have
had a particular talent for foft and tender fubjedfs.
He drew moftly pieces of devotion in his younger
days, and had no opportunity to fhew the grandeur
of his genius •, but in hp future paintings he made it
appear that his talent was univerfal *, that he could
excel alike in the ferious manner as well as in the
gay, in the terrible, as w r ell as in the tender.
He treated of allegorical fubjedts with a great deal
of fancy ; but inftead of taking his ftories from the
fable, as is generally done, he invented them all
himfelf: However, by this method, his pidtures
were like fo many enigma’s, which the fpedfator
would not give himfelf the trouble to unriddle.
Ele always efteem’d the Roman fchool for de-
fign, though he inclin’d to imitate that of Bologna
in his flile and gufto, and particularly Annibale Ca-
racci, whofe manner he follow’d. Though his
gout


gout is not fo lively as that Painter’s, it is lefs louden,
more equal, more graceful, and always correfb. His
attitudes are well chofen, natural, expreflive, and
judicioufiy contrafied : His draperies are well fet,
agreeable, and lliew the naked with difcret'on ; but
there is no great variety in his folds. His expref-
fions, in all his reprefen rations, are beautiful. He
ftudied the paflions with extraordinary application,
as appears by the curious treatife he compofed on
them, which he adorn’d with demonftrative figures;
neverthelefs, even in this, he feems to have but one
idea, and to be always the fame, degenerating into
habitude, or what we call manner. ’Tis true that
habitude is beautiful, but for want of examining na-
ture, and feeing that file can exprefs the fame pafii-
ons feveral ways, fome of which are very lively
and picquant, he has very much leffen’d the value
of his productions in the opinion of the criticks.
What I have faid of the pafiions may fcrve for his
defigns, both of figures and the airs of his heads,-for
they are almoft always the fame, though they are
well chofen, which doubtlefs proceeded either from
his reducing nature to a habitude he had contracted,
or elfe from his not having enough confider’d the
diverfity of which flie is fufceptible, for the Painter
ought to obferve her particular produtions as care-
fully as her general.
Le Brun, when he came back from Italy, law the
neceflityof leaving off his wild and trivial tints, which
his mailer Vouet made ufe of for expedition-fake.
He got rid of them in a great meafure. He tem-
per’d them, and brought them nearer the truth ;
yet, whatever pains he took to leave them off quite,
he always retain’d in his (file tints that were too ge-
neral, efpecially in his draperies and carnations, and
did not enough mind his reflets, which contribute
very much both to the force and roundnefs of ob-
jects, and to the union and likenefs of imitation.
Z 3 . His


His local colours are bad; he was too carelefs in
his endeavours, to give each objed its true charac-
ter by this part of his art; For this reafon only his
pictures, as we fay, fmell always of the pallet, and
have not the effed as to the fenfaiion of nature, as
thofe of other matters have whofe local colours are
more ftudied. For a proof this aflertion, the fpec-
tator need only put one of le Brun’s bett pieces, by
one of the bett of the Venetian fchool; he will find
the excellence of the comparifon in the part of the
local colours, that all is on the fide of the Venetian
pidure, and that le Bran comes infinitely fhort of it
on that account. This method will dired him in
all cafes wherein he would judge of the goodnefs of
the local colours.
As le Brun err’d in that part of his arr, fo he com-
mitted a fault in his lights and fhadows. He feldom
took care to make the fore-part of his pidures fuffi-
ciently brown, and was of opinion, that great lights
ought not to be placed in the hindmoft part of a
pidure ; by which means moft of his works have
very little effed.
*Tis not the fame as to his intelligence of the
ClaroOfcuro, though he did not ftudy that fo much
as he ought to have done in his youth; yet in his
riper years he faw the necelfity of it, and pradis’d
it with fuccefs. His grand compofitions, containing
the hiftory of Alexander the Great, arc fufficient
proofs of his knowledge of this artifice.
His laft produdions, which are his bett, fhew
the extent of his ability and genius, and the prints
that are grav’d after them, will render his name fa-
mous to all pofterity.
He was a univerfal Painter; he perform’d well
alike in all kinds, Jandfkip only excepted. His
pencil was light and mellow. He was equally exad
and eafy in his performances. In a word, as much
as he is to be cenfured for making his ttile too ideal
and •


and unnatural, and not diverfifying it, he was, how-
ever, mailer of fo many parts of his art, that he
defervesa place among the Painters of the firft rank ;
and whatever a fadion may fay or do, to lelTen tlie
value of his works his memory is reveng’d on it,
by the praife that is ftill given him throughout all
Europe, and no doubt pollerity will continue to do
juftice to his merit.
I fhould now fay fomething of Pierre Mignard, a
native of Troyes, and principal Painter to the King;
but his life being fhortly to be publifh’d at large,
together with a dcfcription or his paintings, the rea-
der will excufe my preventing the zeal of that au-
thor by weaker praifes. His pidures that are to be
feen in the publick places, may in the mean time
lerve to fatisfy the world of his worth ; and the
paintings in the great hall at St. Cloud, winch is
one of the mod confiderable works in its kind that
ever was made, is diffident to give- fatisfadion to
the impatience and cunolity of the pubhek vvith re-
ference to Monfieur Mignard s character.
CLAUSE G E L E
Otherwife call’d
Le L O R R A I N.
TH E means that fortune took to draw this
Painter out of his native obfeurity, and ren-
der him one of the famous men of his age in his pro-
feflion, are very extraordinary and furprifmg. In
his youth his parents put him to fchool, but he was
lb dull at his book, that they found it was fo much
time loft, fo they bound him ’prentice to a paftry-
cook. He ferv’d his time out, though to little pur-
pofe; and not knowing what to do with himfelf, he
went, in company of fome young fellows of the fame
Z 4 trade.


trade, to Rome, to feek after fome employment to
get his livelihood. He knew nothing of the lan-
guage, and was befides very ill bred,°fo no body
caret! to fet him at work. Chance at laft brought
him to Auguftino Fafib, who hired him to pound
his colours, clean his pallet and pencils, look after
his houfe, drefs his meat for him, and do all his
houfhold-drudgery, Auguftino keeping no other fer-
vant. His matter, in hopes to make him ferviceable
to him in fome of his greateft works, by little and
little taught him fome rules of perfpedive. Lorrain
at firll could hardly be brought to underftand thofe
principles of art j but when he began to have fome
notion of them, and to profit by his indufiry, he
took heart. His loul enlarg’d itfelf, and he fet about
his fiudies with wonderful eagernefs. He would be
in tiie country from morning to night, making his
ooiCi vatic ns on the effects of nature, and in painting
or dcfigning them. Sandrart relates, that being in
the country with him to ftudy together, Je Lorrain
made him obferve with as much nicety, as if he had
been well verfed in phyficks, the caufes of the di-
verfity or the fame view or profpeCt, explaining
why it appeared fometimes after one fafhion, and
fometimes after another, with refpedl to colours, in-
ftancing in the morning dews and everting vapours.
His memory was lo good, that he would paint with
a great deal of faithfulnefs what he had Teen in the
country, when he came home. He wasfo ablorb’d
in his labours, that he never vifited any body. His
diverfion was the fiudy of his profeffion, and by
mere force of cultivating his talent, he drew fome
that got him an immortal reputafion in the
kind of painting to which betook. By this we may
perceive, that conflancy and affiduity of working
will be too hard for the heavinefs of a man’s inteF
Jetffuals. He did not perform without difficulty ;
and his performance not anfwering his intention, he
would


would fometimes do and undo the fame pieces feven
or eight times over. There was nothing of manner
in his touches, and he often gave a tendernefs to his
finifh’d trees by glazing.
Notwithftanding he was very careful to learn a
good gout of defigning in the academy, yet the fi-
gures that are in his landfkips are all defign’d with
an ill gufto. He died at Rome, anno 1678, in an
extreme old age.
BARTOLG MEO MORILLO , or MURILLIO,
ASpanifh hifiory-painter, born at Seville of a
noble family. He had been wonderfully ad-
dicted to drawing from his infancy, which made his
father put him to be infiruCfed in that art. Having
finifh’d his ftudies under an eminent matter, he went
tor America, where he continued his profeffion with
great induftry; but finding himfelf not like to im-
prove according to his expectation, he return’d to
Seville, and meeting therewith none that could in-
ftruCl him, went for Rome, where he improv’d to
the admiration of all men. After fome time {pent
there he return’d for Spain, where he was much em-
ploy’d by the King and his court. He painted fe-
veral hiltory-pieces for the late King Charles of
Spain, which were fent by him to Rome, as a pre-
fent to the Pope, and where they began to call our
artift another Paolo Veronefe. There are many
noble altar-pieces of this Bartolomeo in Spain, and
fome in Flanders, which are yet in great efteem.
He was a perfon well verfed in feveral kinds of lite-
rature, being much admired while he lived, and
univerfally lamented at his death. He died in the
year 1682, and was interr’d with great pomp and
folemnity, his pall being born up by two mar-
quifles, and four knights of different orders. We
have feveral eminent pieces of this matter in England,
con


confiding of beggar-boys as big as the life, playing
together in different aCHons. Some of thefe belong-
ing to the earl of Melfort’s collection were fold in
the banqueting-honfe at a good rate, and of which
there aj£ abundance of copies extant among us by
different hands.
HERNANDEZ el MU DO,
ASpanifh hiftory-painter, difciple of Titian, and
deaf and dumb from his cradle. He was fo
good an imitator of his mafter, that his pieces are
in great efteem at Madrid. He was employ’d by
King Philip 11. to do many pieces at the Efcurial,
which that king had then newly built; but above all
others, his molt famous pictures were thofe of the
four evangelifts, which he painted in Frelco, at the
four corners of the upper great cloyfter of the monks.
Upon the finifhing that of St. John in the ifle of
Patmos, this Painter became fo proud of his perfor-
mance, that he exprefs’d a great defire the King
ftiould come and fee it, which being notified to his
Majefty, he accordingly came: But being brought
thither with an expectation to fee a pleafant piece,
and finding nothing but St. John in a defart rocky
country, which could afford little pleafure, he was
by no means pleafed with the fight, which he imme-
diately declared. The deaf and dumb Painter ob-
ferving by his aCtions and countenance, how little,the
King underftood the excellence of his piece, through
want of a true gufto in the art, fo foon as ever his
Majcfty’s back was turn’d, fuddenly caught up the
two corners of his cloak, and making them into the
fhape of affes ears, and clapping them to the fides
of his head, fignified, pointing at the King, that
he was an afs for pretending to give judgment of
what he fo little underftood.
OF


OF
TASTE,
AND
Its VARIETY with respect to feveral
NATIONS.
AFTER having written of the Painters
of feveral nations in Europe, we thought
it might be a-propos to fay fomething of
the different taftes of thofe nations. We have fpo-
ken of the grand guflo in its place, and have fhewn
that it ought always to be met with in a perfect
piece; and that it is that which chiefly charadterizes
a perfedl Painter: But there is a general guflo in
mankind, which is alike fufceptible of purity and
corruption, and becomes particular by the life it
makes of particular things. We will here endea-
vour to explain it, and fhew how it is form’d, and
in what it terminates.
One may reafon of the tafte of the mind, in fome
meafure, as of that of the body. There are four
things to be confidered in the tafle of the body,
viz.
i. The organ.
2. The things eaten, or that are tailed.
3. The fenfation which they caufe.
4. The habitude which this fenfation produces in
the organ by repetition.
I u


In like manner there are four things to be con*
fider’cl in the tafte of the mind, viz.
1. The mind which taftes.
2. The things that are tailed.
3. The application of thofe things to the mind,
or the judgment that the mind makes of them.
4. The habitude caufed by feveral judgments re-
peated, from whence a conftant idea is form’d in the
mind.
From thefe four things we may infer.
That the mind may be called tafte, inafmuch as
it is confider’d as an organ.
That things may be laid to he of a good or ill
tafte, as they contain, or are diftant from the beau-
ties which art, good fenfe, and the approbation of
feveral ages have eftablifhed.
That the judgment which the mind makes of an
objeft at firft, is a natural tafte, which may after-
wards be perfected or corrupted, according to the
temper of the mind, and the quality of its objeds.
In a word, that the judgment repeated, produces
a habitude, and that habitude a fettled idea, which
gives us a continual inclination to the things that we
have approved, and are of our choice.
Thus what we call gufto in painting, is by little
and little form’d in the minds of men who are cu-
rious in the art. Though every gufto is not good,
yet every particular man believes his the beft. For
this reafon tafte may be thus defined *, ’Tis the ha-
bitual idea of a thing conceived to be the beft in its
kind.
There are three forts of tafte in painting. The
natural gout, the artificial, and the gout of each
nation.
The natural gout is the idea we conceive of any
thing at the fight of fimple nature. The Germans
and Flemmings feem very rarely to leave this
and ’tis the common opinion that Correggio had no
2 other.


other. What makes the difference between his idea
and theirs is, in that ideas are like liquors, that take
the form of the veficls into which they are pour’d.
Thus the natural gout is mean or fublime, according
to the talents of particular perfons, and the choice
they are capable to make of the objeCls of nature.
The artificial gout is the idea we conceive at the fight
of another man’s works, by the good opinion we
have of our maker’s knowledge and leffons. In a
word, by education, the gout of each nation is an
idea, which the works that are made or feen in any
particular country forms in the mind of thofe who
dwell in it. The different takes of nations may
be reduced to fix, the Roman, the Venetian, the
Lombard, the German, the Flemmifh, and the
French.
The Roman take is an idea of the works that are
to be met with in Rome: Now, ’tiscertain the mok
valuable works which are in Rome, are thofe we call
antiques, and tfie modern productions made in imi-
tation of them, whether it be in fculpture.or paint-
ing. The rarity of thefe pieces confiks chiefly in
the beauties of defign, the fine choice of the atti-
tudes, the delicacy of the exprekions, the fair order
of the foldings, and a fublime kile to which the an-
cients railed nature, and the moderns after them in
the beginning of the fixteenth century. ’Tis no
wonder therefore that the Roman gout, which
minds only the parts we have mentioned, kiould be
deficient in colouring, it could not acquire a reliki of
that from the antiquities, colours are not to be found
there, and we consequently mils them in the Roman
tafie. The mind of man is too narrow, and his
life too fhort, to take in all the parts of painting,
and at once to profefs them to perfection. The
Romans did not delpife colouring ; indeed they
could not well defpife a thirig of which they had ne-
ver any juk idea; but the other parts of the art,
whereof


whereof they were better inform’d, and endeavour’d
moft to be perfedf in, hindered their ftudying that
of colours. They had not leifure to do it,* and did
not value them fo much as they ought to have
done,becaufe they did not underhand them fo much.
The Venetian tafte is quite different from the Ro-
man. The latter negledled colouring a little too
much, and the former did the fame by defign, there
being very few antiques at Venice, and few pieces
of fculpture or painting of the Roman tafte. The
Venetians applied themfelves to exprefs beautiful
nature, which they took from objefts in their own
country; they chara&eriz’d them by comparifon,
not only by (hewing the value of the true colour of
one thing by the true colour of another; but by chu-
fing in this oppofitron an harmonious vigour of co-
louring, and every thing that might render their ob-
jects the more probable, the more like, and the
more furprifing.
The Lombard tafte confifts in a flowing mellow
defign, in which a fine choice of nature is mingled a
little with the antique, in colours very nearly ap-
proaching thofc of the life,- and laid on with alight
pencil. Correggio is the bell example of this gout,
and the Carracci, who endeavoured to imitate him,
are more corredt than he in their defigns, but infe-
rior to him even in their gout of defign, in grace,
in delicacy, and in colouring. Annibale, while he
(laid at Rome, learnt fo much of the Roman gout,
that I don’t reckon any thing he did, after he had
half finifh’d the Farnefe gallery, among the works
of the Lombard fchool.
Neither do I place among the Lombard Painters,
thofe mafters who, though they were born in Lom-
bardy, imitated the Roman or Venetian fchools in
their tafte; becaufe, in this cafe, I have more regard
the manner they followed, than to the country
where they were born. The Painters, and the cu-
* 2 rious.


nous, who, for example, have put Palma Vecchio,
Moretto, Lorenzo Lotto, Morone, and feverai
other good Lombard Painters in the Lombard
fchool, have infenfibly occafion’d a great deal of
confufion, and made Tome perfons believe that the
Venetian and Lombard fchools were the fame thing,
becaufe thole Lombard, whom I have mention’d,
follow’d Giorgione’s and Titian’s manner entirely.
1 ufed formerly to talk after the fame rate, accor-
ding to this confufed idea, becaufe the greateft part
of our French Painters talk fo; but reafon, and the
Italian authors, who have treated of this matter, con-
vinced me of my error, and fet me right.
The German taftc, is what we commonly call the
Gothick gout. ’Tis an idea of nature, as we fee her
generally with her defedls, and not as fhe might be
in her purity. The Germans have imitated her
without choice, and have onlycloath’d their figures
with long draperies, the foldings of which are dry
and broken. They minded the linifhing of their ob-
jects more than the good difpofition of them. The
exprelfion of their figures is always infipid, their de-
figndry, their colouring indifferent, and their per-
formances well labour’d. However, there have
been fome German Painters, who ought to be di-
ftinguifh’d from the reft of their nation; and who,
in fome parts of their art, were equal to the beft ma.
fters of Italy.
The Flemmifh tafte differs only from the German
in a greater union of well chofen colours, in an ex-
cellent Claro Ofcuro, and in a more mellow pencil:
I except three or four Flemmings from the common
Painters of that nation. They were Raphael’s difciplcs,
and brought their mafter’s manner of defign and co-
louring out of Italy with them. I alfo except Rubens
and Van-Dyck, who view’d nature with penetrating
eyes, and railed her effects to an extraordinary ele-
vation,


vation, though they retain’d fomething of the Flem-
miffi tafte in the gout of defign.
The French tafte has been always fo divided, that
’tis difficult to give a juft idea of it. The Painters
of that nation feem to differ very much from each
other in their produdions. In their travels to Italy,
fome of them thought it fufficient to flay at Rome,
and there they fell in with the Roman gout. O-
thers lived at Venice, and return’d with a particular
inclination for the Venetian fchool, and fome of
them applied themfelves with all their mduftry, to
imitate nature as they found her. Among the moft
fkilful French Painters, who died within thefe laft
thirty or forty years, fome follow’d the antique gout,
others that of Annibale Carracci in defigning, and
both the one and the other are trivial enough in their
colouring. But they were otherwife poffefs’d of lb
many fine parts of their art, and have manag’d their
fubjeds with fo much elevation, that their works
will always be the ornament of France, and the ad-
miration of pofterity.
The End of Monfeur De Pile’j Treatlfe .
T H E


C T J H E Reader will eajily perceive, /to thd*
-*■ /Ztf French author has not vouchfafed to do
jujiice to the Painters of our nation, yet he has
very little to fay of thofe of his own ; and the
lafi fentence of his book agrees fo ill with his ac-
count of the French Painters, a?id the French
tajie, that had not the authors of that nation
been the vainef writers in the world, when they
talk of their countrymen, he would not have been
guilty of fo ridiculous a four if in their favour.
Floe befi of their Painters were much more infe-
rior, in all the parts of the art, to our Van-
Eyck, than Van-Dyck was to Raphael and Ti-
tian. In the following pages we fall prove,
that the Englijh Painters and Paintings, both
for their number and their merit, have a better
claim to the title of a School, than thofe of
France. But the French would fain thrift
themfelves into all the honourable places, as well
in the arts and faiences, as in the empire of
Europe.
A a
A N


AN
ESSAY
TOWARDS AN
ENGLISH SCHOOL
OF
PAINTERS.
A.
Mr. ROBERT
Commonly call’d
A U G U S.
WAS a good Englifh Landflcip-Painter,
both in oil and diftemper. He was
alfo fkilful in architecture, in which
kind he painted many fcenes for the
play-houfe in Covent-garden. There are not many
of his pictures extant among us of thofe that are,
the mod confiderable is a piece of landlkip prefenced
by him to the company of Painter-ftainers, (whereof
he was a member) and which now hangs in their
( hall


hall. He is reckon’d among the held of our Englifh
Landfkip Painters, and became eminent, notfo much
by his labour and induftry, as through the bent of
his natural genius. He died in London, in the year
1679, and about the fixtieth year of his age.
Mr. H E N R r ANDERTON
WAS a Face-painter and difciple of Streater,
in great efleem about the year 1665, which
he did not long furvive. He travell’d to Rome,
where he ftudied fome years after the antique, and
at his return drew the beautiful dutchefs of Rich-
mond, which recommended him to draw King
Charles 11. and moft of his court. He interfer’d in
his bufinefs with Sir Peter Lely, and had a great
fhare of reputation in thofe times. He was likewife
a landfkip-painter and in ftill life ; as alfo, a good
imitator of his mafler, ferjeant Streater, till he left
his way, and fell to face-painting.
Mr .EDMUND ASH FIELD
WAS a gentleman well defcended, who drew
both in oil and crayons. He was difciple to
Mr. Wright, and painted fome heads as big as the
life. He firft found out the way to multiply the
number and variety of tints in crayons, and therewith
to draw various complexions in imitation of oil-paint-
ing. This he perform’d on paper, and prafliAl
feveral years with dsferv’d applaufe. He brought
thofe heads to ten pounds price. From him the
prefent Mr. Lutcrell had his inftruddion, who has
improved that invention, and multiplied the varie-
ty of colours to effedl any thing; as alfo found
out a method, unknown before, to draw with thofe
chalks or crayons on copper-plates, either by the
i|fe, or hiftorieally.
Aa 2 JOHN


B
JOHN BAPTIST CASPARS ,
Commonly call’d,
L E L r s BAPTIST ,
WA S born at Antwerp, and brought up in the
fchoolof Thomas Willeborts Boflaert, adifci-
pleof Vandyck. Coming over into England in the
time of the civil wars,major general Lambert took him
into his fervice; and upon the happy reftoration of
King Charles 11. Sir Peter Lely being received for
his Majefty’s principal Painter, he employed Baptift
to paint his poftures, which he perform’d very well,
and after his death he did the like for Mr, Riley,
and afterwards for Sir Godfrey Kneller. This Bap-
tift was a great Judge of Painting, and likewife
eminent for his defigns for tapifbry, having been an
admirable draftiman in the academy. He died in
London about fourteen years ago, and lies buried at
St. James’s.
JOHN BAPTIST MONNOTE R,
Commonly fill'd the FLOIEER-PAINTER,
WA S born at Lifle in Flanders, and brought
up at Antwerp. His bufmefs there was
hiftory-painting ; but afterwards he return’d to
Lifle, and apply’d himfelf to painting flowers, where-
in he fucceeded to admiration. Monfieur Le Brun
having undertaken the painting of Verfailles, em-
ploy’d Baptift to do the flower-part, wherein he
ihew’d his excellence, as is yet to be feen in that
palace. His grace the duke of Montague being
then ambafiador in France, and obfcrving the curia
... oufnefs


oufnefs of this painter’s work, invited him over
to England, and employ’d him in conjunction with
Meflieurs Roufleau and La Force, to adorn his mag-
nificent houfe in Bloomfbury, where a great variety
of flowers and fruit of this mafter are to be feen,
and thofe the beft of his performance. There are
alfo feveral other pieces of his at my lord Carlifle’s,
my lord Burlington’s, and other perfons of quali-
ty; but the moft curious of all, is the looking-
glafs at Kenfington houfe, which he painted for the
late queen Mary, of glorious memory, her maje-
fty fitting by him almoft all the while. His flow-
ers have generally in them a loofnefs and freedom
of penciling, together with a luftre of colouring,
which is inimitable. They are alfo of an ordon-
nance very beautiful and furprizing, bearing a good
price fuitable to their great worth, and are eafy to
be diftinguifh’d from thofe of other matters, by
comparing them together, the only way 'to arrive
at a diftindion of one man’s works from anothers.
His beft performances are own’d to be in England,
He began a vaft colledion of fine flower-prints, many
of which were executed by his own hand, and the
reft finifti’d by his direction. He died in Eng-
land about ten years ago, and lies buried at St.
James’s.
Mr. FRANCIS. BARLOW,
WA S born in Lincoinfhlre, and at his com-
ing to London, put apprentice to one Shep-
herd, a face-painter, with whom he lived but few
years, becaufe his fancy did not lie that way, his
genius leading him wholly to drawing of fowl, fifli
and other beafts, wherein he arriv’d to that perfec-
tion, that had his colouring and penciling been as
good as his draught, which was moft exadft, he
might have caflly excell’d all that went before him
A a 3 in


in that kind of painting, of which we have an in-
ftance in the fix books of prints after him, now
fold by Mr. Temped:. He drew fome ceilings of
birds for noblemen and gentlemen in the country.
There are feveral prints extant after the defigns of
this mafler, among which are the cuts for a new
edition of Aifop’s fables, in which undertaking he
wanted due encouragement. lie alfo drew feveral
of the monuments in Weftminftcr-Abby, and in
Henry VIPs chapel, which were intended for a large
edition of Mr. Keep’s Monumenta Weftmonalteri-
enfia. But notwithftanding all Mr. Barlow’s ex-
cellency in his way, and tho’ he had the good for-
tune to have a confiderable fum of money left him
by a friend, he died poor in the year 1702.
Mrs. MART BEAL ,
WA S an Englifh gentlewoman, born in Suf-
folk, who having learnt the rudiments of
painting of Sir Peter Lely, drew after the life, and
had great numbers of perfons of good rank fat to
her, efpecially the greateft part of the dignify’d
clergy of her time, an acquaintance Hie got by her
hufband, who was much in favour with that robe.
She was little inferior to any of her contemporaries,
either for colouring, (Length, force or life, info-
much that Sir Peter was greatly taken with her per-
formances, as he wou’d often acknowledge. She
work’d with a wonderful body of colours, was ex-
ceedingly induftrious, and her pictures are much
alter the Italian manner, which fhe learnt by hav-
ing copied feveral of the great mailers of that coun-
try, whofe pidures fhe borrow’d out of Sir Peter’s
collection. She died at her houfe in the Pall-Mall
about fix years ago, being 65 years old, and lies
buried at St. James’s.
ED-


E D WA R D du B O IS,
WAS a hiftory and landfkip-painter, but
chiefly the later, born at Antwerp. He
was difciple to one Groenwegen, a landfkip-painter
likewife, who redded many years in England, and
had been fome time in Italy. Du Bois allb traveled
to Italy where he continu’d eight years, during all
which time he ftudied the antiques, and painted af-
ter the Italian gufto, jointly with his brother a
painter, now living here. He work’d fome time
in Paris, and in his way to Italy did feveral pieces
for Charles Emanuel, duke of Savoy. Soon after
his return to Holland, he came to England, and
died in London about feven years ago, being feven-
ty-feven years old. He lies buried in St. Giles’s
church. He and his brother, by their extraordi-
nary induftry, have made one of the fineft colledli-
ons, of clofet pieces efpecially, of any in England.
DANIEL BOON,
WA S a Dutch droll-painter, and a great ad-
mirer of uglinefs and grimace, both in his
fmall and great pictures, in which he feldom for-
got to endeavour to raife mirth in his country-men,
and ours of the fame fublime genius. He died lately.
JOSEPH BUCKSHORN,
WA S a Dutch painter, born at the Hague,
who came over to England about the year
1670. He was efpecially eminent for his copies
after Sir Peter Lely, whofe manner he came fo near,
that feveral heads of his have been miftaken, by
good judges, for that great mafter’s. He copied
alfo Vandyck, and the prefent lord Rockingham
A a 4 has


has the pidure of the earl of Strafford done by him,
after that great painter. He was Sir Peter Lely’s
drapery-painter for many years, and died in Lon-
don, at the age of thirty-five, being buried in St.
Martin’s church.
BUSTLER ,
WAS a Dutchman, both a hiftory and face-
painter, in the reign of Charles 11. There
is a good pidure partly perform’d by him, in Mr.
Elfum’s pofTeflion of the Temple, which confifts of
three Boors playing together,- in different actions,
by Mr. Buftler; a good landfkip behind, by Mr.
Lanckrinck 5 and a little dog on one fide, bv
Hondius,
NICHOLAS B T E R,
WAS a. hiftory and face-painter, born at Dron-
them in Norway. He was much employ-
ed by the late famous Sir William Temple, at his
houfe, at Shene, near Richmond in Surry, where
he died about 20 or 21 years ago. He was a paint-
er of good hopes, but died young, the effed of
an intemperate life. He liv’d with Sir William
three or four years, during all which time he was
conftantly employ’d by him, in one fort of paint-
ing or other. One thing is remarkable of him,
and that is, that he was the firft man that was bu-
ried in St. Clements Danes after it was rebuilt, and
which had been firft built by his countrymen.
Mr.


c.
Mr. JOHN CARINGS ,
V\7AS an Englifli landfkip-painter, who Jiv’d
* ' the better part of his time in Holland, and
drew many views of that country in a manner very
neat and elaborate. His pieces bore a very great price
in his life-time, but having very little befides their
neatnefs to recommend them, they have fince been
lefs efteem’d. He died at Amfterdam above fifty
years ago.
Mrs. ANNE CARLISLE ,
WA S an Englifh gentlewoman, contemporary
with Vandyck. She copied the Italian ma-
ilers fo well, that Ibe was much in favour with
King Charles I. who became her patron, and pre-
fented her and Sir Anthony Vandyck with as much
Ultra Marine at one time, as coll him above 500 1.
She died in London about 26 years ago.
FREDERIC CAUSABON ,
Alias K E R S E B O O M,
WA S born at Solingen, a city of Germany, in
the year 1623. At 18 years of age he went
to Amfterdam to be inftruefted in the art of paint-
ing, but by whom is uncertain. From thence
he remov’d (o Paris in 1650. and work’d fome years
under Monfieur Le Brun; but afterwards he was
fent to Italy by the chancellor of France, and main-
tain’d there by that minifter 14 years, two whereof
he fpent with Nicholas Pouflin, of whofe manner
he was fo nice an imitator, that fome of his pieces
have


have been taken for his. Thus qualified for hiflo-
ry-painting he came to England ; but not finding
encouragement here in that way, he bent his flu-
dies towards portraits, wherein he was not unfuc-
cefsful either as to drawing or likenefs. He was
the firfl that brought over the manner of painting on
glafs, (not with a print as the common way now is)
in which he perform’d fome hiftories and heads
exceedingly well. Perfpedlive he underflood tho-
roughly, having been difciple to two excellent ma-
ilers in that art. He fpoke five languages admira-
bly well, and was, in fhort, an accomplifh’d paint-
er. He died in London in the year 1690. and lies
buried in St. Andrew’s Hoi born.
FRANCIS Be C L E TN,
WA S a Dutch painter, and mafler of the ta-
pifiry works to king Charles I. at Mortlack,
for which he painted cartoons in diflemper. He
was very eminent for his invention, and made fe-
veral defigns that were extraordinary fine, for paint-
ers, gravers, fculptors, &c. among which were the
cats for fome of Ogilby’s books. He died at Mort-
fack a little before the refloration.
ADAM C O L O'N I,
Commonly call’d the Old,
\\7 A S a Dutch painter, born in Roterdam, but
’ * who redded a great while in England, and
became efpecially eminent for his final! figures in ru-
ral pieces, for his cattle, country-wakes, fire-pieces,
&c. He alfo copied many pidlures of beafls after
Balkan, particularly thofe of the royal collection,
which are efleem’d his befl performances. He di-
ed


cd in London in 1685. aged 51. and lies buried in
Sc. Martin’s church.
HEN RT alias AD R lAN COLON /,
WAS the Ton of the before-mention’d. He was
inftrnted by his father, and brother-in-law
Mr. Van Diefl, and became a good drafts-man, as
a great number of academy-pieces drawn by him
teftify. He often wrought upon the fmall figures
in his brother Van Dieft’s landfkips, and they re-
ceived no fmall addition of beauty from what he
did, efpecially when he ftrove to imitate the man-
ner of Salvator Rofa. He died young about the
year 1701. at 33 years of age, and lies buried in
Sc. Martin’s church. He was a perfon of lively in-
vention, and painted very quick.
Mr. HENRI COOK,
WA S an Englifh gentleman, and hiftory-
painter, who had his education here, and fome
part of it in the univerfity of Cambridge. He was
a perfon of good reading, judgment and experi-
ence, and after he had traveled fome years in Italy,
and been an afliduous copier of the beft matters,
became not only a great critic in painting, but al-
fo a good performer, as appears by many public
pieces of his, viz. the altar-piece at new-college-
chapel in Oxford, what he has done at Chelfea-col-
lege, at Hampton-Court, and on many cielings and
flair-cafes of this town and kingdom. His excel-
lent collection of pictures fold at his death, fpeak
his relifh, wherein were many fine copies of the car-
toons of Raphael, and after moft of the befl ma-
fters, perform’d by himfelf. His copies after the
cartoons are particularly remarkable, being drawn
in turpentine oil, after the manner of diflemper,
of


of which he is faid to be the inventor. He died
in London the 18th of November 1700, aged near
58. and lies buried in St. Giles’s church.
Mr. ALEXANDER COOP E R,
WA|S the elder brother of Samuel Cooper
Efq ; and, together with him, brought up
to limning by Mr. Holkins, their uncle. He per-
form’d well in miniature, and going beyond fea, be-
came limner to Chriftiana queen of Sweden, yet
was far exceeded by his brother Samuel, who was
much the greater mailer. He did likewife landfkip
in water colours exceedingly well, and was account-
ed an extraordinary drafts-man.
SAMVEL COOPER Efq;
WAS born in London in the year 1609. and
brought up under his uncle, Mr. Hoikins.
He was a performer in miniature, of whom our
nation can never fufficiently boail, having far ex-
ceeded all that went before him in England in that
way, and even equall’d the moil famous Italians,
infomuch that he was commonly ilil’d the Vandyck
in little, equalling that mailer in his beautiful co-
louring, and agreeable airs of a face, together with
that ilrength, relievo, and noble fpirit; that fofc
and tender livelinefs of flefh, which is inimi-
table. He had alfo a particular talent in the loofe
and gentle management of the hair, which he ne-
ver fail’d to exprefs well: but tho* his pencil was
thus admirable, yet his excellency was chiefly con-
fin’d to a head, for below that part of the body
he was not always fo fuccefsful as cou’d have been
wiih’d. The high prices his pieces flili fell at,
tho’ far fhort of their value, and the great efteem
they are in even at Rome, Venice, and in France,
1 are


are abundant arguments of their great worth, and
have extended the fame of this mailer throughout
all parts of Europe where art is valu’d. He fo far
exceeded his mailer, and uncle, Mr. Hofkins, that
he became jealous of him, and finding that the
court was better pleas’d with his nephew s per-
formances than with his, he took him in partner
with him ; but ilill feeing Mr. Cooper’s pictures
were more reliih’d, he was pleas’d to difmifs the
partnerihip, and fo our artiil fet up for himfelf,
carrying moil part of the bufmefs of that time be-
fore him. He drew king Charles 11. and his queen,
the dutchefs of Cleveland, the duke of York, and
moil of the court: But the two pieces of his which
were moil eileem’d, were thofe of Oliver Cromwel,
and of one Swingfield. The former is now in the
hands of Richard Graham, Efq; and by him high-
ly valued. The French King once offered 150 I.
for it, yet could not have it. The other is in the
collection of colonel Robert Child, who fets a great
value upon it. This lail picture Mr. Cooper having
carried to France, it introduced him into the favour
of that court, and was much admir’d there. He
likewife did feveral large limnings in an unufual fize,
which are yet to be feen in the Queen’s clofet, and
for which his widow received a penfion during her
life from the crown. That which brought Mr,
Cooper to this excellency, was his living in the time
ofYan-Dyck, many of whofe pictures he copied,
and which made him imitate his flile. Anfwerable
to his abilities in painting, was his great fkill in mu-
fick, efpecially the Lute, wherein he was reckon’d
a matter. He was many years abroad, and perfo-
nally acquainted with moll of the great men in Hol-
land and France, as well as thofe of his own coun-
try ; but he was yet more univerfal by his works,
which were known throughout all parts of Chritten-
dom. He died in London in the year 1672, at
fixty


fixty-three years of age, and lies buried in PancraS
church in the fields, where there is a fine marble monu-
ment fet over him, with the following infcription*
H. S. E.
SAmuel Cooper Amiger,
Anglia Apelles ,
Seculi fui, & Artis Beats ,
In qua excokndd
Shut Neminem , quern fequeretur , invenit ,
Ita nec, qui Eum ajfequatur , eji hahiturns.
Supra owns Exemplum ,
Simul ac omne Exemplar ,
Minio-Graphices Art if ex fummus ,
Summis Europa Principibus notus ,
Et in Pratio habitus ;
Cujus porrb egregias Animi Botes,
Ingenium expolitiffimum ,
Linguarum plurimarum Peritiam ,
Mores fuaviffimos ,
Ut tarn brevis Tabella rite complebli pojfet
Ipftus mice Mami delineanda fuit:
Sed Modejlior ille ,
Bum per Ora , Oculofque Omnium Famd volat ,
Cineres hie potius Juos optavit delitefcere ,
Ipfe, in Ecclejia Pace, feliciter requie/cens
Charijpmd Ccnjuge Chrijiiand.
Ohiit quinto Bie Mail Anno.
fuse 63. Salu-
tis MDCLXXII.
Mr .CROSS,
W A J a famous copier in the reigns of King
Charles I. and 11. A ftory goes of him,
that being employ’d by King Charles I. to copy
feveral eminent pieces in Italy, and having leave
of the Hate of Venice to copy the fam’d Madonna
i of


of Raphael, that was in St. Mark’s church, he
perform’d the talk fo admirably well, that he is
faid to have put a trick upon the Italians, by
leaving his picture for the original, which Jaft he
brought away with that celerity and caution, that
tho* feveral meffengers were fent after him, he had
got fo much the ftart of them, that he carried the
piece dextroufly off. Afterwards in Oliver’s days,
the then Spanifh ambaffador here Don Alonfo de
Cardenes bought this picture when the King’s
goods were expos’d to fale, together with the XII.
Caefars of Titian, and the King Charles on the dun
horfe by Vandyck (of which Jaft there is a good
copy by Sir Peter Lely in the Middle Temple-
Hall) all which, fome fay, remain in the efcurial to
this day, tho* others affirm the picture of King
Charles on the dun horfe, is now in the pofleffion
of the duke of Bavaria, who bought it of one Myn-
Heer van Cullen. This Mr. Crofs copied likewife,
admirably well, Titian’s Europa, which picture of
his is now in the collection of the earl of Kent.
D.
HENRT and JOHN BANKERS.
HENRY was a good landfkip-painter, and
employ’d by Charles 11. to paint all the fea-
ports in England and Wales; as alfo all the royal
palaces, which he perform’d admirably well. He
was firft bred a graver, but upon the perfuafions of
his brother John took to painting. He ftudied
fome time in Italy, before he came to England.
He work’d for great numbers of our nobility and
gentry, and had good rates for what he did, being
efteem’d the neateft and belt painter, in his way,
of that time. He left England in the time of the
popiffi plot, being a Roman Catholick, and died
foon


foon after at Amfterdam. As for John Dankers,
he was a good hiftory-painter, and liv’d for many
years after his brother, dying in like manner at
Amfterdam.
WILLIAM D E R TK E y
WA S a hiftory-painter born at Antwerp.
He was lirft bred a jeweller, but afterwards
took to painting. He for many years drew hifto-
ry as big as the life in England, with tolerable fuc-
cefs. In his works there were many excellent parts
of a boldnefs of pencil, whatever there might be
wanting in grace, and a pleafmg variety. He died
about feven years ago, leaving behind him a
daughter, whom he had inftrudled in his art.
Lord Bifhop D I G B T y
THE reverend lord bifhop of Elfin in Ireland,
may very well find a name in this account
of the Englifh Painters, fmce he has defervedly
rais’d one in that kingdom, where he is arriv’d to
be a fpiritual peer. His limnings have much of
beauty and juftnefs of draught in them, and are
to a great degree elaborate, with a due regard to
the graceful part of nature. He is a fingle inftance
of any perfon of that robe, that has made fo fuf-
ficient a progrefs in this art, as to be voted a ma-
iler, either in that kingdom or this, how com-
mon foever *tis in other nations for the clergy to
apply themfelves to painting.
Mr .WILLIAM DOBSON,
\A/' AS a gentleman born in the year 1610. in St.
Andrew’s parifh in Holborn, and defcended
from a family, at that time very eminent in St. Al-
bans.


bans. He was both a hiftory and face-painter, be-
ing contemporary with that great mailer, Sir An-
tony Vandyck, whofe excellencies he came very
near, tho’ he fail’d in fome of his graceful parts ;
yet we are to conlider he wanted the opportunities
the other had of becoming perfeCl. The greatnefs
of his genius, fhone thro* the meaner employments,
which were his allotment, being put out apprentice
very early to one Mr. Peak, a ftacioner, and trader
in piClures in the city of London, with whom he
ferv’d his time ; yet had, by his mailer’s procure-
ment, the advantage of copying many excellent
pictures, efpecially fome of Titian and Vandyck ;
the manner of which two mailers he, in fome mea-
fure, always retain’d. How much he was behold-
ing to the latter of thofe two great men, may eafi-
ly be feen in all his works. He was alfo farther in-
debted to the generoGcy of Vandyck, for prefenc-
ing him to King Charles I. who took him into his
protection, kept him in Oxford all the while his Ma-
jefty continu’d in that city, fat to him feveral times
for his picture, and oblig’d the Prince of Wales,
Prince Rupert, and molt of the lords of his court
to do the like. He was a fair middle-fiz’d man,
of a ready wit, and a pleafing conversion, yet be-
ing fomewhat loofe and irregular in his way of liv-
ing, he, notwithdanding the many opportunities
he had of making his fortune, died poor at his
houfe in St. Manin’s-Lane, in the year 164.7. and
the 37th of his age. This is to be remarked of
our artilt, that as he had the misfortune to want
Stable helps in his beginning to apply himfclf to
painting, lo he wanted alio due encouragement
which the unhappy times of civil war could not
afford ; yet he fhone out thro* all thofe disadvan-
tages, which (hews us what he might have been had
Rome been the place of his education. There are
m England feveral hiftory-pieces done by him, of
B b which


which his grace the Duke of Buckingham has one
in his collection, of great value. His portraits are
defervedly efteem’d among us, to which nature in-
clin’d him fo powerfully, that had his education
been but anfwerable to his genius, England might
juftly have been as proud of her Dobfon, as Ve-
nice of her Titian, or Flanders of her Rubens.
The greateft number of his pictures are to be feen
in and about Oxford, where he refided many years.
E.
• GERRA R D EDE M A,
wA S a landfkip-painter, born at Amfterdam,
and difciple of Everdine, whofe manner he at
firfl follow’d. He came into England about the
year 1670. and became very famous for landfkip.
Elis manner was afterwards broad and bold, in imi-
tation of fome Italians. His pictures commonly
afford a fcene of cliffs, cafcades and views (as the
learned Dr. Burnet in his theory calls it) of a broken
world. He chofe a country uncultivated, full of
rocks, and falls of water; the latter of which he
never fail’d to exprefs well, difperfing a gentle
warmth throughout the whole, to make amends
for the horror of the profpeCl, which generally re-
prefents Norway or Newfound-Land, places in
which he ftudied, as Everdine, his matter, did be-
fore him, after whom there are many prints, ex-
prefling a country wild and rude, Mr. Edema di-
ed at Richmond in Surry, whither he had retir’d
for the recovery of his health, about the year 1700.
and the 40th year of his age. His too great in-
temperance fliortened his days.
Mr.


F.
Mr. WILLIAM FAITHORN,
a difciple to Mr. Peak, painter to Prince
Rupert. After the civil wars broke out he
■Went into the army, when being taken prifoner in
Bafing-houfe,and refufing to take the oaths to Oliver,
he was banifh’d into FranCe,where he ftydied feveral
years under Champagne, a famous painter of that
time, and arriv’d to a very great perfection in cor-
redlnefs of drawing. He was all© a great profici-
ent in graving, as likewife in painting, efpecially
in miniature, of which there are many in (lances now
in England. He died in Black-Friars about the
beginning of King William’s reign, and was there
buried, being near 75 years of age. His praife
was- celebrated by his friend Mr. Flatman, in the
following copy of verfes on his book of drawing,
graving and etching.
Should I attempt an elogy, or frame
A paper jirubiure to fecure thy name ,
The lightning of one cenfure , one fiern frozvn
Might quickly hazard that , and thy renown.
But this thy book prevents that fruitlefs pain ,
One line fpeaks purelier thee , than thy beji (train.
Thofe myfieries , like to thefpiteful mold
Which keeps the greedy Spaniard from his gold ,
Thou doji unfold in ev'ry friendly page ,
Kind to the prefent , and fucceeding age.
That hand , wbofe curious art prolongs the date
Of frail mortality , and baffles fate
With brafs and fleet, can furely able he
To rear a lafting monument for thee.
For my part I prefer, to guard the dead. ,
A copper-plate before a fheet of lead.
B b 2 Sa


So long as brafs , fo long as hooks endure ,
So long as neat-wrought pieces thou'rt fecure.
A Faithorn Sculpfit is a charm can fave
From dull oblivion , and a gaping grave.
Ur.THOMAS FLAT MAN,
A S both a poet and painter. He drew in mi-
niature, as may appear by the following ftan-
za in his Pmdarique ode, call'd the Review, where
where he thus [peaks of himfelf as a limner.
To extricate myfelf from love ,
Which I could ill obey , but worfe command ,
I took my pencils in my hand ,
With that artillery for conquefi Jirove j
Like wife Pigmalion then did I
Myfelf deftgn my deity *,
Made my own faint , made my own fhrine ;
If Jhe did frown one dafh could make her fmile ,
All bickerings one eafy ftroke could reconcile:
Plato feign d no Idea fo divine.
Thus did I quiet many a fr award day ,
While in my eyes my foul did play ,
Thus did the time , and thus myfelf beguile ;
Till on a day , but then I knew not why ,
A tear fall 1 n from my eye ,
Wafh'd out my faint , my fhrine , my deity:
Prophetic chance ! the lines are gone ,
And 1 mufi mourn o'er what I doted on:
I find ev'n Giotto's circle has not all per fell ion.
Now fince Mr. Flatman's works fpeak for him in
one kind, I will leave the others to do fo too, tho*
perhaps limning was his greater excellence. He died
n London fome few years ago.
tt


Le F E VRE de V E N I S E,
VffAS a French hiftory-painter, who came into
England in the reign of King Charles 11. He
was better at defigning, as appears by his works,
than at painting. He had a particular excellence in
ftaining marble, which he did leveral times for
prince Rupert. He died in London about twenty-
nine years ago, and lies buried in St. Martin’s
church.
Mr. JOHN FREE MA N,
VVTAS a good hiftory-painter in the reign of King
Charles 11. He was thought to have been poi-
fon’d in the Weft Indies, but he return’d to Eng-
land, and died here; yet his genius wasfo impair’d
by that attempt on his life, that his latter works
fail’d of their ufual perfedlion. He was look’d upon
as a rival to Mr. Fuller, infomuch that his brother,
colonel Freeman, offer’d to lay a wager of 100 1.
that he fhould draw a figure with that mafter, which
challenge, for what reafon I know not, was never
accepted. Mr. Freeman was in his drawings, efpe-
cially in the academy, moft extraordinary, and equal
to any of our modern mafters. He was, in his lat-
ter days, fcene-painter to the play-houfe in Covent-
Garden, where many of his works are ftill to be
feen.
Mr. ISAAC FULLER ,
'yyAS an Englifh hiftory-painter of good note.
He had a great genius for drawing and defign-
ing hiftory, which yet he did not always execute with
due decency, nor after an hiftorical manner; for he
was too much addicted to modernize and burlefque
B b 3 his


his fubjefts, there being fometimes a rawnefs of co-
louring in them, befides other extravagancies fuitable
to the manners of the man : But notwithftanding all
that a critick may find fault with in his works, there
are many perfections in them, as may be Teen by his
Refurrection at All-fouls college-chapel at Oxford,
to which that at Magdalen college, though per-
form’d by the fame hand, cannot in the leaft com-
pare. There is alfo at Wadham college, in the
fame univerfity, a hi (lory-piece of his, in two colours
only, admirably well perform’d*, for whatever may
be objected againft this mafter, as one that wanted
the regular improvements of travel to confider the
antiques, and form a better judgment, he may be
reckon’d among the foremoft in an account of
Englifh Painters. He ftudied many years in France
under Perrier, and underftood the anatomical part of
painting, perhaps equal to Michael Angelo, follow-
ing it fo clofe, that he was very apt to make the
mufcelling too ftrong and prominent. Among his
works, there are feveral fine pieces in many great
taverns in London, which are not efteem’d the worft
of his performances. He died in London above
thirty years ago.
*
G
MA R K GA R RA R D,
SON of Mark Garrard, and born at Bruges in
Flanders. He was fometime principal Painter
to Queen Elizabeth, and afterwards to Queen Anne,
con fort-royal to King James I. He was both a good
hiftory and face-painter, dying at London in the
year 1635, and in the feventy-fourth year of his
age. 1 here are feveral prints after him now extant
among us.
HENRT


H E N R T GA S C A R,
WAS a French face painter, encouragM here
by the dutchcfs of Portfmouth, whofe pic-
ture he came over to draw. Many following her
example, employed him alfo, fo that he got a great
deal of money in England in a fhort time, nor could
our wife nation then fee the difference between him
and his contemporary Sir Peter Lely. What he
wanted in the graceful part, indraught, and a good
choice of nature, the talent of but very few, he ufu-
ally made up with embroidery, fine deaths, laced
drapery, and a great variety of trumpery, ornaments
which took for a while, till at length Monfieur
found that his gay cap and feather manner would no
longer fucceed here, which made him leave England
about twenty or twenty-five years ago. By a pre-
vailing aflurance, cuftomary with his nation, he has
fince impofed as much on the Italian Noblefle, as he
did on thofe of England, and was lately living at
Rome, though we hear he is now dead. He is re-
ported to have carried above 10,000 1. out of Eng-
land.
HORATIO GENTILESCH /,
WAS an eminent Italian hiftory-painter, born
at Pifa, a city in the dukedom of Tufcany.
After having made himfelf famous at Florence,
Rome, Genoa, and in molt parts of Italy, he went
for Savoy, whence he removed to France; and at
laft, upon the invitation of King Charles I. came
over to England, and was well received by that
King, who appointed him lodgings in his court,
gave him a confiderable falary, and employed him
in his palace at Greenwich, and other publick places.
The molt remarkable of his performances in Eng-
B b 4 land.


land, were the cielings of Greenwich and York-
houfe, the latter of which are now in the colle&ion
of the prefent duke of Buckingham. He did alfo a
Madonna, a Magdalen, and Lot and his two daugh-
ters, for King Charles, all which he performed ad-
mirably well. The piece of his which was moft
e deem’d abroad, was the Portico of cardinal Benti-
voglio s palace at Rome. He made feveral attempts
at face-fainting while in England, but with little
luccefs, his talent lying wholly towards hidory, with
figures as big as the life. He was much in favour
with the duke of Buckingham, and many of the
nobility or that time; but after twelve years conti-
nuance in England, he died here at eighty-four years
of age, and lies buried in the Queen dowager’s
chapel at Somerfet-houfe. His print is among the
heads of Van-Dyck, he having been drawn by that
great matter. He left behind him a daughter.
ARTEMIS IA GENTILES CH 7,
WH O was but little inferior to her father in
hittories, and even excell’d him in portraits,
a manner of painting which mod; are inclin’d to at-
tempt who come to England, where it is chiefly in
vogue. She lived the greateft part of her time at
Naples in much fplendor, and was as famous all over
Europe for her amours as for her painting. She re-
commended herfelf to the edeem of the fkilful by
many hi dory-pieces as big as the life, among which
the mod celebrated was that of David with the head
of Goliah in his hand. She drew alfo the portraits
of fome of the royal family, and many of the nobi-
lity of England.
Mr.


Mr. RICHARD GIBS 0 N y
Commonly call’d the Dwarf ,
WAS difciple of Francis de Cleyn, and an emi-
nent mafter in the time of Sir Peter Lely, to
whole manner he devoted himfelf, and whole pictures
he copied to admiration. Being page to a lady at
Mortlack, Ihe put him to de Cleyn to learn to draw,
which Ihe obferv’d he had a particular genius to.
He had the honour to inftruft in drawing the late
Queen Mary, when princefs of Orange, and the pre-
fent Queen Anne, when princefs; he went over to
Holland to wait on the princefs Mary for that pur-
pofe. He painted both in oil and water colours, but
chiefly the latter. He was greatly in favour with
King Charles I. (to whom he was page of the back-
infomuch that that King gave him his wife
in marriage, who is likewife a dwarf, and (fill living,
though of a great age. On this wedding, Mr.
Waller made that copy of verfes, which begins
thus:
Deftgn or Chance makes others wive ,
But nature did this match contrive
Eve might as well have Adam fled.
As jhe deny’d her little Bed
To him , for whom Heav’n feem'd to frame ,
And meafure out this only Dame , &c.
He alfo receiv’d confiderable favours from Philip
earl of Pembroke, who was his patron. He drew
Oliver Cromwel feveral times, and died in Covent-
garden foon after the late revolution, at threefcore
and fifteen years of age, lying buried in that church.
Mr.


Mr. WILLIAM GIBSON
TXT AS nephew to the foregoing, and inftrufted
both by him and Sir Peter Lely. His great-
eft: excellency lay in his copies after the laft of thofe
two matters, whofe mannef he made it his chief en-
deavour to imitate, and wherein Ire was not altoge-
ther unfuccefsful. He became an eminent limner,
and drew great numbers of portraits for many of the
beft rank. His great induftry was much to be com-
mended *, for purchafmg not only the greateft part
of Sir Peter’s collection after his death, but likewife
for procuring from beyond Teas, a great variety of
valuable things in their kind, infomuch that he may
well be faid to have had the beft collection of draw-
ings and prints, after the greateft Italians, and other
matters, of any perfon of his time. He was a great
encourager of the art he profefs’d. He died lethar-
gick in London, and was buried at Richmond, in
Surrey, in the year 1702, at fifty-eight years of age.
His kinfman, Mr. Edward Gibfon, was inftruCted
by him, and firft painted portraits in oil, but after-
wards finding more encouragement in crayons, his
genius lying that way, he made a confiderable pro-
grefs therein, till death intervening, put a flop to
all his endeavours. He died young, at thirty-three
years of age, and lies likewife buried at Richmond.
Mr. JOHN GREENHILL
WAS a gentleman defcended from a good fa-
mily in Salifbury, where he was born. He
was difciple to Sir Peter Lely, whofe manner in a
fhort time he fuccefsfully imitated, and became a
great proficient in crayon draughts, as he afterwards
did in painting. He fail’d very little of his matter’s
excellencies, who firft negleCted, and then became
jealous


jealous of him as a dangerous rival, for he never let
him fee him paint but once, and that was by a ftra-
tagem. Mr. Greenhill had long had a defire to fee
Sir Peter manage his pencil, but fo Ihy was that great
artift of revealing his myftery, that he would never,
lend him the leaft afliftance all the while he was with
him, which made Mr. Greenhill, after he had left
him, have recourfe to a wile to procure that which
he mull otherwife have defpair’d of. He procured
Sir Peter to paint his wife’s pidlure, through which
means he had an opportunity to Hand behind and
fee what he did; which being greatly to his fa-
tisfaftion, on a double account, he made his mailer
a prefent of twelve broad-pieces, and fo took the pic-
ture away with him. Having thus obtain’d his end,
he in a little time became exceeding famous for face-
painting, infomuchthat had he not died young, the
effeft of too free living, England might have boalled
of a Painter, who according to his beginnings, could
not have been much inferior to the very bell of fo-
reigners, whom we have always fo much encouraged
in the portrait way. He was moreover poetically
inclin’d, and very agreeable in converfation, which
won fo much on Mrs. Behn, that Ihe endeavour’d,
on her part, to perpetuate his memory, by the fol-
lowing elegy.
What doleful cries are thefe that fright my fenfe ,
Sad as the groans of dying innocence ?
‘The killing accents now more near approach ,
And the infectious found
Spreads , and enlarges all around.
And does all hearts with grief and wonder touch.
The famous Greenhill's dead I ev'n he
That con'd to us give immortally ,
Is to th ’ eternal filent groves withdrawn ;
Youthful as flowers fcarce blown , whofe op'ning leaves ,
A wondrous and a fragrant profpetl gives ,
Of


Of what its elder beauties wou'd difplay^
When it fhou'd flourifh up to ripening May.
JVitty as poets warm'd with love and wine y
Tet f ill J par'd heav'n , and his friend ,
For both to him were facred and divine ;
Nor cou'd he this no more than that offend.
Fix'd as a martyr , where he friendfhip paid ,
And gen'rous as a God ,
Fifiributing his bounties all abroad ,
And foft and gentle as a love fick maid.
Creat majler of the noblejl my fiery ,
That ever happy knowledge did infpire ;
Sacred as that of poetry ,
And which the wondering world does equally admire •«
Great nature's works we do contemn,
When we on his do meditate \
The face and eyes more darts receiv'd from lAm,
Than all the charms fhe cou'd create ;
The difference is his beauties do beget
In the enamour'd foul a virtuous heat ,
Wbiljl nature's groffer pieces move ,
In the courfe road of common love.
So bold , yet foft , his touches were *,
So round each part , fo fweet , fo fair ,
That as his pencil mov'd men thought it prefi
The lively imitated breafl ,
Which yields like clouds where little angels refl:
The limbs all eafy , as his temper was ,
Strong as his mind and manly too ;
large as his foul , bis fancy was , and new ,
And from himfelfhe copyd ev'ry grace ;
For he had all that cou'd adorn a face ,
All that cou'd either fex fubdue.
Each


Each excellence he had that youth has in its pride,
And all experienc’d age can teach.
At once the vig’rous fire of this,
And every virtue, which that can exprefs,
In all the height that both cou’d reach j
And yet, alas! in this perfection dy’ d.
Droop’d like a blojjom with a northern blafi,
When all the J,batter’d leaves abroad are cafi,
As quick as if his fate had been in hafie.
So have I feen an unfix’d fiar,
Outfhine the refi of all the num’rous train,
As bright as that which guides the mariner,
Dart fwiftly from its darken’d fphere,
And ne’er fhall light the world again.
Oh, why fioou’d fo much knowledge die ,
Or with his loft kind breath.
Why cou’d he not to fame one friend bequeath
The mighty legacy.
But ’twas a knowledge giv’n to him alone,
!That his eterniz’d name might be
Admir’d to all pofierity.
By all to whom his grateful name was known.
Come all ye fofter beauties come.
Bring wreaths of fiow'rs to deck his tomb ;
Mixt with the difinal cyprefs and the yew,
, For he fiill gave your charms their due ;
And from the injuries of age and time.
Secur'd the fweetnefs of their prime
And befi knew how t* adore that fweetnefs too .
Bring all your mournful tributes here.
And let your eyes a filent for row wear,
Fill ev'ry virgin, for a while become,
Sad as his fate, and like his pi blure dumb .
JOHN


H
JOHNHANNEMAN
WAS both a hiftory and a face-painter, born at
the Hague. He was difciple to one Rave-
fteyn, and came into England in the reign of King
Charles I. He was employed for Tome time under
Mytens, principal Painter to that King, and
continued here fixteen years, at the end of which he
went for Holland, and there drew the princefs-dowa-
ger-royal, his highnefs the prince of Orange, and all
the court. He Jikewife drew that piece, reprefenting
peace,in the flates-chamber at the Hague; as alfo the
picture of two ufurers telling their gold, for Myn-
heer van Wenwing. Whilll he was doing this laft
piece, he happen’d to want money, whereupon
lending to the perfon he was working for to borrow
a fum, it was accordingly fent him. When the pic-
ture was finifh’d, it was carried home, and the price
demanded paid for it; but when Myn-heer thought
to have the money he had lent (having flip’d the
opportunity of flopping it out of mete generofity)
he was anfwer’d, that the gold which he had bor-
row’d was all put into the picture (meaning that
which the mifers were telling) and that he muft ex-
pe6l no further fatisfaflion. This Painter died abroad
about twenty years ago.
Mr. JOHN
WA S a good face-painter, contemporary and
competitor with Sir Peter Lely. He was fo
excellent a copill, that many of the portraits which
he did after Van-Dyck, pafs at this day for origi-
nals of that prodigious man. He died in London,
in


in the year 1679, and lies buried in St. Martin’s
church.
EGBERT HEMSKIRK
WAS born at Haerlem, and difciple of De
Grebber. He became very eminent for
painting drolls after the manner of Brawer. His
grofs and comical genius fucceeded for a long while
among us. In moft of his converfations, as he call’d
them, you may fee the pidure, and read the man-
ners of the man at the fame time: But to fpeak of
his painting part, a thing chiefly aim’d at in this
fliort account, there is little fault to be found with
it, unlefs fometimes with the foulnefs of the colour-
ing. His drunken drolls, his wakes, his quakers-
meetings, and fome lewd pieces, have been in vogue
among the waggilh colledors, and the lower rank
of virtuofi. He went in this kind a great way, but
after all fell far fhort of Brawer, Teniers, and the
red of his noble fore-runners, in the lludy of fots-
paradice. He often introduced his own pidure
among his drolls by means of a looking-glafs he had
upon, his pallet. He was a man of humour, and for
that valued by the late earl of Rochefter, for whom
he painted feveral pieces. He died in London about
tyro years ago, leaving behind him a fon whom he
Kad inftruded in his way.
Mr. NICHOLAS HILLIARD
WAS a celebrated Englifh limner, who lived
above an hundred years ago. He drew
Mary Queen of Scots in water-colours, when Ihe
wa> but eighteen years of age, wherein he fucceeded
to admiration, and gain’d a general applaud. He
was both goldfmith, carver and limner to Queen
Elizabeth, whofe pidure he drew feveral times, par-
-2 ticularly


licularly once, when he made a whole length of her,
fitting in her throne, which piece was defervedly
efteem’d. There are, moreover, two wonderful
pieces of his, now in the poffeflion of Simon Fan-
fhaw, Efq; and by him valued, not without reafon,
as ’tis the opinion of Tome good judges, at above
fifty guineas each, though not much bigger than a
crown-piece. One of thefe is the pidure of our
artift himfelf, with this infcription in gold letters
round it.
Nicolaus Hilliardus Aurifaber , Sculptor , & cele-
bris Illuminator Serenijfma Regina Ehfabetha )
Anno 1577. AEtatis fua 30.
The other is the pidure of his father, fometime
high (heriff of the city and county of Exeter, with
this gold inlcription round it.
Richardus Hilliardus quondam Vice-Comes Civita-
tis & Comitatus Exonia , Anno 1560, tat is
fua 58. Annoq j Domini 1577.
Thefe two pidures in miniature are To mafterly
done, that not only the faces are finely colour’d,
and naturally with a good relievo •, but allb the heads
and beards are fo well perform’d, that almoft each
Tingle hair is expreflcd. Now, though thefe tw<s
pieces were alone fufficient to prefcrve the memory
of this great artift, yet cannot I omit adding what
the famous Dr. Donne fays of him, in a poem of
his, call’d the Storm. His words are thefe,
—A hand , an eye y
By Hilliard drawn , is worth a hijlory.
At what time he died, never came to my knoW'-
ledge, and fo I hope the reader will excufe that
omiffion,
2 HA A S


HA NS HOLBEIN.
MOnfieur de Piles having given the reader an
account of Holbein’s birth and education in
the German fchool, we fhall only relate here fome
things omitted by him, more particularly what con-
cerns him as an Englifh painter. His manner was
extraordinary and unufual, differing from both that
of the ancients and moderns, lb that it feems as
if he had not been incited or inftruded by an ex-
ample, but rather that he followed purely the dic-
tates of his own genius-, and tho’ it be doubted
by fome, whether he ever faw any of the rarities
of Italy, or had any mafter, yet there is nothino-
to be feen of his doing, but what is painted to the
utmoff perfedion. This is manifeft by that piece
of his of Death’s Dance, in the Town-Hall at Balle,
the defign whereof he cut neatly in wood, and af-
terwards painted, which appearing wonderful to
the learned Erafmus, he requefted of him to draw
his pidure, defiring nothing fo much as to be re-
prefented by lo judicious a hand. This being per-
form’d, and Erafmus perceiving by his rare art,
that he deferv’d a more plentiful fortune, he per-
fuaded him to come to England, promifing him con-
fiderable advantages from the bounty of King Hen-
ry VIII. At his requeft Holbein fet our for this
kingdom, bringing along with him Erafmus’s pic-
ture, and letters recommendatory from that oreat
man ; to the then Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas More.
Sir Thomas receiv’d him with all the joy imagin-
able, and kept him for three years at his houfe, dur-
ing which time he drew his pidure, and thofe of
many of his friends and relations, all which were
hung up in the great hall of that houfe. The King
coming one day, upon an invitation, to dine with
ir Thomas, and at his entrance into the hall, be-
c holding


holding fo many ravifhing objects, the pidlures
Teeming almoft as much alive as the perfons, who
were all there prefent, his Majefty fo much admir’d
the excellency of the painter, that the next day fent
for him, and entertain’d him in his fervice upon
very advantageous terms. The King from time to
time manifefted the great efteem and value he had
for him, and upon the death of Queen Jane, his
third wife, fent him to Flanders to draw the pic-
ture of the Dutchefs-Dowager of Milan, widow to
Francis Sforza, whom the emperor Charles V. had
recommended to him for a fourth wife; but it be-
ing upon the King’s defe&ion from the Roman See,
he rather chofe to match with a proteftant princefs,
in hopes by that means to engage the proteftant
league in Germany in his intereft. Cromwel, his
prime-minifter, (Sir Thomas More having been re-
mov’d and beheaded) propos’d Anne of Cleves to
him, but whether the king was diflatisfied with
her having made a fort of pras-contra6t with the
fon of the Duke of Lorain, or did not approve
her principles, being a Zwinglian, he was not over-
fond of the match, till Cromwel, who had a mind
to effedt it *to fecure himfelf againft the papifts
whom he had difoblig’d, fent over Hans Holbein
to draw her picture Jikewife, who, as the Lord
Herbert of Cherbury fays in his hiftory, was repre-
fented by this mafter fo very fine, that when the
king came to fee her portrait, he immediately re-
folv’d to marry her •, tho’ it Teems by the fame ac-
count that the painter, perhaps purfuant to the in-
ftrudtions he had receiv’d from Cromwel, had fol-
low’d the beauty of his fancy more than that of na-
ture, for as much as the king was pleas’d with
the pidlure, fo Toon as ever he law the lady he was
difgufted at her, yet he afterwards marry’d her,
that he might not difoblige the princes of Germany.
When Erafmus wrote his Morite Encomium, he
i fent


fent a copy of it to Hans Holbein, who reading it
was fo pleas’d with the feveral defcriptions of fol-
ly, that he defign’d all of them in the margin, but
having not room to draw the whole figures, he
patted a piece of paper to the leaves where lie cou’d
not do it; and when he had done fo, he fent the
book to Erafmus for a prefent. Erafmus feeing he
had drawn the picture of a fat Dutch lover hug-
ging his lals and his bottle, for the reprefentadon
of an amorous fool, wrote under it, Hans Holbein,
and fo return’d the book to the painter, who, to
be reveng*d of him, drew the picture of Erafmus
for a Mufty Groper, that bufy’d himfelf in fcrap-
ingupold manufcripts and antiquities, and wrote un-
der it Adagia. The original book is in the library
at Bade, and Monfieur Charles Patin when he re-
dded there, defir’d leave of the magiffrates to have
the plates of all Holbein’s figures engrav’d, that
he might publifh them in a new edition of Moriae
Encomium: this edition is the belt of that book,
before which is perfix’d the life of Holbein at large
with two prints of him, the one drawn when he
was young, and the other when he was old. Thefe
two prints are very much unlike one another:
there is alfo an account of all his pieces, and in
whofe poffeflion they are. He us’d to paint with
his left-hand, and a print of him done by Hollar
is (till extant, representing him drawing in that
manner. Holbein not only drew the aforefaid pic-
tures, but alfo thofe of Henry VII. and Henry
VIII. on the wall of the palace of White-hall,
which perilh’d with it in the late fire. Some endea-
vours were us’d to remove that part of the wajl on
which thefe pictures were painted, but all prov’d
ineffectual. He drew many other pictures in Eng-
land, particularly a large piece of Sir Thomas More,
and his family, which was lately to be feen at Bafils-
Eye houfe in Oxfordfhire; but foms queftion whe
C c 2 ths


ther this pidlure was done all by Holbein or not.'
I have feen the following tetraftick upon him, by
a foreigner, which I thought it not improper to
infert.
Egregius pi PI or magno qui gratus Erafmo ,
His quantum accrevit laus , Baftleia , tua ?
Bivifus nojiro te fucipit orbe Britanms
Hclhene , orbe uno laus tua non capitur.
This painter was as celebrated in miniature, 3s
he was in oil-colours, and moreover perform’d a
multitude of defigns for gravers, fculptors, jewel-
lers, &c. He lived and died at Whitehall, in thofe
lodgings which are now the paper-office.
IE ENCES LAUS HOLLAR, ,
W AS ? gentleman born at Prague in Bohemia,
in the year 1607. He was by nature much
inclin’d to miniature and etching, in which laft art
he became exceeding famous, tho’ he was not a lit-
tle difcourag’d therein by his father, who wou’d
have had him follow other ftudies. In the year
1627. he left Prague, and vifited many cities in
Germany ; when coming at laft to Colen, he waited
upon the Pari of Arundel, that truly great and
noble patron of arts, who was there on his embafly
to the emperor, to Vienna, and afterwards came
over with him to England. He liv’d here for fome
time, and drew many churches, ruins, perfonsand
views, which he afterwards etch’d, and which will
always be in good efteem; his particular excellency
was etching, and there are great numbers of his
prints in England to do him that juftice my pen
muft not pretend to. Pie at laft got into the fer-
VJCe °1 f he Duke of York, but upon the breaking
out


out of the civil wars, retir’d to Antwerp, and there
died.
ABRAHAM H 0 N D I US,
W AS born at Roterdam in the year 1638. He
was a painter whole manner was univerlal.
He drew hiftory, landfkip, Cielings, and final! fi-
gures ; but above all the reft, beafts and hunting
pieces were his principal ftudy. In all thefe kinds
his colouring was often extravagant, and his draft
as commonly uncorred. He delighted much in a
fiery tint, and a harfti way of penciling, fo that
few of his pidures being without this diftinguifhing
mark, his paintings are eafy to be known. The
dogs and huntings he drew are in good requeft, tho’
fome of his latter performances gre carelefs, he be-
ing, for many years, afflided with the gout fo fe-
verely, that he had prodigious fwellings, andchalk-
ftones in mofl: of his joints, the effeds of a feden-
tary and irregular life. This diftemper occafion’d
his death in London, about the year 1691.
Mr. JOHN HOSKINS ,
yy AS a very eminent limner in the reign of
King Charles I. whom he drew, with his
Queen, and moft: of his court. He was bred a
face-painter in oil, but afterwards taking to minia-
ture, he far exceeded what he did before. He died
m Covent-Garden about 40 years ago. He had
two confiderable difciples, who were Alexander and
Samuel Cooper, the latter of whom became much
the more eminent limner.
Cc 3
JAMES


JAMES H O U S M A N y
Alias HUTS MAN,
\\7 A S a hiftory and face-painter, who refided
in England in the time of Sir Peter Lely, and
endeavour’d to rival him in the portrait way. He
was born at Antwerp, and bred up to painting un-
der one Bakerel, who was brought up with Van-
dyck in the fchool of Rubens. This Bakerel was
not much inferior to Vandyck, as is to be feen in
feveral churches of Antwerp, efpecially in that of
the Augullin monks, where Vandyck and he have
painted to out-vye each other, and both had com-
mendations in their different ways, tho* the fuperi-
ority was yielded to neither. But Bakerel, being a
poet, as well as a painter, he wrote a fatyr upon
the Jefuits, on which account he was forc’d to take
leave of the city of Antwerp; fo that Houfman
having, by that means, loft his mafter, came for
England. Some of his hiftory-pieces are well paint-
ed, his colouring being bright and fanguine, and
in the airs of his faces, he out-did moft of his
countrymen, who often know better how to per-
form the painting-part than to chufe the beft
life, or execute agreeably any defign. Some Cu-
pids of his were much admir’d *, but what he valu’d
himfelf moft upon, was the pifture of Catherine the
Queen-dowager of England. This piflure did him
great fervice, fo that he always boafted of that per-
formance, and call’d himfelf her Majefty’s painter.
He carry’d the compliment yet farther, for in all
his hiftorical pieces, for a Madonna, a Venus, or
any fuitable figure, he always introduc’d fomething
of her refemblance. The moft famous piece of his
performance was over the altar of that Queen’s cha-
pel gt St. James’s, now a French church. He di-
ed


cd in London about 10 years ago, and lies buried
in Sc. James’s.
CO RNELIUS JOHNSON,
Alias JANSENS ,
WAS an excellent painter both in great and
little, but above all his portraits were admi-
rably well underftood. He was born in, and re-
fided a long while at Amfterdam, from whence he
came over to England in the reign of King James
I. and drew feveral fine pictures after that king,
and molt of his court. He alfo liv’d in the time
of king Charles I. and was contemporary with Van-
dyck, but the greater fame of that matter foon e-
clips’d his merits; tho’ it mutt: be own’d his pic-
tures had more of neat finifhing, fmooth painting,
and labour in drapery throughout the whole, yet he
wanted the true notion of Englilh beauty, and that
freedom of draught which the other was matter of.
He died in London.
MARTIN JOHNSON ,
TH E famous Teal-graver, was alfo an extraor-
dinary Jandfkip-painter after nature. He
was bred, ’tis true, to graving feals, but painted in
his way equal to any body. He arriv’d at a great
excellency in landfkip-views, which he ttudied with
application, making a good choice of the delight-
ful profpeds of our country for his fubjefls, which
he perform’d with much judgment, freenefs and
warmth of colouring. Several of his -landfkips are
now in the hands of the curious in England, tho*
they are very fcarce. He died in London about
the beginning of King James the lid’s reign.
C c 4 tEIL~


K
WILLIAM deKE I S A R,
WA S a very neat land lkip-pain ter, after the
manner of EJfheimer. He was perfectly
of the Dutch gout, minding little particulars more
than the whole together. He wrought fome time
with Mr. Loten, the landfkip-painter. He imk
tated various manners, and drew fome forts of cat-
tle and birds very well. He alfo painted tombs,
and feveral forts of Hone-work in imitation of Ver-
gazoon. He was not unfkilful in painting of ar-
chitecture and flowers. He died in London about
16 years ago.
Mrs. ANNE KILLIGREW \
W A A a young gentlewoman, daughter of Dr.
Killigrew, mailer of the Savoy, and one of
the prebendaries of Weftminller. She painted fe-
veral hiftory-pieces, as alfo fome portraits for her
diverfion exceedingly well; as likewife fome pieces
of Hill-life. Mr. Becket did her picture in mezzo-
tint© after her own painting. She was alfo a poe-
tefs, and wrote a book of poems which were print-
ed. She liv’d unmarry’d, and died young about
20 years ago.
Mr. JOHN ZACHARY KNELLER,
WA S born at Lubeck, and brother to the pre-
fent Sir Godfrey Kneller. He travell’d into
Italy, and when he came to England, painted fe-
veral portraits in fmall very neat. He did alfo fe-
veral pieces in ftill-life exceedingly well. At lafl:
he took to water-colours, and copied divers of his
brother’s portraits, in miniature, with good fuccefs.
-g . He


He died in Covent-Garden about four years ago,and
lies buried in that church.
L.
Major-General LAMBERT ,
w AS a great encourager of painting, and a
good performer in flowers, as is yet to be feen
in the duke of Leeds’s houfe at Wimbleton. ’Tis
probable he might have learnt this aru or at leaft
been further’d in it by Baptift whom he
receiv’d into his fervice at his coming to England,
in the time of the civil wars. His eldeft fon John
Lambert Efq *, painted alfo faces for his diverflon
very well, of whom many pictures are ftill to be
feen. This laft gentleman died about four years
ago, at his eftate in Yorkfhire.
PROSPER HENRICUS LANCKRINCK ,
WAS of German extraction, and as near as can
be guefs’d, born in the year 1628. His fa-
ther being a foldier of fortune, came with his wife
and only fon (this Profper) into the Netherlands,
and that country being then embroil’d in war, pro-
cur’d a colonel’s command, which he enjoy’d not
many years, dying a natural death at Antwerp. His
widow being a difereet woman, fo manag’d her
fmall fortune, as to maintain herfelf fuitable to her
hufband’s quality, and give her fon liberal educa-
tion, defigning him for a monaftery ; but his young-
er years difeovering a natural genius to painting,-
by his continual fcrawling on paper, fhe was oblig-
ed to comply therewith, tho’ with the greateft re-
luftancy, and put him to a painter. Now, though
of this perfon he may be fuppos’d to have learnt
the rudiments of his art, yet the city-academy of
Ant-


Antwerp was his chiefeft preceptor. His advances
in the fcience were prodigious, and his natural ge-
nius being for liberty, led him to that delightful
branch of painting, Jandfkip, wherein he had the
advantage of Myn Hcer Van Lyan’s collection,
which was very large, and full of curious pieces of
all the eminent matters of Europe. Mr. Lanckrinck
made his principal ftudy after the pictures of Ti-
tian and Salvator Rofa, and by his great art was
foon taken notice of by the curious. His mother
dying, and coming to fome fortune young, and ad-
mir’d for his performances, he refolv’d to come to
England, where he met with a reception fuitable to
his great merit. Sir Edward Sprag, that noble
fea-commander, being a great lover of painting,
became his patron, recommending him to feveral
perfons of quality, and the virtuofi of that time,
among whom was Sir William Williams, whofe
houfe was entirely furnifti’d with this matter’s pic-
tures, yet, which was not long after, moft unfortu-
nately burnt; fo that of this great painter, there
are now but very few finilh’d pieces remaining, he
having bellow’d the greateft part of his time, while
in England, on that gentleman’s pictures. He was
alfo much courted by Sir Peter Lely, who employ-
ed him in painting the grounds, landlkips, flow-
ers, ornaments, and fometimes the draperies of
thofe pictures he intended to gain efteem by. As
to his performances in landfkip only, they were
wonderful, both as to the invention, harmony,
colouring and warmth ; but above all furprizingly
beautiful and free in their Ikies, which by general
confent excell’d all the works of the moft eminent
Painters in that kind. This may appear by fome
pieces of his, yet to be Teen in the cuftody of thofe
curious lovers of art, Mr. Henley, Mr. Trevor and
Mr. Autten, the father of which laft was his great
friend and patron. His views are generally broken,
rude


rude and uncommon, having in them fome glar-
ings of light well underftood, and warmly painted.
The only ceiling I know of his painting, was at
Richard Kent’s Efq •, at Chaufham in Wiltlhire,
near Bath, which is worth feeing. He practis’d
moreover drawing by the life, and fucceeded well
in fmall figures, which were a great ornament to
his landfkips, and wherein he imitated the manner
of Titian. Mr. Lanckrinck being of a debonnair
temper, acquir’d a numerous acquaintance, among
whom was Mr. Robert Hewit, who being a great
lover of painting, at his death left behind him a
large and noble collection of pictures. Our artifl
was not only a good bottle-companion, and excel-
lent company, but alfo a great favourite of the la-
dies, thro* his complaifance and comely appearance.
But amidft all thefe delights, little of the latter part
of his life was employ’d in painting, they being
believ’d to have much fhortened his days, for he
died in his middle age in Auguft 1692. None of
his time gave greater teftimony of a true love to,
and a great knowledge in painting than Mr. Lanck-
rinck, witnefs his noble and well-chofen collection
of pictures, drawings, prints, antique heads and
models that he left behind him, mod of which he
brought from beyond fea.
Mr. L A' N IE R
WAS a Painter well fkill’d in the Italian hands.
He was employed by King Charles I. beyond
fea, to purchafe that collection made by him, the
firft Prince we ever had that promoted painting in
England, to whom he was clofet-keeper. He gave
a particular mark, by which we diftinguifh all the
things of this kind which.die brought over. By
rcafon of the troubles that enfu’d, we can give no
account


account of his death, but that before he died, he had
the mortification to fee that royal collection dif-
pe rfed.
MARCELIUS LAURON,\ orLAROON ,
WAS born at the Hague in the year 1653,and
firft brought up under his father, who was a
an^^^P‘P a^nter * Afterwards he was put to
a hiftory-painter at the Hague, with whom he ftaid
not long Then being very young, he came over
with his father to England, where he was once more
placed with a painter, one La Zoon, whom not ha-
ving any great opinion of, he was turn’d over to
Mr. FJefheer, with whom he ferved his time. When
he came to work for himfelf, he made it his endea-
vour to follow nature very clofe, fo that his manner
was wholly his own. He was a general painter, and
imitated other matters hands exaftly well. He paint-
ed well, both in great and little, and was an exaft
draftfman ; but he was chiefly famous for drapery,
wherem he exceeded moft of his contemporaries. He
was hkewifc fam’d for pictures in little, commonly
call d converfation-pieces. There are feveral prints
extant after this matter, both in Mezzo-tinto and
engraving. He died of a confumption, about the
age of fifty-two, at Richmond in Surrey, where he
lies buried.
Sir PETER L E L T,
WAS born in Wettphalia in Germany, in the
year 1617. He was bred up for fome time
at the Hague, and afterwards committed to the care
of one De Grebber. Coming over to England in
the year 1641, he for fome time follow’d the natu-
ral bent of his genius, and painted landfkip with
fmall figures, as Jikewife hittorical compofitions; but
2 at


at length finding face-painting more encouraged
here, he turn’d his dudy that way, wherein, in a
fhort time, he lucceeded fo well that he furpafled all
his contemporaries in Europe. In his younger days
he was very defirous to finifh the courfe of his ftu-
dies in Italy, but being hinder’d from going thither
by the great bufmefs he was perpetually involv’d in,
he refolved to make himfelf amends, by getting the
bed drawings, prints and paintings of the mod cele-
brated Italian hands. This he fet about fo indudri-
oufly, that at length he obtain’d what he fought af-
ter, and may well be faid to have had the bed cho-
fen collection of any of his time. Among thefe
we mud reckon the better part of the Arundel col-
lection, which he had from that family, many of
the drawings whereof were fold at prodigious rates
at his death, bearing upon them his ufuai mark of
P. L. What advantage he had from this expedient,
may diffidently appear by that wonderful dile in
painting which he acquired by his daily converfing
with the works of thofe great men. In his correct
draft, and beautiful colouring, but more efpecially
in the graceful airs of his heads, and the pleading va-
riety of his podures, together with the genteel and
loofe management of the draperies, he excell’d mod
of his predeceflbrs, and will be a lading pattern to
all fucceeding artids. However, the criticksfay he
preferr’d almod in all his faces a languiffiing air,
long eyes, and a drowzy fweetnefs peculiir to him-
felf, for which they reckon him a mannerid, and
that he retain’d a little of the greeniffi cad in his
complexions, not eafily forgetting the colours he had
iifed in his landfkips, which lad fault, how true fb-
ever at fird, ’tis well known he left off in his latter
days. But whatever of this kind may be objected
againd this great Fainter, ’tis certain his works are
in great edeem abroad, as well as here, and they
are both equally valued and envied j for, at that
time.


time, no country exceeded his perfections, as the va-
rious beauties of that age reprefented by his hand,
fuftkiently evince. He frequently did the landfkips
in his own pictures, after a different manner from all
others, and better than moft men could do. He
was likewife a good hiftory-painter, as many pieces
now among us can fhow. His crayon-drafts are alfo
admirable, and thofe are commonly reckon’d the
moft valuable of his pieces, which were all done en-
tirely by his own hand, without any other aftiftance.
Philip earl of Pembroke, then Lord chamberlain,
recommended him to King Charles I. whofe pic-
ture he drew, when prifoner at Hampton-court.
He was alfo much favour’d by King Charles 11. who
made him his principal painter, knighted him, and
would frequently converfe with him as a perfon of
good natural parts and acquir’d knowledge, fo that
it is hard to determine whether he was the more
compleat painter or gentleman. He was well known
to, and much refpeded by the people of the great-
eft eminence in the kingdom. Becoming enamour’d
of a beautiful Englifh lady, he after fome time mar-
ried her. His eftate and family ftill remain at Cue,
in the county of Surrey, a place to which he often
retir’d in the latter part of his life. This great art-
ift died of an apoplexy in London, in the year 1680,
and in the 63d year of his age. There is a marble
monument with his buft railed for him in Covent-
garden church, where he lies buried, whereof the
carving was perform’d by Mr. Gibbons, and the
epitaph written, as ’tis faid, by Mr. Flatman. A
copy of the latter is as follows ;
Hie ftlus eji Petrus Lelius ,
lu Anglia Famd & Divitiis crevit ;
Primus fcilicet in Arte Pifioria Magijler,
Pile Secundus erit qui felicius imitahitur.
Mire Taheilas animavit , quibus Pnetium
Longe


Longe hinc dijfita ftatuent Secula •,
Ipfe interim dignijfimus cui Statua decernatur ,
Qua ejus in feros Nepotes referatur Gloria.
5 JEtatis fuce 63.8a-
'•lutisy Mdclxxx.
Oliit Novembris 30. Die, Amo.
Proh Dolor! ut cujus Penicillo tanta Venujtas ,
Reddit adhuc Vivos tot pofi Jua Fmerd Vultus ;
Ipfe Cadaver iners, & tetro Pulvere mijius
Nunc jaceat. Cum fe primo fubduxerat Unus
Lelius , innumeri furgunt de Gente Minorum
Pi £lores , aufifragile s tent are colores:
Sic poftquam occubuit Sol Aureus , Ajlra repente
Mille fuos pandmt Cceli Laquearibus Ignes ,
Quanquam Mille licet vix Umbram Unius adaquant ,
Petre Vale , nunquam merito te Laude fequemur ,
Majorem Invidid •, neque noftro Carmine vivos
Ni te Gibbonius Spirantem in Marmore fingat.
BALTHAZAR Van L E M E NS,
WAS a hiftory-painter of a good family in
Flanders, and born at Antwerp. His Imall
pieces of hiftory are very pleafing and well colour’d.
His manner was free, and often very graceful. His
misfortunes in the latter part of his life, wherein he
was often in trouble, might very well give a check
to his fancy, which made him proftituce his pencil
to every undertaking that produced prefent profit;
fo that *tis no wonder if many of his latter perfor-
mances were really very much below himfelf. His
drawings and fketches are excellent, and by fome
thought much better than many of his finifh’d
pieces. He. died in London, in the year 1704.
Mr,


Mr. WILLIAM LIGHTFOOT. ;
WA S a good Englifh painter in perfpedlive, ar-
chitecture and landfkip. He began in di(tem-
per, but afterwards took to oil-painting. He was
concern’d in the contriving and adorning fome part
of the royal exchange. He died in London about
thirty-five years ago.
JOHN L 0 T E N y
WAS a Hollander, and a landfkip-painter.
He lived and painted many years here, in a
manner very fylvan, like the glades and ridings of
our parks in England. He is, for the moft parr,
very cold in his colouring, which is mix’d with an
unpleafant darknefs; however, he underftood well
the difpofition of lights and fhadows. He delighted
particularly in oaken trees, which he almoft every
where introduced into his pictures. His Jandlkips
are generally very large. Lie did many (forms at
land, accompany’d with (bowers of rain, tearing up
of trees, dalhings of water and water-falls, cattle
running to (belter, and the like, which he had a par-
ticular genius to, and excellence in. Thefe pieces
were admirably good. He painted alfo many views
of the Alps in Switzerland, where he lived feveral
years. His works abound among us, fo that *tis
eafy to be feen whether this character of him be juft
or not. He died in London about twenty-five
years ago.
Mr.


M
Mr. THOMAS MA NB T'
WAS a good Englifh landfkip-painter, who
had been feveral times in Italy, and confe-
quently painted much after the Italian manner. He
was famous for bringing over a good collection of
pictures, which were fold at the banqueting-houfe
about the latter end of King Charles lid’s reign. He
died in London about fourteen or fifteen years ago.
DAN I E L MTT ENS
*
WAS a Dutch portrait-painter in King James,
and King Charles Ill’s time. He painted
the pictures of thofe two Kings, the latter of which
is now in the pofleflion of the prefentLord-treafurer.
Some of his pictures have been taken for Vandyck’s,
whofe manner he imitated. His head is alfo to be
feen among thofe of that great mailer, who painted
his picture. He had a penfion from King Charles I.
being his Majefly’s principal painter ; and upon
Vandyck’s arrival in England, though he loft his
place, yet his penfion was continued to his death.
O
Mr. ISAAC OLIVER
WAS a very famous limner, who flourilh’d
about the latter end of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. He was eminent both for hiflory and
faces, many pieces of which were in the pofleflion
of the late duke of Norfolk; and being a very good
defigner, his drawings were finilh’d to a mighty per-
fection, feme of them being admirable copies after
D d Par-


Parmeggiano, &c, He received fome light in that
arc from Frederico Zucchero, who came into Eng-
land in that reign. He was very neat and curious
in his limnings, as may be feen from feveral hiftory-
pieces of his in the Queen’s dofet. He was likewife
a very good painter in little. He died between fifty
and threefcore, in King Charles Id’s time, and was
buried in Black-Friars, where there was a monument
fet up for him with his buflo, all which has been
fince deftroyed by fire. I have feen a print of him
with this Latin infeription under it;
ISAACUS OLIVERUS ANGLUS , Pittor.
Ad vivum Utos qui pingis Imagine Vultus y
Olivere , Oculos mirifice hi capiunt.
Corpora quee Formas jufto ha , .c exprefta Colore
Multum eft , cum Rebus convenit ipfe Color.
Mr. PETER OLIVER
WAS fon of the before-mentioned, who had
inftru&ed him in his arc. He became ex-
ceeding eminent in minature, infomuch that he out-
did his father in portraits. He drew King James I.
Prince Henry, Prince Charles, and moft of the court
at that time. He lived to near threefcore, and was
buried in the fame place with his father, about the
year 1664.
P
Mr. H E N R T P A E RT
WAS firft difciple of Barlow, and afterwards
of Stone, the famous copyer. He was
brought up a fcholar, and fpent fome time at one
of our univerfuies. He painted under Mr. Stone
feveral


feveral years, but afterwards fell to painting faces
by the life, yet his talent feem’d to be for copying.
He copied with great afliduity in the greatcft part
of the hiftory-pieces of the royal collection in Eng-
land, and in feveral of them he had good fuccefs.
What he feem’d to want was a warmth and
beauty of colouring. He died in London about the
year 1697 or 1698.
Mr. THOMAS PEMBROKE
TW AS both a hiftory and a face-painter, and dif-
ciple of Laroon, whole manner he imitated.
He painted feveral pictures for the Earl of Bath, in
conjunction with one Mr. Woodfield, a difciple of
Fuller, and now living. He died in London in the
twenty-eighth year of his age, and about twenty
years fince.
JACOB PEN
tt/” A S a Dutch hiftory-painter in the reign of King
Charles 11. He was excellent both in draw-
ing, colouring and compofition, and died in Lon-
don about twenty years ago.
Mr. E D W A R D PIERCE
\\T AS a good hiftory and landfkip painter, in the
reigns of King Charles I. and 11. He alfo
drew architecture, perfpeCtive, &c. and was much
efteem’d in his time. Little of his work now re-
mains, the far greater part having been deftroyed
by the dreadful fire in 1666. It chiefly confifted of
altar-pieces, cielings of churches, and the like; of
which Jaft fort there is one yet remaining done by
him in Covent-garden church, where are to be found
many admirable parts of a good pencil. He work’d
D d 2 fome
403
Engli/h School of PAINTERS.


feme time for Vandyck, and feveral pieces of his
performance are to be feen at Bel voir-ca file in Lei-
cefter-fhire, the noble feat of the duke of Rutland.
He died in London about forty years ago, leaving
behind him three Tons, who all became famous in
their different ways. One was a mod excellent car-
ver in ftone, as appears by a noble marble Vafe of
his doing at Hampton-court. There is a fine head
of Mr. Pierce, the father, in Mr. Seamer the gold-
fmith’s poffeflion, which was painted by Dobfon.
Mr. FRANCIS Le PIPER ,
WA S the fon of a Kentifh gentleman, dc-
feended from a Walloon family. His fa-
ther having a plentiful eftate, gave this, his eldeft
fon, a liberal education, and would have had him
apply himfelf to the ftudies of learning, or have
been a merchant; but his genius leading him whol-
ly to defigning, he cou’d not fix to any particular
fcience or bufmefs, befides the art to which he na-
turally inclin’d. Drawing took up all his time,
and all his thoughts; and being of a gay, facetious
humour, his manner was humorous or comical.
He delighted in drawing ugly faces, and had a ta-
lent fo particular for it, that he wou’d, by a tranfi-
ent view of any remarkable face of man or wo-
man that he met in the ftreet, retain the Jikenefs
fo exaft in his memory, that when he exprefs’d it in
the draught, the fpeftator, who knew the origi-
nal, wou’d have thought the perfon had fat feveral
times for it. *Tis faid of him, that he wou’d fteal
a face i and a man that was not handfome enough
to defire to fee his pifture, fat in danger in his com-
pany. He had a fancy peculiar to himfelf in his
travels: he wou’d often go away, and let his
friends know nothing of his departure make the
Tour of France, and the Netherlands a-foot, and
w 2 fome


fometimes his frolick carry’d him as far as Grand
Cairo: he never advis’d his friends and relations
of his return, any more than he gave them notice
of his Intended abfence, which he did to furprize
them alternatively with forrow and joy. By this
means, at fevcral times he traveled thro* part of
Italy, part of France, Spain, Germany, the Ne-
therlands and Holland. The greateft curiofities
that he fought after were the works of the Paint-
ers, which he examin’d every where with pleafure
and judgment, and form’d to himfelf a manner of-
defign, which no man, in that kind, ever excell’d,
and perhaps ever equali’d. Having a good eftate
of his own, and being generous, as moft men of
genius are, he wou’d never take any thing for his
drawings. He drew them commonly over a bottle,
which he lov’d fo well, that he fpcnt great part of
his hours of pleafure in a tavern. This was the
occafion, that fome of his belt pieces, efpecially
fuch as are as large as the life, are in thofe houfes,
particularly at Mr, Holms’s the Mitre Tavern in
Stocks-Market, where there is a room call’d the
Amftcrdam, which is adorn’d with his pictures in
black and white. The room takes its name from
his pieces, which reprefenting a Jefuit, a Quaker
preaching,and fome other preachers of moft religions,
that were liable to be expos’d, was call’d the Am-
fterdam, as containing an image of almoft as ma-
ny religions as are profefs’d in that free city. The
two moft remarkable pieces are the Jefuit and the
Quaker, wherein the differing paffions of thefe two
feds are fo admirably well exprefs’d, that there ap-
pears no want of colours to render them lively and
perfetft. He drew alfo other merry pieces for one
Mr. Shepherd a vintner, at the Bell in Weftminfter,
which Mr. Holms purchas’d to make his collection
of this matter’s pieces the more complete, and the
benefit of Ihewing them has not been a little ad-
Dd 3 vantageous


vantageous to his houfe. Mr. Le Piper drew ano-
ther famous droll-piece, reprefenting a conftable,
with his mirmidons, in very 'natural and diverting
poftures. He feldom defign’d after the- life, and
negleCled the part of colouring i but yet he fome-
times, tho’ very rarely, colour’d fome of his pieces;
and, as we are inform’d, was not very unfuccefsful
in it. He was a great admirer and imitator of Au-
guftine Caracci, Rembrant Van Rhine’s and Hem-
fkirk’s manner of defign, and was always in rap-
tures when he fpoke of Titian’s colouring: for not-
withftanding he never had application enough to
make himfelf mafler of that part of his art, he al-
ways admir’d it in thofe that were, efpecially the
Italians. He drew the pictures of feveral of his
friends in black and white, and maintain’d a cha-
racter of truth, which fhew’d, that if he had thought
fit to beftow lb much rime, as was neceflary to
perfeCl himfelf in colouring, he vvou’d have rivall’d
the bell of our portrait-painters in their reputations.
Towards the latter end of his life, having brought
his circumfiances into a narrower compafs than he
found them on his father’s death, he fometimes
took money. He drew fome defigns for Mr. Ifaac
Becket, who perform’d them in mezzo-tinto. Thofe
draughts were generally done at a tavern ; and,
whenever he pleas’d, he cou’d draw enough in hull
an hour to furnilh a week’s work for Becker. His
invention was fruitful, and his drawing bold and
true. He underftood landfkip-painting, and per-
form’d in it to perfection. He was particularly a
great mafler in perfpeClive. In defigning of his
landfkips he had a manner peculiar to himfelf. He
always carried a long book about with him, like a
mufic book, which, when he had a mind to draw,
he open’d, and looking thro’ it, made the lower
corner of the middle of the book his point of fight,
by which, when he had form’d his view, directed
sgtunkv ;; ~ 'U his


his perfpeClive, and finifh’d his picture. His hand
was ready, his ftrokes bold ; and, in his etching,
fhort. He etch’d feveral things himfelf, generally
on oval filver plates for his friends, who being, mod
of them, as hearty lovers of the bottle as himfelf,
they put them to thofe ufes that were mod lervice-
able to them over their glaflfes, and made lids with
them for their tobacco-boxes. He drew feveral of
the Grand Signiors heads for Sir Paul Rycaut’s his-
tory of the Turks, which were engrav’d by Mr.
Elder. In the latter part of his life he apply’d
himfelf to the ftudy and practice of modelling in
wax, in balTo relievo, in which manner he did a-
bandance of things with good fuccefs. He often
faid, “ he wifh’d he had thought of it fooner, for
that fort of work fuited better with his genius
“ than any.” Had he liv’d longer, he wou’d have
arriv’d to a great perfection in it. Being one time
at a tavern with Mr. Faithorn, Mr. Sturt, the gra-
ver, and others, he fketch’d a head with a coal on
a trencher, and gave it to Mr. Faithorn, who
touch’d upon it *, in the mean time Mr. Le Piper
drew another on another trencher, and exchang’d
it with Mr. Faithorn for that which he had touch’d.
They did thus ten times, and between them wrought
up the heads to fuch a height of force, that nothing
cou’d be better done in the kind. Thefe trenchers
are ftill extant, but we cou’d not hear in whole
hands they are at prefent. Some time before his
death another eftate fell to him, by the deceafe of
his mother, when giving himfelf a new liberty,
on the enlarging his fortune, he fell into a fever
by his free way of living, and making ufe of an ig-
norant furgeon to let him blood, the fellow prick’d
an artery, which accident prov’d mortal. He was
very fat and corpulent, and that might contribute
to the misfortune that happen’d to him in being jet
blood: but however heavy his body was, his mind
D d 4 was


was always fprightly and gay. He Was never out of
humour nor dull, and had he borrow’d more time
from his mirth to give to his ftudies, he had cer-
tainly been an honour to his country. He died in
Aldermanbury about eight years ago, yet lives ftill
in the memory of his acquaintance with the cha-
racter of an accomplitti’d gentleman, and a great
matter in his art. His pieces are Icatter’d up and
down, chiefly in this city, and the beft, and moft
of them, are in the hands of Mr. Le Piper, his
brother, a merchant of London, His corps was
carried from Chrift-Church hofpical, to the church
of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondfey in Southwark,
where ’twas buried in a vault belonging to his
family.
• • *
R.
REMIGIUS Van L E MPU T,
Alias R E M E Ej
\\f A S a famous copier in the reign of king
Charles 11. of the neat matters, as Stone was
of the great Italians. He was a native of Antwerp,
and a great copier of Vandyck, by whom he was
much encourag’d. His pieces fometimes, through
the advantage of time upon them, pafs for that
great matter’s, now age has a little embrown’d the
tint, foftned the colouring, and perhaps conceal’d
fome part of the ftifnels, whereof he ttands accus’d
by the critics. He had 150 /. for copying Henry
VII. and Henry VIII. in one piece after Holbein,
being the famous picture that was on the wall at
Whitehall, which was afterwards burnt. He was
very famous for the beft collection of drawings and
prints of any of his time. It was he that bought
the celebrated piece of King Charles I. on horfe-
back by Vandyck, now at Hampton-Court, for a
fmall


fmall matter in the time of the troubles, which car-
rying over to Antwerp, he was there bid 1000 Gui-
neas for it, and flood for 15001 but thinking that
not enough, he brought it over to England again,
where the times being turn’d, he hill infilling on
the fame fum, he had the pidlure taken from him
by due courfe of law, after it had coft him a great
deal of money to defend. He died in London a-
bout 30 years ago.
JOHN RILEY Efq;
VI/' AS born in London in the year 1646. He was
an excellent Englilh portrait painter, who ar-
riv’d to his great fkill in that province, through
the inftrudtion of Mr. Zouft, an extraordinary Dutch
mailer, of whofe manner he retain’d much, tho’
perhaps with him he wanted the choiceft notions
of beauty \ but for the painting part of a face, few
have exceeded him of any nation whatfoever. Had
not the gout, an enemy to the fedentary and llu-
dious, carried him off, we might have oppos’d a
Riley to a Venetian Bombelli, or to all that the
French academy has produced, in that manner of
painting, to this day. His fame rofe from the
death of Sir Peter Lely, at which time he was re-
commended to the favour of King Charles 11. by
Mr. Chiffinch, whofe picture he drew. He was af-
terwards employ’d in drawing fome of the king’s
children, and at laft his majefty fat to him himfelf.
He allb drew King James 11. and his Queen, and
King William and Queen Mary upon the revolu-
tion, when he was i'worn their Majeflies painter.
He was very diligent in the imitation of nature,
and ftudying the life rather than any particular man-
ner, by which means he attain’d a pleafant and molt
agreeable ftyle of painting. His excellence was con-
fin’d to a head, a great number of which do him
juftice,


•Fittice, even in the beft collections of our nation.
fie was modeft and courteous in his behaviour, and
of an engaging convention. He died in the year
16 9*- at 45 years of age, and lies buried in Bifhop-
gate church. r
PETER RO ESI RATE N,
\\f E S born at Haerlem, and difciple of Frans
Hals, whofe manner he at firft follow’d, but
afterwai ds falling into (till-life, and having perform-
ed an extraordinary piece, that Sir Peter Lely
to King Charles, and which his Majefty
approv’d, he was encourag’d to purfue that way,
which contmu dto his dying day. He was an
excellent matter in that kind of painting, viz. in
gold and filver plate, gems, fnells, mufical inftru-
ments, &c. to all which he gave an unufual luttre
in his colouring, and for which his pictures bear a
good price. lis faid, that one day promifing to
fhew a triend a whole-length of his matter Frans
Hals, and thro’ a little delay, his friend growing
impatient to fee it, he fuddenly call’d up his wife
(his matter s daughter, whom he had married ) and
told him Ihe was a whole-length of that matter.
FL died latt hummer was three years in James ftreet.
Covent Garden, and lies buried in that church.
Mrs. SUSANNAH PENELOPE ROSE,
WI F E to Mr. Rohe the jeweller, now living,
and daughter to Mr. Richard Gibfon the
dwarf, before-mentioned, by whom fhe was inftruCl-
cd in water-colours, and wherein (lie perform’d to
admiration. She not only copied finely, but alfo
drew exceedingly well after the life in little. She
died about fix years ago, at 48 years of age, and
lies buried in Covent-Garden church.
, JAMES


JAMES ROUSSEAU
WA S a French landfkip-painter, horn at Paris.
He had great part of his inftrudion from
Harman van Swanevelt, who married a relation of
his. He afterwards travell’d to Italy, where he
ftudy’d fome years, and perfeded himfelf in archi-
tedure, perfpedive and'landfkip, by blowing, the
manner of the moft eminent painters in that kind,
and ftudying the antiquities. Returning to Paris, he
was wholly employ’d, for fome years, by the King at
Marly, and elfewhere*, but leaving that fervice up-
on the perfection, he retir’d to Swifferland, from
whence he was invited to return by Monfieur Lou-
vois chief minifter of ftate, upon all the promifes
of indemnity imaginable, to finifh what he nad be-
gun i which, refilling to do, he notwithftanding
made a prefent to the king of his draughts and de-
mons for that purpofe, and moreover nominated a
perfon to perform the work. After a little ftay in
Swifferland he came for Holland, from whence he
was invited over to England by the duke of Mon-
tague, who employ’d him at his ftately houfe in
Bloomfbury. Upon his coming over hither he far-
ther improv’d himfelf in the ftudy of landfkip, and
added his beautiful groupes of trees to the many
drafts he made after nature, in feveral parts of this
kingdom. His views are commonly fylvan and fo-
waters of all kinds, well underftood and
tranfparent, his fore-grounds great, and generally
well broke •, and in a word, the whole very agree-
able and harmonious. His fkill in arc hi tenure
made him often introduce buildings into his land-
fkios i as he did alfo fmall figures after the manner
of Ponfiin. Many of his pidures are feen at Hamp-
ton Court over the doors i but far greater numbers are
at the duke of Montague’s in Bloomfhury, where,
in


in conjunction with La FoflTe and Baptift the flower-
painter, he did the flair-cafe, and many other parts
of that magnificent fabrick. He had all due en-
couragement from that noble peer, who allow’d
him a penfion during life, which, however, Jafted
but few years after the finifhing of his grace’s houfe.
When we Ipeak of Painters, we commonly mean
what relates., to the performance of their art, and
that we hawr chiefly confin’d ourfelves to in this
account ; but in treating of this perfon, we might
Jay a better fcene before us of many in fiances of hu-
manity join’d with his pious and charitable a<sls,
efpecially that at his death, in bequeathing almoft
all he had to his poor fuffering brethren of the
proteftant perfuafion here in England. He died in
London about twelve years ago. He executed with
his own hand feveral prints in Aqua Fortis after his
own landfkips, from whence we may form a better
idea of this mailer’s works. Thefe plates are now
in the poflcflion of Mr. Cooper, the print-feller.
S.
CASPAR S MIT Z, better known by
the Name of Magdalen Smith,
a Dutch painter, who came over to Eng-
land about 25 years ago. Pie pradlis’d his
profeflion fome time in London; but afterwards,
upon the encouragement of a lady of quality, whom
he had inflrudled in his art, and from whom he
receiv’d a confiderable penfion, he waited on her
ladyfhip over to Ireland, where he gain’d the great-
eft eflcem, and had very large prices for his work.
Pie painted portraits in oil of a fmall fize *, but
his inclination Jed him moll to drawing of Maoda-
Jens, from whence he had his name, and whereof
he drew a great number by a certain Englilh gentle-
woman,


woman, who pafs’d for his wife. Thefe Magdalens
were very gracefully difpos’d, beautifully colour’d,
exprelTing the character of grief and penitence, and
the whole together handlbmely ordered. Mr. Smitz
had moreover a particular talent for painting fruit
and flowers, infomuch that one bunch of grapes of
his performance was fold in Ireland for 40 /. Ster.
He feldom fail’d to introduce a thiftle in the fore-
ground of his magdalens, which he painted after na-
ture with wonderful neatnefs. He inftruCted with
fuccefs feveral fcholars, who have fince made good
proficiency in the art; but tho* he got a great
deal of money by thefe and other means, yet thro*
his irregular way of living, he died poor" in Dub-
lin about feventeen years ago.
Mr .THO MA S STEVENSON ,
W AS bred up under Aggas, and became a good
painter, not only in landfkip, but alfo in fi-
gures and architecture in diftemper. He was ef-
pecially eminent for fcene-painting, tho* his works
are not fo much in efleem at this day, as when he
liv’d,
Mr. JOHN STONE,
an extraordinary copier in the reigns of King
Charles I. and 11. He was bred up under
Crofs, and having the foundation of an exquifite
drafts-man, perform’d feveral admirable copies, af-
ter many good pictures in England. He did a great
number of them, and they are reckon’d among the
fineft of any Englifh copier. He did alfo fomc
imitations after fuch matters as he more particularly
fancied, which performances of his are (till had in
great repute, and receiv’d into the beft collections a-
mong us. Hefpent 37 years abroad in the ftudy
of


of his art, where he improved himfelf in feveral lan-
guages, being befides a man of fome learning. He
died in London the 24th of Augufl, 1653, and lies
buried in St. Martin’s.
PETER STOOP
\\TAS a Dutch battle-painter, who came into En-
g land, from Portugal, with the late Queen-
dowager. His chief ftudy was battles, huntings
and havens, which he perform’d for fome time with
good fuccefsj but after the arrival of John Wyke in
England, who painted in the fame way, his pictures
were not fo much valued, by reafon of the greater
excellency of that mafler. This Stoop etch’d feve-
ral prints of horfes, as likewife the Queen-dowager’s
publick entry. He died here about twenty years
ago.
Mr .ROBERT STR EATER
WA S born in the year 1624, and bred up to
painting and defigning under Du Moulin. Be-
ing a perfon of great induftry, as well as capacity,
he arrived to a very eminent degree in divers bran-
ches of his art, efpecially in hiflory, architecture and
perfpeftive, wherein he excel’d all of his time in
England, and Ihew’d himfelf a great mafler by the
truth of his out-lines, and the learning of fore-fhort-
ning his figures, as may be feen by his works. He
was ah'o excellent in landfkip, having a mighty free-
dom of penciling 'With equal invention, and was
moreover remarkable for ftilMife, infomuch that
there are fome fruit of his painting yet to be feen,
which are of the higheft Italian guflo, both for pen-
ciling, judgment and compofition. To do him but
common Juflice, he was the greatefl and mofl uni-
verfal
' 2 ‘


verfal painter that ever England bred, which we
owe, in lome meafure, to his reading, he being re-
puted a very good hiftorian, which no doubt con-
tributed not a little to his perfection in that way of
painting. He had alfo a very good collection of Ita-
lian books, drawings and prints, after the belt ma-
ilers, was always very vigilant in drawing in the aca-
demy, and this even in his latter days for the encou-
ragement of youth; and, in a word, he may well
be efteem’d the compleateft draftfman of his time.
Upon the happy reiteration of King Charles 11. he
was made his Majelty’s ferjeant-painter, his merit
having recommended him to that Prince, who was
a judge of painting, and confequently knew well
how to reward it. At length, by continual fludy
and afliduity, he became fo afflicted with the Hone,
that it made the latter part of his life anxious to him,
infomuch that to get rid of his pains, which were
moll intolerable, he refolved to be cur, which King
Charles hearing of, and having a great kindnefs for
him, he fent on purpofe to France for a furgeon,
who coming over and performing his office, though
he did not die under the operation, he did not long
furvive it, for it was, in great meafure, thecaufeof
his death, in the year 1680, at fifey-fix years of age,
after he had lived in great elteem and reputation all
his days. His principal works were at the theatre at
Oxford, fomc cielings at Whitehall, which are now
burnt; the battle of the giants with the gods, at Sir
Robert Clayton’s; the pictures of Moles and Aaron,
at St. Michael’s church in Cornhill; all the ancient
and fine feenes in the old play-houfe, and many more
of equal value and conlideration, which I have not
room to infert.
JOHN


JOHN STBRECHT
a landfkip-painter, born at Antwerp in
Brabant, and brought up in that city under his
father. He was a clofe imitator of nature in all his
landlkips, and in his younger days went upon the
Rhine, and other adjacent places, where he drew
feveral pleafant views in water-colours, fo that he
fpent more of his life that way than he did in paint-
ing, for which reafon his drawings were more valu’d
than his pictures. The occafion of his coming
hither was this. The duke of Buckingham, in his
way home from his embafly in France, palling thro*
the Netherlands, ftaid fome time at Antwerp, where
meeting with feveral of this mailer’s works in Jand-
fkip, he was fo well pleafed with them, that he in-
vited him over to England, and promifed to make
him his painter in that way, which, upon his coming
over, he perform’d and he did a great number of
thofe pidlures for himatCliveden-houfe: However,
after three or four years hay with him, he left him,
and perform’d feveral pieces for the nobility and
gentry of England, among whom he was for fome
time in vogue. He alfo drew feveral forts of cattle
with good fuccefs, which he commonly placed in
his landlkips. He died about three years ago in
London, and lies buried in St. James’s church, be-
ing feventy-three years old.
T
Mr. H E N R T WILSON
w AS an Englilh face-painter of good note, born
in London. After he had been inftrudled for
fome time, by Sir Peter Lely, in the nature of face-
painting, he traveled for Italy, where he ftaid fix
or


or feven years, and during that time copied with
wonderful care and exadnefs, a great number of
pictures of the belt mailers, by which means, at his
return to England, he became not a little famous in
the portrait-way, and was much more acceptable to
the curious in his art than he was to amiftrefs, whom
he had courted for a long time, till at length thro*
a melancholy habit of body, contracted by her un-
kindnefs and a fedentary life, he Ihot himfelf with
a piftol. He had a particular genius for crayons, in
which he perform’d admirably well, after the pic-
tures of Correggio, Titian, and the Carracci, while
he was at Rome, He died at 36 years of age, and
lies buried at St. Clement’s.
V*
HENR T VANBERBORCHf
XITAS born at Frankendale in the Palatinate, and
VV ftudied under his father of the fame name. By
reafon of the wars breaking out, he was removed to
Frankfort in the year 1636, when the Earl of Arun-
del palling by that way in his embalfy to the empe-
ror, he took him along with him to Vienna, from
whence he fent him to Italy to colled what rarities
he could procure there for him. Ac his return he
brought him over to England, and he continued
with him to the Earl’s death, upon whole deceafe
he was preferr’d to the fervice of the Prince of Wales,
afterwards King Charles 11. when after having lived
a confiderable time at London in great elleem, he
return’d to Antwerp, where he died. His father
was like vvife very much valued by the Earl of Arun-
del for his fine colkdion of rarities and antique cu-
riofities.
£ e
JOHN


JOHN V A NDER-HETDON
TKfAS a good face-painter, and a native of Bruf-
fels. Coming over to England, he work’d
for Sir Peter Lely in his draperies and copying, fe-
veral years, till afterwards marrying, he went into
Northampton-fliire, where he was employed by
mod of the nobility and gentry of that country.
There are feveral of his pictures to be feen in thofe
parts, efpecially at the Earl of Gainlborough’s, my
Lord Sherrard’s, and at Belvoir-cattle. He M died
about nine years ago at my Lord Sherrard’s, and
lies buried at Staplefort in Leicefter-lhire.
ADRIAN VAN-DIEST
VVTAS a fam’d landfkip-painter, born at the
V V Hague, but whom we may very well term an
Englifh painter, having been brought up here from
his youth. He was chiefly inftrufted by his father,
who commonly drew Tea-pieces *, but that which con-
tributed mod to make the fon a matter, as he often
own’d, was drawing after thofe noble views of Eng-
land in the weftern parts, and along our coafts. He
alfo drew many of the ruin’d cattles in Devon-ttiire
and Cornwall, being encouraged by that noble peer
the Earl of Bath, at his feat in thofe parts. This
Painter’s diftances have a peculiar tendernefs, and
his clouds a freedom that few have arrived at. Had
he lived in Italy, or been more encouraged here in
the ftudy of his belt manner, he might have equal’d
the greatett landfkip-painters either of our own, or
other nations ; but the lofs of his legs early by the
gout, and the low prices for which he painted after-
wards, check’d his fancy, and made him lefs care-
ful in his defigns, which on fome occaflons would
be good imitations of Salvator Rofa and Bartholo-
I meo.


meo. He began a fet of prints after fome very
good drafts done by him after landfkip views, but
before he could finifh them, he ended an affliClcd
life in the year 1704, and the forty-ninth of his age,
lying buried in St. Martin’s church.
Sir ANTH 0 N T VANDTCK
HAD his firft inftruClions from Henry Van-Ba-
len of Antwerp, but having feen the more
admirable works of Rubens, he left Van-Balen to
follow that great matter* whom he judg’d more wor-
thy his imitation. Rubens, charm’d with his wit,
conceal’d nothing from him that was neceffary topo-
lifh and make him afkilfulartift, being far from en-
vying or feeking to nip his glory in the bud, as mod
others would have done. Whilft he liv’d with this
matter, there happen’d a paffage which not a little
contributed to his reputation. Rubens having left a
picture unfinifh’d one night, and going our, con-
trary to cuftom, his difciples made Life of that op-
portunity to fport and play about the room, when
one more unfortunate than the reft, ftriking at his
companion with a maul-ttick, chanced to throw
down the picture, which receiving fome damage, as
not being dry, the young men were not a little a-
Jarm’d at it, well knowing how very angry their
matter would be when he came to find his work
fpoil’d. This made them ufe their beft endeavours
to fet things right again, but finding all ineffectual,
they had recourfe, as their laft remedy* toVandyck,
who was then working in the next room, entreating
him by all means that he would touch up the pic-
ture anew. He complying with their requeft*' old
as they would have him, and fo left the piece upon
the Eafel. Rubens, coming next morning fo his
Work again, firft went at a dittance to view his pic-
ture, as is ulual with painters, and having contem-
Ee 2- plated


plated it a little, fuddenly cried out, he liked his
piece far better than the night before, the occafion
of which being afterwards talk’d of, it not a little
redounded to the honour of Vandyck, and encreafed
his efteem with his matter. Whilft he lived with
Rubens, he painted a great number of faces, and
among the reft that of his mailer’s wife, which is
efteemed one of the bell pidlures in the Low-coun-
tries. He made two more admirable pieces for his
matter, one reprefenting the feizing of our Saviour
in the garden, and the other the crowning him with
thorns. After having finilh’d thefe two fine pic-
t ires, he travell’d to Italy to fee Titian’s works, and
at his return made that incomparable piece for the
monaftery of the Auguftins at Antwerp, confiding
of St. Aultin looking up ftedfaftly to heaven, which
appears all open and Ihining with light. The prince
of Orange hearing of his fame, fent for him to draw
his princefs and children’s pictures, which he per-
form’d to admiration. No fooner had thefe rare
pieces appear’d in publick, but the molt confiderable
perfons in Holland were ambitious to be drawn by
the fame hand. The nobility of England and France
fent likewife on purpofe for this curious artift, that
they might partake of the fame happinefs; but fo
numerous were they, that Vandyck not being able,
with his utmoft indullry, to content them all, drew
only thofe he had the molt refpedl for, who grati-
fied him accordingly. Being arrived in England, he
was preferred to King Charles I. by Sir Kenelm Dig-
by, when the King not only knighted him as a pecu-
liar mark of his efteem, but alfo made him a pre-
fent of a mafly gold-chain with his picture fet round
with diamonds, and befides fettled a confiderable
penfion upon him. He was a perfon of low ftature,
but well proportion’d ; very handfome, modeft, and
extremely obliging, and moreover a great encou-
rager of all thole of his country who excell’d in any
art.


art, moft of whofe pictures he drew with his own
hand, and which were engraven after him by the
beft gravers of that time, (as Bolfwaert, Vorfter-
man, Pontius, & c.) and fome were etch’d by him-
felf. He married one of the faireft and nobleft la-
dies of the Englifh court, daughter of the Lord
Ruthven, Earl of Gowry, whofe father being ac-
cufed of a confpiracy againft K. James I. his eftate was
confifcated, fo that he had no great portion with his
wife, except her beauty and quality. He always
went magnificently drefs’d, had a numerous and
gallant equipage, and kept fo noble a table in his a-
partment, that few princes were more vifited, or
better ferv’d. Towards the latter end of his life,
growing weary of face-painting, and being defirous
to immortalize his name by fome more glorious un-
dertaking, he went for Paris, in hopes to be em-
ployed in the great gallery of the Louvre, but not
fucceeding there, he return’d hither; and by his
friend Sir Kenelm Digby, propofed to the King to
make cartoons for the banqueting-houfe at White-
hall, the fubjed of which was to have been the in-
llitution of the order of the Garter, the proceflion
of the knights in their habits, and the ceremony
of their inftalment, with St. George’s feaft; but his
demand of 80,000 1. being judg’d unreafonable,
whilft the king was treating with him for a lefs fum,
the gout, and-other diftempers put an end to his life.
He was buried in St, Paul’s church, and whatever
monument was fet up for him, it was deftroy’d after-
wards by the fire.
E e 3
WIL*


WILLIAM VANDER-VELDE ,
Commonly call’d the Old ,
an extraordinary fhip-painter of Amfter-
* dam. Coming over into England, he was
much employed by King Charles 11. - for whom he
painted feveral of the fea-fights between the Dutch
and Englilh. He alfo underftood navigation admi-
rably well, and is faid to have conduced the Englifh
fleet to the burning of Schelling. He was the father of
a living matter, whom no age has equall’d in fhip-
painting, and this we owe to the father’s inftrudfi-
ons, who was an admirable draftfman of all mari-
time objects. He lived at Greenwich, to be the
more converfant in thefe things which were his con-
tinual ttudy, and in which King Charles 11. and
King James 11. gave him all poflible encouragement,
making him their painter, with a confiderable fal-
lery, which was afterwards continued to his fon,
now living. The father, in his latter days, com-
monly drew in black and white, on a ground pre-
par’d on canvas, but which appeared like paper.
He gave an eafy freedom to his fails and tackle, as
alfo to every part of a fhip due proportion with in-
finite neatnefs. For his better information in this
way of painting, he had a model of the mafts and
tackle of a fhip always before him, to that nicety
and exadlnefs, that nothing was wanting in if, nor
nothing unproportionable'. This model is ftill in the
hands of his fon. Old Vandervelde died in London
about fourteen years ago.
FRANCIS


FRANCIS VAN-ZOON
'IXT’AS an eminent Dutch painter of fruit, flowers
and plants. He was bred up at Antwerp un-
der his father, old Van-zoon, a painter in the fame
way. Having married a niece of ferjeant Streater’s,
fhe brought him into the bufinefs of feveral perfons
of quality, which firft occaflon’d his being known.
He painted loofe and free, yet kept clofe to nature,
and all his piftures feem drawn by the life. He be-
gan fome large pieces, wherein he propofed to draw
all the phyfical plants in the apothecaries garden at
Chelfea, but which work proving tedious, he defift-
ed from it, having greater encouragement otherways.
He died here in London about four years ago, and
lies buried at St. James’s.
HARMAN V A R E L S T
\\T AS elder brother of the famous Simon Varelft,
V now living. He painted hiftory, fruit and
flowers, after a manner very pleafant and well co-
lour’d. He educated feveral fonsand one daughter
in the fame way of drawing, moft of whom are ftill
Jiving. He ftudied fome time at Rome, and refid-
ed a while in the emperor’s court at Vienna, which
city he left,upon the Turks coming before it in 1683,
He died at London about feven years ago, and lies
buried in St. Andrews-Holborn.
HENRI'' VERGAZOON
a Dutch painter of landfkip and ruins, but
chiefly the latter, which he performed exceed-
ing neatly. His colouring was very natural, but his
landfkip-part commonly too dark and gloomy, ap-
pearing as if it was drawn for a night-piece. He
E e 4 painted


painted fometimes fmall portraits, which were very
curious. He left England fome time ago, and died
lately in France.
F. de V O R S T E R MA N
W/'AS difciple of Harman Sachtleven, and an ex-
traordinary curious and neat landfkip painter in
little, in which he may very reafonably be faid to
have exceeded all the painters of his time. He per-
form’d his landfkips with wonderful care and neat-
nefs after the Dutch gout. He fpared no pains in
his views, which commonly reprefenc places on the
Rhine where he had fludied and accuftom’d himfelf
to take in a large extent of hills and diftance. The
extravagant prices he demanded for his pictures,
hinder’d him from being often employed by King
Charles 11. who was pleafed with his manner of
painting, efpecially that piece he made of Windfor-
caftle, now extant in the royal collection. He ac-
company’d Sir William Soarns, fent by King
James 11. on an embaffy to Conftantinople, but upon
that minifter’s death he return’d to France, and died
there. His defign in going for Turky was to draw
all the remarkable views in that empire, but he was
difappointed by his patron’s death, without whofe
protection he durft not attempt it, to the great regret
of all lovers of art.
W
Mr. ROBERT IV A L K E R
WAS an Englifh face-painter, contemporary
with Vandyck, and whofe works, by tjhe life,
belt fpeak their own praifes. He lived in'Oliver
Cromwell’s days, and drew the portraits of that ufur-
per, and all his officers, both by fea and land. The
great


wreat duke of Tufcany bought an original of Oliver by
this matter; the manner this. Having fent over
fome agent here to purchafe fuch a pidure for him,the
perfon could light on none to his mind for a long
while, till at length hearing of a woman, a relation
of the ufurper’s, that had one, he went to fee it, and
found it in all refpeds fo well perform’d, that he bid
her a o-ood price for it. She not wanting money,
told him, fmee fhe had the honour to be related to
the protedor, fhe would by no means part with his
pidure; but the gentleman ftill infifting upon having
ft, and defiring her to fet what price fhe pleafed up-
on it, fhe thinking to get rid of his importunity by
her exorbitant demand, afk’d him 50c 1. for it,
when, contrary to her expedition, he had no fooner
heard the fum named, but he tojd her fhe fhould
have it, and accordingly paid down the money im-
mediately, which fhe being bound by her word to
take, parted with her pidure even with regret, tho
at fo great a rate. This is to be underftood to have
happen’d in the protedor’s lifetime Mr. Walker
painted alfo Oliver Cromwel, major-general
Lambert, both in one piece, which pidure is now m
the pofleflion of the Earl of Bradford. His own
pidure, drawn by himfelf, now hangs in the foun-
der’s nailery, near the publick library in Oxford.
He died a little before the reftoration.
Mr. PA R RE Y WAL ? 0 N
f T TAS an Englifh painter, and dilciple of Wal-
\\ ker. He painted ftilMife very well, but his
particular excellence lay in knowing and difcovenng
hands. He was well verfed in Italian pidures, and
had the care of the royal colledion. He was alfo re-
markable for mending the works of many of the
great matters that had fufter d either by age or ill


ufage, and this he did by feveral of the beft pic-
tures at Whitehall. He died in London about feven
years ago.
Mr .WILLIAM WI S S I N G
WAS a face-painter, bred up under Dodaens, a
hiftory-painterat the Hague. Upon his coming
over to England, he work’d fome time for Sir Peter
Lely, whole manner he fuccefsfully imitated, and
after whofe death he became famous. He painted
King Charles 11. and his Queen, King James 11. and
his Queen, the prince and princefs of Denmark, and
was fent over to Holland, by the late King James,
to draw the prince and princefs of Orange, all which
he perform’d withapplaufe. What recommended him
to theefteem of King Charles, was his picture of the
duke of Monmouth, whom he drew feveral times,and
in feveral pollutes. He drew molt of the then court,
and was competitor with Sir Godfrey Kneller, who
was at that time upon his rife. Mr. Willing was a
perfon whofe good manners and complaifance re-
commended him to molt people’s elteem. In draw-
ing his portraits, efpecially thofe of the fair fex, he
always took the beautiful likenefs; and when any
lady came to fit to him, whofe complexion was any
ways pale, he would commonly take her by the hand,
and dance her about the room till Ihe became
warmer, by which means he heighten’d her natural
beauty, and made her fit to be reprefented by his
hand. He died much lamented, at the age of thir-
ty-one, at the late Earl of Exeter’s (Burleigh-houfe
in Northampton-lhire) and lies buried in Stamford-
church, where that noble peer erefted a monument
for him, with the following infeription,
guem


Quern Batava Tellus educavity
Gallia aliquando fovit ,
Anglia cumulatiorihus heneficiis profecuta eft ,
Artium, quas varias callehat , juftior ASftimatrix .
Vir facillimis fuaviffmis MoribuSy
Inter Florem (ft Robur Juventa ,
Wgefimum Secundum Vita Annum ingrejjus ,
IVillielmus JViftingus HagenJtSy
H. S. E. \
Tift or Antiquis Tar , Uodiernis Major ;
celeberrimi non degener Difcipulus .
Heu Fatum pracocis Ingenii!
Quam fubito decerpitur Botrus ,
Cateris feftinantius maturefcit:
Cujus ad confervandam Memoriam,
Munificentiftimus ‘Joannes Comes ExceJirenJtSy
Patronorum OptimuSy
T. M. T. C.
Obiit 10. Die Sept. An . 1687.
There is a Mezzo-Tinto print of him, under which
are thefe words;
GulielmusWijftngus, inter Tiftores, fui SeculiCele-
berrimoSy nulli fecundus j Artis fua non exiguum
Decus ift Ornamentum .
Immodicis brevis eft /.Etas ■ ■
FRANCIS


FRANCIS POUTERS
WAS born at Lyere, in the year 1614, and
bred up in the fchopl of Rubens. He was
a good Painter of figures in fmall, chiefly nakeds ;
as alfo of Jandfkips. His merit promoted him to be
principal painter to the Emperor Ferdinand 11. and
afterwards coming into England with that Empe-
ror’s cmbaflador, he was, upon the death of that
Prince, made gentleman of the bed-chamber, and
chief painter to King Charles 11. then Prince of
Wales. He lived a conflderable time at London in
great efteem, and at length retiring to Antwerp,
died there.
Mr. MICHAEL WRIGHT
*II7AS an Englifh portrait-painter, born of Scots
parents. He painted the judges in Guild-hall,
which pieces of his are defervedly in good efteem.
He alfo drew a Highland-laird in his proper habit,
and an Irifh Tory in his country drefs; both which
whole-lengths were in fo great repute at the time
when they were done, that many copies were made
after them, Mr. Wright’s manner of painting was
peculiar to himfelf. He was well verfed in paintings
and drawings of almoft all mafters. He was like-
wife well fkill’d in ftatuary, and had a conflderable
collection of antique medals, of which he was an ex-
cellent judge. In his latter days, he waited on my
Lord Caftlemain, in his embafly to Rome, and was
hislordlbip’s Major-domo. Returning to England,
he died ;n London about fix or feven years ago.
THOMAS


THOMAS Van WT K E,
Commonly call’d the Old,
WAS father of John van Wyke, and a famous
painter, born at Haerlem. He painted land-
fldps, efpccially havens and fea-forts, flapping and
fmall figures; but his particular excellency Jay in
reprefenting chymifts in their laboratories, and things
of like nature. He follow’d the manner of Peter de
Laer, alias Bamboccio. He left England, after he
had lived abroad a confiderablc time, and died here
about twenty years ago.
JOHN Van WYK E,
SON of thebefore-mention’d, wasaDutch battle-
painter of great note. He has both in his
horfes and landfkips, a great freedom of penciling
and good colour; as alfo a great deal of fire in moll
of his defigns, fome of which are very large, efpe-
cially thofe of fieges and pitch’d battles, as at Na-
mur, the Boyn, &c. His hunting-pieces are alfo
in great efteem among our country gentry, for whom
he often drew horfes and dogs by the life, in which
he imitated the manner of Woverman. He died at
Mortlack, where he had lived for fome time, about
the year 1702.
z
Mr. Z 0 U S r, or S 0 ES T,
\IHAS an eminent Dutch face-painter, who came
- into England about fifty years ago, and found
here encouragement fuirable to his merit. The por-
traits he drew after men are admirable, having in
them


them a juft, bold draft, and good colouring; but he
did not always execute with a due regard to grace,
efpecially in women’s faces, which isr an habit can
only be acquir’d by drawing after the moft perfect
beauties, of which ’tis fufficiently known our na-
tion is better ftored than his country. What we
owe more efpecially to him, is for his educating Mr.
Riley, of whom I have fpoken elfewhere at large,
and therefore fhall not need to repeat any thing here.
Mr. Zouft painted feveral perfons of very great qua-
lity. His colouring was very warm, and he was a
great imitator of nature ; but for the moft part he
was unfortunate in his choice. He died in London
about thirty years ago.
F INIS.


ft*, f£'%& ' rfo*}.


