

DEED OF SETTLEMENT
OF THE
HUNTER RIVER
NEW
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
INCORPORATED 1852.
Printed *t Richard Jotres, at the "Msaccai ” Oifitffh




//335'5/r/06tf**-
/9 5 On
INDEX.
Clause. Page
Preamble 3
1. Constitution and name of Company 4
2. Capital; shares not divisible; capital may be increased 4
3. Untaken or forfeited shares 5
4. Object and business of Company, how managed 5
5. Capital paid by instalments 7
6. Disposal of shares forfeited by default 7
7. Shareholder in arrears not to exercise rights 7
8. Number of shares entered on Deed of Settlement 8
9. Shareholders’ Register to be kept 8
10. Ditto Company not responsible for errors 8
11. Ditto Evidence as between Company and shareholder, but not) q
as between disputing claimants /
12. Ditto Persons entered thereon to be deemed shareholders;) 1Q
Company not to notice trusts /
13. Company’s property personal estate 10
14. Shareholder’s liability ; his shares liable for debts to the Company 10
15. Shareholder not entitled to inspect the books 11
16. Mode and form of transferring shares 11
17. Power to enter form of transfer—fee for transfer 11
18. Liability to cease on transfer of shares 12
19. Trustees—To prove title 12
20. „ —Not partners—may sell shares—or become shareholders 13
21. „ —When entitled to dividend 13
22. Shareholders to sign Deed of Settlement 14
23. Liabilities and rights of new proprietors 14
24. Shareholders need not re-execute Deed of Settlement 15
25. Qualifications for voting 15
26. Distant shareholders to vote by proxy—form of proxy.. 15
27. Shareholders no right until they execute Deed of Settlement; no power \
to transfer while in debt to Company /
28. Liability of shareholders as between themselves 16
29. Shareholders indemnified from liabilities of Company 16
30. Directors—Six to manage affairs of Company 17
31. „ —Qualification 17
32. „ —How elected—to appoint Chairman—quorum 18
33. „ —First six elected 18
34. „ —Mode of retirement and election 18
35. „ —Casual vacancies how filled—provision for removal 18
36. „ —Notification of candidates for office 19
37. „ —Remuneration—two months’absence to disqualify 19
38. „ —To appoint solicitor, bankers, officers, and servants 19
39. „ —To sue at law or in equity, &c 20
40. Auditors to be appointed—duties 20
41. Proper books to be kept by Company 21
42. Cheques, how to be signed—shareholders not to bind Company 21
43. Meetings of Directors 22
44. Directors—To make rules and regulations 22
• I Uivo (*uu lOgUiuuxuuo
-45. „ —To execute deeds of trust \ , i.. 22
46. „ —To invest surplus fund 22


47. Half yearly meetings of shareholders 22
48. Number of shareholders to constitute meeting 23
49. Directors to report to half yearly meetings 23
50. Formation of Emplacement Fund 23
51. Investment and disposal of Replacement Fund 24
52. Dividends to be advertised, and paid within 21 days 24
53, Unclaimed Dividend Fund 24
54. Directors to call special general meetings 25
55. Shareholders may call special general meetings 25
56. Powers of special general meetings 25
57. Provision for dissolution of Company 26
58. How questions to be decided at meetings 26
59. Shareholders’ book of proceedings to be kept 26
60. Liability of officers of Company 27
61. Officers indemnified from loss 27
62. Two-thirds in number and value of shareholders may determine that \ 2?
Company be dissolved /
63. Disposal of effects on dissolution of Company 28
• ~ . n • i.* „ L OC
Deed of Settlement, &c., to be open for inspection of shareholders .... 28
65. Special general meetings to determine meaning of doubtful clauses in 1 2g
Deed of Settlement /
66. Act of Council to be applied for 28
67. Duplicate Deed of Settlement may be executed 29
r.o (JaftUmonf fn fate effort, from date thereof 29
68. Deed of Settlement to take effect'from date thereof.
m' Ai


DEED OF SETTLEMENT.
CtjllS £nfoentUl*e, made the eighth day of September, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty- f arti es.
two, between and by the several persons whose names and
seals now are or may hereafter be hereunto subscribed and
affixed. WHEREAS they the said several persons parties Agreement to
to these presents have agreed and determined to form a form a Com *
copartnership for the purpose of trading with steam and P an '’*
other vessels between Morpeth, in the colony of New South
Wales, and Sydney, in the said colony, and other places:
AND WHEREAS they the said several persons parties
to these presents have further agreed and determined that
the capital of the said Company shall be forty thousand
pounds, divided into four thousand shares of ten pounds
each : AND WHEREAS at the date of these presents for'
three thousand five hundred and fifty shares have been sub- and as tQ r t ’ ljQ
scribed for, and it has been agreed that the remainder of the allotment of
said shares shall be from time to time allotted by the Direc- remaining
tors of the said Company to such persons as they consider shares.
would be eligible shareholders: AND WHEREAS each Further agree-
of the said several persons parties to these presents have ™®^ g as to
agreed to take the number of shares in the said capital of
the said Company respectively written opposite to his or her
name and seal, subscribed and affixed by him or her hereto,
and has paid the deposit on each share, and given certain
promissory notes for payment of the residue in manner
hereinafter mentioned: AND WHEREAS they the said interpretation
several persons parties to these presents have further agreed clause.
that in the construction of these presents the expression
“ the Directors’’ shall mean the Directors for the time being
of the said Company; the expressions “ shareholders,”
“ proprietors,” and “ members,” shall respectively mean
proprietors or owners of shares in the capital and joint stock
for the time being of the said Company; the expressions
“ share”* and “ shares” shall respectively mean a share or


shares in the capital and joint stock for the time being of
the said Company; the expressions “ meeting of the share-
holders” or “ meeting of the Company” shall mean a
general meeting, whether yearly, special, or by adjournment;
the expression “ Deed of Settlement” shall include these
presents and any other deed or deeds which may hereafter
be prepared by order of any general meeting of the said
Company under or by virtue hereof; and also that in such
Deed of Settlement including as aforesaid words or names in
the singular number or in the plural number and importing
males only shall be held and construed to include several
persons as well as one person and the converse, and females
as well as males, and bodies corporate as well as individuals,
unless it be otherwise specially provided or unless there be
something in the subject or context repugnant to such
meaning or construction as aforesaid.
Testatum.
iSoto tf)(0 Indenture OTHtIUSSeff), that in pursuance of the
said agreement, and in consideration of the premises and for
the purpose of carrying into effect the wishes and intentions
of the parties hereto, they the said several persons parties
hereto and each of them whose names are herewith sub-
scribed and seals affixed, for themselves and each of them for
himself or herself severally and respectively, and for his her
and their several and respective heirs, executors, adminis-
trators, or assigns, do and each of them doth, not the one for
the other of them, or the heirs, executors, administrators,
or assigns of the other of them, covenant, promise, declare,
and agree to and with the other or others of them, their and
each of their respective heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns, in manner following, that is to say :
Constitution I. That they the said several persons parties to these
and naming of presents, and the several other persons who shall become
Company. shareholders as hereinafter provided, shall while holding
shares in the said Company be continue and remain a Com-
pany or Society to be called " THE HUNTER RIVER
NEW STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,” and shall
and will at all times, so long as they continue partners therein,
promote and advance the interests and advantages of the
said Company to the utmost of their power. And that the
Continuation. ga Company shall have continuance until such time as the
same shall be dissolved in pursuance of any of the provisions
for that purpose herein contained.
£4o*ooo in U* r^HAT or igi na l capital fund or joint stock of the
4000 shares of Company shall be forty thousand pounds sterling, and
£io each. shall be divided into four thousand shares of ten pounds


each, every one of which shall be numbered in regular order
commencing from one, and be thereby hereafter identically
distinguished, but the number of such shares may hereafter
be increased under the power for that purpose hereinafter
contained. Provided always, that it shall not be lawful Shares not to
for two or more individuals to hold jointly (excepting as be divided into
trustees, executors, or administrators) any share or shares, fractlonal
and in no case shall any share be divided into fractional parts, pa
but whenever any shares shall become vested in two or more
persons jointly, the one of such persons whose name shall
stand first in the books of the Company as one of the
owners of such shares shall be considered the sole owner
thereof for the purpose of voting and acting as a shareholder.
Provided also, and it is hereby further agreed and de-
clared, that it shall and may be competent and lawful for any
special general meeting of the Company duly convened for
that purpose, and of which one calendar month’s previous
notice shall be given by advertisement, to increase the capital
of the said Company to a sum not exceeding, with the pre-
sent capital, the sum of one hundred thousand pounds, and
to raise such increased capital by creating an additional
number of shares of ten pounds each, to be allotted rateably
among the shareholders for the time being, or to be disposed
of to the public, as such general meeting shall direct. Pro-
vided always, that such meeting shall not be competent to
authorise such increase of capital unless a majority in number
and value of the whole body of shareholders shall then be
present; but if such majority in person or by proxy shall
fail to attend such meeting, it shall be incumbent on the
Directors for the time being to obtain the assent in writing
of such majority before such increase of capital shall take
place.
111. That in case any of the shares of the Company shall Untaken or
remain unsubscribed for and unappropriated, or any shares forfeited
become forfeited in manner hereinafter mentioned, they shall
be taken by the Directors and held by them for the general posed of by the
benefit of the proprietors of the said Company, and shall be Directors,
disposed of from time to time in such manner or retained by
them as the said Directors shall think fit. Provided
always, that whenever such shares shall thereafter be sub-
scribed for and taken, all instalments thereon then in arrear
shall be duly paid.
IV. That the business of the said Company shall be that Object and
of trading with steam or other vessels to and from Morpeth business of the
and Sydney aforesaid, and to and from other ports and om P an y*
places, subject to the direction and management hereinafter


Business to be provided for; that is to say, that the business affairs and
f lO °° n ' c . oncerns ie Company shall from time to time and at all
Directors 6 be under the control of Directors, who shall have the
entire ordering, managing, and conducting of the Com-
pany, and of the capital, stock, estate, revenue, effects,
affairs, and other concerns thereof, and who shall also regu-
late and determine the mode and terms of carrying on and
T , transacting the business of the Company conformably to the
duotedTnthe -^ Settlement. That the business of the said Corn-
Hunter River pany shall be carried on at such place or places within the
District. District of the Hunter River, in the said colony, as the said
To commence Directors may from time to time determine, and such busi-
of°this deecf 6 ness commence rorn the day of the date hereof. And
the Directors are hereby authorised and empowered with the
Power to funds of the Company to purchase the fee simple or take on
purchase 5 k* re or * ease ? by the year or otherwise, any lands, houses,
or build vessels’ wharves, stores, or premises they may think eligible and
houses, necessary for carrying on the business of the Company, or
wharves, &c. to build any such houses, stores, offices, or premises, and to
purchase, build, or hire steam and other vessels, and the
and the same same business premises, steam and other vessels, to sell again
m or ° r un(^er exchange, or otherwise dispose of, at their dis-
-1 ! * cretion, for the benefit of the Company, and to give* dis-
housesossol3 ’ c barges for the purchase money; and such lands, houses,
wharves &c., °ffi ces > wharves, stores, premises, steam and other vessels,
to be deemed shall, for the purposes of this Deed of Settlement, be
personal pro- deemed personal estate and part of the capital of the Com-
bevestedtnthe P an y> be i n the Directors as Trustees for the
Directors in ° Company upon such trusts as will secure the intent and
trust for the object of this Deed of Settlement. And it shall be lawful
Company. for the Directors of the said Company from time to time to
Power to Di- establish any branch houses, wharves, stores, offices, and
rectors to es- premises, and appoint any agent or agents, in any town or
offices 11 P^ ace wbhin the Australasian Colonies, with such clerks,
’ servants, or other persons as they the said Directors may
think advisable for carrying on the business of the Com-
pany, and at their discretion to dispose of and discontinue
the same, and to dismiss any agent or agents, clerks, ser-
vants, or other individuals connected with such establish-
ments ; and all such branch houses, wharves, stores, offices,
All agents, and premises, and all other business establishments of the
servants, &c., sa ij Company, and all agents, clerks, servants, or other
the control*of P ersons connected therewith, shall be under the control and
the Directors, government of the said Directors, who shall and may from
time to time make all such rules and regulations for the
management of the same as may appear to them advisable
and judicious.


V. That the capital stock or fund of the said Company Capital to be
shall be paid by instalments and in the manner hereinafter paid U P b y
mentioned : That is to say, each of the several persons parties “d promissory
hereto shall on or before the execution hereof by him or her note g i
pay to the Board of Directors, or their authorised agent, or
to the credit of the Company at such bank as the Directors
may appoint, on each and every share the sum of two pounds
ten shillings, and shall before such execution as aforesaid
give to the Directors, or their agent, the further sum of
two pounds ten shillings respectively each, by promissory
notes (payable to the Chairman of the Board of Directors
of the said Company) at three, nine, and eighteen months,
respectively on each and every share.
VI. That in case any of the shareholders for the time lu case of de-
being: of the Company, or their respective executors, fault of any
administrators, or assigns, shall refuse, neglect, or decline sc^avs 6 ' 1 3
to pay the said deposit or any of the said promissory notes, or after 9am e ma y
any other instalment on shares to be received in pursuance be due.
of the Deed of Settlement, within thirty days next after the
day appointed for payment of the same, then and in every
such case it shall be lawful for the Directors of the Company
to declare that the shares, estate, and interest of and in the
Company of such respective shareholders, or of their respec-
tive executors, administrators, or assigns, so refusing,
neglecting, or declining, as aforesaid, and all benefit and
advantage therefrom or incident thereto, so far as respects the
shares in and to which such default shall have been made, g
and all previous payments made in respect thereof, shall “
thenceforth be forfeited to the other shareholders, and the m ents may be
Directors may dispose of the same in manner hereinbefore declared for-
mentioned, and the transfer thereof by them to any new felted, and the
proprietor shall be good and valid, and as binding upon the
person so making default as if he, she, or they had shares
actually transferred the same, and the said Directors may
and they are hereby authorised with such transfer to give
new certificates for any such shares. Provided always,
that nothing herein contained shall prejudice the right of without prejli-
the Directors to enforce payment of such deposit, promis- Directorate ° f
sory notes, or instalments, in arrear as aforesaid, or to en f orce p av .
recover damages for the nonpayment thereof. ment.
VII. That no shareholder shall be allowed to transfer his No shareholder
shares, to vote personally or by his representative at any whose pay-
meeting of shareholders, or to claim any dividend, or to be ments are in
eligible to any office in the Company, or exercise any other
right or privilege under the Deed of Settlement, untd such otherwise con-
shareholder shall have fully paid and satisfied the amount of formed with


Deed of Settle- any promissory note or instalment which shall have been
ment to exer- made or become due or payable in respect of his or her
ofshare- nSbtS sbares > an( l sba M otherwise have conformed to the pro-
holders. visions of the said Deed of Settlement.
Shareholders
to have sub-
scribed on the VIII. That the number of shares subscribed for or
deed the num- holden by each person shall at the time of his executing the
her of shares D ee( j 0 f Settlement be written opposite to his name as sub-
takenVy them. thereto, and a certificate may be delivered to him in
Directors to a form to be approved by the Directors,
issue certifi-
cates of shares
Shareholders’ IX. That the names, additions, and places of abode of
Register to be shareholders, together with the number of shares held by
Shareholders to eacb tbem > anc * tbe numbers thereof respectively, and the
o-ive notice of amount of subscriptions paid thereon, shall from time to
change of resi- time be entered and written in a book to be kept for that
dence or mar- purpose, to be called “The Shareholders’ Register,” and
Assignees every shareholder w r ho shall at any time change his or her
executors ’ name or place of abode, or who being a female shall marry,
legatees, com- and the assigns of any shareholder who shall become insol-
mittees, guar- V ent, and the personal representatives or legatee or legatees
notice an y vvbo sbab die, or an 7 now trustee ? g uai ’ -
gueuo ice,re. or comm ittee of any shareholder being appointed,
shall immediately upon and after any of the said events
leave a notice in writing at the nearest office of the said
Company, stating his her or their name or names, or new
name, or names and place or places of abode, and when
a female shareholder shall have married, then the name
and place of abode of her husband.
That Direc-
tors shall not
be bound for
making such . , ,
registry to en- X. That previous to the entry in “I he shareholders
quire whether Register” of the name of any person as a new proprietor of
the shares are an y s j iare or shares in the capital of the Company it shall
inffieperson not be necessary for the Directors to enquire whether such
claiming to be share or shares is or are legally vested in such person or
registered as a otherwise, nor shall the Company be responsible for the
shareholder. signatures to any transfer, receipt of dividends, or other
ttm° n document, or liable to loss occasioned to others by any
signatures to forgery of such transfer, receipt, or other document, it being
any deed of the true intent and meaning of this Deed of Settlement that
transfer,receipt if t h e name of any person shall have been improperly regis-
Such V 1 re n is tra- tered in “ Tbe Shareholders’ Register” as a proprietor of any
tion con- share or shares, such person shall, as between himself and the


shareholders and members of the Company, be to all intents be ‘
and purposes a proprietor of the Company in respect of such c ompan y ani i
share or shares, and all claim, cause of action, or demand, the person so
which the last or former proprietor of such share or shares, registered as a
or of any person claiming by from or under him, may have
for or on account of the same, shall be wholly and exclu- by f orraer p ro .
sively upon or against the new proprietor of such shares, his prietors shall
executors or administrators. be ma de up on
such last re-
gistered share-
holder.
XI. That “The Shareholders’ Register” shall, as between shareholders’
the Company and any one claiming to be a proprietor in Register to be
respect of any share or shares, be conclusive evidence on conclusive evi-
behalf of the Company to prove whether he is a proprietor C Q o befc^ e v en
of the Company in respect of such share or shares, and as to and pers JJ n *
his place of residence, and as to all other particulars therein claiming to be
set forth. But neither “The Shareholders’ Register,” nor a shareholder ;
any other books, deeds, documents, or writings in the bufc not ag be _
custody or possession of the Company, or of the tween j n di-
Directors or other officers thereof, shall be deemed, con- yiduals disput-
strued, or taken as the title of any proprietor to his or her claims to
share or shares of the said Company, as between him and 8 ares ’
any other person or persons claiming to be entitled to such and the Corn-
share or shares. And the Directors and other officers of the pany shall not
said Company shall not be bound or required to produce ga ° b
“ The Shareholders’ Register,” or any other book, deed, register or
document, or writing in their custody or possession, in any other docu-
action or suit between any proprietor of the Company and ment.
any person or persons claiming to be entitleed to any share The disputants’
or shares. But the title of such proprietor, or of such per- titles being de-
son or persons respectively, to such share or shares, as pendent on the
between such proprietor and such person or persons, shall evidences held
at all times depend upon the deeds, documents, or writings, respectively,
in the custody or possession of such proprietor or other
person or persons respectively, or any other evidence in his, But if the Di-
her, or their possession or power. Provided always, that rectors shall
if the Directors shall in any case require the deed or docu-
ment by which any share or shares shall have been trans- transfer 0 f anv
ferred to any proprietor to be deposited and kept in the shares to be
office of the Company, then and in such case it shall be lodged with
lawful for such proprietor or any future proprietor of such them, then the
share or shares, or for any other person otherwise directly
interested in or under such deed or document, by writing cause the same
under his, her, or their hand or hands to require the same to to be produced
be produced and shewn forth when and where he, she, or °& payment of
they may require, on payment of all reasonable costs and attendinlTthe
charges attending the production and shewing forth of the production
same. thereof.


The person ap- XII. That the person in whose name any share shall
peering by stand in “ The Shareholders’ Register” shall to all intents
and P ur P oses whatsoever within the meaning of the Deed
oie e pro- 0 f Settlement be deemed at law and inequity the absolute,
shares'shall be scde > and bena ficial holder and owner of such share, and
the only recog- shall as such be the only person known to or recognised by
nised owner of the Company in all votes, transfers, notices, payments, and
such shares. a ll other matters relating to the same share, and by his act
all other or future proprietors of such share shall, as regards
And the Com- the Company only, be for ever bound. And the Company
beY B n<f t DOt sbad * n no case be bound to notice or be affected by express
notic^trustsor n °ti ce of any trust or equitable charge imposed on any
equitable in- share, or with any gift thereof by way of legacy, until the
terests affect- legatee or other claimant shall have become a shareholder
ing shares. as herein mentioned.
All property of XIT I. That all the property of the Company shall, as
the Company between the several shareholders thereof and their respective
as between the rea i an d personal representatives, be considered and deemed
tobe^deemed P ersona l estate, and that no benefit of survivorship shall
personal estate take place among shareholders, but each of the shareholders,
as between one another, shall have a distinct and separate
right to his share, and the same shall be vested in him as
part of his personal estate, but to all intents and purposes
under and subject to the provisions of the Deed of Settle'
ment.
Shareholders XIV. That each shareholder shall be entitled to and in-
interested in terested in the profits and be liable and subject to the losses
profits and 0 f the Company in proportion to his shares in the capital.
in a proportion es Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall be
to shares held taken to affect or prejudice the indemnity now or hereafter to
by them. be secured by Act of Council limiting the liability of pro-
Sharestobe prietors. And the shares of every shareholder shall, before
due by the pro- a nd in preference to every other right or claim whatsoever,
prietor thereof be subject to and charged with all debts, liabilities, and en-
to the Com- gagements due from and existing between him and the Com-
ply- r. pany, whether in respect of his direct transactions with the
Svfn C g°ine after Company or mediately or otherwise, and whether they be
month’s notice those of such shareholder solely or jointly or in partnership
to such pro- with any other person ; and the Directors may, and they
prietor may are hereby authorised and empowered after giving to the
forfeited -* areS proprietor of such shares one month’s previous notice in
or may sell writing, to cancel, extinguish, and declare forfeited, or to
such shares sell and dispose of such shares, either wholly or in part, as
to pay such th e case may seem to require, by way of or towards satisfac-
tion or liq aidation of all or an ? P art of such debts > liabilities >
proprietor for or engagements, and after such sale any balance, after pay-


ment of all claims and expenses, shall be paid over to the balance of the
proprietor. purchase
money.
XV. That no shareholder of the Company not being a No shareholder
Director or Auditor, his executors, administrators, legatees, (trnless he be a
assignees, or creditors, or any other person or persons other officer)
claiming or to claim by from under or in trust from him, to have a right
shall be entitled, under any pretence whatsoever, to inspect of inspection
or have in equity a discovery of all or any of the books, of books, &c.
accounts, documents, or writings of the Company, except
such as may be produced for his inspection at any meeting
of the Company, or except as otherwise provided for by the
Deed of Settlement.
Agreements or
transfers of
XVI. That all assignments or transfers of shares in the ®jj ar ® 8 to be in
said Company shall for the present be made in or according i n a se t r fj rt^ ere *
to the following form, and shall be prepared by or under the w hen perfected
superintendence of the Directors of the said Company for to be regis-
the time being, and when perfected shall be registered in tered.
the books of the said Company; but no assignment or i
transfer of any share or shares shall be made within three original apro-
years from the date hereof to any person other than an prietor to‘be
original shareholder of the Company, but after the expira- mad e within
tion of such three years to any person whose name has been JjJ 1 , 1,00 y®ars-
previously submitted to and approved of by the Directors, ap-
proved of by
the Directors,
Know all men by these presents that Form of trans-
of in consideration of the sum of f er
to him paid by of
doth hereby bargain, sell, assign, and transfer
unto the said , his executors, administrators,
and assigns, shares of him (her or them) the said
of or in the capital stock of the “Hunter
River New Steam Navigation Company,” numbered . To hold
the same to the said , his executors, adminis-
trators, and assigns, under and subject to the conditions, provisoes, and
regulations, in the Deed of Settlement of the said Company contained,
and other the conditions and regulations for the time being thereof,
and to any other conditions affecting same at the time of the execution
hereof. And the said doth hereby accept the said
shares, subject to the said conditions, provisions, and regulations.
In witness whereof the said parties to these presents have hereunto set
their hands and seals, this day of in the year
of our Lord 18
XVII. That the Directors shall have power from time Directors em-
to time to make such alterations respecting the form, pre- P° were d to
paration, custody, and registration of the instrument to be manner™
made and executed upon the sale and transfer of shares as transfer.


shall appear to them necessary and advisable for the security
of the Company and the due assignment of the said shares;
Transfers not sales and transfers of any shares not made con-
made in con- form ably to the provisions of the Deed of Settlement, and
formity with according to the regulations of the Directors, shall be invalid
for the' time° n 3 at aw * n ec l » every purchaser or tranferee of
beino-to be shares shall in respect thereof, if required by the Directors,
invalid. either expressly or by a general regulation in that behalf,
Transferee to execute this Deed of Settlement, or a deed to be prepared for
execute Deed that purpose by the Directors whereby he may enter into
of Settlement, covenants with the Company duly to observe and abide by
Fees payable the stipulations, provisions, and regulations, for the time
to the Cora- being affecting or intending to affect holders of shares in this
pany not to Company. Provided that the fees paid to the officers of
l^ie Company f° r preparing, registering, and perfecting
each transfer, every such transfer shall not exceed two shillings for every
form of transfer.
On completion XVIII. That whenever any shares shall be duly and
of transfer all effectually transferred to a new holder according to the
liability of pre- stipulations of these presents, then and in such case the
torto cease. 8 responsibility of the previous holder as a member of the
Company in respect of such shares shall (so far the law will
in that behalf allow) cease and determine, and such previous
holder and all persons claiming by from or under him shall
be exonerated and released from all subsequent claims, de-
mands, liabilities, and obligations in respect to the same
shares, and from all future observance and performance of
the covenants, conditions, stipulations, and agreements in
the Deed of Settlement contained, in respect of the same
shares, and the purchaser shall thenceforth, with respect to
all liabilities and engagements incurred on account of the
same shares, stand in the place of the previous holder to all
intents and purposes whatever.
Represeuta- XIX. That before any assignee of an insolvent share-
Mdera tcnsub' er s^ or transfer any shares vested in him in that
m°it to\he S Di- capacity, or receive any dividend in respect of such shares,
rectors the or before any executor, administrator, or legatee of a deceased
documents, &c., shareholder, or any trustee for any minor or other share-
under which holder, or husband of a female shareholder, shall sell,
r > or assign any shares vested in him in any such
capacity, or shall become a member of the Company in
respect of such shares in respect of the same, he shall leave
for inspection with the Board of Directors the deed or
instrument of assignment, probate of the will, or letters of
administration, under which, or the certificate of the mar-
rige with the person in whose right he shall claim to be en-


titled to the same shares, or attested copies of such deeds of
assignment or official extracts of such wills or letters of ad-
ministration, as the case may be, in order that a minute or ° r ig s e * r() ° e er "
extract of such deeds of assignment, certificate, or will, as their title to
the case may be, may be entered in the books of the Com- the satisfac-
pany, or shall otherwise prove and establish his title to the turn of the Di-
satisfaction of the Directors. rec ors ’
XX. That the trustee of any minor or other shareholder, Trustees, &c. t
or the husband of any female shareholder, or the executor, in whom shares
administrator, or legatee of any deceased shareholder, or the
assignee of any bankrupt or insolvent debtor possessed of be partners.
shares, shall not ipso facto be a member of the Company in
respect of such shares as be vested in him in any of the
aforesaid capacities respectively, but such assignee of a
bankrupt or insolvent debtor may sell and dispose of such but may dis-
shares in manner and subject to the provisions herein ex- P oBe of snares >
pressed and contained with respect to the sale and transfer
of shares, and any such trustee, husband, executor, adminis-
trator, or legatee, as aforesaid, shall be at liberty either to
sell or dispose of the shares so vested in him in like manner
and subject as aforesaid, or at his option (if approved by the
Directors as hereinafter mentioned) to become a member of
the Company in respect of such shares, on complying with or w ith consent
the provisions of these presents as next hereinafter in that 0 f Directors
behalf expressed, and on previously obtaining the consent of become mem-
a Board of Directors to hold such shares and become a ers the
shareholder in respect thereof. Provided that nothing ora P an ?-
herein contained shall be construed to mean that the relation-
ship between such trustee and his ward, or others, as afore-
said, shall be in anywise altered from the law of this colony,
present or future, nor to authorise or empower any trustee or
other person to act beyond or contrary to his trust or power.
XXI. That the trustee of any minor or other share- Such trustee,
holder, or the husband of any female shareholder, or the entitled
executor, administrator, or legatee of a deceased shareholder, bofor© title
who shall not under the provisions lastly hereinbefore con- accrued,
tained elect to become and be approved of as a member of the
Company in respect of the shares vested in him in any such
capacity, and also the assignee of every bankrupt or insol-
vent debtor possessing shares, shall be entitled to receive any
dividend which shall have become due on the same shares
so vested in him in any such capacity as aforesaid before his
title to the same shares accrued; but no dividend which but not to be
shall have become due on the same shares after his title shall entitled to sub-
have accrued shall be payable to or recoverable by him, but SendT until he
shall, till such person shall become a member of the Com- become a mem-


ber or transfer pany in respect of the same shares, remain in suspense, and
shares. shall not be paid till the transfer thereof shall be completed
and the new holder thereof shall claim the same, and every
transfer shall carry with it the profit and interest and
share of capital and surplus fund in respect of the shares
transferred, so as to close all the right and interest of the
party or parties making such transfer in respect of such
transferred shares.
If shareholders XXII. That in case any person or persons in whom any
neglect to ex- s |j are
or shares shall by original subscription, purchase,
Settlement for marriage, bequest, or representation, or other mode of
so days after acquisition, become vested, shall not have executed the
notice shares Deed of Settlement, and shall for thirty days next after notice
h® de- in writing sent to him, her, or them, by the Secretary to the
feited ° r ' Company requiring them to subscribe the said Deed of
Settlement, neglect or refuse to execute the same in person
or by attorney, it shall be lawful for, but not imperative on,
the Directors* to declare the shares so vested in such persons
so neglecting or refusing, and all benefit and advantage
whatsoever incident thereto, to be forfeited to the other
Not necessar s h are h°lders, und the same shall be forfeited accordingly.
Proyided always, that it shall not be necessary to tender
for execution, to such person the Deed of Settlement for his execution.
That all new XXIII. That every person to whom shares shall be
proprietors transferred, and who shall not at the time be a member of
r bT? to b ie Company and subject to the provisions of the Deed of
considered 6 Settlement in respect to any other shares, and every person
members of the who being a trustee of any minor or other shareholder, or
Company from the husband of any female shareholder, or the executor,
the date of administrator, or legatee of any deceased shareholder, as
shall a foresaid, shall by notice in writing, as aforesaid, signify to
not be deemed the Directors his desire to become and be approved of by
members until the Directors as a member of the Company in respect of the
the execution s } iares vested in him in such capacity, and shall not at the
Deed oTSet- me l^e s^iares becoming vested in him by the means
Dement. aforesaid be a member in respeet of any other shares, shall
as to all duties, obligations, claims, and demands upon or
against him in respect of such shares be considered a mem-
ber of the Company from the time of the same shares being
so transferred to or so becoming vested in him, as aforesaid,
but as to all profits, rights, privileges, benefit, and advantages
to arise from the same shares, no such person shall be con-
sidered as a member in respect of the same until he shall
have executed the Deed of Settlement or a deed in con-
formity with clause number seventeen hereof.


XXIV. That every person in whom any shares shall Original
vest by transfer or otherwise who previously to such vesting holders of
shall have executed the Deed of Settlement, and who shall s
be a member of the Company to all intents and purposes execute deed
in respect of any other shares, shall as to all the shares so on transfer of
vesting in him as aforesaid be considered as a member from other shares,
the date of the transfer to him, or from the time of leaving
his title to such shares in the office of the Company, or
proving and establishing it as aforesaid, as the Directors may
recommend, and shall not be required nor shall it be neces-
sary for him to re-execute the Deed of Settlement.
Holders of 5
shares to have
XXV. That each of the proprietors of shares in the said l 0 shares
Company who shall hold not less than five share shall be 2 votes,
entitled to one vote in the deliberations and resolutions 15 shares
thereof, and in like manner each shareholder who shall
hold not less than ten shares to two votes, and for fifteen 4 votes
shares to three votes, and for twenty shares four votes, and 25 shares
for twenty-five shares five votes, and one vote for each addi- 5 votes,
tional ten shares above twenty-five shares; but no share- io Ch
holder shall be entitled to more than twenty votes; and if shares above 25
any shareholder be a lunatic or idiot, such lunatic or idiot shares,
may vote by his committee, and if any shareholder be a No shareholder
minor he may vote by his guardian or any one of his guar-
dians, and every such vote may be given either in person or minors
by proxy. vote by guar-
dians and
others.
XXVI. That the votes of shareholders in the said Com- Shareholders
pany who may reside at and beyond a distance of twenty res ident be-
miles from the place where any meeting of the Company JJJJ 1 ‘ “| les
may be held may be given by proxy, the person holding p roX y to “ V
and using such proxy being a member of the said Company another mem-
entitled himself to vote, and the same shall be in the form or her entitled to
to the effect following : vote *
I, A. 8., being the holder of shares in the “Hunter River Form of proxy.
New Steam Navigation Company,” do authorise and appoint C. D. to be
my proxy at the meeting of the said Company to be held at
on the day of and to vote for me on all matters
and affairs of the said Company at such meeting, or at any adjournment
thereof, unless I myself shall be personally present. As witness my hand
this day of 18
Provided always, that the said proxy shall, previous to Proxy to be
voting in virtue thereof, be produced to or left with the produced.
Directors or Secretary of the Company; and provided


always, that nothing herein contained shall disqualify any
shareholder who may reside within twenty miles of such
place of meeting voting by proxy at such meeting, in man-
Members un ner lin(^er conditions before expressed, in the event
avoidably'ab- °f his being prevented from voting personally, by reason of
sent may also sickness, or necessary absence beyond the distance of twenty
vote by proxy, miles from the place of meeting on the day of voting.
No shareholder XXVII. That no person or persons who shall or may at
r? hts^o^be an y t * me or mes hereafter be entitled to any share or shares
erUitled° r to B di- * n the said Company, either by purchase, descent, or other
vidends until operation of law, shall be entitled to have any vote in the
execution of affairs, meetings, or resolutions of the said Company, or
deed and receive any dividend which may become due on such shares,
shares. 1 ° he, she, or they shall have executed the Deed of Set-
tlement, or otherwise bound himself, herself, or themselves,
to conform to the provisions thereof, and other the regula-
tions for the time being of the said Company, and his, her,
No shares to or their shares shall be duly registered in the books of the
be transferred said Company; and no proprietor of any share or shares
until all liabili- ghall be authorised or allowed to transfer or assign any such
ties by the share
or shares until any debt due to the Company by such
proprietor in respect of such shares, or in any other respect
he discharged, or on any other account, be duly satisfied and discharged.
Shareholders XXVIII. That the several proprietors and shareholders
not to be 0 f t^e ga j ( j Company, their, his, or her heirs, executors,
between them- administrators, or assigns, shall not in any case or event, as
selves for more between themselves, be answerable to the capital stock
than their thereof for or in respect of the debts or other demands or
respective ca u s U p on the said Company beyond his, her, or their
8 areSi respective share cr interest.
Individual XXIX. That in case any lawful demand shall at any
members in- time or times be made upon any individual proprietor or
d ® mn .ifi®d from shareholder of the said Company for or in respect of any
of the Com- 68 debt, obligation, or engagement, owing or made by the said
pany. Company, and not incurred by him, her, or them, indi-
vidually* or if he, she, or they shall sustain or be put unto
any loss or damage by reason of any action, suit, or other
proceedings at law or in equity being instituted or prosecuted
against him, her, or them, through or on account of his, her,
or their being a proprietor or shareholder in the said Corn-
Provided they pany, all and every such proprietors and shareholders shall
give notice to b e f rom time to time indemnified and saved harmless by and
Directors of out 0 f t j ie ca pital stock of the said Company and the growing
raadeonThem proceeds thereof; Provided that prompt and immediate
on account notice of such demand be given to the Directors, and not
thereof. otherwise.


XXX. That the business affairs and concerns of the Affairs of the
Company in all its branches shall from time to time and at Company to be
all times hereafter be under the control and are hereby ™ ana g e a b y
reposed and vested in six Directors, as hereinafter men- Slx irector3,
tioned, who shall have the entire controlling, ordering,
managing, and conducting of the Company, and of the
capital, property, revenue, affairs, and concerns thereof,
and who shall also regulate and determine the mode and
terms of carrying on and conducting the business of the
Company—subject nevertheless to the provisions of the
Deed of Settlement.
XXXI. That no proprietor of the Company shall be Qualification as
eligible for or be elected a Director thereof who shall not be Director—the
possessed in his own right of at least twenty-five share in the bolding of 25
capital stock of the Company, or who shall be insolvent, Disqualifica-
or who shall be a Director or other officer in any other tion
Steam Navigation Company running boats on or in the being insol-
Hunter River; and in case any Director being duly elected y ent, being an
shall, whilst he be in office, fall within any of the disqualify c" m any
cations aforesaid, his office of Director under this Deed of pany running
Settlement shall immediately cease and become vacant, boats on the
Provided always, that no person being concerned or Hunter River,
interested in any contract under the Company shall be n ? fc ,
capable of being chosen a Director thereof, and no Director i n any contract
shall be capable of being interested in any contract with the of the Com-
Company during his holding office. pany.
XXXII. That the Directors of the said Company shall Directors to be
continue in office for one year from the time of such election, elected an-
and thenceforth until some other Directors be appointed in nually-
their place (unless they or any of them die, or retire, or
become disqualified), and such Directors shall every year, To appoint
within eight days after the annual meeting, choose out o f c bairman.
their number one who shall be Chairman of the Board of
Directors of the said Company for the ensuing year. That Three Direc-
not less than three Directors shall constitute a Board for the * ors a
transaction of business, of which the Chairman shall be one, man to'beTne.
except in case of sickness or necessary absence, in which case
the Directors present may choose one of their number as
Chairman in his stead pro tempore: that the Chairman for Chairman to
the time being may take part in proceedings, and shall vote vote >
as a Director, having also a casting vote in case an( l to have a
of their being an equal number of votes for and against any cas tiog vote,
question before the board. Provided always, That in the On vacancy of
event °t any vacancy occurring in the office of Chairman of office of Chair-
the Board of Directors, it shall be lawful for such board at man to tbe
their first meeting after such vacancy shall occur to choose Board Dlrec ’


tors to make another Director as Chairman, and such newly chosen
appointment. Chairman shall remain in such office so long only as his
immediate predecessor would have done had he remained in
office.
Names of pre- XXXIII. That Bourn Russell, Esq., James Dickson,
sent Directors. Esq,, John Portus, Esq., Peter Green, Esq., Samuel
Cohen, Esq., and Andrew Lang, Esq., be and are hereby
declared to be the present and first Directors of the Com-
pany.
At the annual XXXIV. That at each annual meeting of the share-
meeting two holders of the Company, which shall be held on the first
Directors to Monday in the month of August in each year, two Directors
retire * shall retire from office, such retirement to be in the inverse
position in which their names are above written, until all the
present Directors now in office shall have retired, and then
in each succeeding year the two Directors who have been
longest in office shall retire, and so on from time to time
during the continuance of the Company; and at every such
Two new Di- general meeting in the month of August in each year the
rectors to be shareholders then present, by themselves or their proxies,
then elected, elect two new Directors in the place of the Directors
Chairman to w | lo s b a n have s 0 ret i r ed, and the Directors shall elect their
eeec e . Chairman in the manner aforesaid. Provided always,
Directors and every Director or Chairman on going out of office shall
eligibbTfbr re- be eligible for immediate re-election, and shall be deemed to
election. have been in office only from the time of such re-election.
Vacancy in
Board of Di-
rectors to be
filled up at the
next general
meeting.
If more than I
vacancy special XXXV. That every vacancy in the office of Director
general meet- oceasione( i by death, resignation, disqualification, or removal,
fof that or by any other means than by going out of office by rota-
pose. tion, shall be filled up by the election of a new Director at the
Directors so nex j; general meeting of the shareholders ; but in case more
elected to con- Gne suc b vaca ncy shall occur, then such vacancies shall
sXngVnTyls be filled up at a special general meeting to be called by ad-
such persons in vertisement by the Directors within one calendar month next
whose places after such vacancies shall occur, and every shareholder who
they may be g b a u be elected to such vacant office shall continue in office
BO long on| y as the person in whose place or stead he may be
had they ecu- elected would have been entitled to continue in office if such
tinned Direc- death, resignation, disqualification, or removal had not
tors.


happened. Provided, that in case the conduct of any If the conduct
Director shall at any time be such that his continuing in an y Erector
office shall appear to the five other Directors to be prejudicial by the “her*
to the interests of the Company, such other Directors shall Directors be
report the same to a general meeting of the shareholders, considered pre-
which meeting shall determine whether such Director shall judicid to the
continue in office. SSSL**
general meet-
ing to deter-
mine if he shall
continue in
office.
XXXVI. That no shareholder after the first election of Candidates for
Directors shall be capable of being elected a Director unless Director to
he shall have notified in writing to the Board of Directors give u days’
at least fourteen days previous to the day of election his notice previous
willingness to act as Director in the event of his being th® da y of
elected, and the names of such candidates shall be by the Namesof can-
Directors forthwith published in one local and one Sydney didates to be
newspaper for the information of the shareholders. published by
the Directors.
XXXVII. That the Directors be allowed the sum of t 0 each Dmec-
twenty shillings each out of the funds of the Company upon tor for his at-
every meeting of the Board at which they shall respectively tendance at
attend, provided they respectively be present at such meeting t i^° ard
within a quarter of an hour from the taking of the chair, and
shall remain at such meeting until the adjournment thereof, not in the
Provided also, that such payments to the Directors shall whole to exceed
not exceed in the whole the sum of .£3OO in any one year £3OO P er an "
among all the Directors. Provided also, that if any ifoirector
Director do not attend at any one meeting of the Board of continue
Directors for two consecutive months he shall be considered a bsent for two
as no longer a Director, and his office shall cease and mont . hB his
become vacant, unless it shall appear to the majority of the ghSTbecome
other Directors that such absence has been caused by illness vacant, unless
or other unavoidable circumstances, and has not been detri- he can show
mental to the Company. justification for
such absence.
XXXVIII. That the Directors shall appoint the solicitor Directors to
and bankers of the Company, and shall and may engage, a Ppoint solici-
employ, and take all agents, clerks, and other officers, tor ’ hankers,
• _ ® * * * accents cpr—
apprentices, servants, and persons whomsoever, as they may v ® ntg * and
consider necessary for the management and carrying on others,
the affairs of the Company, who shall be removed
and replaced by the Directors from time to time,


and be paid and remunerated by them as they shall see fit,
To take seeuri- tlie Directors being hereby required to take such security or
ties for per- guarantee for the due and faithful discharge and perform-
formance of ance of any duty or business by any person so employed by
duties. them as to the said Directors may seem meet, and being
hereby authorised, with or without premium, to execute any
apprenticeship indenture and to covenant and instruct any
To take ap- such apprentice in any branch or branches of the Company’s
prentices. business.
To sue at law XXXIX. That the Directors for the time being shall and
or m equity. ma y order the commencement, prosecution, and defence, and
enter or cause to be entered appearances, and accept of make
and deliver any declaration, pleadings, or other proceed-
ings, of any action or actions, suit or suits, at law or in
equity, for or in respect of any sum or sums of money, debts,
dues, titles, or breaches of covenants, claims or demands
whatsoever, of or concerning the affairs of the Company, or
order the abatement, discontinuance, or nonsuit thereof, and
To take pro- also present any petition to obtain a fiat in insolvency, or
advene* ta^6 P r °ceedings, or do any act necessary under the
Insolvent Acts or any future act or acts for relief of creditors
or debtors, against any person whomsoever, whether a mem-
ami in Crimi- her of the Company or not, and also to prefer any indictment
nal Court. or cr j m i na | proceeding on behalf of the Company for
stealing or embezzling any money, effects, securities, or other
property of the Company, and for any fraud, crime, or
offence, committed or attempted against the Company, and
To compound also compound any action, suit, or proceeding, and execute
actions and an y j ee( j 0 f composition or assignment for benefit of credi-
es' . tors, and also to refer disputes and differences between the
arbi Company and any other person whomsoever, whether a
t ration? member of the Company or not, to arbitration, either before
or after action commenced, and for that purpose to enter
bondsorpowers into an( * execute bonds, power or powers of attorney, for the
of attorney, recovery of any monies due to the Company, to act on behalf
of the Company, or which may be necessary to effectuate the
proceeds tothe P ur P oses of these presents, and the monies to be recovered
credit of the in any such action, suit, or proceeding to be carried to and
Company. form part of the funds of the said Company.
At every half- XL. That at the first meeting of shareholders, and at
yearly general every half yearly general meeting subsequently held by the
Auditors tobe Company, two Auditors, to be taken from the shareholders,
appointed, to shall be appointed by the shareholders to inspect and audit
report on the the accounts, and the said Auditors are hereby authorised to
monetary examine into and report on the monetary state and condition
affairs of the 0 p t } ie a ff a j rs 0 f the Company, and for that purpose to


have full access to all books, accounts, and other documents Company at
connected with the Company, and also to employ such
clerks, officers, and servants of the Company as they may me
find necessary in making such examination or preparing
such report, which report shall be signed by the Auditors
and delivered to the shareholders at their next half yearly
general meeting. Provided always, that it shall be
competent for any general meeting of shareholders to direct Any general
the said Auditors to examine and report as aforesaid, and meeting may at
that it shall be lawful for any such meeting reasonably to time
remunerate such auditors for their loss of time, care, and
j *i. • * 1 * ' ' IU cAallllllc cUIU
diligence in the matter entrusted to them. report.
XLI. That the Directors shall cause all necessary and Directors to
proper books of account to be provided and kept at the cause proper
offices of the Company, and they shall cause to be made and h°°h 3 to he
written therein fair, explicit, and true entries of all the ker)t ‘
transactions, business matters, and things, and of all receipts,
payments, and dealing, which from time to time shall be
made, done, or effected by or on behalf of the Company,
and all profits, gain, or loss arising therefrom, and also an
account of all dealings and investments which shall be made
with or of the capital of the Company, and how the same from
time to time may have been paid or applied, and also entries
of all such other matters and things as are usually written
and entered into books of account kept by persons or Com-
panies engaged in concerns of a nature similar to the con-
cerns of the Company hereby established, all which books
of account shall remain at the offices of the Company, and
be kept in a perfect state, so that the affairs of the Company
may at any time be considered, and their true state and con-
dition by such books made to appear.
XLII. That all cheques, bills of exchange, promissory All cheques,
notes, and all other negotiable securities, in name or on account &c., to be
of the Company, shall be signed, drawn, or endorsed at a s 'o ne at e .
meeting of the Board of Directors by the Chairman for the Board 1 by°reso-
time being, or any two of the Directors then present and lution’thereof,
authorised thereto by resolution or order of the Board, and
that no bill, note, or negotiable security, signed, drawn, or
indorsed in any other manner than as aforesaid shall be
binding on the Company, and each of the shareholders doth Disclaimer bv
hereby for himself, his executors, administrators, and assigns, shareholders*of
expressly renounce and disclaim all right and title to sign, their right to
draw, accept, or indorse any bill, note, bond, or negotiable
security whatsoever, in the name of the Company, or to fndmdual acts,
contract any engagement or engagements so as to bind,
charge, or prejudicially affect the same.


Board of Direc- XLTII. That the Directors shall meet at the Company's
ever mT$ °® ce f° r *be despatch of business once every fourteen days at
Boole of pro- * l east - That a book of proceedings shall be kept, showing
ceedings to be the names of the Directors present, and all orders, resolu-
bept, tions, or business brought before or transacted at each
ti nd r!f" e(l meeting, which book shall be signed by the Chairman for
and *be me being of each meeting of the Board, and such book
dence as be- so signed shall be kept by the Directors, and shall as between
tween the the members of the Company be conclusive evidence and
shareholders proof of all matters and things therein set forth as ordered,
L a "entfd settled, done, or proposed,
therein.
Power to Direc- XLIV. That the Directors shall and lawfully may from
tors to make time to t j me ma k e suc h rules, provisions, orders, and regula-
rules and rep’u* i 71 7 ' .
lations for & tlQ ns, respecting the government, carrying on, and manage-
managementof ment of the affairs and business of the Company, as they
the Company’s shall deem expedient, provided the same be not repugnant to
affairs. the Deed of Settlement.
Directors to XLV. That each Director shall immediately, or within
execute decla- thirty days next after his election, execute a deed in trust to
ra ion o rust. t j lo e g* ect a q properties vested in him as one of the
Directors of the Company are held by him in trust only for
tQ B directorate an( * on behalf and benefit of the Company ; and it shall be
execute deeds. lawful for the Directors, or any three of them, the Chairman
of the Board for the time being being one, to sign, seal, and
execute all deeds and other instruments for carrying out the
business and affairs of the Company.
Authority to XLYI. That the Directors of the said Company for the
Directors to time being shall have power to invest such of the receipts
funds tSUrp US and funds of the Company as may not be required to meet
the ordinary expenses thereof in the purchase of Government
securities, or on first mortgages of freehold property in the
colony of New South Wales. Provided no advance shall
be made on mortgage of any freehold property to more than
one half of the value of the property so mortgaged.
Half-yearly XLVII. That general meetings of shareholders of the
meetings of Company shall be convened and holden, at such place
shareholders to j n jj unter Ri ve r District as the Directors may appoint,
on the first Monday in the month of August, and the first
February. Monday in the month of February, or as soon thereafter as
The meeting in p oSS ible or practicable, in each and every year during the
August to be cont i nuance 0 f the Company, the meeting to be held in the
meeting. month of August being considered and held to be the annual
meeting of the Company j and the Directors shall cause at


least fourteen days’ previous notice of such general meetings
to be given by advertisement in the local newspapers, stating
the business to be brought before such meeting, and all
qualified shareholders shall have power and authority to
vote and decide upon all such matters as by virtue of the
Deed of Settlement shall be then brought before them.
Provided that all such general and special meetings shall
be presided over by the Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chairman of
for the time being, or in his absence by one of the Directors ect ° o^. r s d t Q
to be chosen by the meeting, and in case of the absence of p res id e .
all the Directors, then by such other qualified shareholder as
may be chosen by the meeting, who may take part in any
discussion, and shall in case of equality of votes in any
matter have the casting vote.
XLVIII. That if at any meeting of the Company, whether Twelve quali-
annual, general, special, or by adjournment, twelve s^are " con-
holders qualified to vote shall not assemble and proceed to st j tute meet-
business within one hour from the time fixed for holding the i n g.
same, no business shall be discussed or entered upon; but
in such case there shall be another meeting of the
Company, at the same place and on the same day and hour
fourteen days thereafter, and so from time to time as often as
the same shall happen until at some meeting there shall be
present such number of duly qualified shareholders as before
named, when the meeting, notwithstanding some of the
shareholders may depart after the resolution appointing the
Chairman shall have been moved, shall be fully competent
to transact business.
XLIX. That previous to each half yearly meeting of The Directors
the Company the Directors shall draw up a report of the po r \ U^each"
affairs of the Company and the business transactions during half-yearly
the previous half year, and submit the same to such meeting meeting, and
for examination and approval, and shall in such report show show what
what amount of dividend the Directors recommend to be end K ,
. , r . . i recommended
paid tor the previous halt year. hy them
L. That twice in every year, beginning from the first half Replacement of
year after the commencement of the trading of the Com- funda.
pany’s boats in the colony, such proportion of the net profits
made by the Company during the preceding half year as
the Board of Directors for the time being may think
requisite, but not exceeding a fourth part thereof, shall be
retained and form part of a fund to be called the “ Replace-
ment Fund,” and the residue of such net profits, or so much
as any half yeaely meeting of the shareholders may determine,
shall be proportionally divided among the shareholders as


aforesaid : Provided always, that if the said Company
insure their own vessels, cargoes, stores, or premises, from
loss or damage by fire, tempest, or other accident, it shall
be lawful for the Directors to debit the Company with the
fair and average premium for such insurances, and to carry
the same to the “Replacement Fund” before ascertaining
the net profits aforesaid.
Replacement LI. That the said “ Replacement Fund” shall be accu-
Fund to accu- rnulated for the purpose of meeting any extraordinary
contingencies! demands, contingencies, or losses, and wear and tear, and
be applied to that purpose by any general meeting of the
shareholders, and in the mean time may be invested as
such 6 fund IDVeSt hereinbefore directed as to the investment of funds, and
When amount- w ben and so often as such accumulation shall amount to
ing to J of the one-third of the paid up capital of the Company, the excess
capital, surplus beyond that sum may either be suffered still to accumulate
priated PPr °' P ur P oses aforesaid, or be invested in the purchase of
additional steam boats, or be divided amongst the share-
holders by way of bonus to the dividends, as such general
Such fund may meeting may decide. Provided always, that if before
purchase of “ Replacement Fund” shall amount to one-third of the
new boats be- paid U P capital of the Company it shall appear to any such
fore the same general or special meeting of shareholders that any one of
shall amount the boats of the Company then trading should be replaced
the capital** a new boat, it shall be lawful for such meeting to appro-
tdl3 ‘ ' priate the whole or any portion of such fund to the purchase
of such new boat.
Dividends to LIT. That the Directors shall by public advertisement
andpa!d tlSBd announc c the amount of dividend after the same shall have
within 21 days, been agreed to, and shall within twenty-one days next after
every meeting at which any dividend shall have been deter-
mined upon by the shareholders cause the same dividend to
be divided amongst and paid to the shareholders respectively,
according to the number of their shares; but no shareholder
shall be entitled to receive any dividend in respect of any
share or shares held by him, her, or them, on which any
debt to or lien of the Company may be chargeable.
Unclaimed LIII. That all dividends which may not be demanded
within six calendar months next after the same respectively
shall become payable shall be passed to an account called
“the Unclaimed Dividend Fund,” and all dividends passed
to the “ Unclaimed Dividend Fund” shall, when duly
called for, be paid thereout, but without interest on the
same.


LIY. That the Directors shall have power to call special Directors era-
general meetings of the shareholders for such purposes, and powered to call
to be held at such times and places, as they may think ®P^'^J? eneral
proper, and the Directors shall cause fourteen days’ previous niee lngB ‘
notice of every such special meeting to be given by adver-
tisement inserted in one newspaper published at Maitland
and one at Sydney, and if they think necessary by letter
addressed to each shareholder ; and in every such notice the
object or objects of such meeting shall be fully stated.
LV. That twenty shareholders, holding in the aggregate Twenty share-
not less than two hundred and fifty shares in the said Com- holders (hold-
pany, may at any time or times, by writing under their in g 2so shares)
hands addressed to the Directors, and left at the head or t 0
principal office of the Company, require the Directors to generaTmeet-
call a special general meeting of the shareholders, to be mgs.
holden at the usual place of meeting in the Hunter River
District, so that such requisition fully express the object or
objects for which such special general meeting is required to
be called, and so that such requisition be left as aforesaid at
least twenty-one days before the time named therein for the
meeting to be holden ; otherwise it shall not be incumbent
on the Directors to take notice of any such requisition ; and
in case the Directors shall refuse or neglect to comply with
such requisition for fourteen days after the same shall have
been left as aforesaid, the shareholders subscribing such
requisition may call such meeting, to be holden at the place
aforesaid, by giving fourteen days’ notice thereof in one
newspaper published in Maitland and one published in
Sydney as aforesaid, and every such advertisement shall
fully express the objects of such general special meeting,
and the day, hour, and place for holding the same, and also
the delivery of the requisition to or for the Directors, and
their refusal or neglect to call such special general meeting,
and shall also contain the names of the shareholders sub-
scribing such requisition, and all acts of the shareholders at
such special general meeting shall be as valid, with respect to
the matters specified in such notice, as if the same had been
done at any annual or other general meeting of the Com-
pany ; but no business shall be transacted at any special
general meeting other than that for which it shall have been
expressly called.
LVI. That it shall be competent for any such general Such special
meeting to repeal all or any of the regulations which subse- g enera l meet-
quently to the date of these presents may be made by the jj B . B e “P OW ’ er *
Directors affecting tlie prosperity or concerns of the Com- and Lu-
pany, and to make any new laws or regulations for better lotions, &c.


managing the Company and conducting the business affairs
and concerns thereof, and to alter or repeal any of the
existing laws or regulations thereof, which new laws and
regulations shall be as binding and effectual to all intents
and purposes as if the same were contained in these presents.
If at any time LVII. That if it shall happen at any time during the
it be found continuance of this co-partnership that it be found one-half
up & capital P has P U P capital shall have been lost, by misfortune or
been lost, Di- otherwise, then and in such case the Directors for the time
rectors com- being shall be obliged to call a special general meeting of
pelled to call a t h e shareholders (pursuant to the directions for calling special
meetfnoP g meetings) to determine whether the said Company
cide as°to the shall be wound up or whether it shall continue, and if it shall
dissolution of be determined at such meeting as aforesaid that the same
the Company. b e wound up and closed, then the said Directors shall with
all convenient speed and dispatch wind up and close the
accounts and affairs of the said Company as hereinafter
mentioned.
At all meet- LVIII. That at every meeting of the shareholders of the
ings questions Company all motions, questions, and propositions which shall
dedded^b ien submitted f° r determination thereof shall be pri-
show of bands warily decided by a show of hands by a majority in number
* of the qualified shareholders then and there personally pre-
and finally by sent; but if one or more shareholders present at such meeting
ballot if de- qualified to vote shall be dissatisfied with such show of hands,
manded. they ma y d eraanc l a ballot upon any motion, question, or
proposition depending before such meeting, and such ballot,
if required, but not otherwise, shall be had and taken accord-
ingly, and upon such ballot every shareholder present and
qualified to vote may deposit in a balloting box to be pro-
vided for that purpose, and to be placed upon a table in front
of the Chairman, a paper upon which shall be written the
number of votes which the shareholder depositing the same
shall claim to have, either in his own right or as proxy or
attorney, but distinguishing the same, and also his assent to or
dissent from the motion, question, or proposition then before
the meeting; and three of the shareholders shall be chosen
by majority in number of the shareholders present as scruti-
neers, and retire and investigate and report to the meeting, or
any adjournment thereof, the result of such ballot, and the
same result shall be declared by the Chairman, and shall be
entered in the book of proceedings as the decision of the
Shareholders’ meetin S ordin g l y-
book of pro- JJX. That the orders, resolutions, and proceedings of
ceedmgs to e eyer y me eting 0 f shareholders shall be entered in a book to
an§ signed by be kept for that purpose, and when so entered be signed by


the Chairman of such meeting, and the same when so Chairman,
entered and signed shall, as between the shareholders, be and to be evi-
conclusive evidence of all such orders, resolutions, and pro-
ceedings, and that the person signing the same as Chairman members of the
was duly elected as such. Company of all
things duly
entered there-
LX. That no Director or other officer or servant of the Officers of the
said Company, his or their heirs, executors, or adminis- Company to be
trators, shall be charged or chargeable with any monies, fiis
goods, chattels, credits, and effects, other than he or they own act 3 or
respectively shall receive, and shall in no case be answerable default,
or responsible for the acts of each other, but each and every
of them for his respective acts and deeds only, nor shall any
of them be answerable for any rise or fall in the price of the
effects, or the insufficiency or deficiency in title or value of
any mortgages or other securities in or upon which any
portion of the capital of the Company may have been in-
vested, nor for any loss, misfortune, or damage which may
happen in the execution of the aforesaid offices and trusts,
except the same shall be occasioned by wilful default or
neglect.
LXI. That the Directors and other officers for the time Officers indem-
being of the said Company shall from time to time and at all nified from
times be saved harmless and indemnified by the Company * OB8 ’
from and against (and it shall be the duty of the Directors
as such out of the estate and effects of the said Company
being under their control to replace and pay) all costs,
charges, loss, damages, and expenses which they or any of
them may incur, sustain, or be put unto, in and about the
execution and discharge of their respective duties and offices,
or in and about any action, suit, or proceeding, either at law
or in equity, in which they or any of them shall or may,
whilst acting in pursuance of these presents, be concerned, unless occa-
or by reason thereof become damnified, unless the same shall Bioned b J their
be sustained or incurred by reason of the wilful act, neglect, ° r
or default of the parties sustaining or incurring the same Qr un jg Sg
respectively, or unless such parties shall have neglected or
declined to submit the management or prosecution or defence proceedings to
of any such action or proceeding to the Board of Directors the Board of
of the said Company. Directors.
LXII. That whenever two-thirds of the proprietors in Two-thirds in
number and value, at a special general meeting convened for nurab er and
that purpose (of which meeting at least thirty days’ previous Shareholders
notice shall be given, stating the object thereof), shall deter- maj at a


special general mine that the Company shall be dissolved, that then and from
meeting dis- thenceforth the said Company shall stand dissolved, and the
S< any reetors for the time being shall then take such measures
for winding up and closing the concerns of the said Com-
pany, as the said Directors shall, in their discretion, consider
most advantageous and expedient.
On dissolution LXIII. That in case of a dissolution of the Company
of the Com- a n the lands, buildings, vessels, and other saleable property
behold, liabili- Company, shall be sold, and the monies to arise from
ties paid, and such sale, together with the other monies of the said Corn-
balance pany, shall (as soon as and immediately after the said
divided. Directors shall have paid and satisfied all claims and
demands upon the said Company and relieved them from all
debts and engagements) be divided amongst the several
members according to their respective interests.
Deed of Settle- LXIV. That these presents, and all and singular deeds,
ment, rules,and ru les, and regulations of the said Company, shall be deposited
be^openk) 8 ’ t 0 at °^ ce sa fo Company, or other secure place to be
inspection of appointed by the Directors, and shall at all times be open to
shareholders, the inspection and perusal of the several shareholders.
If any doubt LXV. That if any doubt shall hereafter arise as to the
arise as to the true mean i n g an( ] construction of any of the clauses and
clause in the provisions of this deed, or of any subsisting rule or regula-
Deed of Settle- tion of the said Company, the said Directors, either volun-
ment, &c., a tarily or upon the requisition of any twelve proprietors of
decide. manner before appointed for the purpose of expounding and
determining the same, and the sense and meaning given by
the majority of the proprietors at such meeting to any such
clause, rule, regulation, or provision, shall be deemed the
true sense and meaning thereof.
Act of Council LXVI. That the Directors shall forthwith apply for
j£ r be a PP lied and solicit such Act of Council as they may deem expedient
for the interests of the Company, and on obtaining such Act
shall and may submit the shareholders to such individual
liabilities as to their persons and properties as may be
imposed by way of condition for obtaining the said Act, and
may comply with any restrictions and conditions which the
Legislative Council may think fit to impose, notwithstanding
they may be at variance with any of the existing rules of
this Company, and shall and may pay and defray the cost
and expense of and incident to such application out of the
funds of the Company.


LXVII. That as it may be frequently necessary to Power of at-
transmit these presents for execution by shareholders, or for torney from
other purposes, to different places, and in order to guard shareholders to
against the consequences of loss or destruction of the same, o^te^Deed 0 ?/”
it hath been deemed expedient that two parts thereof, or Settlement,
duplicates of each other, should be prepared and executed;
and inasmuch as many of the persons who shall execute one
part of these presents may not execute the other part or
parts, it has been thought expedient, in order to preserve
entire conformity between the parts, to empower some person
as the attorney of the party who shall have executed one
part of this Deed to sign, seal, and deliver the other part or
parts in the name of the person whose personal signature and
execution shall not appear to the other part or parts : XotD,
therefore, tijis Enhentuw further toitncaaetf), that for
effectuating the purposes last aforesaid, each and every of
the said parties proprietors of the said Company whose per-
sonal signature shall not be subscribed to each part of this
Deed of Settlement doth hereby make, ordain, constitute,
and appoint Joseph Chambers, of Maitland, in the said
colony, gentleman, and also such other person as shall for
the time being be Chairman of the Board of Directors of
the Company, the lawful attorney and attorneys of him, her,
or them, the proprietor or proprietors who as the party or
parties to these presents shall have executed one part only of
the said Deed, and in the name and as the act and deed of
the same shareholder or shareholders, proprietor or pro-
prietors, to sign, seal, deliver and execute the duplicate or
counterpart of this present Deed of Settlement, he, she, or
they, the constituent or constituents, hereby declaring that
every duplicate or counterpart of this Deed so executed by
his, her, or their attorney or attorneys, or either of them,
shall be of the like force and effect as if executed by him,
her, or them, and hereby agreeing to ratify and confirm all
and whatsover such attorney or attorneys, or either of them,
shall lawfully do in the premises by virtue of this present
power and authority.
LXVIII. And lastly it is hereby declared and agreed by Declaration
and between the parties to these presents, that, notwithstand- that deed shall
ing the dates of the subscriptions of the respective parties ~ ake e ? ect
hereto, the contract shall be held to have commenced on the thereof 6 dat °
day of the date of these presents.
whereof the said parties to these presents
have hereunto set their hands and seals the day and year
first before written.




ACT OF COUNCIL.
ANNO DECIMO SEXTO VICTORIAS REGINAS.
By his Excellency Sir Charles Augustus Fitz
Roy , Knight Companion of the Royal
Hanoverian Guelphic Order , Governor-
General of her Majesty's Australian Pos-
sessions, and Captain-General and Gover-
nor-in-Chief of the Territory of New
South Wales and its Dependencies , and
Vice-Admiral of the same , with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council .
An Act to Incorporate the Proprietors of a
certain Company, called “ The Hunter
River New Steam Navigation Company,”
and for other purposes therein mentioned.
(Assented to 21st December, 1852.)
Whereas a Joint-Stock Company, called the Hunter River Preamble,
New Steam Navigation Company, has been lately established
at Maitland, in the colony of New South Wales, under and
subject to the rules, regulations, and provisions contained in
a certain Indenture or Deed of Settlement bearing date the
eighth day of September, one thousand eight hundred and
fifty-two, purporting to be a Deed of Settlement of the said
Company : And whereas by the said Indenture or Deed of
Settlement, the several parties thereto have respectively and
mutually covenanted and agreed to be, and continue (until
dissolved under the provisions in that behalf therein con^


Company
corporated
tained), a Joint-Stock Company, or Partnership, under the
name, style, and title of “ The Hunter River New Steam
Navigation Company/’ for the purpose of carrying on the
business of trading with steam and other vessels to and from
Morpeth and Sydney, in the said colony, and to and from
other ports and places, with full power to the Directors for
the time being of the Company to engage, hire, build, or
purchase, suitable premises for the carrying on of all such
operations and works, and from time to time to hire and em-
ploy all necessary agents, clerks, officers, apprentices, and
servants, and to pay salaries and wages to the same: And
whereas it was by the said Indenture or Deed of Settlement
further agreed that the capital of the Company should consist
of forty thousand pounds, to be contributed in four thousand
shares of ten pounds each, and of such further sum, not
exceeding the sum of one hundred thousand pounds, as a
majority in number and value of the shareholders,
for the time being, might determine, to be raised
by the creation and allotment or sale of new shares
of the like amount as therein provided: And whereas
by the said Indenture or Deed of Settlement provision
has been made for the payment of dividends and bonuses,
and for the disposal and application of the profits,
and also for the due management of the affairs of the said
Company: And whereas the said Company is desirous of
being incorporated accordingly, but subject to the provisions
hereinafter contained : Be it therefore enacted, by his Excel-
lency the Governor of New South Wales, with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council thereof, as follows:
I. Such, and so many, persons as have already become, or
at any time or times hereafter, shall or may, in the manner
provided by and subject to the rules, regulations, and pro-
visions contained in the said Indenture or Deed of Settle-
ment, become proprietors of shares of or in the capital, for
the time being of the said Company, shall, for the purposes
aforesaid, but subject nevertheless to the conditions, restric-
tions, regulations, and provisions hereinafter contained, be
one body politic and corporate, in name and in deed, by the
name of “ The Hunter River New Steam Navigation Com-
pany,” and by that name shall and may sue any person or
persons, body or bodies politic or corporate, whether a
member or members of the said Corporation or not; and
may be sued, implead, and be impleaded, in all Courts what-
soever, at law and in equity, and may prefer, lay, and pro-
secute any indictment, information, and prosecution against
any person or persons whatsoever, for any stealing, embez-
zlement, fraud, forgery, crime, or offence ; and in all indict-


merits, informations, and prosecutions, it shall be lawful to
state the money and goods, effects, bills, notes, securities, or
other property of the said Company, to be the money,
goods, effects, bills, notes, securities, or other property
of the said Corporation, and to designate the said
Company or Co-partnership by its corporate name, when-
ever for the purpose of any allegation of an intent to
defraud or otherwise however such designation shall be
necessary; and the said Corporation shall have perpetual
succession with a common seal, which may be altered,
varied, and changed from time to time, at the pleasure of the
said Corporation.
11. The several laws, rules, regulations, clauses, and Confirmation of
agreements contained in the said Indenture or Deed ofP rovisi J n 8 of
Settlement, or to be made under or by virtue or in pur- 0 ag ett b ®'
suance thereof, are, and shall be deemed and considered to laws * of the
be, and shall be the by-laws for the time being of the said Company, sub-
Corporation, save and except in so far as any of them are, this A °t
or shall or may be altered, varied, or repealed by, or are, or general
shall, or may be inconsistent or incompatible with, or re-
pugnant to, any of the provisions of this Act, or of any of
the laws or statutes now or hereafter to be in force in the
said colony; subject nevertheless to be, and the same may
be, amended, altered or repealed, either wholly or in part, in
the manner provided in and by the said Indenture or Deed
of Settlement, but no rule or by-law shall, on any account or
pretence whatsoever, be made by the said Corporation, either
under or by virtue of the said Indenture or Deed of Settle-
ment, or by this Act, in opposition to the general scope or
true intent and meaning of the said Indenture or Deed of
Settlement, or of this Act, or of any of the laws or statutes
in force for the time being in the said colony.
111. It shall be lawful for the said Corporation from time Increase of
to time, to extend or increase their capital for the time being, capital,
by the creation, allotment, and disposal of new shares, in the
manner specified and set forth, and subject to the rules, regu-
lations, and provisions, contained in the hereinbefore in part
recited Indenture or Deed of Settlement; but so nevertheless
that the total amount of all the new shares, to be so from
time to time created, shall not, together with the original
capital, exceed one hundred thousand pounds.
IV. The capital or joint stock for the time being, and all Capital and
the funds and property of the said Corporation, and the shares to be
several shares therein, and the profits and advantages to be P ers o na hy*


derived therefrom, shall be, and be deemed, personal estate,
and be transmissible accordingly, subject to the regulations
of the said Indenture or Deed of Settlement.
Corporation V. The Corporation shall not be bound in any manner,
notice trusts or an y trusts or equitable interests or demands affecting any
equitable in- share or shares of the capital, standing in the name of any
terests affect- person or persons, as the ostensible proprietor thereof, or be
lug shares, required to take any notice of such trusts or equitable inter-
ests or demands; but the receipt of the person or persons in
whose name or names the share shall stand in the books of
the Corporation, shall, notwithstanding such trusts or
equitable interests or demands, and notice thereof to the said
Corporation, be a good, valid, and conclusive discharge to
the Corporation, for or in respect of any dividend or other
money payable by the said Corporation, in respect of such
shares ; and a transfer of the said shares by the person or
persons in whose name or names such shares shall so stand,
shall, notwithstanding as aforesaid, be binding and conclusive,
as far as may concern the said Corporation, against all per-
sons claiming by virtue of such trusts or equitable interest
or demands: Provided always, that nothing herein contained
shall be deemed or taken to interfere with or abridge the
right and power of a Court of Equity to restrain the pay-
ment of any such dividend, or other money payable there-
after by the Corporation, in respect of any such shares, or
the transfer thereafter of any such shares, or to direct the
payment of such dividends or other money by the Corpora-
tion, or the transfer of such shares by the person or person*
in whose name or names they may stand, to such other per-
son or persons as such court may think fit.
Limited power yi. it shall be lawful for the said Corporation, notwith-
standin £ an y statute or law t 0 the contrary, and notwith-
o an s, c. gtan( 3i n g an y c ] a use or provision herein contained, to purchase,
take, hold, and enjoy to them and their successors, for any
estate, term of years, or interest, any houses, offices, build-
ings, lands, and other hereditaments, necessary or proper for
the purpose of managing, conducting, and carrying on the
affairs, concerns, and business of the said Corporation, and
also to take, hold, and enjoy, all houses, offices, buildings,
lands, and hereditaments held by the said Company, before
the passing of this Act, and also take and to hold, until the
same can can be advantageously disposed of, for the purpose
of reimbursement only, and not for profit, any lands, houses,
and other real estate’ which may be so taken by the said
Corporation, in satisfaction, liquidation, or discharge of any
debt due to the Corporation, or in security for any debt or


liability, bond fide incurred, or come under previously, and
not in anticipation or expectation of such security, but not
for any other purposes ; and to sell, convey, assign, assure,
and dispose of, such houses, offices, buildings, lands,
hereditaments, and other real estate, as occasion may
require.
VII. It shall and may be lawful to and for all and every Power to other
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, who are or persons to con-
shall be otherwise competent to grant, sell, alien and convey, tothTcor^ora 8
assure and dispose of, unto and to the use of the said Corpo- J° on> e orpora ’
ration, and their successors, for the purposes aforesaid, or
any of them, any such houses, offices, lands, hereditaments,
and other real estate, whatsoever, as aforesaid accordingly.
VIII. No dividend or bonus shall in any case be declared No dividend to
or paid out of the subscribed capital for the time being be taken out of
of the said Corporation, or otherwise than out of the net the capital, but
gains and profits of the business. from the profits
IX. In any action or suit to be brought by the said Provisions as to
Corporation against any proprietor or proprietors of any actions or suits
share or shares in the capital of the said Corporation, to f ? r , callsand in ’
recover any sum or sums of money, due and payable to the Bta m6n 8 *
said Corporation, for or by reason of any instalment or instal-
ments, call or calls, made by virtue of this Act, or of the
said Indenture or Deed of Settlement, it shall be sufficient for
the said Corporation to declare and allege the defendant or
defendants, being a proprietor or proprietors of such or so
many share or shares in the capital of the said Corporation,
is or are indebted to the said Corporation in such sum or
sums of money, as the instalment or instalments, call or
calls in arrear, shall amount to, for such and so many instal-
ment or instalments, call or calls, of such or so many sum or
sums of money upon such or so many share or shares
belonging to the said defendant or defendants (as the case
may be), whereby an action hath accrued to the said Corpo-
ration, without setting forth any special matter; and on
the trial of such action or suit it shall not be necessary to
prove how, or in what manner such instalment or instalments,
call or calls, became or were made payable, or any other
matter, except that the defendant or defendants, was or were
a holder or proprietor, or holders or proprietors, of one or
more share or shares in the capital of the said Corporation,
and that such instalment or instalments, call or calls, was or
were in fact due, and that the time fixed for the payment
thereof was given as is directed by the said Indenture or
Deed of Settlement, and the said Corporation shall there-
upon be entitled to recover what shall appear due.


Calls and in- X. Nothing herein contained shall prejudice, or be deemed
stalraents, con- prejudice, any instalment due, contract or other act, deed,
Made’done matter > or thing entered into, made, or done by the said
under the Deed Company, under, or by virtue of, the said Indenture or Deed
of Settlement of Settlement, before this Act shall come into operation, but
before this Act garae instalment, call, contract, act, deed, matter, or
tobeprejudiced thin g- shal ] ba as / al ' d and eff f tual > t 0 int , e " tS and PUr-
by it. poses, as if this Act had not been passed, and may be en-
forced in like manner, as if the said Company had been
incorporated before the same instalment, call, contract, act,
deed, matter, or thing had been made, entered into, or done.
Limit of liabi- xi. In the event of the assets of the said Corporation
htms. being insufficient to meet its engagements, then, and in that
case the shareholders respectively shall be responsible to the
amount of their subscribed shares only, in addition to such
subscribed shares.
In what mat- XII. It shall not be necessary to use the Coporate Seal
ter3 Corporate j n r€S p ect t 0 an y 0 f the ordinary business of the Company,
quired to to or for the appointment of an attorney or solicitor for the
used. prosecution or defence of any action, suit, or proceeding,
and any person duly authorised and empowed under the
Corporate Seal, may, without such Seal, execute any deed,
and do all such other acts, matters, and things as may be
required to be executed and done on behalf of the said Cor-
poration, and in conformity with the provisions of the Deed
of Settlement and of this Act.
Saving the XIII. Nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed to
rights of her affect or a p p i y t 0 atl y right, title, or interest of her Majesty,
S Bty ne a rsonB her heirs or successors, or of any body or bodies politic or
not mentioned corporate, or of any person or persons, except such bodies
n this Act. politic or corporate, and other persons, as are mentioned m
this Act, and claiming by, from, or under them.
CHARLES NICHOLSON,
Speaker.
Passed the Legislative Council, this tenth day I
of December, one thousand eight hundred V
and fifty-two. )
Wm. Macpheron,
Clerk of the Council.
In the name and on behalf of her Majesty , I assent to this
Act .
CHAS. A. FITZ ROY,
Governor General.
Gov. House Sydney , Dec. 21, 1852.


1508
02235726


