

t,tkj>au3U&
80. « .
HISTORICAL SKETCHES.
COLONIAL SERIES.
No. YI.-AUSTRALIA.
PUBLISHED BY
®ljc for tlj£ propagation of % Gospel in <#olll9ll parts,
19, DELAHAY STREET, WESTMINSTER, S.W.
1884.
PRICE ONE PENNY.


HISTORICAL SKETCHES.
AUSTRALIA.
Whatever of history Australia may have had in the countless
ages of its unrecorded past, the interest of the Englishman of to-day
in this colony, one of the many homes of his race in the Kew
World, dates from a comparatively modern period. Its first
colonization .by Englishmen was due to the difficulty found by
His Majesty’s Government, after the loss of the American Colonies
in 1783, in disposing of those on whom the sentence of transporta-
tion beyond the seas had been passed for offences against the
laws and liberties of their native land. The discovery by Captain
Cook about this period of the hitherto unknown and unexplored
continent of Australia came as a timely boon to England, who
saw that in its distance, its loneliness, and the natural advantages
along its thousand miles of coast, this new possession of the British
Crown fulfilled every requirement of a convict settlement. Enforced
expatriation in those days to an unknown land was compassed
about with more terrors than could invest it now, when there is
scarcely an island left in the remotest seas of the South Pacific
where a convict, if he could be sent there, would not find his coming
anticipated by the English trader or traveller. Even to these days
Botany Bay is a name which it appals the free-born Briton to
recall, for though transportation to Australia has long since been
a thing of the past, that exquisite landscape has scarcely yet
recovered the ancient glories of the name, which Sir Joseph Banks,
the eminent of Cook’s expedition, gave to it for the
surpassing beauty of its flora.


It was to this heaven upon earth that in May 1787 the first
cargo of those whose mission it seemed to be to convert it into a
hell was consigned by the English Government. The vessels of the
Royal Navy which conveyed them to their destination, consisted of
the Sirius frigate, the Supjrfy armed tender with six transports—
having on board 565 male and 192 female convicts, with a guard of
above 200 troops of the line. In these days of steam, it seems
strange to find the historian of the settlement record that “ under
the blessing of God,” the voyage of 15,000 miles was “happily
completed in eight months and one week,” the whole fleet being
safe at anchor on January 20, 1788. The duty of the State to
make any provision for spiritual ministrations to outcasts like
these was not recognised, and probably the thought of it, if enter-
tained at all, was dismissed by those in authority as a privilege to
which the unhappy people had forfeited all claim. But private
sympathy was able to obtain what official indifference had failed to
supply. Samuel Marsden, whose name will be for ever identified
with Australia and New Zealand as chaplain from 1794 to his
death in 1838, records that a friend of his own represented strongly
the hardship of cutting off the exiles of 1787 from all means of
grace, and the result of his benevolent action was the appointment
of one chaplain, Mr. Johnson, to the convoy. Upon landing, the
authorities soon found that Botany Bay, beautiful as it was, was
deficient in several essentials, notably the supply of water, for the
settlement of the convicts. The commander of the party, Captain
Philip, who had been appointed Governor of the new colony,
proceeded along the coast and took occasion to visit a small inlet,
marked on Captain Cook’s chart as a hoat-harbour and called after
the name of the sailor who first discovered it, Port Jackson. Here,
much to his surprise, he found himself in a harbour large enough to
hold all England’s navy, navigable for men-of-war fifteen miles from
its mouth, and sheltered from every wind by numerous coves and
headlands. Here was established the first settlement on the banks
of Sydney Cove, where now a city, with its churches, banks, and
public offices, its warehouses and wharves, stands proudly forth amid a
population of 238,000 souls, a witness to the enterprise of the Anglo-
Saxon race, and also to the Church’s inherent power to develop her
strength under new conditions. Then we hear on the self-same spot
v.: the stillness and tranquillity “ of that thick wood which was then
for the first time interrupted by the rude sound of the labourer’s


axe, and the downfall of its ancient inhabitants, a stillness and
tranquillity which were from that day to give place to the hoise of
labour, the confusion of camps and towns, and the busy hum of its
new possessors.” »
The flag of England was at once hoisted on the heights, and the
health of King George 111., with success to the new colony, was
“ drunk with all the honours ” ; but no religious ceremony seems to
have consecrated the proceedings of a day so memorable in the annals
of England, Nor, while the construction of barracks, prisons, and
official residences was immediately begun, were any steps taken to
provide for the decent performance of Divine worship, and it was
not until six years after the landing, that Mr. Johnson was able to
perform his ministrations except in the open air “ wherever he
could find a shady spot.” Well might a Roman priest who dis-
embarked from a Spanish ship which visited the harbour exclaim,
“ If my country had settled this place, before any house for man we
should have built a house for the Living God.”
It seems to have been considered sufficient for the safe custody
of the convicts thus expatriated to turn them adrift inland, on the
assumption that the natural obstacles to escape would insure
their continuance in a state of bondage ; but soon it came to pass
that they were constantly decamping into the bush, or starting off,
as one party of Irish convicts did, northwards, in the vain hope of
reaching China. The authorities therefore cast about to find some
spot where such facilities for escape could not exist, and Norfolk
Island was accordingly selected for the next consignments from
England. Mr. Johnson took the first opportunity of following
them with his ministrations. In 1791 the number of convicts in
the colony had risen to 3,500 out of a total white population of
5,000. But still Mr. Johnson remained the sole representative of
England’s Church. At his own expense in 1793 this devoted
servant of the Cross had built and opened the first edifice in
Australia, to which the name of church could properly be given,
and it was not until 1800 that Governor Hunter erected a permanent
church at Paramatta, and laid the foundation of another, afterwards
St. Philip’s, Sydney. In 1794, the loneliness of Mr. Johnson’s
position was relieved by the appointment of Mr. Marsden as his
colleague, and when in 1800, Mr Johnson returned to England,
Mr. Marsden was for seven years more left as the only clergyman
in charge of the colonial population now numbered by thousands.


It is true that he was not the sole representative of religion. A
Roman Catholic priest had been transported, and the Governor
set him free with the official notice that he would thus be enabled
“ to exercise his clerical functions ” once in three weeks at Sydney,
Paramatta, and Hawksbury. It is recorded how at one time the
convicts of that communion had for their only consolation in the
wilderness a consecrated wafer left with a Roman Catholic of
Sydney, round which “ these men of sorrow were wont to assemble,
there to bow down and offer up their prayers and receive
consolation in their misery—no voice but the silent one of faith,
not a priest of their religion within 10,000 miles.”
But it was yet to be some years before the dawn of a brighter
day was first to appear above the horizon of this dark continent.
In 1808 Mr., afterwards Archdeacon, Cowper went out as Assistant
Chaplain. In 1817, five chaplains were commissioned to minister
to a population of 17,000 souls, of whom 7,000 were convicts. In
1833 this population had risen to 61,000, which included 18,000
Protestant convicts, who, with the masters to whom they had been
assigned, were gradually developing the internal resources of
the colony.
It was in 1795 that the S.P.G. had first commenced its connection
with Australia by the appointment of two schoolmasters, who were
soon followed by a clergyman. It was reserved, however, for one
man of remarkable gifts, Mr. Broughton, to bring home first to
the awakened conscience of England, her responsibilities to those
whom she was sending in such large numbers across the seas. Free
immigration had, as of course, followed quickly upon the system
of transportation, and the Duke of Wellington had seen in
Mr. Broughton, as Curate of Farnham, those qualities which to
his keen eye and wide experience of men, marked him as a bom
leader in such a Christian enterprise. When Mr. Broughton sought
an interview with the duke at Strathfieldsaye, to announce his
readiness to accept the office of Archdeacon of New South Wales,
the duke replied, “ I don’t desire so speedy a determination. If
in my profession indeed a man is desired to go to-morrow morning
to the other side of the world, it is better he should go to-morrow
or not at all.” The duke’s pregnant sentence “They must have
a Church” showed that England’s rulers were at last sensible of
their duty to those whom either by force or of their own free will
she had sent out to colonise the vast Australian Continent.


In the letters patent originally constituting the See of Calcutta,
Australia had been included within the jurisdiction of that llishop
from whom it could in the nature of things never receive any
spiritual oversight. The ecclesiastical arrangements under which
Archdeacon Broughton went out in 1829, were graphically described
by him at a later period when addressing a meeting in Herts, a few
weeks before his death in 1853 :
“ I cannot give you,” he said, “a better idea of the size of the Archdeaconry ot
New South Wales, than by asking yod to imagine your own Archdeacon having
one church at St. Alban’s, another in Denmark, another at Constantinople, while
the Bishop should be at Calcutta, hardly more distant from England than from
many parts of the Archdeaconry of Australia.”
After spending five years from 1829 to 1834 in visiting all the
settlements within his jurisdiction, and in efforts to induce the
colonists and the Government to aid in the erection of churches and
schools, and devoting also what time he could spare to the
preparation of a grammar of the aboriginal dialects, Archdeacon
Broughton returned to England in 1834 to make a vigorous appeal
to the mother country and to its Church for aid. Public opinion
was successfully aroused at home, and the S.P.G. and S.P.C.K.
cordially voted grants, which, together with the gifts of private
benevolence, amounted to £13,000. But the most important x-esult
of his visit to England was that the Church and State co-operated
to found a See in Australia, and in February, 1836, Archdeacon
Broughton, who had nobly earned the honour of being its first
Bishop, was consecrated by Archbishop Howley, as Bishop of
Australia, Immediately on his return to the colony, the Bishop
set himself with characteristic vigour to the great work before him.
St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney, was begun. He took a leading
part in the Legislative Council, on the great question of State
education, and he visited not only his own diocese proper but also
Tasmania and New Zealand, though neither was included in his
letters patent. To both of these appendages of his vast diocese,
the Colonial Bishoprics Council, which was established in 1840,
devoted its earliest attention, and Bishop Broughton was greatly
cheered in his work in the Antipodes by the consecration ’of Bishop
Selwyn to New Zealand in 1841, and of Bishop Nixon to Tasmania
in 1842. In 1847, Bishop Broughton was privileged to see a further
subdivision of his original diocese. He surrendered one-fourth of
his income towards the endowment of other sees, and on St. Peter’s


Day in that year the first Bishops of Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Newcastle were consecrated in Westminster Abbey, Bishop
Broughton being at the same time created by royal letters patent
Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of Australia and Tasmania.
This great prelate died in 1853. He left 150 clergymen where he
had found twelve, and he had seen his diocese divided into five.
There is no more significant proof of the strides by which
Australia was rapidly marching on towards an assertion of her own
dignity and importance, than the fact that in 1840, in deference to
her own remonstrances she ceased to be a penal colony, and
England no longer sent out the dregs and scum of her own
dangerous classes as the instruments of colonisation. Australia had
now become an important member of England’s colonial system.
Her unrivalled pasturage, the large flocks and herds which were
thus fed without an effort on the part of their owners on her
thousand plains and valleys, and her capacity to export wool in
sufficient volume to supply all the known world, now tempted
to her shores the capitalist as well as those sons of England whose
only capital was their power of work and the inherent enterprise
of their race. In less than half a century after the first convict
touched her shores in 1797, she had grown into a dependency
which bids fair, if her progress continues at the same rate, to
develop into one of the great powers of the world, and then it may
be that the New World will be “ called in to redress the balance of
the Old ” in a sense never dreamed of in Burke’s philosophy.
Hereafter then we have to record the life of colonists who were no
longer the refuse of the mother country, but who numbered in their
ranks some of the choicest and noblest of her sons, and who carried
with them the Church of their fathers to transplant it in a freer
atmosphere, and with no burdens upon her more grievous to be
borne than what her faithful sons might decide in solemn council
to impose.
The task of organising the Church on the purely voluntary
principle was at once laid upon the Bishop of Adelaide. That was
the only diocese in Australia, vrhich from its earliest days derived
no portion of its support from either imperial or colonial funds.
Among the first measures passed by both houses of the legislature
on the foundation of the colony, was one for abolishing State
aid to any religious denomination. The S.P.G. was making in
1856 a grant of £SOO per annum, with the view of eliciting local


contributions. Bishop Short undertook long journeys on horseback
in “ the bush ” and ministered to the scattered squatters who had
settled wherever they found good pasturage for their flocks. But
he was perplexed how to maintain out of the offerings of the people
even the small staff of twenty-four clergy, who then were almost
alone in the land as ministers of religion.
“Without partial endowment,” said Bishop Short, “the voluntary principle
wall and does fail. During the early stages of a Colonial diocese the Society must
aid the development of the self-supporting principle hy annual grants if the Church
of England is to take root. Our people when they arrive have to learn the first
principle of giving for the sake of religious ordinances. The Church endowments
at home have absolutely killed the idea. It is new and strange to them.”
And the Bishop of Melbourne, in 1858, repeated the same story —
although in that diocese a grant from the Colonial Legislature made
it not absolutely dependent upon the voluntary principle.
“My object,” wrote the Bishop, “is with the Divine help to establish two
principles in the church of this diocese, viz : —that all the members should
contribute something towards its maintenance and extension, and further,nthat
they who really love the Lord should contribute in proportion to their means.
But the position of the Church in England, the want of a sense of responsibility
towards it among the great body of people there, and the niggardly subscriptions
of the wealthier members, areagreat hindrance to us. Every newimmigrant requires
to be taught that; as a Churchman he has certain responsibilities which he will be
expected to acknowledge and to act upon, and that he must not depend for the
ministry of the Gospel any more than for his food and clothing upon the charity
of others. This is a lesson that Englishmen are very slow to learn. Moreover,
we complain that when our wealthier colonists return from a visit to England they
show the effect of the bad example which is set them there in the reduced amount
of their contributions to all Church purposes. ”
The Bishop of Newcastle had found the same practical difficulty,
but still the contributions to the Diocesan Church Society showed a
'steady advance year by year, having risen from £531 in 1851 to
£5,323 in 1856. The Bishop’s unwearied activity in visiting the
most distant and scattered settlements of his vast diocese was
acknowledged by the Presbyterian body at their Synod. It was
proposed and carried unanimously, that inasmuch as the visitations
of the Bishop of Newcastle were evidently attended with the most
beneficial results to his own communion, some similar mode of
visitation should as soon as possible be carried out in their own
body—an involuntary tribute to the virtues of episcopacy not often
so solemnly recorded by Presbyterians, who probably failed to see
any humour in it.
The severe labours of the Bishops of Adelaide and Newcastle
involving long cross-country rides of 1,000 or 1,500 miles each were


materially relieved when in 1857 the diocese of Perth was formed
out of Adelaide, and that of Brisbane in 1859 from Newcastle.
The discovery of gold in Australia about this period brought to
its shores a horde of reckless adventxxrers, who added to the difficulties
of the Church, which could not pass them by, though its labours in
their behalf were not acknowledged by the offering to it of any
substantial part of their gains. In visiting the gold fields and
holding services, in ministering in all the ou'lying districts of the
see of Sydney, not yet included in any new diocese, the Church in
Australia owed her knowledge of the vast field yet uncultivated to
the energy and perseverance of the Bishop of Sydney’s chaplain,
the Rev. E. Synge. It was nothing uncommon on his part to start
on an itinerating journey in the bush for nine months at a time,
and to travel 5,000 miles with only such appliances of civilisation
as a settler’s rough welcome could supply to vary the monotony of
camping out in the open. His diaries of that period record
adventures, which appear now almost invested with the semblance
of romance. He tells how he passed from station to station with
no road or track, “ steering only by the compass N.N.E. over a wild
open plain,” where kangaroos and emus were the only companions
of his solitude, and his sole reward at the end of the day was to
hold a short service in wool sheds containing sometimes the fleeces
of 40,000 sheep, among people to whom he was the first to minister
for sixteen years and more. Nor was his nightly rest under the open
canopy of heaven made more secure by the occasional presence after
nightfall of a tribe of blacks, dancing a “corobbery” in front of
his camp-fire. One result of Mr. Synge’s itinerations was the
subdivision in 1863 of the diocese of Sydney by the formation of
the diocese of Goulburn, and his diocesan, Bishop Barker, acknow-
ledged his great obligations to Mr. Synge, as well as to the S.P.G.,
which had furnished his stipend. In 1863 the Bishop was able to
record that, since his succession to Bishop Broughton in 1854,
eighty-eight new churches and school-churches had been opened for
Divine service, while the cathedral, which had been begun by his
predecessor, was making rapid progress towards completion. The
Sydney Church Society founded in 1856 had raised in five years
£44,000, whereby thirty-one additional clergy were maintained, and
the number of clergy had now risen to ninety-two, while a
theological college—called after its munificent founder, Mr, Moore,
a wealthy colonist —was providing for all Australia a regular supply


of candidates for Holy Orders, greatly to the satisfaction of tlie
several Bishops, who saw in it the promise of an indigenous-clergy,
and of thus becoming independent of the Mother Church for a
supply of the means of grace.
“ Without Moore College, I should be comparatively helpless,”
wrote the Bishop of Sydney on his return to Australia after a
visit to England in 1863. The newly appointed Bishops of
Goulburn and Brisbane had visited Sydney with the Bishop of
Newcastle and Bishop Patteson for a Conference, in 1864, on the
prospects of the Church in Australia under the new development of
subdivided dioceses, and also with the view of its taking the
Melanesian Mission under its special care, as the Missionary branch
of the Australasian Church. The S.P.G. responded to the united
appeal of the Bishops for grants in aid of the newly-formed
dioceses, while the Bishop of Newcastle sent to the Society £67
collected throughout his diocese, as “some little proof of the
gratitude felt towards the Society, which at first really planted
the Church in Australia, and has ever since so wisely and generously
fostered its growth. Having received so much from her, it is a
real pleasure to return a little.”
But the time was now approaching—and nothing marks more
clearly the rapid advance of the Australian Church—when she might
stand alone without extrinsic aid, strong in her own Divine power
and capacity for self-development. The far-sighted prelates, who
combined with spiritual force the qualifications of great adminis-
trators, took measures to place the finances of their dioceses upon
a surer basis than dependence upon alms from the Mother Church
at home, or even upon State aid in the colony. In 1864 the
Bishop of Newcastle had inaugurated an elaborate scheme for
an endowment fund of £50,000 at once, and ultimately of
£IOO,OOO, and by his own munificence he gave an impetus to
the fund which acted upon the faithful laity in the diocese,
who could not fail to recognise that the Bishop had set
them an example which it should be their pride to follow. The
colonial legislature had first now given effect to its long threatened
measure for abolishing the State aid to religion, by limiting existing
giants to the lives of those who were already in receipt of them.
It was clear therefore that the time had come when churchmen
must look to themselves alone for the support of their Church.
The principle vh’.ch the Bishop laid down was, that no parish


should be endowed to the full amount of the clerical stipend.
‘‘That,” he said, “would not be a healthy state of things. Let the
worshippers always contribute something towards the means of
grace.” Bishop Tyrrell, who was taken to his rest in 1879, after an
episcopate of thirty-two years passed without once having returned
to his native land, crowned the edifice of his diocesan endowment
fund which it had been his chief care to build up with the hand of
a master-builder, by leaving all he possessed in this world to the
diocese which he had loved so well, and served so faithfully. He
thus hoped that by judicious husbandry of diocesan resources, and
by setting an example to the colony, to form the nucleus of one
grand endowment fund of £27)0,000, whereby the Church might
become independent of all further support save such as the voluntary
offerings of the faithful might supply, to meet the current
expenses of the Church and her ordinances. The depreciation in
the value of colonial property since Bishop Tyrrell’s death has
caused a temporary check to the development of his scheme for a
general endowment of the diocese; but it may be hoped that the
tide may turn, and then it will be seen with what wisdom and
foresight “ the one Bishop who never came home ” provided for
the spiritual wants of a colony, which in its rapid growth and
development is one of the brightest gems in England’s colonial
system.
The Bishop of Adelaide also gave in 1866 a graphic account of
how his diocese (in South Australia, where in 1845 the Society had
supported three clergy), had step by step become self-supporting and
able to carry on its organisation without any help from the S.P.G.
after 1865. From the formation of the diocese in 1847 the Society’s
grant had been £5OO per annum :
“ In 1850 all State aid to religious ordinances was withdrawn, and the ministers
of the Church of England were thrown for support upon the liberality of their
several congregations, aided by contributions from a general Church Fund, which
the South Australian Church Society annually collected, as well as the grant of
the S.P.G. It was soon, however, felt that the Bishop, clergy, and laity of the
diocese must be brought into closer fellowship and sympathy, if the body of the
Church was to make increase of itself by the co operation of all its members,
rather than by the single-handed energy of the Bishop, or of zealous individuals
among the clergy and laity. A conference accordingly was invited, which at
length happily resulted in the Synodal compact which binds the Bishop, clergy,
and laity to unity with each other, and with the Mother Church. Before,
however, this had been accomplished, a steady and liberal benefactor (Mr. William
Allen, to whom we mainly owe the noble building and institution of the
Collegiate School of St. Peter’s, Adelaide,) had left to the Bishop a bequest of
5,000 1, the interest of which was to be applied in aid of clergy stipends.


Meanwhile, the general finances of the Church had been carefully administered
by the Standing Committee of Synod, consisting of clergy and laymen. The
Bishop, therefore, left to the disposal of this body, not only the Society’s annual
grant of 500 Z. but the interest of the Allen Bequest, in addition to the general
Church Fund raised by annual contributions from the various The
result showed the value of the Synodal organisation, and the advantage of lay
co-operation.
“ The principle kept steadily in view by the Standing Committee was to give the
fullest development to the voluntary system ; believing it to be a religious duty
in every Christian to give of his means for the support of religious ordinances.
If the minister were paid out of the offertory, every pound so received was
supplemented proportionably. This system worked well, but in 1859 a further
step was taken, viz. to endoio the churches. Many of the leading members of our
communion agreed to subscribe various amounts for seven years. The proceeds
were invested, and the sum total of principal and interest at the close of this
period is to be applied by the Synod to the object contemplated. To the fund in
1865 the S.P.G. gave a handsome donation of I,OOOZ. At the close of 1866 the
sum total amounted to 10,OOOZ.
“ Another like scheme had for some time been in operation, by assisting parishes
to endow their cures to the extent, in the first instance, of 40Z. per annum. A
capital sum of 500 1, was placed in the hands of trustees to be invested in land
for the benefit of each parish which subscribes its quota of 200/, the rest being
made up from the annual donation of 100/. to the diocese of Adelaide by the
Bishop of St. Asaph, the general Church Fund, and property in Adelaide
managed by the attorneys of S.P.G. In this manner about 6,000 Z. have been
invested in parochial endowments. Every year two parishes in turn are invited
to avail themselves of the benefit, and thus a character of steadiness and
independence has been imparted to clerical incomes, by which the prominent
defects of the voluntary system have been in some measure rectified. The clergy
receive half yearly, on the report of the Finance Committee, the Synodal
supplement to their incomes, and the sum to which they were entitled from the
endowment. These arrangements in their combined effect have raised the ordinary
incumbency to a minimum of 250/. per annum, while in the principal city
churches it reaches 450 1, to 500/.
“There was another source of emolument to some of the older and more ex-
perienced clergy from the Chapter Fund—the appointment to the titular office of
dean, canon, archdeacon, or rural dean belonging to the Bishop. The fund is
managed by the incorporated Dean and Chapter, and while it is increasing year
by year, so as eventually to bear its own charges, the members of the Chapter
(who are the Bishop’s council in spiritual matters) receive from the attorneys of
the S.P.G. an honorarium, the Dean 100 Z. per annum, the Archdeacons 75Z. each,
Canon and Rural Dean 50Z.
“A Clergy Widow and Orphan Fund has also been established, which, if man-
aged in accordance with its principles, will no doubt furnish 30Z. per annum to
the widow, as well as pensions to the children of deceased subscribing clergy.
“ In these ways a moderate but certain provision has been made for the clergy of
the diocese of Adelaide, not by damping or repudiating the voluntary principle,
but by correcting its unsteadiness and supplementing its deficiencies. If the
ordinances of religion are worth having, they are certainly worth paying for. I
rejoice to say that this principle is conscientiously held and extensively acted upon
by the members of the Church of England in South Australia.
“ I may now show the progress of the Church under the above system. With
larger funds at the Bishop’s disposal it might perhaps have been"more rapidly
developed; but I doubt if it would have grown so solidly as by ‘self-help’
in dependence on the good providence of God. When the Bishop landed in
South Australia, December 28, 1847, there were five clergy and five churches,
including the wooden barn-like building so called in Fort Adelaide. In February’


1866, the actual number of licensed clergy was thirty-eight, and the churches
completed, or in progress, sixty. No doubt with funds it is easy to plant clergy
and build churches in anticipation of congregations, but the work is more
satisfactory when the people themselves feel the want, and impose on themselves
the burden of maintaining their minister, and building an edifice in which he
may minister to them. Twenty-two substantial and commodious parsonages have
been built, with glebes, in many cases, of twenty acres, attached. The Collegiate
School of St. Peter’s has been established at a cost of 20,000 i. and several other
large and substantial schools in connection with the pai'ish churches have been
built in various townships.
“The Yen. Archdeacon Woodcock, formerly a Missionary of the S.P.G. in
South Australia, bore his testimony thus :
“ ‘Mam 7 of our churches are already partially endowed, while the rest are in
course of being so. As regards provision for perpetuating the ministrations of
our Church in all our parochial districts, a matter always regarded by me as of
vast importance, our position is confessedly superior to that of any other of the
Australian dioceses. Deriving no aid from the Colonial Treasury, we have
nothing to fear from adverse parliamentary votes. We have long since passed
through a crisis to which the Church in several of our sister colonies is still
exposed.’ And it may be that the ordinances of religion will, by the blessing of
God, be perpetuated when the ties which bind the Australian colonies to this
country shall in process of time have been dissolved, The recollection of benefits
received will then, as now, draw the hearts of the members of the Church
towards their fatherland and Mother Church, of which the S.P.G. has been the
honoured instrument in conferring upon them the inestimable blessing of pure
doctrine and apostolic discipline.”
And when in 1881 Bishop Short retired at the age of eighty from the
scene of his long and active Episcopate, he was enabled to leave to
his successor a goodly heritage which had been steadily enriched by
his judicious administration. The Cathedral of St, Peter’s, Adelaide,
which he had not commenced until larger questions of diocesan
organisation had been first settled, will remain, as long as the
colony lasts, a monument to Bishop Short’s care for the beauty of
the Sanctuary.
In the diocese of Melbourne the disturbing influences of the large
emigration in search of gold had arrested the progress of the Church
in the same ratio towards self-support, but the Bishop nevertheless
was able to point to the public Church funds being well expended
in grants for churches and parsonages. In 1851 there were but
five churches and four parsonages; in 1866 there were upwards of
100 churches and 250 parsonages, while the clergy had risen in
number from seventeen to 114. Still the material progress of the
colony made demands upon the Church which she was scarcely able
to meet, though the diocesan offertories amounting to <£14,517 in 1866
showed that the colonists appreciated the efforts made by the Bishop
and clergy to supply them with the means of grace. In 1875 the
grants from the State to this diocese were withdrawn, and the


condition of the diocese is succinctly stated in the following
memorandum issued from the Bishop’s Registry :
“From 1847 to 1875 the Church in Victoria had received aid from the^State
towards the promotion of Public Worship. This aid, small in amount at first,
was gradually increased to about 20,000 Z. per annum, at which sum it remained
for many years. The money received year by year was wholly expended (until
within the last few years), in accordance with Government regulations, in equal
proportions in the promotion of Church building and the maintenance of the
clergy. Under this system large voluntary contributions were elicited, resulting
in the erection of a large number of churches and parsonages, in the maintenance
of a numerous body of clergymen, and in the establishment of the Church in
centres of population throughout the colony. Melbourne, Ballaarat, Geelong,
Sandhurst, and Castlemaine, and other large towns, obtained their duly
constituted parishes, with their churches, parsonages, schools, incumbent
ministers, and in some few cases curates.
“In the smaller towns and villages the condition of things as far as it goes was
the same, but in many cases the churches were unfinished, sometimes a parsonage
was not provided, the contributing power of the people being less, and the
stipends of ministers required supplementing from without.
“ While ‘ State aid ’ continued unabated and without expectation of cessation,
the continually expanding wants of the Church were to a certain extent met.
Fully formed parishes ceased to receive assistance, others were helped from year
to year on a gradually descending scale, and a large portion of the grant in aid
was devoted to what may fairly be called Missionary work. But when by the
action of the Legislature a day was fixed for the total extinction of the grant, the
Church by its Assembly determined to capitalise as much as possible of the
money still to be received ; expending, meantime, in the case of buildings, only
just so much as would satisfy liabilities incurred in expectation of the receipt of
aid from the Public Treasury, and, in the case of stipends, only moneys absolutely
needed to keep ministers at their posts, and small grants deemed necessary to
break the suddenness of the withdrawal of help upon which the recipients had
been accustomed to lean.
“ The five years’ notice of the withdrawal of the grant from the State enabled
us to moderate the force of the blow this withdrawal will inflict upon us by
gradually receiving it, and also to perceive beforehand the effect it is likely to
produce by watching the influence upon the ministrations of the Church in
particular districts of the lessening from year to year of the portion of the grant
allotted to them. In some cases the members of the Church have, by the with-
drawal of extraneous assistance, been made more sensible than they otherwise would
have been of the personal obligation they are under as Christian men to support
their minister ; and they have to some extent (and I think in some cases fully)
supplied from their own means that portion of their minister’s stipend which was
no longer attainable from the public revenue. But in thinly populated districts
it has in many cases been found that the increase in the amount of private
contributions has not been sufficient to provide for the clergyman a decent
maintenance; and although, when unwilling to abandon his post, and trusting
perhaps that the future would improve it, he has remained at it, he has'done so under
circumstances of the most trying description.”
When in 1876 Bishop Perry felt that the time was come to
resign to younger hands the reins of the diocese which he had held
so firmly for nearly thirty years, he was succeeded by Bishop
Moorhouse, who at once proceeded in his own vigorous manner
and trenchant language to deal with questions of pressing im-


portance to the Church in Melbourne, After his installation on
January 11, 1877, he thus addressed his new diocese on the subject
of Clerical Education :
“ Since my arrival here I have heard that one of the'great wants of the Church
in the diocese is the necessity for supplying ministers of sufficient culture to keep
abreast of the times. I have been told that the Church in the colony desires
certain work to be done, for the doing of which men of a high type of culture are
required. We cannot expect to drawfor the wants of this colony from English sources.
To draw English clergy to the colony we must have far more overpowering reasons
to induce them to come than at present. For instance, I could not conscientiously
urge to such a man as a reason for coming here the greater liberty of our Church—
although that is a powerful argument that had its effect with myself. FI or could
I dilate upon the spiritual destitution of the colony. In the latter case my
answer would at once be—Why, it is absurd that more than 800,000 Anglo-Saxons
of an energetic character, settled in a fine colony like Victoria, cannot breed their
own parsons without coming to England to beg for them.
“ The question then arises, What are the best efforts we can use for the
education of these men ourselves 1 I mean for the education and training of the
cultured men whom the Church requires. Under the existing state of things of
course it is impossible for me to appoint difficult examinations for Holy Orders, if
the means are not afforded them of coming up to that standard. It is, to speak
plainly, a matter altogether for your consideration. If you come to church to
worship God you must listen to sermons. These sermons may be good, bad, or
indifferent ; but, if they are bad, certainly none but yourselves can make them
better, because none but you can furnish the means for educating clergy who will
be able to preach good sermons. It rests altogether with yon to deal with this,
for in fact it is a mere question of pounds, shillings, and pence. If the means are
afforded us of establishing a theological college in connection with the University
of Melbourne, presided over by two men selected, say, from my own
university or Oxford, you would have in a few years men coming from such an
institution with a theological and scientific training who would supply the want
now felt in the colony. If we want men to teach our clergy we must adopt this
means of obtaining them. You must either starve your pockets or starve your
souls. ”
On tbe 15th of January a public meeting to welcome the Bishop
was held in the Town Hall. Many clergy came, and ministers of
various denominations. The Governor was present. Bishop Moor-
house said that, since he had spoken of giving a better and larger
education to the clergy, he had been met with the observation, “ You
do not seem to appreciate the poverty of the Church of England in
Victoria ” :
“ Well, no ;I do not. I look round this room and see no signs of it. I look
at miles of villas and see no signs of it. I meet in the streets men in their
working clothes and see no signs of it. I suppose we ai'e not very much poorer
than the denominations which stand beside us, and if we were, still I know of no
poverty here that could discourage me. I put it to you as men of common sense
—1 do not speak of the higher aspects of the question, I do not say a word about
our duty to fight for the glory of God, for the welfare of man, for the advance-
ment ot the kingdom of Christ —but 1 put it to you as a question of self-interest,
and I say boldly that there is no form of expenditure in which you can indulge
which will bring you as good a return as giving your ministers a good education.
‘‘iSince last I spoke to you 1 have held an ordination in what 1 am constrained


to call our cathedral. It is a very inconvenient building. I want to see here in
Melbourne for my fellow-countrymen—not of one parish, but of all parishes and
for all strangers coming to Melbourne from time to time—grand services, suoh as
people crowd to in St. Paul’s and in Westminster Abbey. People around Melbourne
build palaces for residences, and it does not accord with their daily life to put up
shanties for churches. The people of Sydney and Adelaide shame the people of
Melbourne by their churches; and the Presbyterians and Independents in
Melbourne show the Church of England people here what to do. It may be said
that I shall find many difficulties in my way in regard to the cathedral; but if
you will set to work in earnest to help me to raise the cathedral, we shall soon see
it finished.”
Bishop Moorhouse, however, did not content himself with simply
exhorting others to supply the means for the improvement of
clerical education. He gave £l,OOO to found a scholarship at
Trinity College, Melbourne, and his example was at once followed
by two wealthy colonists, who each made similar offerings. The
Bishop also gave liberally to the Cathedral Fund, and was warmly
supported by the leading colonists, who had in 1881 raised £lB,OOO
of the £25,000 estimated as its cost. To the Bishop of Melbourne
is due the idea of introducing Church Congresses into the southern
hemisphere, and the presence at Melbourne in November, 1882,
of bishops, clergy, and laity from all parts of New Zealand and
Australia showed how much this reproduction of the Church in
the old world was appreciated.
In the diocese of Sydney, where Bishop Barker had succeeded
Bishop Broughton in 1854, what was originally the Diocesan
Church Society, which bad raised in eleven years £84,000 for
Church purposes, became merged in the Diocesan Synod. The full
summary of the blessings which had flowed to the colony up to
1879 from the work of the Society is taken from a colonial
newspaper :
“That Society, in existence for well-nigh a quarter of a century, seems to afford
a good example of suitable means wisely applied, at a suitable time, to meet an
urgent pressing want. In consequence of the rapid increase of the population of
the colony at the time of the gold discoveries the wants of the Church greatly
outgrew its apparently available resources. It was a happy thought which
suggested to the Metropolitan, how, in the failure of assistance from the State,
the Church, from her own resources, might yet be made to provide the ordinances
of religion for her children. This he proceeded to effect by the formation of a
Society, which, combining and stimulating the efforts of Churchmen in a common
cause, enabled that to be done by the Church which had hitherto been done by
the State. Thus the growth of the Church, which seemed about to be arrested,
was promoted. With what zeal and self-denying energy the work of establishing
and building up this Society was undertaken and successfully carried out we need
not say, and the results have been, if not all that could have been wished, yet
still most encouraging. In the subdivision and extension of parishes, in the
erection of churches and parsonages, in supplying and sustaining ministers, the


Church Society has proved to be the true handmaid of the Church in the diocese
of Sydney, including in its earlier days the extensive dioceses of Goulburn and
Bathurst, and at a later period the still more extensive diocese of Northern
Queensland. The number of clergymen—not to speak of catechists, now, as it
appears from the Society’s last report, assisted by the Society—almost equals the
entire number labouring at the time of its formation in the then undivided
diocese extending to the Murray on the south, and Fort Bourke on the west. To
the Metropolitan, and those who so cordially aided his efforts, it must be encour-
aging to know, that not only have similar societies been formed in the dioceses
of Goulburn and Bathurst, but the organisation of the Church Society has
commended itself to the Churchmen of Victoria and Tasmania as worthy of
imitation.
“The funds of the Society are supplied by members of the Church throughout
the diocese in various ways—by collections in churches, by general subscriptions
and donations, by contributions from auxiliary or branch associations. The
moneys thus received are distributed by a committee very fairly representing the
Church in the diocese. The Bishop of the diocese as president, the licensed clergy
of the diocese being members of the Society—twelve laymen appointed annually
by the Synod, and representatives of parochial or district associations. The
distribution by the Committee of the funds placed at their disposal—guarded by
the rules, and defined by the objects of the Society, has been economical and
judicious, as evidenced by the large sums elicited by the comparatively small
grants made.”
The death of Bishop Barker in 1881 removed from the diocese
an administrator of no mean capacity —who left it well equipped
w th both spiritual and secular forces to carry on the campaign
of the Church. His successor, Bishop Barry, has been too recently
appointed for us to do more than record his consecration on January
Ist, 1884, and indulge the well-founded hope that under his auspices
the Church may take up a nobler position in the future than even
in the past.
Synodal action throughout these older dioceses had now long since
become the established form of Church government. In 1867-8 the
Bishops of Sydney, Adelaide, and Newcastle, had summoned their
clergy and laity to meet in conference. The opening address of the
Bishop of Sydney that “We do not desire that the Church of
England in these colonies should be placed in the position of an
established church ” gave the keynote to the deliberations of these
assemblies. Resolutions were everywhere adopted regulating the
internal economy of the dioceses, in the administration of the
contributions for various church purposes, in the formation of a
Clergy Widows and Orphans Fund, and in extending the Missionary
work to the aborigines and Melanesia. In 1868 Perth was the only
diocese without a Synod, but it still was receiving grants both from
the imperial treasury and the colonial legislature. That the
education of the rising generation of Australians was not neglected


is proved by the fact that on the occasion of the Dube of Edin-
burgh’s visit in 1867 to Melbourne 11,000 children were assembled
from the various schools in his honour.
It has now been seen how by the division of the original see
of Australia in 1847 the first generation of its daughter dioceses
has attained, in only thirty-seven years, a state of development and
organisation as remarkable in the past as it is full of promise of
still larger growth in the future which lies before it. It will be
interesting now to record how far the further subdivision of the
sees formed in 1847 has had like results. As already stated, the
first off-shoot was from the diocese of Adelaide, when in 1857 the
diocese of Perth was constituted, to which the S.P.G. had voted
£3,000 as an endowment. The Venerable M. B. Hale —Archdeacon
of Adelaide —was consecrated its first Bishop. But it was not
as Archdeacon that Bishop Hale had won his title to the gratitude
of the Australian Church, nor was it that dignity which he con-
sidered as his highest honour hitherto in the diocese. He had been
Principal of the Native Institution at Poonindie, Port Lincoln.
Bishop Short, while Port Lincoln was still in the diocese of Adelaide,
had early in his episcopate shown his practical sympathy with the
native races, and had started the Institution at Poonindie with the
■aid of the S.P.G., for their regeneration. One great object was to
secure the recognition by the colonial squatters that the aboriginal
occupants of the soil of Australia were members of the human
family. For, alas! it was the exception when the colonist did not
treat them rather as vermin to be shot or run down whenever
he came across them in the bush. Bishop Short found an able
coadjutor in this noble enterprise first in the Rev. O. Hammond,
and afterwards in Archdeacon Hale, with whose name indeed the
benevolent schemes will ever be associated which checked the rough
treatment and cheered the last years of a race doomed, it might be,
to wane, but still proved capable of higher things and of appreciating
Christian tenderness and care. The colonial Government had
granted the trustees of the Institution a fourteen years’ lease, and
Mr. Hammond had early succeeded in obtaining the confidence of


liis peculiar charge. A colonial layman visited Poonindie in 1859
and thus describes what he saw:—
“ I arrived at Poonindie on Sunday evening at seven o’clock, the bell was rung
for evening service, when all the adult native population and other residents
assembled in the schoolroom, forming a congregation of about thirty-five persons.
Mr. Hammond read service, the whole congregation joining in the responses in a
devout and intelligent manner, the singing being led by two men (aborigines)
playing on flutes from native music. I never saw a more orderly or attentive
congregation. Here were those who, by many persons, are deemed but one
remove above the beasts that perish, reckoned almost beneath the notice of the
Almighty, incapable of civilisation, unsusceptible of religious impressions, and
helplessly sunk in ignorance, barbarism, and sensuality; here were these, a
remnant it is a true, but yet a people clothed and in their right mind, worshipping
Him whom their fathers knew not.”
The “run” which Government had allotted to the Institution
comprised thirty-five square miles, and the stock upon it consisted
of about 6,000 sheep and 300 head of cattle.
The population of the diocese of Perth is under 33,000. Trans-
portation to Western Australia having now ceased for some years,
a more steady increase in population is looked for by the introduction
of immigrants. There are scarcely any large or wealthy squatters
in the colony. Storekeepers, who are in many instances mere birds
of passage, and publicans, who interest themselves little in the
religious welfare of the colonists, are among the best-to-do people.
The population is scattered over a vast area.
In January 1871 the Church, which had, for some years, enjoyed
the status and privileges of an established Church, was, without
a day’s warning, suddenly dis-established. This change placed the
Church on the level of other religious bodies who receive State aid,
save that the stipends of the Government chaplains were treated as
vested rights, guaranteed to them daring occupancy. Disendowment
was soon to follow, and, State aid being withdrawn, the Church of
England stood to the Government in the same position of indifference
that she has been made to occupy in the sister colonies.
In 1870 Bishop Hale, true to his life-long sympathy with the
aborigines, desired leave to exchange his bishopric for the chaplaincy
at Albany, where the Native Institution was lingering for want
of his fostering care. His benevolent purpose was, however, frus-
trated by the unanimous appeal, which he could not resist, that
he would not yet resign the see—and Nonconformists as well as
Churchmen, in gratitude for his consent to remain among them,
pledged themselves to more vigorous efforts on behalf of the
aborigines. He therefore remained Bishop of Perth until 1875,


when, on the X’etirement of Bishop Tufnell from Brisbane, Church-
men there gave him an unanimous call to come and preside“over
them He was succeeded by Bishop Parry—once coadjutor Bishop
of Barbados—who gladly welcomed the opportunity of resuming
the active duties of the episcopate. He took up warmly the work
among the aborigines which his predecessor had so well commenced.
To the value of that work the Royal Commission of Inquiry into
the Condition of the Aborigines bore gratifying testimony.
Contrasting the Mission Stations with the Government Stations
the Commissioners say emphatically, ‘ Our own observation has
shown us that without comparison, stations under the Missionaries
are most effective. We therefore strongly recommend that all be
placed under similar management.’ With such encouragement
before them the Committee appointed at the session of the Synod to
promote Missionary work among the aboriginal inhabitants, decided
to recommend : Ist, That steps should be taken as soon as possible,
in accordance with the permission already obtained from the Govern-
ment, to establish a Church of England Mission Station on the
Reserve recently set apart for the natives of the Murchison River,
on a plan similar to that of the Mission Stations in Victoria.
2nd, That the North-west district, where already a good deal has
been done on the settlers’ stations to bring the natives into habits
of regular industry—the number of natives so employed, being
estimated in Mr. Watkins’ report at from 2,000 to 2,500 —the plan
best to be adopted will be that of establishing schools for the
children on each of those stations, as well as at Roebourne and
■Cossack.
Newcastle was the next diocese in which subdivision came to the
relief of Bishop Tyrrell’s arduous labours by the constitution of the
see of Brisbane in 1859. Upon his arrival in the diocese Bishop
Tufnell set vigorously to work on the formation of a Diocesan
Church Society, for providing stipends for the clergy and funds for
the erection of churches, parsonages, and schools. In conjunction
with the Governor, Sir G. Bowen, the Bishop pressed on the S.P.G.
the establishment of an Industrial School for the education of the
young aborigines, who numbered in 1861 from 10,000 to 15,000
within the colony of Queensland. Sir George accompanied his
appeal to the Society with a Report published by the local
legislature, showing that “the most hopeful mode of ameliorating


the condition of the Australian blacks is by educating the children
while employing the parents in the work of a cotton plantation,”
The S.P.G., though unable to make a specific grant at once, offered
to maintain a clergyman in connection with the proposed industrial
school, which was subsequently started at Somerset.
Already, in 1861, the Bishop could report that the number of
clergy had increased from three in 1859 to sixteen, while the
contributions of the Church were £2,900 in 1861 against £375
in 1860. Hence, the Bishop said, the Society will see that “I have
not failed to urge upon the colony the duty of supporting their
clergy,” —but in a diocese then as large as Great Britain and France,
with very little postal communication, and all communication
sometimes cut off by the rising of the creeks ” —the progress of the
Church was of necessity somewhat slow. The first Synod of the
diocese met in June, 1868, and agreed upon a constitution in harmony
with those of the older dioceses. The work of the Church developed
so rapidly under these new conditions that already in 1872 Bishop
Tufnell is calling attention to the claims of North Queensland to
be an independent see. “ Urge, I pray you,” wrote the Metropolitan
in 1873, “ the needs of N. Queensland on behalf of a population
which is mainly Church of England, and may be secured to us for
ever by timely aid. At present it is chiefly digging and migratory,
but it will in time be settled.”
In 1874 Bishop Tufnell resigned, and was succeeded by Bishop
Hale, who was induced at last to leave his old diocese of Perth.
His sympathy with the down-trodden native races found ample
scope for exercise among the Polynesian labourers who were brought
over to work in the sugar-factories and plantations of Queensland.
The Bishop in 1878 was able to promise himself that before long
the General Church Fund, now amounting to upwards of £2,000 per
annum, would be able to bear the cost of all spiritual work among
the colonists, and that “ we shall then be able to devote the S.P.G.
money entirely to Missions proper, i.e. among the islanders, Chinese,
and aborigines.” The benefits which the Church Fund had conferred
upon the diocese are clearly stated in a letter published by the
Bishop in 1879 :
“ First I will refer to what happened in the case of certain towns, important
centres of population. In all these cases—so it happened in the good providence
of God, and through the instrumentality of the General Church Fund—l had men
immediately at hand, and thus I was able to fillup those important cures without
delay, and that in the most satisfactory manner.”


“But happy as have been these results to the towns, the beneficial effects
which have resulted to certain country districts demand, if possible, still warmer
expressions of thankfulness to the Giver of all good. Six country districts hfive
received clergymen, which had never before enjoyed the privilege of having a
separate Church of England clergyman assigned to them. Another district, a yery
important one which had been vacant for a considerable time, is again supplied
with a clergyman. And from each of these places I received the most gratifying
account of the way in which the men are doing their work. All seven are new
men, five from the mother country, one from South Australia, and one, who has
been for some years a resident in this colony, was ordained for his present cure.
“It would he impossible to estimate the amount of increased activity and life
in Church work which is represented by the mere mention of the above-named
facts. In attempting any such estimate w 7 e must take into account not only the
good which is done to individual souls by the actual minis'rations of religion
publicly and from house to house ; but we must remember also the advantages
which arise to these several communities through the efforts wdiich they are
induced to make to help themselves. In some instances, it was a matter of
uncertainty whether the people of the districts would be able to make up the
requisite stipend. But it was absolutely necessary that they should have a
clergyman, and therefore we had to say to them, ‘ Put forth your own efforts, do
your best yourselves to raise the stipend, make it manifest that you are really in
earnest, and the General Church Fund will not leave you in the lurch.’ ”
The labours of the Rev. E. Synge, the pioneer of the Australian
Church, have already been recorded. It was to his survey of the
large tracts of country still nominally under the Bishop of Sydney,
that the formation of the see of Goulburn in 1863 was mainly
due. The Bishop of Sydney had long felt that the connection with
his diocese was extremely shadowy, and that the immense distances
made it quite impossible for the Church there to be dependent
for succour upon Sydney and its Church Society.
Immediately after his consecration in 1863, Bishop Thomas set
to work, and found at once a population of 50,000
nominal Churchmen scattered over districts varying from twenty-
five to 450 square miles in extent utterly destitute of clerical
ministrations. He appealed, and not in vain, to the S.P.G. for
aid. In 1865 the Bishop made a visitation of his diocese, and
records how he had the “melancholy privilege” of preaching to
men who had not had the opportunity of attending divine service
for twenty-five years in one instance, and thirty in another. But
already in 1865 the presence of a Bishop had given an impetus
to Church work, and the number of clergy had risen from twelve
to twenty-one. The Bishop continued his watchful care over a
diocese comprising 84,000 square miles, and he gradually reaped
the reward. He gives, in 1877, a summary of what the work of
an Australian Bishop is. “His visitation,” he says—


“ Was divided into three journeys—March to June, and October and
November, 1876, and February to June, 1877. It occupied 24 weeks of
continuous travelling over 3,094 miles, in our own rough travelling carriage.
I have held forty-nine confirmations, and admitted 1,079 persons into Church
communion and fellowship ; inspected sixteen new churches erected since my
previous visitation, 1872-3, and eight parsonage-houses; originated schemes fir
eighteen more churches and three parsonages ; preached 163 sermons ; addressed
sixty-five meetings ; and slept in ninety different houses. But these brief statists s
furnish a very inadequate idea of the toil and effort needed day hy day to throw
oneself fresh and vigorous into new work and into all the details of church
organisation, committees, official inspection, &c., in each place. To be hurried
along by the throng of important business needing the utmost attention on my
part each hour, involves an amount of labour which nothing but actual experience
of the journeys can explain, and nothing but Divine help can enable me to
accomplish. We carry with us on all our journeys Testaments, Prayer-books, and
other Christian books for distribution in the solitary places of the diocese. We
have traced the good results of these in many instances. We have distributed
thousands in the past thirteen years, and must believe that great good has been
the result in cases which came to our knowledge.”
In 1879 the Bishop could appeal to the following satisfactory
record of both material and spiritual progress:—
“ The diocese possesses twenty-eight parsonage-houses ; but six of the parishes
are still without permanent residences. Nevertheless, in three of these, active
measures have been adopted for the erection of suitable houses. Fifteen of the
parishes are enriched by valuable glebes presented by generous donors or
purchased by the liberality of parishioners ; and good school-houses exist in
twelve districts. The diocese likewise possesses 92 churches, with accommodation for
about 11,000 worshippers ; besides these, Divine Service is conducted in a great
variety of places and buildings, and I have returns showing attendance at these
of nearly 4,000 persons, so that accommodation is provided in one form or
another for at least 15,000 members of our communion, with an average attendance
of 10,470. We have about seventy Sunday schools, with 3,760 children enrolled,
and an average attendance of 2,500. Ten years ago we had only fifty Sunday
schools and 1,560 scholars.”
Measures were taken in 1867 still further to reduce the limits of
the diocese of Newcastle by the formation of the new see of
Grafton and Armidale, to which Bishop Sawyer was consecrated.
But, to the sorrow of his diocese, he was accidentally drowned on
March 15, 1868, in the Clarence River, as he was returning to
Bishopthorpe, after holding Divine Service at Grafton. He was
therefore Bishop in his diocese for the space of scarcely three
months, and necessarily little could be done towards organisation in
so short a space of time, especially as it was much taken up with
visiting the principal towns, and arranging for residence and future
journeys. On St. Matthias’ Day, 1869, in Westminster Abbey, the
present Bishop of Grafton and Armidale was consecrated by royal
mandate to be a bishop of the Church, and sailed for his diocese in
the May following, reaching it at the end of August.
The diocese consists of an area of land bounded by the sea on


the east, by the colony of Queensland on the north and north-west,
and to the west and south by the boundaries of the dioceses of
Bathurst and Newcastle.
The following explanation, given by Bishop Turner, of the terms
so often used in descriptions of Australian life, may help to a better
understanding of the various phases of the Australian land
question:—
(1) A “Squatter” derives his name from the manner in which such persons in
the early days of the colony took up portions of land to farm sheep thereon. A
person with more or less capital—a younger son, perhaps, of a not very wealthy
house ; or an officer in H.M.’s service, either army or navy; or a person who had
little taste for literature, especially Latin or Greek, found in Australia what he
deemed an opening for his enterprise. Purchasing a thousand or more sheep
somewhere, he started up country to see where he should locate himself. Having
found what he deemed a suitable country not previously “taken up,” he settled
down there and paid a small —very small—rent to the Crown for the use of a very
large area of country as his sheepwalk—possibly as much as 100 square miles.
On some place in that area, generally near to some creek or river, the squatter built
his home of bark or weather-boards, with bark or shingle roof, according as his
means or nearness to greater civilisation allowed. Convenient access to water was
the point chiefly considered in the selection of a site for the homestead, and that
has often caused the back of the house to have the view, while the front looks out
on to a plain, perhaps, or mere forest land. The home thus chosen and made was
called the “station,” or the “head station.”
(2) Tlie “ run ” is the space of land originally taken up as already described at
a rent, and on that land the sheep and cattle, or both, “ ran,” i.e. went about as
they would freely, without fence, or other let or hindrance. The uncertainty of
the boundaries of these “runs” led to the appointment by the Crown of certain
persons to determine them. (3) The “station,” which strictly meant the
“homestead,” is now often used to indicate the same as the “run.”
(4) The “ free-selector ” is a modem term derived from the manner in which
persons are now allowed to purchase land of the Crown, and may be thus
explained. Most of the land occupied by the squatter is only rented by him of
the Crown ; now such land may be chosen or selected for purchase by any person
whatsoever: that he may do, up to a certain area fixed by law, upon very easy
terms, and at the same time obtain a right of grazing sheep or cattle over a
proportional area in the immediate neighbourhood of the purchased land, free of
any rent. As all that is required of such persons is that the land which they
select be not previously sold or alienated, or is not subject to a right under certain
circumstances vested in the “squatter,” usually called a “pre-emptive ” right,
they are free to select land wdiere they can ; they are popularly called “free
selectors ” The quantity that one person may select at first is from forty to 620
acres, with a right of grazing over three times as many acres as he selects,
provided the land so sought to be used be not already purchased by some one else.
For the number of acres selected for purchase he must pay forthwith at the rate
of os. an acre, if forty acres 10Z., and so forth ; at the end of three years he must
make a declaration upon oath that he has resided on his selection, and a com-
missioner must be satisfied that he has during those three years expended IZ. an
acre on the area selected. That settled, by payment of 15s. an acre, he becomes
the freeholder of his selection ; but should he not choose, or not be able to pay
the 15s. per acre, it is allowed to remain unpaid, but the selector must pay a rent
to the Crown, at the rate of five per cent, on the balance of the purchase money.
It will be seen from that, that practically every acre of land is put at the value of


2 1., 11. for purchase, and 1L for necessary improvements, before the land will he
enfranchised.
‘ ‘ And what,” asks the Bishop, “is a parochial district in the colonies ? Is it like
an English parish, even of the largest area ? Certainly not. In the diocese of
Grafton and Armidale there are cures extending over seventy miles from the
curate’s residence in one direction, and in another over forty miles. In that area you
may travel all day and scarcely see a soul, save perhaps some poor German
shepherd, with his umbrella under his arm, and possibly a dray or two drawn by
from twelve to fourteen bullocks, or ten horses. The population is about 2,000
or 2,500 souls at most. Over such a country has the curate to move, day by day,
winter and summer, all seasons, cross creeks and rivers, up and down gullies, to
look at which, in a carriage, would scare most English people, but which Australian
horses and drivers and the irrepressible buggy descend and mount without any
more hesitation than just to look to see what’s at the bottom.
“ It may be of some interest to tell of an adventure that befell myself in the
western part of my diocese some years ago. I had arranged a tour altogether
about 1,800 miles long, and guided only by maps, had sent notice to every station
that I intended to visit. Towards the end of the journey I had crossed a river
called the Barwon at about midday; not a sign was there then of any flood, nay,
the river was said to be lower than usual, nor could any flood be fairly expected,
inasmuch as there had been no rain beyond thunder showers for weeks. We
travelled that day twenty-four miles only, to a station called Goangera, which is
situated on the edge of a river which enters the river Barwon at Walgett, To my
amazement, when I reached the station J found that the river was bank high, and
from that station all my work was on the opposite side of this swollen river.
Should I give up my appointments, and take my way on the side of the river on
which I was, letting the flood be my apology ? If not, how should I get across ?
After Divine Service and sermon with administration of Holy Baptism, a council
was held, and as Australians are not easily beaten when they determine to do
anything, sundry hearty young men promised me that if I would meet them at a
fixed place up the river next morning, they would see if they could not get me
and my belongings over to the other side. Accordingly I met them at the spot
appointed ; the river was not falling yet, and was therefore still bank high, and
we were to get horses and buggy and ourselves over to the other side. Horses were
unharnessed, buggy dismantled, pole, lamps, harness, cushions, &c., with Bishop
put into a canoe (i.e. a pine-tree scooped out, fore and aft alike) : by a galvanised
iron rope, fastened to a tree on each side, we were enabled to keep up against
the stream, and land safely on the opposite shore. Next came the horses ; they
are gently moved into the water, held by a halter, and swim across, getting out
where they can. And now for the buggy. Having taken out the pole, and
fastened an empty cask to the upper part of the carnage, a strong rope is attached
to the front axletree, and the end carried across to the other side ; the buggy is
gently let down into the river, while the strong fellows on the opposite side by
main force pull the whole concern through the flooded river. It should be seen
to be properly appreciated. Gradually the carnage disappears beneath the stream.
Shall we ever see it again ? Will it be kept at the bottom a while by some “ snag,”
or be carried away in the flood ? No ; there it comes happily out of the stream,
wet and well washed ; and after a good overhauling to see if all be sound, horses
are harnessed, friends thanked, and off we go on our way again. It will be
scarcely necessary to say that clergy, being sometimes over-bold, lose their lives
in endeavouring to keep their appointments during rainy seasons. There is one
useful rule to observe in crossing flooded rivers on horseback, viz., never to have
your feet in your stirrups while you are crossing.”
jf On St. Peter’s Day, 1869, the Rev. Samuel E. Marsden, grandson
of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, known as the Apostle of New
Zealand, was consecrated Bishop of Bathukst —an enormous


district which had hitherto belonged to the diocese of Sydney and
Newcastle, of which it formed the western portion. On reaching
his diocese before Easter, 1870, he was heartily welcomed.
“ When left to myself,” wrote the Bishop in 1876, “ with a map of the new see
before me, I was appalled by the magnitude of the work I had undertaken; the
area being about 700 miles by 400, bounded on the east by the western boundaries
of the diocese of Sydney, Newcastle, and Grafton and Armidale, on the north by
Queensland, on the west by South Australia, and on the south by the diocese of
Goulburn; and being almost as extensive as the united sees of all the other
Bishops of New South Wales. The formation of this diocese is an indication of
the progress of the Church, as the previous bishoprics had been bounded by the
sea, but that of Bathurst has no seaboard. I have not yet succeeded in getting
to the borders of it on the west, which a man in the colony described as in the
region where the sun sets.
“ Bathurst is a city of aboiit 6,500 people, situated at a height of 2,300 feet
above the level of the sea, and reached from Sydney by a railway which winds up
one side of the mountain range, that lies between the eastern and western
districts of the colony, by a series of zigzags, and descends the other side by
a similar series. On all sides Bathurst is surrounded by mountain ranges, with
deep valleys down which, when it rains, impetuous streams rush, which have to be
crossed by the clergy, in their visits to the people, who have settled on the flats
as being the most productive parts agriculturally, or upon the top of the ranges
as goldminers, where that metal is found as well as upon the lower ground. Some
estimate of the difficulties of parochial visitation may be formed from what was
experienced by me in a journey from Hill End to Chambers Creek, a distance of
six miles, which took two hours ; the descent of fifteen hundred feet to the river
Turon averages one foot in three feet. This liver had to be crossed with the
water half-way up the saddle flaps—and further on the ‘ Macquarie,’ in which my
horse began to swim, and was nearly carried down the stream with me on his
back, only a vigorous pull of the left rein saved me from destruction. Risks
which I have occasionally to run are frequently encountered by the clergy, who
have made it a rule to keep the appointments made and published months before,
rather than disappoint people who often come twenty or thirty miles to avail
themselves of the means of grace provided at the quarterly, monthly, or
fortnightly service.
“About 150 miles front Bathurst a district is reached which appears to be a
dead level. I have travelled 750 miles from Ehibbo, along a road which had no
perceptible ascent or descent, except into or out of a creek or bilabong. The four
chief rivers in my diocese ate the Macquarie* the Lachlan, the Castlereagh, and
the Darling. None of then! die navigable except the latter* which, running
north and south through the district assigned to me, finally falls into the sea,
“As the climate of Australia is naturally dry, most of the people live on the
banks of rivers and creeks* This adds Very much to the amount of a clergyman’s
travelling, as he has to follow the windings of the streams. The first
appointment I made was to a district with a river frontage of 1,200 miles
to visit in going down, and the same distance to traverse in returning on the
opposite bank—but even this statement does not give any idea of the work,
as the creeks or small rivers which fall into the main streaih had also to be
visited. And in addition the clergyman has td go * out back, ’as it is called, in
search of stock-keepers and shepherds, who are in charge of flocks watered by
means of tanks. Some clergymen have to travel 8,000 miles a year to conduct
services, of which sometimes as many as forty a month are held by them,
involving an absence of six weeks from the town which may be called their head-
quarters, where the inhabitants have no service on the Lord’s Day during the
long absence of their pastor, except in cases where a good layman, licensed by the
Bishop, reads prayers and a sermon.


“As we have not State aid, the clergy are dependent upon the voluntary
offerings of their parishioners. When a new district is formed the Bishop goes to
various centres of population in it, and invites the people to a meeting, at which
ways and means are discussed, ending by certain persons putting their names
down as subscribers for various sums, from ten shillings up to ten pounds (in
exceptional cases fifty pounds are contributed). On -the average about 250/. are
raised for each clergyman—but as he must keep several horses his income is not
so good as it would appear. Four clergymen are in receipt of 350/. a year.
I have every reason to be pleased with the success which it has pleased Gob to
give to our efforts to extend His kingdom in the Western districts of Australia.”
In 1875 the diocese of Melbourne received its first relief by
subdivision and the creation of the diocese of Ballaarat, about
half the size of England, with only twenty-eight centres of
population, which numbered about 215,000, of whom at least
56,000 belonged professedly to the Church of England, many to no
religious body.
“The aid given by the S'.P.G.,” writes the Bishop in 1881, “has been a means
of stimulating the liberality of the colonists. In the arduous task of raising
yearly a Diocesan Susteutation and Church Extension Fund of about 2,000/. the
help of the S.P.G. of 200/. per annum, and latterly of 300/.-, has been an
unfailing and fruitful argument for local liberality. Thus, notwithstanding many
deaths and removals, we have been able in five years to increase the number of
clergy from thirty-six to fifty; of readers (probationer clergy) from eight to
sixteen. The offer of 1,000/ by the Society to meet 4,000/. has elicited that sum
raised by me for the Endowment of the diocesan work. This means some 300/. or
350/. per annum.”
By the Letters Patent constituting the See of Sydney in lieu
of the Bishopric of Australia, all those parts of Australia not
included in any other see were under the charge of the Bishop
of Sydney as Metropolitan —but so early as 1870 the rapid growth
of the colony of Queensland impressed upon the Metropolitan
that the time was approaching when it might claim to have
another Bishop. In 1860 this colony had no separate existence,
and the population of the district was 25>000; in 1868 it
exported produce to the ainottnt of two millions sterling, and
there was in 1870 a population of 115,000 Europeans scattered over
its vast area. Its rich gold-fields, the fine wool of its sheep, its
successful sugar plantations, its fruits and cereals—as well those
commonly found within the tropics as others belonging ,to colder
latitudes, which the climate, varying to the elevation,
produces in abundance, —attracted an increasing number of im-
migrants, especially as the Queensland Immigration Acts offered
grants of land on most favourable terms*, There was also a large
influx into the colony of Chinese and Polynesian labourers. The


Bishop of Brisbane had found himself unable to cope with the
increasing demands thus made upon his staff of clergy. The question
of a new see became therefore of pressing importance, if the scat-
tered members of the Church of England were not to be left to
stray into other folds. In 1871 the Churchmen in the colony began
to make practical steps towards the formation of the see, but it
was not until 1878 that the endowment was so far advanced as to
justify the consecration of a Bishop. In June 1878 the Rev. G. H.
Stanton was consecrated for the northern portion of the colony
under the title of Bishop of North Queensland, and lost no time
in making himself acquainted with the demands of the vast field
entrusted to him. Rarely has a Bishop met with a warmer welcome,
and rarely has such a welcome been more highly appreciated: —
‘* I cannot relate in one letter, ” wrote the Bishop, ‘‘ a fraction of the great course
th it the Church must enter, and claim, and cover. The whole colony bristles
with splendid opportunities. People are intelligent, large-hearted, and responsive.
Their energy and *go ’ have done wonders. Where I expected only log-huts and
wigwams, i find well-built houses and large towns. Where 1 expected only rough
irreligion and even insult, I have been received -with enthusiasm and warmest
welcome. I feel thorough'y at home amongst them, and already understand the
line that the Church must imperatively take for her own standing and progress.
Already I have moved about enough here to see that the wide lines of the Church
must not be narrowed. Australia is altogether too big in heart and head for the
littleness of sects.”
When the Bishop arrived nothing existed worthy of Church
organisation—seven isolated congregations with clergy, under the
direction of a Bishop fifteen hundred miles distant. But vigorous
work was at once begun. The Bishop was very strict as to new
churches, and allowed no grant from the General Fund without
having first seen the plans;—
“ Churches out here are the ugliest erections you can conceive—something be-
tween a barn and a log-house. 1 insist on a chancel and proper appointments.
The Church must teach the people the alphabet of Church life and worship.” .
Four large bush districts were mapped off, which will be worked
by four itinerating clergy for about seven months in the year,
these clergy then helping in town parishes for the remainder of the
year. Missions were also organised among the aborigines, and
among the South Sea Islanders and Chinese, of whom there are
as many as 20,000 in the diocese.
Further acquaintance with his diocese confirmed the Bishop’s
view that the Church in North Queensland had a promising future
before her among the varied classes who composed the community.


In 1880 he reported that since his arrival he had been travelling
incessantly in order to see much of the colony before summer
heat passes beyond locomotion point.
“ Everywhere I have been received with the heartiest welcome. I have visited
every town and centre of population; and, in company with the bishop of
Brisbane, have extended my visits over a large part of his southern diocese. All
the people assure me of their readiness to co-operate in vigorous Church work. I
like the colony exceedingly, and the people are most generous. Here is a splendid
field for the Church ; placed on its own wide lines, and worked with devoted,
educated, well-disciplined clergy; no inferior men, however well meaning, will
suit the Church in this colony. Among the squatters are many university and
public school men, while the struggles of a young settlement have sharpened the
people beyond average intelligence. They take a clergyman’s measure very quickly.
They thoroughly respect real devotion to Church work, and care little about its
exact complexion. The Church of England is exactly suited to these people. My
own course has been to identify the Church with the best interests of the people,
to make her the patron, and friend, and helper of every good work for the welfare
of the colony. Signs of progress are already numerous. Two new churches are
being built, one at Mackay, and another at Ravenswood. I have held confirm-
ations in every town. I have consecrated two cemeteries, and have ordained four
priests. The formation of a Diocesan Council is the next matter in hand, for the
future Synod must take shape from it. Here everything must be begun, for
no organised Church life has existed. Difficulty arises from the scattered condi-
tion of the people, and the impossibility of gathering them for any central
meeting. The stations or farms are usually about forty miles apart, and the towns
are more than a 100 miles distant from each other. The present population of
North Queensland is very small, certainly not more than 20,000 Europeans. As
a large number of these are Germans, or Irish Roman Catholics, you can under-
stand the smallness of our Church community. When the untouched resources
of North Queensland become better known at home, a large influx of population
must take place. It will certainly be the richer half of Queensland. Like a new
house being furnished, the first expense of railways and roads now presses heavily
in increased taxation. Cattle on these stations so multiply that no adequate
market has been found for them, and station property has sunk in value ruinously.
Few capitalists have come here yet. The clergy have hard struggles to make
ends meet. We could not continue without the S.P G.’s help. Few owners live
on their stations; they employ a superintendent, while themselves reside in
Sydney, or in England—for very many of them are there. This increases our
difficulty in raising money. The Bishop of Brisbane has felt this difficulty
severely. lam extremely anxious to obtain land while it is cheap for the Church.
In time such property would relieve the Church of the inconveniences belonging
to our voluntary system.”
The latest stages of advance in Church extension, organisation,
and finance are thus announced by the Bishop :
“ I know you will fully share my feelings of delight and thankfulness that my
diocese now has a properly constituted Synod. The Conference merged into a
Synod, and the draft of constitution was adopted after a few amendments had
been made. No proceedings could have been happier or heartier. A full account
of stewardship was rendered, and expressions of unqualified satisfaction and con-
fidence followed it. Now we go forward to incorporation. I feel greatly
strengthened by having a duly constituted Synod at my back. It increases power
for good, and it will relieve me of much responsibility. We have a fine body of
laymen ready and able to direct all financial matters. Now my diocese takes a
fresh start. The Synod confirmed my policy, and strongly approved of our land


purchases. I look back on the past fire years with intense thankfulness. I laid
the foundation-stone of a second church here. Townsville is the only town north
of Brisbane which now has not a second Church of England church. That is a
sign of progi’ess. Our plan is to anticipate the advance of population by erecting
some Mission church wherever people begin to settle. This gains for the Church
a decided ‘first-in-the-field ’ advantage.
“Only let me have a regular supply of educated, competent clergy, and the
Church here will cover the whole field, and command the intelligent adherence of
all classes. Do shake Oxford and Cambridge into earnestness and enthusiasm to
plant the old Church in new places where she renews her youth and recommences
her grand history—freed from her home enemies, and able to re-adapt her old ex-
periences to modern conditions.”
And yet another diocese— Riverina, the twelfth in the Australian
continent—is so far advanced that its Bishop has been designated,
and will he consecrated in the course of the present year (1884).
Put the records of the Australian Province will not be complete
without including some mention of the diocese of Tasmania —the
Isle of Wight of Australia.
The appointment of Bishop Sandford in 1883 as the third Bishop
to this see recalls a part of the Society’s past work, which, though,
of course, but small among its widespread operations, may fairly
be reckoned as one of its triumphs. Tasmania stands high on the
list of colonial dioceses, being the thirteenth in order of foundation
among the seventy-two Colonial and Missionary Bishoprics of the
English Church—the diocese of “Australia” having from its
foundation in 1836 included Tasmania up to 1842, when Dr. Nixon
was consecrated Bishop of that island. The Society’s work had
begun in 1838, when four Missionaries were sent to Tasmania to
tvork among the colonists.
The fate of the aborigines since the arrival of the first settlers
forms a chapter in the unwritten history of the dark side of
Australian colonisation, but after many years of suffering and
persecution at the hands of the white man, the miserable remnant
of the once lords of the Tasmanian soil were gathered together,
some by capture, more by persuasion ; and after much debate as to
their ultimate disposal, and after some few changes in their destiny,
they were transported to Elinder’s Island, in Bass’s Straits. The
last capture was made in December, 1842, the very year of Bishop
Nixon’s consecration. There every reasonable provision was made
for their comfort, but the race declined, and in October, 1847, the
Government decided to remove the small handful that remained
to Oyster Cove, and another twenty years saw the end of the last


survivor. The work of the Society, therefore, in Tasmania was entirely
colonial. In 1841 the number of the Society’s Missionaries was'
eleven, and its expenditure on Tasmania £2,557. From the first
the Society’s object was not so much to subsidise the clergy, as to
enable the Church to plant herself in the colony, to encourage
a healthy self-reliance, to lay the foundations of a stable system
of diocesan finance.
By the end of 1848, less than six years from the arrival of the first
Bishop, no less than £57,386 had been raised for these objects, of
which £33,544 was raised in the colony. More and more was
gradually raised there, and in twenty years time from the beginning
of its grants to the diocese, the Society was able to cease making
them altogether, leaving the Church vigorous and growing, so that
there was in 1883 a body of fifty-six clergy ready to welcome their
new Bishop.
Thus in less than fifty years a single diocese has become thirteen :
instead of the solitary clergyman who volunteered for the thank-
less duty of caring for the first settlers, who did not value his
ministrations, there are in Australia and Tasmania thirteen Bishops
and 575 clergymen, amid a population of nearly three millions.
“A little one has become a thousand, and a small one a strong
nation.”
It has been already stated that all these dioceses are unconnected
with the State, and have established a system of Synodal action,
which provides for all matters of internal government and of out-
ward development. Each diocese has its own Synod, and the
Provincial Synod meets every third year, under the presidency of
the Metropolitan, in Sydney. In this there are two Houses, viz. of
Bishops and of Diocesan Representatives. No Synod can make any
alteration in the Articles, Liturgy, or Formularies of the Church,
except in conformity with what may be made by competent authority
of the Mother Church. The Colonial Legislature has by an act given
binding force to the Synodal Constitutions in regard to the holding
of property. The material help required for building up this group
of Churches has not all come from England, but the aid given in the
mother country has drawn forth large gifts from the colonists.
One colonial family gave £5,000 towards the endowment of the
See of Goulburn, a layman gave £2,000 to that of Grafton and


Armidale, and the newly-formed See of liiverina owes its existence
to a colonial layman’s munificent gift of £lO,OOO. For the main-
tenance of the clergy, however, the colony has, especially since the
cessation of State aid, been almost entirely dependent on the grants
of the S.P.G., and on the local efforts which those grants elicit.
It is believed that the first clergyman who has been placed in each
diocese, not being a Government chaplain, has been placed by the
Society’s assistance. It gave £2,500 for the endowment of the
See of Tasmania, £l,OOO to each of the Sees of Brisbane and Goul-
burn, £3,225 towards the endowment of Perth, £l,OOO towards the
endowment of the clergy in each of the dioceses of Newcastle,
Adelaide, Melbourne, and Ballaarat, and £5O ' towards the endow-
ment of the clergy in North Queensland. Its total expenditure
in Australia since 1795 exceeds £225,800. But the aid which the
Society is glad lavishly to give in the early days of a colony and
Church is withdrawn gradually and on principle as each colony
increases in wealth ; and at the present time its grants to Australia
are limited to a small grant to two aged clergymen in Sydney, who
have covenants with the Society dated so long ago as 1837, and
a grant of £3OO per annum to the diocese of Perth and one of £2OO
to that of North Queensland.
The existing grants to Australia will soon cease, but it appears
likely that the Society’s help may yet be required, and on a larger
scale, in the northern regions of that continent which are only now
coming into notice; and the Australian dioceses will then share
the privilege, which they have already enjoyed in Melanesia, with
the Mother Church and its ancient Missionary handmaid, of carry-
ing the Gospel to New Guinea and the groups of equatorial islands
which lie between Australia and the Society’s Missions in Borneo
and the Straits.
March, 1884.
LONDON I R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS.
