

A PENGUIN SPECIAL
TOM WINTRINGHAM
NEW WAYS
OF
WAR




NEW WAYS OF WAR
BY TOM WINTRINGHAM
Mr. Wintringham believes that war is
not a “ difficult mystery ” to be left to
soldiers. “ To-day it is the duty of all
citizens of a democracy to understand
this business of fighting for a People’s
War is the only effective answer to
Totalitarian War.” Soldiers and civilians
will find the answers to many of their
questions about recent events in France
in this book. Here, also, are practical
suggestions for each one of us which
can give us the knowledge and confidence
that if we choose new paths of thought
and action we can destroy Fascism for ever.


THE AUTHOR
says of himself: “I was born in 1898 in a house of solid
Victorian brick in a town of solid Victorian prosperity. The
prosperity was not elegant; in fact, it stank a bit of fish.”
Growing up in this provincial town of Grimsby “ I absorbed
from my parents, nonconformists in religion, liberal in their
outlook on life, a tradition of non-political radicalism.”
Though known most widely to the public through his articles
in Picture Post, Daily Mirror, etc., as a military writer, he
is also a poet and short-story writer. His books include Coming
World War, Mutiny, English Captain, and Deadlock War. His
military opinions are based on practical soldiering with the
8.E.F., 1914-18, and with the International Brigades in Spain,
where he commanded the British Battalion and later became
instructor in the officers’ school.


A PENGUIN SPECIAL
NEW WAYS OF WAR
BY
TOM WINTRINGHAM
PENGUIN BOOKS
HARMONDSWORTH MIDDLESEX ENGLAND
41 EAST 28TH STREET NEW YORK U.S.A.


PUBLISHER’S NOTE
First Published August, 1940
Reprinted August, 1940
Reprinted May, 1941
If you are not already on our mailing list and
would like to know when new books are added,
please send in your name and address on a
postcard. Suggestions for new additions are
welcomed.


INTRODUCTION
In September, 1939, the Germans overran Poland.
In April, 1940, they seized almost the whole ofNorway.
In May they broke through Belgium and France,
reaching the sea. In June they took Paris and de-
feated France. In each of these campaigns they have
shown us new ways of war, which we must learn.
We can learn from these and other campaigns not
only the methods of the Germans, but how to counter
these methods and improve on them for our own use.
M. Reynaud, then Prime Minister of France, said
on May 21st, 1940 :
“ The truth is that our classic conception of the
conduct of war has come up against a new conception.
At the basis of this conception there is not only the
massive use of heavy armoured divisions or co-
operation between them and aeroplanes, but the
creation of disorder in the enemy’s fear by means of
parachute raids, which in Holland nearly caused the
fall of the Hague, and in Belgium seized the strongest
fort of Liege.
“ I will not speak to you of the false news and the
orders given by means of the telephone to the civil
authorities with the object, for example, of causing
hurried evacuations.
You will understand that of all the tasks which
confront us the most important is clear thinking.
We must think of the new type of warfare which we
are facing and take immediate decisions.”
This book has one aim only—clear thinking. This,


as M. Reynaud said—unfortunately, too late —is the
first need when faced with new methods of warfare.
But how is the reader to feel sure that the new
methods are correctly described in these pages, and
the right antidotes suggested ? In many newspapers
and some booklets there are articles that pick out
this or that feature of the German attacks as the
essential keys to their success. Why should what I
write here be believed, rather than the soothing state-
ments of retired generals in some papers and the
bright thoughts of journalists without military experi-
ence in others? Without wanting to boast, it is
necessary for me to give my own credentials in this
matter.
One thing admitted by all observers of the German
attacks is that they use most of their bombers as a
flying artillery. Five years ago, in a book called
The Coming World War, I wrote that:
“ The aeroplane in the next war will not mainly
be a special sort of scout; it will mainly be a special
sort of artillery.”
Then, fighting in Spain, I experienced this use of
flying artillery, and found its chief point of difference
from the older forms of artillery. In a pamphlet
called “ Battle Training in Word and Picture,” pub-
lished soon after the beginning of the war, with the
approval of the War Office, I wrote :
“ This seemed to us the principal value of the
aeroplane against a trained infantry: it is a sort of
artillery that can be concentrated very quickly to check
an enemy break-through or to hammer at a centre of
resistance when your enemy is retreating.”
Those who have listened to the 8.8. C. news service
during the nine months since Poland was invaded


will remember how many times the reports of our
Air Ministry have dwelt mainly on reconnaissance
flights. Over the Siegfried Line, deep into Germany,
over Norway and over the swaying battles of May
and June, 1940, many of our aeroplanes have been
used as “ a special sort of scout.” Many others have
been used for long-range bombing raids away from
the centres of fighting. How many have been used
as “ a sort of artillery that can be concentrated very
quickly,” smashing at the enemy troops who are
actually doing the fighting on the ground we do
not know. All we know is that this use of the bomber
is seldom reported. If we judge from the reports,
our planes are too seldom the flying artillery that I
predicted and that the Germans employ to the full.
The second thing that enters into the German
formula of warfare, all observers agree, is the use of
heavy tanks, so powerfully armoured that they are
not vulnerable to light anti-tank weapons. In the
Daily Herald for September 7th, 1939, I described the
lighter German tanks that had not done well in Spain,
and went on to describe some of the bigger machines
that have clawed their way through our lines :
“ Perhaps because of experience gained in Spain a
new tank of about twenty-five tons* has been de-
veloped in Germany mounting a field-gun of about
three inches and a smaller gun of 37 mm. besides
machine-guns.”
These are the machines that the French anti-tank
guns failed to stop.
In a book called Deadlock War, published in
* I know now that the German heavy medium tank of
about 25 tons has been reinforced by a small number of very
heavy models, probably 70 to 80 tons.


March, 1940, I wrote that; “ there seems good reason
therefore for developing a relatively large size of anti-
tank gun.” In this book I praised the German
88 ram. gun, which is used for anti-aircraft work, anti-
tank work, and as field artillery. This gun is slightly
larger than the French 75 field-gun, which, according
to French official reports, was found the best substitute
for dealing with tanks, when the little anti-tank gun
was found to be too light.
My “ credentials ” on this point are my putting
in print, before there was any fighting in France, the
need for a bigger and better anti-tank gun.
The third main factor in the success of the German
tactics and strategy is that they have employed and
developed the tactics known as “ deep infiltration.”
This means that their army does not attack strung
out in a line, and maintaining contact all the time
between its advanced units and its main forces. It
does not hit like a fist, but like long probing fingers
with armoured finger-nails. Each separate claw seeks
a weak spot; if it can drive through this weak spot,
it does not worry about its flanks, or about continuous
communications with the forces following it. It
relies for safety upon surprise, upon the disorganisa-
tion of its opponents due to the fact that it has broken
through to the rear of their position.
Since the war in Spain, where I found that both
sides had to adopt this tactic when trying to advance —
using, if they had no armoured divisions, their
strongest units to form the “ probing fingers ” —I
have been advocating this tactic of infiltration. It is
not part of the doctrine of the French or British
armies. But, as I have continually pointed out, it
is part of the doctrine of the German army, part


of the secret ” of their successes, we have to
learn.
One final point, not so much as to the methods
that the Germans employ as to the methods by which
we can resist them. From Spain I drew the con-
clusion that in defence as well as in attack the initiative
of the subordinate commander and of the ordinary
soldier is the most vital quality to be cultivated.
I pointed out, in print, before this war, that under
attack from the air regular systems of command break
down : “ the officer can no longer content himself
with giving definite orders and seeing that they are
carried out. Every man under him must be given
the indispensable minimum of ‘ general idea,’ so that
each man can act on his own initiative if need be, for
a period, when isolated from command ” {How to
Reform the Army).
And I demanded, as the key-note in the training
and organisation of troops, “ intelligence, inde-
pendence, initiative.”
The need for just the qualities I demanded has
been strikingly confirmed by the analysis of the French
defeats of May, 1940, made by the military corre-
spondent of The Times, who wrote on May 21st
1940 ;
“ There is also some reason to believe that the
French Army is shaking off the effects of the extremely
rigid tactics which are the fruit of an ultra-cautious
doctrine, and undoubtedly hampered them during the
first two or three days of the German offensive on the
Meuse. If the initiative which has been most un-
fortunately withheld from subordinates should be re-
stored, the French officer will soon show that he has
not lost the inheritance of improvisation and quick


action in emergency which come to him from a great
line of military ancestors.”
Let me repeat that these quotations are not given
in the spirit of “ I told you so.” They are not claims
that I foresaw what would happen in this war : actually
I was so sure of the possibility of defence against
tanks and aeroplanes that I thought this war would
be a deadlock. The claim I make is that I put down
in writing before this war began, or during the early
months of it, many of the essential things that have
given the Germans success in Northern France. These
things, therefore, were not a surprise to me; I have
not had to find explanations for them based on a hasty
analysis. And my second claim is that I have for some
time been recommending methods by which armies
can fight and cities can live in spite of the bombers;
I have been recommending methods by which tanks
were in fact stopped in Spain and can be stopped
in France, or in Britain. This book is not simply an
attempt to describe more accurately than others have
described the new ways of war; it is an attempt to
get, before we are too late, the new methods adopted
that I feel certain «an be victorious in defence.
Britain and the (people who five in Britain can be
made safe. But the changes necessary to give us
that safety are enormous. I state my view of these
changes in the chapters that follow, .on our army,
our auxiliary fighting forces and our policies. On the
Navy and Air Force I write nothing here. I was in
the old Flying Corps, the R.F.C., before there was
an Air Force. But that was a long time ago, and I
do not know naval problems and air problems well
enough to guess at the answers.
But modern war on land I do feel able to claim


that I know something about; in fact I believe that
there is no officer in the British Army who has had,
within the past ten years, a year or more of hard
campaigning against modern arms and modern tactics,
against tanks and planes. Those who served with
me in the International Brigade in Spain had this
experience, which I have tried to summarise.
Parts of some of the chapters that follow embody
pages from my book, Deadlock War, published by
Faber and Faber, from a pamphlet now out of print,
published in the “ Fact ” series, and from articles
published in Picture Post and the Daily Mirror. I
have to thank the editors or publishers of these for
their permission to reprint these passages.
London, July, 1940.
T. WINTRINGHAM




CHAPTER I
At the moment when these pages are written Britain
is in danger of invasion by an opponent using new
methods of war. In order to understand these new
methods, and find a way of countering them, we
must first analyse what they are, and how they have
developed.
It is possible for anyone to judge how war is
developing, changing, the main lines of its present
“progress.” A civilian can do this by the same
methods, using the same common-sense attitude to
facts and theories, that he uses to understand the main
lines of progress or alteration in trade or transport
or production. It is not difficult for any man to see
that there was a period when almost all transport
was by road or sea ; then a period when canal trans-
port became an important factor in the world’s way
of shifting heavy goods about; a later period when
railways were the main means of doing this, and a
period now developing in which road transport,
powered by petrol and diesel engines, displaces to some
extent the previous methods. These changes are not
complete: railways do not destroy the canals, nor
are all railways entirely bankrupted later by lorry
traffic. But all the same these changes exist. And
similar changes take place in war, and are just as easy
to see.
Sometimes these changes are exactly parallel to those
going on in transport and industry. Thus there was
a period when the supplies of armies, and the armies


themselves, travelled by road or river. Then came
a period of “ railway war.” To-day we have “ petrol
war,” a period which most of an army’s supplies and
men have to be moved by petrol or diesel vehicles.
To fail to recognise such changes can be fatal. Some
French generals judged in May, 1940, that the Germans
could not make their main blow through the Ardennes,
because there are few railways in that area. In fact
the main German blow did fall there. The French
were surprised, and their main line at Sedan and along
the Meuse was broken—partly because they had not
realised that “ petrol war ” had replaced “ railway
war.”
War is not a very certain business. It is not, perhaps,
subject to the same natural uncertainties as agricul-
ture, though it is almost as dependent on the fickleness
of weather. Yet there are no magical mysteries of
war, any more than there are in agriculture. The
ordinary man, finding that some uncertainties are
bound to exist, allows for them, and gets beyond them
to the things that are fairly certain. The farmer
harvests when he can, in spite of the weather’s
uncertainty, and does not say: “We can reach no
decision, since it may be raining to-morrow.”
We see tendencies in war, and separate them out.
How do these affect each other ? It is hard to say.
It is as if we were given figures, say 2 and 3, but
do not know if they should be added to make 5 or
multipled together to make 6. (It seems just possible
sometimes we should put them one on top of each
other and get two-thirds as the answer to our sum.)
But we are on quite safe ground if we say that however
these figures are treated they do not equal a sardine
tin.


Within the experience of many men now living is
a Great War, some knowledge of other smaller wars,
such as that in Spain, and knowledge of the present
struggle. These show certain tendencies. One,
clear and obvious to everybody, is that wars nowadays
often mean trenches. In Julius Caesar’s day or
Napoleon’s, or the elder Moltke’s, soldiers were
fairly rarely in trenches. Now they are rarely out
of them. That is clear enough. We can take many
equally obvious tendencies in warfare that appear
between 1914 and the present day, and reckon that
our main uncertainty is whether these tendencies will
grow and increase, fade out, add to each other, or
partially cancel each other. But we can see also
that however these tendencies are multiplied or sub-
tracted, they cannot produce a sort of war in which
it is possible to carry out a “ Charge of the Light
Brigade a gallop by men on horses, armed with
swords, to attack an enemy position.
Yet this manifest impossibility is still part of the
“ doctrine of the British Army,
As we shall show in more detail later, the “ Charge
of the Light Brigade ” idea, and the group of ideas
that fit with it, still to a large extent dominate the
training and the tactics of the British Army, even of
sections of it that are equipped with armoured
vehicles. This idea is not a small, relatively harmless
vestige of past ideas and forms embedded in new ways
of thought and action. It governs, to a large extent,
drill, discipline, the aims and methods of commanders,
and the attitude of the men commanded.
This is an example of the survival, from times long
past, of ideas and methods of warfare that have been
completely swept away by the development of modern


weapons and tactics. Clearly one of the first things
to do, if we are to attempt to understand and answer
the Nazi methods of war, is to strip away this lumber
of old-fashioned ideas and scrap the text-books that
embody them.
But this is only a small part of our job ; we have
also to get to the roots of the changes that happen
in warfare, and see how these changes arise.
The shape of war has changed, throughout history,
principally in accordance with changes in civilian
methods of production and transportation. Weapons
and armour developed with the slow discovery of
methods of working metals. The arts of building
and drainage are the basis for the arts of fortification.
Chemistry, giving propellants and explosives, and
engineering, giving the aeroplane and the motor
vehicle, affect the actual conduct of battles to-day
more than the “ systems ” of warfare evolved from
experience and study of war as such, Faraday, the
scientist, “ inventing electricity,” and Clausewitz, the
military theorist, analysing war, were working at about
the same time ; Faraday’s work—in its present form
as the magneto and the wireless valve —has altered
warfare more than the labours of Clausewitz, war’s
greatest scientist.
Within recent times one of the things that have
altered war most is the general change throughout
the world’s industry from single-acting, simple
machinery, that carries out only one operation and
then must be reset, to automatic machinery that repeats
what it is doing as often as the man minding it desires.
The rifle, that fires a shot and then has to be reloaded
by hand to fire the next one, belongs to the old days;
the machine-gun, that can go on firing so long as the


man handling it presses the trigger, belongs to the
present, the century of automatic machinery.
This type of machinery, organised in new ways for
mass-production, can produce almost unlimited
amounts of material of all sorts. The twentieth
century, therefore, can equip armies of millions, far
larger than the forces ever before brought to battle,
and give these millions much greater supplies of
ammunition per man.
Mass-production factories can also often use women
as then labour power in war-time. All modern pro-
duction needs far less labour per article produced
than was needed by older methods. A very large
proportion of the man-power of whole nations is there-
fore released, made available for the armies.
Changes in production and in the organisation of
civil life in these ways not only made possible, but made
inescapable some of the aspects of the last world war
and of the present one : forces consisting of “ nations
in arms,” able to fling daily at their antagonists
thousands of tons of lead, steel and explosives, and
supplied by crowded railways, crowded roads, with
the products of a great part of each nation’s industries.
And these aspects in turn make possible another
aspect: a trench deadlock, position warfare. This,
I know, is not the form of war we are all interested
in now, but we have to deal with it because it precedes
and influences the development of the German
tactics of to-day.
Three months after the Great War had begun there
was a continuous line of entrenchments along all the
front from Switzerland to the sea. This line, though
breached at many points during four years of war,
was always re-established a few days or weeks after


a breach was made in it, until the final battles of the
war.
Six months after the war began in Spain a line of
entrenchments existed from the Pyrenees to a point
near Gibraltar. This line was more than twice as long
as the Western Front of 1914-18. It was not continu-
ous, but the gaps in it were filled by fortified farms and
villages, and other “ strong points.” In two years of
warfare from the time when this line was established,
it was often breached, but was usually re-established
a few days or weeks after a breach was made in it.
The line in Spain was established and held by forces
not a quarter of the strength of those on the Western
Front twenty years before. The forces in Spain at
the time when the trench lines were forming, were
not much larger than the forces that Napoleon placed
in the Spanish peninsula a hundred years earlier.
Napoleon’s armies had little to do with trenches.
Why did the armies of 1936-39 dig them ? Why did
the main forces of the British, French and German
armies hide themselves, during 1939-and much of
1940, in vast entrenchments?
This business of hiding armies behind earthworks
or in prepared ditches has been done before in history,
when the armies were concentrated for the siege or
defence of cities. Small areas, as well as cities, have
been defended by trench lines, such as Wellington’s
lines of Torres Vedras or the Russian lines outside
Port Arthur. But these were exceptions : in the past
war has usually consisted of a relatively small amount
of sieges, and a lot of moving and fighting on the
surface of the ground unencumbered by entrench-
ments.
The great numbers employed in a modern war make


possible position warfare, the “ trench deadlock ” of
1915-18. But they do not cause it. The cause lies
in the amount of lead, steel and explosives that even
a small unit of men can pour out in front of them
over all the ground they can see, and to a less extent
over more distant ground they cannot see. Fire-power,
the ability to kill at a distance, has become so great
that unarmoured troops meeting, roughly equal in
force, reach a halt. Anyone who stands up on either
side dies. Each side is driven to dig in, and each side
attempts to get round its opponent’s flanks. They
keep on widening and widening the battlefront in
this way until they reach a barrier they cannot go
round—neutral ground or the sea. Thus the con-
tinuous trench line forms.
This is a completely new form of warfare compared
with all campaigns previous to the twentieth century.
What used to be a small part of warfare has come to
dominate, and dictate the shape of, much of “ real
war.”
It may be objected that the new strategy and tactics
of the Germans have nothing to do with trenches and
position warfare. What we are interested in is the
technique of the Blitzkrieg, not the technique of
“ Bore War ” that preceded it. But Blitzkrieg tactics
and strategy are almost entirely developed with the
idea of escaping from the trench deadlock that held
the armies between August, 1914, and March, 1918,
and held them again from September, 1939, to April,
1940. We can only grasp the essence of the Blitzkrieg
if we realise that it is an opposite to, a reaction against,
the war of trenches that otherwise condemns armies
to practical uselessness.
From October, 1914, to March, 1917, on the


Western Front, position warfare became more and
more rigid, immovable, and futile. To “attack”
meant to lose twice or three times as many men as
your opponent, with no considerable gain in ground,
and no decisive effect on anything except your own
cannon-fodder. The armies were locked in solid and
continuous lines of trenches, in which they were
pounded and obliterated by an even heavier hail of
shells.
From March, 1917, to March, 1918, position war-
fare was in full flower, but some of the factors that
must lead to its partial decay, its change into a new
shape, became apparent. One factor was the tank ;
another, more important, was a new method of defence
—which inevitably developed into its opposite, a new
tactical method for infantry advance. The defensive
method was known as “ elastic defence ” or “ defence
in depth ”; the second developed from it, and adopted
because it was a success, was called the tactic of
“ infiltration in attack.”
Ludendorff, My War Memories, 1914-18, describes
the development of the first of these, the defensive
tactic, durine the winter of 1916 :
“ In sharp contrast to the form of defence
hitherto employed, which had been restricted to
rigid and easily recognised lines of little depth, a
new system was devised which, by distribution in
depth and the adoption of a loose formation, enabled
a more active defence to be maintained. It was, of
course, intended that the position should remain in
our hands at the end of the battle, but the infantry-
man need no longer say to himself, ‘ Here I must
stand or fall,’ but had, on the contrary, the right


within certain limits, to retire in any direction before
strong enemy fire. Any part of the line that was
lo.st was to be recovered by counter-attack. The
group, on the importance of which many intelligent
officers had insisted before the war, now became
officially the tactical unit of the infantry. The posi-
tion df the N.C.O. as group leader thus became
much more important. Tactics became more and
more individualised. Having regard to the ever
more scanty training of our officers, N.C.O.’s and
men, and the consequent falling-off in discipline, it
was a risky business, of the success of which many
eminent soldiers were sceptical, to make ever greater
demands on the subordinate leaders, and the
individual soldier.
“ The controversy raged furiously in my staff; I
myself had to intervene to advocate the new tactics.’
To the civilian reader it may be pointed out that this
paragraph by Ludendorff first describes a new method
of defence deep ” from front to back, scattered
rather than all laid out in lines; it then describes, as
its logical counterpart, a new and “ revolutionary ”
organisation of the army intended to make this
defence possible. “ The group . . . became the
tactical unit.” This means that the unit which
received separate orders, acted “on its own,” did
different things at different times from the units
alongside it, was now the smallest possible one, a
group of ten or a dozen men led by a corporal or
sergeant.
The importance of this will be seen when it is com-
pared with the past. In the days of Frederick the
Great tactics had stiffened so much that the usual


tactical unit in battle was the whole infantry of an
army. Frederick alone had to think and decide;
everyone else just obeyed. All the foot soldiers
advanced at the same time, in one straight or slanting
line, and they tried to keep in rank, even in step, from
one flank of the army to the other. In Napoleonic
days the tactical unit was the corps, division, or
brigade, more rarely the battalion. At Waterloo the
whole corps of the Young Guard or the Old Guard
moved into action together, doing the same thing at
the same time. When Wellington counter-attacked, he
moved forward the whole of Vivian’s brigade of cavalry
and Adam’s brigade of infantry, and these bodies
moved in close formation as units. The minor
formations of which they were made —squadrons of
cavalry and battalions of infantry—did not co-operate
“ in their own time,” but acted as if the brigades were
single things commanded by one voice.
In the war of 1870 the development of fire-power
made mass formations, shoulder to shoulder, no longer
useful. But the tactical unit in action was still the
brigade or battalion, rarely the company.
In the relatively open warfare of August-October,
1914, the tactical unit was usually the same as in 1870.
It was sometimes larger during the two following
years, when generals were beginning to hear about
trenches and barbed wire and machine-guns, but had
not yet begun to believe that these things mattered.
Whole divisions of British infantry climbed out of the
trenches to commit suicide “ dressed by the right.”
The official British history says, for example, of the
34th Division at the Somme :
“ At zero hour the whole infantry of the division,


Year.
Tactical
Unit.
Men in Unit.
No. of Men in
a whole army
responsible for
tactical deci-
sions.
1757 -
1815 -
Army
Brigade or
15,000-50,000
1
1870 -
Division -
Battalion or
2,000-6,000
20-30
1914-16
Brigade -
800-3,000
100-200
Company-
Division -
200-15,000
200-10,000
1917 (German)
Group
8-16
100,000-200,000
except the head of the second column, rose as one
man. ... In a matter of ten minutes 80 per cent,
of the men in the leading battalions were casual-
ties ” (Military Operations , France and Belgium ,
Vol. V, Brigadier-General Sir J. E. Edmonds, 1932,
page 379).
But there were also operations planned with more
realism, and carried out with more independence. In
these the tactical unit became the company, and
finally, as Ludendorff says, the group.
Statistically, it looks like this: figures are for the
usual tactical unit in battle, and not for small outpost
actions or exceptional battle conditions :
Ludendorff’s phrase, “tactics became more and more
individualised,” did not at first mean that the in-
dividual soldier had to take many decisions on his own
initiative ; the “ individualisation ” was of command.
Corporals and sergeants had, more and more, to take
decisions without the possibility of reporting to, or


getting orders from, their officers. Then, later, the
typical German defensive line in battle became a
thickly-dotted scatter of machine-gun “ pill-boxes ”
and of machine-gunners and riflemen in shell-holes.
In daylight there could often be no communication
between these “ nests ” and the larger groups of men
in “ strong points,” trenches and deep dugouts behind
them. A machine-gun needs only one or two men to
work it, a shell-hole seldom gives cover for more than
two or three men. The “ tactical unit,” the group of
ten or twelve, was now sub-divided into three or four
smaller groups in shellrholes or pill-boxes. Tactics
became completely “ individualised.”
Ask any British infantryman who went through
Passchendaele : were not those “ Jerries ” in twos
and threes the people who held us up ?
The change in position warfare that took place with
this development can be described as a change from a
continuous “ brick wall ” of entrenchments to a looser
network like that of barbed wire. This network
would “ give ” if necessary ; and however hard you
pushed at it, it was almost impossible to make a real
hole in it.
Then in 1918 the Germans turned to the attack.
Their troops had received a year’s training in “ in-
dividualised ” tactics. They applied these to the
attack, developed and practised the theory called
“ infikration,” and with this new method destroyed
the British Fifth Army (March, 1918), and put their
opponents in such danger that only by the skin of
their teeth did the latter avoid the loss of the Channel
Ports or of Paris.
Their method can be described by a metaphor : the
defence to be penetrated is, necessarily, a criss-cross


of strong positions and weak ones. Any line of
trenches, after bombardment, is weaker at the points
where shells have blown it up; there are also inevit-
ably natural weaknesses such as “ dead ground ”
(i.e. ground that cannot be seen) near to it, and covered
ways of approach, ditches or lines of shell-holes, along
which the enemy can penetrate. In our metaphor
this criss-cross is represented by an iron grating such
as that which covers sewer-holes in streets : the bars
are the strong bits, the spaces between them the weak
ones.
Such a grating is almost indestructible by the
heaviest of hammers. Nor can you force even a box
full of matches through it—a company of men, held
together. But take your matches out, set them
flaming, and throw them in twos and threes at the
grating ; some will get through beyond it. A defence
line is like a badly ventilated sewer : if fire gets down
into it, it blows up.
Infiltration implies that groups and little packets of
infantry (later, of armoured troops) wriggle their way
through and beyond the strong positions of the enemy,
whether these positions are continuous trenches or
not. They neglect these strong positions, and sheer
off from those of the second and third fines, using
mist, darkness or smoke to get by. They go for the
enemy’s artillery, his cookhouses, his ammunition
dumps, his airfields, and his command centres. Other
groups try to seize ridges behind his lines, defiles,
river-crossings, etc. Other groups work through the
same gaps, behind them, and try to widen these gaps
by attacking the enemy’s strong positions from the
rear or flank. Other groups are always piling in
behind.


At first the infantry groups “ filtering ” forward, to
get through a “ fine-meshed ” defence, have to be
tiny. Then as gaps are torn in the meshes, whole
companies can march or crawl or run through the
holes created. Then the gaps are widened, and
battalions push through ; but these battalions have to
be ready to “ come to pieces,” to parcel themselves
out into little independent groups as soon as they hit
against a formed line of defence through which they,
in turn, must filter.
In such a battle the corporals and sergeants leading
little groups forward have to display even more
initiative and independence than in elastic defence.
They must understand the task they have been given,
and use their own wits to find their own way to
do it.
By the tactics of infiltration the trench deadlock
was broken in 1918, and “ position warfare ” became
something else again. It was no longer siege warfare,
but war of movement under new conditions, and with
a new shape. And here we see how the Blitzkrieg
develops directly from its opposite, the stalemate of
the trenches.
The same process went on in Spain twenty years
later. The continuous and rigid trench lines, manned
by all available troops, were replaced by a deep net-
work of posts and strong points. Advance in waves
was replaced by deep infiltration. At the battle of
the Ebro in July, 1938, when Republican forces
filtered twenty to thirty miles forward after crossing
the river, sections of thirty men were given “ operation
orders,” general directions for movement and an
outline of tasks, for two days’ fighting. These sections
were expected to be “ on their own ” for that period ;


the sergeant leading them was, for that time, his own
colonel and his own general.
Such changes have happened before in warfare, and
usually in the same direction; the increasing power
of weapons, their ability to kill at distance, has con-
tinually enforced on armies tactics that are more
flexible, more open and entail more separation between
units or individuals, and a more complex co-operation
between them. This general process (against which
there have been periods of reaction) parallels the pro-
gressive division of labour and growing complexity
of function observable throughout civilisation. But
it derives much more directly from the improvement
of industry and its effect on weapons. There has
been no stagnation of science and technique since
1918 ; industry can produce more and better weapons,
able to kill more effectively at greater distances. The
present war, therefore, not only includes this
“ mincing ” of armies, but carries it to greater
lengths.
It is, after all, exactly the same process as that noted
by Napoleon, who wrote :
“ The nature of arms decides the composition
of armies, their plans of campaign, their marches,
positions, and encampments, their order of battle,
and the design of their fortifications; this sets in
constant opposition the military system of the
ancients and that of modern times. The arms of
the ancient world made necessary depth of rank;
modern arms demand extended order {Vordre
mince); the former called for upstanding strong
points with high towers and walls ; the latter make
necessary low forts covered with slopes of earth


that mask the masonry ” {Precis of the Wars oj
Julius Ccesar, by Napoleon Bonaparte).
To refuse to adopt the tactics of infiltration and of
clastic defence is as out of date as to build walled
castles, or to put your air-raid shelters above the
surface of the ground.
The first essential thing about the Nazi blitzkrieg
tactics is that they are tactics of infiltration, carried
to much greater lengths than ever before, and speeded
up by the use of the two new technical weapons of
importance, the tank and the aeroplane.
The word “ infiltration ” does not occur in the
published documents of the British War Office that
govern the training of troops and the policy of com-
manders ; it does not occur in Infantry Training or
Field Service Regulations.
And some dislike of the word “ infiltration ” is
noticeable in some parts of the British Army. This
may in part be due to reasons similar to those which
led the French Army authorities, in 1918, to ban the
word. When the Germans were boasting of their
new tactic (and had by means of this tactic strained
the French and British armies almost to the point
where these armies must split off from each other),
French war correspondents were strictly forbidden to,
write of infiltration. Jean de Pierrefeu, then an officer
at French headquarters, wrote :
“ This terrible word, which expressed the latest
moves of the enemy and his method of fighting,
was feared on account of the striking light it would
throw upon our present inferiority in the country
and the army. Not only has the word a suggestion


of cunning, it expresses a treacherous action im-
possible to avert, of a kind to cause alarms ” (French
Headquarters, 1915-18, by Jean de Pierrefeu).
But after the experience of the B.E.F. in France
during May and June, 1940, it is widely recognised
within the British Army that the German tactics are
those of infiltration, such as I have described, and
that from these tactics we have much to learn.
A full acceptance of these tactics as an essential
part of modern war makes a great difference to all
forms of training and equipment. To take Lone simple
example that continually recurs in warfare: the
business of an advance guard. Advance guards used
to be considered in the British Army mainly as pro-
tective organisations. Their job was to go ahead of
larger bodies of troops and to see that these larger
bodies were not surprised by some enemy action.
They had a secondary purpose, which was to clear
out of the way small forces of the enemy which might
delay the progress of the main body, and to force
larger forces to disclose their positions.
Now all this is changed. If you accept the tactics
of infiltration, the advance guard of any force moving
forward has duties that are in essence very different
from these. The business of an advance guard is no
longer mainly protection, exploration and the rapid
removal of small obstacles. To-day the business of
an advanced guard is to probe for weak spots in the
enemy’s line and to get behind that line.
Naturally, in order to fulfil this very different role,
the advance guard of an array practicing the tactics


of infiltration will consist of different troops, differ-
ently armed and differently trained, as compared with
an advance guard carrying out the tactics of the
past.
The Germans have planned the whole of their army
and its equipment round these tactics. To give an
example, they have given pieces of artillery to their
infantry, so that any unit of infantry, of battalion
size or larger, that is filtering forward, has with it a
certain amount of artillery fire-power as well as the
more normal infantry weapons. We have not got
this specialised equipment; we have got, for example,
no “ infantry gun ” such as the Germans use, which
is handy enough for the infantry to take it with them,
man-handling it forward when it cannot be dragged
by or carried on a lorry. This puts us at a dis-
advantage, but the disadvantage is not a great one.
The tactics of infiltration are far more a question of
training, understanding, morale, organisation and
leadership than they are a question of special equip-
ment and such special weapons as tanks and dive
bombers. Once we have learnt the general idea of
these tactics and fitted ourselves to carry them out,
we shall be able to make do with any equipment that
can be made sufficiently mobile.
There is one form of weapon that fits very badly
to the tactics of infiltration. That is the heavy gun
and heavy howitzer which needs a special emplace-
ment, can only be moved slowly, and makes a good
target for tank raids, for dive bombing, or for infantry
units filtering forward. Heavy artillery of this sort
was needed in great quantities during the trench
warfare of 1915-18. It may be needed again if we
again have a stabilised' front at some future period


or in certain areas. But it is not a suitable weapon
for the blitzkrieg.
There are other weapons which fit particularly well
with infiltration, and need the utmost development.
One of these is the lightest form of machine rifle or
sub-machine-gun. In relatively slow-moving warfare
the heavy machine-gun tends to dominate the battle-
field ; its accuracy, its immense fire power, its ability
to go on firing for long periods make it the ideal
weapon for battles such as the Somme or Vimy Ridge.
But for infiltration something much lighter, much less
expensive in ammunition, and much more a weapon
of opportunity is desirable for the advance units of
the infantry, including those put behind the enemy’s
lines by armoured vehicles or from the air.
From all this certain conclusions: if we are to
meet the new Nazi tactics, we must do the following:
1. Understand the tactics of infiltration and train
our troops in them, and in methods of meeting them.
2. Realise the connection between these tactics
and the trench deadlock; for defensive purposes
realise that these tactics make linear defence and
passive defence no longer valuable, and make
counter-attack the only basis for successful defence.
3. Clear out of our army the remnants of the
past—ideas, methods of training and organisation
and the men who cannot change—and revive in
the army the qualities necessary for carrying out
and meeting infiltration: qualities of initiative,
independence, the spirit of attack and counter-
attack.
Clearing up the past is an essential preliminary;
.therefore the next chapter is given to it.


CHAPTER II
In the previous chapter I asserted that the “ Charge
of the Light Brigade ” was still part of the official
doctrine of the British Army. Here is the evidence
for this assertion, taken from official manuals which
are in most cases the only ones available for officers
and troops in training.
“A characteristic (of cavalry) conferred by the
sword, is the power to press home an attack mounted.”
—-Cavalry Training {War), 1929, page 135.
“ The armament of the individual cavalryman is the
rifle for use dismounted and the sword for mounted
attack. . . . Mounted rifles . . . carry no sword, and
are thus not equipped for shock tactics.”— Field
Service Regulation, Yol, 11, 1935, page 6.
“ The use of the sword in war : in the charge against
both cavalry and infantry each man will ride at his
opponent with the fixed determination of running
him through and killing him.”— Cavalry Training
{Horsed), 1937, page 30.
“ In modern war, opportunities for shock action,
though they have become less common owing to the
power of fire, will still present themselves. . . . The
leaders of squadrons, troops and sections should be
constantly on the look-out for such opportunities.”—
Cavalry Training {Horsed), page 117.
“ Shock action ” or shock tactics is the technical
phrase for riding into or over men, hitting them with
swords and bayonets, and similar Stone Age follies.


The manual from which the last two remarkable
quotations are taken is dated 31st July, 1937—more
than a year after the opening of the Spanish War.
No less than twenty-three pages of the text are devoted
to sword and lance* exercises, and these are illustrated
by twenty-two drawings (“ plates,” as they are called
in accordance with Victorian tradition). A further
twelve “ plates ” are devoted to drill; only three are
given to the formations necessary in action, and one-
one !—to the use of fire.
Cavalry, the sceptical reader will answer, is a small
fraction of the Army, unimportant, a plaything.
That is true. But the point is that the War Office
believes that the Charge of the Light Brigade is still
possible; and this belief colours its training and
handling of all other troops. Take, for example,
armoured cars. The last handbook I know begins ;
“1. The principles and system of training will be
as laid down in Cavalry Training {Horsed), with
certain modifications . . . laid down in this chapter ”
(page 1.) (The chapter contains no mention of swords
or lances.)
“Mounted drill . . .” (by this is meant drill in
armoured cars) “ is based on the same principles as
that of cavalry ” (page 4).
“ The principles of training in field operations
given in Cavalry Training {Horsed) are, in general,
applicable to armoured car regiments.” (page 12).
The above three quotations are from Cavalry
Training ( Mechanised) Pamphlet No. 1, 1937.
It is not stated whether armoured cars should be
given lumps of sugar after a good gallop. In this,
* The lance as a weapon was discarded twelve years ago.
These are exercises in its ceremonial use.


as in all else, we must presumably follow the authori-
tative doctrine that armoured cars are cavalry.
One further quotation is necessary from the same
manual: “Itis of the greatest importance that all
leaders should be trained ;
1. To act quickly and make rapid decisions ; with
this object officers will be encouraged to hunt
and ride across country.” —Cavalry Training
(. Mechanised) 1937, page 13.)
So long as the leadership of the British Army
consists mainly of men who find the highest expression
of their energies and interests in fox hunting, it will
remain the theory of the army that fox hunting is the
method by which mental alertness can be induced.
It will seem abnormal to such leaders that a racing
motor-cyclist from the dirt tracks should be given
command of a squadron of armoured cars; it will
seem normal that a man who plays polo should be
given such command. But in fact, as any sensible
person can see, a dirt track rider is much more likely
to be a good leader of a mechanised advance guard
than a polo player.
The doctrine of infiltration implies that the leaders
of a modern army must allow subordinate commanders
to use their own judgmdht. Each of the units of a
mechanised striking force must be “ given its head.”
But owing to the social structure of Britain in the past,
and of the class that rules the army, it is difficult in
the British Army for the higher commanders to trust
and encourage their juniors in this way. The leader-
ship that hunts foxes cannot believe that the young
officers from civil life (so charmingly labelled
“ temporary gentleman ” in the last war) can possibly


think for themselves and act for themselves without
close and continuous control from above. As for
sergeants, corporals, and ordinary men of the ranks,
they are unfortunately debarred by birth and income
from polo and fox hunting; how can they possibly
be given the right and the duty to act on their own ?
In this way class considerations have in the past made
it difficult for our army to achieve the form of leader-
ship necessary for modern war.
In other words the root of the reluctance of the
British Army to adopt modern methods of war lies
in its snobbery. And this does not only apply to
the love of horse-flesh (as compared with the skilled
mechanic’s love for his machine) it also applies for
example to our Territorial Army, whose officers have
been chosen or have chosen themselves on a social
basis. The son of the bank manager or of a successful
speculative builder finds it pleasant and useful to be
a Territorial officer in time of peace j he gains thereby
business contacts and the sort of prestige that will get
him elected to the more select golf club in his town.
Persons becoming officers for these reasons do not
necessarily possess any quality of military leadership
whatever and for this reason leaders of the army
who like to tie everything up in red-tape, and refuse
to adopt tactics that allow subordinate commanders
to use initiative, often have the perfectly good
argument that the subordinate commanders appointed
to serve under them are in fact unable to use initiative.
Our answer to their argument is simply that other
subordinate commanders must be found, not chosen
on the basis of snobbery and the old school tie but
on their capacity for active responsibility.
Sections of society left behind by the changes of


social life develop myths. The two myths that we
have been examining so far may be described as the
myth of the man on horseback and the myth of the
gentleman as the natural leader. All such myths
once had a basis in fact. The man on horseback
ruled warfare in Europe for a thousand years, from
the break up of the Roman Empire to the Battle of
Cr6cy. The Welsh and English long-bowmen, at
Crecy, defeated the armoured knights who had
hitherto been invincible; from that time cavalry
took a secondary place, and gradually a dwindling
place, in warfare. The last real cavalry charge in
the history of war was the charge of the 21st Lancers
at the Battle of Omdurman, at the end of the last
century. This charge has been described by Mr.
Winston Churchill, who took part in it as a subaltern.
It is clear from Mr. Churchill’s description that it
could not possibly have succeeded against an enemy
with modern arms.
But this myth that was truth in the Middle Ages,
and was fading from reality in Queen Victoria’s day,
still haunts the minds and imaginations of the British
Army’s leaders to such an extent that sections of our
Tank Corps are called “ cavalry tanks.” Until this
myth has been destroyed, our army can never be a
modern instrument.
The second myth that we have mentioned, the
gentleman as the natural leader of the people, had
also a great deal of truth in it at one period, and this
period is less far back than that of cavalry.
There was a time in the past when the gentry of
England mainly lived on their estates. They were
a squirearchy. And in each village the squire and
his sons, and those few others who were accepted as


gentry, had a natural and customary relationship with
labourers and poachers, the village craftsman and the
cottage families. It was a direct relationship ; the
squire and the hedging man talked the same language,
used the same oaths, and seldom allowed the farm
bailiff or tenant farmer or agent to shut each off from
the other. When men of these sorts formed the
bulk of the British Army there was also a natural and
inborn relationship between the officer and the private.
It was not a relationship that we need praise or
condemn ; it is past and dead. But it did exist; in
a few county battalions you can find it existing still,
though in a tepid and half-alive state. To-day the
gentry of England, or that section which produces
the officer class, seldom lives on its estates. It works
in offices. Three-quarters of this officer class meet
no free craftsmen and no skilled land workers through
all their lives, except at odd week-ends. In their
offices, at work, they talk to secretaries and trade-
union leaders. In their homes they talk to servants
and gardeners. They tell you what the proletariat
thinks by quoting their charwoman. They have never,
in civil life, learnt how to get the best out of men whose
hands know things, whose skill is real but inarticulate.
Almost universally you will find these members of
the officer class consider that garage mechanics —the
only skilled men they know —are infernally surly.
They deal with “ their ” workers through foremen,
or through trade-union secretaries. When these
gentry become officers they try to deal with their
men only through sergeants, which is fatal. They
have neither the patriarchal, almost feudal, attitude
towards their men that marked good officers of a
past day, nor the identification with their men that


marks the officers of an army hastily built by a people,
such aS the army of the French Revolution.
There still remain a certain number of people who
play polo and hunt foxes, and of other gentlemen
from the public schools, who make very good officers
indeed. They have as a natural gift, or they have
acquired, the qualities necessary for leadership in war.
I do not suggest that these men should no longer be
officers. We need leadership wherever we can find
it. But I do suggest that their most valuable con-
tribution to the defence of their country at the present
moment will be for them and their class to give up
the monopoly of military leadership which they have
held in the past. If they can achieve that effort of
will and understanding which brings into the leader-
ship of the army the right men from the working class,
and from the sections of society that lie between the
working class and those educated at public schools,
they will at the same time be helping to make an army
that is capable of carrying out the defence of this
country on modern lines.
There is a third myth, not yet mentioned, that we
must deal with faithfully before we turn to the positive
side, the organisation and the morale necessary for
victory. This third myth bulks large in the fife of
almost every British soldier. It is the myth of the
bayonet. Like the other myths mentioned, this had
full justification in the pash In the battles of Marl-
borough and Frederick the Great the bayonet was
often the decisive weapon. The musket was such an
inefficient firearm that it could only prepare the way
for an assault; after an exchange of volleys, a “ fire-
fight,” came the charge with fixed bayonets which
pierced or rolled up the enemy’s line.


But in the War of American Independence men
trained in these methods came up against more
accurate musketry. One of the British generals who
lost America, Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne,
wrote in his “ Orderly Book ” :
“ The Officers will take all proper Opportunities,
and especially at the beginning of the Campaign, to
inculcate in the men’s minds a Reliance upon the
Bayonet. Men of half their bodily strength, and
even Cowards, may be their match in firing, but
the onset of Bayonets in the hands of the Valiant
is irresistible. The Enemy, convinced of this truth,
place their whole dependence in Entrenchments and
Rifle pieces. It will be our Glory and preservation
to storm where possible.”
Unfortunately for “ Gentleman Johnny ” Burgoyne,
as he was known to his opponents, entrenchments
and rifles proved more effective in America than
bayonets. By the time of the American Civil War,
nearly a century later, muskets and rifles and artillery
had become so much more effective that General
John B. Gordon, of the Confederate Army, wrote in
his Reminiscences of the Civil War :
“ I may say that very few bayonets of any kind
were actually used in battle, so far as my observa-
tion extended. The one line or the other usually
gave way under the galling fire of small arms, grape,
and canister, before the bayonet could be brought
into requisition. The bristling points and the
glitter of the bayonets were fearful to look upon
as they were levelled in front of a charging line;
but they were rarely reddened with blood. The
day of the bayonet is passed except for use in


4 hollow squares, or in resisting cavalry charges, or
as an implement in constructing light and tem-
porary fortifications. It may still serve a purpose
in such emergencies or to impress the soldier’s
imagination, as the loud-sounding and ludicrous
gongs are supposed to stiffen the backs and steady
the nerves of the grotesque soldiers of China.”
By 1904, the date of the Russo-Japanese War, it
was possible to put down in actual figures the in-
effectiveness of the bayonet. A Captain F. Culmann,
in his Elude sur les Caracteres Generaux de la Guerre
d y Extreme Orient, stated that the losses of the Russians
from bayonets, swords and spears were only I*7 per
cent, of their casualties ; 98 -3 per cent, were caused
by projectiles of all sorts. The Japanese, who were
attacking, and who had to face a heavier cavalry than
they possessed, lost 3 per cent, by “ armes blanches,”
and 97 per cent, by projectiles. In other words, the
bayonet was by that time only able to wound or kill
one man as compared with thirty or fifty wounded by
rifles, machine-guns and artillery.
Yet when I was taught warfare, in 1914, I was told
that attack consisted still of a fire-fight and then an
assault with fixed bayonets. In other words, I was
taught the same infantry tactics as were employed at
Blenheim or Fontenoy, and were becoming a little out
of date soon after Waterloo. And all too many
English troops, from 1914 up to the present day,
have been taught exactly the same thing. They have
not been taught, as the Germans have, that “ attack
is fire that advances, defence is fire that counter-
attacks.” The average British soldier has been led
to expect that after using his weapons for a time he


will “ get to grips ” with his opponents. Our Field
Service Regulations have defined infantry as a “ force
that closes with’the enemy.” And naturally when
they are unable to close with the enemy, our infantry
feel lost and disappointed.
After the Norwegian campaign, and still more after
the fighting that ended at Dunkirk, our newspapers
reported continually the disappointment of our troops
that they had not been able to “ get at ” the Germans.
They never had a chance to get to close quarters.
They were longing for hand-to-hand fighting, but
they were driven out of Norway and Belgium and
France without ever meeting their opponents hand
to hand. And this complaint is typical not of our
less well-trained fighting units but of those who have
received the longest and best training available in the
British Army.
The cult of the bayonet is still in force. Walk
down Whitehall any morning and you will see sentries
with fixed bayonets. Most of these sentries have
been placed in Whitehall recently, since the authorities
woke up to the fact that parachute troops can be
dropped by sJie enemy near centres of command and
organisation. The main purpose of these sentries
can therefore be presumed to be to protect the War
Office, and other institutions supposed to be of value
in war, from attack by German parachutists. It is
well known that these parachutists carry sub-machine
guns or machine-pistols. They also carry hand
grenades. Against automatic weapons and against
hand grenades men with bayonets are useless. Clearly,
these sentries, therefore, will have to fire their rifles.
But the British service rifle fires less accurately with
the bayonet fixed than it does with the bayonet


removed. So we get the position that our sentries
(in any case inadequately armed) are made to carry
a rather ridiculous survival from past ages on the
ends of their rifles, which reduces their efficiency
against the actual enemies they may expect to meet.
An issue of War Weekly , dated 28th June, 1940
after two campaigns in which bayonets were found
useless —gives a picture of an instructor “ demon-
strating the bayonet charge.” The journal comments :
“ The Germans have already shown their unwilling-
ness to face the shining steel of British bayonet
fighters.” They have. They have also shown that
those who now try to use the bayonet can be wiped
out by anyone with any modern weapon.
Yet on the newsreels you may see members of
Britain’s new citizens’ army, the Local Defence Volu-
teers, practising bayonet fighting. Such films are
presumably passed by the censorship, in which the
War Office has full say. If I had my way such films
would be banned as liable to cause alarm and despond-
ency ; training in bayonet fighting would be confined
to one platoon in each battalion; and all the rest of
the bayonets in the British Army would be solemnly
melted down for steel, out of which we could make
sub-machine guns and hand grenades.
There is a tendency in Britain, in this summer of
1940, to think that our greatest need is the manu-
facture of weapons and ammunition, of tanks and
planes. I know well how badly this equipment is
needed. No sacrifice can be considered too great for
the production of such gear. But I know also that
increased production is not the first or the main
thing needed by our fighting men. The first thing
needed is the destruction of these bewhiskered myths ;


the main thing needed is to replace them by a sane
and serious view of war, of discipline and tactics, and
morale.
As the shortest possible summary of our argument
on the nature of war and its changes, on infiltration
and the need for initiative in modern tactics, we can
say that:
1. Modern war makes imposed, arbitrary and auto-
matic discipline and rigid tactics not only
useless but harmful, unsuccessful.
2. Modern war makes voluntarily, understood and
thinking discipline and elastic tactics based
on initiative and independence, more valuable
than ever before,
3. In the British Army s training there is insistence
on the discipline and tactics outlined in 1, and
disregard for those outlined in 2.
The way to alter that is to inject a large dose of
democracy. There is no other way. Democracy is,
in its essence, the way of living, organising ourselves,
training and, if necessary, fighting; that includes
voluntary, understood and thinking discipline, and
methods of work based on elasticity, initiative and
independence.
It is not the formal framework of democracy that
is needed. An army cannot elect its officers or vote
on what its tactics and strategy shall be. It is the raw
stuff of democracy that is called for ; men who feel
free, and feel themselves by natural right the equals
of their fellows; men who accept regulations and
order—restrictions on their individual actions—be-
cause they realise the need for these in strengthening
their collective actions; men who accept commands


as part of inescapable methods by which they them-
selves can achieve their own desires and aims—an
army of free men.
It has been a peculiar quality of most of the
successful armies of the past that they have felt
themselves to be relatively freer men than their
opponents. Sometimes this was an illusion, but
usually their feeling was based on a certain amount
of reality. At a time when democracy is accused of
inefficiency and a degenerate inability to defend itself,
it is worth a couple of paragraphs to remind the
reader of wars usually considered important by
historians.
Tiny Greek armies, of citizens, defeated enormous
Persian forces of slaves. Alexander the Great, with
his “ companion cavalry,” rode over despotisms much
more autocratic than his Greek-influenced principality.
The armies of the Republic of Rome were free men
in form, and more nearly free men in fact than the
Carthaginians they destroyed. The Germanic and
Gothic tribes that overran the Roman Empire had a
primitive democracy of their own. The English
archers at Cr6cy and Agincourt were already, because
of the looser feudal structure of England, becoming
semi-independent yeomen; they beat the French
serfs and knights who were still in every sense “ their
lord’s men.” Cromwell’s army, which appointed its
“ agitators ” and sent them to argue politics with
the Lord General, was more democratic than that of
King Charles. Washington’s poorly-trained national
militia beat the Hessians of King George. The ragged
armies of the French Revolution fought most of
Europe with success, and Napoleon’s great armies
were made out of these men of the Revolution and


were fired by its principles—however much Napoleon
himself departed from those principles.
The Great War is recognised now as a war that
was not “ for democracy.” Because of this we are
apt to forget there was, in fact, rather moje democracy
available in some countries than in others. The armies
that collapsed were the Russian, the Turkish, the
Austrian and the German—in that order. The
countries with the least democracy collapsed first;
the order is also the order and degree of autocracy.
There are, of course, exceptions to this rule ; there
are exceptions to every generalisation that can be made
about human history. In spite of Frederick the Great
and General Franco, we can reckon that throughout
two thousand years of warfare the majority of successful
armies have been created by communities relatively
freer and more democratic than their opponents. The
odds, to judge from “ form ” of the past, are about
three to one in favour of a democracy (relative, limited,
qualified, even monarchical) beating an autocracy.
This is “ wet paint! ” The idea is a new one, or
will be new to most people. It is commonly believed
to-day that the totalitarian state is necessarily stronger
for warfare than the democratic one. And it will be
argued against this view that the Germans have
achieved an army capable of fighting a modern war
by methods very different from those of democracy.
That is true, and this I am convinced is the weakness
of the German Army. It consists of a thin crust of
picked men, admirably trained, who possess initiative
and dash because they have been taught that they are
the masters of Europe and the world, the knights of
to-day. But behind this thin crust, behind these
armoured finger-nails, the German Army consists


largely of over-drilled men doing things automatically,
according to the book, incapable of initiative and
indeed of any form of fighting except that of the
herded mass attack.
Totalitarian methods produce an army fit for war.
Our own methods of the past have not produced
such an army. But we can find ways to make such
an army, which not merely retain democracy but use
its vital force to make something far better than the
Nazis can ever produce. We do not need to model
ourselves On and copy the Germans, however much
we may need to reach their level in tactics; Crom-
well’s New Model Army is still the best model for
British fighting men.
The essence of democratic discipline is that it is
the self-discipline of men who agree. It can be very
severe ; it can be the very opposite of anarchy. But
it cannot exist without a feeling of freedom to discuss,
freedom to take responsibility, and a deep and shared
understanding of aims held in common. To make such
discipline we have to destroy two solidly based ideas.
One of these ideas is that the young man entering
the Army “ must learn to be silent, not only when he
is rightly blamed, but also, if necessary, to suffer
injustice in silence. . . ”
The other idea is that “ if doctrine is actually right
in its general fines, it is less harmful to stick to one
version of it, even if it should no longer quite conform
to the reality, than—by improving it—to expose a
principle ... to general discussion with its most evil
consequences. . . . For how can you expect to fill
people with blind faith in the rightness of a doctrine
when by constantly altering its external structure you
create uncertainty and doubt ? ”


These ideas are part of the “ doctrine,” the beliefs
about life and war, held by many of those who in the
past have ruled the British Army. I have quoted them
from a foreign book because this book puts into out-
spoken language the cloudy faiths of Camberley and
Aldershot.
The book is Herr Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
These ideas are essential to Fascism: injustice
endured in silence ; doctrines maintained, when not
fully realistic, because general discussion is evil;
blind faith. They are not only out of place in the army
of a democracy, they are out of place in any army
that has to fight against an alert and modern opponent.
They are harmful to that army’s fighting power,
because this power is necessarily built largely on
independence, initiative, and intelligence. These
qualities cannot be combined with the principles I have
quoted.
The Germans have made a good army on the basis
of blind faith and the acceptance of injustice. But
is only good compared with the armies it has met so
far, armies hampered by folly and the myths of the
past. We can make that army look not so good.
A man who will accept injustice in silence will also,
for the same reasons, accept orders that do not make
sense to him; he will try to carry out these orders
without understanding them. In the old days that did
not matter much ; to-day it is fatal. Neither elastic
defence nor infiltration can be carried out well if orders
are obeyed with blind faith and without understand-
ing. And the German ways of handling these tactics
are not perfect; they are wooden, and when strongly
fought are over-cautious.
An injustice is an inefficiency. It is unpleasant to


be reminded that one can be inefficient; but the
officer or N.C.O. who is unjust, and therefore ineffi-
cient, must have this pointed out to him.
Because obedience is necessary, and obedience is
impossible if every man protests at once against orders
that he misunderstands or that are actually unjust,
protest against injustice must normally be made “ off
parade.” But a request for explanation of an order
that “ does not make sense,” that a man cannot make
part of himself and use all his wits and abilities to
carry out, should always be made by the man himself,
directly and at once. And the officer must, if he can,
explain. If he can’t, he must say “no time now, carry
on,” or must say “ carry on: you’ll see the idea later.”
In no case must he tick a man off for failing to under-
stand the order, or for querying it.
Explanation and command are opposites. Like
most opposites in this puzzling world, they intermix.
Changes in weapons and consequent changes in war
make it necessary that there should now be the maxi-
mum possible amount of explanation in the mixture.
It is the duty of the commander to put explanation
in with his orders to the limits of his time and ability.
But it has been proved useful, in armies that have made
their popular origins and attitudes part of their fighting
power, to have alongside the commander of any but
the smallest units a type of leader whose principle
duty is to explain, to hear complaints, to remedy
injustices and take some part in punishment. He
relieves the commander of many administrative duties,
of many "concerns about morale and discipline. He
stands closer to the men, in every way, than is possible
to the commander because of the latter’s function,
and in the experiences of these armies he has been


proved to be an invaluable link in the machinery of
warfare.
In Oliver Cromwell’s “ New Model ” army he was
called the “ agitator,” because he whipped up the
fervour of those godly and dangerous fighters. In
armies of the French Revolution he was the “ delegate.”
In the armies of the Soviet Republic he is called the
“political commissar.” In those of the Spanish
Republic he was often called by the same name as in
Russia, but his official title was comisario de guerra
commissar of war. ,
The Adjutant-General’s branch of the British Army
(which some say is a direct descendant from Crom-
well’s “ agitators ”) is responsible for the selection of
officers, care of wounded, health, discipline, burial,
welfare, routine and pay of the troops (F.S.R., Vol. I,
page 45). Ido not suggest that this branch should be
encouraged immediately to appoint “ political commis-
sars ” throughout the Army. But I believe that the
rescue of the British Army from obsolescence can be
effected most thoroughly and most rapidly if a Corps
of Adjutants can be formed to modernise it from
within, beginning usually with an attack on the barrack-
square, parrot-rigmarole mentality that must be
rooted out.
The Adjutant-General’s branch has already made a
step towards this proposal, which I first put forward
in April, 1939, by appointing Welfare Officers and
laying it down that men in the ranks may approach
such officers directly with their complaints or their
suggestions.. (All other officers, according to ancient
custom, can only be approached by a private if he gets
an N.C.O. to accompany him.) But the Welfare
Officer can fulfil only part of the job that I believe


necessary. Men must be persuaded, made to under-
stand, given the enthusiasm that will change their
discipline from an acceptance of orders to an eager
use of all their powers in pursuit of a common aim.
They must be made to feel that their own contribution
has value and is accepted, that the war is their war.
This can only be done on a political basis; a man whose
main concern is welfare can remove grievances of the
smaller sort, but he cannot do this political work with-
out which a democratic discipline is impossible.
I repeat that in modern battle the corporals and
sergeants leading little groups of infantry forward,
the junior officers and men of the mechanised units,
have to display initiative and independence, and have
to rely on their own judgment. When a small group of
tanks has broken through to a point fifty miles behind
the main line of the enemy, when a sergeant has led
his section to a point near the enemy’s artillery, these
units are cut off from command. The initiative they
need can come either from very long training along
rigid lines, or from the qualities and beliefs of the
men themselves. We have not got time for a long
period of Nazi training (even if we desired such a
training, which implies the destruction of all that we
are fighting for). Our only way to produce an army
capable of doing the job is to use the qualities of the
men who form our democracy to the fullest possible
extent, releasing them from-the hampering myths and
snobbery of the past.


CHAPTER III
An important aspect of the Nazi blitzkrieg has been
left out of the previous chapters, or only mentioned in
passing. It is their use of tanks and planes. In this
chapter we attempt to summarise the methods by
which it is possible to meet German tanks and planes.
The question of air attack is very simple. To meet
it you only have to keep your head, keep your morale.
It is a weapon against morale. It does not in fact
kill many men. The dive-bombers sound like all the
archangels of Hell. They are literally the most terrify-
ing things that exist on earth. And they kill very few
people. There is only one thing to do about bombers.
That is stay in a hole and pay attention to your
business. Your business, usually, is not with them,
but with men and machines on the ground.
Always remember that Hitler is trying to make
you afraid—or is perhaps succeeding in making you
afraid—simply by making various sorts of loud noise.
However afraid you may be, if you run you are in greater
danger from the bombers than if you stay put. And
if you put your face down and stop watching for the
enemy tank or the enemy infantry, you are doing
exactly what Hitler wants you to do. And you are
doing what is dangerous for yourself, and for your
side.
When aeroplanes come over, don’t look at them.
They see faces more easily than anything else. Keep
looking where the tanks or the enemy’s infantry may


appear. Then the bomber is less likely to spot you.
Even if he does spot you, he is absolutely unable to
hit you except by accident.
Troops who have not been accustomed to bombing
attacks can be frightened, shaken, tired and worried
by such attacks. But if they do not bunch, if they
remain in trenches or fox-holes or under any sort of
cover, they cannot be killed by such attack. There is
therefore no need whatever for units to retreat before
air attack alone. There is some need that the infantry
should be given weapons by which it can hit back at
the dive-bomber; to give men a feeling that they
have at least a chance to get their own back on those
who are attacking them is good for morale. But if
they are given such weapons—the light machine gun
and the Bofors gun are both useful —it must be well
rubbed into them that these weapons must be directed
first against ground targets, and only used against air
attackers when no ground targets are available and time
and ammunition is to spare. (The Bofors and other
light anti-aircraft guns can, of course, be mounted in
such a way as to make them quite useful anti-tank
weapons, and the absurd specialisation of these
weapons should be ended.)
The only other thing that needs saying about
German air tactics is that they concentrate their
bombers most heavily at the points where their
armoured units are held up. Road blocks and
strong points designed to stop the advance of mechan-
ised units should therefore be protected to some
extent against air attacks. Travelling recently in
England I have seen too many cases where a road-
block has been prepared, but there is no trench, or
dug-out, near the road block in which its defenders


can hide from the bombers and yet still do their job.
Such positions should be made as far as possible proof
against both forms of attack.
It is also quite unnecessary to put road blocks
where they are extremely easy to see from the air.
We have plenty of trees alongside our English roads,
and cover from the enemy’s view is an essential part
in any defensive works.
While these seem to me the only points of import-
ance with regard to German air tactics, I am doubtful
whether the British Army has yet fully realised the
need for certain simple rules by which it can protect
itself against any form of air attack.
The first rule is that troops must act in the right
way as soon as aircraft come over them. It is not
necessary and usually it is not possible for orders to
reach troops in the field in time. They should
scatter, if moving in close formation ; they should
not scatter far or attempt to reach cover if that is
more than twenty to fifty yards away; they should
lie still, keeping their faces down. This procedure
should become the normal one of the army, so that
wherever men are, or whatever they are doing, they
immediately disappear into the landscape and make
their unit a bad target as soon as a plane comes over.
It will of course be nectary in some cases to order
men to pay no attention to planes whatever ; gunners
must keep on working their batteries if need be, and
men with particularly urgent work to do must not
drop it. But these exceptions should be specially
ordered; the rule should be to break ranks, scatter,
lie down. And the reason for this rule should be
carefully explained to men, so that they understand
that faces and movement show up from the air. They


must understand also how much this business of air
attack can hamper the movement of an army, and
therefore how necessary it is for them to rally quickly
as soon as the plane has gone by, or as soon as it is
recognised to be one of ours.
Under conditions of severe air pressure the transport
of a modern army moves mainly at night. In fact
most of the work of the army is done at night, and as
little as possible is done in the day. But a commander
should never hesitate to expose troops whose morale
he can trust to air attack in daylight. Such attack
may slow down the movements of his troops, but will
not cause heavy casualties if they move in irregular
and open formations, and keep still whenever possible
while bombers are above them.
The tank is a much more serious weapon, at the
moment, than the aeroplane. I must admit that in
things I have written before May, 1940, I predicted
that tanks in this war would be almost as useless as
thev were in the Spanish War. But that was because
I could not conceive that the Allied armies would
completely neglect the lessons of the War in Spain.
To take only one example, the French 37 mm.
anti-tank gun was tried out by the Republican forces
in Spain. It was found to be just heavy enough to
knock out most of the German and all the Italian
tanks used in Spain. But clearly its shell was too
light and its muzzle velocity insufficient for heavier
tanks. Everyone knew that heavier tanks were being
built. The French themselves were building tanks
of seventy tons, with very heavy armour. Officers of
the International Brigade who were members of the
French Reserve of Officers went back to Paris and
reported that the French anti-tank gun was too light,


and that the Soviet gun throwing a shell twice as
heavy was a far better weapon. I and others in
Britain privately and publicly advocated a much
larger gun. It remains, I think, rather doubtful
whether the refusal to listen to us was due to stupidity
and incompetence, or whether it was due to the fact
that industry in France and Britain is organised so
little for production and so much for profit that if
the soldiers had wanted a change in the design and
size of their anti-tank weapons, they could not have
got such a change without long delay and very heavy
costs.
The Germans on the other hand tried out in Spain
their 88 mm. gun which combines the work of an anti-
aircraft and anti-tank weapon with that of field
artillery. Its shell is nine or ten times the weight of
the French 37 mm. shell, and the fact that it can be
used for the three purposes named makes it possible
for the Germans to have far more of such weapons
per mile than was possessed by the French and British
armies.
Early in the Spanish War we had no way of stopping
enemy tanks. Then miners came from the coal pits
and iron mines, sometimes carrying brown paper
parcels of mining explosives under their arms. They
strung themselves out across the fields near Madrid,
crouching under olive trees or bushes, in roadside
ditches or any hole in the ground. They waited for
the tanks. And when these blind machines came
nosing into a line of our “ dynamiters,” one of our
men would throw a packet of explosive with a crackling
fuse, dropping it between the tank and the ground.
And there was no tank !
If the tank did not come near enough, the men on


each side of it would watch the direction in which
the tank’s guns were pointing. Bolting from cover,
one of them would cut across to get close into the side
of the tank, so that he could sling his “ present ”
under the tracks. A tank’s machine-gun can seldom
fire downwards sufficiently to catch a man who is
crouching just beside its tracks. Sometimes these men
blew themselves up on the way to the line, or as they
were blowing up a tank. But they mastered the tanks.
In May, 1940, larger and more powerful German
tanks smashed across Belgium and France, caught the
British Army, the Belgian Army and many French
divisions in a net of steel and flame. The French
anti-tank guns were too weak; the British too few.
And the men who knew how to destroy German tanks,
who had practised the job and were confident and
proud of it —these men were Spanish refugees or
International Brigaders, locked up in French concen-
tration camps ! Or they had been sent to Africa or
Syria to make roads, their help refused, their souls
embittered.
And in the French and British and Belgian armies
there were few hand-grenades; there were none big
enough to stop tanks ; there were no men trained for
this job.
These methods were not only used by the opponents
of General Franco in Spain. Brigadier-General
P. R. C. Groves, D. 5.0., visited General Franco’s
forces in 1937, and on November 7th in that year the
Observer printed his account of an attack on General
Franco’s lines at Fuentes del Ebro, carried out by
over eighty Russian-made 14-ton tanks.
“ While the men in the front line trenches held


their ground and beat off the advancing infantry,
the supports and the reserves from the village closed
on the tanks. They closed in with bombs, bottles
of petrol, and rags soaked in the same liquid.
Nine of the tanks were captured or destroyed by
this means, and the remainder retired; the five
disabled in no-man’s-land were knocked out by
anti-tank guns.”
Brigadier-General Groves then described the
Russian tanks, and their vulnerable points. He goes
on;
“ The armament of this 14-ton tank consists of
a 4i-centimetre quick-firer and a machine-gun, both
mounted in a cupola; both must fire in the same
direction, and neither can be depressed sufficiently
to reach a man close alongside and bent double.
However rapidly the cupola may be turned, a
simultaneous rush from all directions invariably
ends in a number of men reaching the tank un-
touched ; it is these who use the rags, blankets,
petrol, and picks ; bombs do the rest.”
It is really amazing the British generals, even if
they refused to learn from the “ Reds ” —who held
up German tanks and planes for more than two years
—should have also refused to learn from the Fascists !
But it is no use digging up the past, except to make
for ourselves entrenchments against a future danger.
I believe the following points about anti-tank
grenades are correct. Fuses should be very rapid :
two to two and a half seconds. In a second a tank
may travel forty feet, and you cannot afford to have


your grenade burst behind the machine. The best
place from which to throw the grenade is a position
as close to the side of the tank as possible; let the
machine go just past you and sling the grenade under
the tank from behind it, dropping flat as you do so.
Don’t try to lob the grenade up into the air, as it will
probably bounce off, or waste its puncheon armour
that can resist it. The tracks and cog wheels of a
tank, and in some types the relatively unarmoured
belly, are the machine’s weakest points.
Where roads have to be guarded, grenades that will
go off when a tank runs over them are very useful.
They are much better than land mines, which have
to be buried where German bombs may set them off.
Even the largest grenade can be hidden by the man
carrying it in the bottom of a ditch, or in some sort
of hole, until the tank comes along. With these sort
of grenades, it is useful to have a string across the
road. The man on one side hauls on the string just
as the tank is approaching. On the other side a man
rolls the grenade out on to the road. A check string,
which must not get tangled, prevents the grenade
from going too far across to the other side. If you
have grenades to spare, string several of them together
to make a “ necklace ” over which the tank cannot
pass without detonating at least one grenade.
Remember always that a tank’s driver and gunner
can only look out of little slits in the armour plate.
If you stay hidden they cannot see yqu. If you
jump out suddenly, the tank gunner has to turn his
turret round to bring his guns to bear on you. The
most dangerous distance away from a tank is two
hundred yards ; the safest distance is six inches.
And remember that bullets bounce off armour. To


fire a rifle or machine-gun at a moving tank only tells
the crew where you are. If a tank is stopped, and
you are a very good shot, you may be able to put a
bullet into the little slits from which the driver and
gunner look out. But it is not easy.
Men handling grenades against tanks should not
have rifles. They should be supported by one or
two men with rifles who take a position well away
from them, and whose main idea is that they will
distract the tank’s attention and make it swing its
guns towards them and away from the hidden
“ dynamiters.”
There is no reason whatever why a great industrial
nation such as ours should not make plenty of these
grenades in a week or two. We in Spain had not
always enough, so we used “petrol bombs.” Ido
not recommend these, and I mention them only with
a serious warning. At least ten per cent, of those
who try these nasty things are likely to burn them-
selves quite badly.
And the petrol bombs are not much use. They
seldom can be relied on to stop a tank. If lobbed
on to the top of a tank, in the way that is sometimes
advised, they merely warm it slightly. If on the
other hand they are thrown underneath it, the petrol
just splashes out on to the road and the tank runs
over it without injury. The only method that I
know that has any chance of success includes a length
of curtain or blanket wrapped round the petrol bottle,
which should be so thrown as to get caught up in the
tracks and bogies of the tank ; I believe the only part
of*a tank that can normally be damaged by flame is
the rubber of the bogie wheels on which the track
runs.


These petrol bombs seem to have caught the
imagination of soldiers and public alike. That is
probably because they seem much easier to make
than any form of hand-grenade. And few English-
men know much about explosives. Their enthusiasm
for petrol bombs is due to their eagerness to get on
with the job, using whatever materials are ready to
hand. But we have great quantities of explosives
in this country. *lt is not at all difficult for us to
make really enormous quantities of large hand-
grenades, each containing a pound or a pound and a
half of explosives. These, in the hands of brave men,
are far more efficient than either anti-tank guns,
petrol bombs or tank traps.
In a later section of this book I mention some of
the other methods by which tanks have been checked
and can be checked again. But for trained soldiers I
am convinced that the use of large hand-grenades is
considerably the best method. Anti-tank guns, too,
seldom seem to be available at the points where tanks
break through. Anti-tank mines are usually exploded
by bombers, or the tanks avoid them. The hand-
grenade can, on the other hand, be far more widely
distributed than any gun can ever be. It can be
given to troops whose main work is transport or the
making of rdads, as well as to the men of the line.
It does not have to be laid out on or just under the
surface of the ground, like the anti-tank mine. Under
air bombardment the men responsible for anti-tank
work can hide their grenades in deep slip trenches
or in dug-outs. For these reasons the “ grenadiers ”
are much more likely to get their tanks than are any
other sort of troops.
We have to imbue anti-tank troops with the idea


that tanks are something to be hunted. Tanks stick
to roads whenever they can ; they lay up at night in
woods or villages. They are most vulnerable when
at rest, but can be checked by any sort of obstacle
and attacked when moving relatively slowly.
German mechanised units usually advance under
cover of a screen of motor-cycle scouts. Such scouts
cannot bring much fire-power to bear and are excellent
targets, even when riding fast. But they can be
checked and slowed down by any sort of extemporised
obstacle. In a narrow village street, if a blanket is
slung on a rope across the road from one window to
another so that the approaching Nazis cannot see
beyond the blanket, they are going to do very little
rapid advancing until they have had time to cut the
rope holding the blanket up—probably by means of
hand-grenades lobbed into the windows on each side.
Even so simple an obstacle as this therefore will
probably cause them to check in such a way that they
can be attacked with hand-grenades as well as with
machine-gun fire if available.
Broken glass on the roads is bad for the tyres of
motor-cycles and armoured cars. It is possible to
hammer nails through boards so that their points
project for an inch or two ; these can be roped together
and pushed out across the road from the ditch or from
a doorway. The aim should be to make it impossible
for the enemy motor-cyclists and lightly armoured
cars to get ahead ; then the Germans will have to
bring up their tanks. If we stop their tanks in the
ways that I have described, we have stopped the
German army. For nowhere has that army shown
itself able to make headway without its tanks pre-
ceding it.


CHAPTER IV
How should we train the army ? To those who know
that a German invasion may occur before this booklet
is published, this may seem rather a foolish question.
On the contrary, this possibility makes it an even
more serious question than it would otherwise have
been. For invasion does not mean the end of all
things. It certainly does not necessarily mean the
end of the war. But the possibility of invasion does
mean that we may lose a number of troops and have
to replace them quickly; we may have to raise a
much larger army, training rapidly each age group
as it is called up’ Therefore the possibility of in-
vasion makes necessary a great speeding up of training.
It is here that we come against the question of drill.
And I repeat here arguments that I first put forward
when conscription was being discussed in this country
but had not yet been instituted.
Infantry Training states that:
“ Drill is the foundation of discipline and esprit de
corps and forms part of the training of all infantry
units. Its objects are :
“i. To compel the habit of obedience. During
drill it becomes instinctive and automatic
for the leader to impress his will on his
subordinates, and for them to carry out
his intentions exactly.


“«• To stimulate, by combined and orderly move-
ment, the man’s pride in himself and his
unit.
“ iii. To enable bodies of troops to be formed up
and moved, rapidly and without confusion.
“ iv. To restore the morale of troops which have
been disorganised.”
(page 31).
It will be seen that the objects of drill are almost all
spiritual ” : three of the four objects are concerned
with obedience, command, pride and morale. There
is only one object of drill that is material, physical:
to ensure that men can be moved rapidly and without
confusion. Certainly this much drill is necessary.
Men of average intelligence need some three to six
hours of drill in order to make it possible for them to
move anywhere in sufficient order. In a short training
schedule it is best to crowd all these hours into a single
week, towards the middle of the schedule. Let them
fall over their feet and their weapons for a week or
two: then give them a bit of drill and they will see
the need for it. •
But to take perfectly good young men and give
them weeks on end of barrack-square, knocks out of
them not only any “ instincts ” for fighting they may
have, but also their ability to think about all orders
received and to use their own judgment. Inde-
pendence, initiative and intelligence are all ground
out of the recruit at the average training depot.
Infantry Training lays down a suitable schedule for
Regular Army depots : in 420 hours work it includes
94 hours of drill, 6 hours bayonet training, 6 hours
of guards and sentries, and 95 hours of physical


training—almost half the recruit’s first three months
or more is spent in this way.
Obsolete tactics due to obsolete drill have before
now destroyed armies. The armies of Austria were
defeated by Frederick the Great largely because they
were “ strategically fixed to the alignments on which
they deployed. . . . The drill-book of the day was
partly responsible for this absurdity ” (Studies in
Napoleonic Strategy, by Captain R. A. Hall).
The drill of the British Army, until recently, was
that of the’Crimean War. It suited the tactics of the
Crimean War : the men did then in battle in those
days exactly what they had been taught in drill.
Drill teaches movement of walking pace or quick
step. In modern war men crawl or run, or lie down.
Drill teaches movement in unison, with men shoulder-
close beside each other. In war men are in loneliness,
yards apart, moving separately more often than
together ; men need to learn how to move singly and
keep in touch with their group.
Drill teaches straight lines and use of the smoothest
available ground. In war all straight lines are suicidal
(because of enfilade fire by hidden machine-guns and
observation from the air) and broken ground is sought
because it gives cover.
Drill teaches men to stand up stiffly until ordered
to do otherwise. In war men should lie down, auto-
matically, or sit down, when any movement ends.
Men standing about waiting for the next thing to
happen can be seen from the air, or from observation
posts, far more easily than those who lie down.
Drill teaches men to obey definite, limited, im-
mediate orders. In war, at the crucial moments, they
will not get such orders. Such orders cannot reach


them in time. They have to act and think for them-
selves.
Here we reach the “ spiritual ” or disciplinary dis-
advantages of drill. Those who argue for plenty of
it (and I found them at the base of the International
Brigades, Albacete, using almost the same arguments
as at Aldershot, twenty-one years earlier), usually begin
their thesis with an indisputable proposition: that
discipline means obedience to command. It is not
willingness to obey but the fact of obeying that counts.
And in war it may be necessary to exact obedience to
orders that go against a soldier’s utter weariness, his
natural feeling that he is called on to do more than
his share (“ I’m always picked on ”) and the desire
of his body and mind for continued existence. Men
half asleep must be made to go on moving; men
half broken by noise and instinctive fear must be
made to leave relative safety and risk heavy odds in
counter-attack. War makes necessary strong nerves
and strong will-power in the commander and absolute
obedience by the men commanded. Agreed. ’
Therefore you must train men to give conditioned,
automatic, “ instinctive ” obedience to the word of
command. That is the case for drill.
And the answer to this case is that conditioned,
automatic, “ instinctive ” obedience is impossible under
conditions of actual warfare, if you are going to adopt
the tactics that are most suitable for modern war.
You cannot have such obedience when there can be
no minute-by-minute orders to obey.
You can get absolute obedience without drill. It
can arise from enthusiasm, from a consciousness of
common aim, from the desire for efficiency and victory,
from the mutual respect that links, in any army,
c


good officers to good men; these things drill stifles
and overlays with a grudging reluctance to do a single
thing beyond what is directly ordered.
In order to keep these really valuable qualities alive,
drill must be cut down in the training of all troops.
For the open air physical exercise that drill gives I
would substitute a certain amount of football, par-
ticularly the training of men in games of the type to
which they are not accustomed. Most men know
either Association or Rugby football; we should teach
them Northern Union and American rules; the
American game has more points of resemblance to
war than any other that I know.
I would also greatly increase the amount of field
work, particularly section and platoon training. A
number of competitions based on Boy Scout games
are useful because they teach men the use of cover,
of shadow, and of their eyes. Special ways of digging
are also useful. A good infantryman can dig himself
in when ■flat on the ground, without showing his
head or arms above a foot-high piece of cover. This
needs practice.
There are plenty of other ways, beside drill, to give
men exercise. Because of their efficiency against
tanks, water obstacles, such as rivers and canals, are
of greater importance in modern war than they used
to be. Why on earth are not all regular troops good
swimmers, so that they can cross such obstacles
without cumbrous boats or pontoons ?
In recommending sports and swimming as better
training than “ at the halt on the left form platoon ”
(or that ungainly groping for bayonets that follows
the order “ Fix-hipe! ”) I do not feel that lam out
of touch with the British tradition, playing fields of


Eton and all that. In advocating the use of films for
tactical training and military education in general I
am certain that I am in line with all good modern
educational theory. All films ever made that show
warfare, ancient or modern, in a moderately realistic
fashion, should be available free to troops in training.
Even films that show some lack of realism can be
used, if corrected by short lectures. Since I know
no British or American films of equal military value,
I must recommend the Russian films, Chapaiev , Men
of Kronstadt , and Defence of Petrograd. The worn
copies of these circulating in the training camps of
Spain taught more than days of ordinary instruction ;
there are probably others of equal value.
In suggesting alternatives to drill I have, in this
chapter, confined myself to only one aspect of the
problem : that which can be called the more practical
or materialistic aspect. There is another aspect: the
moral. It is the more important. The question is
not so much one of replacing obsolete training by
better training, as one of replacing the whole “ drill ”
attitude of mind, the attitude towards command and
initiative, surprise and orthodoxy, that governs the
Army to-day.
In the final chapter of this book I shall deal with
questions of courage and morale. Here let me say
that I fully acknowledge the possibility that men can
be made as it were automatically courageous by a long
and careful process of drill. But we have not time
for that, and we have a better method to hand. Men
who understand what they are fighting for, men who
are in fact fighting for a country that is theirs and for
their freedoms and for those they love, will not be
lacking in courage. All we have to do is to understand


their qualities and make them understand their tasks.
Then, from the moral point of view, there will be no
need for much drill.
Another positive proposal in the matter of training;
as soon as men have had some grounding in the use
of their own weapons, they should also learn a little
about the use of weapons employed by other units
and other arms. A modern battle is a closely woven
web of various arms and various services. The
training of the British Army has in the past been too
departmentalised ; the infantry knows too little about
the capacity and problems of its artillery, of sappers
and signallers, of planes and tanks. This training
is useful from a double aspect; it helps the various
arms to co-operate. It also helps them to know before-
hand what the Germans can and will do to them.
The British infantryman will not face only German
infantry; he comes up against German planes and
tanks, artillery and mortars. If he is attacking he
must know how to destroy as efficiently as possible the
enemy’s supply services, the lines along which reports
and commands travel, the framework of the enemy
army. Therefore he should be taught something
about these as they exist in our own army, and should
at the same time be taught special methods and
appliances the Germans are known to use.
Such a diversification of training will also hold the
interest of the men being trained better than a course
of training that only deals with the technique of the
particular unit or weapons to which the men belong.
And an interested man learns far faster than a man
suffering from the natural and inevitable boredom of
military life.
It would be good if this principle of integration of


arms and services could also be carried out in the
organisation of our army as well as in its training.
The German Army has carried further than any
other the principle learnt in Spain : that all arms and
weapons must be as far as possible integrated within
the smaller units of the army. The Germans have
to some extent “ artillerised ” their infantry. They
have provided the infantry with small, horse-drawn,
quick-firing weapons which form part of each infantry
regiment and are the of the regimental
commander.
In Spain we found it necessary to attach a small
unit of engineers, when we could get hold of them,
to each infantry brigade. And in the same way we
found that medium tanks were usually best handled
if given to the infantry brigade commander ; they
were less efficiently handled when not closely linked
up with the infantry.
This integration and co-operation between all arms
is an essential development of the modern army. The
tactics needed therefore are not simply those of
self-dependence, of infiltration and of defence by
small self-contained units. They are also tactics of
co-operation ; the fire of each unit must cover the
next unit. The machine-guns must interweave their
fire and they must protect not only their riflemen and
other machine-gun posts but also the hidden anti-
tank guns mingled with them. The phrase is clumsy,
but the best way that I know to describe these tactics
is to call them “ the tactics of co-operative self-
dependence.” Whatever name or label we give
them, they are clearly essential to the training and
organisation of an array for modern war.


I have only one more suggestion to make about the
training of troops. And that is that far more time
and care should be given to the training of men in
the use of hand-grenades of all sorts. I have already
indicated my reasons for believing that these weapons
are the best answer to the tank. But clearly men who
are to use them effectively must practice continually
if they are to get their grenades at the right moment
under moving vehicles.
I should not like to s#y that it is easy to hold a
defensive position simply with men and hand-grenades.
But I do know that men in deep narrow trenches,
with concrete shelters or deep dug-outs where they
can hide under heavy bombardment, and pill-boxes
for their sentries, can stand up to any amount of
hammering and still keep their position. Then if the
enemy attack in armoured vehicles they can use their
large hand-grenades ; against enemy infantry attacking
they can use the small ones. And if you have plenty
of men and plenty of grenades you can be extremely
hard to shift. The reason why you cannot rely only
on such a defence is that there is bound to be some
weakness in your line; the enemy will force his way
in at some point where the defence cracks under
pressure—and he must at once be thrown out again
by counter-attack. For counter-attack you need
weapons that will hit at a greater distance than a
hand-grenade can be thrown. But for purely passive
defence, men with grenades and machine-guns can
put up a very good show. Therefore we should give
far more time to training men in throwing this missile
at towed targets and at stationary targets, until they
can drop a practice grenade exactly where they want
to and when they want to. It will be very much more


useful than instruction as to how to “ Biff the
Bloody Boche in the Belly with the Bayonet.”
In all our training of soldiers,, we must encourage
them to use their heads by allowing them plenty of
alternative courses of action, among which they must
themselves choose.
When war was relatively simple and many soldiers
were very simple indeed, it may have been necessary
that the orders given to these soldiers should be
entirely plain and straightforward. The rule grew
up that in British “ operation orders ” —orders for
definite movements on the field of battle, that reach
not only battalion and company commanders but also
in some cases sergeants and corporals—no alternative
courses, to meet variable contingencies, could be
admitted.
A farmer, speaking to farm labourers, can give the
order: if it is fine, we will harvest to-morrow; if
not, we won’t. But a captain speaking to his com-
pany, cannot say: if the enemy’s barbed wire is
found to be fairly well destroyed, by the patrols we
are sending out, we shall attack, if not, we won’t.
Such alternatives are normal in all ordinary lives.
A child has to cross the road to get to school. You
tell it: if the traffic lights are green towards the
traffic, red towards you—wait. When the traffic
lights change, cross over—but look out for cars
turning across your path.
Alternative courses, dependent on things that may
or may not happen, can be understood by farm
labourers and by children. Clearly they can be
understood by soldiers.
The reason why soldiers are not supposed to get
orders with “ ifs ” in them is not that they cannot


understand such orders. It is that they have to use
their own judgment and initiative in deciding which
alternative to choose.
Since they must now be trained to use initiative,
we should drop these rules that stand in the way of
such training.
And in our actual operation orders, when fighting,
we must also trust the men on the spot to do the
best they can with the general directions given them.


CHAPTER V
Up to the present we have been dealing only with the
ways in which our army can prepare itself to meet
the Blitzkrieg. Now we turn to the question of a
People’s War.
Let us define what we mean by this at once. It
does not mean the indiscriminate arming of everyone.
It means that the efforts of our army for the defence
of this country should be supplemented by some
training and some arming of about four million men,
who continue to live as civilians and to work at their
jobs until invasion occurs or until they are needed.
Among these four million there would almost
certainly be over half a million ex-service men.
There are ex-servicemen between the ages of forty
and fifty-five who are entirely capable of taking part
in local defence. And these men can help in the
training of the others.
The Local Defence Volunteers are the beginnings
of such a force. They have been given too little to
do, and often the wrong things to do ; their organisa-
tion and leadership is not yet that of a People’s Army.
But the force is growing and developing ; it can grow
until the real eagerness of our people to defend their
homes finds full expression within it.
Those who oppose the idea of a People’s War argue
that men are helpless against the machines of modern
warfare. They argue that an amateur army is useless,
would lead to confusion and would even hamper


our trained soldiers. But with these arguments they
are going directly against the experiences of the past,
the history of struggles for freedom in many parts of
the world.
It has happened several times in the past that a
People’s War has broken the most powerful military
machine of the period.
The Dutch Republic rose to greatness by means of
such a People’s War; Italy was freed largely by
Garibaldi’s fighters.
When Napoleon ruled Europe from Warsaw to
Spain, from Scandinavia to Sicily, a People’s War
broke out against him in Spain. Each Spanish village
became a fortress. Each Spaniard became a guerrilla
fighter. This war destroyed Napoleon’s strength.
About the same period we in these islands were
threatened with invasion. Pitt called for the power of
calling and arming at a moment’s notice the whole of
the active population. Sir John Moore, who revolu-
tionised the training of the British Army, and pro-
duced Wellington’s incomparable soldiers by seeing
that each irfan understood and was interested in his
job, was put in charge of our defences. He wrote :
“ Nothing would damp the enemy’s spirit more
than to see the country turned out against him.
He knows the strength of our army—regular,
militia and reserve—and will come prepared to
meet and may hope to beat it.
“ But h° w penetrate or subdue a country where
the population are armed and opposed to him ? ”
That is the spirit of the People’s War. And since


those days there have been many other examples, in-
cluding the two years’ defence of Madrid.
A battalion that I commanded helped to hold the
last road into Madrid. It consisted of men and boys
no different from you who read these lines. Many of
them had received only ten days’ training. None
of them had more than six weeks. They had a few
machine-guns, all of them over twenty years old. But
these 500 men held up 2,000 of Franco’s infantry,
commanded by Reichswehr officers and backed by
German guns and German planes. Our battalion was
scattered by German tanks. It reformed when the
tanks had gone and took back the lost ground. That
also is the spirit of the People’s War.
And I know from that experience that this in-
vincible spirit can be roused and set free in the people
of this country. But only if we are as revolutionary
as William Pitt, and the men who dared to make him
Prime Minister when he was only twenty-four years
old. Only if we are as revolutionary as Sir John
Moore, and dare explain fully to our soldiers and our
citizens the task that lies ahead of them. You do not
make a People’s War by ordering people to do things.
You do it by convincing, arousing, letting loose their
strength.
At the moment when this is written a People’s War
is being waged in China. The Chinese forces include
a regular army, which is much weaker in fire-power-
than the Japanese invaders. But they also include
guerrilla forces that work behind the Japanese lines,
and carry on so continual a pressure that the Japanese
are never safe away from the cities that they hold and
the railways that they patrol in force.
Finally those who oppose the idea of a People’s War


as “ amateur ” and “ inefficient ” should study Luden-
dorff’s book The Nation at War. Ludendorff was a
well-trained Prussian officer, intensely professional,
and not in the least an amateur. He advocates that
when Germany is faced with a war on two fronts, the
German Army should be fully concentrated on one of
these fronts and that a People’s War should be waged
by an armed population on the other. And he
writes :
“ A ‘ People’s War,’ blazing up all over the
country, will eventually prevent the victor from
reaping the full fruits of his victory.”
Since history and the opinions of great generals like
Sir John Moore and Ludendorff are against them, the
opponents of the idea of a People’s War have to fall
back on some very strange arguments. They say
that we are demanding “a Tommy-gun for every
village idiot.”
Do they think that the people of Britain consist
mainly or largely of village idiots ? We have rather
a different idea about the characteristics of the British
people.
They argue that “ much nonsense is talked about
the lesson of Spain . . . the true lesson of Spain is that
the better equipped, better organised side won.” It
‘ is possible that these journalists know more about
Spain than I do. I only fought there.
I, as a soldier, say that we proved in Spain that a
People’s Army can hold up Fascism year after year.
And we lost because Hitler and Mussolini had then—
and have now—friends in Britain, powerful enough to
prevent us getting arms and food. We lost, too,


because the friends of Fascism here were not fought
and rooted out by those who professed to be against
them.
A final point; defence needs training and full
equipment. We agree with our journalist friends on
this. It does. But if we have not time for full
training, if we have not made the arms yet, what
shall we do ? Sit down ? Surrender ? Not while
these islands have men, metal and explosives.
The plea for defence by fully-trained troops is a
plea—almost—for surrender. For we have not got
nearly as many fully-trained troops as France had. In
France those who feared the French people had their
way. Their way led to capitulation.
Those who ruled France during the first year of
this waj were afraid of their own people. They were
afraid to tell them the truth. They lulled them with
stories of impregnable fortifications ; they told them
that the French army was nearly five million strong.
In fact the French Army was scarcely half that strength.
They suppressed all criticism in the press and jailed
those who might ask awkward questions. If we fall
to that level here we shall get the same results ; if on
the other hand we make the change necessary towards
a people armed, alert, and angry, we can hold up
Fascism no less efficiently than the Spaniards or the
Chinese. And since we have immensely more in-
dustrial power, and resources that cannot be com-
pared with the Spanish resources, or the Chinese,
after holding up the Fascists we shall soon be in a
position to take the initiative and crumple them up.
There are those who say that the idea of arming the
people is a revolutionary idea. It certainly is. And
after what we have seen of the efficiency and patriotism


of those who ruled us until recently, most of us can
find plenty of room in this country for some sort of
revolution, for a change that will sweep away the muck
of the past. But arming the people is also com-
pletely part of the tradition of the British. It is in
fact part of the British Constitution, and the fyrd of
Anglo-Saxon times, the militia or volunteers of later
periods, have often been called “ the Constitutional
Force,” because it is part of the fundamental law of
this country that each able-bodied citizen can and
should have arms and training for defence.
The tradition of an armed people in Scotland goes
back beyond the days of Wallace and the Bruce; in
Wales the wars by which the Kings of England were
held up for more than a hundred years were waged
not by a professional army separate from the ordinary
people of the country, but by that people acting as an
army. In England the tradition exists to this day in
various forms. I remember as a child looking at a
parish notice-board outside a church and laughing at
the strange name of one of the areas of local govern-
ment to which a notice referred ; it was called “ The
Wapentake of Thoresby.” A Wapentake—l do not
know if these areas have survived reforms in local
government—was a country area in which the able-
bodied men must bring each year their weapons to a
central place, so that the authorities might see that
these weapons were kept in good condition, and that
the men handling them were fit to do so. It is a pity
that these traditions of our past have been allowed to
slide out of existence.
We can, if we choose, go even further back into the
history of Britain, and still find the tradition of a
People’s Army. King Arthur of the Round Table is


reported by Geoffrey of Monmouth, our first historian,
to have called his people together when war threatened,
and spoken as follows :
“ ‘ Comrades,’ saith he, ‘ alike in adversity and in
prosperity, whose prowess I have made proof of in
giving of counsel not Jess than in deeds or arms,
now earnestly bethink ye all in common, and make
wise provision as to what ye deem best for us to
do. . . . The more easily therefore shall we be
able to withstand the attack of Lucius, if we shall
first with one accord have applied us to weighing
heedfully the means whereby we may best enfeeble
the effect thereof.’ ”
It is not a small or unimportant thing that we have
far back in our traditions a leader—so far back that he
is the king of the fairy tales and of the poets—who asks
his fighting men for their advice and speaks to them as
comrades.
All this, some will say, is very well, but what of the
practical side of the matter ? How should these four
million men be armed and how should they be trained ?
Let us take the question of arms first. It is well
known that there are not yet enough arms in Britain
to equip fully all the men in the army, including those
in training and those registered but not yet called up.
So where are the arms to come from for a People’s
Army ?
Rifles first. There are hundreds of thousands of
rifles, of various sorts and sizes, to be bought in the
American continent. Our army cannot use them—
because they are of all sorts and sizes. Ammunition


would get mixed. Buy them and let our citizens’
army have them.
The .22 rifle should not be despised. It is more
valuable than most pistols.
But the weapon that every imaginative youth who
wants to fight would like to have is the “ Tommy-
gun,” the sort of sub-machine gun used by gangsters
and by G-men in the U.S.A. Why not appeal to
those who make and possess these weapons in the
U.S.A. ? A few days after we had asked for these
guns, and for American and Canadian sporting rifles—
some of which are heavy enough to kill grizzlies—we
should find the New York docks piled high with them.
Half the farms in North America have weapons of
some sort. And the little sub-machine guns are
made by the thousands.
During the war in Spain, factories in Catalonia were
able to make these simple sub-machine guns. Fac-
tories in Britain can certainly do so. What the
Catalans did was to take a captured German gun and
copy it; what we should do (in normal times) is to
spend many years discussing the design. That is
what we did with the Bren gun. The Catalan system
is better.
Some years ago those who knew German arms
pressed on the War Office the idea that some of our
troops should be armed with “ Tommy-guns.” A
general is said to have answered : “ We do not intend
to introduce the methods of the Chicago gangster into
European warfare.” Now someone else has intro-
duced these methods, and very effective methods
they are. Twelve thousand parachutists, most of
them carrying sub-machine guns, dropped into
Holland in the three days following May 9th. That


was the moment to wake up; and if we had woken
up then, we might already have had in this country
the whole available supply, new or second-hand, of
such guns from North America. And within a few
weeks we could be turning out several hundred a
week in this country. If we mean to arm the people,
it has got to be done.
Another important weapon is even easier to make.
That is the hand-grenade. Our men in France in
1914 and 1915 made hand-grenades out of plum-and-
apple jam tins. They are not always perfectly safe,
these home-made hand-grenades. We are not advising
anybody to start making them in the kitchen. It is
quite considerably unwise for youngsters who know
nothing about explosives to experiment with them.
But there are in this country not only factories but
even garages, pithead workshops, etc., which are
quite capable of turning out effective hand-grenades.
They are so easy and so cheap to make that it is
really a miracle of incompetence that this country
has, at the time of writing, remarkably few available
for those who must defend it. The small hand-
grenade, about size of an orange, is excellent
against men. But we also need a much larger grenade
against tanks.
I have already published, and I repeat below, the
simplest possible design for a small home-made hand
grenade. Idoso in order to prove to every one that
these grenades can, in fact, be made in every town
in the country. And that the materials of which they
are made are available everywhere.
It is not the best grenade in the world. But it
can do the job. It is not a tank-stopper. To make
a tank-stopper you take the same design and make it


HOME-MADE GRENADE


much bigger, to hold at least a pound of explosive.
I prefer lbs.
It is dangerous. Do not play with these things.
I realise that in publishing this there is the risk that
some patriotic mine-owner will get a few of these
grenades made, for testing. But that is a risk that
has to be taken. For if invasion occurred to-morrow,
and parts of this country were separated from other
parts, we might need something really “ home-made ”
like this little weapon. We should not be able to
get on with it without a design such as that I publish
here.
Here is the way to make it; Take an 8-oz. stick of
ordinary commercial blasting glycerine, such as the
Polar Brand, made by 1.C.1. Divide it carefully, in
two or three parts. It is somewhere near l£-ins. in
diameter. Take two metal pipe couplings, of about
2-in. bore. Malleable iron or steel are best. These
are in every plumber’s stock. They should be stuck
together with any glue that grips metals, or welded
together roughly. Wrap the explosive in stiff paper
and slip it inside the couplings, which form a heavy
metal tube. Some of the explosive will probably
stick out at the ends. That’s all right. Make a hole
in the explosive at one end with a pencil. Get ready,
BUT DO NOT INSERT, a detonator to fit this hole.
Modern detonators are safer than those of the past,
but they should not be handled or put near the
explosive until this becomes necessary.
Attach firmly to the detonator a length of black
quick fuse, the sort that bums about 2 ft. per minute.
Three inches is enough; that gives you 1\ seconds.
You shorten this fuse as desired, to give a 5-second
or 2|-second interval between lighting and bursting.


With the ordinary “ Bickford ” fuse it is a good tip
to attach the heads of two matches to the fuse at
the point where you want to light it.
Wrap the whole thing in a piece of waterproof
cloth, to be tied at the neck near the fuse. An
ordinary sponge bag would do. And that completes
a grenade which anyone accustomed to explosives
can make, and any brave man with a little training
can use.
With our enormous manufacturing resources we
can make far better grenades than these. And they
can be made in factories and workshops that at present
are doing nothing towards the production of war
materials. They will be handier than this home-
made design ; probably it will not be necessary to
light them ; they will have a pin to be pulled out and
a handle to release, as has the Mills bomb. But it
cannot be too strongly emphasised that we need and
can have grenades by the hundred million. We need
not only production on a great scale but also pro-
duction in many centres, so that if bombing or in-
vasion puts out of action a factory here and a power
line there, there is no hold-up in the supply of these
handy little weapons.
It is perfectly true that if these things are made
by the million and widely distributed, there will be
accidents. There may even be some cases of murder,
and probably more cases of criminal negligence. But
the life of this country is at stake; the number of
accidents will not be comparable with the accidents
we have every year on our roads. Moving about
the country in motor-cars, etc., we kill some hundreds
of people ; preparing to defend ourselves we might kill
some dozens. That would be regrettable. But so is


war. And we should not tie our hands when
threatened by Fascism, because of bye-laws about
explosives and the other necessary regulations of
peace.
A government of a country that has been long
accustomed to peace is naturally reluctant to put
explosives and lethal weapons in the hands of its
citizens. A government that represents propertied
classes is always terrified by the fear of revolution.
If we are to have a People’s Army we must break
down this reluctance and this fear, and find for our-
selves a government that will entrust to the people
the means for their defence.
One final word about weapons. Some “ parashots ”
are carrying twelve-bore guns. These are not good
enough for the job. But if they have to be used,
the following can be done: take each cartridge and
remove the cardboard end; shake out the small
pellets of shot. If you can get hold of more powder,
remove the wad that separates the powder from the
shot and add enough extra powder to fill half the space
where the shot used to be. Take the pellets, which
will seldom stop a man at twenty yards, and melt
them down to make large slugs. These should be
about the size of your little finger. Pack three of
these into the open end of the cartridge, and you
have something that will stop a man at fifty yards or
more.
Another way of doing the same thing is to pour
candle-grease into the shot; the candle-grease will
solidify and make a single “ bullet ” out of the shot
which will be dangerous to an enemy at considerably
greater range than the shot normally would be. But
because shot-gun barrels are “ choked ” the candle


grease “ bullet ” must be made a little smaller than
the inside of the cartridge.
Still a third way is to slice the cartridge with a
sharp knife round the middle of the cardboard tube,
so that the part containing the lead pellets is almost
separate from the part containing the powder. When
such a cartridge is fired the whole end of it goes off
as a single bullet.
Some rather absurd things are being done about
shotguns at the moment when this is written. In
some country areas they have been collected from the
farmers and country people for the L.D.V. Then they
have been taken to the nearest market town and locked
up in the police station or some other centre. Frankly,
this looks more like disarming the people than arming
them. It is the sort of thing that happens when the
local gentry and the chief constable are far more
afraid of ordinary Englishmen than they are of Ger-
mans. If parachutists landed outside many towns that
I know, they would find that their way had been cleared
for them by the British authorities, who have dis-
armed the first people that could get at them. There
are farmers, farmers’ sons and other village people
who have joined the L.D.V. and brought rifles as
well as shotguns to the first parade. Then to their
astonishment they are told that they may not keep
these weapons at home or carry them with them in
the fields. They may not even go rabbit shooting.
It is a good thing that we know from past experience
how immense is the stupidity of some of the English'
country gentry and of most bureaucrats. Otherwise
it would be natural to believe that this disarming of
the people is definitely treacherous.
The next thing to be considered after weapons is


training in the use of weapons. That will he dealt
with in the next chapter. But there are two points
essential to our present defence that come partly
under the military authorities, partly under civil
authorities, partly under the L.D.V. or the People’s
Army of the future. These two points are the mining
of bridges and the placing of obstructions in open
spaces so that enemy aeroplanes cannot land on them.
Bridges in Poland, in Belgium, and on the Meuse
in France were not blown up. England has many
rivers, and it may be necessary to blow up the bridges
over them, at an hour’s notice, if the Germans land
tanks from planes or ships. At present many of these
bridges are guarded by men whose job it is to see
that parachutists do not blow them up. But in few
cases are there arrangements made and explosives
ready to blow them up ourselves if we need to do so.
If I were in charge of an area of the country I should
go to some mineowner and ask him to lend me enough
explosive to wreck the bridges in my area, and enough
men to bore the holes necessary, and to fire the shots
if need be. There might be accidents ? Yes. But
better several accidents than a failure to blow up
bridges in front of a German armoured column.
It is not a question of the Local Defence Volunteers
or civilian authorities taking over this business of
blowing up bridges. The destruction of a bridge is
a military decision and must, wherever possible, be
left to a military authority. But the people who live
and work near a bridge, the local L.D.V., and the
local government body concerned, must help the
military in two ways. They must, when necessary,
see to it that the bridge can be blown up. And if
invasion happens, and there are landings from the


air at unexpected places and bombings that cut com-
munications, someone really near the bridge—not
miles away at the end of a telephone wire—must take
responsibility if military orders do not come through.
It is a very serious thing if bridges are blown up too
soon; troops and transport may be cut off on the
wrong side of the bridge and may therefore fall into
the enemy’s hands. But it is a much more serious
thing for a bridge not to be blown up at all; and
this has happened so often when the Nazis are moving
unexpectedly fast in their blitzkrieg way, that we
ought to take this matter seriously at once and be
ready to make our rivers strong lines of defence against
enemy tanks.
Our islands are very well provided with rivers.
The Germans have a few amphibian tanks which can
swim a river or a canal; but these few machines are
relatively lightly armoured and not of great value in
battle. All the rest of their vehicles can be checked
by rivers and canals. But there are many roads in
this country, and therefore many bridges. At the
moment when I write the rivers that are our best
lines of defence could in most cases be crossed by
any German mechanised division without any delay
whatever. By preparing these bridges for destruc-
tion and acting resolutely at the right moment, we
could force them to delay for some hours at each of
these little rivers, if not for longer periods of time.
Where they find the bridge blown up, they have to
bring up infantry who swim over or paddle over in
rubber boats, secure a wide foothold on the other
side and protect their engineers, who make a bridge
of boats or pontoons across the stream.
A point of equal importance is the obstruction of


landing places where troop-carrying planes can come
down. Every place where an aeroplane can land is
a way in for the invader. All who live in the country
or can get into the country for an evening or a week--
end, can help to block up these ways. Some authori-
ties are slow to realise the danger. Near a town I
know is a disused aerodrome. This is guarded by a
few volunteers not very well armed. It ought to be
made unuseable at once—unless the Air Ministry
needs it. If it is needed, a heavy guard should be put
on it.
And it is not only aerodromes, or mainly aerodromes,
that must be made impossible for Nazi planes to land
on. There are big fields giving a clear space of
250 to 300 yards. There are downs and grass-
covered commons, cricket fields, golf courses.
Here are three methods of making them unuseable
1. Trip wires, securely fastened down, can be strung
across about 4 feet high. They can be higher ;
they must be strong.
2. Where there are crops, take some stout poles
like telegraph poles and bury them well down.
They will not interfere much with reaping.
Put them 50 feet apart. They should knock
the wing off any aeroplane that tries to land.
3. Where possible, trench open spaces such as
downs. Don’t worry about the hilly bits,
they are safe. Across the level bits, cut
trenches with one wall straight up, about
3 feet deep, and the other wall sloping. These
trenches should be at least 10 feet wide to
catch the wheels of a fast-moving plane.


There is more to do, and many willing hands to do
it. It might be as well to make it difficult for Nazi
seaplanes to land in some parts of our rivers and on
the Norfolk Broads.
Cars that are not needed for defence units, and
are not in use, must be really immobilised, in such a
way that a competent mechanic cannot make them
workable. Otherwise the Germans will be presented
with all the transport they need if they capture a
few towns.
In Poland and in France, German tanks drove up
to civilian petrol stations and took their petrol from
the pumps. All the stations should be guarded at
once. The guards should be instructed when and
how to bum the petrol. Where it is difficult to set
petrol alight, because of danger to surrounding
buildings, it may in some cases be enough to have
means ready available for destroying the petrol pumps.
In other cases it should be possible to make the petrol
temporarily useless by dumping sugar, linseed oil, or
some similar substance into the storage tank. Water
will not do.
In some towns it would be wise to close down the
petrol pumps within the town, as an elementary
A.R.P. precaution, as well as a precaution against
tank raids. Supplies for these towns could be made
available at roadside petrol stations in relatively open
country.
But if to-day we appointed volunteers, or half-trained
soldiers, or even trained men who had not been in
the front line in France, to guard such petrol stations,
the first thing they would ask is: “ What do these
tanks look like ? ” It is urgently necessary that
silhouettes, photographs and drawings of all German


and British types of tanks, armoured cars and army
transport vehicles should be circulated to our soldiers,
and throughout the civilian population. Then you
can be sure that you do not blow up a British tank
or wait smilingly while a German vehicle approaches
waving a Union Jack as camouflage.
In these ways many of us can do much to make
Britain impregnable even [before we get arms and
learn how to use them.


CHAPTER VI
This is a first lesson in modern warfare. It concerns
all of you, whoever you are, that five in Britain.
Whether you work on the land or in a factory, in a
city office or near the sea coast, you may turn round
any morning now and find that the war is within ten
miles, or a mile, or a hundred yards of you. A study
of the suggestions which follow will not transform
you into a mature soldier. But it will enable you to
be useful instead of passive in the fight to repel the
invader.
First you should leam how to take cover.
Then learn how to use weapons.
Then learn how to move with as much use of cover
as possible; then learn how, and what, to dig.
After that, learn the ways in which you can stop
tanks.
Then learn the probable tricks and tactics that the
enemy will use against you,
I know that you can learn these things within a few
days or weeks because I have myself played a con-
siderable part in teaching these things to five hundred
Englishmen, Scotch, Welsh and Irish, who within
six weeks of the first hundred being grouped together,
became one of the best battalions of the International
Brigade in Spain. The first hundred got six weeks
training, but drafts were coming in until the last week
of all, and a few of those who moved up the line with
us had only ten days’ training. Yet in that line the


battalion endured over fifty per cent, in casualties—
one man killed and wounded out of each two men
who went into action. And after this hammering
they were only 800-900 yards back from the line where
they had started. They had lost almost all their twenty-
year-old semi-derelict machine-guns ; they had been
scattered by tanks and reformed ; but they were still
in position as a fighting unit, covering the last road
into Madrid, despite the continued pressure of an
enemy four times greater in man-power and twenty
times greater in fire power.
Because that was done by men no different from
yourselves, by men who taught themselves and became
soldiers through their desperate eagerness to save the
world from Fascism, I know it can be done by you,
since that eagerness now is in you and you also are
defending your homes and your future.
The first thing needed is space on which to practice.
Forget the trespassers’ boards, and the rules that say
that the parks must be locked, or that you may not
go on the grass. But don’t practice only in the open
country ; take also some side streets, or back gardens
that your neighbours will willingly let you trample
through if you explain what you are doing. Practice
what you can in the yard of the factory, in the play-
ground of an empty school, anywhere you can find
the space.
If there is no cover in the only place where you
can train for war, make some cover. Put a blanket on
a couple of sticks to represent a bush, dig a little hole
and throw up a foot of earth to one side of it; drag
out old packing cases ; arrange two bicycles together
and cover them with waterproof. Sort yourselves out.
As a first rough approach to organisation make ten


men a section, and thirty men a platoon. Practice
sorting yourselves out so that you can fall in quickly
—the section in three ranks of three with the section
leader in front of it, and three of these together to make
a platoon. Then start on the business of working from
one end to another of an area, first in threes, then in
sections, then in platoons, in such a way that men are
not closely bunched together, yet each man uses to
the maximum possible whatever cover is available.
I put this point of cover first because raw troops,
eager to fight, always expose themselves too much,
get killed too quickly, either by neglect of cover or
by bunching together too closely.
There are many games and competitions which the
Boy Scouts know that teach the use of cover. Ask your
local scouts. Don’t be ashamed to leam from some
cocky kid. If it was only your life that was in question,
you might not like a fourteen-year-old teaching
you how to keep your head down, when to crawl and
when to rush. But this is not your personal life only ;
it is everyone else’s that you know and the millions
that you don’t know ; it is defeat jjr victory.
The next thing is the use of weapons. There are
only three sorts of weapons that you are likely to be
given at first. One is a rifle or shot-gun, one is a pistol,
one is some sort of hand-grenade.
There are plenty of trained soldiers to handle all
the Tommy-guns, machine-guns, artillery and other
weapons at present available. So consider first these
three.
To use any of these weapons in the right way, you
must be able to gauge the distance between yourself
and the target. Space a few men out at varying dis-
tances away from a group of other men. Number


the men spaced out. Tell Number One to signal with
hand. Get your group of men to write down their
estimate of how far away that man is from the group.
Do this for short distances, as well as for long ones.
Then when you have actually paced out these distances,
choose those men who are the best natural judges of
distance. Start them in on the instruction of small
groups of others. Make use of all sorts of slopes and
gradients to exercise their judgment. If it’s practic-
able, get some ex-Service man to teach you how to
judge distance by the apparent size of an ordinary
window, by the relation between the breadth of your
thumb, nail, held out at arm’s length, and a two-story
or three-story house. In the local pub., instead of
playing darts, make the boys guess the distance to any
feature that can be seen from the door or the window.
When it comes to hand-grenade work, teach your men
what is the width of a wide street, and a narrow one ;
the most important distances fol hand-grenade work
are those from twelve yards to twenty-five yards.
Distances look very different if you are lying down,
or if you’re in a hole with your eyes on the level of the
ground, and that’s the next thing to get your men to
realise.
Get them to make certain of the distances between
lamp posts, the telegraph poles, etc., in any area that
they are likely to be defending. Then you can judge
distances along a road by counting how many telegraph
poles are between you and the target.
Aiming comes next on the list. You must teach
yourself how to press the trigger of a rifle without
jerking or shaking the barrel, and while keeping your
aim completely firm and steady. You can get on with
this job with the help of any weapon whatsoever that


possessed sights and a trigger. Don’t bother to do
aiming practice standing up, without cover. That
sort of method of firing went out years ago. Practice
lying flat on the ground, kneel or crouch behind
sandbags or a wall—or even aim standing behind a
wall and let your elbows rest on top of it.
The following is a convenient form of practice:
Get or improvise a target of white paper and a small
black bull’s eye. Put this on a stick near the ground
so that it remains steady. Get one of your men to
aim with the rifle (which must be empty of any cartridge
or charge in the breech of the magazine). Get another
man to lie down a ad look through a hole in the centre
of the bull’s eye. Tell him to repeat the usual firing
orders : “ Fire,” “ Re-load,” etc. It’s his job to see
that the foresight and backsight of the weapon are
correctly in line with his own eye (and therefore with
the bull’s eye of the target) while the other man keeps
his aim and fires. There are two main rules for good
aiming : breathe gently and naturally while taking your
aim, and squeeze the trigger very slowly and firmly.
This practice is likely to be infinitely more valuable
to you in the days ahead of us, than any amount of
sloping arms and drilling.
On pistols there are two essential things to remem-
ber : Never assume that “it isn’t loaded.” It may be.
And don’t expect with any sort of pistol, unless you
are a good shot already, to affect a man at twenty yards
range. Unless you are thoroughly used to a pistol,
all you can do is wait with it round the door when you
know that an enemy is likely to come through the door,
or wait with it round the corner when you know he
is likely to come round the corner. Then fire at point
blank range.


Men who have never used a rifle can, however, fire
one fairly well as soon as they have learnt how to
judge distances, how to aim correctly and how to press
the trigger.
All this can be done without ammunition. Our
ammunition is precious. Do not waste it in practising
too much at the rifle ranges—if you get any chance
to practice there at all. In Spain few of our men had
more than five rounds to practice with before they
went into action. And if you kfiow you are not a good
shot but still you get hold of a rifle or shotgun some-
how, hand it over to the next man you come across
who knows the job.
The hand-grenade is a useful weapon for everyone.
Great precision of aim is not required. Any man
and any woman—who can throw a brick, should be
able to do valuable damage with a hand-grenade,
especially if they can estimate distances up to twenty-
five yards. Actually a brick is not a bad instrument
to start practising with, if no grenade-like objects are
available.
The commonly used Mills bomb is shaped like a
rather small orange and weighs 1-lb. 10-ozs. It may
be that the grenades we shall make in Britain will be
of various weights, sizes and shapes. They may be
cylindrical in shape, like a nine-inch length of gas
piping, or they may look like a tin of canned fruit
or beans. None will be lighter than one pound ; the
best weight to practice with is probably two pounds;
there may be some “ specials ” for rolling under
approaching tanks that will weigh four to six pounds.
So practice with different weights. There is an art
to master in the throwing of a grenade. It’s no use
trying to chuck it as if it were a cricket ball. You must
D






PATROLS
THE WRONG WAV
Patrols must always avoid skylines


THE RIGHT WAY
Patrol withdrawn. Men in position 2 have been covering men at 1; those in position 1
will then cover those at 2


HOW TO FIRE A RIFLE
Top: Position of elbows on the ground.
Bottom: Position of body. Both feet should be spread at this
angle with heels on the ground.


The wrong way to make protective cover
The right way


Anti-tank trench made in shape of cross. This gives
protection from enfilade fire in the arms of the cross at
right-angles to the direction of approach of tank


A house is solid protection except where two windows
come in line
Make your loop-holes at different levels so that your head
cannot be seen against the loop-hole behind you


ORDERS MEAN SOME-
THING
The Spanish Republican Forces
were taught discipline and the care
of arms by means of a Very popular
comic strip describing the adven-
tures of the bad soldier Canute.
In the pages reproduced above
(1) Canuto has been on sentry duty,
(2) he goes to sleep, (3) the enemy
approach in the dark, and (4) an
enemy tank comes up while Canuto
is snoring, (5) the attack is beaten
off but poor Canute has been
completely flattened


lob it well up into the air so as to get distance. You
can do this either under-arm or over-arm, according
to which comes easier to you. Under-arm is easier
when standing up ; over-arm when you are in a trench
or a hole in the ground. Try first to get the grenade
to drop on a line some yards away from you. When
you’ve become accurate to within a foot or so, twice
in every three throws, increase the distance until you
discover what your maximum effective distance is with
each weight of grenade. It’s not important where
the grenade rolls to after it has dropped, but the point
where it drops is very important. When you’ve
advanced so far that you feel you can deal with a moving
target, space your men out in a line, and persuade
some fearless friend to cycle past them towing a pram
or a filled sack. Then let every man lob his “ grenade ”
on to the target as it passes him.
Digging has several distinct uses in modern warfare.
You should forthwith learn how to dig a hole for your-
self when lying on your belly. How to make a valuable
trench out of a useless straight ditch by cutting slots
to cover one man in a wall of the ditch, or in both walls.
How to make a “ fox-hole ” for yourself, in which
you can reduce your personal risks from enemy fire
or bombing. If you have no spades, go round to the
nearest block of houses and yell out, “ Spades for the
People’s Army, please.”
Put in as much practice as you can with a pick-axe
now. It’s not as simple as it looks. But any pick
and shovel navvy will put you on the right lines. It’s
the best possible instrument for giving you depth in
trenching. And, when the guns begin, only depth
spells safety!
The next thing is how to stop tanks. I have already


given some ideas on this subject. If you can think
of a better way, no one will stop you trying. But
don’t do silly things like trying to electrocute them
by switching current on to the tram lines. Tram lines
happen to be d very good “ earth.”
If you want to try anti-tank ditches, which cannot
be guaranteed, but are sometimes useful, dig a trench
with one wall vertical and six feet high, and the
bottom slanted up gradually to make the other wall,
so that from ground level to the foot of the vertical
wall is about fifteen feet. If you possibly can,
strengthen the vertical wall with cement, steel rails
or railway sleepers. Otherwise the tank will just come
up to the vertical wall, and grind away with its tracks,
as if it were butting the wall, until it has brought
down enough earth to give it something to tread on
in order to climb up.
The sloping wall must, of course, be towards the
direction from which tanks are likely to come. Earth
dug out should be made into parapets behind which
men can lie and wait for tanks with their hand-
grenades.
Look around your area for railway embankments,
canals, marshy places, rows of houses built closely
together, and other natural obstacles. And always
remember that the German bombers co-operate with
their tanks. If the tanks arc held up, the bombers
try to destroy the obstacle that is holding them up.
So where you plan a tank trap or a road block have
a few holes as shelter from the bombs.
There is another way in which tanks can be stopped
by brave men. Where the path that they will take
comes close to thick cover or consists of a narrow
village street, you can wait for them with crowbars,


lengths of tram-line or similar pieces of metaL This"
is a job that is best done from the open doorway of
a house against a tank travelling fairly slowly and
very .close to the house. The metal bar must be
thrown or rammed into the side of the tank so that it
gets in amongst the gear wheels and bogie wheels of
the track. If a tank is travelling fast the bar will
probably be jerked out of your hand, and you will
fail to get it in among the works. But if you can get
it properly placed, the tank will be stopped, and
will probably block the road for those following it.
For smaller tanks a pick slung into the tracks from the
side will sometimes do the job.
Besides tanks you have to deal with the German
motor-cyclists. Here again I have given some
practical suggestions. If you spill any of them off
their machines, get on to them quickly. But your
aim is not the man so much as the tommy-gun or
pistol or whatever weapon he carries. Get it quick
before an armoured car or tank comes up.
If some of the motor-cyclists stop down the road
and there are no heavier vehicles in sight, you can
stalk them with hand-grenades. Their weapons are
likely to be inaccurate. No tommy-gun can possibly
hit you at 500 yards ; at 200 yards it will not hit you
if you are quick; at 100 yards or less it will cut
you in half with bullets within two seconds. Keep
these qualities in mind when tackling parachutists or
infantry armed with this weapon, as well as the motor-
cyclist.
The next thing in German armoured divisions are
armoured cars and light tanks. These usually only
carry machine-guns, which are dangerous at half a
mile or less, but cannot drill through a strong brick


wall, three feet of earth, or any sort of solid barricade.
If they stay out of range of your hand-grenades, keep
quiet and let them stay there. Do not try to use
rifles against them, as it only tells them where you
are. An occasional sniping shot from a man who is
posted well away from your main position will keep
them sitting inside their vehicles and afraid to lift
the lid and have a good look at your position.
The medium and heavy tanks are armed with light
artillery, and the Germans follow their tanks with
lorries which carry mortars and field-guns. The light
tank artillery can knock holes in a house, but it
takes an awful long time to knock a house down. It
can chip, but it cannot destroy, a solid barricade.
The big mortar can much more easily smash a house
or a barricade. But it has a shorter range than a
rifle. The Germans bring it up the road as far as
they dare, then they hop over the hedge with it, or
plant it behind a tree and start lobbing their fat,
slow-moving shells out of it. Keep a good look-out
for these mortars, and when you see one being put
into position try to get some rifles to pick off the men
serving it. > .
But if two of these big mortars get your range, it
is likely that you may have to move to a flank or to
a second position behind that which you are holding.
Under bombing, machine-gun fire, or the fire of light
weapons, such as tanks carry, stay where you are.
But against heavier artillery, including the big mortars,
you have to judge sensibly whether too many people
are going to get killed if you stay' where you are, or
whether you can stick it for another hour or two and
still keep your fighting power.
My own rough rule in the matter is : never even to


consider moving until I know that 20 per cent, of the
men with me have been killed or wounded. And
don’t consider the question really urgent till you
have had double those casualties. Then get out;
otherwise you are losing the chance of remaining
a fighting unit that can do the same job over
again a very short distance farther back or to the
flank.
If you must get out, get out quickly. Send your
best man back first to pick the place where the unit
will rally, and to rally them there.
When the Germans are held up they not only bring
up their bombers and the. big stuff to hammer at the
obstruction, they also try to go round it, outflank it,
surround it and attack it from the rear, flow past it
and leave it behind while they press on much farther.
Look out for these tactics; deal with them as best
you can ; keep as much touch as you can with those
to the right and left of you. But don’t retreat because
outflanked. Don’t even retreat, at any rate in day-
light, when you are surrounded. Keep on blocking
that road or holding that village or bit of trench until
it is dark enough for your leaders to meet and decide
whether it is better to stay where they are or go
stalking Germans, or go looking for some of your
own people.
One of the best bits of practical training that any
group of men can carry out is to make a detailed plan
of the way in which they would defend the place
they live or work in. After making the plan, why not
go ahead and made the necessary defences ?
Any village can be made into a fortress. But in
Poland, Belgium and France hundreds of villages
were rushed by the Germans before any defensive


measures were taken. This must not happen
here.
One of our essential preparations for defence against
invasion is a rapid survey of defensive possibilities
of our villages. And after that survey immediate
action not only by the authorities, but by every citizen
able to help. The first defences for a village are
road-blocks. The second are buildings roughly pre-
pared and stocked for defence. The third are trenches.
Road-blocks must be powerful enough to hold up
motor-cyclists, armoured cars, and the lightest forms
of tank. It is very difficult to hold up medium and
heavy tanks, though a solid barricade may delay these.
There is one great principle for any road-block. It
is useless unless “ covered ” by weapons. A couple
of motor-cyclists, if they are not fired at, can smash
their way through a barricade by means of half a
dozen hand-grenades.
The purpose of a road-block, therefore, is to stop
the enemy vehicle so that it is a good target for men
who are going to defend the village. If you have not
got such men, or they have not got arms, it is very
little use holding up your own traffic by means of a
barricade. Therefore one of the first things to do is
to survey the villages and decide whether or not a
garrison of troops in training or other forces can be
definitely allotted to the defence of each village.
Sentries guarding a road-block from damage by
our own traffic may need to stand up in the road
near the barricade. But it would be better to make
the road-blocks so substantial that traffic will avoid
them for fear of receiving damage. Then you can
put sentries where they will be most effective, at least
fifty yards away and off the road. Men with hand-


grenades can be nearer than that. But not on the
road.
The best form of road-block is made with concrete.
Next best, use boards or wire netting or sandbags,
piled up till they are four feet high, with plenty of
earth packed in between the boards or wire. Each
wall should be three feet thick. If possible, one of
the parts of the road-block should have walls all
round it, making a little square fort by the roadside.
A couple of men can shelter there from enemy machine-
gun fire, and even from the 4-pounder shells of
enemy tanks. A road-block must face both ways.
The enemy may break into the village behind you
in the dark or on foot and you must be prepared to
defend it from both directions.
Road-blocks leave part of the road open for our
ordinary traffic to pass. This bit of road must be
blocked if you are to hold up the enemy. Again, it
is not enough to put a few strands of barbed wire
across. A good thing to keep handy to block up this
gap is an old derelict motor-car, filled to the roof
with bricks and rubble. It can be pushed into position
by a few men. But then it should be tipped over on
its side. Otherwise, if the Germans get up to the
barricade, despite the defenders’ fire, they will simply
push the old car out of the way again. To pull a
heavily loaded car over is .not easy. Put a stout rope
from the chassis up over the roof and haul from the
other side.
To make a house useful for defence knock loop-
holes that command the ways of approach. If these
can be hidden by creepers, or set in some corner of
the house where they are not easy to see, so much
the better. Have buckets of water handy and blankets


or curtains to cover the windows. These should be
hung somewhat away from the windows, otherwise
the blast from a shell or hand-grenade may drive the
glass through them. Two good thick mattresses or a
thick brick wall will stop a bullet. You must be
able to get into the attic, and, if possible, on to the
roof. Barricade heavily the ground-floor windows,
and have stout timber to help the door to stand up
to a hand-grenade. If possible, have some way for
the defenders to leave the house. A “ crawl trench ”
just deep enough for a man to crawl along is enough.
We have boasted “an Englishman’s home is his
castle.” Let us plan and prepare to make it so.


CHAPTER VII
War is not only a question of fighting; it is also a
question of politics. In fact the classic definition of
war, made by the greatest German military theorist,
Clausewitz, is that war is a continuation of politics by
other means. This last chapter therefore contains my
view of the political questions involved in the defence
of Britain against Fascist aggression.
Those who are only interested in the technical side
of fighting can stop reading my book at this point.
But those who want victory should read this chapter.
I am not here putting forward political opinions based
on my own desires and feelings; lam not putting
forward the programme of any political party. Ido
not happen to belong to any political party. What I
am trying to outline here is a simple and one-sided
view of politics that derives directly from military
needs, the needs of victory. My outline of what I
believe is needed for the defence of Britain would be
incomplete without it.
For success in war a country needs men, arms,
food, brains, allies, and a fighting spirit. Let us look
at what has happened about some of these things in
the past few years.
We need men. For a generation this country has
had betweefi a million and three million unemployed.
Our social system, our rules about property and our
customs about profit have been preventing these men
from working. They have been kept alive. But both


physically and morally these-men have been damaged
by unemployment; they have been made less fit for
work and less fit for fighting than they would have
been. Their children, many of whom are now of
military age, have had too much to worry about and
too little to eat. Unemployment is an absurdity:
there are plenty of things that men need and plenty of
things out of which men can make what they need.
And unemployment is unnecessary; both the Soviet
Union and Nazi Germany have abolished it, and clearly
it is only kept in existence here because we count
profits as more important than the right to work.
During the first nine months of the present war we
have had on the average over a million still unem-
ployed. The figure as I write is probably about
three-quarters of a million. There are still miners
unemployed, while other miners are worked for
exhaustingly long hours—not because this is an
efficient way of getting coal, but because it is a profit-
able way. Clearly it is a military need, vital to the
defence of this country, to see to it that work should
in future be done because, and in me way that, the
country needs that work done, not because it will
increase the income of owners or shareholders.
There is a second way in which men are wasted
to-day. All over the country men are willing to
volunteer for working or fighting, but are kept in their
present occupations because they need a wage to live
on and because volunteers are not wanted. They are
kept building houses, offices and cinemas when they
want to be building fortifications. Houses, offices
and cinemas are profitable. Men are kept making
steel into library book-shelves and office furniture.
The steel is needed for war; the steel-workers’ skill


is needed for war. But furniture and book-shelves
are profitable.
When the B.E.F.'had to retreat from Belgium and
from France, it had to retreat not because of the power
of the Fascists but because of the power of profits. It
lacked the necessary equipment because our rearma-
ment programme had not been designed to get that
equipment; it had been designed to be profitable to
some groups of banks and some employers—our steel
trusts and the other great interests that provided not
only our industrial leadership when Mr. Chamberlain
governed us but our political leadership also.
Let us mention two of the weapons that the B.E.F.
did not possess. It had very few hand-grenades, and
none large enough to stop a tank. Yet thousands of
millions of pounds had been spent on rearmament.
Why were these grenades not made ? Partly because
of wrong military theories. But partly also because
they are not very profitable. Any factory can make
them; you do not have to be a very large and im-
portant firm in order to make hand-grenades. Because
firms outside the “ rings ” can make them, there is no
considerable profit to be made from them. The price
cannot be kept up by a sort of monopoly, a ring or
price-fixing agreement. And therefore they have been
neglected.
Take another weapon. The Germans, as I have
stated, have an all-purpose 88 mm. gun for anti-
aircraft work, anti-tank work, and for use as field
artillery. We have no such gun; instead we have
three different types, one for each job. To produce
three guns is more profitable than to produce one.
It is also more costly, and you get fewer guns for the
same amount of money and labour if you are working


on three different types than if you concentrate on
one type which can be “ mass-produced.” Because it
is more profitable we made the three types, and made
too few of them to meet the German mass-produced
fire-power.
Therefore I say that in our use of men and in our
production of arms we are hampered by the social
system that has as its basis the search for profits and
the protection of private property in the means of
production. In other words we are hampered by
capitalism. And what we need, in order to be strong,
is a planned use of men, machines, and factories ; in
other words what we need is socialism.
Those reading these pages who are not socialists
may object that I am putting forward ideas that
divide the nation. My answer is that these ideas only
divide the nation if the opponents of socialism insist
on continuing to oppose, even when it is clearly seen
that capitalism has failed to use the men or produce
the weapons—even when the House of Commons
with a large Tory majority is forced by the obvious
necessities of war to agree to government measures of
war socialism more sweeping than the Labour Party
had been advocating before war broke out. The
nation is only divided on these matters if those who
believe in or represent the interests of private capitalism
choose to divide it.
And if they do so the people of this country will
believe that they prefer a victory by Hitler to the
sacrifice of their privileges.
This issue may be brought home very sharply to all
of us if the Germans succeed in establishing some sort
of blockade of our islands, which reduces the amount
of food that can be imported. There is still good land


lying idle in Britain. We have not yet won back from
the thistles and the couch-grass some of the acres that
were allowed to go out of cultivation during the past
fifty years.
These acres were allowed to go out of cultivation
because of financial and economic interests ; because
some of our rulers were interested in the export trade,
and some of our exports depended on countries
abroad finding in these islands a market for the food
they produce.
And interests of these sorts, with the interests of
financiers and land-owners and traders, still hamper
the production of food in Great Britain. The whole
machinery set up by recent governments to deal with
agriculture was originally machinery for limiting
the output of British agriculture. Naturally, that
machinery has not worked well when turned over to
the opposite purpose of increasing the output of
British agriculture.
If we can produce a single ton of potatoes more by
doing so, we should abolish private property in land.
If on the other hand some lesser measures would pro-
duce more, let us take those measures. But let us not
pretend that those interests and those sections of our
society who have steadily ruined the actual land of
England, steadily betrayed it to the weeds and the
vermin, are the best people to organise the production
of the food we need.
On men and arms and food, this conclusion is
inescapable : that since we need socialist measures for
victory, these measures will best be carried out by
socialists. A man who really believes in a thing does
it better than the man who regretfully and half-
heartedly accepts it as necessary.


The three other things that I have said are necessary
for war are brains, allies and a fighting spirit. In the
army, and I believe also in the production of war
materials and of food, we are not using all our best
brains. For class reasons, because of snobbishness or
because of “ pull,” men who went to the right schools
but learned remarkably little at them are given posi-
tions above men of ability who come from what used
to be called the lower classes. There are immense
untouched reserves of qualified people who are crying
out for work, but can only get minor jobs or some-
times no job at all. In industry there are many shop
stewards who could in fact run their factories far better
than they are in fact run by the managing directors ;
too many of the latter have been appointed by banks
not because these managers know the factory or
industry but because the bank will then feel safer about
an overdraft or an advance.
The question of allies and of the fighting spirit of
our people seems to me mainly a question of our war
aims. What are you in fact fighting for, reader?
What is the aim that you share with almost all the
people that you know? You are fighting or ready
to fight for your homes, for those you hold dear,
and for your right to have a say in your own
country. But you know this is not enough. Your
aim goes beyond this: you want a world in
which this business of world war is not going to
happen again.
There arp two ways to peace that any sensible man
can see. One is a world run by one man, or one
group of men, or one nation. It will certainly be a
peaceful world—for a time. But to get there, the
victors in Europe will have to fight America and Asia.


It would need several world wars to get such a peace.
And it would not last.
The whole history of mankind tells us that it would
not last. All the great empires of past ages have been
overthrown ; peoples grow strong and determined to
get their freedom. They fight for it.
The other way is by an agreement of free peoples.
That is the way I believe we must choose. And I
believe that we are in fact fighting as the front line
troops of the freedom of all peoples—or soon shall be.
Those #ho say that this war is a war between two great
Empires, each fighting for the right to rule and
exploit other peoples without the latter’s consent, are
speaking of a war that is past. They are, to be exact,
speaking of Mr. Chamberlain’s war. Mr. Chamber-
lain lost that war. It is over. We are now engaged
on quite a different struggle, and it is time we woke up
to that fact, and made it clear to the whole world.
That we can do by a restatement of our war aims that
embodies a policy giving hope to Europe and to our
own people.
Our war aims should be stated as the freedom of
all peoples—just like that. But to make them real,
we must also state that the peoples we conquered in
the past are set free. That means India, and the
Crown Colonies. It means a Constituent Assembly
in India and a consultation with representatives of the
colonies, and possibly with the U.S.A., as to the
future of those colonies. Unless we state these free-
doms that are in our power, we cannot without
hypocrisy claim to be defending the freedoms of peoples
conquered by Hitler and Mussolini in recent years.
We should therefore offer ourselves as allies and
associates to all nations and peoples throughout the


world —whether now neutral or at war, whether
conquered by our own forces in the past, or colonised
by our peoples, or conquered more recently by the
Fascist dictatorships—in their endeavours to secure
their full rights and equalities as nations, their power
to choose and change their rulers and their ways of
life.
And we should offer opportunity to build up with
us and all free men a new order of the world that will
ensure peace by a world-wide agreement of
We should direct this appeal in particular to the
inheritors of Garibaldi and Mazzini, of Goethe and
the great scientists of Germany.
I believe that this restatement of our aims and
policy should be accompanied by a restatement of
home policy, including full acceptance of the idea of
a People’s War. The following four points seem to
me to come under this heading :
1. A Citizen’s Army. Four million men reinforcing
our present army and armed with weapons not
needed by that army, such as the rifles that
can be bought in many parts of the world and
the hand-grenades we can make in any garage
or small workshop.
2. Arrest the Fifth Column. Those who want
to muzzle the press and surrender to Hitler
must be arrested; those who are unable to
use the forces of the people (red-tape civil
servants, the P6tain sort of generals) must be
removed.
3. A New Leadership. Mr. Chamberlain and
those who helped to build up the strength of
Fascism must go from the government; the


people must be organised in new ways through
some sort of committees of public safety or
councils of action so that they can give their
share to the new leadership.
4. The Home Front. To help those who are
remaking our industry, producers must have
a wider voice in administration ; the methods
of Whitehall must be abandoned or thoroughly
revised. The government’s powers must be
handled by men not afraid to use them, and
the morale of the nation must be raised by a
progressive programme that embodies obvious
needs, such as the ending of unemployment
and the national use of the nation’s resources.
A policy on these lines would release the energy
and confirm the courage and fighting spirit of the
British people. There is no need for us to talk heroics
on this subject. The British people are stubborn and
courageous and have the will to fight. But Nazi
methods of war are methods of terrorism. Their
weapons and their tactics are directed towards breaking
morale. We cannot possibly have too much stubborn-
ness, too much courage and endurance and will to
victory. We may need all of these qualities that we
can summon up.
The tactics of the dive-bombers are tactics of the
“ war of nerves ” carried to a new level. Their pro-
jectiles kill few people, but the horrifying noises that
they make can shake anyone. If we remain as we
are, with much of our eagerness to fight and work
continually thwarted, with men and women soured by
the feeling that they are not wanted, not consulted,


not given a chance, there will be cracks in our morale
which will deepen when the full force of the German
war machine is turned against us. But if we have a
policy such as I have sketched, and that policy is made
clear and alive in all of us, we shall armour our morale
more strongly than the Germans can possibly armour
their troops.
On this question of morale let me add also a few
words to those men and women who may very soon
be fighting, or be close to fighting, for the first time.
The first taste of fire is disturbing to everybody.
Your inside turns over. Your tongue feels dry.
Things don’t seem right somehow. Please take my
word for it; everybody feels like that. Some of the
old sweats and some of the lads with swank in them
may pretend that they are not afraid. But everyone
is afraid the first time, and most people all the time,
in battle. This fear is nothing to worry about or be
ashamed of. You are not a coward or useless because
your breath comes quick and your left knee twitches.
That is normal, it happens to V.C.’s and D.S.O.’s.
So don’t worry about it, and keep busy if you can.
If you can’t be busy and have just to wait, which
often happens in war, watch your tongue and keep a
grip on yourself, so that any specially loud noise, or
the squeal of a wounded man, does not make you
jump up and be silly. It is useful sometimes to have
some trifling phrase in your mind that you keep on
saying over to yourself while you are waiting, especially
if you are a few yards away from the next men, as you
usually sholild be when in action. I remember
saying to myself “ why die crying ? ” You can
probably make some better phrase than that, or you
can turn your mind to someone you are fighting for.


Or, if you are a politician, think of Mr. Chamberlain.
Be angry instead of being afraid.
A battle is always a muddle. But you can keep
your head as well as the unarmoured bowmen of
Cr6cy, who destroyed the knights, hitherto invincible,
who tried to ride over them. Your weapon may be a
tin can of explosive or a shot-gun that will only hit at
fifty yards. Treasure it until you have a good chance
to kill a German. Even if you only get one, you have
helped to beat Hitler.
To teach people not to be afraid of being afraid is
one of the most necessary and most neglected things
in war. Youngsters who feel as almost all soldiers
feel during battle imagine that these feelings are
abnormal, and become obsessed with the idea that
they have a yellow streak in them. If they can be
reassured on this point they will do their job well;
but they will do it still better if they are inspired by
the feeling that they are fighting for something so
great and so hopeful that it masters and lifts them up.
And in this country freedom, made real in new forms,
is still as powerful and as heartening as it was in the
days when Milton wrote that liberty
“ hath enfranchis’d, enlarg’d and lifted up our
apprehensions degrees above themselves. . . .”
Finally, to shape and unify us all into a people that
knows and feels not only what we are fighting but
what we are living for, I end this book with the
suggestion that an agreement of the whole nation
should be put to the whole nation, should be put to
meetings and parades of civilians and soldiers, to
every organisation within the country and to every


household. And I believe that it should be put to
governments and peoples throughout the whole world
for their assent or for their modification. It should
be put also to those opponents of Fascism who, with
remarkable stupidity, we keep in concentration camps
or shackled to their homes in Britain and the Empire,
simply because their birth or parentage makes them
“ enemy aliens.” Those refugees from the Fascism
they have struggled against who would accept this
agreement, and were vouched for by known opponents
of Fascism should, I hold, be set free to work and
fight with us, becoming our most trusted allies and
finding for us new allies in the countries ruled by the
dictatorships.
The form of words that I give below is a draft that
I shall be submitting to others for criticism and
amendment while this book is being printed. It may
or may not find publication elsewhere; it may or
may not be improved by the amendments my friends
will make in it. But as I see it now it is something at
least equally important, for the winning of this war,
as any of the things I have tried to hammer home in
previous chapters.
We need an army revitalised and reformed; we
need support for that army from millions of citizens
who can defend this country, so that parts of the army
are freed to take the initiative against Hitler’s sprawl-
ing empire. We need a restatement of our war aims
in terms of human freedom, and a restatement of our
policy that will bring eagerness and enthusiasm to
our own people and to free men everywhere. And we
need to clinch this determination of ours, so that we
no longer feel shut off from our neighbours by un-
certainty of their views or lack of clearness of our own


views ; we need the strength and release of comrade-
ship. With that aim I put to you, and ask you to put
to others, this;
OUR AGREEMENT
We are going to fight Fascism, and its friends
wherever we find them, until Fascism is destroyed
throughout the earth.
We shall do this because Fascism organises oppres-
sion, delights in warfare, and lays waste homes and
arts, sciences and the ordinary lives of men.
As soldiers, or as civilians who from now on count
themselves soldiers, we shall give in the common
disciplined effort all our initiative and abilities,
including our ability to hang on as our soldiers hung
on at Calais and Dunkirk, We will stick by what-
ever we find to do or are told to do, in spite of
invasion, bombardment, wounds, hunger or whatever
may be the price of victory. We will take all that
comes courageously ; and we will not do anything
that may endanger victory.
Knowing that science and the riches of the earth
make possible an abundance of material things for all,
and trusting our fellows and ourselves to achieve that
abundance after we have won, we are willing to throw
everything we now possess into the common lot, to
win this fight. We will allow no personal considera-
tions of rights, privileges, property, income, family or
friendship to stand in our way or hamper us.
Finally we take this oath : that whatever the future
may hold we will continue our war for liberty by
every means, open or secret, that we can use; we
shall go on, stubbornly and doggedly, until we have


overthrown Fascism, with the aid of all free men
and men who seek freedom anywhere across the
earth.
Men of the past made our .nation by conquering
tyranny; like them we shall conquer. This is our
decision, our free choice, our agreement.
REPRODUCED BY PHOTO OFFSET
BY THK SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LTD., MELBOURNE.




maxr.
m
V/
e/ >t/
o <*r
°n/
Jr,
e 'o
°yy
*d.
c *s
dd
"r,
Cd
St *t
*h
°k
' c h
dot
*h
*fi t
*//■
<"d
s fie
r 'tt
e d
*Pp/.
' e d
‘th
*5
'°n
'th
Jr,:
•ty
°tt
e 'd
*n
tit
*n».
eep well informed
by reading
PENGUIN SPECIALS
Ask your bookseller for
a complete list
