

v SL:f^
CHRISTIAN PRIVI LEGES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
r^K._
J'ArtS
fvo» sr
FAREWELL SERMON
PREACHED IN
%h Caijxetol €\)mt\ 0f §lnmt §ljnxdj t
NEWCASTLE, NEW SOUTH WALES,
Easter Sunday, 1866,
/ /
,
THE REV. CANON FLETCHER, 8.D.,
A
Of St. Mary Hall , Oxford ,
AND LATE INCUMBENT OP CHRIST CHURCH, NEWCASTLE.
{** s%s\6%ci<j()s, aXA* ey do s£s\sl;ag,Y)V vpoig, not) sQyjxoc
vg,oig f 'lvci upsig vTrotyYjls, xou xagirov Qsgrjh, xoCi 6 xocgirog
{j[j,u)v fisVYj.” —St. John xv. 16
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
Sgtmeg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, OEORG-E STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
One Shilling .


in Christ Jesus ; Grace be to you,
our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
i i. 1, 2.
and Peace, from God
Christ.” —Ephesians


FAREWELL SERMON.
ACTS, Chap. XX. 25, 26, 27.
“ AW, behold , / ye , among whom I have
gone preaching the kingdom of ,shall see my face
no more:
Wheref ore I take you to record this day , that lam
pure from the blood of all men :
For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God.”
The history of the travels of St. Paul has been ever
considered full of interest and instruction: So exact
and so simple is the language which carries us into
the various scenes of the Ministry of this great Apos-
tle of the Gentiles, that, as we read the narrative, we
almost seem to be witnesses of his labours, dangers,
and persecutions. From his miraculous Conversion,
when hastening to accomplish his errand of Persecu-
tion against the disciples of the Lord Jesus, on his
way to Damascus, until we find him a prisoner at
Rome, the interest of his life becomes more and more
attractive. During his travels in the Service of that
Holy Master (who had shed the brightness of
Heaven’s light around him and within him, and who


had thus by special interposition called him to the
work of an Apostle), we find him at Ephesus, where
he had early won the hearts of a few disciples, —
“ persuading the things concerning the Kingdom
of God.” 1
It was in this idolatrous and licentious city that
“ God wrought special miracles by the hands of
Paul,” 2
so that many believed,
“ and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.” 3
Nevertheless an Uproar was raised against the
Apostle and his Work, 4 and so great was the Uproar,
that he was compelled to leave Ephesus, although for
many reasons he considered that the Church in that
City had an especial claim on his Ministrations;
which claim he did not neglect, for after his second
journey, he returned from Jerusalem, and abode at
Ephesus three years :
But on this occasion so great was the stir against
him, that he was compelled to pass over into Mace-
donia ;
In returning from this his third journey,
“ he hasted to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost,” 5
and therefore sailed by Ephesus, and came to Mile-
tus, a few miles distant; and as his heart yearned
over those whom he had led into the ways of Right-
eousness and Peace (living Proofs of the Power of
Divine Grace), he sent thither to call the Elders of
the Church, and addressed to them, as the represen-
tatives of the Flock which he had left behind, that
Farewell charge, from which I have selected the
i Acts xix. 8. 2 Acts xix. 11. 3 Acts xix. 17.
4 The Apostle is supposed to refer to this in 1 Corinthians, xv. 32.
5 Acts xx. 16.


words of my Text; wherein he explains his present
position, and declares the satisfaction which he derives
from a consciousness of having executed his commis-
sion to them with faithfulness and zeal. After a brief
■r
review of his Ministry in Ephesus he reminds them
how he had served the Lord, and had testified the
Doctrine of
“ Repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ.” 6
Then, remembering the severe trials through which he
had passed,—he boldly looked into the future; and
rightly anticipating the life of every true Soldier of the
Cross, he saw before him struggles and conflicts,
bonds and afflictions, —he saw them, but unmoved,
u none of these things move me ” (he said), neither
count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might
finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which
I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gos-
pel of the Grace of God.” 7
The remembrance of the past gave him a quietude
of conscience which did cast a light upon the labours
he had undergone, and armed him with renewed
strength for hardships still to be endured: —With
confidence did he seal the Record of his past Ministry
in the Ephesian Church; —Then did he close his
account as between himself and that Church, touching
their mutual obligations and responsibilities up to
that time ; —Then did he make those who had received
the Ministrations of the Christian Church at his hands
6 Acts xx. 21. 7 Acts xx* 24.
St. Paul’s Farewell charge to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, assembled at Miletus, was delivered about the yeat* of
our Lord 60.


and had heard the Doctrines of Christianity from his
lips, to be witnesses that he was
“ pure from the blood of all men” ; 8
that the fear of man had not restrained him from
proclaiming the whole
“ counsel of God,”
the warnings and denunciations against Sin, and the
promises which point to a glorious inheritance among
them which are sanctified : —Then did he call them
as Witnesses that he had coveted no man’s*silver, nor
gold, nor apparel; but had laboured with disinterest-
ed zeal to feed the Church of Christ which that only
Saviour had purchased with His Blood: Then did he
claim as Witnesses for time and for eternity those
who, willing or unwilling, had received the message
which he brought, or had rejected, at their own souls’
peril, the Words of the Gospel which he had pro-
claimed.
Thus with boldness and authority did he sum up
his mission ; and, this done, all prayed and all wept
when they thought that they should not see his face
again: and so they went with him to the Ship.
Why need I explain to you, Beloved Brethren in
Christ, my reasons for having selected this text, as a
guide to direct my words and your thoughts to-night?
Surely you do see at once their application; you
have already drawn a comparison, if not a contrast,
between the circumstances of the Apostle and his
Ephesian flock at the time when he spake the words
before us, and that occasion which is now present to
ourselves; —nay more —you have almost anticipated
the words which I now would speak, and have learnt
8 Acts xx. 26.


the feelings of my heart yearning over you, as a
Father for his children : —Ah! yes —It is so : you
know it all beforehand, —during the years that are
gone by you have, perhaps unconsciously, been learn-
ing the lesson of to-day; and before you hear from
me the special words which I may speak, you know
full well from the work of my ministry what it is that
I would say: —
On this high Festival of our Church, 9 (made, if it
be possible, even more solemn than usual as regards
ourselves, by the occasion which has brought hither
this night so great a throng of Worshippers), you have
come to hear one more message, to join in one more
solemn Service, to receive one more Blessing, from
him who for five long years and upwards has served
unceasingly at the Altar of your Sanctuary, and for
that period has gone in and out among your house-
holds, among young and old, rich and poor, happy
or afflicted, weak or strong, whithersoever the calls
of duty have summoned me : —This is the cause, —
the simple cause; you have flocked once again,—and
for the last time, —around the Shepherd who has led
you and your little ones to the green pastures which
Jesus has provided, and to the waters of comfort,
which at His command have streamed forth from the
Rock, to refresh your wearied spirits amid the toils
and troubles of your wilderness way: —You have
come to hear a Farewell Sermon ; and why ? —I trust,
dear Christian Brethren, that you have come not from
curiosity, nor from cold compliment; rather let me
hope that you have assembled here this night from a
deep sense of religious Responsibility, in the presence
of each other and of God, to hear the last message
9 This Sermon was preached on Easter day.


which probably I may ever deliver from this Pulpit
as a Minister of the Gospel of Christ Jesus my Lord.
For the last time I now address you ; —for the
time I repeat my warnings against sin; —for the last
time in this Church I proclaim the eternal Truths of
the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God ; —for the last
time, Beloved Brethren, (hitherto my people) I tell
you where to find the cooling stream to refresh the
thirsting soul, —where to gather up the heavenly food
that God has sent to feed the hungering soul; where
to seek Grace and Strength and Comfort to bear you
on and onward through the parched desert of the
world’s ways, —towards the land of Promise, where
you may hunger no more, nor thirst any more, 10
where the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne
may feed you, and lead you unto living fountains of
waters. Let me not seem to arrogate too much to
an occasion like the present, when I would assign to
it the value of a special opportunity for thought and
action : other Sermons you will be privileged to hear,
more learned or more stirring,—more eloquent or
more inviting; and I pray that a double portion of
God’s Holy Spirit may rest on those who may be
selected to succeed me in the performance of these
solemn duties; yet is this an especial occasion; —like
St. Paul at Miletus I would now call on you as Wit-
nesses,—willing or unwilling,—now, —and once again
hereafter, when blindness and prejudice and falsehood
and pride and selfishness and hypocrisy have been
torn off before the gaze of an all-seeing God, and
before the countless myriads of a World’s Population;
when Truth shall be seen as true, and falsehood de-
tected in its malicious mask ; —when the mysteries
10 Revelation vii. 16.


of iniquity shall be exposed for the confusion of
sinners, and the secrets of all hearts be laid bare; —
when there shall exist no longer the cloak for envy,
the excuse for hatred, or the dark darings of the pro-
fligate ; —when the closest secrets of every heart will
be made a spectacle to angels and to men, and every
lying tongue shall be forced to utter its own contra-
diction :
Oh ! my dear Brethren, what an amazing manifes-
tation shqjl we then behold : —yes ! and then, as now,
shall
“ I take you to record , that lam pure from the hlood
of all men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you
all the counsel of God.' n
And if our Ministry points to such amazing results,
if my declaration of warnings, and my proclamation
of Promises are left on record for God’s final duds'-
ment; —if your own lips shall on that last Assize be
compelled to bear witness whether I have faithfully
u warned the wicked of his way to turn from it,” 11
or not; and earnestly set before you all the encoura-
ging doctrines of Revealed Truth, or not; —If
must on that day, before God’s inevitable Judgment,
repeat the words which have told you of Life and
Death, of Heaven and of Hell; and if your Lives are
to be judged according to these unchanging Truths;
then, my Christian Brethren, this must be a solemn
meeting for you and for m —Solemn, —because, it
sums up heavy responsibilities for you and for me ;
I must give account of the consequences of every
message which I may have shrunk from delivering;
and you must give account of the use which each one
11 Ezekiel xxxiii. 9.


of you shall have made of every message you have
heard, or might have heard, from me as the Ambas-
sador of God. Hear how God hath decreed, —
“I have set thee a Watchman unto the house of
Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the Word at my
mouth, and warn them from me. —When I say unto
the wicked, 0 wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if
thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way,
that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his
blood will I require at thine hand ; —Nevertheless, if
thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if
he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his ini-
quity ; hut thou hast delivered thy soul.” 12
It must, therefore, he as we have said; —it must be
as you have thought; —There is a Special Importance
attached to a last Discourse (however poor and un-
impressive in itself), beyond those which have pre-
ceded it, for the reason stated here; and moreover
because what is said or done for the last time marks
the transitory condition of all human things, and
directs our thoughts onward to the last opportunities
of making our calling and election sure : —Thus a last
Sermon, the last day of each revolving week, or
month, or year, —the last struggle between life and
death, —the last day of life, —the last hour of Time
itself,—and then, the unchangeable results of the last
Judgment,—are all linked together, binding in the
Opportunities of Life, and the Eternal Interests of
every Soul; making a Record l of every warning and
every invitation of God’s amazing Love, whereby He
would draw us upwards to the bright realities of Im-
mortality and Glory.
12 Ezekiel xxxiii, 7,8, 9.


Seeing then that this occasion is a solemn one, my
heart urges me to turn it, by God’s help, to the best
account, if haply it may please our Master to bless
our work to-night, and to move one at least of this
throng of listeners to hear a word in season, (repent-
ing of opportunities let to slip by, and of former
warnings disregarded), and now to take up the Stan-
dard of the Cross in earnest, and realise the Heaven-
sent Truth,
J
u To-day is the day of Salvation.”
How then shall I direct your thoughts and aid the
efforts of your souls in grasping the present opportu-
nity ? The occasion itself proposes the subjects of
meditation, as we hear St. Paul, in his Farewell to
the Christian Flock at Ephesus, instructing us, by
his words and by his example, briefly to review the
experience of past ministrations, and to improve the
consequent reflections, by applying them to the ulti-
mate purpose of the established Ministry of Christ’s
Holy Church on earth.
St. Paul in his charge more than once uses the
words
“ Ye know”
referring to what he had said and done ; —and think
it not strange, my Brethren, if I too charge you to
remember what, through five years, I have said and
done. Indeed do ye try, dear Brethren, to remember:
for verily it is an important part of a Christian’s duty
to exercise memory for his Soul’s Welfare. Have I
not aforetime explained to you how that faculty must
be exercised, with powers far in advance of our pre-
sent limited comprehension, throughout the endless
ages of Eternity, for sorrow or for joy ? Then let
it even now have more free exercise, in summing up


the many sounds of spiritual lessons, repeating the
messages of Penitence enforced and of Pardon pro-
mised : —Echoing the invitation ‘ Wash you, make
you clean in the stream of Holy Blood to cleanse the
guilty soul,’ and lovingly exhorting you to ‘ feed on
the Bread which came down from Heaven to give life
unto the world
Let memory serve to tell you often of the voice
which has cheered you onward with promises of a
Home full of untold Bliss and Crowns of unfading
Glory; of the communion of Angels and Archangels,
of Martyrs and of Saints,—true champions of the
Cross, —all followers of Jesus, —all heirs of Immor-
tality and Joy, filled with the spirit of redeeming
Love, and filling the expanse of Heaven with Praises
of Eternal Song.
First, then, let us call to mind a few of the subjects
which by the help of God’s Holy Spirit I have laid
before you, according as I have desired (God is my
witness) to instruct you in the main features of the
Covenant of Grace;
u not shunning to declare unto you all the Counsel of
God”
keeping back nothing that might be profitable unto
you, —urging you to
u Repentance towards God, and Faith toward our
Loed Jesus Cheist,”
that so in the day of Judgment, when once again I
shall stand before you as your Minister, to give a final
account of my Stewardship respecting you, I may
be able to do so with confidence and joy, and in the
midst of the manifestation of now hidden thoughts,


may be able to join in St, Paul’s triumphant excla-
mation,
“ I am pure from the Hood of all men
and as I have been
“allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel,” 13
even so have I preached, not as pleasing men, but
God, who trieth our hearts : —not at any time using
flattering words as ye know, nor of men seeking
glory,—
“ for if I yet pleased men I should not be the Ser-
vant of‘Christ 14
But ye are witnesses how I have
“ exhorted and comforted and charged every one
of you —that ye would walk worthy of God, who
hath called you unto His Kingdom and Glory.” 13
I ask you, then, now in the days of life, as ye may
hereafter be questioned when a more awful day shall
have come, —Have I not set before you Life or Death,
Heaven or Hell ? Have I not preached unto you
“ of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come ”? 15
Have I not bid sinners, old and young, to pull down
the Dagon Idol of Selfishness, which they so long
have worshipped, and to tear off that cloak of hypo-
crisy which they so long have worn, hoping to hide,
even from the eyes of God, that corruption of Sin
which is destroying the Vitality of the Soul’s heavenly
Birth ? have I not pressed on you, almost with
weeping, your acceptance of God’s Grace, freely
offered, —that being converted and become as little
children, you
“ may grow up into Him in all things, which is the
13 1 Thessolonians ii, 4, &c. 11 Galatians i. 10.
15 Acts xxiv. 25.


Head, even Christ, —and be renewed in the Spirit of
your mind”: 16
Then, when you have felt the stings of returning sin,
remember how I have besought you to cast the load
at the foot of the Cross, and bowing lowly and faith-
fully at the feet of Jesus, to hear and receive the
Penitent’s Absolution and Acceptance,
u Thy sins are forgiven thee ” 17 — u Go in peace.” 18
Have I not endeavoured to set before you, through
the beautiful simplicity of scripture figures, and by
the fulness and force of Scripture promises, the in-
dissoluble union which exists between Christ and His
Church, inviting you to become the Bride of Christ,
by putting on the marriage garment of His purity
and love ?
I call you to record this day that I have set before
you the examples of God’s Saints, to show what man
can do, yea what man has done , when he is in earnest;
what Victories he can achieve when he goes forth to
combat, even against the Giants of Sin and the hosts
of Satan, armed with Truth and Righteousness and
Faith, and the all-conquering Word of God.
Dear Brethren in Christ, can ye not even now
hear, as it were, the echoes, returning from the Ever-
lasting Hills, of the words wherewith I have cheered
you on to the Battle of the Lord by the bright pro-
mises of eternal thrones, of unfading Crowns of Glory,
and of increasing joys ? ye cannot so soon have for-
gotten my ministerial exhortations striving to lead
you into the paths of obedience and faith, by kindling
in your hearts the Fire of the Love of God and
of His own dear Son; ever calling you to fix your
16 Ephesians iv. 15, &c. 17 Matthew ix. 2. 18 Luke vii. 50.


gaze on the cross-crowned height of Calvary, that by
there beholding The MAN, the Lamb of God, as a
bound and bleeding sacrifice on the uplifted Altar of
a world’s redemption, you might daily realise more
perfectly that greatest proof of His Eternal Love,
and learn to lisp on earth what every saint in Heaven
shall sing,
u Wo love Him, because He first loved us,” 19 and
gave Himself for us; that He might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar peo-
ple, zealous of good works ”: 20
Then too when the clouds and mists of earth seemed
heavy hanging all around, remember how I have,
by Revelation’s light, brought Heaven’s illuminated
Courts before the vision of your Faith, that the dark-
ness of earth might be scattered before the light of
Hope, and that the weakness of humanity might be
inspired to action by the greatness and majesty of
your immortal souls. Time now would fail me to
enumerate mj subjects of Discourse, explaining the
Parables and Miracles of our Blessed Lord, with all
the deep doctrines of 1! is Gospel, revealed and illus-
trated by their wisdom and their marvels; —or the
types under the older dispensation, with all the atten-
dant ceremonies and prophecies, pointing to Him in
whom they were fulfilled, as the Priest to offer the
One great sacrifice of Universal Atonement, —as the
Prophet to declare the Revelation of Heavenly Mys-
teries,: as the King Eternal to command and to
protect His people.
Nor have I omitted to explain to you the revealed
nature of the two highest means of Grace:—Have I
19 1 John iy. 19. • 20 Titus - 14


baptized more than 250 of your Infants in the
“ Washing of Regeneration,”
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and then left you and them to puzzle
out for yourselves the deep meaning of that Sacra-
ment ? Surely, my Brethren, you must yet remem-
ber how in explaining that Mystery, I led you to the
banks of Jordan, there to
‘ ‘ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the
sin of the world,” 21
submitting to descend into the river of His own crea-
tion, that thereby He might fulfil all righteousness, —
become an example of obedience to the Ordinance of
admission into the Ark of His Holy Church, and
“ sanctify Water to the mystical washing away of
sin;” 22
Then it was that I bid you see the dove-like presence
of the Holy Ghost descending from the opened
Heavens, hovering above and lighting upon the head
of the baptized Jesus, and bid you hear the Voice
which came from Him whose
“Word runneth very swiftly,”
saying
“ This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.” 23
Or review the seasons when you have knelt before
the Altar of your Sanctuary, to receive the mysterious
symbols of Christ’s Body and Christ’s Blood, that
your souls, through the exercise of a living faith,
might be fed on
21 John i. 29. 22 Office of Publick Baptism of Infants.
23 Matthew iii. 17.


‘ the Body and Blood of Christ as your bodies are
by the Bread and Wine: ’ 24
Have I served out to you, one by one, the broken
consecrated Bread, and prayed to God, over and on
behalf of each and all
“ The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was
given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto ever-
lasting life—-or
“ The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was
shed for thee preserve thy body and soul unto ever-
lasting life
but failed to fill your minds with high and holy
thoughts on the solemnity and benefit of that Blessed
Sacrament, by explaining its nature as a mighty
means of Grace, and itself as a feast kept in obedience
and with gratitude to Him who hath left this injunc-
tion as a perpetual legacy to His Church,
u This do in remembrance of me 25
Will you not testify that I am clear in this matter ?
And so with all the great Features of our Christianity ;
Through the various stages of our Saviour’s Life •
I have led you, Christian Brethren, to the stable of a
Saviour’s lowly Birth; to the temple of a Saviour’s
earliest lessons; to the wilderness of His fasting,
temptations, and victory over the Tempter; I have
guided you through the journeys of His mission, by
the scenes of His power and compassion,—to the
garden of agony and bloody sweat, —to the Cross on
Calvary, —and to the Sepulchre which received our
Saviour’s wounded and breathless corpse,-—I have
summoned you to rejoice with me in His Glorious
Resurrection and Ascension, and at the Coming of
24 Church Catechism. 25 Luke xxii. 19.


the Holy Ghost: —To wonder at the Majesty of the
Triune Jehovah, and whilst praising Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, for Creation, Preservation and Redemp-
tion, I have often reminded you that the Spirit of God
ahideth with God’s Church for ever, to lead her into
all Truth, and to raise her from the dreadful Fall,
from the deep depths of Adam’s degradation, unto the
heights of Heaven, into intimate Fellowship with the
Sons of God. I will not further enumerate the sub-
jects on which I have discoursed to you, as a congre-
gation whom I have been commissioned to instruct,
seeking to spiritualize your hearts, and to inspire you
with hope and zeal, with strength and' perseverance :
Let the Day of the Manifestation of all things com-
plete the list, and stamp it with the Seal of God’s
Eternal Truth. But forget not that for every Sermon
you have heard, you will be called on to render an
account, when the fashion 6f this world shall have
passed away : — 1 What ye have heard, do, and the Gop
of Peace shall be with you,’—For
“if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them.” 20
And if any one here present, still scoffing at minis-
terial authority, and under-valuing the Commission
with which Christ Jesus has invested His ministering
Servants, should ask how I can thus boldly review
my labours of five years,- —I answer with like bold-
ness, even as St. Paul would have answered, that what
I have preached, and wdiat I have done, I have spoken
or done not of myself, but by the teaching and gui-
dance of the Holy Ghost; I have laboured by virtue
of my Commission from the Great Head of the
Church, —I have spoken in His name, and acted by
28 John xiii. 17.


His authority ; —I have brought His message and no
other; —Christ’s Messenger, I have besought you
“in Christ’s stead be ye reconciled to God 27
I dare not, therefore, give up anything of my autho-
rity, however it may have been sneered at by the
worldly and the impious, who would fain trample in
the dust Christianity itself: —
The instructions which I have received from mv
Holy Master are these,- —you shall have His very
words:—
“He that heareth you heareth ME; and he that
despiseth you despiseth ME ; and he that despiseth
ME despiseth Him that sent ME.” 28
It alters not God’s decree, because ungodly men
despise His Servants, or His Son, or God Himself:—
That it should be so helps to confirm the truth of the
warnings, and to prove the authority of the work ;• —
for those servants who have courage to imitate the
pattern of Him who gave no license for sin, must
expect from the followers of Satan the same treatment
which marked the progress of their Master’s mission.
I am not now rendering an account as between a
Master and His Servant, but as between that Servant
and his people: and remember, my Brethren, that
our short-comings will not lessen your Responsibili-
ties ; —lt you have received a true message, and not
obeyed it, you have disregarded Christ’s message,
not mine: Christ Jesus is pleased to use poor feeble
men, like myself, as instruments to do His Work, and
to proclaim His Gospel.
“We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of
us.” 29
27 2 Corinthians y. 20. 28 Luke x. 16.
29 2 Corinthians iv. 7.


I assume to myself nothingl speak as I hear,—
as Christ instructs me,—as the Holy Spirit of God
may put words in my mouth : —I feel that lam hut
as a Trumpet in the mouth of the Mighty Preacher
of Eternal Truth ; —and therefore I dare not believe
that the sound has been other than according to the
Will of Him who has sent me. What comfort to me
now to reflect that in spite of the scorn of the profli-
gate, the insults of sinners, the oaths of the impious,
and the falsehoods of deceivers; —in spite of the
enticements of the cunning, and the flatteries of those
who have sought to extract from me a license for their
gains of ungodliness; —yea in the face of all such
enemies of God, I have been upheld through His
Grace in my denunciations of sin, and in warning
them to flee from the wrath to come. From you then
the question at this time demands more than ordinary
attention, Have you heard the Truth as it is in Jesus,
and received the message—whether of warning or
encouragement, —of comfort or fear, —of promise or
threat, with faithful meekness, that it might lead you
to the Saviour of your souls ? —Or have you lost the
opportunity by slighting the message ? Look back,
my Brethren, —take a retrospective view of your
spiritual life, —find there an answer to this solemn
question : What see we ?- —a pathway marked with
the signs of many treasures lost: a path strewn with
the wreck of mighty powers, which have yielded to
the storms of sin without an effort; —and the remains
perhaps of some dashed against the rocks of death by
breakers which their own folly had aroused ;
“ wretched and miserable and poor and blind and
naked,” 311
' 30 Eevektion iii. 17.


gazing upon a flood of troubled waters, on which
GrOD had launched for us an Ark of great Salvation,
and had fitted it with everything requisite for carry-
ing us into the Haven of Eternal Rest.
Has it been thus in the past experience of any of
us? omy Brethren, yield not to despair,—but look
upward, look forward again :
Lift up your eyes unto the hills, from whence
cometh your help 31
forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are before,
press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus.” 32
It is for God we work,—it is for the Soul’s Life
that we warn and exhort, —the stake of an Eternity
depends upon the struggle. Tremendous thought!
0 that we could sound an alarm which might pene-
trate the recesses of vice, and draw out to the light
of day every captive who is crouching in the murky
corners of despair !
0 that we could persuade the man who receives
the gains of ungodliness, that these are as poison to
his soul! and that the warning of St. James holds
true as applied to him,
Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
miseries that shall come upon you i your riches are
corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten, &c.” 33
Alas ! how strong is the grasp which the world has
upon the rich man’s soul.—l have warnedl have
invited. and now my work is done \ the past —in
words or deeds cannot be recalled: more rapidly
than do the waters of our river mingle with the ocean-
31 Psalm cxxi. 1. 32 Philippians iii. 13. 33 j ames v . L &c .


tide, past opportunities flow by, and are lost to the
hardened sinner, —lost in the depths of the vast
Ocean of Eternity.
0 this solemn day ! this highest Festival on which
we are reminded how Christ burst death’s fetters, —
and came forth from His Burial-chamber,
“ the Prince of Life ” and Immortality,
c ‘the First-born from the dead.” 1 The King of Saints. ’’ 34
0 this solemn day ! —on which the separation of a
Pastor and his people forces us to look back and to
observe how few live up to their high and holy privi-
leges as the called of God, the redeemed of the Lamb.
In how many instances is man’s life illustrated by
a ship anchored in our harbour, —the fair winds of
heaven pass over her, —the fair tide that would bear
her to the bosom of the Ocean flows by her, yet she
lies just where she was, —she makes no progress, she
only swings round and round within the limits of a
narrow circle, as the flowing or the ebbing tide may
move her: and why ? because deep down, hidden
beneath the moving waters, an anchor holds her to
the binding mud; —she cannot make her way upon
the watersshe cannot obey the invitation of the
beckoning winds to waft her onward; she cannot go
with the free ebbing tide, as it hastens to the Ocean,
although it seems to urge her into company; —She
cannot go:—the next fair wind may beckon to her
again ; the next ebb-tide shall find her there again •
just where she was before : —She cannot go, for the
stout anchor holds her:—She illustrates the sluggish
life of man, the condition of the spiritual sluggard ;
Pile fair winds of God’s Spirit are blowing over him ;
4 Acts iii. 15. Colossians i. 18. Revelation xv. 3.


the strong currents of Divine Grace are flowing by
him; but he makes no progress on the voyage of life;
yon may find him to-morrow just where he is to-day;
he swings round and round within the narrow limits
of his daily habits, —swayed to and fro by the passing
circumstances of worldly life : —and why ? because
deep down, hidden among the idols of his heart, an
anchor holds him to the mire of earth ; it is his secret
sin; he cannot go, for the chain cable of his evil
inclinations holds down his soul to this anchor in the
mud; if he could but cut asunder this cable, and
leave behind him the anchor in the mud, how pros-
perous a passage might his soul be making over the
wide Ocean of God’s Love and Power to her glorious
mansions far away!
But why, Brethren Beloved in the Lord, do
I linger in laying down my ministry among you;
—why protract the fleeting minutes of the last
Congregation which recognizes our connexion
as a Pastor with his Flock ? If I should draw out
my words till midnight, I could not tell you half my
thoughts; yet once more will I repeat my oft-told
message—once more sum up the burden of my mis-
sion :
It is the Blood of Jesus Christ that cleanseth us
from all our sins : The merits of His spotless life, the
merits of His inestimable Sacrifice, these are imputed
to the account which stands between Believers and
their God, in the pages of His memory: God’s
Spirit convinceth them of sin, they tare off the
rags which made them loathsome; —they hasten
to the cleansing stream, and are clothed with
the Righteousness of Christ: —Thus the Father
sees them, —thus He knows them as His own


dear children in Christ; He assures them of His par-
don and His love ; He feeds them with heavenly food,
and comforts and strengthens them by the Inspiration
of His Spirit: —They learn the source of their Justifi-
cation before the eyes of an all-seeing God, —they
learn how Christ’s Life is the light of men, and
Christ’s Death the ransom-price of man’s Redemp-
tion ; —how He died once for all, and how continuous
Mediation perpetuates the benefits of past Crucifixion.
They learn how faith enables them to realize the
blessings of their new creation, to live as sons of God,
to grow in grace, and long for glory.
They learn that prayer is the key of Heavenly
treasures; and with hearts brimful of love to God
and man, mingling their voices with the Choir of
Angels,
“ They praise God in His holiness; they praise
Him in the firmament of His power.” 30
Men and Brethren, hold fast these mighty Truths,
with the firm grasp of Faith; for it is by Faith that
man is justified,
“ Not of works, lest any man should boast 3,1
yea by faith of Jesus Christ, —a faith that shines before
men, illuminating the circle of its influence —that
Christian Life may illustrate the concordant doctrines
of St. James and of St. Paul
u I will show thee my faith by my works,” “as it
is written—the Just shall live by Faith.” 37
In all the struggles of your Christian life,
my Brethren,
“ I commend you to God, and to the Word of His
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you
an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.” 38
35 Psalm cl. 36 Ephesians ii. 9.
37 James ii. 18. and Eomans i. 17. 38 Acts xx, 32.


I dare not try to sum up all the acts of kindness
which I have received from many of you; nor can I
repay them : —my Master will recompense them to
you by more than earthly blessings : —may the rich-
est gifts of Heavenly Love fall, like the Angels’ food
with which wandering Israel was fed, round about
your habitations.
Though by diiferent roads, we still shall journey
onward through the wide wilderness to the bank
where the streams of Jordan flow, —still shall we have
the shadow of the same Rock, —still feed on the same
heavenly Manna, —still drink of the same refreshing
waters, —still receive the same word of comfort, —the
same Graces, —and the offer of the same Salvation:—
The members of Christ’s Church are One, —no dis-
tance can sever their union in Christ; one God is
theirs; —one Love is theirs; —washed in the laver of
the same regenerating stream, —taught by the minis-
try of the same Lord Jesus, —fed by the Spiritual
realities of the same Body and Blood, —redeemed by
the same Saviour, and sanctified by the same Spirit,
they look for the enjoyment of the same God and
Father of all, in the Peace and Brightness of the same
Inheritance. Now is the Church’s- trial, but she is
strong and calm and steady,—because she leans on
the promise,
“ Lo, I am with you alway even unto the end of
the world.” 39
Then once more I exhort you to cling closer to her
strength. We live in dangerous times; —This is an
age giddy in the whirl of physical developement;—
an age of steam and stir and strife, —a sensualizing
age:—we are startled by the bursts of success and
3S Matthew xxviii. 20.


disappointment; —rapid gains and rapid losses; —
changes and chances, unsettling and unsettled; —men
are impatient of the old, greedy of the new ; and un-
godly men thrust themselves forward, defiling the
very ceremonies of our Sanctuary by the interference
of their impure hands ; —they take hold of the very
Ark of God, like Uzzah whom God’s anger slew: —
By such men’s help dishonour is done to our Religion :
Then let the true soldiers of the Cross unite with
faith joined to faith, and prayer to prayer, and soul
to soul. There is much need, —for even now is heard
the demand —that the truth of Christ’s Gospel should
be made to stoop to the coldness of Rationalism,
which leaves no room for faith ; to the pretensions
of Puritanism, under the cloak of liberality; —to the
extravagance of Fanaticism, hid beneath a mask of
duty ; —and even to the shameless ignorance of Infi-
delity, which, living in an atmosphere of discontent,
grasps at everything, —possesses nothing.
Regard these signs of the Times as warnings, not
as terrors, to the Church of God ; the Ark of God is
safe amid the tempest and the storm, —she rises above
the water floods, which are lifting her higher and
higher—nearer and nearer to her God, until at last
o J
she shall rest on her Ararat, —on the summit of the
Everlasting Hills.
Ye old —ye aged Pilgrims —long have been your
years of labour, great have been your opportunities, —
know ye that the Lord’s harvest day is almost come,
“ The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer.” 40
Ye young and strong, and beautiful and gay,
trust not in your youth, for it is turning into ago ;
40 1 Peter iy. 7.


boast not of your strength, for it is the strength only
of a day ; —and
“ glorious beauty is a fading flower,” 41
for like the sweet and pretty blossom of the spring,
it soon must fade and fall;
Sorrow not when cares drive gaiety away, for if
“ weeping endure for a night, joy cometh in the
• ?? 4,2
morning. **
ü ße ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of
His might, putting on the whole armour of God
“ Give unto the Lord glory and strength :—wor-
ship the Lord in the beauty of holiness
Then shall thy renown go forth for thy beauty,
and, as it was said in days of old regarding the holy
city built on the mount of the Lord, all shall say thou
art exceeding beautiful. 43
Ye rich, glory not in riches, for gold cannot buy
Salvation.
Ye poor, confide not in the virtue of your poverty,
but trust in the Living God, and in the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, knowing assuredly, that
‘ c There is none other name under Heaven given
among men, whereby we must be saved.” 44
To all of you —Farewell —as a Minister of Christ
for you, —once more I say —Farewell:—
May God bless you with exceeding Blessings: and
do ye pray for me,
“ So that I may finish my course with joy, and the
ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.” 45
u And now, behold , I know that ye all , among whom
41 Isaiah xxyiii. 1 42 Psalm xxx. 5.
43 Ezekiel xvi. 13. 44 Acts iv. 12.
45 Acts xx. 24.


/ have gone preaching the Kingdom of , shall see
my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this
day that lam pure from the blood of all men, for I have
not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.' I'’ 1 '’
Brethren, I commend you to God.*
Omy God —if Ministerial Benediction be of any
avail, before Thy Eternal Throne or in the hearts of
Thy people; —If Faith hath power on earth, and
Prayer be heard before the Mercy-seat of Heaven; —
If Love for the souls of men can draw down the
Blessing of the Love of God Then my Father—
my Saviour —and my Sanctifier, —the Triune Majesty
of my God, I pray Thee, let one vast out-pouring of
Spiritual Benediction, uttered by the Love of Man,
inspired by the Love of God, descend upon this people,
11 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that des-
cended upon the mountains of Zion —
and let it be received by every one here present, as
that whereby
“ The Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life
for evermore.
“ May the Lord bless you all, and keep you,”
my Beloved Brethren in Christ, —
“ May the Lord make His face to shine upon you,
and be gracious unto you; may the Lord lift up His
° 1 47
countenance upon you, and give you peace,
both now and for evermore.
Unto God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, three persons in One Godhead, be
ascribed all Greatness, Power, and Glory,—all
Majesty, Dominion and Praise, for ever and ever.—
Amen.
* On this the whole assembly arose —as by one impulse —and re-
mained standing to the end of this supplication.
46 Psalm cxxxiii. 3. « Numbers vi. 24.


w
}
•
\
V
%
>, '
I
♦
JOSEPH COOK AND CO.,
•
y
PRINTERS,
GEORGE STREET, SIDNEY.
%
t
<
t
C
4
*
>
•
V
*
i
/
4
*
*


•
** |
U' .*
'• *'•**
**
- — •
v "y
1
-V-v. ***
' > v ■ *»
' ' -i. * %
n.
*
’ %
S
' • >
.... : i/i
X'
*
*
f
«■
%
>' V
• _ <\ /
"w*- >? • •
1 If
!
1
•
.
v> *
V.
. ‘ * f
; * i v y
’ - >'<.T
• r ■ 4.
’ * ' • .
V
* V
.-*v T ' ■ •»
■ *•<*'
fj
ir
/
t
#
w
*■ $
4
-
r 1
\
. ** N
4 ¥
%
0f
/
.£
< ,./■ '■
; X
f ',?• .•>
\
' : ' * i
\
W
✓
*
1
*
9»
L
■ I \./
