

LAYS OF LAKE WENDOUREE,
MIND YOUR LOCOMOTIVE.
OTHER POEMS,
By J. W. MILLS


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce
(/CyiyS


LAYS
LAKE WENDOUREE,
“MIND YOUR LOCOMOTIVE,”
AND OTHER POEMS,
BY
J. W. MILLS.
[All Rights Reset,vep.]
U'allatat :
Perry, Anderson & Co.. Printers. &c., Lydiard Street. Pallarat.
MDCCCXCIT.
; r i j I


Berry, Anderson & Co., Printers, Etc., Lydiard St.
South, Ballarat.


THIS VOLUME
Is Resdecteuldy Dedicated to
Ton. fimt-CM. ®.
WHO HAS EVER REEN FIRST IN ADVANCING THE
INTEREST OF LITERATURE IN BALLARAT,
liY THE AUTHOR,
J. W. MILLS.


A P rayer For the Queen.
By an old friend.
10RD, Tliy best blessings shed
| On our loved monarch’s head,
Round her abide,
Teach her Thy holy will,
Shield her from every ill,
Guide, guard, and speed her still,
Safe to Thy side.
Grant her, O Lord, to be
Wise, just, and good, like Thee—
Blessing and blest.
With every virtue crowned,
Honor’d by nations round,
Midst earthly monarchs found,
Greatest and best.
Under Thy mighty wings
Keep her, 0 King of kings ;
Answer her prayer,
Till she shall hence remove,
Up to Thy courts above,
To dwell in light and love—
Evermore there.
A. R. N.


PREFACE.
It is usual when an author makes his bow before the
public to preface his work with a few remarks. It is not
necessary that they should be pertinent to the contents, as
readers of prefaces will have observed, but it is the fashion to
say something, and the writer of these poems has no desire to
appear odd in this matter. A gentleman who wrote about two
hundred years ago let his readers into the secret of his motive
for publishing his book. “It was not,” he said, “to make money
nor to acquire fame: it was not to gratify his vanity nor to
administer to his ambition ; but it was to feed fat an ancient
grudge he boro the lawyers and doctors.” The author of this
little volume, like the gentleman mentioned, has no thought of
filling his breeches pocket or of gratifying his ambition, but,
unlike the other man, he publishes his book in the hope of
doing good, and not as a medium for venting his spleen.
*
Arriving in the colony in the infant days of gold digging,
the author at once applied himself to the task of benefiting his
fellow workers. He became a frequent contributor to the
Press, and took an active part in the public questions of the
day. He threw his energies into the cause of shortening the
hours of labor, and literary institutions found in him an ardent
and enthusiastic supporter. His labors in assisting to establish
free libraries in Castlemaine and Ballarat are especially worthy
of remembrance, and the laboring classes are largely indebted
to him, as well as many others, for the opportunities everywhere
abundant of cultivating their minds and participating in the
literary wealth which has been stored up from time immemorial.


The contents of this volume will speak for itself. It
displays considerable ability in the art of versification, and
shows the author to bo possessed of a fertile imagination and
much quiet humor. The pieces have been written in the inter-
vals in a busy, active life, and many of them have appeared in
the newspaper Press.
The author launches his little craft upon a well traversed
ocean. He has to brave the dangers of rocks and shoals and
sunken sands before he reaches the clear blue waters of the
open sea. If, like many another literary skip, it should
come to grief the author can console himself with the couplet
in Byron—
Tis pleasant sure to see one’s self in print ;
A book’s a book although there’s nothing in’t.
JAS. VALLINS.


INDEX.
Page.
The Alfred Bells ... ... 1
Old England’s Springtime ... ... ... 3
Mind Your Locomotive ... ... ... ... 5
On the Corner... ... ... ... ... 7
Compulsory, Secular, Free ... ... ... 9
Little Hero of Preston Yale ... ... ... n
Ode to the City Clock ... ... ... ... 13
Spring Song ... ... ... ... ... 15
The Toilers ... ... ... ... ... 17
Ode to Victoria ... ... ... ... 19
Spirit of Poetry ... ... ... ... 22
Ode to the Fire Brigade... ... ... ... 24
Eureka Stockade ... ... ... ... 26
Lay of the Larrikins ... ... ... ... 28
The Little Blind Girl in the Tower... ... ... 33
Beautiful Park, Echuca ... ... ... ... 35
Recollections of Tynemouth ... ... ... 37
Christmas King ... ... ... ... 39
An Invocation... ... ... ... ... 44
Unveiling the Statues ... ... ... ... 42
Impromptu to a Lady ... ... ... ... 44
Little Numbers ... ... ... ... 45
Gleams of Sunshine ... ... ... ... 47
Vision of Lake Wendouree ... ... ... 49
Floating the Victorian Loan ... ... ... 58
Have you seen the Major ? ... ... ... 60
The Quid Nunes ... ... ... ... g 2
Anglo-Australian Telegraph ... ... ... 63
The “ Telegraph” Scandal ... ... ... 65
The Melbourne Exhibition ... ... ... gg
The Lay of a Lost Bell ... ... ... ... 70




LAYS OF LAKE WENDOUREE,
“MIND YOUR LOCOMOTIVE,”
AND OTHER POEMS!
The Alfred Bells.
[The following poem was written by Mr. J. W. Mills, for
presentation to the late F. M. Claxton, Esq., at the termi-
nation of his mayoral year of office .]
mING out ! ring out! the Alfred bells,
In simple melody that tells
Of happy hours, beside
The pleasures of the good old times,
When listening to the solemn chimes,
And dreaming oft of sunny climes
Beyond the ocean -wide.
Ring out ! ring out! in merry peals,
Till memory’s mystic voice reveals
Those scenes we loved so well ;
In England’s happy homes they bring
Their gladness with the voice of Spring—
Their music in our hearts shall ring
A merry, merry peal!


Thrice welcome bells, in chorus grand
Eing out your joy-notes o’er the land
Our weary lives to cheer ; jj
Long may their sweet and solemn sound
From sacred temples, turret-crowned,
In our Australian homes resound
Deep, sonorous, and clear !
Their music sweet, and softly fanned,
Like whisperings from the spirit land
As on the air it swells ;
These voices in our hearts are found,
They echo back their joyful sound—
Einging, swinging, whirling round—
God bless the Alfred bells !
Our native land, our youthful dreams,
Our Sabbath bells and sunlit gleams.
Around our heart still clings ;
And oft our lingering spirits gaze
Adown on those enchanted days,
The sylvan scenes and merry lays—
The gladsome springtime brings !
No more we’ll hear the Christmas hymn,
’Neath snowcapped hills or hoar-frost grim,
Fall softly on the ear ;
But melting rays and burning skies,
And winds whose fiery breath replies
To sounds of praise that ever rise,
In accents loud and clear!
Ye bells, ring out ! for who shall say
That we may see another day,
And who our fates foretell ;
When father, mother, sister, son,
And friends and foes, all one by one,
Shall reach the undiscovered bourne—
List to the passing bell!


Hark ! now the bells are ringing sweet,
And crowds are gathered in the street
Time-honored sounds to hear ;
The ringing of the Alfred Bells—
In simple harmony that tells
Of dear Old England’s merry bells,
And good old English cheer 1
Old England’s Springtime.
©THE land of our birth, that bright spot of earth,
And all the wild echoes of woodland and moor,
The voices that bring
In the blushes of spring
With loud vernal songs the old welkin doth ring—
Inspiring, appealing,
To all hearts revealing
True pleasure and joy.
Where the lark mounts on high with his song to the sky,
And the voice of the mavis and cuckoo is heard,
The redbreast flits o’er
The cottager’s door,
And Nature’s sweet incense doth rise evermore—
Shining and gleaming,
In soft sunlight beaming,
With joy o’er the earth.


Where the bright laughing stream doth sparkle and gleam
Through moss covered rocks, where the primroses peep,
And each moonlit dell,
Where sweet Philomel
Attunes her rich notes on the evening to swell—
Dancing and leaping,
Where willows are weeping,
O’er mountain and glen.
Where the ivy doth cling to the old forest king,
And spreadeth his mantle o’er every bough ;
He leadeth his train
Over castle and fane,
The ruined old abbey he doth not disdain—
Creeping and peeping
Where the mighty are sleeping
’Neath marble entombed.
And the life-giving vine doth cheerily twine
And merrily blossoms to gladden the heart ;
It spreadeth along
Its tendrils so strong,
The winds breathing perfume, the air full of song—
Clinging and springing,
The joy bells are ringing
The springtime is come !
Old England’s not dearer to hearts that are near her
Than to the wanderers in these far-off isles ;
No country so fair,
No music so rare,
That comes in the springtime, and is borne on the air—
Bringing and singing
Of memories still clinging
Around England’s homes.


Mine Your Locomotive.
ALL men, like locomotives,
Are travelling on through space,
And life is but a railway train
For all the human race.
Be then a steady driver
In duty never fail,
Mind your locomotive
And keep it on the rail.
The fast men of Victoria,
With overheated brains,
Whose lives are all sensation—
They travel by those trains.
The drunkard and the lunatic
That in our prisons pine
Once were honest travellers,
But now are off the line.
The gambler and the forger,
The thoughtless and the frail,
The blackleg and the libertine,
Are found upon the rail.
The man with high position blest
Comes also in our theme,
He lives high pressure all his life—■
Is always under steam ;
He travels always by express
And slow folks he disdains,
As honest people lag behind
Like ordinary trains !


Sometimes he’s brought up to a stand,
Another course must take,
When Justice with her firm strong hand
Puts on the legal brake.
Then, boys, we see how justice fails—
Nor is her dealing even—
He’s let off with a year or two,
Instead of six or seven.
His pastor now comes to his aid,
With tear bedimmed eyes,
Gives him a pious character—
To set him free he tries.
To bankers, clerks, and managers
Who travels fast and free,
Mind your locomotives,
And let the bank-notes be ?
Rushing madly on through life—
It is an oft told tale—
They only reach the terminus
To find it is the gaol.
There is a point in all their lives
That innocence might claim,
But driving hard above their speed
Has brought them down to shame.
Get up the steam and start afresh,
Prom every danger flee,
For it the ladder’s kicked away
You’ll find you’re “up a tree?”
Be then a steady driver—
In duty never fail;
But mind your locomotive
And keep it on the rail !


On the Corner.
ON the Comer, book in hand,
On the Corner take your stand,
There’s something good and something grand
Comes daily to the Corner.
Christians, Pagans, Turks, and Jews,
Ancient Britons and Hindoos,
Retailing scrip and mining news—
You’ll find*them on the Corner.
On the Corner young and old,
Always dreaming mines of gold,
Ever selling—often sold
By others at the Corner.
The jolly dogs oft start a claim
In Devil’s Gully or Elaine,
Christen it with some sounding name
They pick up at the Corner.
On the Corner he who dares
May speculate in mining shares,
And face the market “ bulls” and “ bears,”
And tigers at the Corner.
New Kohinoors and newer Parks,
And Freehold’s New but latest Clarke’s,
With Golden Reefs and Noah’s Arks,
Are lively at the Corner.
On the Corner bound to sell,
The shares were up but soon they fell,
So I’ve the kernel, you the shell—
’Tis business on the Corner.


The claim is right—they know the ground,
There’s others marked out miles around,
And sinking—-but no washdirt found
Excepting at the Corner !
On the Corner take a trip
And turn your single shares to scrip,
Sell them off and let them rip,
Launched safely on the Corner.
Jumps go up like other shares,
Sometimes go down, like Corner prayers,
Whatever gold the lawyer spares
You’ll get it at the Corner.
On the Corner, it is but fair
To say the stock is mostly square,
And mining swindles grown more rare
Than diamonds on the Corner.
When Ballarat—and not till then—
Is blest with sterling honest men,
Her glories will return again
Like sunbeams on the Corner.
On the Corner—but take heed
No more mining martyrs bleed,
Fair dealing will the best succeed
And prosper on the Corner.
Dishonesty may flaunt and flout
Its wiles and witcheries about,
The rogues must all be weeded out
For ever from the Corner.
On the Corner, book in hand,
On the Corner take your stand,
There’s something good and something grand
Comes daily to the Corner.


“Compulsory, Secular, Free!”
[. Respectfully dedicated to The Hon. Lieut.-Colonel IV. C.
Smith, M.L.A., Minister of Education, on opening the
Macarthur Street State School ]
¥ICTORIA, blessed with her free education,
The handmaid of science and progress will be;
Her mottoes will echo from nation to nation,
To the ends of the earth, to the bounds of the sea ;
These are the words that new life will awaken—
“ Compulsory, secular, gloriously free !”
This is our standard, and this our reliance
And thousands of true hearts around it are twined ;
We’ll scorn the destroyers, and bid them defiance,
Who try to enslave us or fetter the mind,
And pray for God’s blessing on free education,
Leave dogmas and creeds and fierce zealots behind.
With plaudits triumphant we hail this evangel
Above all the triumphs of princes and kings,
With richest of blessings it comes like an angel,
To brighten our homes and true happiness brings ;
The future will bless ns, and each generation
Will live in its sunshine or rise on its wings.
This day at her feet on the altar of science
Another proud temple’s devoted to thee,
Where children may learn, above all, self reliance—
Reading and writing and arithmetic free !
And learn that their downfall or true elevation
Depends on obedience, and truth—(when outspoken),
Is more precious than gems from the unfathomed sea.


We’ll seek for the truth and will not dissemble,
Obedience and labor will make our life sweet ;
Kingdoms may totter and tyrants may tremble—
The world up in arms on rod battle fields meet ;
We are ruled by this angel of light—Education ;
That reigns o’er this nation, who bows at her feet.
Bring hither sweet music to this great ovation,
With loud songs of triumph raise higher the piean,
With laurels go meet her, with true adoration.
Crown her with garlands—proclaim her the queen ;
Stand firm by her throne, with heroic devotion
Guard her from enemies both secret and seen.
Victoria will soar upon eagle’s strong pinions
While free education our statutes doth grace,
Brightest of stars in the Austral dominions ;
Grand in her mission and proud in her place ;
The vanguard of progress and civilization—
Hope star of nations, the pride of our race.
lo triomphe ! the word has been spoken—
Our brave legislators were strong in the fight,
Faith grows the firmer with pledges unbroken,
And mountains on mountains recede from our sight ;
Onward the march is, and nobler and higher
The victories achieved by the truth and the right.
Give arts to the genius and trades to the bolder—
Man lives not alone by the sweat of his brow—
To labor and Learning will Science unfold her
Deep hidden treasures and secrets to view ;
Intelligent labor the compass to guide us
O’er life’s stormy ocean unerring and true.
Let this be your grand aim—your noble ambition,
Aspiring to knowledge to greatness and fame ;
Though unblest with riches, by birth or position,
You may leave to your country a glorious name.
Emblazoned on ages when blest Education
Is marching right forward new victories to claim!


Little Hero of Preston Vale.
\_The following lines are a true narrative of a sad incident
that took place at Preston Vale, near Mount Alexander, in the
year 1887, during the progress of the waterworks, when the
whole country was in flames. The dreadful scene was
witnessed by the author of this little book, oj which the lines
will speak for themselves .]
mjHE bright sun was towering in the sky,
A, And the heavens were overcast ;
And a deep red glare shot through the air
Like the breath of a furnace blast.
The earth was scorched by the lurid fire
That fell on each hill and dale,
And bush fires blaze through the smoky haze
That spread o’er Preston Yale.
The shepherd had gone with his panting flocks
To graze on the mountain side—
In vain to come back by the well known track
To his hut in the valley he tried.
His wife had hied to her nearest friends,
Nor did she stop by the way—
In haste to prepare the old festive fare,
And to welcome the New Year’s Day.
The hot winds raged through the crackling trees,
The streams in the valley were dried ;
Wild herds rush’d back from the fiery track,
And the flames poured on like a tide.
Amid smoke and heat and the burning rays,
The roar of the wind and the fire,
Each man prayed for the brook and the shade,
As the sun mounted higher and higher.


Beneath the red gum’s ample shade,
Watching the flaming sky,
And trembling all, with hearts dismayed,
We heard a childlike cry.
The voice came from the burning bush,
And echoed through the dale.
Amid the smoke and flames that rush’d
On madly down the vale,
We saw a little girl come near—
The wind and flames grew higher—
Her cries upon the blast we hear
Exclaiming, “ We’re on fire !”
She held an infant to her breast,
Wrapp’d in her tiny cloak,
And lovingly the babe caress’d
Amidst the fire and smoke.
From her limbs the smouldering clothes
We quickly tore and out;
She had no thought except for those
Left in the burning hut.
“ Oh, save my sisters from the flames !
This babe is safe and sound ;
Save them !” the dying child exclaim’d,
And sank upon the ground.
When from her shrivell’d arras we took
The babe unhurt, she smiled,
And cast an earnest ling’ring look
Where flames were raging wild.
Her sisters screamed, but help was near ;
The fires crept round their feet—
The bush-fence blazing in the rear
Prevented their retreat.


A rescuer, with strong, sturdy arms,
Clasping their bodies round,
Onward came through fire and flame,
And the glare of the heated ground.
0 God, this sight of human woes
Did melt the stoutest heart!—
Their scorched skin and smould’ring clothes
Would not asunder part.
This little heroine of Preston Yale
Sleeps in her silent grave ;
Her sisters oft weep o’er her suffering so deep,
For she died her sisters to save.
Ode to the City Clock.
LL hail the day with joy and pleasure
Our longing eyes have strained to see—
The city clock, the bells, the tower,
From eternal “ Sleep” set free ;
The works, the hands, the chimes diurnal,
Moving on with merry sound,
Refreshed by “ Sleep” with grace supernal,
Bless’d as they go daily round.
Illustrious stranger ! we all greet thee,
Welcome is thy shining face,
Feinting sternly time is fleeting
That measures man’s allotted space ;
Teach us to grasp the living present
And count the moments as they fly.


The past—so full of untold sorrows,
Sweetest hopes and joys have fled ;
Vision’d prospects all departed,
And mingled with the silent dead ;
The future may look dark and clouded,
But sunshine reigns up in the sky.
Fair Ballarat! young, rich, and noble,
No stranger comes to thee unblest—
The sick, the dying, and the orphan
Find within thy bosom rest ;
Corroding treasures have not harden’d
Hearts that feel for human woes.
Bleak winds have swept the tempest round us,
Billows breaking loud and high,
On sunken rocks and quicksands drifted,
No hands to save, no help is nigh ;
Yet hope thro’ golden clouds is gleaming—
Faith through all our trouble flows.
List to the gentle music ringing,
Resonant full of tones sublime,
The brief and solemn records keeping,
Marks the restless flow of time ;
And ringing softly, sweetly chiming,
Round the cycle night and day.
This outpost guard is set to warn us
On the battle field of life—
A land-mark in the fray to guide us,
Onward marching in the strife :
The warning voice may be unheeded—
Our lives unhonored pass away !
When clock and tower grow old and hoary,
And future watchers on them gaze—
Hallow’d with mouldering dust of ages,
When men look back on golden days ;
And tell their sons the ancient glories
Of the gold mines and the men.


And stalwart, toiling, bustling races—
Living, hoping, straggling on.
Plodding through their lives and singing
Of the brighter age that’s gone ;
And looking to the good times coming,
Dreaming our waking dreams again.
This clock may live when we are lying
Unwept, forgotten, in the grave,
And other men and other women
Battling on Life’s ruffled wave —
This generation past for ever,
Far from scenes of earthly strife.
A few more setting suns may find us
Bereft of all we loved on earth —
Unloosed the dearest links that bind us
Round our bright Australian hearth ;
And all our joys and sorrows ended
On the troubled sea of life !
Spring Song.
WHEN spring its perfume wafts around
And blooms the crocus bright,
The snowdrop and the violet sweet
Peep forth in glad sunlight ;
And Nature sings her merry songs,
And all her charms disposes—
Blest is the sight, but summer bright
Shall bring us lovely roses.


When gladness o’er the land resounds
And fiow’rets gay do shine,
The cowslip and the marigold,
Primrose and eglantine,
And living streamlets leap and dance
When hoary winter closes—
Blest is the sight, but summer bright
Shall bring us lovely roses.
I love the spring-time gushing clear—
Bright and joyous maiden,
She brings to man the brimming cup
And bees with honey laden ;
When nature dons her mantle green,
And every hue discloses—
Blest be the sight when summer bright
Shall bring us lovely roses.
Then let us sing to glorious spring,
That brings us sweetest flowers.
And fills the air with incense rare
And charms the fairy hours ;
God paints the lily and the rose,
And richer gifts disposes—
Blest be the sight when summer bright
Shall bring us lovely roses.
«
Youth is the spring-time of our life,
Then beams genial summer,
And autumn’s russet hues reveal
That winter is next comer ;
To Him our youth and lives we give,
In whom our trust reposes,
And bless the sight when summer bright
Shall bring us lovely roses.


The Toilers.
’MfO classic muse tempts ms to soar
J|p| Beyond the scenes of humble life,
No proud heroics blazoned o’er
With battle-fields and mortal strife.
No combats on the land or sea —
Where human hearts are rent in twain—
Nor cannon’s roar has charms for me,
Nor glory mid the heaps of slain.
Be mine the humble task to cull
Fresh flowers from the life of man,
A treasury always rich and full
For man to read and God to scan.
Fear, anger, jealousy are his,
And hope—the mainspring of the soul—
Ever grasping at some future bliss
Beyond his reach or his control.
Below the angels by degree—
Ambitious, vengeful, proud, and brave,
Covetous, yet unselfish, he
Whose only birthright is the grave.
Plac’d on the earth to work and win
His share of happiness by toil,
Not as a punishment for sin ;
The wealthy drones till not the soil !


To work, “to work” to win his bread
Is-man’s true dignity below ;
Luxurious ease by riches fed
From life’s polluted sources flow.
Give him but wealth, he’ll want the more,
Till countless gold is in his hands ;
Give him rich gems and store on store,
With fruitful fields>and teeming lands.
He lacks contentment that will bless
The toiler for his daily bread,
His golden key to happiness ■'
Reveals but misery in its stead.
He sweats, and toils, and piles up gear,
And still remains unsatisfied,
To lose it then his only fear,
Lest it is swept on by the tide
That onward flows with mighty sweep,
And bears upon its bosom all
His life-won gains into the deep,
Engulph’d and lost beyond recall.
There is a golden glorious mean
Where poverty and wealth lives not,
A point of earthly bliss between—
Found in the humble toiler’s lot.
Be these our nobler ends and aims—
To live and love, and thank, and bless
A bounteous Providence, who sends
Us toil, and rest, and happiness.


Ode to Victoria.
▼ICTOEIA ! happy, blest, and free,
Thou empress of the Southern Sea,
Whose mountain currents flow
O’er golden sands ; bright streamlets run
And glistening gems gleam in the sun,
Where wealth is found and treasures won
Deep in the earth below.
Where is the man that loves her not ?
Saxon, Teuton, Celt, or Scot,
Gael, or Ancient Briton,
Descendants of a glorious race ;
Earth is now their resting place,
Their honored names and deeds we trace
As with sunbeams written.
Hope ! star of the coming time.
Where men of every land and clime,
And every race and tongue,
Shall flock to see this wondrous land,
An empire vast, unrivall’d, grand,
And countless as the glittering sand,
A nation strong and young.


On fair Australia’s peaceful shores
No battles rage nor cannons roar,
No discord, feud, or strife ;
No castles proud her mountains deck,
No lordly tyrants hold in check
A thousand warriors at their beck
To strike for death or life.
The war cry and the trumpet sound.
The watch fires and the sentry’s round,
Dread omen’s of the fight ;
Dire sounds that echo in our ears,
The clang of arms, the groans, the cheers,
Mingled with gore and human tears,
Begrimed their armour bright.
The age of chivalry has fled,
When mailed knights their vassals led
In battle’s grim array ;
And clansmen fierce the foe attack
With claymore, dirk, and battle-axe,
Leave death and bloodshed in their tracks,
March onward to the fray.
Long may that constellation bright
Illume our Austral skies by night,
So near the polar star,
Sweet emblem of our standard fair ;
Commerce and peace its glory share,
And woe to him whose hand shall dare
Unfurl it in fierce war.
To future ages, without end,
May we this bloodless banner send
Unspotted, free, and pure ;
Blazoned with victories nobly fought;
Triumph of skill and human thought,
Miracles of art and science wrought
That will all time endure.


Hither we come for woe or weal,
We live in peace, and love and feel
Each man is our brother,
Who nobly fought and bravely stood
United by our common blood,
A universal brotherhood
Each helping on another.
Thrice honored be that little band
Who proudly strive and firmly stand
The vanguard of our right;
Who never have their birthright sold,
Nor swerved from truth for place and gold.
But like the Spartan braves of old
Stand foremost in the fight.


Spirit of Poetry.
IN the morning sunlight beaming,
When its rosy lustre’s shed,
On the sparkling dewdrop beaming,
When the misty twilight’s fled—
In the clouds the voice has spoken,
When the thunder loudly calls ;
In the mountain silence broken
By the roaring waterfalls.
In the wild tempestuous ocean,
In the river, stream, and lake—
Flowing through our speech and motion
And our lives asleep or ’wake.
Whispering when the sun reclining
On the golden clouds of eve,
When the full-orbed moon is shining
And the stars their light receive.
When the spring is bright and blooming
In the sunshine, in the shade—
In the storm clouds dark and looming
When the summer glories fade.
Music singing in the mountains,
Beauty blazing in the light ;
Gushing from eternal fountains
Endless music day and night.


Ever-lasting, ever-flowing
Through the earth, the air, and sea,
Nature’s lavish hand bestowing
Untold treasures rich and free.
Not in the battle cruel and gory,
Where victor boasts and foeman yields ;
Not in pomp, and pride, and glory—
But in lilies of the fields.
O’er the hills and valleys ringing,
The stars and trees their voice outpours,
Sweetly breathing, ever singing—
Lo ! God is here and He is ours.


Ode to the Fire Briga de.
[.Respectfully Dedicated to the Captain and Members of the
Ballarat and City Fire Brigades.']
HARK ! ’tis the solemn midnight hour,
, City and town are slumbering around ;
The silent watchers on each tower
Send forth the deep and well-known sound.
’Tis the dread knell of the great fire bells
Booming again through the air,
Rolling, ringing, and tolling,
Booming and speaking out loud,
And thrilling our hearts with despair.
In the hot wind’s riot and roar,
Breathing its fierce, furnace breath,
Their deep-mouthed tongues evermore
Speak of sad havoc and death—
Calling to action, to work, and to aid,
The willing strong hands of our Fire Brigade.
List to the knell of the great fire bell,
To the sound of the hoofs and the wheels ;
The tinkling of bells the wayfarer tells,
The approach of carriage and reels.
“ Ready, aye, Ready!” their motto’s aim,
To save, not destroy, they come ;
They seek not glory, gold, nor fame,
Nor martial musicjblends its strain
With clang of arms and beat of drum.


Is there no bravery but in strife ?
No heroes without slaughter made ?
No honor but in taking life,
Or charges of the Light Brigade ?
No greatness, glory, grandeur, fame,
In saving lives from'fire and flame ?
Through the night watch, through the day,
Untiring at their post they stand—
Where duty calls to them, “ On the way !”
Obedient to their chief’s command ;
At danger’s point, like brave men, each
Seeks to be foremost at the breach.
Shall we not honor men whose deeds
Are worthy of the minstrel’s tongue,
And offer them our humble meeds
Whose nobler aims remain unsung ;
Who dauntless, sturdy, bold, and bravo,
With manly hearts they “ Strive to Save.”
Give me the man who ever tries
A feilow-creature’s life to save,
Who thinks not of the sacrifice
Amid the flames or on the wave ;
True heroes they, like gems and gold,
Their lustre with their Jives unfold.
Success to the Fire Brigades !
True courage is found on their side,
They wear not the garland that fades,
True hearts and strong hands are their guide.
May they prosper and flourish, and ever aspire
To be “ Ready, aye, Ready,” at each call of “ Fire !”


Eureka Stockade.
HISTORIC name of Soldiers’ Hill,
Though unrecorded yet may fill
The story of an hour ;
There are memories in the words that tell
Of those who nobly fought and fell,
When Ballarat unbound the spell
Of tyrants and of power !
’Twas here the midnight camp was laid,
And solemn vows and oaths were made,
And vengeance prayed to speed ;
And curses deep and loud arise
From hireling bands and worthless spies,
Who sold their country’s liberties
And boasted of the deed.
Ho watchfires burn, no voices heard,
The outposts placed, unset the guard—
And sentries paced around :
No sound of drum or rifle crack,
But all in silent bivouac,
And ready for the night attack—
They lay upon the ground.
As couchant tigers wait their prey,
From early eve to break of day,
Their watching did not cease :
Their maddened brains with liquors reel,
They gloat upon their unused steel—
Like cravens boast, like demons feel
Their bloodv thirst increase.


Soldiers’ Hill—familiar name !
Unhonored and unknown to fame,
Not here our miners.bled ;
But from its brow the soldiers saw
The victims of their cruel law.
Yet o’er their deeds a veil we draw
In memory of the dead.
Eureka Stockade ! from this place
Victoria may yet boast a race
That will not yield like slaves ;
For liberty their watchword’s aim,
’Tis liberty true Britons claim,
“ For Liberty”—and not the name,
Is written on the graves.
Where brave Eureka heroes lie,
Whose names and deeds will never die—
Their last great tribute paid.
Beneath that simple stone inurned,
Each heart with love of freedom burned—
Each heart the power of tyrants spurned,
But now how lowly laid !


Lay of the Larrikins.
Cl] AN no wise head propound a plan
V By which our native larrikin
Can get an honest living ?
Or give a solid reason why
That to scenes of vice they fly
And all our laws and rules defy
That seem not worth the giving ?
Is there no chart by which to guide
Our youthful race o’er life’s rough tide ?
No lighthouse, buoy, or beacon
To mark the hidden rocks of life
To show the quicksands, dread and rife,
The paths of infamy and strife
That mind and manhood weaken ?
And no kind hearts outside the goal,
To guide the erring and the frail
To knowledge and to science?
And show him how to seek and find
Food for the body and the mind,
To leave his vices all behind
And teach him self-reliance ?
To know himself, all else to know
Is but an evanescent glow,
No substance in it found ;
But fleeting shadows ling’ring nigh
Like clouds that in the moonlight fly—
The meteor flashing in the sky
The echo to the sound.


To shun with high and holy aim
Those pests of our young nation’s fame,
Where midnight revels ring ;
Where Bacchus with his horrid train
Misery and death triumphant reign ;
Fierce brawls and ribaldry profane
Their untold curses bring.
Throughout the world in every age
His name is graven on its page
Indelible and clear ;
And he shall ever find a place
Amidst our erring human race
So long as there remains a trace
Of human nature here.
His works, though neither good nor great,
Have had some influence on the fate
Of empires new and old ;
Greece, England, and Araby the blest,
Media, Persia, south, east, and west,
To say the truth, were once possessed
Of larrikins untold.
Yet from their graceless ranks have sprung
Men gifted with the pen and tongue
To plead their nation’s cause ;
Statesmen and warriors brave and wise
In senate and in field they rise,
“ Cynosure of their country’s eyes,”
Upholders of its laws.
From teeming millions of this earth
The men who boast of noble birth
That peasants may not claim,
Once young and reckless, fierce and wild,
Have grown to manhoood from the child,
Though oft in pleasure’s path beguiled
Have found the road to fame,


In youth, our holy prophets say,
The mind’s elastic as the clay
The potters fingers mould ;
Divine and pure, without a stain,
The ever-restless busy brain,
Rough hewn, re-modelled, will retain
The silver and the gold.
A priceless gem, a mount of light,
Unsullied, holy, spotless, bright,
Eternal and Divine ;
Though darkest clouds and sorrows shade
This thing immortal and not made,
The light within'jt shall not fade—
It shall for ever shine.
If youth’s the forecast of the man
Then is the native larrikin
A type of all their race ;
That nation will be cursed indeed
Evolved from this reckless breed,
Who own no country’s laws or creed
And have no resting place.
Our Parliament was once graced with
J. D. W ds and L. L. S h ;
One was a precocious youth,
The other was a setter
Pitchfork’d to a a Treasury seat,
He went the Governor to greet,
Than dirty larrikins in the street
He proved himself no better.
Crammed to the brim with’legal lore
Of Blackstone, Hale, and sundry more,
Their musty records clipping ;


From larrikins colonial sprung
A prodigy for one so young,
He’d never curb his naughty tongue
Until he got a whipping.
A thousand larrikins set free
In one triumphant jubilee
And universal greeting,
Would not such classic language use,
And with such elegance abuse,
Nor of such infamy accuse
Each other at their meeting.
Of later years the records tell
That larrikins get on as well
In session as in city.
When W n and M‘L n rage
Their friends rush in to disengage,
Like mentors of the Roman age,
The combatants in pity.
The Argus, Telegraph, and Age
Make larrikins their present rage
On which their thunder falls ;
When trade in politics is low
And lying paragraphs no go
They wield their mighty pens you know,
Upon poor servant “gals.”
Instead of healing, oft they try
To deeper cut, and probe, and ply
The hearts of honest men.
They howl and rave till on the scent,
Like bloodhounds on their victim bent,
Men’s characters are torn and rent
No matter how and when.


The Melbourne organs, it is said,
Barter the truth for daily bread,
If by chance they find her ;
For coward hands that stab behind,
For blatant rant and lies designed
I’ll search creation till I find
A Meibom ne organ-grinder.
You may but think my lines a dream
And nonsense lank without a theme,
Larrikins for my text ;
Although the subject’s rather stale
And musty as an oft-told tale,
I must its Classic beauties veil,
To be continued in our next.


The Little Blind Girl in the
Tower.
[Old Colonists ivill remember this cruel event that took place
in Melbourne some years ago.~\
CljOLI) and. hungry, dark and cheerless,
V The little blind girl in the tower
Is struggling hard with gaunt starvation,
And a heartless tyrant’s powers.
Bread and water, cuffs, unkindness,
Imprisoned in a gloomy cell ;
No mercy shown to youth or blindness,
And pains no mortal tongue can tell.
This world to me is dark, she’s saying,
Unblest with kindness, friends, and sight ;
Alas ! for me no flower’s blooming,
But clouds instead and endless night.
Daily dying, weak, exhausted,
Without the glowing light of day ;
Unsolaced by the bright sunlight
To guide my solitary way.
All, all is dark, but death’s before her—
The road to bliss and heavenly light,
No prison bars, no gloomy towers,
Nor gaoler’s keys can stay her flight.


She’ll soon be free—her prison broken ;
Into her soul the light hath shone ;
The world recedes, and peace is near her ;
0, God ! she’s dead—her spirit’s gone.
Aye ! gone to God, inhuman gaoler ;
Starve them, bind them, slap their face ;
They’re weak and blind, and undefended,
Like poor, suffering Mary Grace.
Ye men and mothers of this nation,
If ruthless tyrants thrive and live,
Against their wicked wanton cruelty
Your firm and fearless protest give.


Beautiful Park Echuca.
A DOWN the Park and by the river side,
i There’s rich profusion for poetic souls,
Where hearts full weary of the world may glide,
And drink at fountains where the river rolls ;
And rise from Nature to it’s Great First Cause,
To learn the vastness of His wondrous laws.
There’s music breathing through the hoary trees
That bow in adoration o’er the streams,
And soft enchantment lends its wings of ease
To enrapt spirits and to sylvan dreams ;
Where golden wattles softly waft along
Their sweetest perfumes to the vernal song.
Here beauty brightens all the sunlit copse,
Here soft winds whisper.by the flowing tide ;
And dreaming oft, upon thy grassy slopes—
And listening to each voice that sighed—
I’ve wondered how the careless world could miss,
And pass unraptured by Those scenes of bliss..
Umbrageous sand-hills, clad with Murray pine,
Glint through the verdure of gigantic gums,
Whilst flow’rets ope their golden lips and shine
Redolent to the balmy spring that comes—
Weaving their fantastic and their wreathy stems,
And creeping on and peeping out like gems.


If men from wealth and wordly cares could steer,
And snatch a moment from the cares of life,
Nature hath treasures to the soul more dear
And riches worthier of their mortal strife ;
For all in fleeting life is but a breath—
Beyond the boundless, shoreless sea of death !
To bid adieu to these fair scenes I’ll say,
The flowery pathway where the rivers swell
With sweet reluctant amorous delay ;
I quit thy shades, farewell! farewell !
While memory holds, thy mystic ties will bind
Thee, fair Echuca, to a pilgrim’s mind.


Recollections of Tynemouth.
OLD Tynemouth and the beetling cliffs
1 That tower in grandeur o’er the sea.
Brings back the dearest memories
Of what it was and is to me.
The seaworn rocks, the shingly beach,
The tempest and the ocean’s roar ;
Familiar sounds, like music sweet
Re-echo round the seabonnd shore.
I’ve stood upon the wreck-strewn sand
And seen the billows raging high,
And brave men perish in the sea,
And willing hands to help them nigh.
’Twas here the mother saw her sons
All sink beneath the madden’d wave—•
The wife did hear her husband's cries,
No human help their life would save.
The northern rocks, the southern sands,
Have ope’d their portals grim and wide,
And for death’s mighty sacrifice
The rocks, the seas, the sands have. vied.
I’ve seen the lifeboat’s gallant crew,
And heard their wives and sisters weep
Amid the storms, and breathless watch’d
Thera battling on the angry deep.


No braver hearts old England boasts,
No truer men the country yields,
No higher triumphs are achieved
Than by the lifeboat crews of Shields.
I love thy name, dear coaly Tyne ;
Thy rough-born sons no herald needs
To tell the world that they are brave,
And trumpet forth their glorious deeds.
Far from the scenes of youthful life,
Beneath this bright Australian sky,
I hear the ocean’s solemn voice
And listen to the wavelet’s sigh.
And feel that life is not unblest
With future hopes, and often when
I look upon the days of yore
And live my childhood o’er again,
By the old abbey’s crumbling walls,
Watching the moonlight shadows fleet
Aslant the restless foaming waves
That wash around its hallow’d feet.
I’ve dreara’d of other lands and climes
Where sunlit vales bright gems unfold,
Of mountains high and flowery plains
Where streamlets leap o’er sands of gold.
And said within my inmost heart
Whilst gazing on the dark blue sea,
“ Tynemouth, farewell ” —my place of birth,
Adieu for ever, lost to me !


Christmas King.
W ONG live and reign old Christmas King,
■fluj) Monarch of joy and mirth,
I hear his merry footsteps ring
With gladness o'er the earth.
Welcome, Christmas King to-morrow,
And make the welkin ring ;
Away with discontent and sorrow,
All hail, old Christmas King !
With mirth and music we’ll go meet him,
And love shall speed the hours ;
With garlands gay and songs we’ll greet him,
And strew his path with flowers.
Raise your songs of triumph higher,
The joy-bells sweetly ring ;
With organ, trumpet, harp and lyre,
Welcome this rare old king.
He comes, he comes, in ancient glory
To Victoria’s peaceful shore,
In summer bright or winter hoary,
He shall bless us evermore.
He comes with laughter, love, and song,
And kisses sweet he’ll bring ;
And we in chorus loud and long
Will praise this jolly king.


The mansion proud, and lowly dwelling
With revelry shall overflow,
And sunshine all our cares dispelling,
Twine the rose and mistletoe.
Reign, then, supremely o’er the nation,
Fill with gladness every heart;
Rich and poor of every station
In his feast shall have a part.
Where’er a British heart is beating,
On Arctic seas or arid plain,
This king shall bless their merry meeting ;
He shall in their bosoms reign.
How full of grace and peace the morning !
How full of love and joy to man !
Star of hope and life returning
Shadows forth the wondrous plan
Of mercy, peace, and life to all
Who mercy, truth, and life embrace :
Of man’s redemption and his fall,
And of Jehovah’s love and grace.
Oh, that all the world could share it !
Every people, clime, and tongue ;
That every human ear could hear it,
That music sweet by angels sung.


A InVocation.
fiE LL me, 0, Thou great Creator,
Where I am, and what I be—
Raise my soul from sordid pleasure,
Centre all my thoughts on,Thee !
Enlighten Thou the mental darkness
That o’ercasts my struggling soul.
Cleanse the low, impure, and grovelling,
Irradiate with light the whole !
Teach me how to seek and find Thee,
To adore Thy glorious name ;
To know Thee most—whose hands created
And upheld this mighty frame.
0, ye stars, reveal to mortals
How ye shine, and live, and move,
Like angels peering through dark portals—
Man below and God above !
All our works and ways are trifles,
Compared with nobler works of Thine,
Where planets, stars, and suns are shining—
Mysterious, godlike, and divine !


Unveiling the Statues.
[Presented by Mr. Thos. Stoddart, and placed in the
Botanical Gardens, Ballarat.']
KNOW ye the land where the skies are unclouded ?
Know ye the grandeur that genius hath wrought ?
Angelo and Praxiteles were only poor mortals,
With divine aspirations and godlike in thought.
Behold the pure marble, rough hewn and unuhiselled,
Evolved from the matrix in form so divine ;
Line upon line, with rare beauty increasing,
Revealing new glories, unfolding design.
0 ! man, thou art great in thy true avocation,
Safe-guided by God, who thy destiny knows :
Reflecting the image of Him who created
The fountain where life’s stream incessantly flows.
Speak not of the greatness and grandeur of nations,
Their battles and bloodshed by land and by sea ;
For achievements like these give palms to the savage ;
A nation of warriors can never be free.
Such freedom won is but short-lived and fleeting,
Untold are the miseries that war leaves behind ;
True art, like an angel fresh from the glories,
Ennobles man’s soul and unfetters his mind.


Hither we’ve come on this day of rejoicing
To see the rich treasures now brought to our land ;
Here will we gaze on this scene of enchantment,
Our beautiful gardens made gloriously grand.
Unfold ye the beauty hid ’neath the veiling,
Reveal to our vision the classic outlines ;
Raise high the pfean, the proud song of triumph,
When art with Dame Nature in harmony joins.
They speak to the present, they’ll live in the future,
And ages to come will bless the proud name ;
Our children will honor the gift of the donor
Who seeks in good actions the triumphs of fame.
He knows the happiness whose gifts we are extolling,
True pleasure that flows from a generous heart,
Ah, few know the pleasure of giving to others ;
The rich are unwilling from their treasures to part.


Impromptu to a Lady.
SHE RE is a harp that "echoes sweetly,
From a cottage in the vale,
Notes of weird and wild enchantment
Ringing out o’er hill and dale,
Music of memories fresh and blooming
Wafted on each passing gale.
There is a songstress in the mountains
Sings so sweetly, though unseen ;
I know the bird is no king-fisher,
Yet I know it is the queen ! —■
Her tuneful voice is ever .'ringing
Through the woods and wattles green.
In that loved home back in the forest,
Muses shed their lustre round,
And songs from nature stealing o’er us
In this favored spot resound,
Gushing like the laughing streamlets
Among the hills with verdure crowned.
Such music from the breath of mortals
Uplifts us from this world of tears,
To snatch a glimpse beyond those portals
Where end our earthly hopes and fears,
And nerves the soul to fight life’s battle
In the strife of coming years.
Sing on, sing on, thou pretty warbler.
Of hopes and aspirations high,
Tempt us to mount on weaker pinions
Where the new-fledged eaglets fly—
Where suns shine m eternal glory
Above the clouds that underlie !


Little Numbers.
\_The following lines were suggested by a paragraph
published in the Evening Post, June 9th, 1869, extracted
from the Sydney Evening Post, wherein it ivas stated that
the children at the Randwiclc Orphan Asylum had lost their
identity as human beings by answering to numbers instead oj
names. ]
f|HEY call poor little children “ numbers,”
, Whose mothers lie beneath the sod,
And count the souls by cold rotation,
That bear the impress of a God.
And sometimes flog, and flay and pound them—
’Tis human work and brave no doubt—
Then like good Christians call the doctor
To see their numbers not rubbed out.
No loving heart for little “ numbers,”
No mothers weep when they are sad—
No blest affection’s ties surround them,
No childlike songs to make them glad ;
No sisters dear, nor brother’s guidance—
No father’s help, no mother’s prayer—
No friends to love and none to love them,
Or bright domestic hearths to share.
Who cares and prays for little “ numbers,”
Confined within that spot of earth ?
Who stirs the soul that in them slumbers,
Or tells the story of their birth ?


For them no flower of childhood’s blooming,
No little birds sweet music sing ;
Their lives unblest and dark and looming,
No roses bloom nor violets spring.
No little tombstone kindly worded—
Sad remembrance of their fate—
Their memory’s lost and unrecorded,
Except in “ numbers ” by the State !
0 God protect those little “ numbers ”
And Thou their guide and Father be !
For such are of Thy glorious kingdom,
And suffer them to come to Thee !
Ye mothers of Victoria listen
To the words that life imparts,
And bless the beaming eyes that glisten
In the sunshine of your hearts.


Gleams of Sunshine.
Cf LEAMS of sunshine still flit o’er us,
Through the dark and wintry skies,
And hopes of happiness before us
Gild the storm-clouds as they rise.
Gleams of sunshine, often shaded,
Lurk within the darkest mind ;
Bring to life emotions faded
Round the saddest hearts entwined.
Gleams of sunshine, bright and dearest,
In the bliss of childhood’s dreams,
When the heart is light and clearest
Life is full of sunlit gleams.
Gleams of sunshine, dreams of glory
Hover round our little life,
Nor leave us, when grown old and hoary,
Midst the din of worldly strife.
Gleams of sunshine, pure and holy—
Rays from God’s eternal light—
Uplift the soul downcast and lowly,
Glow in sorrow’s darkest night.
Gleams of sunshine, bright unclouded,
Burst the germs of virtue sown,
In our hidden life enshrouded
By affliction’s storms o’erthrown.


Gleams of sunshine, God revealing,
To the soul supremely blest,
O’er the raptured spirit stealing
Foretastes of eternal rest.
Gleams of sunshine may remind us
That our lives are ebbing fast,
Of friends and kindred left behind ns,
Of joys and hopes forever past.


Vision on Lake Wendouree.
SEATED on the margin of the Lake,
Though not asleep, nor yet awake ;
When the pale moon ascending high,
And clouds were flitting o’er the sky ;
Near a fathomless water hole,
This vision o’er my spirit stole.—
Under a shady willow tree,
That flourished near the Lake,
A monster rose and glared at me —
A huge black Mephistophele ;
And from his sombre shining robes,
His eyes shone out like fiery globes :
On his head he wore a pile
Like Joe the Bellman’s antique tile.
Aghast I sat, beneath this tree,
Whilst the dread monster glared at me,
And roared, with language loud and free,
“ Art thou A. Jenkins of some low degree,
Who builds those little crafts I see,
And who this silvery lake defaces,
With hulks, and punts, and apple cases ?”
From a case he then did draw,
A sword just like a huge cigar.


“ In Heaven’s name, who calls ! who calls !
Art thou a spirit of good or ill,
Whose voice, like mighty waterfalls,
My inmost soul with terrors fill ?
W ho art thou, blade and ngly sprite ?
Thy bark is loud, what is thy bite ?”
“ I am the genius of this Lake !
’Tis left to me to mar or make ;
The grandeur of these waters sound,
Where e’er a rugged spot is found.
Away, proud youth, from these domains,
For on these shores my genius reigns,
Or death will be your fate I reckon.
Behold ! my name is ‘ Yanderdeoken !’ ”
He rushed on me with sweeping stroke ;
His wonderous sword did end in smoke,
And on the grass did roll ;
Then I clutched him by the throat—
We struggled hard till near a boat,
That happened then to be afloat,
Near the deep quarry hole.
He cursed the gods who helped him not,
And swore the next cigar he got,
Its edges should be double.
He slipped his foot clean o’er the bank,
And in among the rushes rank,
He floundered on until he sank,
And made the waters bubble ;
I saw him sink beneath the wave,
Nor did I care his life to save,
Although I had a rope ;
Down, down he went, I let him go
To where the roots, and rushes grow.
Amid soft music, rich and slow,
The Lake resumed its silvery glow,
Mingled with voices from below,
Singing aloud—“ your earthly foe
Is past all human hope.”


{THE QUEEN OF WENDOUREE.
And then aroseTfrom out the sea,
Amidst this glorious melody,
A form of classic mould and birth,
That was not of our mother earth ;
In her right hand a shining gem,
That shed around a lustrous glow ;
Beneath a sparkling diadem,
Her hyacinthine tresses flow ;
Bathed in the fiery setting sun,
Whose regal splendours brightly shone,
The glories of an orient sky
O’erhung the radiant canopy ;
And clustering round like glittering stars,
Were myriads of her worshippers.
Her chiselled lips so chaste and round,
Ope’d sweetly, and gave forth this {sound.
And in rich tones of music said:—
“ Well hast thou done, the monster’s dead,
No more to rule this silvery sea,
For I am the Queen of Wendouree,
And those my chosen followers all
Who come rejoicing at.my call,
To this great water hole.”
Then voices from a mighty throng,
On gentle breezes • borne along,
Chanting this sweet and glorious song,
Came stealing o'er my ■soul. —■
SONG.
Lake Wendouree, bright shining sea,
Though not by mountains bounded ;
And not in a deep romantic dell,
Where living streamlets dance and swell,
And echoes from the old church bell
Leap from each crag, and sweep around
With sonorous sweet melodious sound ;


Or where the elves and the fairies dwell,
On flower capp’d hill or mossy cell,
Where the daisies bloom, and the pimpernel
Peeps through the morning dews.
BOAT SONG.
(After Sir Walter Scott.)
HAIL TO THE LAKE.
Hail to the Lake that in glory advances,
Blest in the bloom of its evergreen shore,
Gleams in the stars and the moonlight that glances,
O’er the still waters and trees evermore.
Heaven send it happiness,
Gem of the Wilderness,
Grandly to flourish and stately to grow.
Long may Lake Wendouree
Proud of her oarsmen be ;
On the Lake in measured time,
Bow, brothers, row.
Row brothers, row, for the triumph is near us,
Stretch to your oars, and proudly you’ll find,
Victory sits on our ensign to cheer us ;
Unwreathed are the garlands who leave us behind.
So shall our merry men
Ply their swift oars again ;
Greater the glory the stronger the foe.
Long may Lake Wendouree
Proud of her oarsmen be.
On the Lake in measured time,
Row, brothers row.


Ours is no alpine glen, reft by the fountain,
Unheard is the slogan's wild echoes again.
Each foeman lies low by the stream in the mountain,
No sound of the bugle is heard in the glen.
Bright in the setting sun,
Glory and beauty shone,
Gaily to bourgeon, and softly to glow.
So shall our merry men
Ply their swift oars again.
On the Lake in measured time,
Row, brothers, row.
The music ceased, and silence reigned,
The spirits fled, but there remained,
Lingering near the peaceful sea,
Two nymphs of music, mirth, and glee—
Euterpe and Euphrosyne.
High on the starry empyrean,
I heard a voice above the prean,
From amidst the golden clouds unseen ;
In sweetest tones, thus spake the queen:—
“ Most noble youth, well done ! well done !
Thou hast a richer guerdon won
Than treasures can repay.
I will show thee here this night,
In the glorious vista bright,
This silvery Lake bathed in the light
Of the future day.”
And as she spake in tones so grand,
The scene was changed to spirit laud,
Where the elves and the fairies play.
Methought I saw the peaceful sea
Within the shores of Wendouree,
And voices full of mirth and glee
Were ringing out right merrily,
All the live long day.


Bedecked with arbours, ferns, and trees,
And fountains dancing in the breeze,
And banks adorned with flowers ;
Men and women of every grade,
Of every calling, rank, and trade,
Sailing, or seeking in the shade,
To pass the sunny hours.
As far as the eye could reach was seen,
O’ershadowed by the foliage green,
Every craft that floats ;
And rich gondolas sailed o’er
The placid Lake from shore to shore,
Amid the din, and rout, and roar
Of steamers, yachts, and boats.
And on a central island raised,
A temple in the sunlight blazed,
Of beauteous form and mould,
Of Grecian outline, marble pure,
That might the seraphim allure,
Our earthly glories to endure,
Beneath its dome of gold.
To this our fathers’ spirits hied,
Borne on the gentle winds that sighed
Ambrosial sweets around,
Rejoicing in the scenes that bless
Thousands of men with happiness.
This world is not a wilderness
Where earthly bliss is found.
Beneath'the trees and willow copse,
On grassy hills and flowery slopes,
Where the clematis and jasamine
Around the classic portals twine,
Were filled with strange forms, that came to see
The jocund mirth and revelry.


Amidst this throng and from afar,
There came a bright particular star ;
The sea nymphs and the naiads gazed,
And look’d in wonder as it blazed,
So near the glorious queen ;
They whispered soft, I hoard them tell her,
“ He was a glorious star indeed.
Behold ! he has brought an umbrella,
Ho thinks he’s coming to a feed.”
Nor could they guess why it was made
To overshadow this bright shade.
“This earthly thing his glory levels.”
(So said a wicked little sprite),
We’ll make him master of the revels,
In which his soul doth take delight.”
His trumpet voice that knows no bounds,
Throughout the sculptur’d hall resounds,
And wakes each nymph that there reposes
On sunny banks of budding roses.
Upborne aloft on lightning’s wing
To where the meek eyed cherubs sing ;
I heard the hosts of spirits sing
This song out on the sky. —
SONG.
Give me the soul that seeks and clings,
And soars above all earthly things,
To find enjoyment at those springs
Whose fountains never dry ;
True spirits of the earth that grace,
And strive to bless the human race ;
And not the rich, the proud, the base,
Whose spirits ever die.


Some spirits from the east were there,
Who did not seem the bliss to share :
In life they’d done their level best
To stay all progress in the west.
Discontented envious elves,
Who found no bliss but in themselves.
We paused awhile, no spirit knew us,
Save an angry ugly sprite,
It was the shade of B y L s ;
Hut oh ! how changed, in such a plight.
He hated poetry and the ladies ;
Loved the dross of worldly wealth ;
Was chained up near the gates of Hades ;
And like the Cerberus of old,
Guarded the gates of massive gold.
Hear him the vanquished monster lay,
Athwart on Lethe’s stagnant pool,
Unarmed, even with a good cigar.
He roared and howled both night and day,
And in his slimy trail did draw
Some curious reptiles from a star
That shone out in the morning light,
And cast a dead and dreary light
On the dread abyss where lay the sprite
Uncared for and unknown.
And double-you-see, in glory sent
To this ethereal parliament,
Was there with bright and shining face,
The mirth and revelry to grace.
His views on politics and protection
All vanished with his last election ;
Yet there was glory on his brow,
The halo of a well-spent life ;
A richer, holier portion now,
Beyond the clang of armies’ strife.
He passed along within our sight
And bowed before the spirits bright,


When a lively little sprite
Thus spoke unto the queen:—
“ Although from toil to rest he’s sent,
His life it was not all misspent ;
I think that earthly parliament
Is a paradise of rogues.”
And Moses too, but not the one
That Pharoah’s daughter came upon
While sauntering with her maids while
Adown the banks of muddy Nile;
A lesser light, but he was found
Among the reeds and rushes round
This glorious lake we come to see,
Ruled by the queen, sweet Wendouree.


Fl oating the Victorian Loan.
OH, hear the glorious news,
The loan has been floated ;
Welcome, thrice welcome,
The glad tidings have come—
Borne on the gentle breeze,
Flashed through the mighty seas,
Ring out the joy bells,
The croakers are dumb.
The country is saved from ruin,
The people have triumph’d,
Their enemies vanquished,
And the clique is undone.
Ours is a glorious cause,
Upheld by Britain’s laws ;
Our foes have retreated,
The victory is won.
Down, down with the slanderers,
“ Telegraph” and Traitors,
England believes not
Their villanous lies.
Betrayed by this fiendish band,
Victoria can proudly stand,
Unscathed by their treason —
Our country will rise.


Out, out on the cravens then,
Treat them no more like men ;
Basely they have tried,
To ruin our good name.
And he of the hundred eyes,
He of ten-thousand lies,
His harvest is blighted,
He’s covered with shame.


Have You seen th Major?
IN Lydiard street you often meet,
Close by Craig’s hotel,
Some hangers on of Providence
Or billet-seeking swell :
You’re bailed up right off you know,
The question’s asked, I’ll wager,
Good morning, Mr. So and so,
Oh, have you seen the Major ?
You pass a little farther on,
Then you’ll meet old Brown
Coming round Cobb’s corner,
And rushing up and down
With a long petition in his hand—
He’s an old election stager,'—-
He’ll pull you up and then demand,
Oh, have you seen the Major ?
You meet this billet hunting crew
All thronging down the street,
Germans, Jews, Celts, and Danes—
A seedy lot you’ll meet;
They’re watching all the city round
Like rogues that watch the gauger
But listen to the well-known sound,
Oh, have you seen the Major?


Just let the word be wired round
“ Be up by mid-day train.”
The malady breaks out at once
Of billets on the brain ;
Then every man that votes for Smith,
With prospects rather dim,
Thinks the present Ministry
Should find a place for him.


The Quid Nuncs.
HARD by the fence, their trysting place,
ln scandal they do revel,
Obtaining fresh supply of grace
From scandal’s graceless devil.
The hoarse laugh by the stream is heard
As they retail fresh news,
And through the trees their voices jarred
Like coclt-a-doodle-doos.
From early morn to the setting sun
They stand at the trysting place,
And of their neighbours’ woes make fun
As their tongues keep up the race.
As they stand at the trysting place
Their housework is left undone,
Their tongues keep up in the race
To the setting of the sun.
As they speak of their neighbours near,
Their calumnies mostly agree,
And whispering soft in each ear
He’s no better than he should be.
“ I could if I would, but I won’t,
I believe to his wife he’s unkind,
And she is—Ho ! I could, but I won’t,
I could if I was so inclined.
When they meet at their trysting place
Their laughter resounds on the air,
Retailing such scandals apace
As the devil can honestly spare.


Anglo-Australian Telegraph.
f|HREE cheers of triumph ! raise high the shout—
i The earth is circled round about
From England's coast to Galle,
The wild electric current flees
O’er rooks and reefs and boundless seas—
To shores of old antipodes,
O’er mountain, hill, and valley.
The winged messenger of light
Shall bless us all by day and night,
And hearts and hopes grow brighter ;
Blest science on our world awaits,
And time and space annihilates—
We’ll speak no more of distant states
Or terra incognita.
Eventful present, glorious past,
The world has been hands-joined at last
"; .And speaks from sea to sea :
In oceans deep the voices fly
O’er India’s plains and mountains high,
As lightning glances in the sky—
Unfetter’d, fast, and free !


Australian hearts have leap’d to hear
The magic words fall on the ear.
And many bow’d in sorrow ;
“ The mail’s arrived !” the words resound,
To us a bright oasis found,
The joyful news flies swiftly round
From Melbourne to the Murray.
The gulf that separates this shore
And Britain’s isles is girdled o’er—
The mighty work is done !
Our friends at home and kindred dear
Have said “ God speed” our hearts to cheer,
And England's welcome voice we hear
Each morning with the sun !


The "Telegraph" Scandal.
Or the way Sir Graham Berry was hunted down.
WIRE in, dear “ Telegraph,” wire in !
You have been badly treated,
You get a thousand now and then
And do not mind being cheated.
Since you have lost the “ ads,” you know,
That wore not worth the giving,
It is not worth your while to try
And get an honest living.
Wire in, dear “ Telegraph,” wire in !
You’ll soon have Berry packing.
If you but use the brushes well
Your friends will find the blacking.
The flaming homesteads had a run
When skull and hair was flying,
I’m told that nothing pays so well
As howling cant and lying.


Then, honest “ Telegraph,” wire in !
I really can’t help wishing
That bully “ Punch,” and “ Argus” too,
Would join your noble mission.
The Kelly gang, your stock and trade,
Who need so much ensnaring,
Never belied their country’s name
Because they wanted squaring.
Wire in and lie your level best,
The Ministry must be riled,
They get such slashing cuts from you
Whose life is undefiled.
You must be perfect paragons
Of wisdom, worth, and virtue,
That when you go the way of flesh
Your shadows won’t desert you.
Wire in, my noble “ Telegraph ! ”
For when poor Berry dies
You’ll never get another chance
To propagate your lies.
You’ve had a splendid time of late,
, Sir Bryan’s work at Newham,
Quite a godsend for you to use
Your journalistic broom.
And now, vile “ Telegraph,” with shame
Your brow was never clouded,
For ever in the people’s hate
Your hated name is shrouded.
When we read your filthy slang,
Your lies and foul effusion,
We don’t believe your rumoured tales,
Your truth is but delusion.


You’re sheltered, but your little game
Has for years been scented,
Keep on your canard hunting ruse
You may one day repent it.
You are shunned and scorned by honest men,
Who from your poison flee,
Your shade it casts a moral blight
Like the deadly Upas tree.


The Melbourne Exhibition.
QUEEN OF THE SOUTH.
IBS)RING hither sweet music to this great ovation,
With loud songs of triumph raise higher the paean,
With laurels go meet her with true adoration,
Crown her with garlands proclaim her the queen.
VOICE OF ALL NATIONS.
Hail ! to the voice of nations !
Eesponsive to our call
Comes richly-laden argosies
From the land of the Teuton and Gaul.
The east, the west, and the north ;
Columbia, the great and the free ;
Italy, Spain, and Britannia,
Send proudly their ships o’er the sea.
No pomp of war, nor beat of drum—
With peaceful triumphs, see ! they come.
COMMERCE, PEACE, AND LIBERTY.
Behold, descending from on high,
Fair commerce, peace, and liberty,
Their blessing strewn with richest hand,
Enrobed with might and majesty,
Emblazon’d with light, gold, and gems,
Crown’d with glistening diadems ;
Their voices sweet, and borne along,
Chanting the patriot’s glorious song—
Victoria, Victoria,
Hail, to thy name, “ Victoria,”


AUSTRALIA FELIX.—ODE TO VICTORIA.
Victoria, happy, great, and free,
Proud empress of the southern sea,
Whose mountain currents flow
O’hr golden sands bright streamlets run,
And sparkling gems gleam in the sun ;
Where wealth is found, and treasures won,
Deep iu the earth below.
Hope ! star of the coming time,
Where men from every land and clime,
And every race and tongue,
Shall flock to see this wondrous land,
An empire vast, unrivall’d, grand,
And countless as the shining sand —
A nation strong and young.
RECITATIVE PRAYER.
Oh ! great Creator, Father, Friend,
Where’er Thou art, we look to Thee ;
May Thy rich blessings still attend
To prosper, guide, and keep us free ;
May peace her gentle legis spread
Our sunlit vales and shores around ;
May this young empire never dread
The voice of war and trumpet’s sound.
CENTENNIAL EXHIBITION GRAND CHORUS.
Hurrah ! for the brave old hundred years,
Shades of the century fled o’er us ;
Give three cheers for the bold pioneers—
The stalwart gold-diggers before us.
A chorus we’ll raise to the golden days,
O’er the hills and the valleys still shining,
The bright summer time, the country sublime,
To Australia, the land of gold-mining.


The Lay of a Lost Bell.
\_The incident described in the following lines are well
known to old, colonists. The ship , “ Champion of the Seas,”
was sunk in Hobson's Bay. A certain lighterman by the name
of Throckmorten fished up the bell; he afterwards went to Fiji
slave hunting, or what was at that time called “ blackbird ”
catching, but he never came hack again. ]
IN smoke and fury, fire and blast,
_ With other bells my lot was cast
In good old London city,
Intended for to ring the chimes
In other lands and other climes ;
They found me out of tune and time,
And sold me out of pity.
As fortune favors bells and brave
My destiny was on the wave
lluled by Neptune’s powers,
And sailors were ray messmates long.
I listened to their jovial song,
And never used my noisy tongue
Except to count the hours.
A pleasant life-time thus I spent
Loitil I was to Melbourne sent—
’Twas an unlucky day.
The voyage out was fair and bright,
I did my duty day and night,
At last to land we hove in sight,
And anchored in the bay.


But hopes of bells, as well as men,
Go all a-goe both now and then,
And so it was with mine.
To the bottom went our gallant ship ;
In Hobson’s Bay she took a dip,
And there for months they let ns rip
Like pickles in the brine.
At last a diver chap came down
And seized me by my hairless crown,
And fastened on a rope.
Then up I went to see the sun
And how the mischief had been done ;
1 found my occupation gone
W ithout a friend or hope.
I then my story did relate
To those who saved me from this fate,
As they around me sat.
And soon, as I my story told
Of what I suffered from the cold,
Into slavery I was sold
And sent to Ballarat.
The ruthless man who sent me there
The fortunes of a church to share
By avarice was beaten.
He sailed to Fiji, neat and trim,
To catch poor blacks with irons grim,
He did not catch them, they caught him,
And he was killed and eaten.
“ Served him right,” I heard them say,
And all who steal poor blacks away,
For them I have no sorrow.
Shall proud Victoria stand and see
These monsters go unscathed and free
Who traffic in the southern sea
Like Armstrong, Mount, and Murray ?


Arrived in Ballarat all safe,
1 was treated kindlv as a waif,
-Inst as they treat all strangers.
I was hurried off to great St. T’s,
Fixed on a polo amid some trees.
I witnessed all their jolly sprees,
Away from former dangers.
Here all went swimming, all went well,
I was merry as a marriage bell
As months and years on rolled.
I oft did hear the parson preach
And the doctrines he did teach,
But, alas ! I heard there was a breach,
The church it must be sold.
Hark clouds gathered thick and fast,
And church and bell succumbed at last,
By all friends deserted ;
Except the parson, he stuck well
To book and candle, church and bell,
And lock’d the doors, as I can tell,
And with the keys departed.
When just upon the brink of fate
A friend stepped in, almost too late,
He paid down all the fees.
Though during life I've been oppressed,
In duty’s path I do my best,
And if you want to know the rest
Enquire at St. T’s.
FINIS.
Berry, Anderson & Co., Printers, &c., Lydiard Street, Ballarat.


V V° CH * So#
y \ CELEBRATED O
TRADE
MARK.
OK f
o
AND
Stout>
v..ji. ...n... ~n,. Hi a a a ,jt. ~(1,. ,ji„ a..a. >n aa. A. a a
Matchless for Age, Purity, Flavor
and Condition.
TO BE OBTAINED PROM
HOTELS AND ALL LICENSED GROCERS.
—


E. MOREY & CO.,
HARDWARE,
’iidiiwu |
LYDIARD STREET,
BALLARAT.
|tdxr anb ji£nmb-I}anb Hladjinerg
Always on hand, for Sale or for Hire. Cages, Horizontal Steam
Engines, from 10 in. Cylinder to 24 in. Also, Beam, Vertical, and
Portable Engines, Cornish Flue Boilers, all sizes. Quartz Crushing
Batteries; Pumping and Winding Gears for round and flat rope,
also for round Wire Hopes. Pumping Bobs, Tangyo Pumps, Bound
Wire Rope Pulleys, also Pulleys for Hat and round Manilla Hopes.
Air Pipes, all sizes. Steam, Feed and Exhaust Pipes ; Drawlifts, and
Plunger Lifts from 6 in. to 15 in. diameter. Bellows, Blacksmiths’
Tools, and a large quantity of all other Mining Sundries.


- s 5aF-S
if borages of fljc Da# I
SPARKLING GOCA WATER.
YIGORINE 2
A delicious and invigorating Tonic, containing, in an easily assimilated form, those
Hypo-phosphites of Lime, soda, and Potash which are so necessary, particularly in
warm climates, to sustain the tissues of the brain and body.
It is a non-alcoholic beverage, but may be mixed, if necessary, in any pro-
portion with wine or spirit.
oar>lgsaci Water,'
-This is a bitter Aperient Water resembling the
natural Aperient Waters of Germany and Hun-
gary, which are so highly recommended for
Habitual Constipation, Affections of the L'vcr, Gout, Rheumatism, and Diabetes.
Being charged with Carbonic Acid Gas it is rendered palatable and sparkling, and
is, undoubtedly, the most agreeable Tonic Aperient yet introduced, and is made
from the celebrated Warrenlieip Spring Water.
6
mge p
K\z,'
-Is one of the most pleasant, and, at the same time
wholesome drinks ever placed before the Public, being
both Auti-spasmodicand Invigorating. Ic is free from
all fermentive properties and' suitable to all constitutions.
Tonic Water,
or Exhaustion.
—Which,in addition to Its being a delightfully acidulous
jerated beverage, contains Quinine (Howard's), which
arrests fever, and restores the stomach after sickness
T <n —ls prepared from the finest fresh Lemons, and the entire
process being conducted on the premises, a genuine article
of the highest character is ensured.
r i, p i Tgff i Though a comparatively[new c
W £lt£lr* to be one of the most effective i
limit, and Gravel vet, bn
Though a comparatively[new compound, has been proved
e in cases of Gout, Rheumatic
Gout, and Gravel yet brought before the public,
and persons suffering from those complaints will, on .giving it a trial, realise
great .benefit from its use.
Pota£s Water,
-■ls highly approved for its general cooling and
refreshing properties, and is an excellent antacid.
It is generally used by the medical faculty for the
amelioration of Rheumatic complaints and affections of the Kidneys and Digestive
Organs.
Ten q n p j —Have been so long used as
>OCL& &ucl WPleasant and Refreshing
/ Beverages, taken either with
cr without a mixture of spirit or wine, that any comment is unnecessary in regard
to them, excepting to assure the public that they are made at Ballarat, and guaran-
teed to be from the Warrenlieip Spring Water, which for its purity cannot be
surpassed.


sa**s-
m
|leto pijotograpljcr!
J- K. Andrew,
.
School of Photography,
NEXT POST OFFICE.
3 Enamelled Cabinets - ss.
Enlargements a Speciality from - JEJI.
,A. -
Pest Collection of VIEWS of Ballarat, the
Statuary, Botanical Gardens, Lake, &c.,
I in the City.
I ' I
sfc-Sg


Warrenheip.
Brewers.
Superior JUe.
AND
JUe cm 6 gfouf.
OFFICE : DANA |STREET, BALLARAT.


1 , ftl BLOOSTEIfi, *
Watchmaker,
Icfocllcr unb (Bolhsmitb,
5 STURT STREET, ■
(YALE’S CORNER),
BALLARAT,
fAS a large and varied assortment of Gold and Silver
Watches, Chains, Bracelets, Bangles, Brooches,
Diamond, Engagement and other Gem Kings. Clocks
in great variety. Medals, Trophies, and Presentation Goods
made to order in a highly finished and artistic style.
Triff TUI? UnliVlopf.? m
REPAIRS BY A STAFF OF EXPERT WORKMEN.
A Trial Solicited.
-“'f r "r
"T "r "r'"r"ii 'i 'T
Remember Address —
<Sf* m
YALE’S CORNER.
“We Lead, Competition Defied.” * * *


R. Tx VALE
1 STURT STREET,
Has the Largest Stock out of Melbourne of Albums from 3d.
upwards ; Desks from 55.; Workboxes from 2s. fid.; Wallets
a Speciality, all prices up to £3 3s.
PUBSES, a Large Assortment.
BOOKLETS—CaII and see them !
Canterbury, Is.; also, Ward Lock’s, Is., 25., 2s. 6d., Bs. 6d.;
and Bound Volumes, Morocco, &c., from us. upwards. Sots
of Burns and Scott.
Sets of Dickens’, Scott’s, Mountenoy’s, Jeplison’s and
Wilson’s Novels. Macaulay, &c„ &o.
Selections from Poets ; Shakespeare ; also the Leopold
Shakespeare in all Bindings.
A visit is invited. You can call and inspect
the stock and judge for yourself.
[ tin |Uto IOOH Journals, anb
pipers at
1 STURT STREET.
Advertisements Beceived until 6 o’clock.


JJ
m
SON,
CHANCERY LANE
Oregoi)Laaaer&Sfeg LBaaer manufactorg
sr*
d’ar|enters k Somers,
ALL KINDS OF JOINERS’ WORK
MADE TO. ORDER.
Estimates Given.
A Largo Stock of Ladders, Step Ladders,
Wheelbarrows, Ac., always on hand.
SMALL JOBS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
m.
