

1(0 c 7




OUR SOCIAL SYSTEM.


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
MONEY :
A Study of the Currency Question, especially in i’s Relations to the
Principles of Equity, Utility and Liberty.
“The little work is a clear, brief and pungent exposure of some of
the evils connected with our system of currency, and is well worthy
of being perused by those who have to work for their living.”—
Hamilton Radical.
“ Have we your permission to bring out an American edition ? . .
Quite a valuable addition to the literature of the currency question."
— E. C. Walker, Joint-Editor Lucifer (Kansas, U. S. A.)
“ This excellent little essay supplies a want in the revolutionary
propaganda. . . I shall probably take an early opportunity of reprint-
ing this pamphlet.”—Editor Anarchist (London, England.}
“ A mass of assertions unsupported by evidence, untrue, and utter-
ly absurd in themselves. , .” — Our Commonwealth , (Adelaide, S. A.)
“ Realiy quite bewildering in its mixture of sound sense and—
opinions on currency.”— Freedom (London, England.)
PRICE, THREE-PENCE.
Sold by the author.
AN ANARCHIST PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.
[ 2nd. Thousand.]
THE LITERARY WORLD (London, England) says “ An
Anarchist Plan of Campaign, by David A. Andrade, is by no means
so alarming as its name and the sanguinary color of its cover would
imply. The author’s views are, of course, Socialistic, but he nowhere
advocates violence, and is content to believe that, by following the
plan of cooperation expounded in his pages, the economic fetters
imposed on labor would be removed, and honest employment secured
lor all. The pamphlet is not badly written, and is noticable as one
of the many signs of the times.” Price 3d.
LEAFLETS : Questions for Archists. The Rights of Labor.
Free Love defined and Defended. Anarchy and How to Realize
it. Beware of Government ! Free Laud. &c 6d p packet.
HONESTY,
An outspoken advocate of Social Reform on the basis of
JUSTICE, EQUITY, AND LIBERTY.
Edited by David A. Andrade.
Honesty is the Working People’s Paper. It seeks equality of
opportunity for all and an end to robbery. Hence it aims at the ab-
olition of rent, interest, profits and taxes, and the State which has
created them. It shows the laborers how to cooperate on the cost
principle, and retain the full fruits of their labors.
Yol 1, 3s6d, cloth 6s, half-calf 12s6d. Monthly, 35.6 d. P ann.
Andrade’s News Agency, Sydney Road, North Brunswick, Melbourne,


OUR
lOCIAL
SYSTEM,
AND HOW IT AFFECTS THOSE WHO
WORK FOR THEIR LIVING.
By DAVID A. ANDRADE.
MELBOURNE :
DAVID A. ANDRADE, Bookseller, Stationer, Newsagent,
and Printer, Sydney Road, North Brunswick.




OUR SOCIAL SYSTEM
And how it affects those who Work for their Living.
“ I have said a hundred times, and I will repeat it till I die, that our old
form of society is dying.” To many, these words of Chateaubriand may
sound ridiculous, and merely the pessimistic wail of a false prophet ; but
others, who have carefully studied the world in which they live, and taken
account of the violent internal struggles which are torturing the society of
the present day, will know that the statement is any but a rash one, and
that there are forces now at work in our midst which, if they succeed in
developing their influence much more fully, will ere long wreck our civiliza-
tion as they have wrecked so many grand civilizations of the past.
What is the nature of our civilization ? What is the controlling force
which is guiding our destinies, and regulating our actions towards our
fellowmen ? What is the nature of the system ; is it operating for good
or evil ; could it be replaced by a better, or a worse, one ; are its elements
preservative or self-destructive ? Is our social system a success, or is it a
failure ? These are questions to be considered in the following pages, and
considered fairly and squarely. This is recognized to be a scientific age—
an age of facts : let the facts then answer.
We pride ourselves on our system, which we call “civilized,” and com-
pare it with those primitive forms of society which we call “barbarian.”
e point at our grand works of art, our wondrous discoveries in science,
our massive buildings, railways, telegraphs, tunnels, bridges, shipping,
mining appliances, and machinery of all kinds ; and then we drop a sym-
pathetic tear on the poor heathen who haven’t these luxuries. Oh, the
glories of civilization !


Eut when we begin to ask mpre about it, we see things in a slightly
different light. The grand works of art are here, true enough ; but we
soon find out that those who have been the most active in their production
are rarely the ones who can afford to enjoy their beauty. Wonderful scien-
tific discoveries are constantly being made, but the reward is to the specu-
lating capitalist and not to the inventor. No«ooner is a thing produced
than it passes into the hands of others : the builders of ships cannot afford
to travel in them ; those who construct our railways cannot afford the
uxury of steam locomotion ; tramways are constructed, and they build
fortunes for those who do not make them ; builders do not inhabit the fine
houses they build, but live in wretched tenements only fitted for the popu-
lation of the farm yard ; engineers and mechanics make machinery with
which to drive themselves and their fellow-workers from remunerative em-
ployment ; the miners bring up coal, which heats the boilers of the capi-
talists, while their own hearths are fireless ; they delve into the bowels of
the earth for iron which they afterwards forge into guns and cannons for
their own destruction ; and they toil beneath the earth’s surface to bring
up the gold and silver, which they then convert into coin to hamper their
exchanges with their fellow-laborers, and to make them poorer wherever it
circulates. Notwithstanding all the giant strides which are constantly
being made in all the branches of invention and industry, the worker’s con-
dition only seems to get worse, and he finds himself at the mercy of those
who work not themselves but accumulate the wealth of others. Oh, the
glories of civilization !
Civilization is the dwelling together in society ; and a civilization is suc-
cessful so far as it is associated with harmony. Civil warfare, political in-
trigue, and internal strife of all kinds, are its destruction. Mutual peace
and individual prosperity mark its success. Which course are we now pur-
suing ?
Surely if ever a people were well ruled, we of the present day may claim
to be so. Centuries ago, Aristotle is said to have perfected the art of
government, and we have been improving on him ever since, until the in-
dividual has become almost forgotten and the State is supreme. Whether
it be a theocracy, autocracy, limited monarchy, or republic, which keeps
guard over our actions, we find in all alike the one common political basis
—the division of the people into the rulers and the ruled. The govern-
ments may differ in form, but they are alike in fact : whatever they may
be called, presidents are virtually kings, plutocracies are intensified aristo-
cracies, elections are conquests, and elective rule is no better than hereditary
rule. Whatever the form of government, they are all marked by this


general characteristic—they all rest upon APPROPRIATION and EX-
PLOITATION.
Wherever the fiction of political property has been allowed to become
carried into practice, there slavery, in some form or other, is found to un-
derlie the social structure. It may be a primitive form of chattel slavery,
where the unfortunate toiler is bartered as so much merchandize by those
who have deprived him of his natural heritage in the world’s wealth ; or it
may have developed into a form of feudalism, where he becomes part of the
soil he cultivates and is bought and sold along with it by the baron who
owns him ; or it may have still further developed into the modern system
of landlordism, where the disinherited is free to work for the proprietor,
upon the latter’s terms, but with the only alternative of starvation if he re-
fuses. It is ever the same in effect : those who have appropriated the
world to which all are justly entitled, hold in slavery the millions whom
they have expropriated and live upon the results of their toil. Mulhall*
estimates that in the countries of Europe, with the exception of some hold-
ing very small areas, only 0 in every 100 of the population own the land
in many instances ; 14 in one instance ; 4 in every 100 in three cases ; and
in the United Kingdom, only lin every 200. In Australasia,f a similar
monopoly of the land prevails. Out of a population of three million people,
there are 107,900 landowners and 19,011 squatters in possession of the
land, of which 64,100,000 acres are held freehold, and 589,040,000 acres
are used as sheep runs, while the remaining 1,805,119,840 acres are
held by the respective governments, who keep them for the most part in
idleness. There is a situation for a newly-settled community to be p'aced in !
Only 0 o / o of the population owning land in Australasia ;or T X T of the
entire population possessing of the entire soil ! Of course, from such a
tree, we must expect unpleasant fruits. The many, who have not a share
in this monopoly must reward those who have, in order to obtain access to
the soil from which they must necessarily draw their means of subsistence.
For the privilege of being permitted to work, they pay to those who have
stolen their birthright a part of what they produce by their exertions, and
it is called rent. Rent is the amount paid by the laborer to the usurper
for the right to use the soil which he has appropriated. And the State holds
guard behind him, and with all the machinery of law, police, and executive,
compels, him to render up the blackmail which the idle proprietor extorts
from him.
•Mini hull's Dirt ion (try of Statistic*. 1 SBfi, pasre 207.
tThese figures and a number that follow are taken from Hayter’s Victorian Year
ItVOji, loSu-i.


Not only does the laborer find his efforts checked by the almost insur-
mountable monopoly which the creation of property has put in his way ;
but even when he has passed that barrier, when he has succeeded in satis-
fying the demands of the proprietor, by agreeing to work for the latter’s
profit, lie instantly confronts a new obstacle. He dare not exchange his
product with the product of another, without first paying toll to privilege.
There is only one medium of exchange which he is permitted to use, and
that is scarce and difficult of acquirement, besides which he cannot borrow
it without returning increase upon it as recompense for its use. But as
this monopolized money—this gold—has no inherent power of increase,
and he cannot return more of it than he has borrowed, he is compelled to
give up more of the products of his labor to satisfy the demands of those
who lend him the legalized medium of exchange. He may know that a
] ttle bit of paper issued between himself and those with whom he ex-
changes would answer all the requirements of the case equally as well, if
not better ; but those who rule him know it also, and as it is their func-
tion to protect the interests of property, and as property is the right to ex-
ploit labor by the creation of monopoly, so the ruler steps between them
and enacts a bit of human insolence called a law, which legalizes the mo-
nopolized medium of exchange and prohibits the recognition of a more
just one, and thus enables the monopolizers of the currency to extort an in-
crease for the loan of the money, which to the borrower is worse than use-
less, but which he is compelled to employ. This increase for the use of
money is called interest , or more correctly usury. Of course, those who
own the money can buy the land ; and those who own the land can often
borrow the money and pay the increase out of the proceeds of the laborer ;
while the poor laborer himself, exploited by landlord and usurer, remains
the slave to both of them, and provides all the nourishment for them as
well as for himself. The monetary possessions of Australasia are calculated
to be £19,000,000 —£13,000,000 of which are in gold, £1,000,000 in
silver, and £5,000,000 in paper. The total banking power is estimated at
£85,000,000. For the “use” of this, the bankers of Australasia draw
dividends averaging about 12°/ 0 ; or, in other words, they fleece the public
out of about £10,000,000 per annum. Not only are the usurers enabled
to extort increase upon the gold they put into circulation (and gold is the
only legal tender), but they are actually empowered to take interest upon
their paper issue, which is not money at all, but only a promise to pay
money—a printed acknowledgement of a debt ! J. Sandlant f gives some
very instructive particulars on this point : “ A banker is allowed by the
f State Banks ; by J. Sandlant. Gisborne (N.Z.), 1886.


State for a merely nominal consideration to issue two of paper to one of
bullion he may or is supposed to possess. On this principle the six dif-
ferent private banks in New Zealand, holding two millions ofbullion, could
issue four millions of paper money. . . Now these four millions of paper
note issue become interest-bearing bonds to these banks directly they are
issued. . . Since then, by the act of issue, they become interest-bearing
bonds, let us see how they react upon society. When £s°/ o is charged, a
depression will occur about every ten or twelve years, that is when worked
in conjunction with profits arising trorn discount on bills of accommodation,
varying in the rate of time with the charge made for discount. The Bank
of England returns for 1847, 1857, and 1866, convincingly prove the
truth of this statement. These depressions were by the unthinking attri-
buted to the scarcity of money, but were not ; in reality depressions are
the offspring of interest and the revertionary powers of interest. So then
the two millions of bullion he d by the six different Colonial banks, by the
addition of four millions of paper note issue which the possession of this
two millions of bullion empowers them to employ, would, if fully used at
** lo’ them a capital of eight million in a little over fourteen years, and
that without any of the coin lying in the coffers of these banks ; and this
result is obtained without taking into consideration or account the profits
arising from the discount on bills which would much more than pay the
expense of management.” That is the way the financiers amass their un-
earned fortunes wherever the monopoly of money exists. They succeed in
demanding every year an ever-extending increase on the gold they lend out,
and the promises to pay the gold which they have not ; and this, in spite
of the fact that the world’s gold supply is diminishing each year, and is
totally useless to measure the increasing commerce between the nations.
And the workers never cease toiling to satisfy the insatiable demands of
usury, and to pay the interest upon the millions they are supposed to owe.
Of course, the whole of this is paid for by the laborers out of their own
products. Not even do the capitalists pay any portion of it, for they are
only speculators interposing between the usurer and the laborer and joining
in the plunder of the latter. All the interest which the capitalist is called
upon to pay for the money loaned, he first takes from those he employs or
from those laborers who purchase the product of his employees. Labor
not only pays all rents, but it pays all usury as well. Thus is the laborer
bled. Monopoly first checks production, and usury follows to check con-
sumption.
It is labor alone which supplies all human wants. It has produced in
the past all the capital it now employs, and it is producing all the capital


which will be emp’oyed in the future. Capital is ephemeral ; but labor is
always creative. The total estimated wealth of Australasia, in 1882, was
£590,000,000 ; and the income was £133,000,000, or nearly \ of the
capital. In other words, the workers produced in one year a quarter of the
wealth that was around them. So that had it been possible for production
to cease, and for everything to be consumable, in*4 years not a shred would
have been left to show that capital, or product, had ever existed. It is the
laborer alone who carries on civilization, satisfies all human wants, and
keeps the race alive.
And what about the capitalist—the good, kind, benevolent employer, to
whom the expropriated and exploited laborer goes hat in hand, cringing
for the privilege of being permitted to work ? What is his place in our
social system ? It is to extort another huge slice out of the worker, by
buying his services as much beneath their true value as he can possibly
procure them, and selling them as much above their worth as the circum-
stances will permit him to extort. The more extensive his trade, the
greater will be his power over his employees. The wealth he has accura-
mulated from his laborers gives him the power to regulate commerce.
He can make trade dull or brisk as he desires. He has so much wealth
stored by him that he can rest on his oars when he wants to do so, living
on the reserves. This the laborer cannot do, for his earnings have nearly
all gone to others, and he only retains for himself enough to sustain him
for the day. If the capitalist wants to sw r ell his profits, he can form a
ring with other capitalists and raise the prices charged to consumers, or
he can combine with them to make a corner on the market by buying up
an article of necessity and charging an unusually exorbitant price for it.
If the laborer wants to better his condition under the existing conditions
he cannot do it. His wages—that is the small fraction of his product
which is returned to him by his so-called employer—are kept down to the
lowest level on which he can subsist, and he is worse off than a chattel
slave. As John Adams said, when drawing up the Constitution of the
United States of America, “ What matters it whether you give the food
and c othes to the slave direct, or whether you just give him enough in
wages to purchase the same ?” The laborer need not hope for a reasonable
wage. The capitalist has but to dismiss some of his hands, or fill their
places w ith labor-saving machinery which other laborers have invented and
constructed, and those thrown on of employment will immediately under-
bid tho e employed in order to be reinstated. If the latter do not accede
to a reduction of wage, he will be dismissed to make room for tbe one who
offers his services cheaper. If the workers form a union, and strike for


higher wages, they cannot hold out as long as the capitalists to whom they
have given up nearly the whole of their product, but surrender as soon as
their idleness reduces them to poverty. Under the present system, where
the wage-receiver works for a profit-taker, he can never retain his inde-
pendence, or retain the fruits of his labor. If he is paid £1 for his work,
and the product thereof is sold for £5, he is unable to re-purchase it, but
must be content with a fifth part. The census of the United States of
America, for 1880, * shows that the daily average product of each wage-
worker in manufacturing industry was valued at $lO, while the daily
average wage he received was but $1.15. That is not one-eighth of his
earnings. And that is the very home of industrialism. It is probably a
shade better elsewhere, but only a shade. The available statistics do not
show the Australian laborer’s position in this dismal picture ; but it may
be safely concluded that his condition is not much better than that of his
American comrade, for bis is a profitable field for commercial speculation;
and, of course, where the speculator’s profits are large, the laborer’s losses
must be large in the exact proportion. The annual commerce of Aus-
tralasia is £90,000,000 ; and the gross earnings of labor in 1882, were
£183,000,000. Let us try to make an approximate estimate of how those
earnings are spent. The laborers paid inthatyearfor taxation, £15,000,000; f
the rent they paid to the land monopolists, estimated at say 10°/ 0 on the value
of estates, amounted to £19,000,000 ; the interest they paid to the financiers
for hampering their exchanges was £10,000,000 ; and the business profits,
calculated at 75 0 / 0 + on the merchantable commodities, were £07,000,000.
This will leave the remuneration to the laborers at £22,000,000, or about
of their product, which is probably a fair estimate. The following will
accordingly represent, as nearly as possible, a statement of
How the Australasian Laborers spend their Annual Earnings.
Taxes ... ... ... £15,000,000
Rent @ 10°/ o on estates’ value (£190,000,000) 19,000,000
Interest @ over 12°/ 0 ... ... 10,000,000
Profits @ 75°/ 0 on merchantable commodities 67.000,000
Remuneration to labor ... 22,000,000
Total earnings of Labor
£133,000,000
* Quoted in Parson’s Anarchism,: its Philosophy and Scientifc liasis, page 17,
f This is Mulhall’s computation. Hayter makes it nearly £22,000,000,
J Whether this estimate is an accurate one, the merchants and speculators them-
selves will know best ; however, without more accurate data, it is safe, I think, to
say that a paying business usually “ turns over ” its stock in three or four months,
and brings in an average of something like 25%. I have also heard a successful
tradesman assert that his stock doubled itself in twelve months, and I know that
his calculation could not have been far out of the truth.


Henry Thoreau has splendidly shown by his own experience how proli-
fic are the rewards of labor, and in what ease, comfort, and luxury, the
worker may live where his fellow does not prey upon him. Living as he
did in the woods, almost isolated from his fellows, deprived of the advan-
tages which contact with them and their products would bring him, and at
the mercy of wild creatures who constantly destroyed his crops, he enjoyed
life such as not one in a thousand of the city laborers has any taste of, and
was never troubled with the demon of Want. “ For more than five years,”
he wrote, “ I maintained myself thus solely by the labor of my hands ; and
I found that by working about six weeks in a year I could meet all the
expenses of living.” If this solitary individual could produce so much with
so little labor living under conditions of relative freedom, how much more
could those poor city wage-slaves produce by their united efforts, assisted
by the wonderful industrial appliances of civilized life, were they also free
to produce their own necessities without having to bear the yoke of legal-
ized robbery ?
But have we not a government to protect us ? some will ask, Yes :
and you have seen how it protects you from the aggressions of others, by
making you subservient to the landlord and the usurer from whom you
are unable to extricate yourselves. But, alas, that is not all. Government
not only fails to protect you against the ravages of others, but it does not
protect you against the ravages of itself. It taxes you at every turn ; and
dearly do you have to pay for its services—always paying more than its
worth for what you need, or else paying for what you do not need. And
the whole taxation is paid by the laborer, as we have already seen, out of
his own products. Ho one else pays any taxes. If a merchant pays a
tax, he charges it to his customer, who may be a laborer, or who, if he is
not, will charge it to the laborer he employs. Government grants you
“protection,” does it ? Yes, it erects a custom-house barrier at your boun-
daries to protect the local capitalist, who employs you, from the competi-
tion of the capitalist afar off, as it would tend to reduce the price which
the local capitalist charges for the goods you re-purchase of him. The
tariff your Government collects is charged to the buyer, plus the usual
profits, and labor again pays the entire bill. Perhaps you may boast of
the glorious “ free trade ” which your Government bestows upon you. Poor
deluded creatures ! how do you expect to trade freely, when you own nothing
to trade with, when the land on which you work belongs to others, when
the tools and machinery you employ are theirs, your exchanges are ham-
pered by a monopolized money system, you are bled by interest, and capi-
talistic monopolists form rings to defeat and rob you and eternally extort


profit out of your labors ? Free trade, indeed ? No : there is no Govern-
ment which affords Protection to labor, or allows it facilities to enjoy
Free Trade ; they all exist to enforce the very reverse of these things, by
fostering Monopoly and Exploitation. The Australasian Governments
tax an annual revenue of £15,000,000 from the working people of these
colonies, and expend £20,000,000 in the same time, leaving the laborers
a deficit of £5,000,000 to be met with loans payable with interest. The
expenditure in 53 years (1830-82) was £420,000,000, and the revenue
collected only £315,000,000, leaving labor indebted for the sum of
£105,000,000, owing for nothing at all. All public debts are fictitious
obligations which are owed by labor to idleness. The National Debt of
Australasia in 1882, was £97,000,000, —equal to £3l per inhabitant owing
to the usurers for no services rendered. It was also equal to IG°/ 0 of the
total wealth of the colonies, and paid interest at the rate of
or 3i°/ o of the total income. All these so-called “ debts, ” and all the
loans we receive from the usurers, may be demanded in gold when the time
comes for their repayment; but of course the demand could never be met :
the National Debt alone is more than seven times the amount of gold
which we possess. So the only way these bogus debts can be met is by
borrowing fresh loans to pay them with ; and these, of course, bear interest
and grow eternally,—while the bankers live in idleness and affluence on
the products which they filch from labor in the name of interest.
The worker’s indebtedness to the idler is getting worse and worse as
time goes on. England’s experience in the last half-century shows what
will be the certain fate of the civilized world if some remarkable change
does not take place in the nature of our social system. There the worker’s
lot has steadily got worse. Between 1837 and 1887, the population of
the United Kingdom increased 42°/ 0 , and had other things remained re-
latively equal they would have shown a like increase. But such was not
the case. While the increase of population during the half-century* was but
42°/ 0 , the revenue had increased 73°/ 0 ;or in other words, the worker’s bur-
den of taxation had become 31 °/ 0 harder to bear. And yet the country as a
u hole had become proportionally 82°/ 0 wealthier. But it need not be wondered
at that the laborer’s condition did not advance, considering that the trade*,
resting as it did on profit-plundering, had grown to be 43U°/ o more exten-
sive (still allowing for the increased trade due to increased population) ;
and the banking transactions, which all the time were plundering the
laborers, had made an advance of 530°/ o in excess of the advance of popu-
lation ! Everything in the way of labor’s exploitation had advanced with
* See Mulhall’s Fifty Years' National Progress.


prodigious strides. But the lot of the laborer had become worse. The
worker’s earnings, since 1840, had only increased 25°/ o , while the rents
alone had increased 150°/ 0 . Add to that the losses enumerated above,
and then say whether such “ national progress ” is progress on the part of
the producer or of the thief.
What the world’s money may amount to, and. how it is distributed, can
never be accurately known ; but it is a certainty that it is steadily becom-
ing concentrated into fewer hands. It lias been estimated that twenty
millionaires (out of a population of nearly 600,000,000), alone own wealth
amounting to £145,000,000 (many authorities say much more) ; and the
world’s coinage is said to be £1,190,000,000, and its total money,
£1,046,000,000. If such is the case, it follows that ie
world’s population own wealth equal in value to of its coinage, or
of its money. However that may be, these facts are certain : the world’s
wealth is concentrating in fewer hands ; millionaires and paupers are both
on the increase ; trade is increasingly dull, and emp'oyment becoming
more scarce ; employers are sending the workers adrift to starve ; ins »lven-
cies are increasing, and the big capitalists are swallowing up the little
ones ; the Governments of the world are at the beck of its plutocrats ; life
is getting intolerable to the many and precarious to the few ; homes are
unhappy and woman and man alike wretched ; discontent is everywhere,
and even the most comfortable are beginning to ask whether life is worth
living, and whether slavery, dependence, marriage, and the other institu-
tions of our civilization are not failures after all.
That the present social system has failed must be apparent to all who
have studied it. It has rendered the many subservient to the few ; it has
checked the best human endeavors, and facilitated every method of ex-
ploitation ; it disinherits the great mass, and foreorda.ns their lifelong
misery before they are even born ; it makes one man dependent upon
another’s caprice, instead of making him dependent upon his own energies ;
it is a premium to idleness, and an incentive to plunder ; it is responsible
for the bad morals of the many, who are the creatures of the vile surround-
ings in which it has placed them ; it unites the sexes w hen the require-
ments of nature would set them apart, and keeps them apart when the
healthiest impulses of their nature w ould have them toge her ; it creates
jealousies, hatreds, and mutual injustice. All our political institutions
are destructive and reactionary : the opportunity to control the actions of
one’s fellow, which lies at the base of every governmental system, tends
surely and certainly to make those in power self-seeking, dishonest, and ty-
rannical, and ever ready to dominate and oppress those over whom they exert


authority ; and not only does it corrupt those who rule, but its evil effects
extend to those whom they govern, for every extension of governmental
function assists in decreasing and dwarfing the energies and self-reliance
of the people themselves and making them more helpless, cowardly, and
servile than before. Our social system, by its politically-fostered monopolies,
is continually driving men to poverty, intemperance, and debauchery, and
driving women to prostitution or the slavery of unhappy marriage ; its
oxploitat ons render the parents so poor, and their struggle for existence so
keen and uncertain, that they have neither the wealth, time, inclinat'on nor
ability, to properly clothe, feed, educate and make moral their children,
but allow them to grow up a criminal and vicious generation, and one too
well qualified to perpetuate the present evils.
No political machinery can destroy the evils which the political machinery
has brought into being ; for it is the nature of the ruling institutions to
conserve the bad, to support and extend conventional and reactionary
opinion, and to check all progressive thought in religion, sociology and
philosophy. Laws are made to be obeyed—not to be repealed for the
public good. They are essentially conservative of privilege. All law is
made to protect property and proprietors alone. There is no law for the
poor. Legal victory is a luxury which it requires money to purchase.
If you have no money, you cannot go to law ; or if you manage to, you
may safely reckon on coming out on the wrong side of the ledger. The
justice of a thing has little to do with a legal decision—that decision has
previously been inscribed on the Statute Books on the basis of property
and its right of exploitation. Plutocracy rules the world.
The existing evils of society are too gigantic to toy with. It is useless to
appeal to an extension of suffrage, when the suffrage can offer nothing
more than a choice of masters elected to carry on a system of destruction.
It is equally useless to pin your hopes on fine-spun theories of the taxation
of land values, when those values only exist in imagination and all taxes
are paid in the products of labor. It is useless to preach thrift to those who
have nothing to save, or to hope for universal prosperity when the enrich-
ment of the few is caused by the plunder of the many. Again is it foolish
to imagine that a general patronage of savings banks, building societies,
sharebroking institutions, and the like, will ever tend to ameliorate social
wrongs ; for their gains always imply someone else’s loss. Speculations in
investments in stocks, shares, railway, mining and other companies, are all
speculations on the possible future losses of labor. Dividends do not create
themselves—they are all filched from labor. If the laborers cease to be plun-
dered, th_*re will be no dividends. These “ remedies ” are no remedies at all.


B/fcUO
The present system cannot hold for ever. Every day sees its power
waning,' It is the self-interest of everyone who hopes for the dawn of a
brighter day to assist in dispelling the darkness which overhangs and
t hreatens to engu’ph us, and to work together to substitute in its place a sys-
tem that shall be more just, more merciful, more equitable, more harmonious.
The slavery of the workers by the politically-created and politically-fostered
monopoly of property, and the robbery of the laborers by rent, interest,
profit, and taxation, must be abolished—abolished peacefully, expeditiously,
and permanently. And to do so, we must start from where we now stand,
and despite all the disadvantages which surround us, and with all the
ignorance, all the bigotry, all the intolerance, and all the debasement and
cowardice which characterize the down-trodden millions, we must side by
side make our way along the path which so many have found slippery,
until we reach the long cherished goal of Labor’s Emancipation.
But how can we do it ? How can we get from the present unjust,
destructive system, into one in which justice and happiness shall be the
distinguishing characteristics ? How shall we fight out of the present
blood-thirsty system without the shedding of blood and without the
disastrous reaction which has marked the bloody rebellions of the past ?
How shall we walk from bondage into liberty ?
That is the problem which awaits our immediate solution. We cannot
avoid it : we must face it. We dare not ignore it, for the present system
is destroying us. We, slaves as we are, have to emancipate ourselves.
It can be done. It must be done. It shall be done. But how ?
NOTE.
In estimating the annual profit at 75% on the merchantable commodities in the
table showing “ How the Australasian laborers spend their annual earnings,” a
deduction of about 20% off the total amount of commodities (£112,000,000), is
made in order to allow for that portion of the profits which pay the capitalists’
rent, interest, and taxes, and which have already been included under those heads
Printed by David A. Andrade, 729 Sydney Hoad, North Brunswick, Melbourne.




