

THE
Eureka Stockade
FIFTY YEARS JUBILEE.
A STIRRING PAGE OF HISTORY.


Y <f 7o i r~
~ _ fT 'ft' 1c
tfo Mnfl
. yj|K //
THE
Eureka Stockade
FIFTY YEARS JUBILEE.
t,»%zS f *sr&o ’£o*y£ fLan*£ 7A&.
£*-*>n. Q&& -*-vw *£<-£
w*< s^i it?Ti ni «—*w -f^OB


THE EUREKA STOCKADE.
FIFTY YEARS' JUBILEE.
IT is fifty years now (3rd December, 1904), since the gold
diggers at Eureka took up arms against the Government,
and by that means freed the State from an official despotism.
The story of the early fifties in Victoria is one of fabulous
riches; of a species of wild stampede from all quarters to
Victoria’s untrodden wilderness, and of stirring adventures, all
gilded with massive nuggets and glistening gold dust. It is
also one of governmental imbecility; of class favouritism and
tyranny; of lawlessness and crime, encouraged and fostered by
official neglect and corruption. At a time when the gold
fields contained the great bulk of the population, the colony
was governed by a Legislative Council that represented the
interests of the Crown and the squatters, but was entirely
ignorant and unsympathetic concerning the welfare of those
who paid the taxes. The diggers were beyond the pale of
political representation, and therefore the new constitution
given to Victoria in July, 1851, was inadequate from its very
inception. A narrow, prejudiced Conservatism kept it so, and
was largely responsible for much injustice and suffering.
THE DIGGER AND TAXATION.
During 1852 and 1853 the population of Victoria increased
from 90,000 to 250,000. All classes grew opulent at the
expense of the diggers’ labours. Thousands of officials fattened
upon his earnings, and visited upon him the meanest acts of
oppression. The first Governor of the State, nearly all his
heads of departments, and three out of every four men who
found themselves in positions of temporary authority began to
pack the public service with their ne’er-do-well relatives from
the old country to create highly lucrative and wholly unneces-
sary offices by the score, and to swell the cost of governing
about a quarter of a million people to an annual sum variously
estimated at from £4,000,000 to £5,000,000. The diggers,
while having no right of protest, paid from £500,000 to
£BOO,OOO a year in direct taxation alone. The great land-
owners and wool producers, who, by various practices, had
obtained possession of the public estate, and who controlled
all, or nearly all, the elective representation, paid £20,000 !
The individual digger paid £lB, and then £36 a year for the
right to work ten feet square of ground. The individual


squatter paid from £lO to £2O a year for the right to hold
thousands of acres. If the digger did not pay his fee on the
very day it was due, he was ridden down like a dingo and
gaoled like a criminal. The squatter paid when he pleased,
and often did not pay at all. Many of the independent
diggers refused to pay the extortionate taxes on principle,
and there were many more who found it absolutely impossible
to pay. At a time when the gold yields amounted to 40,000
or 50,000 oz. a week, that amount was split up between 80,000
and 100,000 diggers, so that the average earnings of each man
was about half an ounce per week, or from £1 to £2, according
to the price obtained for the gold. When in 1853 the licence
fee was raised to £3 a month (15s a week), the burden,
especially in view of the ruinous cost of provisions, was out of
all reason.
CRIME AND CORRUPTION.
For the taxes wrung from him—often at the sabre’s point—
the gold-seeker obtained absolutely no return. Within
eighteen months 9000 “ old lags ” —ticket-of-leave-men or
convicts who had escaped from life sentences in Tasmania—
took to the Victorian bush or continued their careers of
plunder and murder upon the diggings. A great proportion
of these “Van Diemomians” were bloodthirsty scoundrels, who
knew no regard for law or life. Overnight diggers asleep in
their tents beside their loaded weapons were awakened with
screams of “ murder ! ” the firing of guns and revolvers, and
the stampeding of horses. Next morning a digger was found
with his brains blown out, his throat cut, or his head battered
,in and his belongings rifled. These occurrences were almost
nightly. After the mutilated bodies were discovered, a
calvacade of police officials—conceited youths with gold-
braided caps, tinselled uniforms, and white kid gloves—would
ride through the camps to the clanking of their long sabres,
but beyond this display of “armed force” and ridiculous
official pomposity nothing was done to check the committal of
further atrocities. These officials were often degraded, brutal
men, and some of them levied blackmail upon the criminals
as tbe price of freedom to kill and plunder. A number of
the convicts, such as Bentley, whose name is notorious in
connection with the Ballarat riots, went into the sly grog
selling business, and if their nefarious operations were only
conducted in a large enough way, made fortunes both for
themselves and the Government officers. The shanties kept
by these malefactors were hotbeds of infamy. Diggers wbo
were about to return to Melbourne with their “ piles ” were
entrapped in the grog shops and never heard of afterwards.


Crimes of violence were committed there nightly and the
police took no notice. The liquor vended was molten poison,
but as the Government collected from £BOO,OOO to £1,000,000
a year in spirit duty, nobody would have raised a finger if it
had been freely fortified with strychnine. But woe to the
small, sly grog sellers who were not adepts at palm-greasing !
Tents were fired over their heads, and one case is on record
where a brutal “ commissioner ” burnt out a widow with her
five little children. On the death of her husband, the woman
had been advised to sell a few nohblers, and as a result of the
inhuman administration of the law, she and her babes were
turned adrift in penury. Officials, whose salaries were £4OO
a year, were known to have accumulated fortunes of £15,000
and £20,000 in two or three years. The mutteriugs of wide-
spread discontent gradually became ominous.
THE EUREKA DIGGINGS.
The Eureka and Canadian Leads, at Ballarat East, were
worked by some of the finest types of men on the gold fields.
These were no “ new chum diggings ” —no honeycomb of
shallow holes scooped out to depths of 5 feet, 10 feet, or 12
feet, with a nice clean golden gravel, or a soft pipeclay bottom !
The branching little gutters that united in the great Eureka
lead dipped down to depths of from 100 feet to 170 feet, the
last 40 or 50 feet being through spongy clay that oozed
gallons of water every hour, and trebled the amount of labour.
Below it was mud and water to the hips, and on the surface,
when the puddling was in progress, it was the same. It is
hard to believe it, but it is, nevertheless, a fact that the now
beautifully clean and well kept town of Bellarat East was fifty
years ago the muddiest and slushiest place on the gold fields.
The diggers at work looked for all the world like animated
lumps of mud, and yellow and red clay covered everything in
a batter of a foot thick, or in a slimy puddle even more
discomforting. After a shower of rain the quagmire was well
nigh impassable. The men who put down these deep shafts
and toiled in those dispirited circumstances were not the class
who wished to live upon the toil of others. Before “ bottom ”
could be reached, 700 or 800 slabs, paid for at the rate of £5
per 100, had to be used in timbering up the shaft walls, and
from six weeks to two months’ labour risked upon the
prospects As the lead ran in a winding, irregular fashion
the shaft might easily be sunk in the wrong place; and
although claims like Miller’s on the Gravel Pits and the Gum
Tree each yielded over £20,000 worth of gold, scores of diggers
made little or nothing. Through the exposure and the wet
workings sickness was very rife, and as medical attendance


was either very costly or unobtainable, Holloway’s pills are
said to have been taken by the boxful, and even given to dogs
and horses. There was no machinery on the claims, all the
haulage being done by the ordinary back-aching, arm-
stretching windlass.
A BALLARAT DIGGER HUNT.
The digger hunts were arranged and conducted in much
the same way as fox hunts, excepting that the hounds were
represented by the subordinate troopers, who were " sooled ”
on to the industrious diggers by the “ commissioners ” and
their parasites.
On a bright spring morning, as the sun rose over Black
Hill, flooding with silver light the wooded gullies, the human
ant bed of the claims, the thickest of tents, and the gaily
flaunting flags, the cry of “Joe ! Joe !” (a contemptuous name
for Governor Latrobe applied to all his officials) was heard
from a shaft and taken up by the diggers for miles. At the
same moment a strong body of troopers, their sabres and
trappings flashing bright in the morning sun, were seen
doubling the Camp Hill and cantering along the track now
lying under the railway embankment. Their leader flashed
his sword here and there, evidently giving directions. The
troopers spread out to encircle the gully and yard up in a kind
of corral all the “ shallow fossickers,” as well as those in the
deeper shafts and cuttings. The dogs barked, guns were fired,
and a score of diggers, springing from mud bank to tailings
heap—now lost to view in the hollows and again vaulting into
view over the embankments—raced for the bush like rabbits.
Foot police, who had stolen unobserved round Bakery Hill,
took after the fugitives at full speed, while the troopers,
fearing the perils of the honeycombed gullies, cantered along
the higher ground to head them off. Within a few seconds
diggers came to view from the gullies and from the tents like
swarms of ants. Some were ridden down very rapidly, others
provided exciting “ courses,” while others again stood stock
still.
“ Here, you fellow ! Where’s your licence ? ”
“ Who are you calling a fellow ? ”
" Oh, haven’t got it! Come on (slipping out handcuffs),
we’ll have you for insulting conduct as well.”
Diggers were assailed with the foulest oaths and insults,
and some of those who protested were brutally assaulted with
the baton. Very often those who fled to the bush had their
licences in their pockets. Their object in running was to
divert attention from comrades less happily situated, and to


excite storms of ridicule for the “ Joes” who rode them down.
The great majority of the troopers and their officers were low,
illbred, brutal fellows, who had taken Government services as
a shield from the hard, rugged, and adventurous life of the
gold fields, and many of the men whom they treated like
felons were educated gentlemen, to whom in the old country
the persecutors would have been compelled to touch their hats.
To get their licences, men were often compelled to walk
miles to the Government tents, and wait there for hours until
an insolent official consented to take their money as a kind of
favour. To get change was well nigh impossible—the official
kept it as a dividend for himself. While the digger was thus
wasting his time waiting on Government stroke, the ticket-of-
leave men, to whom the eye of the law was blind, were
probably robbing his tent or jumping his claim. Diggers who
left their licences in their tents were arrested and chained to
logs throughout the bitter nights. Next morning they were
brought before the magistrate.
Now, what have you got to say for yourself?” asked the
bench.
“ Well, your honour, I have
" Silence, you scoundrel! Another word and I will commit
you. Fined £5 or a month.”
Of course there were good magistrates, police officers, and
officials even on the gold fields, but the other kind were only
too prevalent. Their oppression and insolence fanned the
revolutionary spirit into open violence.
THE POT HOUSE MURDER.
In October, 1854, although the yields from the alluvial had
fallen off, and the vast number of unsuccessful diggers was
rapidly increasing, the central government, as if determined
at any cost to create a rebellion, sent instructions to the
officials to conduct digger hunts at least twice a week.
Where was the poor fossicker to find his £3 a month ?
About this time two old shipmates, named Scobie and Martin,
met after a long separation, and they got very drunk. Both
were harmless, respectable men. As they were going home
they knocked at the door of Bentley’s Hotel, Eureka Street,
with the object of getting a “ night cap.” Bentley’s Hotel
was one of those haunts of vice already referred to. The
proprietor was a ticket-of-leave man ” from Norfolk Island,
where he had served ten years. They could not get in and
started on their way again. When they had walked about
fifty yards, men from the hotel dashed after them and split


open Scobie’s skull with a spade. Public opinion convicted
Bentley of being concerned in the murder, but on his being
brought before Dewes, the police magistrate, that worthy
promptly discharged him. The indignation caused amongst
the diggers, especially as there was evidence of Dewes having
been bribed by Bentley, was indescribable. Indignation
meetings were held and funds subscribed with a view to a
further prosecution. On 17th October a vast assemblage
gathered near Bentley’s shanty. A boy threw a stone at the
lamp and shattered it, and, as if this were the signal, the
crowd rushed the premises, destroying and drinking the
liquors, wrecking the furniture, and ultimately demolishing
the whole place with a fire-stick. The flames of rebellion had
already been kindled. The police, who were powerless to
restore order, arrested three unoffending diggers (MTntyre,
Fletcher, aud Westerley) with the object of making them the
scapegoats. Now came another act of tyranny. Three men
arrested were taken away to Melbourne, “tried ” there without
the opportunity of setting up any defence, and sentenced to
three, four, and six months’ imprisonment. Bentley was
subsequently arrested in deference to the excited public feeling
and sentenced to three years on the roads. He ultimately
committed suicide by a dose of laudanum. Dewes, P.M., fled
to British Columba, was convicted there of embezzlement, and
died by his own hand in Paris.
HOISTING THE SOUTHERN CROSS.
As a result of the indignation meetings, a deputation,
consisting of Kennedy, Black, and others, went to Melbourne
to interview the Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, and make a
statement of the diggers’ grievances. According to Garbouari
Raffaello —an excitable little Italian, who wrote an accentric
book about the stockade—“ Kennedy was the hero of the day.
A thick head, bold, but bald, the consequence, perhaps, not of
his dissipation, but of his worry in bygone days. His merits
consisted in the possession of a Chartist slang as well as his
cleverness in spinning a yarn never to the purpose, but
blathered with long phrases and bubbling with cant.” The
deputation came back crestfallen. They were told by the
Governor, it was said, that he did not believe them. As if to
add fuel to the diggers’ rage, detachments of the 12th and
40th regiments arrived in Ballarat, together with police
reinforcements, to carry out a policy of intimidation.
On Wednesday, 29th November, 1854, a meeting of from
10,000 to 12,000 diggers assembled on Bakery Hill. The
“ Southern Cross ” flag was hoisted, licences were burned,
defiant speeches were made, and at the close there was a


discharge of firearms. The next day (Thursday) there was
the last digger hunt. It was marked by intense feelings on
both sides. Now thoroughly aroused, diggers tore troopers
from their horses, and there was more than one vigorous rough
and tumble, in which the police got considerably the worst of
it. The main body of the diggers formed into a kind of
broken regiment and retreated down the main road, where
they threw up rude barricades and assailed the police with a
few gun shots and showers of stones. That night in the
camps there was tremendous excitement. The sounds of
accordians, fiddles, and songs that constantly broke the stillness
of the night were silenced, and the discharge of firearms was
more than ordinarily frequent.
PREPARING FOR BATTLE.
A thousand men commenced to drill under Peter Lalor
and a big German named Yern. Mounting a packing case
with a double-barrelled gun in his hand, Lalor followed the
example of Henry V. by inviting the “man who hath no
stomach for this fight ” to depart. “Itis my duty now,” he
said, “to swear you in and take oath to be faithful to the
Southern Cross. Hear me with attention. The man who,
after this solemn oath, does not stand by our standard is a
coward in his heart. I order all persons who do not intend to
take the oath to leave the meeting at once. Five hundred
men then repeated :
“We swear by the Southern Cross to stand truly by each other
and fight to defend our rights and liberties. Amen.”
The rebels went into camp on the Eureka lead, in the very
heart of the diggings. About an acre of ground was marked
off, and the recruits began to enclose it with earthworks and
barricade of slabs, stones, and saplings. A pole, said to have
been eighty feet long, was erected upon a central position, and
Ross, a Scotch Canadian, whom Lalor appointed captain, ran
up the Southern Cross to the summit amidst great cheering.
Between 200 and 300 men slept in the trenches and under
the tents within the stockade on the night of Friday, Ist
December, Lalor giving as the password, “ Vinegar Hill.”
From daybreak on Saturday morning the scene was a busy
one. Yern, the “ long-legged,” who was keenly disappointed
at Lalor’s being appointed loader, sullenly drilled his pikemen.
From behind a heap of gravel at another spot sharp commands
to “ Shoulder poles,” “ Order poles,” “ Ground pikes,” “ Pick
up poles,” showed that an awkward squad was being disciplined
into the mysteries of fighting with clubs and clothes props.
Near the centre of the ground three blacksmiths’ forges were


flaming, and hammers were ringing upon the anvils. These
men were sharpening villainous-looking pikes, and one of
them (an immense German) was boasting of his past deeds of
daring when fighting in Mexico. Rivalling him in loquacity
was a ginger-headed, ferrety little man, who talked loudly of
“ rights and liberties,” and advised “ the roasting out of red
coats as they had burnt out Bentley’s.” His every second
word was either a cold-blooded threat or an oath. This little
man afterwards turned out to be a Government spy. Three
stalwart-looking fellows named Hynes, Gittins, and Mullins
laid down their pikes and took to a game of cards, and a big-
shouldered fellow, known as “ Happy Jack,” was teaching the
terrier dog to jump over his hands.
Black, Lalor’s “ Minister of War,” who had bee i out with
a small party foraging for weapons, returned with two muzzle-
loaders, half a dozen pistols, and a rueful countenance.
Parties of “ old lags,” he said, were collecting j retty well
everything of value on the diggings and giving vouchers for it
in the names of the stockade leaders. The soldier of fortune
came along also. “ I’m an old Waterloo man,” shouted a
sturdy fellow over the palisade, “and all I want is £5O to
fight for you. Cheap as dirt at the price.” The man was in
earnest, but he was driven away without ceremony, and
Gittins set a dog upon him, for on the diggings a dog was to
be found anywhere. Women also—for there were female
prospectors at Little Bendigo—offered for service, and cheered
the diggers greatly. Before the morning was far spent the
sentries admitted two messengers of peace—one a Canadian
named Budden, who unsuccessfully sought to induce Ross to
go home with him; and the other, Father Smyth, a Roman
Catholic clergyman, who fruitlessly pleaded against bloodshed.
The Irish diggers cheered, but their minds were made up.
Towards the afternoon about 150 men marched out with
about 30 or 40 guns and rifles between them, and an
extraordinary assortment of pikes, poles, picks, ar.d shovels,
with the object, it has been said, of marching on the
Government camp, but they returned again to the stockade,
where a horseman had arrived with the tidings that 800
troops and men-of-warsmen were then on their road to
Ballarat to quell any outbreak.
THE EUREKA FIGHT.
Between 5 and 6 a.m. on Sunday, before the diggings had
awaken to the gaiety and dissipation of the weekly holiday,
“ Baldy ” Summers, a youth who had kept watch on an
eminence near the stockade, burst into the tent wiiere Lalor
had thrown himself down to a fitful slumber with the news.


“ the Joes were coming.” The call to arms brought every man
to his post within a few moments. M'Gill, Robertson, Hynes,
and a few more with firearms, took the spot near the barrier,
and Yern, with his pikemen, flanked and supported them.
“ Let no man,” said Lalor, “ fire before the command. When
he does fire, let him pick an officer and make sure of him ! ”
It was a grim, determined little company. They waited the
onslaught in perfect silence.
A quarter of a mile away, plainly distinguishable in the
grey, cheerless light of the morning, appeared a body of troops,
with foot and mounted police. Three hundred,” said Black,
“if there is one. It will be man to man, although every one of
them is fully armed.” The mercurial little Italian (Raffaello)
began a verse of the “ Ca Ira,” but was promptly silenced.
The attacking force numbered 70 mounted police, 05 soldiers
of the 12tb Regiment, 87 of the 4Uth Regiment, and 24 foot
police—in all 276 men (100 mounted and 176 afoot). Behind
the palisade the crudely-armed diggers could hardly have
mustered similar numbers.
When within 300 yards, the invaders broke into open
order, and Lalor quickly ordered a redisposition of his men to
meet the manoeuvre. To 200, 150, and 100 yards they came
marching steadily forward. “ Fire! ” shouted Lalor, and the
thirty pieces spluttered in a ragged fusilade. As the smoke
cleared a gap was noticed in the ranks, but almost simultane-
ously the troops came forward at the double. A second
snapping shot had hardly sounded from the stockade before
the assailants had halted, formed, and poured in a withering
volley. Hynes, Gittins, and Happy Jack fell dead, and further
along amongst the pikemen rose the shrieks and moans of
dying and wounded. Once at the barrier the assailants vaulted
over or carried away the flimsy structure as if it were cardboard,
and with bayonet and sabre hewed and slashed their way
through the defenders. Ross shot an officer of the 12th in the
leg, but the officer closed with him and shot him dead with his
pistol. The massive dead body of Happy Jock received fifteen
stabs, and the terrier that whined upon it lost its head. The
front rank broke and fled. For one instant the pike and pole
men stood firm and laid low two or three soldiers, but their
position was hopeless and they fled too, seeking refuge in the
holes and in the bush. The big German blacksmith lay dead,
and he was surrounded by several wounded. The last seen of
Lalor was the appearance of his tall figure upon an eminence
endeavouring to effect a rally. As he extended his arm a bullet
shattered it and he fell, only to stagger a few yards and be
covered up with slabs by two or three pikemen until the coast
was clear and he could escape to the ranges. Diggers were


shot down and stabbed with bayonets as they fled, and tents,
as well as everything else that was inflammable in or near the
stockade, were soon reduced to heaps of ashes. The Southern
Cross was torn down, but it escaped the fire, and is said to be
a valued possession in Ballarat to-day.
AFTER THE BATTLE.
The troops quickly reformed after the work of slaughter
and destruction, and returned to Camp Hill with their wounded
and a long procession of prisoners. The scene left behind
them was an appalling one. Amongst the smouldering ruins
of the stockade lay fourteen corpses, eight men in the last
throes of death, and nearly twenty wounded. The official
report was that 30 were killed and 125 taken prisoners.
Captain Wise and five soldiers were killed, and Captain
Quendo and several soldiers wounded. Lalor escaped to a
hut in the ranges, where his arm was amputated by Dr Hoyle,
and he subsequently made his way to Geelong after several
narrow escapes from detection. Believing that Vern was the
insurgent leader, the authorities placed £5OO upon his head
and £2OO upon the head of Lalor. Although scores of diggers
had the opportunity of giving them up to justice, both of
them were loyally shielded.
Monday, 4th December, was given up to burying the dead.
At night two or three men crept up under cover of the dark-
ness and fired upon the Government sentries, who promptly
responded with a fire that killed an inoffensive passer-by and
a woman and a child who were seated in a tent. Next day
(sth December) a force of 809 men with artillery arrived from
Melbourne, and further hostilities on the part of the diggers
were not to be thought of.
A copy of the Government proclamation, issued immediately
after the fight, may still be seen at the Ballarat Fine Arts
Gallery. It reads:—
V.R.
NOTICE.
Government Camp, Ballarat, 3rd December. 1854.
Her Majesty’s forces were this morning fired upon by a large
body of evil-disposed persons of various nations, who had en trenched
themselves in a stockade on the Eureka, and some officers and men
were killed or wounded.
Several of the rioters have paid the penalty of their cr me, and
a large number are in custody. All well-disposed perrons are
earnestly requested to return to their ordinary occupations, and to
abstain from assembling in large groups, and every protection will
be afforded to them by the authorities.
Eobt. Ebde, Kesideut Commissioner.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Printed at the “ Times " Office, Bakery Hill, Ballarat.


While this notice was being posted the police dropped in
on the local editor, who had just commenced a flaming
editorial with the words: —“ This foul and bloody murder calls
to high heaven for vengeance, terrible and immediate.” He
was marched away to the lock-up with the rest of his fiery
sentiments undelivered.
The prisoners were carted to Melbourne for trial on charges
of high treason. The Age, which has already embarked upon
its campaign for unlocking the lands, aroused public opinion
in the interests of justice and a fair trial. “The Age,” says
Raffaello in the book he wrote a year after the stockade, “was
just then budding. It soon mustered a Roman courage in the
cause of the diggers, and remained the diggers’ paper.” On
All Fools’ lay, 1855, after 64 witnesses had been examined
and 178 jurymen summoned, the first batch of prisoners was
acquitted {.midst general rejoicings, and a general amnesty
granted in respect to the remainder.
The men of Eureka lost the fight on that Sunday morning,
but in rea.ity they won a great and decisive victory over a
narrow, tyrannical oligarchy and corrupt officialdom. The
Governor Sir Charles Hotham) was forced to appoint a
commission of inquiry; the diggers’ grievances were ventilated ;
the licence was abolished in favour of the miner’s right: the
gold fields were given the privilege of making their own
mining regulations; and, what was more, Ballarat, Bendigo,
and the other fields were given representation in Parliament,
Lalor and Humffray being Ballarat’s first representatives.
These reforms having been conceded, there was no more law-
abiding and peaceful population than the industrious diggers.
Extract from The Age, 2nd December, 1904.
(By One who was taken Prisoner,
Tried by Court Martial and Acquitted).
D. M'INNES.
[?]


MEETING AT BALLARAT.
CELEBRATIONS INITIATED.
A public meeting and demonstration, organised by Mr
James Oddie, J.P., who witnessed the fight at the Eureka
stockade on the memorable 3rd December, 1854, was held in
the Alfred Hall this evening. There was a large attendance.
Lantern views of the stockade in 1854, etc., were exhibited,
together with photos, of old Ballarat pioneers still in the flesh.
Copies of a sixty-page booklet, entitled “ The History of the
Eureka Stockade,” were distributed gratuitously in the hall.
Resolutions were submitted as follows:
1. That a fund be constituted at an early date for keeping in
order in perpetuity the graves of the Stockaders who were slain on
the 3rd of December, 1854.
2. In the opinion of this meeting the State Government would
do an equitable, humane, and graceful deed by granting a pension
to the aged widow of the late Mr J. W. Esmond, Victorian gold
discoverer, who, with her daughter, are both sesidents of the city of
Ballarat, and are not in affluent circumstances.
3. This meeting is of opinion that the current antiquated State
system of police should be superseded by a modern British municipal
system. In 1854, as the territorial system, it controlled the collection
of the gold licence at the point of the bayonet, and was responsible
for the murder of a numbnr of innocent diggers by its officers.
The resolutions were carried. Addresses were delivered by
several eye-witnesses of the encounter, including Mr Hartley,
of Egerton; Mr "Tommy” Marks, who nursed Peter Lalor
when he was being conveyed (wounded) to Geelong; Messrs
Manning, Oddie, and others.
The celebrations will be continued on Saturday by the
holding of a sports’ gathering at the Eastern Oval; while on
Sunday there will be a demonstration at the Eureka Stockade.
Messrs Deakin, M.P.; Prendergast, M.L.A.; and other repre-
sentative men will speak.
A cheque for £5 towards the expenses of the celebration
was acknowledged from Mr Walter M. Hitchcock, of London,
formerly of Geelong, who was digging in Ballarat at the time
of the trouble at the stockade. Mr Oddie announced that he
would be able to raise £lOO towards keeping in order the
graves of the diggers killed at the rising.
