



L' >k


On Sunday, 26th June, 1921, at the unveil-
ing of Memorials to James Brown and John
Bobbie, in the Hunter’s Hill Congregational
Church, the Rev. A. P. Campbell, 8.A., for-
merly Pastor of the Church, said:
“We are met this afternoon to memorialise
the service rendered to this Church by two
men, John Bobbie and James Brown, the one
a Scotchman, the other an Englishman, and
each possessing some of the finest characteris-
tics of his race.
“John Bobbie was one of the founders of
this Church. So far as can be traced it Avas
due to his enthusiasm and energy and fore-
sight more than of any other that this land
was secured, this building erected and the
fellowship here established.
“I know of no man who in his day and
generation possessed more zeal for the spread
of the Gospel in the land of his adoption.
After a period of untiring service in the
Church at Pitt Street, where he conducted
a Bible Class in which he exerted a rich and
enduring influence, he came to Hunter’s Hill
to fill the position of schoolmaster. Conscious
of the spiritual needs of the district, he at
once busied himself in an endeavour to pro-
vide such means for the preaching of a free
Gospel of grace as his nonconformist con-
science regarded essential to human welfare.
In those days men who, like himself, had
come to prize the privileges of a faith which
set them free to think their own thoughts
about God, and to challenge the right of
bishop or priest or creed to come between


them and their souls’ sure convictions—in
those days such men burned with a passion
to make available for others the liberty they
so dearly cherished. Hence to establish here
a church which would offer to the individual
full and free access to Christ, which would
gather sinful men into the availing presence
of the Redeemer, and nurture young and
old in the liberty, ‘the glorious liberty of
the children of God,’ became a purpose
toward whose fulfilment John Dobbie gave
heart and mind and soul and strength.
“And with the building of the Church he
built himself into it. He was in the truest
sense one of its pillars—not an ornament,
but a support. In season and out of season
he was to be found labouring for its welfare.
He cared not for name or fame; he cared
only that the Master he served be known
and owned as the sufficient Saviour of men.
The witness he bore was widespread through-
out the district. No one knew better than
he the value of the training of the mind,
but he knew also, and it burned like a fire
in his breast, that it is not culture, but free
religion, that is the foundation of all stability.
A nation never rises higher than the God it
worships. A man is not adequate to the
purposes of destiny except his soul be open
to the redeeming grace of God in Christ.
Hence to exalt Christ, to bear testimony to
the power of Christ in his own life and
experience, to gather men in to the school
of Christ was to him an obligation first before
all others, to whose discharge he joyously
gave his strength as long as his strength
would last.


“To attempt to assess the measure of his
influence in this district, of the services he
rendered in so many ways with unfailing
consistency is quite impossible. It was an
investment of influence whose yield only the
long eternity will reveal.
“He was a rugged Scot and his rugged-
ness became him. He possessed the Scot’s
humour, his native shrewdness, lit up by the
grace the love of Christ imparts. During
the period of my ministry here I found him
a dear old man who proved to be a young
man’s loyal and loving friend. Never did
he offer me other than the readiest support,
the fullest sympathy and an encouragement
which made easier the difficult days of a
first charge.
‘ ‘ There is a story told of Shaftesbury that,
when he died after long labours for the sake
of waifs and strays, one ragged child was
overheard to say to the other, ‘Shaftesbury
is dead.’ ‘What!’ was the reply, ‘Our
Shaftesbury?’ ‘Yes,’ was the answer, ‘Our
Shaftesbury.’ It was highest testimony. And
it has its analogue. This man whose memory
we are seeking to perpetuate was ‘Our John
Dobbie.’ He gave his heart to our Church
here, and he won our hearts in the giving.
We must remember him and posterity must
know how truly we valued the love he gave.”
After a tribute to the service rendered by
James Brown, the address concluded thus —
“And so we seek to-day to perpetuate the
memory of these two men who gave to this
Church long years of faithful, untiring and
devoted service.


“They were men who, when they put their
hands to the plough, never looked back, and
they were fit for the Kingdom of God. They
were often weary in their long service, but
they were never weary of it. Their faithful-
ness has w r on for them a rich reward in the
higher service to which they have been
promoted.
“Such men are indeed ‘the salt of the
earth,’ ‘the light of the world.’ It is fearless,
faithful witness, constant through long years
that is the strength of any Church.
“They belong to a generation which is
rapidly passing away. They have cast their
mantles. God gives those to know, upon
whose shoulders their mantles have fallen,
that He requires for His work a like faith-
fulness and a like devotion. The Church
of Christ to-day needs such men—and the
community needs them too.
“God has a mighty work for us to do,
and the inspiration of such lives proves to
us that if the spirit be willing, the work
will be done. Let us be up and doing—in
the same great service which means redemp-
tion, life and peace. We cannot thank them!
We can thank God for them! And we can
pray—we must pray that to us
‘The grace be given
To follow in their train.’ ”




