

THE
rticled (£/lerks’s^?^ssocialio rl
OF QUEENSLAND.
BRISBANE :
Alexr. Muir & Morcom, Printers, Creek Street.
r ~QJ




THE)
JUticieii Clerks’ Jlssodation
— of —
QUEENSLAND.
RULES.
1. The Society shall be called “ The Articled
Clerks’ Association of Queensland.”
2. The objects of the Society shall be
(a) To promote friendly intercourse among the
members, and


(h) To assist them in acquiring the art of public
speaking, and in improving their legal know-
ledge by the reading of essays and by the
holding of trials and debates on various legal
questions and subjects.
3. The. membership of the Society shall be limited
to Clerks serving under articles of clerkship, and to
those who have passed through their term of articles,
but have not yet been admitted as Solicitors ; but any
person may continue his membership for a period of
two years, from the date of his admission as a Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of Queensland.
4. The original members of the Society shall be the
gentlemen having either of the qualifications herein-
before mentioned who attended at the meetings of the
Society held on the 29th day of June, 1887, and the
15th day of July, 1887, or either of them.
5. Any person who has either of the qualifications
of membership, hereinbefore mentioned, may be elected
a member, by the vote of at least two-thirds of the
members present at any ordinary meeting of the
Society, provided such person shall have been proposed
and seconded at the ordinary meeting next preceding
that at which the election is to take place.


6, The ordinary meetings of the Society shall be
held fortnightly on Wednesday evenings, commencing at
8 o’clock, and ending at 10 o’clock. All other meetings
shall be termed Extraordinary Meetings, and shall be
convened by the Secretary at the request, in writing, of
any six members of the Society or of the majority of
the members of the Committee, of which seven days’
notice, stating the objects for which such meeting is
called, shall be given.
7. The subscription shall be ten shillings per year,
payable in advance. No member, whose subscription is
in arrear, shall be permitted to take any part in the
proceedings of the Society.
8. The management of the Society’s affairs shall be
vested in the General Committee. The General Com-
mittee shall consist of five members, including the
Chairman, Secretary, and Treasurer for the time being,
and shall be elected at the Annual General Meeting,
each member of the Committee being eligible for re-
election. Three members shall form a quorum.
In the event of any vacancy in the General Com-
mittee occurring by the resignation, or otherwise, of any
member, the vacancy shall be filled by the vote of the
members at the next ordinary meeting.


9. The Secretary shall at each meeting of the Society
take minutes of the proceedings, record the subjects
which were under discussion, with the names of the
speakers ; and such minutes shall be read and confirmed
at the next meeting.
10. A General Meeting of the members shall beheld
annually, in the month of July, to pass the Treasurer’s
accounts, receive the report for the preceding year from
the retiring Committee, and to consider such other
business as may be brought forward.
11. At any meeting of the Society eight members
shall form a quorum.
12. The decision of the chairman of any meeting
upon all questions of order, and his interpretation of
these rules shall in all cases be final, and no discussion
shall take place on a point of order.
13. All debates shall be carried on, subject to the
following regulations :
(a.) No member other than the mover shall be
allowed to speak twice on any motion. Tfie
mover of an amendment shall not be entitled to
speak twice.


( b .) The leaders of a debate shall each be allowed
to speak for 20 minutes in their opening addresses,
and shall each be further allowed 10 minutes for
their replies, the opener of the debate replying
last. No other member shall be entitled to speak
for more than 15 minutes. Headers of essays shall
be allowed 40 minutes.
(c.) Each speaker shall, when speaking, address the
Chairman,
(d.) The Chairman shall allow any member to make
a personal explanation, when he claims that his
words have been misunderstood or misquoted, but
the explanation shall be strictly confined to su h
misunderstanding or misquotation.
14. Any member misconducting ® “any
meeting of the Society may be suspended by the
Chairman of such meeting for the remainder of the
meeting, and such misconduct shall be dealt with as the
next ordinary meeting of the Society may determine.
15. All questions under discussion at any meeting
shall be decided by a majority of those present, except
where otherwise provided. All elections and any ques-
tion under Rule 14 shall be decided by ballot.


'37* f f
6mSu> o
(j-j f ‘-i C '■ ■ 8
16. These rules shall not be altered, added to, or
repealed, except at an Extraordinary Meeting of the
Society specially convened for that purpose, of which
14 days’ notice (in writing), detailing the alterations tq
be proposed, shall have been given.
