

R-FUGIOUS PAHS
a 00,-2,
BOX |
St. Paul’s, Dock Street, E.
Jform of Ifrra^er
TO BE USED ON
THURSDAY, 26th OCTOBER, 1905,
AT S O' CLOCK F*. IVI.,
AT THE
Dedication of the Memorial
TO THE
CREW OF THE BARQUE
“BRIER HOLME.”


■
■


ORDER OF SERVICE.
Hymn No. 193.
T ESU, Lover of my soul,
Let me to Thy bosom fly,
While the gathering waters roll,
While the tempest still is high:
Hide me, O my Saviour, hide,
Till the storm of life is past;
Safe into the haven guide,
O receive my soul at last.
Other refuge have I none;
Hangs my helpless soul on Thee ;
Leave, ah ! leave me not alone,
Still support and comfort me.
All my trust on Thee is stay’d,
All my help from Thee I bring;
Cover my defenceless head
With the shadow of Thy wing.
Plenteous grace with Thee is found,
Grace to cleanse from every sin ;
Let the healing streams abound;
Make and keep me pure within ;
Thou of Life the Fountain art;
Freely let me take of Thee;
Spring Thou up within my heart,
Rise to all eternity. Amen.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son
Holy Ghost. Amen.
Then shall be said by all:
Our Father which art in Heaven
from evil. Amen.
but deliver us
V. O God, make speed to save us.
R. O Lord, make haste to help us.
V. Praise ye the Lord.
R. The Lord’s name be praised.
Psalm xxiv.
HP HE earth is the Lord’s, and all that therein is: the compass
of the world, and they that dwell therein.


2 For He hath founded it upon the seas: and prepared
it upon the floods.
3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who
shall rise up in His holy place?
4 Even he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart: and
that hath not lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive
his neighbour.
5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and
righteousness from the God of his salvation.
6 This is the generation of them that seek Him: even of
them that seek thy face, O Jacob.
7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting doors: and the King of glory shall come in.
8 Who is the King of glory: it is the Lord strong and
mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle.
9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting doors: and the King of glory shall come in.
10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of hosts, He
is the King of glory.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy
Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be:
world without end. Amen.
LESSON—I. Cor., 15 to 29
Hymn No. 370.
J7TERNAL Father, strong to save,
Whose arm hath bound the restless wave,
Who bidd’st the mighty ocean deep
Its own appointed limits keep:
O hear us when we cry to Thee
For those in peril on the sea.
O Christ, Whose voice the waters heard
And hush’d their raging at Thy word,
Who walkedst on the foaming deep,
And calm amid the storm didst sleep;
O hear us when we cry to Thee
For those in peril on the sea.


O Holy Spirit, Who didst brood
Upon the waters dark and rude,
And bid their angry tumult cease,
And give, for wild confusion, peace ;
O hear us when we cry to Thee
For those in peril on the sea.
O Trinity of love and power,
Our brethren shield in danger’s hour;
From rock and tempest, fire and foe,
Protect them wheresoe’er they go ;
Thus evermore shall rise to Thee
Glad hymns of praise from land and sea.
Amen.
THEN SHALL THE TABLET BE UNVEILED.
Then shall follow an Address by
The Right Rev. BISHOP TAYLOR-SMITH
(Chaplain General to the Forces).
Hymn No. 221.
saints on earth in concert sing
With those whose work is done;
For all the- servants of our King
In Heaven and earth are one.
One family, we dwell in Him,
One Church, above, beneath ;
Though now divided by the stream,
The narrow stream of death.
One army of the living God,
To His command we bow;
Part of the host have crossed the flood,
And part are crossing now.
E’en now to their eternal home
There pass some spirits blest;
While others to the margin come,
Waiting their call to rest.
Jesu, be Thou our constant Guide;
Then, when the word is given,
Bid Jordan’s narrow stream divide,
And bring us safe to Heaven. Amen.


be of them that have left a name behind them,
that their praises might be reported; and some there be
which have no memorial. Their bodies are buried in peace,
but their name liveth for evermore.
V. As for the earth, the stones of it are the place of
sapphires.
R. And it hath dust of gold.
Let us pray.
W E render Thee thanks, O Lord, for the gifts which Thou
didst bestow upon Thy servants whose Memorial we
here dedicate in Thy holy house; as well as for all Thy
servants which are departed from us in the sign of faith, and
now do rest in the sleep of peace. Humbly beseeching Thee,
that it may please Thee of Thy gracious goodness shortly to
accomplish the number of Thy elect, that we, with all those
that are departed in the true faith of Thy holy Name, may
have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and
soul, in Thy eternal and everlasting glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
Collect.
O ETERNAL Lord God, Who alone spreadest out the
Heavens, and rulest the raging of the sea; Who hast
compassed the waters with bounds until day and night come to
an end; Be pleased to receive into Thy Almighty and most
gracious protection the persons of Thy servants who are on
the deep. Preserve them from the dangers of the sea, and
from the violence of the elements; that they may in peace and
quietness serve Thee our God; and that they may return in
safety to enjoy the blessings of the land, with the fruits of
their labours, and with a thankful remembrance of Thy
mercies to praise and glorify Thy holy Name; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
V. When I wake up after Thy likeness.
R. I shall be satisfied with it.
V. The Lord be with you.
R. And with Thy Spirit.
Hymn No. 536.
is a land of pure delight,
Where Saints immortal reign ;
Infinite day excludes the night,
And pleasures banish pain.


There everlasting spring abides,
And never-withering flowers;
Death, like a narrow sea, divides
That heavenly land from ours.
Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood
Stand dress’d in living green ;
So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
While Jordan roll’d between.
But timorous mortals start and shrink
To cross the narrow sea,
And linger shivering on the brink,
And fear to launch away.
Oh, could we make our doubts remove,
Those gloomy doubts that rise,
And see the Canaan that we love
With unbeclouded eyes:
Could we but climb where Moses stood,
And view the landscape o’er;
Not Jordan’s stream, nor death’s cold flood,
Should fright us from the shore. Amen.
A LMIGHTY and everliving God, we most humbly beseech
Thee of Thy goodness, to comfort and succour all them,
who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity. And we also bless Thy
holy Name for all Thy servants departed this life in Thy faith
and fear; beseeching Thee to give us grace so to follow their
good examples, that with them we may be partakers of Thy
Heavenly Kingdom: Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ’s
sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.
('A ALMIGHTY God, who hast knit together Thine elect in
one communion and fellowship, in the mystical body of
Thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us grace so to follow thy
blessed saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we may
come to those unspeakable joys, which Thou hast prepared for
them that unfeignedly love Thee; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
THE BLESSING.


To the Glory of God, and in memory of
the following officers and men of the barque
“BRIER HOLME,"
which was lost near Port Davey, Tasmania, on sth November, 1904,
with all hands, save one.
This tablet is erected by the Boarders of the Sailors' Home.
John H. Rich, Master,
Robert Disney, Mate, Ernest Jas. Millett, 2nd Mate,
John Pollard, Victor Anderson, W. Miller, A. Rydberg, Philip Canivet,
Alexr. Coull, Wm. Dobie, M. Friersen, George Tarbet.
Apprentices,
Edward Sadler, Philip Dulling, Ernest Cecil Blaker,
Richd, A. C. Saunders, Wm. Arnold, James A. F. Howell,
“Until the day break."
Printed by S. F. Hodsoll. 5, Rupert Street, London, E.
