

Notes on the South Sea Islands.
On my return from a seven weeks’ Tour through
the Mew Hebrides group, my friends induced me to
write a short account of them as they appeared
to me.
These beautiful Islands and their fast-decaying
races tpere very interesting to me, and I thought a few
notes on them would prove interesting to those ivho
would read them.
My object in writing these notes will be attained
if they awaken in readers an interest in this group of
beautiful and fertile islands lying to the north-east of .Aus-
tralia; islands that should be looked upon as part of our
island continent, and should by every means in our power
be retained. lam pleased to find the question of ownership
is engaging more serious attention lately than it has ever
done before, Missionaries are agitating, fearing the results
of their life work may be thrown away. .Australian states-
men have taken the matter up afresh lately, and one of the
first important duties of the Commonwealth Parliament
will be to exact a promise from the Imperial Government
that mo foreign power will be allowed to annex the Mew
Hebrides.
What I have written. is recorded from mental
observations made while passing through, and does
not pretend to be thorough or exhaustive. The notes
appeared in their present form in the columns of the
“ (Brighton Southern Cross,” and my reason for re-
printing them is to be able to supply the numerous
requests for copies ivhich, of course, were not available.
R. CHEESEMAN,
(Brighton Jlurseries.
Brighton, Victoria.
iS/qlfoi.




A Holiday Cruise.
„ 1 Lft Sydney on December i, on
board the S.S. Mcrabare, for a trip
through the islands lying between
N.S.W. and Santa Cruz, ray travelling
companions being Mr. Peter Barr, of
Daffodil fame, and Mr. C. McPherson,
proprietor of the “ Shepparton News."
Ihe Mcrabare is a new steamer of
1,200 tons, well suited to the island
trade. She has accommodation for
30 saloon passengers, and had a full
complement all the way of both sexes,
comprising missionaries, planters,
traders, &c., some going home to resume
work, and others coming away from the
islands for a well-earned holiday.
Captain H. Williams commanded, a
brusque man, of unusual energy, and
a thorough knowledge of the intricate
passages through which we had to pass.
His crew were composed of white
officers and colored seamen, these
latter continually deserting, so others
have to be taken on wherever oppor-
tunity offers. They are good working
fellows when well officered, but useless
otherwise.
Our first call was at Lord Howe
Island, about 450 miles from Sydney.
This island is remarkable for its forma-
tion and flora; a lofty mountain rises
•abruptly from the waters edge, on the
north side of the island, to a height of
3000 feet. The two peaks are named
Mount Gower and Mount Lidgbird.
The harbour is crescent shaped, pro-
tected from the usual rough seas by a
■coral reef, through which are passages
deep enough for small vessels only.
Larger boats anchor outside, and often
have to steam away to avoid being
■driven ashore, 'j Gales are frequent, and
it is just a chance whether communica-
tion can be established with the shore.
The formation is partly volcanic, and
partly coral, very fertile, and supports
: a dense flora, “From this island alone
is obtained the famous Kentia palms,
used so extensively throughout the
world for decorative purposes. Kentias
Fosteriana and Belmorana grow on the
coast, and for some distance up the
hills. K. Canterburyana grows towards
the tops of the mountains, and K.
Moorei on the extreme tops, which are
usually in the clouds. The climate is
genial and moist. There is no evidence
of an aboriginal population on, this
island. The present inhabitants—all
whites—number 100. They are all
engaged in collecting palms and palm
seeds for export. The seeds are col-
lected all the year round. & About 20
tons were brought to Sydney by tne
Membare on our return, for re-ship-
ment to Europe. The waters are
teeming with blue fish, a large species
of perch. They are of a deep blue
color, are readily caught with lines, and
are Worth ss, per cwt. on the island.
A plant has just been erected for curing
these fish for export. This industry is
being helped on by the N.S.W. Gov-
ernment, who have control of the
island, and administer its affairs. I
understand land can be leased, but not
bought.#) This island could support
.quite a dense population, but I am
told the present inhabitants resent
additional population, and make them
as uncomfortable as possible, fromC
the mistaken notion that every addi-
tional worker must share with them
what is now only a bare living, quite
losing sight of the development that
is possible from enterprising colonists.
Leaving Lord Howe for Norfolk Is-
land, we pass the famous Balls Pyramid,
a remarkable geographical feature, ris-
ing abruptly out of the sea, a huge
obelisk of rock, 2,000 feet high. •> No
human being will ever scale this rock or
even set foot upon it.


Steaming n6rth-east from Sydney,
1,000 miles brings us to the Norfolk
Island, a place of great beauty. This
was formerly a penal settlement on a
large scale, where all the worst criminals
from Great Britain were isolated, after
the abandonment ..of Botany Bay.
Huge prison' barracks, &c., were
erected. The ruins still remain. They
are now roofless, and many of the walls
have been carted away by the inhabi-
tants for building purposes. We
walked through the ruins, and saw the
handiwork of thousands of prisoners,
who had beguiled the tedium of their
confinement by scratching names, in-
itials and rude drawings on the walls of
their cells. This form of wall decora-
tion had been obliterated from time to
time by coats of lime wash. This we
removed in places with a penknife, in
flakes, disclosing the evidence of prison
life. The remains of the condemned
cell still, exists, with part of the walls
intact, covered with the names of those
who would leave it for the scaffold.
The Supreme Court—large enough for
a Melbourne population—is still in fair
preservation, and is now used for a day
school. The soil on this small island
is very fertile, and the climate delight-
ful, neither hot nor cold. ■ The well-
known Norfolk Island Pine grows
everywhere, on the tops of the hills,
and down to the water’s edge. We
measured one—32 feet in circumfer-
ence 6 feet from the ground. It grows
to a great height, is pyramidal, and
clothed with branches, almost to the
ground. Fugosia Pattersoni is quite a
timber tree here. Both should prove
valuable for coast planting. The in-
habitants are mostly half caste, and are
the descendents of the “Bounty”
mutineers. They are a very hospitable
race, rustic and simple. They wear
European clothing, but go bare footed.
Most engage in farming pursuits. There
are plenty of horses and cattle on the
island, but sheep, I understand, are not
a success. Norfolk Island is the head
quarters of the Church of England
Melanesian Mission. A beautiful
memorial church was erected in
memory of Bishop Patterson, murdered
at Santa Cruz, and a complete
training institute exists there for pre-
paring native teachers, A magistrate
, resides on the island, and is styled the
. “ Governor.” He is supreme in all
judicial matters. A constable also re-
sides there, but is at present away ia
his holidays. , Custom’s duties are col-
lected, but alcoholic liquors of aU kinds
are prohibited. Although the island is
quite a miniature—about 5 miles long
by wide—the inhabitants think it
quite a large affair, as evidenced by an
answer given me to a question. I en-
quired of one : “ Where do the palms
grow ?” “ Oh,” he promptly answered,
“ they grow up the country, sir!” The
inhabitants speak very good English to
English-speaking people, but when con-
versing with one another they accent
the words in such a way that
no one unused to them can under-
stand. Wild lemons and limes
abound throughout the island, and
grapes appear to do well. Maize, is
grown in limited quantities, and sweet
potatoes for home consumption. The
inhabitants are content with just suf-
ficient, and appear not to be enterpris-
ing. A few whales are caught in the
winter, and we had sufficient evidence of
some being caught last winter, as no
effort is made to destroy the refuse,
which is allowed to lie on the beach.
The stench is unbearable. This island,
like Lord Howe, is capable of support-
ing a much larger population in ease
and comfort. The landing-place—on
the rocks—is bad, and, in rough
weather, dangerous. We take on a
cargo of onions for the islands, a quan-
tity of beef for the ship’s use, to supple-
ment the 30 live sheep we have on
board—the last we will get till we re-
turn. We watch our opportunity, get on
the rocks, and at the most favourable
moment jump into the boat, getting a
saltwater bath in doing so, climb on
board, and steam away for New
Caledonia and the New Hebrides.
Two days’steam brings us in sight
of the coral reefs protecting the
French Islands of New Caledonia
where the slightest error would mean
disaster. Night coming on, we were
enabled to observe the beautiful effect
of phosphorescent water. The sea is
calm, and the ripple made by the
vessel’s passage through the water,
dimly illuminates everything on board.
We burn blue lights to signal the pilot,
whojsafely navigates the vessel through
the maze of reefs and rocks, to Noumea,
the capital of the French settle-
ment. The waters alongside the reefs


aV u beautiru!! y ptiospnoresceht, the
whole ship being lighted up by the re-
■ flection. _ Noumea, the capital of New
Caledonia, lies snugly in a spacious and
beautiful harbour. The entrance is
narrow but safe, and the largest vessels
afloat can be accommodated in the
harbour. It is said the entire French
fleet can be safely accommodated there,
and this is something for Australians to
keep m mind. Every point is com-
manded by forts, mounting guns of
modern types. Sentries are observed
everywhere. Their dress (white duck)
makes them observable even at a long
distance. One cannot move anywhere
without feeling the close scrutiny of
officials, whose duty is to observe and
report. My camera gave them some
uneasiness. I was often detained for
examination, and sometimes taken be-
fore higher officials, before permission
was given to use it. I mentioned this
suspicious scrutiny to the British Con-
sul, who warned me to be very careful
not to expose a plate in the vicinity of
a fort, or I might be taken for a spy
and incarcerated. There is a good
stone wharf at Noumea, with sufficient
accommodation for several vessels.
The town commences at the wharf, and
is about half-a-mile square, the ground
rising rapidly towards the northern
boundary. The streets are fairly wide,
and laid out at right angles. Some fine
public buildings are dotted about, the
Cathedral and British Consulate being
very prominent. The streets are per-
fectly metalled and drained, and planted
with “ Flamboyant ” trees ■ (Poinciana
regia), a perfect shade tree, with
branches spreading—at a height of
about 12 feet—half way across the
street, those on the opposite side meet-
ing them. Daring our visit this tree
was a blaze of scarlet flowers. Hotels
are numerous, and appear to be con-
structed for drinking purposes only.
Wide, covered-in verandahs surround
some, with plenty of chairs and tables.
Large bars and parlors are attached to
all. Very few customers drink at the
bar counter ; they sit down for conver-
sation and amusement, and seem to
drink with great moderation. Wines
and absinthe are the chief drinks, but
cognac, whisky, and perfumed spirits
are also used, and I noticed syrups of
various flavours were always taken with
spirits. Shops are disappointing. They
are mostly' one-std Hod, roomy places,
containing about a basketful of stock,
and often no one in charge. One huge
store is an exception. This universal
emporium is run by an Englishman,
naturalised as a Frenchman. This
place seems to have mopped up all the
business in the town, and, perhaps, ac-
counts for the poverty of the shops.
The market square is in the centre of
the town. No buildings are erected
here, just a block of ground—about
3 acres—surrounded with good streets
and a kerbing. Vendors bring their
trucks and baskets here, and spread
their wares on a sack. All sorts of
goods are offered for sale—clothing
crockery, cutlery, fruit—such as pine
apples, papaw, strawberries, peaches,
guavas, mangoes, grenidellas, &c. The
quantity offered is very small, and not
cheap. Fish are sold alive, being
brought to market in troughs of water
on wheels. Vendors of fish are not
allowed to sell until the inspector has
inspected and passed them. All classes
patronise the market, and do not think
it infra dig to carry their purchases
home; one sees well-dressed women,
and men in spotless white, carrying fish
on strings, fruit and vegetables in
baskets, poultry by the legs, and some
are accompanied by their black servants
for the purpose. European vegetables
do not seem to succeed, but I saw
lettuce, eschallots, radishes, cucumbers
and vegetable marrows in the market.
Goats milk is sold at half franc per
bottle. The shops are open and every-
body astir by 5 a.m. Shops close about
11, and re-open at 3 for a couple of
hours. New Caledonia is a very large
island, being about 240 miles by 25.
Its formation is mainly a confused mass
of mountains, some rising to over 5,000
feet. Everywhere is picturesque and
beautiful, with grand mountain and
rock scenery, but mostly unsuited for
cultivation purposes. The hills, how-
ever, are rich in minerals. ,jj Nickel
mines exist, occupying a stretch of 60
miles along the west coast. I under-
stand they are worked by Australian
miners and Australian capital. The ore
is shipped to Europe. Coal is imported
from Australia. The streets and roads
are made and kept in repair by
prisoners working under guards. De-
parted friends are dear in memory here.
We visited the Noumea cemetery, a few


miles out, and were astonished at the
elaborate memorial tributes to be seen
there, and the general neatness and
precise order in which the graves were
kept. The emblems used were glass
beads threaded on wire and worked
into many beautiful designs _' in
wreaths, chaplets, crosses, cushions,
&c. Many of these emblems are from
3 to 5 feet in height, and so numerous
are they that stands are erected around
many of the graves to hang them on.
I counted 105 on one grave, and esti-
mated their value at
The flora, as far as I was able to see,
is not luxuriant. The principal timber
about Noumea is a species of Melalevca.
It has a striking resemblance to some
of our Eucalypti, such as the sugar
gum. There are good timber trees in-
land, including Kauri pine. The
island is rich in ferns and Aralias.
Cocoa-nuts grow and bear well, but
crotons do not seem at home ; the
climate is probably not hot enough
for them. Ficus Elastica grows luxuri-
antly. This would probably pay to
plant extensively for India-rubber,
which is now greatly in demand. The
Lantana has been introduced, and is
spreading through the island with
alarming rapidity, choking up the
gullies everywhere; it seems at home,
also, on the hills. The sensitive plant
Mimas a Pudica, grows freely, and ap-
pears to be perennial here.
An immense amount of French capi-
tal has been spent about Noumea, and
French capital appears to keep the
place going now, and is likely to be
necessary for a long time to come. No
natives are seen about the town. They
are not allowed to approach within 3
miles. They are very dark —almost
black, and are not a pleasant-looking
race
That New Caledonia should be
possessed by a foreign power is a
matter for regret, owing to its close
proximity to the Australian continent,
and for the reason that France uses it
for the deportment of most undesirable
people. Many of them have found
their way to these shores, and others
will do so. The feeling there towards
England is distinctly unfriendly. One
of the daily journals devotes ’much
space to the abuse of anything English.
I was informed that this bitterness had
only become intense since the Fashoda
incident. We were naturally anxious
to obtain reliable information of events
transpiring in South Africa, and were,
at first, alarmed at the published ac-
counts of the “ defeats of the British by
the Boers.” Everything appeared topsy
turvy, and we had doubts about Eng-
land being in existence on our return.
We were warned, however, by one who
knows, to pay no attention to the cable-
grams, as they were only French ac-
counts, seen through French eyes. We
stayed here six days, unloading coals.
Having finished, we signal for the
police, quite a number of whom come
on board, to search the vessel for stow-
away convicts, The search was quite a
formal matter, and none being found, we
are allowed to depart, in charge of a
pilot, whom our captain does not
want, but takes all the same, as he is
informed he will have to pay pilot dues
in any case. A lot of condemned cham-
pagne is put on board, to be thrown
over after we get well away. The
French steamer La Peruse is an active
rival to the Membare, going the same
trip, and for the same purpose, viz.,
collecting cobra. An unusual keen
rivalry exists between these boats, the
one pushing trade amongst the islands
in the French interests, the other in the
English. f . We meet again several times,
and race from place to place to fore-
stall each other. Each vessel has cus-
tomers upon whom they can depend to
wait their coming, but others give their
loading to the first comer; hence keen
tactics are resorted to, and everything
done to deceive each other, as to
routes, &cq they outbid each other,
also in prices, but the trader benefits
from this. They usually buy cobra
outright, but will carry as freight, if de-
sired.
Twenty hours’ steam bring us
to Anelgauhat, the first station in the
New Hebrides group. The history of
these islands dates back 300 years, be-
fore Captain Cook was born or Aus-
tralia heard of. The intrepid Spaniards,
in their efforts to find a southern con-
tinent —which they believed to exist—
discovered the Solomon group in their
first expedition, Santa Cruz in the
second, and the New Hebrides in their
third effort. They named the largest
island Australia del Espiritu Santo,
under the impression that it was the
mainland of the southern continent.


The name was afterwards shortened to
Espintu Santo, and this has been still
further shortened to Santo, quite a use-
able name. St. Phillip’s Bay, now
.called Big Bay, was the place chosen
for a settlement. A river emptying
into this bay was named River Jordan,
on which the expedition decided to
form a New Jerusalem. Unfriendly
natives and sickness caused the settle-
ment to be abandoned. Relics of this
expedition still exist, in the form of
ruins of large stone buildings. The
Spaniards seem to have made no fur-
ther effort to settle the islands, or hold
them. They abandoned them com-
pletely, and are not even claimants now.
For 150 years nothing more than a call
or two was made by English and
French navigators at the islands the
Spaniards had charted. The work
of thorough exploration was left to
Captain Cook, who also discovered
New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines,
which France was allowed to annex 50
years ago, English statesmen being, at
that time, quite indifferent about them,
indeed looking upon their southern
possessions as an encumbrance. Not
so to-day, however. Australia has, in
the short interval of 50 years, become
a power to be reckoned with, a voice
that commands attention, and were we
go years farther on, any dispute about
who should possess the New Hebrides
would not remain unsettled long. In
the interval that must elapse before we
are in a position to enforce our claims,
we naturally look to the mother nation
to prevent our natural heritage from
being annexed by a foreign power.
Neither England nor France would
consider them worth a war at the
present time, but a close watch should
be kept on the doings of France.
Every acre she acquires in the group
should be neutralized by an acre
acquired by Britain, and every settler
put on the land by France should be
equalled by a British settler. At
present this is not so. French settlers
predominate, and French land-owners
claim the bulk of the land in the groups.
So great is their claim that it is said
were all the waters land in addition to
the Islands there would not be enough
acres to satisfy them. Some of these
purchases I am told were made on
board ship. No trouble was taken to
ascertain the right of the native to
sell. One hand Was airily waived to
the right-, another to the left. The
native agreed, affixed his mark, and
the sale was completed by the pay-
ment of a small sum or a rifle or two.
The depth claimed to the frontage
bought was right across the Island,
Some of these curious French claims
are now attracting attention, and are
to be investigated. It is hoped Great
Britain will requite fair play. Laws
and regulations should be adopted by
the joint powers respecting the acquire-
ment of land, treatment of natives, and
trade privileges. At present they
differ in essential points, and are much
in favor of France. I will instance
some points of difference. England
requires that land must be purchased
from the tribes, who shall meet
together and agree to the sale, small or
large. France is not so particular.
England will not allow English store-
keepers or traders to sell firearms,
ammunition or alcholic liquors to the
natives. France allows French traders
to do as they please.
In the New Hebrides Islands
England only allows recruited
natives to be bound for three years’'
service. France allows French agents
to bind for five years, an immense'
advantage, as a raw recruit is ;
not much use for the first year or
two. The result is that French
traders have a great advantage over
English traders, and French settlers
over English settlers. Neither power
affords any protection to natives as
against each other. They may commit
any offence even to murder—which
they often do—without fear of being
called to account outside their own
tribe. A native’s wives and children
are absolutely his own property, to do
with as he will. Punishment ensues
if whites are injured, and whites are
protected against each other for capital
offences to some extent. British
subjects are taken to Fiji for trial and
punishment. There is no means of
arresting or detaining a wrong-doer
till a warship arrives. A French
subject had killed a man in Efate a
few weeks before we reached there.
We were invited to dinner by a Trader
at Meli Bay, and I was informed the
gentleman sitting opposite to me was
the slayer in question. He enjoyed
perfect liberty, and seemed quite


indifferent as To the consequences of
his action.
We made between 80 and 90 calls
in the Islands, covering about Go
stations. :• Some of these we stopped at
going and returning. Our first call is
at Anelgauhat Harbour, Aneityum;
we reach there about midday on Sun-
day, December 16. The Steamship
Co, are bound under an agreement
with the Presbyterian Mission not to
load or discharge cargo at any of the
Mission stations on the Sabbath, so
everyone not on duty were allowed to
land. The day was very warm, but
we made the most of the time at our
disposal to penetrate as far inland as
possible. Much of the soil is rich and
the vegetation very rank and difficult
to penetrate. Crotons grow from
to 30 ft. high. They are very con-
spicuous objects in the forest. Some
are colored dark crimson, almost blade,'
others scarlet, scarlet and yellow, and
yellow. They are all seedlings, and
some reproduce themselves. , The
majority of the young seedlings seen
about were green, many of them with
traces of variegation, which will
probably intensify as they age. The
beautiful tree fern, Alsophila excelsa,
grows abundantly to a height of 60ft.,
the stems are thin but strong ; they
grow very rapidly here. 1 noticed the
frond scars on the stems were often 6
inches apart, the fronds grow up to 13
ft. long and 8 ft. broad. This has
proved in Victoria our best fern to
withstand the sun, but is liable to
injury from frosts. A climbing fern
(Lygodium) grows luxuriantly here, the
fronds being quite large. Those
bearing spores are beautifully tassellated.
This Island is very rich in orchids,
a purple flowered Colanthe, a white
flowered Phajus, and white Lycaste
growing on the ground, and Dendro-
biinn, brides &c., on the trees. A
few Dendrobiums were in flower, but
are not worth cultivating. The Island
contains many beautiful ferns, including
Asplenium Nidus, and the Stag, and
Elk-horn ferns common in Queens-
land. The beautiful Anoectochilus—
king of the woods—grows on tUhis
Island. The remains of a wooden
tramway that formerly connected with
a sawmill still exists. : The timber cut
by this mill is called Kauri. It closely
resembles the New Zealand wood of
that name, and is said to be a first-
class timber. The enterprise did not
pay, and the machinery has® been
removed. An effort is being made to
re-float the company in Sydney. Mr.
J. P. Wilson, a resident trader —who
treated us with great kindness at
Aneityum—'accompanied us to Sydney
for that purpose. .There is a nice
garden attached to the Mission station,
containing 40 varieties of .Crotons of
the best sorts collected all through the
group.
Tanna is the next island called at —■
an island famous for its great volcano,
always active, and said to be the most
impressive in the world. The natives
are a strong, handsome race, fierce and
quarrelsome, fond of war, and seldom
without tribal differences in active
progress. Their hair, although woolly,
can be trained into tresses, .tf This is
effected by taking small bundles and
binding very thin silky fibre round it
at the base; each head so treated is
composed of several hundreds of these
bundles, the binding being continued
as the hair grows till it stands out like
a huge mop spreading down on the
shoulders. They dip their heads in
lime—which is readily made by burn-
ing Coral —to kill vermin. The lime
gives the hair a burnt, reddish appear-
ance. The ends are soft and silky,
spreading out like freshly frizzed hair ;
,1 saw some quite eighteen inches long.
Tanna is famous for growing yams
(Dioscorea aculeata), and much care
and labour is expended in their culti-
vation. A clearing is made in the
forest, fenced with interlaced reeds as
a protection against pigs ; mounds of
earth, about-S-feet high by 9 feet in
diameter, are then thrown up and
several sets planted in each. The
twining stems from these are carefully
trained on reeds; a single reed at
first, and others added as ’the vine
grows till each mound is roofed over
with reeds, thickly covered with foliage.
The soil is rich, volcanic, of a dull red
colour. The yams grow up to 80 lbs.
and even 100 lbs. in weight in the best
soil. Tanna is the only island on
which I saw this kind of cultivation.
This species of yam forms the chief
food supply throughout the islands,
and is guarded with care. When ripe,
they are dug up and stored in thatched
bamboo sheds, open all round. The


posts supporting the roof and raised
floor are stout bamboo, which it is
said rats cannot climb, owing (.0 its
smoothness and hardness. Taro (Cal-
adium esculenteum) is also largely
grown for making into bread. These
are grated on the rough part of
a cocoanut leaf stem, mixed with crabs
and small fish, folded up in banana
leaves, and cooked on hot stones.
The bread is very solid when cooked,
and almost tasteless. Plantains and
yams are coolced on an open fire, yams
being often taken off and scraped
during the process of cooking. Bread
fruit is well wrapped in leaves and
cooked on hot stones; they are
delicious. Young cocoanuts are avail-
able throughout the year. The milk
is very palatable and nutritious; also
the kernel, which in young nuts is of
the consistency of thick cream. Many
infants, I was informed, are reared
entirely on cocoanut milk. We were
anxious to visit the volcano, but Cap-
tain Williams would not grant the time
necessary on our down trip, but did so
on return in response to our urgent
request. ■, We were told that the tribes
were at war with each other and that we
would probably fail to obtain guides,
that the journey was difficult and
unsafe, that we would have to return
after dark, &c., &c. We were not to
be dissuaded, so a rough plan was
arranged, and Mr. P. Barr, Mr. H.
Crighton, Mrs. Glisson, another lady
and daughter, and myself, were landed
at Sulphur Bay. We were to go to
the volcano, cross over it, descend on
the other side, and journey on to
Wei-sisi, the steamer’s next stopping-
station—a journey estimated at twelve
miles. We landed at Sulphur Bay
and lost half an hour trying to persuade
one of the fifty natives who met us to
guide us to the volcano. One after
another volunteered and then backed
out. At last one agreed to conduct
us to the nearest village. This he
carried out all right, and obtained
a guide who undertook to conduct us
across the volcano to the next village.
There is a track leading up to the hot
hills, about two miles from the crater.
About a mile of this hot surface
resembles an over-baked pie-crust. It
is dry and almost glazed, but breaks
in flakes under foot, jets'of steam
coming through numerous fissures all
about. Earthquake shocks recur at
intervals of two or three minutes, loud
reports are heard from the volcano,
from which dense volumes of smoke
and steam issue, and occasionally a
shower of scoria at white heat. We
mount the crater and look over the
edge when things are more quiet. The
smoke is too dense to see the molten
lava, and explosions commencing again,
we do _ not feel very comfortable.
They quickly increase to a fearful roar,
the hill shakes violently and sends us
all scurrying away. The edge we were
standing on overhangs the crater; it
seems remarkable that it can stand the
repeated oscillations without falling
in. We sat down for awhile and
ate a few biscuits, but before we
had finished an extra loud explosion
and violent shaking of the mountain
cause us to quicklyscramble to our feet.
We had had enough, and agreed to
leave at once; so, finding our guide—
who would not follow us so near the
crater—we began the descent on the
opposite side. It was quite dark, and
we had to slide and stumble down fully
a mile of scoria and ashes at an angle
of 45 degrees. The prevailing winds
blow the ejected ashes down this side
of the mountain ; they just roll down,
and the surface is as true from top to
bottom as though trimmed by skilled
workmen. Our guide faithfully carried
out his agreement to conduct us to
the next village, but nothing would
induce him to go further. The dogs
alarm the villagers, they all turn out
(they don’t have to dress); all the men
have rifles and don’t forget to bring
them. Fresh guides are engaged to
the next village, and this goes on
through seven villages, eighteen guides
being used from start to finish. We
drink cocoanut milk—a capital stimu-
lant—at every village, and travel all
the way from the foot of the volcano
by torchlights, made of Pandanus or
cocoanut leaves, over the roughest
country I ever saw. When our guide
required us to scale a perpendicular
wall ot rock fully 40ft. high, with only
the stout stems of climbing plants to
catch hold of, we demurred, and
sat down almost in despair. , Our
guides urged us to climb, and one
went up quite nimbly to show us how
easy it was. We were almost’ tired


out and in no hurry to try. Our
torches were blazing brightly, lighting
up a scene I will never forget. , One
of our guides came over to me, he
was very angry, and pointing to Mr.
Barr shouted in broken English,
“ What for you bring old fellar man?”
“What for you bring misses?” We
felt guilty, but climbed up, and had a
lot more similar work before us. Ulti-
mately we reach the coast, where
Messrs. Truss and McGrow, two white
traders,,, v reside. They kindly placed
a boat' and crew at our disposal, in
which we reached the steamer. We had
been travelling 12% hours, and were
glad to get safely back, and those on
board were relieved to see us again.
The long journey was explained to us
as made necessary through the dis-
turbed state of the islands, the guides
avoiding direct routes and unfriendly
tribes. The anchor is lifted and
engines started in quite a hurry—we
had delayed the steamer six hours.
The volcano as seen from the water
was grand.
Eromanga is our next stopping
place, an Island twice as large_ as
Tanna, and equally rich in vegetation.
Dillon’s Bay is our landing place, and
we go ashore with that veteran
missionary, Rev. Hugh Robertson,
who, with the Revs. T. W. Leggatt
and J. G. Baton of Malekula, travelled
down with us from Sydney, and
better travelling companions one could
not wish, for their many acts of
courtesy and kindness to us will be
long remembered. They did all in
their power to make our trip enjoyable
and instructive, and the ovations we
were witness to on reaching their
several homes prove the esteem in
which they are held by the natives.
Mr. Robertson’s home is built almost
on the beach at the mouth of a
picturesque creek on the one side and
a lofty range for a background. The
house is the picture of comfort and
homeliness and has evidently been
added to from time to time as addi-
tions were required or funds would
allow. At either end of Mr. Robert-
son’s study hangs boards about raft,
long on which are cut the words,
“ Day Spring,” these once adorned the
quarter of the old boat of that name,
that we remember collecting funds for
when children. The well cared for
garden in front contains fine speci-
mens of Crotons, Draceuas, Hibis-
cus, Poinciana, Amaryllis, Eucharis
Amazonica, &c., fine bread fruit and
other native trees surround the house
and good varieties of oranges,
lemons and limes. Mr. Robertson
is justly proud of his home where he
has resided as a missionary for 25
years. His charming daughter, Mrs.
J. G. Baton, returning from her honey-
moon, was with us and stays for a
month or two at her old home, while a
new home is arranged for her in
Malekula. The Rev. John Williams,
Mr. Jas. Harris and Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon were all murdered at this
station before Mr. Robertson took
charge. White crosses mark the
spots where they fell. War has again
broken out between the tribes on this
Island and armed pickets are posted
round the mission station to prevent
surprise. The native huts are well
built and everything looked clean and
in thorough order. The native
women at this station wear skirts
made of bruised Pandanus leaves;
each skirt contains quite a quantity of
these leaves and I am told some
women wear from three to four dozen
of them. They never take them off
but add a clean one over the top of
the old ones occasionally, the bulk of
leaves assumes enormous proportions,
they look like large Emu’s at a short
distance. The bruised leaves are
exactly the color of Emu feathers. I
saw them stooping over open stone
fireplaces or ovens, and marvel that
they do not catch fire, if they did they
could not get their dress off; it would
take a fire brigade to put them out.
The ceilings in Mr. Robertson’s house
are formed of one hugh mat, con-
structed by the natives with reeds,
they fit exactly and have a pleasing and
novel effect.
The next Island to North East is
Efate or Sandwich Island. This is
about the centre of the group and in
some respects is the most important
Island in the New Hebrides, indeed
it may be called the capital or princi-
pal trading centre. The Australian,
New Hebrides Company and* the
French Company have large stores
there, where all necessary foods an-*-
outfits can be bought at a very cheap
rate. Khaki suits can be purchased


here for ros. No duties are collected
even on spirits or tobacco. Several
of the -stores have drinking bars
attached, and although spirits are al-
most as cheap as ale, they charge a
half france (five-pence) per drink, the
profits are enormous at these rates, but
perhaps the business is not large.
The French hotel is quite a pre-»
tentious building on what is called
the “ Rue du Commerce.” This
street of green sward is about a mile
long and contains about three build-
ings, it is the only street in the Island,
it runs parallel with, and close to the
beach, and should be called the
Esplanade. The township is called
Vila —pronounced Vela —the harbor is
prettily situated, and very picturesque,
it is a mass of live coral, ever_ growing
and spreading. The stone jetty can
only be approached in shallow boats,
carefully navigated through the tortu-
ous passages. Large vessels find a
safe anchorage half a mile from the
shore. The little Island called Vila
Island contains, the mission house,
church and native villages. This
little Island used to be thickly popu-
lated and was the favorite place for
holding cannibal feasts. Groups of
native drums still stand there, some in
a fair state of preservation, others fall-
ing down and decaying. I noticed
some being chopped up for firewood.
These drums stand about nine feet
high. They are made out of
the trunks of trees aft. Gin. to 3ft.
6in. in diameter, bluntly pointed or
rounded at the tops, a narrow slit is
made in one side about six feet long
and the centre is gouged out leaving
only a thin shell, they are planted up-
right, about 10 in a group, close to-
gether, and beaten on the edge of the
slit, with a stout piece of Cocoanut
leaf stem. The sound emitted is very
penetrating and can be heard within a
12 mile radius. No two drums sound
alike. It seems a pity these drums
should be allowed to decay, they
would make interesting groups in our
parks and gardens and could be had
for the cost of loading and freight,
most of them are carved. These
drums were formerly beaten to sum-
mons natives home from the mainland
to protect their homes from sudden
attacks of hostile tribes, they were
beaten to summons tribes to councils
of war; also for pig and man feasts,
and native dances. Could ...these
drums record the history of Vila that
they have borne witness to, many tales
of sufferings and pleasure would be
chronicled. Why several groups of
drums exist within a hundred yards
radius has not been explained, pro-
bably each group belonged to an
acknowledged Chief or representative
from the mainland. This small Island
is not mote than half-a-mile across and
has not been used for cultivation pur-
poses, only for villages and as a place
of refuge against enemies. The
means of communication with the
mainland is by out-rigger canoe.
These canoes are logs, hollowed
out and pointed at the ends, to
which an out-rigger—in the form of
another canoe in immature —is attached r
at the side, at a distance of six to eight
feet. This balances the canoe and
makes them quite safe, they are of
many sizes, built to carry from three
up to 30 men. The larger ones are
used for war parties, and to carry
invited guests to dances and feasts,
they are propelled with hand paddles,
about three feet long, free in the hands
of the boatman who change them from
side to side as necessary. The natives
have holdings on the mainland, where
they cultivate their yams and collect
their food. We pass canoes going
home laden with food stuffs common
to the Islands. The weapons now
used throughout the Islands are of
European manufacture. Everyone
carries a long sheath knife. Rifles are
not permitted in the mission stations,
but the heathen villages have as many
rifles as they have men. The toma-
hawk is also commonly used, the
natives recognize the superiority of
steel over wood, stone, or shells, their
former implements.
Efate is more distinctly ■ French
than the other Islands in the group,
and being central, France has made
special, efforts here. The object was
prematurely exposed in an official
manner a few years ago, when France
landed a number of soldiers at
Harannah • Harbour and, had it not
been for the strong protests from
Australia, this- Island would now be a
recognised French posession. The
troops were actually in posession for
two years, and it was through the


strong public opinions expressed in
Melbourne that the Imperial Govern-
ment 1 were moved to action/'-' which
' resulted in France withdrawing them.
The soil is very rich, and enjoys a
heavy rainfall. A large area is culti-
vated in a rough way. Bananas do
well, and have proved a proijtable
crop; 2000 bunches were taken back
to Sydney by the Membare. They
are not so large as those imported
■ from Queensland, but are of excellent
flavor. Cocoanuts are planted ex-
tensively, and yield enormous crops.
Bats are their only enemies; they live
'in the trees, getting sufficient to eat
and drink from the nuts. Pieces of
zinc are fastened round the trunks to
; present a smooth surface, on which
they cannot climb. Coffee is largely
cultivated under the shade of the
forest trees. They grow about 5 ft.
high, and were loaded with half-grown
berries. An average crop is half a
ton to the acre. The harvesting,
pulping and drying entails consider-
able labor. Were this plentiful, coffee
growing would become a great
industry. The coffee plants are said
to require shade, and those so grown
produce large foliage of a dark green
color. I saw some fully exposed,
whose foliage was too yellow to be
healthy. I think for the best quality
of beans extreme exposure or dense
shade should be avoided if long-lived
plants and well matured berries are
required.
Mangoes are sparingly cultivated;
they grow into large trees and bear
quantities of handsome fruits of
splendid quality. They do not carry
well. Maize is grown largely on the
coral flats, and it grows throughout the
year. A crop only occupies the
ground three months, and immediately
it is harvested another crop is sown
between the rows. The stems of the
old crop are chopped up and laid on
the ground to decay. Four crops a
year are taken from the land, each
crop averaging 30 bushels per acre.
Some land, I was informed, had been
so cropped for seven years without
showing ..signs of exhaustion. No
manures'"arc used. Mons. Chevillard
has large plantations and employs a
number of natives to work them. '5 He
has recently had the title of Chevallier
conferred upon him by France, in
recognition of his efforts to promote
cultivation and French interests on the
island.
Mr. Phillipson Russell is another
large planter and recruiting agent. He
■employs 150 natives. He has quite a
j large village of native huts to acoinmo-
date them, I saw quantities of
: Dracena terminalis rosea and others
on this plantation, and also hedges of
Pandanus Veitchi and crotons, well
colored. Cycas Circinatis grows all
over the island. This is a very hand-
, some cycad. I saw some stems 12 ft.
'and 15 ft. high as thick as a tree fern
; stem —which they somewhat resemble
. —bearing masses of dark green leaves.
> The leaves are worn as ornaments by
; the chiefs, who alone are allowed to
i wear them, and are used for taboo
, ! marks. The banyan tree flourishes on
all the islands. 1 measured one whose
stem and root supports covered a circle
of 150 feet. In the early stage of
growth they cling to a friendly tree for
support; this they gradually envelope
and eventually kill, Recruiting natives
for the sugar plantations in Queens-
land and for neighbouring island work
is carried on from Efate. A recruiter
informed me that the process was very
simple, but always risky. The natives
on all the islands understand the busi-
ness quite well, and there are always
a few who wish to recruit. Some wish
to leave their island on account of
quarrels or to have a change and see
life beyond their shores, or to earn
money to buy clothes or a rifle, &c.
A brig, accompanied by two boats,
goes out on a recruiting expedition.
Both boats are well armed and manned.
One goes to the beach, the other
following up to within rifle-shot as
cover; would-be recruits wade out to
the nearest boat and jump in
The natives on shore are wildly excited
at this time, and keenly watch what is
going on. They may object to one or
more recruits leaving the island ; a
father is losing his son, or a wife her
husband, or a chief one of his subjects.
Having got all who are willing on
board, the boat does not wait for
trouble but starts for the brig with all
speed, but is often fired on from the
shore, and sometimes followed wirh
canoes. It is the covering boat’s
business to deal with opposition and
act as rear-guard. Women are not


recruited unless accompanied by their
husbands. All females over eleven
years of age are married ; there is no
such thing as a single women on the
islands. I witnessed an amusing
incident from our steamer at Epi.
A large number of canoes were
around the steamer, and about twenty
natives came on board and offered
their services as crew. The
women followed in other canoes,
and paddling round the steamer, cried
and howled lustily. Their husbands
took no notice of them whatever,
excepting one who jumped overboard
to join his wife. She did not give him
the kind reception we expected, but,
paddling quickly up to him, attacked
him with her paddle, and half killed
him before she dragged him in. The
French or British flag is flown along
the coast by the sympathises of the
interested nations; there is quite a
rivalry in this respect. On our way to
Epi, we call at several small islands—
Emau, Nouna, Mai (or Three Hills),
and Tongoa. These are more thickly
populated for their size than the large
islands. Tongoa is the training school
for native teachers. We purchased
a few curios from the natives, such as
spears, clubs, bows and arrows, includ-
ing some poisoned arrows, which are
carefully wrapped up and handled
tenderly. Native weapons are very
scarce ; they have been bought up by
traders, and none are made now, steel
knives, &c., having superseded all
native weapons except bows and
arrows; these are largely used, and
the natives are expert shots. I ar-
ranged a match at Laraenu. Cocoa-
nuts were used to fire at, and there
were very few misses at from 50 to
200 yards. For killing birds they use
arrows with broad knobs in place of
points. Others are pointed with bone,
wood, or steel; most are barbed. At
Santo I noticed that they tie pieces of
feather on the ends in a position that
causes the arrow to rapidly revolve in
its flight. Our hair is growing to an
uncomfortable length; there is nothing
for it but mutual assistance. We have
used up most of our clothes and discuss
ways and means. There are two ways
of replenishing our depleted stock —
the ship’s store or the washing tub.
We decide to patronise the former for
a while. The temperature has risen
as we travel north". We only want
clothes enough to keep the sun from
burning us, so we invest in khaki
per suit and loosely woven
shirts. A washing day has to be
laced, however, as shir's, ’&c., were
being used up too frequently to be
stocked. McPherson was the first to
tackle washing. I found him on my
return from shore one day with a tub
of water on the captain’s bridge,
scrubbing a Ranji suit. We induced
the Norfolk Island sailors to wish for
us afterwards. Malekula is the next
important island called at. We go
ashore with the Rev. Mr. Leggett at
Pangkuma. Hundreds of natives were
on the beach to welcome him back.
They all crowd up and shake hands.
We tried to dodge them, but they
won’t have it, so we pushed the busi-
ness and got it over as soon as
possible. There is a pronounced odour
from these people that one likes to
get away from as soon as possible.
I thought I was getting used to it ;
but no’ not yet. Mr. Leggett’s house
is nicely situated on the hillside, com-
manding a fine view. A well-kept
garden surrounds the house, and con-
tains same fine species of hibiscus,
crotons, &c. Sugar cane grows luxuri-
antly. A beautiful gully commences
from near the house and extends for
over a mile inland. It is filled with
palms and beautiful tropical plants;
a pathway runs through the gully to
a native village beyond. This is the
most charming spot in the island.
We walked across Malekula at a narrow
part with Rev. F. J. Paton, who has
a mission station on the other side.
The walk through the forest is very
charming. Quantities of the beautiful
fan palm, Licuala grandis, grow on
this island. We walked through ex-
tensive coffee and banana plantations.
Mr. Patou’s station is prettily situated
on a white coral beach. A splendid
welcome was accorded him by his
adherents, who assembled in force and
gave him three hearty cheers. He had
been absent eighteen months lecturing
in England, Scotland, and the colonies.
Earthquakes had done some damage
to his house and furniture during his
absence. The land is very fertile, and
tropical crops grow abundantly ; but
I am told native labour is scarce, and
one coflee plantation of 5° acres was


abandoned because labour was not
available ro harvest the crop. The
traders say the Christianised natives
become too lazy to do anything. : We
had si hush burial on this island.
A consumptive native recruit was being
sent home at his own request, but died
before reaching it. He was sewed up
in a couple of bags, taken ashore, and
buried about eighteen inches deep
without the slightest ceremony. These
people appear to be devoid of affection;
they have less than our domestic
animals exhibit for one another.
Our next call is at Ambrym, an
island of coral formation, covered with
refuse from an active volcano over
3,5°° feet high. The island was very
dry and everything covered with fine
black ashes from the volcano. Am-
brym contains the only hospital in the
group. The sick—black and white—
are brought here from all the islands,
the_ building is large and substantial,
divided into three wards, accommo-
dating black men, black women and
white men, an operating room, dis-
pensary and nurses quarters are con-
tained within the building. The
natives are treated gratis ; whites are
expected to pay, the beds were all full
at: the time of our visit, and several
brought from various islands by the
Mctnbare had just landed. Dr. J. T.
Bowie, who is in charge of the hospi-
tal, said he would find them accom-
modation somehow. This institution
must be a great boon to the Islands.
A lot of copra was taken on from Mr.
Mansfield’s trading station, close to
the hospital. The cocoanut trees in
Ambrym were attacked last year by
an insect so badly that the whole are
threatened with destruction, the effect
is similiar to a bad attack of red
spider. I examined a number but
could not find a specimen ; many trees
died outright and another similiar
attack will destroy the lot. Every
precaution should be used to prevent
the spread of this disease. Mr. Mans-
field’s grounds were being prepared for
a native feast to take place three weeks
hence. About three dozen holes had
been dug and paved with stone, these
are native ovens; 600 guests were
expected to attend, they bring their
own pigs and native food. Mr. Mans-
field supplements with dainties used
by civilized people. These feasts are
indulged in every few mouths through-
out the group. Pigs are common on
every island; next to the chief, the
owner of the most pigs is the most
important man, and he who can kill
and feast the natives on 100 tusk pigs is
acknowledged as a new chief. These pigs
are long nosed, coarse animals, they
grow long curly tusks, and it is for
these they are prized, more than for
food; great care is taken of them to
prevent the tusks from being broken
or damaged. I saw many tied up by
the legs in the heathen villiages, grow-
ing tusks, absorbing years of care, they
seemed to receive more attention than
members of the family. After the
feasts the tusk jaw are cleaned and
bleached, they are then tallied and
credited to the owner for future pro-
motion. They are tied in rows on
sloping benches under a verandah of
thatch till the next feast, when they
are removed to make room for the
fresh ones. I saw thousands of them
exhibited .in this way in the sacred
clearings, the owners of some of these
jaws were present and I tempted them
to sell, but they would not trade them
at any price; one seemed to be a great
curiosity, having four beautiful tusks
attached; another in which the tusks
had grown through the jaw in its curve
was equally curious, many had dis-
placed several teeth in the course of
their growth, which must have entailed
great suffering. I was told the natives
train these tusks, but could not as-
certain the methods employed. The
jaws are held sacred till next feast day,
but are not much valued afterwards.
I saw some bundles of them hanging
in the villages and the men wear them
on their wrists as bangles, they do
not polish them ; some must have had
them on from childhood, as they were
tight on the wrist and could not be
slipped off. There are plenty of pigs
at liberty in the bush, but all have
owners and are encouraged to go
home once a day for food. Captain
Cook is credited with placing pigs on
the islands, where no mammals formerly
existed, this absence of animal food
doubtless accounts for the cannibal
customs, common to all the islands.
This - objectionable custom is quite
common amongst the bush tribes in
the interior of the islands and we
heard of several such feasts having


taken place quite recently. I do not
think there is a cow on the islands,
but fine herds of goats are kept at the
mission stations, they thrive well, but I
did not see any in the native villiages.
Penticost is a long narrow island
not far from Ambrym, a most un-
pleasant odor was experienced on
going through one of the native
villages, there was no apparent cause,
but we were informed the natives
practice the unsanitary custom of
closing the hut, where a death occurs,
with the corpse inside. On being
questioned, our guide told us there
was a dead pig somewhere about, but
I suspect he knew more, this practice
is not confined to Penticost, but was
not noticed at other villages.
Oba is our next place of cal!, no
mission station exists on this island
and very little is known about it, the
natives are the finest and most intilli-
gent looking in the groups, but are
treacherous, and not to be trusted,
they are tall, strong and beautifully
formed, with much paler skins than
natives of the other islands, they have
fine bushy heads of hair and are pro-
fusely tatooed with blue pigment, the
designs are elegant and contrast well
with the color of their skins. The
coast is steep and rocky and lashed
continuously with surf; landing is
effected with great difficulty and is
only possible at two or three places.
The water banks up ro to 15 feet high
before rolling on the beach with a
roar. I thought our boat must
founder, we threw an anchor out to
have something to pull on and keep
the boat nose on, but the chain
snapped as though it had been a fish-
ing line. One lonely Frenchman lives
at this station and trades with the
natives for copra, he is too lean to eat
or I don’t think he would last long.
We landed a returned recruit at Oba
with his box of clothes, which it is
customery to trade off as part payment
for his three years services; his master
had given him an odd mixture includ-
ing a boxer hat and an umbrella. He
was quite excited as we neared the land-
ing place and spreading his umbrella,
he was surrounded with friends as
soon as he reached the shore, his box
was locked but soon had to be opened
to satisfy their impatience. I thought
they would break it open before he
produced "the key. There were very
few articles in the box and they were
quickly distributed amongst the crowd,
the owner grabbed the boxer hat and
a grey coat, much too small for him,
but he got into it with a struggle and
walked about quite proudly with his
little coat, boxer hat and umbrella, his
bare legs and chest —which the coat
won’t cover —were made the more con-
spicuous, and made hinv the most
comical figure imaginable; the only-
other articles in his box were gaudy
lava-lavas, the women got nothing.
Cocoanuts are more abundant on Oba
than any of the other islands, the soil
is very rich and the vegetation rank
and dense. I penetrated about half a
mile inland up a dense gorge, I would
have gone further but had been
cautioned not to go off the beach.
The natives all carry rifles and seem
very restless, (news has just come to
hand of disastrous fighting on this
Island.)
Malekula, Ambrim, Pentecost, Oba,
Malo and Santo describe a circle, and
from a central position are all in sight.
The waters inclosed by this circle of
islands are always dangerous to navi-
gate, and more particularly so during
the first two months of the year, known
as the hurricane season. Navigators
call this the grave-yard—a name earned
through the numerous disasters to
shipping that have occurred there.
The barometer is closely watched for
indications of a hurricane; so much
dreaded by all, ashore or afloat Suffi-
cient warning is given by this instru-
ment and prudent navigators make a
bolt for the open sea. Should a hurri-
cane overtake a vessel within this circle
there is but small chance of saving the
ship. Hurricanes are not frequent,
and several years have elapsed since
the last disastrous visitation occurred.
Residents are busy preparing and the
roofs of houses, sheds, &c. are being
loaded with stones, and some of the
settlers houses are secured by wire
ropes passed over the roof and bolted
to trees growing near. (Since writing
the above, particulars of a disastrous
visitation has been received.) On our
way to Santo we steam through the
Malo Pass —a narrow and dangerous
passage, with a tide said to be running
ten knots per hour.
Santo is the largest, and in this re


spent, I lie most important island of the
group. Its length is about 80 miles
by 30 miles wide. This was the first
island discovered in the Hew Hebrides,
and as before mentioned St. Philip’s—
or as it is now called, Big Bay—was
the site of the abandoned
settlement, The_ soil is rich,* rainfall
abundant, and climate scarcely varying ;
throughout the year. Traders build !
their houses to suit the climate. The ■
weather side is close boarded, but the
lea side is constructed in part of lattice
or bamboo. Mosquitoes are trouble-
some, and bedsteads are all covered
with nets. Meals are served under a
thatch roofed structure such as we call
a summer house. Quantities of bam-
boos grow on some parts of the island
and are largely used for building pur-
poses. I saw them cleverly used as
conduits on one part of the island.
They are split in halves and supported
on forked sticks; a small dam is made
at the spring and the water conveyed
about two miles to the two neighbour-
ing villages. The water so obtained
is heavily charged with lime, which is
deposited in the bamboos and requires
to be chipped away occasionally. We
witnessed an unusual occurrence from
the steamer. A very energetic sub-
marine volcano was throwing up
co.umns of water, smoke and lava to a
height of 2000 feet. Thousands of
tons of water, & c . must have been
heaved up in some of the explosions,
and after dark the red hot lava was
distinctly seen. This volcano has been
active four months. Before the out-
break vessels passed over the spot in
five fathoms of water ; when I saw it
the waves were breaking over the
foundation of a new island. Santo has
a similar flora to the other islands ;
nI^ yth o g gr °' VS with tropica! gross-
of- ■ R ,‘, ce 18 g ro ' v n on the hill sides •
his is called » dry rice,” a variety that
like' the PIT 6 t 0 • 6 groWn in ™PS
n 1 Chinese nce ‘ Arrawroot is
lade on all the islands from the roots
vision C of S nnat . ifi< ? a * under the super-
thei-’COn-
scheme. Whatever quantity drey make
oTrmt s “ d credited
understand Statl . on Sendin g it I
derstand all monies realised on a
given station are expended on that
station m buildings and i mprov
Missionaries receive ,£ 2 on '
all goods are delivered to them'free'of
freight, so all goods are as chean o
ihem as though they lived in Sydney or
Melbourne. Ihcy have free quarters
and in most cases very comfortable
quarters although the completS
of their homes depends largely on their
own exertions. They alsoNravel fr ee
of fares, including their wives and fam-
ilies. Ihe item of freights and fares
is a very large one, and is set down a?
4 17 ° 7 \ lrd / for l8 99 (vide balance
sheet). A missionary does not ask
leave but goes away for a trip when-
ever he feels a change necessary
usually to one or other of the Aus-
tralian states. Native teachers are left
in charge, of the mission station till
their chief returns. Mission stations
are all established on the coast, mostly
within a few yards of the beach. This
system is adopted for safety. Good
boats are possessed at each station, in
which they can visit neighbouring
stations and islands. _ No missioS
stations exist in the interior of the
I islands, where the natives are as prim-
itive as when the islands were dis-
covered. The missionary conducts a
morning school for all ages, comm' i-
cing at 6.30. The school is dismiw-J
at 7.30; after this the missionaries’
duties appear to end for the day. Aach
station has a staff of native teachers,
who are paid a very small salary and
appear to do considerable work lying
at a distance, &c. On the whole I
think the missionary has a very good
time; very different to those who
did the pioneering work 40 years ago.
The coast tribes a, civilised and safe.
There isplenty of work still to do in
the interiors, but those parts seem to
be approached with much delicacy.
The is more venturesome ; his
lot is anything but enviable. In most
cases he is the only white man for
miles. Most traders have from one to
three native wives, but they are not
valued as domestics. The missionary
is surrounded with fervent adherents.
The trader has to attract workers by
tact and fair dealing. He must be de-
void of fear, as he is always in danger.
He deals direct with the, hill tribes,
who collect and deliver* cocoanuts,
vyhlch are broken open, dried, and the


kernela taken out; this material is
called copra and is used in the manu-
facture of the finer kinds of soaps,
candles, and confectionery. It is
difficult to induce the natives to do
any kind of work. They argue rightly
that they have no need to work. Food
is abundant on all the islands, clothes
tire not required, and beyond tobacco,
knives, tomahawks, and rifles, they re-
quire nothing from the white man.
Traders have had a large share in
civilising the natives and ought to re-
ceive every encouragement. Planters
are employers of labor direct and differ
materially from the trader.
Recruiting is also a great factor in
civilizing and teaching natives how to
work their lands to advantage ; each
one is able to impart some valuable
knowledge to his tribe on his return.
The Santo natives make a rude kind
of pottery ware, such as bowls, basins
and nondescript articles for holding
liquids and as cooking utensils. They
are not acquainted with the potter’s
wheel, but build their wares on a shape,
mostly their knee when the leg is
doubled back. The ware is thin and
brittle, but well burned. It is made
from a black kind of clay, washed over
with red volcanic soil before burning.
This is the only island in the group
where this art is followed. Shell fish
are abundant, winkles (weighing about
ilb. each) being the most common.
I recognised the old village sites by
the shells strewn over acres of ground
hundreds of tons of them —many
embedded 24 inches in the ground
where the natives had lived centuries
ago. Only on Lamanu Island did we
notice division fences between hold-
ings. Loose stones exist on this little
island in quantities; they have been
collected and built into walls about
4ft. high, but very frail, a push would
knock any of them down—indeed they
won’t bear climbing over. , These hold-
ings appear to have been cultivated
long ago, but are not made any use of
now. Malarial fever is prevalent in
all the islands ; whites and natives
are equally susceptible to attacks. @Tt
is sometimes of a mild form, but often
severe ; ague accompanies it. Measles
and scarlet fever sometimes ravage the
islands and,;, cause numerous deaths,
Eczema is common amongst the natives,
and many are in a deplorably condition
in consequence of this malady. Statis-
tics taken from the missionary stations
show that the natives are a decaying
race —the death rate is higher than the
birth rate. 1 was told native women
object to rear more than two or three
children at the outside; any born be-
yond that number are abandoned or
destroyed. Husbands are anxious to
rear children, and in some cases rear
them on cocoanut milk should the
mother be unable or refuse to nourish
them. Each child represents a pro-
perty value to the head of the family,
valuable consideration being given for
girl-wives, and work and assistance is
expected from the boys. Amongst the
natives consumption is the worst dis-
ease, and I am of opinion this is caused,
at least partially, by the growing cus-
tom of the natives in wearing European
clothing. The natives have a strong
desire to obtain and wear something, and
the missionaries encourage them to do
so. If they only understood the art
of wearing clothes and the necessity
of keeping what they wore clean and
dry no harm would result; but many
do not possess a change, and those
who do keep the clean ones for Sun-
days and holidays. I believe wearing
clothes is responsible for many deaths
amongst the natives. The steamer calls
every two months; this occasion is
made a holiday of, so we saw everyone
in their best attire. The heathen vil-
lagers are attracted by the steamer, so
the dressed and naked mingle together
for the day. We always found the
natives strictly honest in their dealings.
They mostly offered to carry the curios
we bought from them to our boat, and
we never had to look for them, Santo
is the last island in the New Hebrides
group. The Banks group of islands
lie farther to the north. We have
three calls to make there before com-
mencing our return trip. The Flora,
on the Banks group, is similar to the
last islands visited. One of the vil-
lages visited on a mountain slope was
artificially terraced with rocks and
richly adorned with rudely carved tree
fern stems. The subject chosen is in-
tended to represent a human face, and
is of the same pattern as seen through
the New Hebrides group. It is a rude
caricature at best; some are set up in
front of native huts and under the pro-
jecting eaves of native temples. I could


not ascertain their significance. ;j The
natives oil their bodies with oil pressed
from the cocoanut kernel; they shine
as though coated with varnish. Most
of them have holes in the lobes of
their ears. They turn these to use.
In some cases they are very large;
it is common to see a pipe stuck in
one 1 and an ordinary wax matchbox
in the other, some use them for button-
holes and adorn them with hibiscus
dowers or small branches of fine leaved
crotons. Natives all beg tobacco and
matches ; they pack the matches away
in their woolly hair or beard, There
are no salt deposits on the islands;
salt water is required for cooking and
dipping baked yams, &c., into. The
bush r tribes journey to the coast for
supplies of salt water, the errand often
occupying from three to four days in
its completion ; the water is carried in
long bamboos ; they have to pay the
coast tribes for the privilege of taking
water from their shores. Women and
boys do most of this laborious work.
A rough sample of salt is made by
building hugh fires on the beach, and
suddenly quenching them with salt
water ; a small quantity of dirty salt is
deposited among the ashes. Most of
the women on the islands have the
two top front teeth missing. On in-
quiring the reason of this deformity I
was informed it is the custom on the
islands to knock these teeth out with a
piece of wood as soon as the second
teeth are grown. Scar tattooing is
practised on all the islands. This
style of decoration must cause much
suffering ; cuts are made about rin.
long and deep in rows or groups
on the back, breast and shoulders;
these cuts are filled with clay to pre-
vent the edges uniting; they heal
slowly, leaving distinct scars or raised
lumps. I saw children suffering from
this form of barbarity; flies constantly
irritate the wounds, no effort is made
by the mothers to keep them off.
Some of the tribes practise«. skull-
moulding ; infants’ heads are bound
up to flatten the forehead and raise the
back of the skull to a conical point,
The natives have good voices and sing
very nicely ; their melodies are quaint
and pleasing. The missionaries have
adopted some of the native tunes for
use in the churches; native songs are
discouraged a.s they are most objection-
able compositions. The only musical
instrument I saw was native flutes made
out of bamboo, with three notes;
natives amuse themselves for hours
with this monotous music. Many of
the natives are clever weavers ; they
use pandanus leaf, split into threads,
for fine work, such as tapa cloth and
fancy baskets. Many patterns are
worked in, and patterns in brown
color are stamped on the tapa after
the cloth is made; this color is a
fast dye, obtained from a native root.
The floors of some of the rooms at the
missionary stations are covered with
pandanus cloth ; it is very strong and
durable; the color is french grey. The
natives are quite expert in making
temporary 1 carrying baskets of
cocoanut leaves, completing one in
a few minutes. An intoxicating drink,
called Kava, is made on some of
the islands from a species of pepper
tree, piper methesticum. The roots of
this plant are chewed by young people,
usually girls, who must have good
teeth and possess the art of chewing
the root “ dry.” The masticated root
is placed in a wooden bowl and covered
with water or cocoanut milk. The in-
fusion is ready to drink in . half an
hour. It is not fermented. The effect
is drowsiness, and lasts for about
two hours if only a moderate quantity
be taken. Its use is forbidden within
the missionaries’ sphere of influence,
and is not largely practised by the
heathens; its constant use produces
skin diseases. Kava drinking is not
practised so much on these Islands as
on the Fiji groun. As far as
I could judge, the islands are
fairly ' healthy for white adults;
malarial fever is the worst malady.
The climata and conditions are not
favourable for rearing white children,
indeed children are a great anxiety,
trouble and expense to their parents.
No suitable schools exist where they
can be sent, so parents have to either
procure a teacher or send their children
to one of the Australian Slates for
schooling. From the Banks group we
commence our homeward course, and
call at most of the islands and stations
referred, to again. The weather through-
out the trip has been delightful, no
wind and very little rain occuring dur-
ing the time. The trip has been most
enjoyable and instructive.
