

A RIDE IN QUEENSLAND.
I had been about a fortnight in
Brisbane; had seen all that was to
be seen in that rising, but still em-
bryo city ; had dined with the
Governor, assisted at a Masonic ban-
quet, attended a fancy ball —no trifle,
by the way, in tropical Australia; —•
made small excursions into the
neighbouring country; imbibed sun-
dry sherry cobblers at u Mason’s,”
the leading hotel; had visited the
Supreme Court during a trial, and
heard some decidedly hard-swearing
there; sat in the stranger’s gallery
of the Legislative Assembly, and
been duly edified by its display of
senatorial wisdom; had, in fact,
done all that was to be done, and
was beginning to find my enforced
idleness irksome, and my time hang
heavily on my hands. Queen Street,
the Regent Street of Brisbane, had
no further charms for me. I knew
its dusty length by heart; its hap-
hazard melange of brick and board-
ing, of plate-glass and canvas ; the
wild independence of its architec-
ture, and the heterogeneous collec-
tion of articles exposed for sale in
shop windows, had no more novelty
for me. I was sick of such sight-
seeing, weary of having nothing to
do, and impatiently waiting the
transaction of some business which
would render necessary a journey
“ Up the Country,” to view a sheep
station in which I was about to take
a share.
In this mood I strolled out one
morning into the botanical gardens
with my after-breakfast cigar. These
gardens occupy a pleasant site on
the banks of the river, are laid out
with some taste, and. offer a con-
vincing proof to the new-comer of
the great adaptabilities of the country
to the requirements of plants and
trees of various climes. The growths
of many lands may here be seen
side by side ; the plum, the pear, the
peach, the grape, the Guava, the
custard apple (heavenly fruit!) the
orange, the pomegranate, the banana,
the pine-apple, the tea, the coffee,
the cacao plant, cotton, sugar-cane,
arrowroot, and tobacco, flourish in
no unfriendly rivalry, and indicate
what may, and doubtless one
day will, be done in this country
when time, labour, and capital have
developed its resources.
After wandering some little time
through this Australian paradise,
getting up a sort of flirting acquaint-
ance with two of his Excellency’s
pet kangaroos, and watching lazily a
little steamer puffing her noisy way
up the river to Ipswich (what a
quaint, yet touching habit, we Eng-
lish have of naming our new homes
after the old ones far away !), the
Queensland sun began to come out
pretty strongly, and I sought shelter
from his rays in a magnificent grove
of bamboos which occupies the
centre of the gardens, here lighting
a fresh cigar to keep off the mos-
quitoes, and listening to the drowsy
hum of insect life, the musical groan-
ing of the bamboos as they bent
before the breeze, and the sounds of
distant labour from the town, I was
enjoying the dolcefar niente to my
heart’s content, when quick footsteps
rapidly approaching roused from me
a sort of semi-reverie. I looked up,
and saw my friend M •, the Co-
lonial Treasurer,
M , a cabinet minister, and
member of the Colonial Parliament,
was a representative man in more
senses ■ than one. A type of many
Australian colonists, twenty years
ago he had landed at Sydney, a raw
youth with his fortune to make.
Now, a man of property and stand


ing, leasing land equal in extent to
a third of an English county, num-
bering his flocks and herds by thou-
sands, possessing a capital country
house within a few miles of Brisbane,
the husband of a charming wife, and
father of a promising family. Still
young, he could well look back on
his past life with pride, and forward
with hope, but alas, —
The best laid schemes of mice and men,
Gang aft agley.
Within a few months of our merry
greetings in these gardens, the Angel
of Death smote poor Mi , almost
in his wife’s arms, and bore him.
from his earthly treasure, to that un-
discovered country we must all one
day visit.
But on this occasion there was no
shadow of what was to come; my
friend drew near with a bright eye
and a springy step —“ What are you
doing, and what do you intend to
do ?”
“ Nothing,” I replied, “for I have
nothing to do. I am waiting for a
letter, and on receiving it, shall pro-
bably start up the country.”
“ Why wait for this letter? come
with me, and see something of the
bush. Parliament is up—the coun-
cil has just had its last sitting for the
season. I make the round of my
stations in a day or two. Come up
to Eiverstown to-morrow. Sleep at
my house, and we will start the next
day. Bring your wife with you, and
leave her to mourn with mine till
we return.”
The offer chimed in with my hu-
mour ; I packed up my a swag,”
anglice , valise, that evening, and next
morning, shipping wife and horse on
board the Ipswich steamer, left Bris-
bane for my friend’s house.
Merrily we paddled off from the
wharf, and rounding the grassy bluff
on which stands the governor’s
house, the white marble of its walls
gleaming brightly oat of a verdant
back-ground, quickly left it and the
city behind us : the town passed, the
picturesque banks of the stream were
thickly dojtted with the country
houses of Ithe more prosperous of
the townsfolk, vineyards stretched
along the slopes and gardens, gay
with brightest flowers, and the vivid
green of the graceful banana decked
either shore ; to those succeeded the
cottages and clearings of the set-
tlers, and many were our stoppages
as their boats came alongside with
passengers or cargo; but these soon
became scarcer and more scarce, till
at last the primeval forest cast its
shadows over the narrowing stream,
and the lonely cabin of some colo-
nising pioneer broke, but at distant
intervals, the silence and the soli-
tude.
About half way on our journey,
we halted to coal. Here the mineral
crops out from both banks, the
seam being cut by the river. The
miners tunnel inwards from the
water, and both coaling and mining
is cheap and easy. Our stock of
fuel replenished, we push on, and
soon pass a “ boiling down ” estab-
lishment, at this time not at work,
but small mountains of whitened
bones and an odour perhaps best
undescribed, testified most emphati-
cally to the hecatombs of beef and
mutton which had there been con-
verted into tallow. From here to
our destination was not far. The
whistle blew a shrill scream of warn-
ing, we steamed up a long reach,
rounded a bend, and my friend’s
place was before us. We pulled up
beside a rough pier, where he and
his family awaited us, and landed to
a hearty welcome,
“ Settling in Queensland must be
an extremely pleasant and profitable
speculation,” was my thought as we
passed from the river bank up the
park-like slope that lay before
M <’s house, and my eye took in
the many forms of substantial com-
fort which he had gathered around
him.
The building stood in grounds of
some three hundred acres, from
which the thick undergrowth, or


“ scrub,” had been almost entirely
cleared away, only leaving here and
there an occasional thicket; the
heavy timber was also in course of
being greatly thinned out, but suffi-
cient trees were left to give beauty
to the landscape and the necessary
shade. On the left, as we proceeded
to the house, was a large garden well
stocked with fruit, flowers, and
vegetables ; to the right was a
cotton-field of considerable propor-
tions, but this had been planted, as
I afterwards discovered, more in
deference to the “ cotton cry ” than
from any real design of practised
cultivation of the plant. M——
was a squatter, pure et simple , one
of the numerous class who believe
in nothing but wool as a paying
industrial product in Australia. And
so the poor cotton plants were left
to flourish at their own sweet will,
to bear witness, by the rank luxu-
riousness of their growth,- to the
fitness of the soil and climate for
them, while their snowy pods burst
unheeded and ungathered ; and the
fitful breezes blew the feathered
seeds to fall and germinate as fate
might please. In the rear of the
house were the farmyard and build-
ings, populous and noisy with
poultry, turkeys, geese, and pigs;
beyond this, again, a paddock, in
which a few sleek cattle, horses,
and sheep were grazing, or cluster-
ing in the shade.
M ——, not content with being
the architect of his own fortune, had
designed his house, and decidedly
had been more successful than many
amateur builders. The edifice pro-
per occupied three sides of a hollow
square. Entering under the broad
verandah which girded it, we passed
through a passage, with a spacious
■drawing-room and dining-room on
either side, into a large and lofty
hall, lighted from above, into which
opened the various other apartments
of the ground floor ; a broad stair-
case, or rather ladder, of polished
wood led to the upper story and the
bed-rooms, entrance to which was
given by a railed gallery extending
all round the house. The hall,
pannelled in dark cedar, was a
delightful feature of the building,
and from the height of the roof,
and the numerous doors that sur-
rounded it, cool even in the hottest
day. It was the common room of
the family. Here also were held
the balls, parties, and private thea-
tricals, in which M delighted.
Here, too, was the justice room
upon occasion ; and here the mas-
ter of the household, mindful of the
Giver of his good things, collected
his family and retainers for weekly
prayer. Leaving the hall by an-
other door, we entered a large yard
with a splendid young Moreton
Bay pine in the centre, beyond it a
row of stables and offices formed
the rear face of the square, and
completed the plan of an admirable
dwelling.
After wandering about, and ad-
miring the grounds, the garden, the
pigs, the sheep, the poultry, the
cattle, and the horses, with which
last my own steed had not scraped
acquaintance, we returned to the
house, and dinner over wiled away
the time with music, singing, and
the like, till the hour of retiring,
which, after the ladies had left us,
we delayed a little over a chatty
pipe and glass, but still parted be-
times to regain strength for our
next day’s ride.
The dawn had broken brightly
next day, when I awoke. I arose,
and drawing the curtains of my
window, looked out. The morning,
was fresh, and almost cold; the
dew-drops glistened on the lawn ; a
thick fog shrouded the river, which,
however, the rays of the sun were
rapidly dispersing. The “ laughing
jackass” was making the woods
echo with his quaint note, the
cockatoos were screaming from a
field hard by, whole flocks of dainty
little paraquets were skimming hither
and thither along the grass, and


pert magpies hopped about jerkily
after their manner, whistling melo-
diously while picking up the early
but unfortunate worm. We were
soon gathered round the cheerful
breakfast table, the gentlemen in
travelling order, i.e ,, boots and
breeches, as to the nether man ;
and about noon, after parting from
our respective Ariadnes, started on
our first day’s stage. The party
consisted of M-——, his brother,
who was also his superintendent,
and the present writer.
About two miles from Riverstown
our route took us through Ipswich,
a neat and thriving town; its former
name was “Limestone,” given it by
the convicts in the penal times, and
carrying out the promise of its ori-
ginal appellation. The houses are
mostly built of that material, offering
a striking contrast to the wooden
shanties, almost universally met
with. We were soon beyond the
town, proceeding along a broad but
rough “ corduroy ” road, formed of
trees laid transversely side by side
and gravelled. The traffic from the
up-country settlements and stations
is great; the soil through which the
road passes for the most part is of a
tenacious clay, that when flooded—-
which it is very often—is heavy to a
degree, so that without this rough
and ready causeway, carts and wag-
gons would be bogged beyond re-
demption. Evidences of the dis-
astrous floods, to which the colony
is too frequently subject, were on
every hand in the shape of collec-
tions of straw and drift-wood, lodged
in the forks of trees some twelve or
fifteen feet above the ground, with
now and then the carcase of some
luckless sheep, rotting and bleaching
to a skeleton, in their midst. The
railway, however, which these go-a-
head denizens of a colony fifteen
years old were already hard at work
on, was soon to give a practicable
road at all seasons, when the “ cor-
duroy ” arrangement would sink into
oblivion, and great were the specu-
lations of the Colonial 'Treasurer and
his brother as to the influence of
this work on the fortunes of their
adopted country,
Our first incident of travel was an
encounter with a hapless “new
chum ” who was in great grief ; he
had evidently just arrived in the
colony, and was resplendent in an
emigrant’s kit imported direct from
Piccadilly. His gaiters were a bril-
liant yellow ; his knickerbockers and
Norfolk shirt still showed the creases
of their folds, and his pith helmet
was fresh from the shop in the Opera
Colonnade. He had a led horse,
which bore a pair of saddle-bags, a
waterproof bed, and an elaborate
canteen that glistened in the new-
ness of its tinnery. In this guise
the plucky and independent Briton
was on his way to his friends, with
the vaguest idea as to where to find
them, but having dismounted to
drink at a stream which crossed the
track, his packhorse had broken
away, and would not suffer himself
to be caught, while the beast he be-
strode showed an equal disinclina-
tion to be mounted ; each time the
foot neared the stirrup, the brute
would edge off to the right; and as
the horse was tall and his owner
short, the struggle was sufficiently
ludicrous; we played the part of the
good Samaritan so far as to help him
to the back of his steed, when he
started after his saddle-bags, which
were now rapidly disappearing in
the direction we had left.
The Colonial Treasurer, soon after
this little episode, cantered off to in-
spect the railway works, and we
followed his lead. We found the
embankments progressing satisfac-
torily, and following their course for
some little time, pulled up at a way-
side inn to bait our horses and to
lunch. The proprietor of this hos-
telry and his family were in a state
of some excitement. It appeared
that the evening before, a party of
navvies had visited him on a drink-
ing bout; these gentry, having sue


ceeded in getting excessively drunk,
left for their camp, but when half way
there, feeling an accession of thirst,
decided to quench it in more brandy.
On returning to the inn they found
its doors closed, their host in bed
and disinclined to open them;
whereupon they incontinently broke
in doors and windows, helped them-
selves, and finally retired without
paying either for the damage or
their drink. The language of the
despoiled landlord was more expres-
sive than elegant, but he was in
some measure appeased by an assu-
rance from the minister, that a body
of police should be immediately dis-
tributed along the line, who, if un-
able to enforce payment for what
had been done, would prevent like
depredations for the future.
The day was on the wane when
we left this for our night’s resting-
place, and we pushed on briskly.
The hills of the “ Little Liverpool ”
range lay before us, and we reached
their summit as the day was declin-
ing ; from whence the eye ranged
over a vast expanse of sombre
foliage, to where the great divid-
ing range loomed in the dim dis-
tance. Beneath us was the smiling val-
ley, and the hamlet where we were
to pass the night. A stream like a
silver thread, wound along the plain,
which was dotted with sheep and
cattle. Presently the sun fell behind
the sea of dusky green, the night
grew rapidly dark, the stars came
out in all their southern brilliance,
and the light of Laidley shone a
bright welcome as we rode up to
the inn, and dismounted at its door.
Here were other wayfarers, and our
party at dinner was almost large.
“ Sublime tobacco,” and a glass or
two of brandy and water, crowned
the repast, and after some talk on
sheep, horses, the markets, and
such like colonial topics, each man
sought his bed.
Next morning we were early in
the saddle, with a long day’s ride
before us. The swampy grounds of
the lower country had disappeared
with the increased elevation; but
our route was still through fine open
forest, chiefly of the iron bark tree,
with intervening patches of cypress
pine and casuarina scrub, the shelter
of wild herds, and the haunt of in-
numerable kangaroos and wallabies,
whose tracks were thick across the
sandy road. Occasionally we crossed
a brook finding its way down from
the hills, or wound along a shadowy
ravine where the tree fern and the
“ bottle ” tree grew in great abun-
dance. The monotomy of lonely
travel would now and then be broken
by a train of bullock drays, laden
with wool from some up-country
station, here plodding their weary
way along, there halting in some pic-
turesque encampment: these trains
are commonly four or five months
on the road. Or we.would over-
take a party of emigrants bound for
the interior, with ruddy faces still
unbrowned by the Australian sun ;
their wives and children occupying
the solitary cart, pushed high up on
a heap of pots and pans and blankets,
and gazing with wide-mouthed won-
der at all the novelties of their new
home ; or a couple of stock drivers,
brown and thin, in search of stray
cattle, would greet us as they passed ;
their . stock-whips long as a lasso,
which, when cracked, sounded like
rifle shots through the woods.
Sometimes we left the ordinary
road for the telegraph track, a broad
path some eighty feet wide, which
cuts its way, straight as an arrow or
a Roman road, through every ob-
stacle, and, therefore, not always
practicable for travellers.
Our noonday halt was at a place
rejoicing in the name of “ Bigg’s
Camp so called from having been
the rendezvous of one of the earlier
squatters and explorers before driv-
ing his herds over the Liverpool
Range, at whose feet it lies. Here
there were now a snug homestead
and country inn, green, grassy
meadows, and a limpid brook ; alto-


gether, one of the prettiest places I
had yet seen in the country. Here,
too, I discovered that my new
English saddle had galled my horse’s
back. A word of caution to any
intending emigrant who may chance
to read these pages : —Take nothing
in the shape of saddlery ; let no ar-
tificer in pigskin, however crafty,
tempt you ; you will find his wares a
mockery, a delusion, and a snare;
in short, all equipments may be dis-
pensed with, and may be got better
and cheaper in the country. The
■only articles with which a man need
provide himself are boots, large
roomy boots; all else is mere vanity
and vexation of spirit. I speak from
■experience, experto crede.
Having doctored up my saddle
and my horse’s back as well as
possible, we commenced the ascent
of the Liverpool Range, by a road
which is certainly as steep as man or
beast could desire. While passing
up the lower part of the slope, my
unsophisticated eye was struck by
the sight of numberless trunks of
trees, that lay on each side of the
road. It looked as if some terrible
tornado had sometime passed that
way, tearing up everything in its
course. On inquiry, however, these
turned out to be nothing more than
discarded drags. The ingenious
waggoner from the table land above
fells a tree, and fastens it to the
tail of his dray before starting down
hill, and thus prevents the chance
of dray or team getting on a little
too fast, and tumbling over the
cliffs ; at the foot of the hill the men
cast off this primitive contrivance,
which they are compelled to remove
to a certain distance from the road,
and the accumulations of years have
formed an enormous abattis, whose
proportions are always increasing.
Gradually, and with painful effort,
we ascended, the eye sweeping over
ravines and valleys, and the wooded
landscape, the view changing with
every turn, till at last, after many a
halt, we scaled the height, and stood
on the table-land. Here, two thou-
sand feet above the sea, we breathed
a fresher and a cooler air, and our
jaded horses stepped out with a
brisker pace. A ride of three or
four miles through an open forest,
and beneath finer trees than we had
yet seen, and we emerged on the
grazing ground par exeellence of the
colony, if not of Australia, the
Darling Downs.
Noble plains, stretching as far and
farther than the eye can reach,
covered knee high with luxuriant
grass and herbage, gay with bright
patches of red or yellow flowers and
the scarlet vetch, while here and
there, in shady clumps, the weeping
myall with its laburnum-like blossom,
the feathery acacia, and the bricka-
low with its leaves of silvery green,
break the monotony of the vast ex-
panse, and gives a park-like charac-
ter to the scene.
These magnificent pastures are
the squatter’s beau ideal! here many
a man, from the rising ground on
which his station stands, can see a
hundred thousand sheep feeding
around him, all his own. The lucky
explorers and bold hearts who first
sat down with their herds on these
then untrodden lands are now the
magnates of Australia; from this
verdant and abounding carpeting
sprung the marble palaces of Syd-
ney, where Dr. Dunmore Lang’s
quondam “ breechless Highlander,”
and many others of equal humble
origin, now live at home at ease.
Do not, gentle reader, imagine
from this that it is easy to go and
do likewise. No: those chances
are past. A station on the Dar-
ling Downs is not to be had now
except at a price whose amount
alone would place the man able to
give it far above the necessity of
labour.
But our journey was now near
over. Our way lay across these
splendid downs to Eastbrook, the
residence of a wealthy squatter and
owner of the land over which, in the


purple light of evening, we now
rode past flocks slowly feeding their
way to the evening fold, each with
their listless shepherd and his dog
behind. Our tired horses began to
sniff the stable, and broke into a
willing canter. Soon Eastbrook head
station and its outbuildings came in
sight, and speedily beneath its hos-
pitable roof we were enjoying well-
earned rest after our two days’ ride..
w. s. c.
LINES
On a well-remembered sentiment once uttered by an English landlord, who has since:
disposed of his Irish estates, to an Irish squire, who has no intention of following his-
example.
“ It is vwin to attempt to reconcile the Gelt to the Saxon.”
“ Ungrateful race ! with hearts you ne’er can win—
Habits you ne’er can mend—a hostile creed,
Which dubs you “ heretic ” —-calls progress, sin—
Which severs Irishmen—and claims the lead,
For “priests, in politicswhile, as of yore,
A “ kingdom in this world ” its prelates covet sore.
“ Saxon and Celt can ne’er be reconciled !
The attempt is useless! Wherefore waste your days,
Amongst a thankless clan, in efforts mild
These Irish tenants to endear, or raise
Such grovellers from their slough of wilful dirt,
Scarce one of whom to please you would a nerve exert?”
Thus speaks some mentor, with complacent air
Of one who “ knows the world,” and, therefore, sneers
With cynical composure at the care
Which fills the breast, and on the brow appears,
Of earnest lord of thankless Irish soil,
Who seeks his tenants’ good with unremitting toil.
But what that lord’s reply ? “ / have a Lord
Who finds me often thankless, hostile too,
Eager to follow for some mean reward
A rival lead, or join some worldly crew.
Shall patience and long-suffering be unknown
By me, who both will need when at my Sovereign’s throne ?”
“ I knew not that a Methodist was here !
A man who knows the world should be the last ”
(Retorts the cynic, with a smiling sneer) —
“To use enthusiast’s jargon ! Prythee cast
Such speeches from your lips, and from your mind
Such thoughts expel, nor deem a friend’s advice unkind i”


And in this modern world ’tis ever so,
Albeit men shrink from open unbelief:
To morning church respectably they go,
And to some favoured poor vouchsafe relief: —
This—all per custom ; but religious zeal
They scout as “ vulgar,” and true faith would scorn to feel!
And what is faith ? Believing Him who loved
That we might learn to love our race as well!
Not those alone who loved Him back were proved
The objects of His care ! He would compel
A foe at last remorseful tears to shed,
By heaping coals of loving fire upon his head!
Is this philosophy too tame for man,
Whose instinct is to vanquish and compel
Ths e who resist his will ? In sooth, a plan
Which vanquishes by patient love would well
Deserve from lofty minds a trial fair,
While cravens shirk the attempt in indolent despair!
