

3 6?c 7 1.
THE
NEW CONSTITUTION
THE LABOUR PARTY.
MEANING OF THE CHANGES.
HANDWORKERS AND BRAINWORKERS.
LABOUR PROGRAMME AND PROSPECTS.
SIDNEY WEBB.
THE proposal to reorganise the Labour Party, formulated by its national
executive, and circulated to the constituent societies for their consideration,
may well prove an event of far-reaching political importance. Instead
of a sectional and somewhat narrow group, what is aimed at is now a
national Party, open to anyone of the 16,000,000 electors agreeing with the Party
programme.
The Labour Party, formally established in 1900, has hitherto been, essentially,
a federation of Trade Unions (mainly the larger ones, with over 2,000,000
membership); three relatively small Socialist Societies (with less than 50,000
membership); Trades Councils and Local Labour Parties in some dozens of
towns; and a few’ other organisations, such as co-operative societies and the
Women’s Labour League. Its first big success was achieved at the General
Election of 1906, w’hen 50 Labour candidates went to the poll, and 29 were
elected to Parliament, where they at once formed a separate Party, with its own
officers and whips. At the last General Election, in December, 1910, 42 candidates
of the Party were successful. The “Labour Members” have been, to the extent
of about four-fifths, the secretaries or other salaried officials of Trade Unions,
whilst the remainder have been members of Socialist societies belonging, as they
are proud to claim, to the “ intellectual proletariat.” The great majority of the
Labour Members are, however, definitely and avowedly Socialist in their opinions,
and the programme of the Party, as declared at successive Party Conferences,
has become one of distinctively Socialist character. This is, of course, only
parallel with a corresponding evolution in the Trades Union Congress.
What is now proposed is a Party organised on the double basis of national
societies and constituency organisations. The Trade Unions and Socialist Societies
will remain as they are, with their rights of representation and of voting power
in exact proportion to numerical membership. But side by side with them in the
Party Conference will sit the delegates of the various Parliamentary constituencies


in which the Party has a local organisation. This is not a complete novelty, as
Trades Councils and Local Labour Parties have always been admitted to affiliation,
but their numbers have so far been small and their influence has not been consider-
able. It is now proposed to get Local Labour Parties organised in as many British
constituencies as possible. The formation of three or four hundred is looked for
within the next three months.
A more important proposal is the introduction, alongside the constituent bodies,
of individually enrolled members. This, too, is not entirely a novelty. Energetic
Local Labour Parties, like those at Barrow and Woolwich, have always admitted
individual members, but usually only as associate members, sometimes only on
ward committees. In view of the prospective doubling of the electorate, and
especially of the admission of 6,000,000 women, five-sixths of them married, it
becomes plain that a much more direct appeal to the electors as such is
indispensable for electoral success. The great majority of married women are not
eligible for membership of any Trade Union. It is, too, unreasonable practically
to exclude from the Party all the men who do not enter through the narrow
gate of Trade Unionism or that of membership of a definitely Socialist propagandist
body. Hence provision is to be made, in every constituency, for a separate
section of individually enrolled men, and another of individually enrolled women,
who subscribe to the Party constitution and programme, and contribute a
minimum of a shilling a year (for men) and sixpence a year (for women). These
sections of individual members will have representatives on the local Executive
Committee, at the Party Conference, and even on the National Executive. It is
hoped to enrol in this way, and to enlist in the service of the Party, not only
many hundreds of thousands of the new working-class electors, but also to
attract many men and women of the shopkeeping, manufacturing, and professional
classes who are dissatisfied with the old political parties.
A third feature is the special appeal to the 6,000,000 women electors. The
Labour Party has, indeed, always been open to women on the same terms as to
men, on a basis of complete equality. It is a ludicrous blunder —one into which
more than one newspaper has fallen —to suppose that the Labour Party has
hitherto included no women, except the members of the Women’s Labour League
and the relatively few women members of the three Socialist Societies. The
Party has always comprised quite as large a proportion of the women Trade
Unionists as of the men. The very extensive Workers’ Union, with over
200,000 members, includes a very high proportion of women. The Northern
Counties Weavers’ Amalgamation finds two-thirds of its 200,000 membership
among women; and the Amalgamated Association of Card and Blowing Room
Operatives and Ringspinners reckons only one-tenth of its membership of 56,000
to be men. Out of the 2,500,000 affiliated members of the Labour Party, it is
probable that something like 250,000 are women, being certainly more than half
of all the organised women wage earners. It is true that, owing to the legal
formalities necessary before political action can be taken by a Trade Union, the
National Federation of Women Workers, the largest exclusively female Trade
Union, is not yet affiliated to the Party; nor are several of the smaller
Women’s Unions.
The Labour Party has so far not laid itself out to make much use of women, and
has never had any woman on its National Executive. Henceforth strenuous efforts
will be made to enrol individual women as members of the Local Labour Parties;
they will have their separate sections, and be secured representation on the local
executives; and —unlike anything done by either the Liberal or the Unionist Party
organisations —provision is made for there being always at least four women members
of the National Executive itself-
These proposals of change have involved the solution of the difficult problem of
how to get the National Executive elected by the Party Conference, so as to ensure
the new elements being represented. The Conference has lately set its face against
any division of the delegates into sections for voting purposes; and the Trade Unions
cling to “voting by card,” wdiich ensures the supremacy of the extensive member-
ships of the larger Unions. Hence it is proposed that the Conference should always
vote as a whole, and always “by card.” But it is proposed that the new National


Executive should be elected from three lists of candidates, eleven from the nominees
of the Trade Unions and other Societies, five from the nominees of the constituency
organisations in which the individually enrolled men will find a place, and four from
a list of women nominated by all the constituent bodies indiscriminately. Thus,
whilst the whole National Executive will be elected by the Conference itself, voting
together, the votes will be cast for candidates on three sectional lists.
More important, however, than any of these changes in the constitution is
the change of spirit that has inspired them. The Labour Party, which has
never been formally restricted to manual-working wage-earners, is now to be
publicly thrown open to all workers “by hand or by brain.” Its declared object
is to be, not merely the improvement of the conditions of the wage-earner, but
“to secure for the producers, by hand or by brain, the full fruits of their industry
and the most equitable distribution thereof that may be possible upon the
basis of the common ownership of the means of production, and the best
obtainable system of popular administration and control of each industry or
service.” The only persons to be excluded (and that, of course, only by inference)
are the unoccupied and unproductive recipients of rents and dividends —the
so-called “ idle rich ” —whom it is interesting to find “ The Times ” editorially
declaring to be of no use to the community. The Labour Party of the future,
in short, is to be a Party, of the producers, whether manual workers or brain
workers, associated against the private owners of land, and capital as such. Its
policy of “ common ownership ” brings it, as a similar evolution brought John
Stuart Mill —to use his own words in the “ Autobiography ” —“ decidedly under
the general designation of Socialist. But it is a Socialism which is no more
specific than a definite repudiation of the individualism that characterised all the
political parties of the past generation, and that still dominates the House of
Commons. This declaration of the Labour Party leaves it open to choose from
time to time whatever forms of common ownership, from the co-operative store
to the nationalised railway, and whatever forms of popular administration and
control of industry, from national guilds to ministries of employment and
municipal management, may, in particular cases, commend themselves.
What the Labour Party at present means by its Socialism is revealed in the.
remarkable pamphlet which it has published on its “ After the War Programme,”
setting forth in a dozen detailed resolutions passed at the Manchester Party
Conference exactly what it wishes done with the railways, the canals, the coal mines,
the banking system, the demobilisation of the army and munition workers, the
necessary rehousing of the people, the measures to be taken for preventing the
occurrence of unemployment, the improvement of agriculture, the taxation to be
imposed to pay for the war, the reform of our educational system, and what not.
The prospective candidate for Parliament, and, indeed, anyone who cares to know
what the politically minded workman is really thinking, should send twopence
for this pamphlet to the secretary of the Labour Party, at 1, Victoria Street, S.W.
Opiniofis will naturally differ as to some of these sweeping proposals, but no
one of any education can safely denounce them as unpracticable or despise them
as ill-informed. It is, indeed, one of the claims of the Labour Party that science
is on their side; that it is their proposals, not those of the Liberals or those
of the Unionists, that nowadays receive the general support of the “ orthodox ”
economists; and that, as a matter of fact, it is essentially their proposals to
which every Minister of State, when he is brought up against a difficult problem
of administration, has actually to turn —and then to lose his nerve, emasculate what
would have got over his difficulties, and produce an abortion which has the
advantages neither of individualism nor of collectivism 1
But the programme of the Labour Party is, and will probably remain, loss
important (except for educating the political loaders of other parties) than the spirit
underlying the programme, that spirit which gives any party its soul. The Labour
Party stands essentially for revolt against the inequality of circumstance that
degrades and brutalises and disgraces our civilisation. It abhors and repudiates the
unscientific and immoral doctrine that the competitive struggle for the means of life
is, in human society, cither inevitable or requisite for the survival of the fittest; it
declares, indeed, in full accord with science, that competition produces degradation
and death, whilst it is conscious and deliberate co operation which is productive of


life and progress. It is unreservedly democratic in its conviction —here also fortified
by political science—that only by the widest possible participation in power and the
most generally spread consciousness of consent can any civilised community attain
either its fullest life or its utmost efficiency. But it recognises that no mere
rightness of aspiration or morality of purpose can in themselves accomplish their
ends ; and that for the achievement of results knowledge and the application of the
scientific method is required,- notably in the science of society, for the further study
and endowment of which it presses. And finally the Labour Party has faith in
internationalism (as distinguished from the characteristically Liberal cosmopoli-
tanism). It repudiates all “ Imperialism ”or desire for domination over other races.
It pleads for the right of each people to live its own life, and make its own specific
contribution to the world in its own way, recognising, indeed, no one “ superior race,”
but “ reciprocal superiorities ” among all races. It is not without significance that
the National Executive of the Labour Party has included, as a fundamental object of
the Party, the establishment of a Federation or League of Nations for such
international legislation as may prove possible. No other political party has yet
nailed this flag to its mast.
What will be the upshot of it all ? How far the Labour Party can get its new
organisation effectively going, and its three or four hundred candidates actually in
the field, before Mr. Lloyd George springs the general election on the country
may well be doubted. In any case, a “ Khaki Election,” with the briefest of
electoral campaigns, and as regards half the electorate at the very first time of
voting, does not afford the most promising opportunity for a now Party. On the
other hand, the country is “on the jump.” Old habits of thought are broken up.
The gigantic problems for solution make the worn-out platitudes inherited from
Gladstone and Disraeli seem unsubstantial. There will be no lack of young and
enthusiastic candidates of education and experience to come to the aid of the
Trade Union officials in upholding the Labour Party’s banner. A political landslide —
especially now that the co-operators are throwing themselves into politics —is not
impossible. But it is, for the Labour Party, not a matter of winning the next or any
particular election. The Labour Party is, without doubt, to-day the party of
inspiration and promise. To-morrow it may well prove to be the party of the future,
destined, perhaps, to play as large a part in the political history of the twentieth
century as the Liberal Party did in that of the nineteenth. —Reprinted by permission
from “ The Observer ,” October 21st, 1917.
Further copies can be obtained at the rate of Id. each; fid. per dozen;
Is. fid. per 50; 2s. fid. per 100; £1 per 1,000, carriage paid, from
THE LABOUR PARTY, 1, Victoria Street, LONDON, S.W. 1.
Co-operative Printing Society. Limited, Tudor Street. New Bridge Street. E.C, I—ll/1917.
