

RAINFALL
WATER CONSEKTATION
. NEW SOUTH WALES,
F. S. PEPPERCORNE, C.E.
:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, 374, GEORGE STREET.
1881.




RAINFALL
WATEE COISEETATION
NEW SOUTH WALES,
F. S. PEPPERCORNS, C.E.
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, 374, GEORGE STREET,
1881.




ih ]f|aii|fiill anil Coit^cruatiim
(IN NEW SOUTH WALES).
BY F. S. PEPPERCORNE, C.E.
Contemporary accounts of an early date since the foundation of the
Colony of New South Wales, in 1788, speak of the great distress
and privation to which the early colonists were often reduced for
want of rain, but it would be a wearisome task to recapitulate the
numerous droughts by which the colony has been afflicted since that
period, and which appear to have alternated with a certain (or rather
uncertain) degree of periodicity, with seasons of excessive rainfall,
accompanied with destructive floods in the various river basins,
particularly on those whose embouchures are on the eastern coast of
New South Wales.
The great drought of 1838-9 was succeeded by nine years of
abundant rains, with fiequent floods, so that during that period the
colony suffered from a plethora of rain, and the floods were almost
as injurious as the drought that preceded them, so much so that on
the alluvial flats of the Hawkesbury, which have always been
specially affected by floods, fears were at one time entertained that
the superabundance of the watery element would put a stop, for a
time, to all cultivation.
But these fears were dispelled in 1849, when there occurred a
drought of unusual severity, and in that year the rain guage at the
South Hea l registered only 21'5 inches for the twelve months,
instead of its usual average of about 50 inches.
The most important point, however, respecting the Australian
rainfall, is the least annual fall in a series of years, together with its
distribution at different periods of the year, and the greatest con-
tinuous fall during shoit periods of time. With respect to the last,
Mr. Jevons has shown in his “ Essay on the climate of Australia,”
that 20 per cent, of the rainfall at Sydney has been in quantities of
more than 2 inches in one day, and this statement, however start-
ling it may appear, has been verified by the published records of
rainfall extending over many years.


Thus, in three days of May, 1840, 10 inches of rain, and in four
days of February, 1843, 11 -6 inches fell. On August 13th of the
same year, a fall of no less than 5‘44 inches took place. On June
24th, 1846, 4 inches of rain fell, and on January sth, 1848, there
were 5 inches of rainfall. On March 9th of the same year there
was a fall of no less than B*7 inches, and in the very dry year of
1849, there was a fall of 2-44 inches in one day. In nine days
ending April 6th, 1855, 17 inches of rain fell, and on one of those
days there was a fall of 5'66 inches, with no less than 2 inches in
one hour! In three days of May, 6*7 inches fell. In April, 1861,
24 inches fell, of which 12 5 inches fell in two days. In two days
of November, 1856, 8 inches fell, and on May 26th, 1858, there
was a fall of 6 inches. In June, 1864, 16 inches of rain fell, of
which 12 5 inches fell in two days. In April of the same year,
17 5 inches fell. In February, 1868, 15 inches fell, of which 8
inches fell in two days, and in 1869, on March 19th, 4*5 inches fell,
while in three days of May in the same year, S - 7 inches of rain fell.
The greatest rainfall occurred in April, 1841, when the rainguage
registered 20*12 inches in twenty-four hours. And again, on Octo-
ber 15th, 1844, when 20*41 inches fell in the same time, and of this
enormous quantity no less than than 5*4 inches fell in two hours,
which is the largest amount ever recorded as falling in one day at
Sydney.
The greatest annual rainfall was in 1860, when it amounted to
82*81 inches, while in 1862 only 24 inches of rain fell. In 1849
the fall amounted to 21*5 inches, which is the smallest amount of
rainfall in any one year up to 1880, which was also a dry year, as
the rain guage registered only 29*52 inches at Sydney, while the
previous year of 1879 showed 63*20 inches, or 33*68 inches more
than what fell in 1880.
The average annual rainfall at Sydney for the last twenty-two
years has been 51*46 inches, and all these figures show that in
comparison with many countries in Europe, the eastern coast of
New South Wales is by no means deficient in rainfall.
Thus, at London, the fall does not average more than 24 inches,
or if we take the whole basin of the Thames, which extends over
6,160 square miles, it does not exceed 27 inches, or less by 24 inches
than what falls at Sydney on an average of years. And if we take
the whole area of England, the annual average rainfall does not ex-
ceed 32 inches ; although in ( 1872, which was an exceptionally wet
year all over Europe, the total rainfall amounted to 46*56 inches.
In Ireland the average yearly rainfall may be taken at 38 inches,
although Sir Robert Kane assumes that 36 inches represent the
average annual rainfall all over Ireland, of which 12 inches pass to
the sea. In France the annual rainfall may be taken at 31 inches,
while in Spain it does not amount to more than 22 or 23 inches.


We have no accurate means of knowing what the annual average
rainfall may be over the whole area of New South Wales, although
the rainfall maps which accompany Mr. H. C. Russell’s annual
reports of rain and river observations, contain a large amount of
useful information on this head. But what we want to know, as
Mr. Russell observes, is the rainfall all over the colony, so that we
may see the limits of local droughts, and when and under what
circumstances they may recur.
It appears from the rainfall map of 1879, which was a year of
abundant rains, that the greatest fall took place in the vicinity of
Cape St. George, near Jervis Bay, where it amounted to 89 05 inches,
and that the least fall was at a place called Cobham Lake, to the
north and west of the Darling, where it amounted to only 4-81
inches. The season of 1880 was generally a dry one, particularly
in that part of the coast extending from Cape St. George to New-
castle, which formed a kind of dry belt, while there was abundant
rain bcth to the north and to the south of each place.
The greatest rainfall in 1880 was at Port Macquarie, where it
reached 63 75 inches, and the least was at an inland station, named
“ Thorndale,” where only 212 inches were recorded. At Sydney
the annual rainfall was only 29-52 inches, being 33 68 inches less
than it was in the previous year of 1879, But at the inland sta-
tion of Currajong Heights, distant 36 miles from the coast, it
amounted to 43 99 inches, and at the Cordeaux river, inland, the rain
gnage registered 46 64 inches, or 17-12 more than what fell at
Sydney.
Mr. Russell observes that the rainfall of 1880, in the northern
districts of which Liverpool Plains may be taken as the centre,
amounted to from two-thh’ds to three-fourths of the average ; that tow-
ards the west it amounted to the average, and in some places to more
than the average, while to the south-west the supply gradually fell
off towards the Lower Darling, where the fall again rose to two-
thirds of the average.
Along the course of the Murray there was a better supply, in
many cases equal to the average, and along the south coast also
the fall was equal to the average. But north of Cape St. George
the quantity fell off, and Sydney, with little more than one-half the
average fall, was in the centre of a very dry district, which was not,
however, of any great extent, scarcely more than 60 or 70 miles in
any direction.
It has been shown by Mr. Russell that the water passing down
the River Darling at Bourke, represents only a small fraction of the
annual rainfall, which is averaged at 20-74 inches, and that of the
whole of the drainage of upwards of 110,000 square miles, not
more than one-eightieth part of the rainfall on this large area passed
down the Darling in 1880.


The width of the river at Bourke is 180 feet, and the velocity,
when in flood, is rather less than one mile per hour, and of the
20'74 inches of rainfall only of an inch (or part) represents
all the water that passed Bourke during the year.
In many respects the river system of the Darling is a peculiar
one, as its basin embraces an enormous extent of flat country through
which the river takes its slow course. And during floods, it has
been observed, that the river water disappears very rapidly, and seems,
it is said, “as if the bottom of the river had been tapped, and the
water let out somewhere,” The only feasible explanation of
this phenomenon appears to be, that the river, having so little fall,
the water in flood time percolates through the loose soil forming the
banks and bed, and passes away underground to the bed rock, where
it forms a vast natural reservoir of pure water, protected from all
evaporation, and the value of such an unfailing supply of good water
can only be properly estimated by the adjacent stockholders and
occupiers of the back sections of the Darling.
On this point Mr. Russell observes : “It therefore seems im-
possible to doubt that an unlimited supply of water passes away
underground, more in fact than would suffice to make the whole of
the western districts a well-watered country ; and all that is wanted
to make this supply available, is a judicious use of the ‘ boring t'od.”’
(Report of 1881, p. 5).
This has now been done, and it appears from the Mining Report
of 1880, that an important discovery of Artesian water has been
made in the flat country between the Darling and the Pai'oo rivers,
the boreholes having been put down near some natural springs known
as 11 mud springs .” There are many of these springs throughout
the Darling district : they form irregular mounds from 30 to over
130 feet in diameter, and rise to a height of 5 feet or more above
the surface of the surrounding ground. . At the “ Wee Wattah ”
spring a 4-inch bore was put down from the bottom of a shaft 110
feet deep, situated about 6 chains to the west of the springs.
The bore, after reaching a depth of 34 feet from the bottom of the
shaft, struck a copious supply of water, which rose in the boring
tubes, and flowed from them to a height of 26 feet above the surface
of the ground, and at the rate of about 15 gallons a minute; but
occasionally the borehole became choked with fine sand, lessening
the outflow of water. The temperature of the water remained
constant at 82 Fahr. The shaft passed through clay and drift,
until water was struck at 110 feet from the surface.
The rain-bearing clouds charged with watery vapour, generally
arrive on the coast of New South Wales from the south, south-east,
and east, and as they are driven inland, they become chilled to the


point at which their moisture is partially condensed, and falls in
showers of rain, for the most part on the eastern slopes of the coast
ranges, and of the main dividing range, leaving comparatively little
for their western slopes. This law of the greater precipitation of
rain on the eastern flanks of these ranges, is shewn by the number,
size and volume of the streams and rivers, which are much greater
on the seaward, or eastern side, than those on the western side of
the main range.
Thus, the Shoalhaven, the Hawkesbury and Nepean rivers, with
their affluents, the Grose, the Warragamba, the Wollondilly and the
Cox ; the Hunter, the Manning, the Macleay, the Clarence, the
Richmond and the Tweed rivers, have all their sources either on the
tableland, or in the deep ravines and gulleys adjacent, at elevations
varying from 1,500 to 2,000 feet above the sea level, on the eastern
escarpment of the main range.
These rivers discharge an enormous body of fresh water into the
sea, every drop of which has been originally derived from its
parent ocean, and has also, at one time, existed in the form of
invisible vapour diffused through the atmosphere, for however dry
the air may be, it always contains more or less of this aqueous
vapour in a transparent or invisible state, and when it resumes, by
refrigerating influences, the liquid state, it gives back to the sur-
rounding air the heat which had oiiginally vaporised the water, by
which beautiful contrivance or law of nature, none of the original
heat is lost.*
It is evident that the two main elements which determine the
precipitation of rain, are the temperature and the humidity of the
atmosphere ; that, the higher the temperature, the greater is the
capacity of the latter to retain large quantities of aqueous vapour in
a state of suspension, and that a fall of temperature below the point of
saturation, must occasion a deposit of moisture in some shape or
other, whether it be dew, mist, fog, rain, hail or snow. If the masses
are under saturation, then less precipitation takes place, or none at
all, according to the degree.
These are all well known facts, and also that a rise of temperature
above the point of saturation, must occasion absorption, so that air
saturated with aqueous vapour contains per cubic foot, as follows,
of water : —At 70° Fahr., 63 grains ; at 75° Fahr , 7 46 grains ;
at BU° Fahr ,8 8 grains. Hence a rise of temperature of a cubic
mile of air from 70° to 75° Fahr. would enable it to support the
additional quantity of 391,412 cubic feet of water as vapour, and a
fuither rise of temperature from 75° to 80° Fahr, would add 454,440
cubic feet to its capacity.
With regard to the distribution of rain, it is found to vary greatly
* Water, in passing into the state ofj vapour, absorbs ,'a certain quantity of heat, which
remains, as it were latent, but is given back on its recon Sensation.


in different countries, and in different parts of the same country,
according to its conformation ; while the elevation of the land has a
much more marked effect on the rainfall, than its distance from the
sea. Mountains precipitate the humidity of the atmosphere, both by
attracting it to their summits, and by these, when acted upon by the
sun’s rays, heating large masses of air in the cold upper regions of
the atmosphere. These warm masses of air stream upwards, and
mingling with the cold strata above, or coming into contact with
cold currents moving laterally, or suffering sudden partial changes of
temperature from the alternation of night and day,—all these
varying circumstances incessantly generate the conditions which
produce rain.
But although the rainfall is generally more abundant in New
South Wales at places adjacent to the sea, than it is at places
further inland, yet there are exceptions to this rule, which seem to
favour the belief that currents of air loaded with moisture, may, and
often do, move inland with great rapidity, and that the atmosphere
is far from needing a fresh supply of aqueous vapour from the ocean,
after every downpour of rain, so that the difference in the annual
amount of rainfall between places on the coast, and those inland,
may, under certain conditions, be inconsiderable, or may indeed be
in favour of the inland district.
That the elevation of the land has a much more marked effect on
the rain-bearing clouds, than its distance from the coast, is exemplified
in the published results of rainfall observations in New South Wales,
during the year 1880. We find there that the total rainfall at
Sydney was only 29 - 52 inches, whereas at Kurrajong Heights,
distant 36 miles from the sea coast, it was 43-99, or 14 47 inches
more than at Sydney ; and at Mount Victoria, it was 40’42 inches,
or 10 - 90 inches more than at Sydney.
Colonel Sykes, with reference to the Ghauts of Central India,
found that at a station 500 feet above the sea level, the rainfall was
99 inches,
At ditto 2,200 feet ditto ditto 170 inches
At ditto 4,500 „ ditto ditto 240 „
At ditto 6,200 „ ditto ditto 194 „
shewing in this case that beyond an elevation of 4,500 feet, there
was a decrease in the rainfall. The effect produced by the fall of a
single cubic inch of rain on one acre of land, is much greater than is
commonly supposed. Thus, a cubic inch of rain falling upon one
acre, yields 6,272,640 cubic inches of water, and this quantity at
277 27 cubic inches to the gallon, is equivalent to 22,622 gallons.
And since a gallon of pure water weighs 10 pounds, an inch of rain
falling on an acre weighs about 101 tons ; so that for every
part of an inch of rain, fully a ton of water falls on each acre. And
since the average annual rainfall at Sydney is about 51 inches, no


In
1869
0-38
In 1873
0-33
>)
1870
0-68
» 1874
0-30
”
1871
0-47
„ 1875
0-25
1872
0-18
„ 1876
0-27
less than 5,151 tons of water fall annually on each acre of land in
its vicinity ! And it is to be borne in mind that every drop of this
large quantity of water, has, at one time, existed in the atmosphere
in the form of invisible vapour.
Of the quantity of water which falls in the form of rain over any
given area, a part passes away invisibly into the air by evaporation ;
a part is absorbed by trees, grass and vegetation ; another part per-
colates into the soil, or goes to feed subterranean springs ; and the
remainder runs off, by the natural drainage channels of the district,
such as its water courses, creeks and rivers to the sea, which is the
parent both of rain and rivers.
This last discharge is a variable quantity, depending greatly on
the climate and on the geological formation of the surface, as wt-11 as
its configuration. In mountainous districts, from 50 to 60 percent,
of the rain will flow off in the rivers, but if densely timbered, the
quantity will be reduced to from 25 to 85 per cent. ; while, on loose
sandy soils, from 80 to 90 per cent, of the rain will be absorbed.
On the other hand, after long continued rains, in ordinary soils,
when all the low-lying ground and swamps have become saturated,
the discharge may be fully equal to the rainfall in that locality.
Mr. Hawkesley, who made some experiments on an area of 100
square miles in Great Britain, shewed that 43 per cent, of the rain-
fall could be collected in reservoirs ; while, in North America, the
mean annual rainfall being assumed at 40 inches, Mr. Fanning gives
16 inches, or 40 per cent., as the proportion available for storage,
thus leaving 24 inches for evaporation and percolation, &c.
But in this Colony, it is believed that we cannot safely assume
more than 33 per cent, (or jf) as a fair proportion of discharge to
rainfall, thus allowing two-thirds for evaporation, percolation and
absorption ; and from observations which were made a few years ago
on the rainfall and discharge at the Upper Nepean and Cataract
rivers, it was found that the proportion of water which passed down
those rivers, for a period of 8 years, was as follows :
The average of these gives 0 - 35, or a little over one third as the
ratio of discharge to rainfall.
With regard to evaporation, the doctrine of averages is peculiarly
fallacious, as so much depends on adventitious circumstances, such
as the state of the atmosphere with regard to moisture, and the
movements of the air, &c. It is naturally most active when the
atmosphere is at its driest, and hottest, the wind brisk, and the water
itself warm ; and it is at its lowest when the atmosphere is moist,
and the air quite still,


Observations on evaporation recorded at the Sydney Observatory,
give 48‘36 inches as the mean of 17 years, from a glass vessel, and
8T92 inches per annum as the mean from a tank in the ground,
which last more nearly corresponds with a storage reservoir. On
this point it has been observed by Mr. Moriarty that there is no
doubt whatever that the measurements of evaporation given for
small vessels, such as are used at observatories, are altogether in
excess of what would take place from large reservoirs, or lakes.
And he says,—“ Indeed, it is now an established .fact that in large
deep reservoirs, the temperature of which in summer keeps below that
of the atmosphere, what has been designated ‘ negative evaporation ’
takes place,—or in other words, the reservoir, under certain conditions,
ceases to be an evaporating pan, and becomes on the contrary, a
condenser condensing the moisture in the warmer air, and causing
its deposition in the form of dew.”— (Memorandum by E. 0.
Moriarty to W. Clark. Report, p. 50.)
This view is confirmed by Mr. Aime Drian, who observes that
when the temperature of the dew point is higher than that of the
evaporating surface, water is deposited on that surface, which action
he styles “ negative evaporation.”
Observations from a glass vessel cannot therefore be taken to
represent the evaporation from a large and deep reservoir, as such
experiments to be reliable, must be conducted on a large scale. In
the eastern and middle United States of America, the evaporation
from storage reservoirs having an average depth of at least 10 feet,
will rarely, according to Mr. Fanning, exceed 60 per cent, of the
annual rainfall, and in Few South Wales it is probable that 75 per
cent, may be taken as the maximum. The average annual rainfall
at Sydney being 51 inches, the evaporation at this rate would
amount to 38 25 inches. *
All these facts have an important bearing on water conservation
in New South Wales, where every stockholder is painfully aware that
the want of surface water is the great obstacle to improvement, and
that without water a sheep or cattle station is practically valueless,
while the presence of it, in abundance, means wealth and prosperity.
The great problem, therefore, which has to be worked out in this
colony is to equalize, as far as it can be done, the inequalities of the
rainfall, and by storing up the superabundance of a wet season, to
make provision for the days of deficiency, which are sure to follow,
and which can only be done by a comprehensive system of dams,
tanks and capacious storage reservoirs, such as has been in use for
hundreds of years in India and other countries.
The question here is, not so much to improve agricultural, pastoral
* At Melbourne, according to the Reports published, the water in an exposed tank on a
level with the ground, will lose about 42 - 3 inches in a year by evaporation, while the average
annual rainfall is stated to be only 25-5 inches.


and mining pursuits, as to render them, in some cases, possible, or
at all events profitable,—not so much to make the necessary provision
for the casual occurrence of an extraordinary dry season, as to supply,
in all seasons, an equivalent, or the nearest possible approach to one,
for the irregularity and inequality of the rainfall over large areas.
Suffering as the Colony of New South Wales has done, since its
formation, from the deficiency of surface water, thousands and tens
of thousands of millions of gallons may be seen daily running to
waste in the rivers of its eastern watershed ; and as all of the water
poured by these rivers into the sea is a part of what had been pre-
cipitated as. rain, it is thus lost to the colony, in so far as the pro-
motion of agricultural and mining opeiations is concerned. Since
it is a well established fact that every gallon of water which can be
kept back from the sea, retained and evaporated, and again absorbed
by the soil, promotes vegetation, and is so much gain to the district, —
while the large quantity which is allowed to run to waste, shews how
very large must be that at the command of the colonists, to use for
their own benefit if it so pleases them.
In estimating the quantity of the rainfall which is thus lost to the
colony, it is not enough that we look at these rivers when in their
normal condition, but we must look at them when in flood, and it is
not so much the want of water in them, as it is the want of the
means of properly regulating their flow, —that is the desideratum.
But the heavy cost contingent on the planning and execution of such
works, has hitherto prevented their being carried out otherwise than
on a very limited scale, and the time seems now to have arrived for
the adoption and initiation of works on a scale of sufficient magnitude
to be of general utility, which can only be done, either by the State,
or by private capital associations, aided by the State.
Since the amount of rainfall is the most important factor in deter-
mining the climate of a country, it follows that if by the construction
of capacious storage reservoirs and tanks of large dimensions, with
weirs on the rivers, we increase the quantity of aqueous vapour
existing in an invisible or transparent state in the atmosphere, we
shall increase at the same time, the quantity which is in excess of
what will saturate the air at any lower temperature to which it may
be reduced, and which will be precipitated in the form of rain or
dew, and become available for the promotion of vegetation. Hence,
therefore, the annual amount of rainfall will be increased in that
locality, and the general result will be an improvement in the climate
of the district or country, for it is well known that, under certain
limitations, climates (like soils) may be made good or bad by human
agency. That this is no crude hypothesis must be evident, when we
consider that as the two main elements which determine the precipi-
tation of rain, are the temperature and the degree of humidity of the
atmosphere. If, by artificial means, we increase the latter, we at the


same time increase the average annual rainfall, which is a most im-
portant element in determining the climate of a country.
It is very evident that no springs can issue from the earth, which
have not previously been deposited there by the atmosphere in the
form of rain, and that while springs feed the rivers, it is the rain
that feeds the springs. It is equally true that in Australia, as in
European countries, all great irregularities, or partial failures, or
deficiencies of rainfall, are, in a great measure, the result of local
influences ; and it is not too much to assert that if it had so hap-
pened that the interior of this great island continent of Australia
had been originally occupied by numerous lofty ranges of mountains,
clothed with forests, and with their accompanying valleys, rivers and
streams, in lieu of consisting of the vast treeless plains which are the
distinguishing feature of the interior, the natural consequence of such
an alteration in the physiography of the country would have been a
corresponding improvement in the climate, and a more evenly-balanced
rainfall. The injurious effects of hot winds which are at present so
detrimental to vegetation, by scorching and drying up every green
plant, and which are equally distressing to animal and human life,
would, in such a case, have been greatly mitigated, and the enduring
and destructive droughts which at uncertain periods visit this conti-
nent, would have been much less severe than they now are, if not
entirely obviated ; for there is little reason to doubt that the
droughts are in a great measure due to the want of elevated country
in the interior, and of those mountain ranges in which springs take
their rise, and from which rivers are fed.
On the eastern watershed of New South Wales, the climatic con-
ditions are such that although the average annual amount of rainfall
over the greater portion of it is generally sufficient for the purposes
of agriculture, yet, owing to its inequality of distribution, both agri-
cultural and pastoral pursuits are carried on under great disadvan-
tages. On the western watershed and the vast plains of the interior,
the rainfall is generally insufficient for agricultural purposes, and the
Murray, the Murrumbidgee, the Lachlan and the Darling are chiefly
supplied from the rain which falls on the distant elevated slopes of
the main dividing range, and on the high tableland of the Darling
Downs. During heavy rains, these rivers sometimes overflow their
banks, and their waters are spread out over a vast extent of flat
country. At Bourke, the width of the Darling is about 180 feet,
and the velocity, when in flood, is rather less than one mile an hour.
From Bourke to Wilcannia, the distance by the river is 535 miles,
and the velocity of the stream when in flood is only L 33 miles per
hour, shewing the small amount of fall in this river.


The deterioration in the climate of a country produced by the de-
struction of its forests, is much greater than is commonly supposed,
which has been frequently pointed out by some of our greatest living
botanical and meteorological authorities. In certain cases, which
are well authenticated, something little short of a total change in the
meteorological conditions of large areas of country has been brought
about in an unmistakable manner, by the destruction of the forests
and undergrowth which so well shelter the soil.
Human industry, together with the practice, in some cases, of
burning the grasses, which in certain soils, instead of producing a
more luxuriant growth of herbage, as it was intended to do, in fact
calcines the ground, and occasionally almost destroys the vegetable
power, combine to augment the evil, and to favor the rapid percolation
of water and its evaporation, thus rendering a climate naturally dry,
still more so year by year.
According to experiments made in Europe, it has been found that
forests maintain at all times a constant mean temperature of
54° Fahr., and that the vapour which is held in suspension in the
atmosphere, when its heat is higher than that of the forest, coming in
contact with the latter, is condensed, and falls in the shape of fine rain,
or “ drip” an effect which may often be witnessed in the early part
of the day, in elevated forest regions. In this way, mountains that
are clothed with forests are often enveloped in mist, owing to the
moist and warm air, when driven up the sides of the mountains, be-
coming chilled to the point at which its moisture is partially
condensed, wh«n it falls as extremely fine rain.
The same effect is sometimes produced by local refrigeration, after
sunset, when the vapour invisibly diffused through the atmosphere,
is suddenly condensed into excessively fine drops of water, forming
the rain called “ serein,” that falls from a clear and cloudless
sky. But, as Professor Huxley says :—“ Such phenomena are
rare, and as a rule, we may fairly expect the formation of rain to be
preceded by that of cloud.”
Both American and European scientists and meteorologists have
demonstrated that the quantity of the rainfall, or, in other words, the
amount of precipitation from the air of the moisture in excess of that
which can be contained in solution at the existing temperature, for
the time being,—is influenced, if not determined, by the effects of
forest covering, particularly in elevated positions ; and all our past
experience has shewn that, under all circumstances and conditions,
trees are the grand regulators of the climate, as well as improvers of
the soil.
It has also been observed that, as agents, or intermediaries for the
discharge of electricities with which the earth and the atmosphere
may be respectively charged, trees act as admirable conductors be-


tween the two, —so that, if the one is overcharged, a forest will
transmit its excess to the other, and “ vice versa,” thus maintaining
in both a proper state of equilibrium.
But if we strip the hills and mountains of their natural growth of
trees, we produce new conditions both of radiation and evaporation,
and the solar heat that strikes the bare surface of mountain ranges,
in a treeless district, is thrown off by radiation and reflexion, so that
any moisture that may be in the ground evaporates very rapidly, and
in proportion to the increased area of denuded land, will be the
increased heat and drought of summer.
Moreover, in such regions, the rainfall is usually fitful and un-
certain in its character, and when it falls, descends in torrents,
washing the surface soil from the hills, and depositing it in the
valleys, there being no longer any trees left to intercept the flow, and
to conduct it to the roots through a mass of vegetable “ humus.”
Torrents of water fill the previously dried-up beds of the creeks and
watercourses, washing away the soil, and forming deep gulleys and
ravines where none before existed, —leave the country more desolate
than it was before. This has been the case particularly in Provence,
which was so beautiful in the middle ages, but which is now only an
arid region owing to the destruction of the Alpine forests. Deep
ravines have been gradually eroded in their escarpment, and have
ended by cutting up the summit of each mountain into distinct peaks.
One of the highest authorities on this question in the United
States, says that the hills on the Atlantic seaboard formerly abounded
in springs and rivulets, but that in many parts of these States, which
were cleared of forests a generation or two ago, the hill pastures now
suffer severely from drought, and in abnormally dry seasons they
furnish neither grass nor water.
From all parts of the State of Maine come the same reports of
the diminished volume of water in the streams, in consequence of
there being less rain in the summer. The snows also are not so
heavy or frequent as they were 20 or 25 years ago. The character
of the Delaware River, and of its affluent streams, has for many
years been undergoing a similar change, and now similar causes have
commenced to operate throughout the valley of the Susquehannah,
in the states of Pennsylvania and New York, where the water
courses are beginning to shew the effects which everywhere follow
from the process of disafforesting the hills.
Professor Marsh warns his countrymen, with regard to the felling
of the Adirondack forests, that their destruction will cause a wide-
spread desolation to be inevitable, and he says that, —“ Already the
rivers which rise in that region flow with diminished currents in dry
seasons, and with augmented volumes of water, after heavy rains.
They bring down larger quantities of sediment, and the increasing
obstructions to the navigation of the Hudson, which are extending


themselves down the channel, in proportion as the fields are encroach-
ing on the forests, give good grounds for the fear of irreparable
injury to the commerce of the important towns on the upper waters of
that river, unless measures are taken to prevent the expansion of
‘ improvements ’ which have already been carried beyond the limits
of a wise economy.”
A German writer who’was employed as a forester in Russia, also
calls attention to the fact that the Volga, the main artery of the
inland commerce of the country, is diminishing in volume owing to
the destruction of the forests at its sources, and that the vast plains
and steppes of the interior are becoming rapidly as desolate and barren
as those of Persia.
Nor is this all the mischief that is produced by the destruction of
the forests of a country, in which when the rain falls it descends in
torrents, filling the water courses, and causing the rivers to overflow
their banks. Owing to this cause, calamitous inundations have of
late become more frequent, and in all these cases, the destruction of
the forests at or adjacent to the sources of the rivers, has clearly been
the proximate cause of the inundations, —by which the valleys of the
Loire, the Rhone and the Garonne in France, the Segura and the
Guadalquivir in Spain, and of the Theiss in Hungary, have lately
suffered so severely.
The disastrous flood of 1840 destroyed property to the value of
72 millions of francs in the valley of the Loire ; those of 1846
occasioned a loss of 45 million francs ; and that of May, 1856,
inundated upwards of a million of acres, causing great destruction
of life and property.
More recently, in 1879, all Europe was startled by the frightful
inundation in the valley of the Theiss, a tributary of the Danube,
which extended over an area of some hundreds of square miles, in-
cluding numerous villages and hamlets, and resulting in the sub-
mersion of the city of Szegedin, with the destruction of no less than
6,230 houses in that city.
The Theiss has its source in the Carpathian mountains, and Mr.
Crosse, when travelling in Hungary in 1877, remarks that, —“ It is
impossible to travel 20 miles in the Carpathians, without encountering
the terrible ravages committed by the lawless Wallacks in the
beautiful woods that adorn the sides of these mountains. The
great proportion of the forest land belongs to the State, —hence, the
supervision is less keen, and the depredations are more readily
winked at.”
More recently, in 1879, one of the fairest provinces in Murcia was
ravaged by an inundation which caused great losses of life and
property, and now again in 1881, we have a repetition of the same
calamity in the Yalley of the Guadalquivir, brought about precisely
under similar circumstances, by which all the surrounding country


adjacent to Seville has been laid underwater, crops, cattle, sheep and
horses swept away, and the beautiful city of Seville itself, which lies
on the left bank of the river, has sustained damages by the inundation,
or rather by a series of inundations, to the extent of nearly a quarter
of a million sterling !
According to an old Spanish proverb :
“ Quien no ha visto Sevilla,
No ha visto maravilla.”*
But a still greater wonder than the beauties of Seville, is the
persistent stubbornness of the people of Spain, in obstinately ignoring
the irws of nature, and the teachings of the past. The noble forests
which formerly under the dominion of the Moors, clothed the slopes
and spurs of the “ Sierra Modena,” in which mountain range the
head waters of the Guadalquivir have their source, —having been
ruthlessly destroyed by their Christian successors, the result is that a
heavy downpour of rain causes innumerable torrents of water to rush
down the denuded sides of the Sierra with overwhelming force,
causing calamitous inundations, and carrying devastation far and
wide.
In the words of Sir R. Ford “ The denuded tablelands are
exposed to the fierce suns of the summer, and to the fierce snows and
winds of winter, while the bulk of the Peninsula offers a picture of
neglect and desolation, moral and physical, which it is painful to
contemplate. Extensive steppes and plains are burnt up by the sun
in summer, and swept by icy winds in winter, while rain is so scarce
on the tablelands, that the annual rainfall does not exceed 9 inches,
and there are districts upon which no shower descends for 8 or 9
months together.”
The destruction of the forests has unquestionably been the cause
of the evil, and a person may now travel for days in Spain without
seeing a single tree, while the country is so barren that a Spanish
proverb declares, —“ that if a bird were to attempt to cross it, it
would have to carry its own food with it! ”
Similar causes will produce similar effects, whether it be in Europe
or in Australia, —and coming to the latter, let us see what have been
the effects produced by forest denudation in Victoria, whose metro-
polis, claiming to be the Queen City of the southern hemisphere, is
dependent for its water supply on the rain which falls on the elevated
ranges, where are to be found the sources of the river Plenty, from
which, and from the creeks adjacent, the Yan Yean reservoir is filled.
The Yan Yean is a compact body of water, 600 feet above sea
level, having a water area, when full, of 1,860 acres, and a capacity
of 5,360 million gallons. The average summer consumption is 16
million gallons, and the maximum daily consumption is 20 million
* “He who has not seen Seville, has not seen a wonder,”


gallons. It is situate in the watershed of an insignificant tributary
of the Plenty, called the “ Dry Creek,” which is, in winter, a muddy
torrent, and in summer a dry gully, although formerly a permanent
rivulet trickled down its bed. Now it brings down only muddy and
impure water, after a heavy downpour of rain.
The flow of the streams where they leave the ranges, has not been
as yet accurately guaged, but it has been observed that the summer
flow of the Plenty and of its tributaries, has gradually diminished as
the timber on the ranges has been cut down ; and that, as one
eminence after another is denuded of its trees, so does one creek after
another shrink up, and finally cease to flow, except during the rainy
season.
The average annual rainfall at the reservoir, for the last 20 years,
has been 24-22 inches, and during the last 5 years it has been only
22*74 inches ; but on the ranges to the north, which in some places
attain an elevation of about 2,000 feet above the reservoir, the
average annual fall probably amounts to 30 inches.
It is however the minimum, rather than the average, which concerns
the inhabitants of Melbourne, and for some years no evil consequences
seemed to result from the destruction of the timber, the forests being
too dense to be diminished to such an extent as to affect the evapora-
tion and rainfall. But now, in 1881, it appears from a recent
report from Mr. W. Davidson, Engineer to the Water Supply
Department, that the Yan Yean reservoir is half empty, and that it
is very doubtful whether there will be a chance this year of filling it
up again ! Not only is the water deficient in quantity, but its
quality has greatly deteriorated, and it appeared from an examination
of the water in February last, that the stream at the inlet was
impure ; that the outlet sample was worse than that at the inlet,
while water taken from the centre of the reservoir proved to be the
worst of all, —the report stating that, “ the water, once contaminated,
contains the seeds of the future putrefactive changes, and these are
found in the highest activity in the body of the lake.”
Mr. Davidson states that, “if sufficient rain falls during the
present winter and ensuing spring to allow of the reservoir being
filled, there is almost the certainty that the water to be supplied to
Melbourne, will be discoloured as it was a year ago ; but that, should
the present season continue to be as dry as in 1879, and the ensuing
summer be also as dry and protracted as was last summer, the effect
would be to render the supply altogether inadequate , and he proposes
to supplement the Yan Yean water supply by diverting the waters of
several creeks into the Plenty basin, and thence into the reservoir,
at a cost of about £224,000.”
Mr. Davidson also states with respect to the offensive taste of the
Yan Yean water last summer, that, —“With a hot season, similar
in all respects to the past summer, it is feared a recurrence of the


disagreeable taste and smell so noticeable in February and March
last, is probable. That such occurences are the outcome of stagna-
tion, together with a high temperature of the water, and the absence
of new supplies for freshening purposes, is now, I think, conceded.”
Further on be states, —“ lam of opinion that while moderate
thunderstorms during the hot season would act as a preventative, the
only effectual and permanent remedy for the obnoxious taste and
smell must be in the introduction to the reservoir of a continuous
stream of water of considerable magnitude and low temperature
during the summer months. But, in many seasons, this cannot be
relied on from the Plenty ranges.”
If the King Parrot creek be tapped, as proposed, the reservoir will be
kept filled by a running stream of pure water, and this plan will probably
be adopted by the Victorian Government, as it can be carried out at
a less expense and in a shorter time than the alternative scheme of
taking the water from the Watts river and creeks adjacent. This
scheme is estimated to cost £520,000, and if large storage accom-
modation were provided (as it should be), the expense would be
nearly one million sterling. But whichever scheme may be adopted,
immediate steps, it is believed, should be taken to restore, as far as it
is possible, by a system of tree-planting on the denuded ranges of
the Plenty, their former climatic conditions.
In South Australia, as in Victoria, the natural forests have been
used up at a rate that would have been perfectly unjustifiable, even if
that colony had been a densely timbered country, which it is not.
Trees in large masses, and at high altitudes, are the great want of
South Australia, and attention has been recently directed to this by
Mr. J. E. Brown, conservator of forests in that colony.
“ Happily,” as Mr, Brown says,—“ for the future prosperity of
the colony, a wise government has taken steps, by the proclamation
of certain districts as ‘ Forest Reserves,’ and by establishing a forest
board, whereby a thorough system of conserving and tree-planting is
being undertaken upon them, to prevent the complete demolition of
the natural forests.”
With regard to the beneficial effects of forests on climate and
rainfall, Mr. Browm says ;—“ It is well known to all who have given
their attention to the improvement of lands in any country, that the
formation of plantations is one of the chief means to this end ; and
that without a due proportion of them, no permanent improvement
can ever be attained. Trees are the grand regulators of climate and
improvers of the soil, under all circumstances and conditions.” —
(Treatise on Tree Culture.)
Mr. Brown is of the opinion that the cause of so much waste and
desert land being found in the central parts of Australia, is attribu-
table to the want of trees to give it shelter, —and although this may
be one of the causes of the periodic droughts which so often visit the


interior, yet there are no doubt other causes in operation, one of
which is the want of any elevated mountain ranges in which springs
take their rise, and whence large rivers are fed, —as the most
abundant rains are generally to be found in the neighbourhood of the
largest rivers and the highest mountains, between which a mutual
interpendence appears to exist. But there are doubtless other
causes in operation to which droughts are due in Australia, and the
science of meteorol »gy is not as yet in a sufficiently advanced state
to enable any reliable theory to be formed on this subject.
The Government of India long ago foresaw the necessity which
existed for making provision in that country against the consequences
of drought by the construction of irrigation canals, tanks and
reservoirs, and have expended up to the close of 1880, upwards of
20 millions sterling on these works ; while for centuries previous to
the British occupation of India, the native rulers had constructed
innumerable tanks and reservoirs, many of which are on a scale of
extraordinrry magnitude.
In the Madras Presidency alone, there are upwards of 53,000
tanks, most of which are of native origin, with many thousan is of
miles of embankments, and about 30,000 separate masonry works,
weirs and escapes. One of these, the “ Yiranam ” tank, has an
area of 35 square miles, while another is nearly of equal area.
The tanks of Mysur are also very numerous, there being upwards
of 30,000 of them, of which more than 4,000 are large irrigating
reservoirs, one of which, the “ Naggar Sulikerrai,” has an area of
about 40 square miles, and another is 40 miles in circumference.
These tanks serve for the storage of water during the wet season,
and give it out for irrigating during the dry season. They ensure
good crops in ordinary seasons, and it is only by their means that
cultivation of rice is rendered possible in most seasons.”
Tank Works in India.
There are five varieties of tank works in use in India, — *
1. The cheapest and most simple is that which consists solely of an
earthen embankment. It can be formed when the soil is
tenacious and the country level, affording a wide area of shallow
water. The bank towards the front should present a long slope,
and be either planted with trees or grass, to protect it from the
action of the water, or it should be revetted with stone. The
chief expense, in addition to the earthwork, is the provision
of a few masonry sluices.
2. An earthen embankment with a front of dry stone. To add to
the strength of the embankment, it is provided with a dry stone
* For of tank works in India, the author is indebted to Captain Baird Smith’s
excellent Treatise on “ Italian Irrigation.”


wall to the rear, as well as to the front, the intermediate space
being filled with earth well beaten down. Sluices and overfalls
for surplus water must be provided of masonry set in lime
mortar. Dry stone walls, having a breadth of from sto 6 feet
at the base, may be carried to a height of 12 feet; but it would
be imprudent to carry them any higher, unless strengthened by
a sloping bank of earth towards the bed of the tank.
An embankment similar to the one just described, but having a
simple front wall of masonry, set in lime mortar. A rear
retaining wall of dry stone or lime masonry is added in the
vicinity of the water course. Such works, when once the earth
is well consolidated, require very little repair.
The most important kind of embankment, and that which is used
for the damming back of the larger water courses, consists of a
massive front wall of masonry, set in lime mortar, buttressed at
intervals by solid bastions of the same material, which give
stability to the fabric. Beyond this wall is a broad earthen
bank, which is secured again in rear, through the whole or part
of its length, by a retaining wall of dry stone, or of lime
masonry. When the rear height of the embankment is great,
a second, and sometimes a third such wall is carried longitudi-
nally through the earthwork. The fabric is provided
with sluices, according to the amount of irrigation required.
Finally, there must be an escape, or overfall, sufficiently large
to carry off a body of surplus water equal to the maximum dis-
charge of the stream before its course was obstructed. The
contour of the embankment is generally a straight line, but
sometimes it follows two or more lines, meeting in angles,—and
occasionally, a convex form in plan is given to the embankment.
The escape outlet generally consists of a massive masonry weir,
having its lower side sloped off. The flood water, as soon as it
reaches the height of the sill of the escape, passes off over the
slope. All the embankments are planted on the exterior slope
with trees, which serve to bind the soil. They should, however,
be kept well to the rear, lest the roots _ should penetrate and
injure the masonry.
One other kind of reservoir remains to be noticed. This is
formed by a great weir, or wall of masonry, without any earth-
work or flood escape. Any excess of water runs over the crest
of the wall, which is sloped off on the lower side. Such works
are extensively used in hilly districts, where the val!ey to be
closed does not exceed 300 feet in width, and when constructed
of good materials, they rarely require repairs. In some cases,
a string weir is constructed at the head of the valley, to main-
tain a large body of water, and in its rear, at convenient
distances, stone dykes are thrown across the breadth of the


valley, and when any subsidiary water course joins it, its supply
is stopped by a second weir. By this method, a few substantial
stone weirs, intermixed with stone dykes, will convert a valley
into a succession of terraces, ascending to the summit of the
hills.
Amongst the hills, the selection of a site for a tank is much less
difficult than in the plain country. Depth of water is the chief
recommendation, with facilities for carrying it by sluices and drains
to the cultivation in the rear.
In a country like India, where the seasons are so uncertain, the
supply of water can hardly be too great for a large work, intended
to irrigate some thousands of acres, provided an ample escape cutlet
be left for the superfluity of water. And, in fixing the position of
the embankment, a first desideratum is, that the dam should be as
short as possible, where the valley is at its narrowest. But it must
also be seen that the ground which is to form the bed of the tank
shall be nearly level, for if it have a rapid descent towards the site of
the embankment, this latter must be greatly elevated in order to give
an extended area of water.
The indications most favourable to the construction of a tank
embankment, may be summed up as follows :
Ist. A channel bringing down an ample supply of water.
2nd. For the bed of the tank, a broad expanse of nearly level land
in front of the embankment, and having a slight dip towards
it.
3rd. That the land to the rear be of greater extent than the bed, and
slightly lower in its level, in order that every portion of it may
be irrigated through masonry sluices constructed in the embank-
ment, and communicating with drains leading to each field.
4th. A rocky foundation at a little depth from the surface.
sth. That water be procurable from the bed of the water course, or
from a well, for the use of the work people.
6th. That stone, lime, and fuel be within a reasonable distance.
It will be seen from the above that Indian tanks are not, as the
word would seem to imply to English ears, mere excavations in the
ground, holding a few thousand gallons only, but are large superficial
collections of water, containing many millions of gallons, and extend-
ing frequently over many square miles of water surface. The
locality having a slight but uniform slope the tank is formed by an
embankment on three sides, that at the lower end being nearly of
uniform height, and the other two gradually diminishing in height,
until they terminate at the level of the ground which forms the
fourth side. Unfortunately, however, these tanks being entirely
dependent on the local rains for their supply, it sometimes happens
that, during a long continued drought, they fail just at the time


when water is most required, and the only remedy for this con-
tingency is to give such an extension of their storage capacity, both
as to area and depth, as will ensure a good supply of water at all
seasons.
It is in fact only by means of large storage reservoirs, or tanks,
together with weirs and dams on the rivers and creeks, that the evils
of droughts can be combated with any success in a country where
floods alternate with dry seasons, and where it is the rainfall alone
of which the hydraulic engineer can avail himself for storage purposes
as we do not possess in Australia any large rivers which, as in
Northern India, receive an unfailing supply from the melting of the
snows and glaciers of the Himalayas, and this, at a time when the
water is most wanted on the plains of central India.
In New South Wales the whole subject of water conservation is
so intimately and inextricably connected with its future continued
prosperity, that it seems to be impossible to ignore it any longer in
a country where, from all parts, complaints are continually being
made of the deficiency of surface water, both for agricultural,
pastoral, and mining purposes. All these staple industries of the
colony are languishing for want of the necessary element, and it
would appear that, with the prospect of another dry season, the
works at many of the mines (particularly the tin mines) will have to
cease altogether until, by the precipitation of rain, the creeks, dams,
and water courses of the interior are once more filled.
An excellent example, in this respect, has been set by the
Government of Victoria in the establishment of a board of water
conservancy, which is now proceeding with its investigations, aided
by two eminent hydraulic engineers. A series of progress reports
have been already published by the board, in which the following
matters are dealt with :
1. The mode of providing the requisite capital for the works.
2. The execution and control of works ; and 3, the legislation
required.
With respect to the first, it is observed that five methods present
themselves, which are as follows;—1. By the association of land-
owners or occupiers, who will be benefitted by the works. 2. By
outside capitalists, or by a joint stock company. 3. By a Joan from
the Government, secured on the rates receivable. 4. By a local loan
guaranteed by the Government ; and lastly, by grants in aid from
the Government.
Whichever of these methods may be adopted in this colony it is
above all necessary that a comprehensive, and not a fragmentary
system of water conservation, be initiated in each district, embracing
every river, basin, or valley in the colony, and showing the capabili-
ties of each for the permanent storage of large bodies of water, and,
in every case, the scheme should be such as would place the actual


and possible sources of the supply as much as possible beyond the
reach of the inequalities and uncertainties of the local rainfall.
There would be no great difficulty in constructing separate maps
of each river basin in the colony, showing accurately the extent of its
catchment or drainage area, together with the lines of its water-shed,
or water-parting. Such maps, in order to be of service to the
hydraulic engineer should comprise numerous contour lines at inter-
vals of from 20 to 30ft. vertical, as such a method of showing the
irregularities of the surface would convey a more accurate knowledge
of the character of the ground than could be attained by any system
of hill shading, however carefully this might be executed.
This would necessitate an elaborate survey of each river basin and
various sections, taken both longitudinally and transversely, would
show the most suitable positions for reservoirs, tanks, dams, and
embankments, and in all cases a careful survey of the proposed sites
of such works would require to be made, including the levels of the
intended embankment, and of the land at its front and rear. The
height of the embankment, and the area of the land to be submerged,
could then be determined, together with its carrying capacity—it
being borne in mind that the main object of these works is for the
conservation of a large body of water in wet seasons, in order to give
it out during dry seasons.
And further, if a geological section or sections across each river
basin were taken, showing all the different strata which make up the
floor of each, such sections would be of great value to the hydraulic
engineer, and would form a useful supplement to the geological map
of the colony, lately issued by the Department of Mines.
All this work would no doubt occupy much time, and would, if
systematically and carefully carried out, cost a large sum of money ;
but there can be no doubt that both the time and the money would
be well expended on such an object of general public utility in a
country which suffers periodically from a water famine.
The conservation of water in large bodies has now become a
great public necessity, and it may be confi iently asserted that no
measure could be devised which would be productive of greater bene-
fit to all classes of the community, than a well devised and skilfully
executed scheme of water conservation by which the material
and industrial prosperity of the colony would be placed on a
secure basis, its resoux-ces and revenues increased, and its progress
assured.
FREDK. S. PEPPERCORNE, C.E
Wentworth Court,
August 1, 1881.




,
.
' ■■ ;• •> . ’ • v: •' - , . ..
. . .
. • qe ■
t .


