

HIDDEN SPRINGS UNCOVERED !
THREE LECTURES
IN REPLY TO
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN'S
PAMPHLET, ENTITLED,
HIDDEN SPRINGS;
(Delivered, in the Victoria Theatre , Sydney, on Sunday Evenings,
October 15 th. 22 nd, 29th, 1876), by
J. TYERMAN,
AUTHOR OF
“A GUIDE TO SPIRITUALISM," "IS THERE A DEVIL?" &c.
PUBLISHED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
R. W. SKINNER, BOOKSELLER, 244, PITT SRREET.
1876.




HIDDEN SPRINGS UNCOVERED !
THREE LECTURES
IN REPLY TO
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN'S
PAMPHLET, ENTITLED,
HIDDEN SPRINGS;
OR, PERILS OF THE FUTURE AND HOW TO MEET THEM.
(Delivered in the Victoria Theatre Sydney, on Sunday Evenings ,
October 15 th. 22nd, 29th, 1876), by
J. TYERMAN,
AL'THOR OF
“A ‘Guide to Spiritualism,” “Is there a Devil?” &c
PUBLISHED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
PRICE ONE SHILLING,
tot Cg:
R. W. Skivvek, Bookseller, 244, Pitt Street.
1876.


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY JOHN FERGUSON,
6 O’CONNELL STREET.


ERRATA.
Page 7, lino 28.—For “ things,” read “ events.”
Pago 9, lino 23.—For “And therefore,’ read “ Hence,”'
Page 10, line B.—For “ Say,” read “think.”
Page 11, line 36.—For “ principle,” read “ principles.” 1
Page 25, line 3.—For “ and,” read “ are.”
Page 54, line 3. —Omit “ it.”
Page 82, line 1. —For “matter,” read “ matters.”
Please Read the Notes at the End of Pamphlet.-


PREFACE.
Ihe following lectures were delivered in reply to Archbishop Vaughan’s
now r celebrated Pamphlet, entitled “ Hidden Springs.” I did not at first in-
tend giving more than one lecture on the subject; but I soon found that
it would take at least two to do anything like justice to it. At the close
of the seeond lecture several friends strongly advised me to give a third,
and deal more fully with certain important points than I had had time to do
in the two previous lectures, and notice some things not touched upon at
all ; and it was more in deference to their wish than from personal in-
clination that 1 gave the third lecture. A very general desire was also
expressed by those who heard the lectures to have them published, and
in compliance with that request 1 send them out, in the hope'that they
may reach, and be of some interest to, not a few persons who did not
hear them delivered.
I he interest shown in the subject dealt with, was evidenced by the fact
that the Theatre was densely crowded each evening by a most respectable
and intelligent audience, notwithstanding that a charge for admission
was made to all parts of the house. And yet, though mine have been
by far the largest meetings which the Archbishop’s onslaught has given
rise to, readers at a distance will hardly credit that certain lectures in
reply to him by Protestant ministers have been reported verbatim in the
daily Press, while mine have not even been noticed; though we have been
rebuking the insolence and exposing the designs of a common foe, who
would fain trample underfoot the liberties of both Protestants and Free-
thinkers. But of course, they are on what is as yet the most powerful
and fashionable side, and I am identified with what is still an unpopular
Cause and must pay the usual penalty of a pioneer. Ido not mention
this fact so much because I personally care about it, as in the interests
of the Movement lam striving to serve. The systematic way in which
the already great and rapidly-developing Liberal Movement is ignored by
the daily Press of Sydney, is a disgrace to respectable Journalism, and a
violation of the principle of fair play on which it professes to be con-
ducted ; but if all who are on the Liberal and Progressive side do their
duty like true men, we shall soon be strong enough to wring at least
justice from the hands of the Press, and we desire nothing more. The


silence of the Press respecting the great meetings we have had, is an
additional reason why many of our friends desired to have the following
lectures published in Pamphlet form.
The first and second lectures are not reproduced exactly as delivered.
1 spoke from notes only, and can simply give the facts and arguments
as used, and as much of the filling up matter as 1 can recollect. The
third lecture was reported by a friend, whose kindness and consideration I
hereby gratefully acknowledge.
Should any Protestants read these lectures, they will please to bear in
mind thKt 1 have replied to Dr. Vaughan purely from a Freethought stand-
point, and have not in any sense attempted to defend Protestantism
against Popery; because 1 am utterly opposed to both, as eeclesiastica
and religious systems. Popery, however, is the greatest enemy to Liberty
and Progress, and Protestants may think that my humble efforts will do
some little good in exposing its Jesuitical spirit, and checking its ag-
gressive designs. A mighty struggle is impending between Ultramon-
tane Popery and Liberalism in all its phases. In that contest Protestants
cannot retain their present illogical position; they will either have to re-
cede Romewards, or advance towards enlightened Freethought. Which
side will the readers of these pages take ? May their own reason and
conscience guide them aright.
J. TYERMAX.
147, Woolloomooloo-street, Sydney, November 8, 1876.


HIDDEN SPRINGS;
OR, PERILS OP THE FUTURE AND HOW TO
MEET THEM,
BY
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN.
FIRST LECTURE IN REPLY THERETO
BY
J. TYEEMAN;
Delivered in the Victoria Theatre, Sydney, N.S,W.,
on Sunday Evening, 15th October, 1876, before
a Densely Crowded Audience.
Du* Vaughan, an Archbishop oi' the Human Catholic
(Lurch, recently availed himself of tlie opportunity fur-
nished by tlie opening of the “ Hall of the Australian
llolv Catholic Guild,” to deliver an extraordinary Lecture,
entitled “ Hidden Springs.” His official position as the
Coadjutor Archbishop of Sydney, combined with his repu-
tation as an orator, a scholar, and a theologian, always
secures a respectful hearing for his public utterances on
important questions. The lecture under consideration,
having been reported verbatim in tlie Sydney Morning
Herald , has been read with keen interest, and is bound to
provoke a good deal of comment and controversy. It. as-
sails different parties on subjects of the greatest moment,
and will therefore be replied to from several quarters. I
have felt it to be my duty to review it from the Freethought
standpoint. It may be deemed presumptuous by some for


any one in my position to undertake to criticise and refute
an Archbishop. But be it remembered that an Archbishop
is only a man; and his deliverances are not necessarily a
whit more true, and cannot be exempted from criticism,
merely because he is an Archbishop. If any one in that
position ventures to misrepresent a number of his fellow
men, and thereby excite prejudice against them; and tries
to mislead the public on questions of vital interest, he must
expect to be called to account at the bar of criticism, and
be dealt with as freely as the humblest layman of his
flock. I confess that I felt considerable diffidence in un-
dertaking this duty, and would have been glad if some one
more competent had come forward to vindicate Liberalism
against the onslaught of this distinguished ecclesiastic ;
but, in the absence of an abler advocate, I will do my
best in the interests of what 1 conceive to be truth and
right.
Before entering upon the subject, I desire to say a word
to the Roman Catholics who may be present. I ask you
to give me a quiet and patient hearing. Without wishing
to offend you or wound your feelings, I cannot in deference
to your conscientious views suppress my own honest con-
victions. And therefore if you cannot bear to hear some
plain, and perhaps hard, things said of your Archbishop,
you had better retire before I proceed further, for we shall
not suffer any interruption. We are not in a Catholic
country, where your church suppresses free speech by law,
and by brute force if needs be ; but in a free British com-
munity, where every man is at liberty to express his honest
views on any subject he chooses, so long as he does not in-
fringe the rights of others. Your Archbishop had a per-
fect right to deliver the lecture in question, and was listened
to respectfully by those who were most opposed to him;
but I and others who may differ from him have an equal
right to criticise his statements, and to endeavonr to shew
wherein he is mistaken. Moreover, the Archbishop expec-
ted to be criticised ; for lie said that he would not be
deterred from doing his duty by “ fear of the criticism of
opponents,” believing as he does, that he holds “principles”
which will “ stand the rough usages of the openest war-
fare ; ” and as he expects, nay challenges, criticism, the
members of his church must not complain if he receives
even a fuller measure of it than he anticipated. 1 there


fore trust that Catholics will give me as fair a hearing as
I am prepared to accord to the Archbishop, when he utters
sentiments to which I am decidedly opposed.
“ Hidden Springs ; or, Perils of the Future and how to
meet them,” is the title of Dr. Yaughan’s lecture. He
has been making a survey of the present religious condi-
tion of Christendom, and trying to forecast the future; and
the result is very distressing to his ecclesiastical soul. The
present is bad enough, but the future threatens to be much
worse; he deplores the one and dreads the other. Infi-
delity in its various forms has taken deep root, and is
spreading rapidly among all classes. Millions of people
are withdrawing from the Christian Church, and becoming
its avowed or secret enemies. And how black the future
is to his priestly vision ; what terrible dangers are looming
up before him! He sees a well-organised, powerful, and
determined army in the distance, marching up towards the
citadel of the Supernatural, bent on its destruction if
possible. As he stands on the watch-tower the sight of
their flashing swords, and the sound of their defiant shouts
stir his heart to its profoundest depths, and well-nigh
paralyse his mental powers. And with such vigor as his
panic-stricken soul can supply he raises the alarm, and
calls upon all Christians to forget their differences, rally
round the standard of Rome, and march forward to meet
their common foe before it is too late. Are things really
as Dr. Vaughan depicts them? Does he mean all that he
says ? Or is he exaggerating and colouring things for the
sake of effect ? Is he acting a new and sensational part
in the ecclesiastical drama, for some temporary or ulterior
purpose ? How far his apprehensions supposing he
sincerely entertains them appear to me to be well
founded, and whether the means he proposes to avert ttie
impending danger are likely to prove effectual, will be
considered in due course.
Two events have lately occurred in the religious world,
which to me are among the most significant signs of the
times. I refer to the late meeting of the Archbishop of
Canterbury and certain leading Dissenters, in reference to
the alleged spread of Freethought and irreligion in Eng-
land ; and to Archbishop Yaughan’s appeal to Protestants
generally to suspend hostilities among themselves, and
against the Catholic Church ; and combine with Catholics


to repel and defeat the designs of a common enemy. "What
a confession of conscious weakness of the various Churches
on the one hand, and a recognition of the increasing
strength of the powers opposed to them on the other!
Liberals could hardly desire a-more flattering compliment.
A marvellous change has come over the Church of England
in her spirit towards Dissenters, as represented bv her
Primate, the Archbishop of Canterbury. There was a
time when Dissenters were hated by good Churchmen with
true Christian hatred. Their case was considered almost
as hopeless as that of poor, deluded Papists. There were
grave doubts as to whether it was possible for them to
get to heaven at all; but one thing was quite certain —if
they did get there they would have to take a back seat in
the upper Temple, and be contented with the coarsest fare
at the marriage supper of the Lamb ; and they ought to be
very thankful even for that favour. But that was when
Dissenters were few, and Freethinkers were fewer still.
Now Dissenters have become a numerous and powerful
body ; and behind them another body is forming, likely to
become still more numerous and powerful, and is opposed
alike to Churchmen and Dissenters. And therefore, the
Church of England, as represented by its ecclesiastical
head, stops its abuse of Dissenters, puts on a condescending
smile, and courts the assistance of those she has so often
shunned, in her efforts to crush a dangerous adversary.
Hence she is doing from fear what she has hitherto refused
to do from love. But Archbishop Vaughan’s conduct is
still more extraordinary than that of the Archbishop of Can-
terbury. I shall deal with this point more fully further
on. For the present suffice it to sav, that the Catholic
Church has for ages persistently refused to recognise
Protestants as in any true sense Christims. Her heaviest
curses have been hurled at them as God-forsaken and
infamous heretics; and the severity of the persecutions
she has inflicted upon them with her hand has proved
the sincerity of the anathemas she has uttered against
them with her tongue. She had the control of
the seven channels through which alone Divine grace
was supposed to flow, and not a drop would she
allow to fall on the heart of a heretic. The Pope,
as the representative of St. Peter on earth, had the
keys of Heaven, and not the ghost of a Protestant would


he allow to enter that happy abode. But there is no logic
so stern and unrelenting as the logic of circumstances.
And circumstances have compelled that Church, whose
boast is that she never changes, to so far alter her attitude
if not her principles, as to recognise Protestants as Chris-
tians, though of course of a very shady character. As re-
presented by one of her Archbishops, she positively ex-
tends the hand —certainly it is only the left hand—of Chris-
tian fellowship to those she long ago handed over whole-
sale to the Devil; and imploringly asks them to assist her
in keeping back the torrent of infidelity, which threatens, if
not checked, to sweep them all away! But let me give
Protestants a word of warning. lam not going to fight
their battles against Catholics. They have champions
enough on their side who consider themselves quite equal
to that task. Besides, as a matter of fact, lam as much
opposed to them in the main as lam to Catholics. But let
me warn them that Dr. Vaughan’s recognition of them
as fellow Christians cannot in the nature of things be
sincere. It is a distinct violation of one of the cardinal
and vital principles of his church ; and therefore it must
necessarily be hypocritical, and intended only for a tem-
porary and selfish purpose. And therefore, if Protestants
are simple enough to respond to his condescending and
pathetic appeal, and assist Catholics in stamping out Free-
thought, and the combined effort succeeds, they may de-
pend upon it that Popery will show its gratitude to Pro-
testantism for its help, by turning upon it also, and crush-
ing it out of existence if it has the power ; for Popery will
tolerate nothing opposed to itself, if able to destroy it.
Speaking of the Archbishop’s lecture generally, it must
be admitted that it displays a good deal of ability and
ingenuity, and is upon the whole an eloquent production;
but it is by no means so logical, candid, and consistent as
could be desired. Indeed, I have seldom read a production
so full of plausible sophistry, audacious assumption, glar-
ing misrepresentation, unblushing arrogance, and preten-
tious superiority. I will endeavour to expose a few of its
sophistries, correct some of its misrepresentations, and un-
mask what appears to me to be its ultimate design.
There is little in the introductory portion of the lecture
that challenges criticism. All will agree with his remarks
upon the hidden springs of human conduct, and the secret
M


forces of nature, by which she works out her mighty pur-
poses. He says that he does “ not propose to treat the
subject as a theologian so much as a philosopher ; not so
much even as a Churchman, as a citizen of no mean city; ”
but I regret to say that the result does not justify the
pleasing expectation thus raised. Had he treated the sub-
ject as an unbiassed and truth-seeking philosopher, I ven-
ture to say that he would have turned out a very different
production from the one before us. But as Mr. David
Buchanan pointed out in his excellent letter in the Herald
the other day, he did nothing of the sort. Instead, for
example, of grappling with the intellectual and philoso-
phic Materialism, as represented by many of the master
minds of the present day, and trying to ascertain its real
sources, and how far it is based on truth and right; he
confines himself to a coarse and revolting form of Material-
ism, which he identifies with revolutionary and destructive
Communism ; and holds that up as a scarecrow to frighten
simple Christians of all sections, and stir them up to efforts
of mutual self-defence. And hence it is much more as a
theologian than as a philosopher that he deals with the
subject, or rather, his effort is essentially that of a priest ,
whose one great aim is the strengthening and glorifying
of the Catholic Church.
The lecture is divided into four parts. In the first part
he deals with Paganism; in the second, with Superna-
turalism; in the third, with Materialism; and in the fourth,
he points out the means by which he thinks Materialism
can be most successfully encountered and crushed. I shall
confine myself principally to the first part this evening.
I.—ln 'speaking of Paganism, I would observe in the
first place, that the Archbishop seriously underrates and mis-
represents it.
Par be it from me to defend the errors and evils of
Paganism ; but I must, in the interests of truth and justice,
raise a protest against Dr. Vaughan’s unqualified and
sweeping condemnation of it. He only speaks of the
Paganism of the past. It might have played out its part,
and vanished from the theatre of time, for any reference
he makes to* its present existence. But it still lives and
operates as one of the mighty forces which sway man’s
passions, control his intellect, and mould his character.
Nay, it extends over a much wider domain, numbers


vastly more believers, and is far more loyally followed than
his boasted Christianity. It is to the Paganism of the
past, however, that I must confine myself as he has done.
That the ancient Pagans were inferior to us in some things
is only what might be expected, if the law of Progressive
Development is the one under which the Creator has placed
the human race ; but that the} r were at least equal to us
in other respects, no impartial student of the past can deny.
But it is only with the religious and moral aspect of
Paganism that I have to deal this evening. Perhaps on
a future occasion I may deal with other features of it, and
show how much even the Christendom of the present is
indebted to it.
In the Paganism of the past Dr. Vaughan sees nothing
good. It was a barren wilderness, without one lovely and
fertile spot: a dark picture, without one line of light and
beauty to relieve it. As he surveys it from his Archiepis-
copal chair, he beholds nothing but debasing error and
reeking corruption. And I regret to say that many
Christians of all denominations commit the same mistake
in dealing with it. It is a common practice to extol
Christianity at the expense of Paganism ; on the unmanly
principle of blackening another’s character, that the sup-
posed excellencs of our own may appear more striking by
contrast. And of course Dr. Vaughan and his fellow
Christians f have the authority of the so-called word of
Cod for their conduct. An insignificant nation of ancient
Jews had the audacity to arrogate to themselves the posi-
tion of God’s “ chosen people; ” and to assume that all
the nations outside their own narrow boundaries were left
in darkness, uncared for by the Creator of all. This
groundless assumption runs through and disfigures the
whole of the Old Testament, An assumption of a similar
character pervades the New Testament. The old dispen-
sation passes away, and a new one takes its place ; but
the new one is based on narrow, sectarian principle
like the old, and assumes that some people are more the
children of God, and have a stronger claim to his favour
than others. Hence, the Old Testament distinction be-
tween Jew and Gentile, becomes in the New Testament
the distinction between Christian and Grentile. But who,
save sectarian bigots, will deny that the teeming millions
of ancient Gentiles, or Pagans, were as much the children


of the Eternal Father as the handful of self-elected Jews ?
And who, save the same little-souled persons, will deny
that the vast empires over which Paganism still reigns
supreme enjoy as much of the Divine favour, according to
the measure of their capacity, as those nations in which
Christianity predominates ?
I will now proceed to briefly notice what the Archbishop
says of Paganism, first, in its relation to God; secondly,
in its relation to man; and thirdly, as to its source or
“hidden springs,” and shew that he has under-estimated
and misrepresented it in each particular.
1. In the first place, let us glance at his views of Pagan-
ism in relation to God.
Dr. Vaughan says that—“As a man’s God is, so will
man be If a people’s God by like to Typhon,
the people will be gloomy; if it resembles Moloch, it will
be cruel; if the Paphian Venus, the people will melt
away into softness and effeminacy.” Of the Pagan Gods
he says that they were “wicked natures”; “fierce,”
“moody,” and “powerful”; “monsters of cruelty, bru-
tality, vindictiveness,” who were “to be feared and to be
propitiated.” According to him they had not one redeem-
ing quality. Their hearts were never touched with one
noble sentiment; their countenances were never lit up with
one friendly smile; their hands were never extended to
perform one beneficent act. Is this true ? Upon what I
have quoted I would remark :
(1.) That what he says of a people partaking more or less of
the characteristics of their God may be accepted as a univer-
sal truth. Gods are generally in the first instance the
creation of a few minds. That is to say, they are but the
embodied conception of certain minds, which have given
attributes more fully and strikingly developed than they
are found to be in their fellow men. The mass beneath
them are by degrees imbued with their ideas of God ; and
as they are not able to conceive of anything greater or
better, they come to accept and worship those man-created
Gods as veritable Divinities; and are gradually influenced
and mouled by their predominating characteristics. Hence,
if a God be intolerant, his worshippers will persecute ;if
cruel, they will torture; if vindictive, they will not forgive ;
if lascivious, they will be sensual; if chaste, they will
cultivate sentiments of purity ; if benevolent, they will be


kind-hearted; if no respector of persons, they will seek to
bring all men to a knowledge of him ; and so on, till we
reach the end of the virtues and vices of human nature.
In this fact we have the key which explains the difference
between the God of Popery and the Gods of Protestantism.
Catholics and Protestants profess to worship the same God;
but in reality they worship the God-idea, which is uni-
versal, as modified by the founders of those systems in the
first instance, and as now embodied in their respective
creeds. I will presently illustrate this in regard to Popery
as represented by the Archbishop.
(2.) I would next remark that Dr. Vaughan’s description
of Pagan Gods is not strictly and universally true. That
some of them were the low, brutal, abominable beings he
describes; and that their reflex influence upon many of the
people produced a superstitious and corrupt state of things
in many quarters, is no doubt true enough. But surely he
knows that the images before which many persons bowed
were no more worshipped as Gods, than the images of
Christ, the Virgin Mary, and various Saints before which
Roman Catholics bow are worshipped as Gods. The use
of those images in Romanism is defended on the ground
that they appeal to the outward senses, and help the de-
votions of the faithful; and the Archbishop would doubt-
less indignantly repel the charge that they tend to foster a
spirit of idolatry, and divert the mind from the worship of
God. And does not simple justice, to say nothing of
charity, demand that a similar explanation and defence
should be given of the so-called idol-worship of Paganism ?
Let Romanism try Paganism by the same rules as it wishes
to be tried by. Besides, Dr. Vaughan must know that
some of the ancient Pagans entertained views of the Supreme
Being which, for beauty, spirituality, sublimity, compre-
hensiveness, and rationality, are not surpassed by anything
to be found either in the Bible or modern theology. He
quotes Dr. Newman’s definitiou of God, which is meta-
physically grand, and theologically noble and elevating.
But I fearlessly affirm that the God Dr. Newman defines
is neither the God of the Bible generally, nor the God be-
lieved in by the majority of Christians. Christians as a
rule fall as far short of Dr. Newman’s exalted and cqmpre-
hensive conception of the Supreme Being, as the mass of
Pagans fell short of the conceptions of the same Being, as


entertained by some of the master minds among them.
The Infinite and Absolute One can never be fully known to
man. When we speak of God we simply use a term which
represents a finite conception of the Great Power
who is the life and soul of the universe. The
God-idea as J have said pervades all nations; but the
form it assumes depends mainly on the mental and moral
characteristics of the people, or rather of certain leading
spirits among them. And therefore, when I)r. Vaughan
speaks of the revolting forms that idea assumed in
ancient Paganism, he should not have suppressed the fact
that by some Pagans it was embodied in as lofty and ra-
tional conceptions as the human mind has ever put forth.
Let us notice two or three of those Pagan notions, and
then say whether the Archbishop’s remarks on this fea-
ture of Paganism are warranted. Anaxagoras regarded
God as an Infinite Mind. Hesiod ascribed unlimited know-
ledge and universal wisdom to him. Socrates spoke of
him as the Universal Mind, governing and actuating uni-
versal nature. Plato, says a writer, “ believed that God
constituted a Being comprising all other beings, and was
the cause of all things terrestrial and celestial. He did
not conceive that a clear knowledge of God was possible;
but that his perfection was such that all his works must
necessarily be good.” Zoroaster designated him as “ the
One Supreme, both in nature and mind.” Orpheus taught
that —there is One unknown Being, prior to all beings,
and exalted above all. He is the author of all things,
even of the ethereal sphere, and all things below it. He
is Life, Counsel, and Light, which all signify One Power,
the same that drew all things visible and invisible out of
nothing.” Pythagoras affirmed that —“ God is neither
the object of carnality, nor the subject of passion ; but is
invisible'find supremely intelligent. In his body he is
like unto Lipht, and in his soul he resembles Truth. He
is the universal Spirit that pervades and diffuseth itself
over all nature. All things receive their life from him.
There is but One only God ; who is not as some are apt
to suppose, seated above the world and beyond the orb of
the universe ; but being himself in all, lie sees all the
things that fill immensity—the only Principle, the Light
of heaven, the Father of all. He produces everything;
lie is the reason, the life, and the motion of all things.”


Aristotle asserted that he is “ The Eternal Living Being,
most noble of all beings, distinct from matter, without
parts or succession; who understands everything, and
continuing himself immovable, gives motion to all things
and enjoys in himself a perfect happiness, knowing
and contemplating himself with infinite pleasure
There are many inferior deities, but one
Mover. All that is said of the human shape of those
deities is mere fiction, intended to instruct the common
people, and secure their observance of God’s laws. A
Spiritual substance is the cause of the universe, and the
source of all order and beauty, all motions, and all the
forms we so much admire in it There is one
Supreme Intelligence, who acts with order, proportion,
and design, the source of all that is just and good.” The
Vedas, one of the most ancient Bibles in the world,
says that “the vulgar look for Gods in water; the
ignorant think that they reside in wood, brick, or
stone ; men of more extensive knowledge seek theiti in the
celestial orbs; but wise men worship the Universal Soul.
For there is but one Living and True God, everlasting,
and without parts or passions ; of infinite power, wisdom,
and goodness ; the Maker and Preserver of all things.”
Now, in the face of such grand and ennobling views of
God as these, I am amazed that Ur. Vaughan should
have indulged in such a wholesale condemnation of
Paganism, so far as its Gods are concerned, as disfigures
his lecture Many of the profoundest thinkers of our
age are inclining more to some of those Pagan notions of
God than to the theological views of either the Catholic
or Protestant Churches. The existence is affirmed of but
“ One ” God, who is described as a “Universal Spirit,”
“the Maker and Preserver of all things,” “ the source of
all order and beauty,” and “the Father of all." What
worthier views of God do we possess, or can we desire ?
If it be said that the mass of the people did not entertain
these views, but others more grovelling and degrading,
my reply is, that it is questionable whether the difference
in their notions of God between the great bulk of Pagans
and the master minds among them, was greater than it is
between the most ignorant and the best educated Catholics
on the same subject. There are millions of Catholics who
more or less confound a tottering old man —the Pope —


with God; and millions more whose idea of God is that
of an Almighty Tyrant, whose wrath can only he appeased
by the frequent offering of sacrifice, in the form of the
Mass, and whose favour can only be obtained through the
agency of well feed priests, who stand between him and
their trembling little souls.
(3.) In the third place, I hold that so far as Dr.
Vaughan’s description is true, it is quite as applicable to
the God of Popery as to most of the Gods of Paganism.
When he said that “ as a man’s God is, so will man be,”
it does not appear to have struck him that his own Church
furnishes one of the most striking illustrations of the truth
of his statement that can be desired. Who is the God of
Popery, and how has the history of that system reflected
the distinguishing attributes of its God ? The Archbishop
will no doubt say that the God of the Bible is the God of
the Catholic Church. But there are virtually two Gods in
the Bible. In other words, the God-idea assumes two
distinct forms, and manifests itself in diametrically oppo-
site ways in that book. Or, perhaps, I had better put it,
that the God of the Bible is a being with two facts. One
is bright, noble, and attractive ; the other is dark, despi-
cable and repellent. W 7 ith the better side of this dual
character I have nothing to do this evening: it is sufficient
that I admit its existence ; and if Dr. Vaughan had done
the same with the God-idea as embodied in Paganism, I
should have had nothing to say against him on this
point; but he tried to make it appear that it was all
bad. Of course I regard the God in question as purely
an Ideal Personage —the mental creation of the writers of
the Bible; but the Ideal has had all the influence of a Living
Reality on its worshippers. Unfortunately, Popery fell
violently in love with the worst side of this imaginary
Being; and through succeeding ages she has remained
unquestionably faithful to her first choice. It has been
the dark side of this Biblical Ideal that she has exhibited
to the world most frequently; and the baneful influence
of its repugnant features that she has exemplified most
fully. Of its lovlier side she has afforded but occasional
glimpses ; and the beneficient influence of its Divine form
has been proportionately small.
I could if time permitted point out many striking re-
semblances between the worst characteristics of this dual


Being, or rather Devil-God, of the Bihle and Popery; de-
monstrating the truth of the Archbishop’s dictum, that a
people will be like the God they worship ; but a few must
suffice. The God of the Bible was a jealous God, and
would suffer no other God to divide with him the allegiance
of his people ; and Popery fought till she made the bishop
of Rome the head of the Christian Church, and crushed
every would-be rival after that position was attained. He
made his chosen people believe that they were much better
than others, and must mix as little as possible with
“heathens”; and Popery fills Catholics with the same
self-conceit, and forbids them mixing more than is neces-
sary with “ heretics.” He had a magnificent Temple to
be worshipped in, and where the symbols of his pre-
sence, power, and glory could be deposited ; how far
Popery has been inflated with the same vanity let
her churches, from St. Peter’s at Rome downwards,
testify. He commanded his people to prove the sincerity
of their devotion by presenting him with various and oft-
repeated offerings—some of which were of no mean value :
and Popery enjoins the faithful to evince their loyalty to
the “ Holy See ” in the same practical form. The smell
of incense was grateful to his olfactory nerves ; and Popery
regales her devotees with the same delicious perfume. He
had a great taste for sacrificial blood, and finally gratified
it in tfie death of his only begotten son; and Popery has
cultivated the same noble taste, and indulges* it daily in
a sacrificial farce, called the “ Mass.” His priests could
only officiate at his altars in dresses of peculiar pattern
and costly value; and Popery decks her priests with gor-
geous robes, in the same humble and unostentatious spirit.
He was very anxious that his priests should be liberally
supplied with the good things of life, and fixed a generous
scale according to which the people were to contribute of
the best things they had towards their support; and Popery
manifests the same solicitude for the temporal welfare of
her priests, and in the most considerate spirit, and
with the nicest sense of justice, she taxes her followers
for their benefit. Nor does the resemblance end
here; there are darker and more repulsive features
which they possess in common. The God of the Bible
would not allow his people to think and act as they
chose in religious matters; they had to accept the religion
0


he prescribed for them as the only true one, and departures
from it were punished in some cases with death: and
Popery claims that hers is the only true religion, is bitterly
opposed to freedom of thought, and tried to stamp out
what she deemed heresy by putting heretics to death,
when she had the power. TheGodof the Bible, claiming the
whole earth as his own, gave away any beautiful and fertile
country which he thought they would like to his people,
and directed that its inhabitants should be either extermi-
nated or enslaved by his chosen ones; and Popery claims,
in the person of her head, the Pope, the right to depose
kings, and give nations to whom she chooses, and
she exercised that assumed right in the past, and
would do so again if she had the power, though it might
involve the destruction of immense property, and the loss
of millions of lives. The God of the Bible was often
frustrated in his benevolent designs to secure the obe-
diance of his subjects to his righteous laws; and some-
times he shewed his magnanimity by ruthlessly destroying
them, as in the case of the antediluvians, whom he swept
off the earth with a flood : and when Popery has failed in
her disinterested efforts to convert hostile people into good
Catholics, she has not unfrequently wreaked her vengeance
upon them in the same benevolent fashion, as the Wal-
denses and others could bear witness; and if her work of
extermination was not quite so complete as that of her
Prototype, it was because she had not such an efficient
agent of destruction at her command as a pitiless flood.
And, finally, the God of the Bible not only inflicted suffer-
ings, with "all the severity of a cruel and unscrupulous
despot, upon the bodies of those who had incurred his dis-
pleasure ; but he threatened to consign their souls to
“ everlasting punishment” in hell; as though it would be
exceedingly soothing to his disappointed feelings, and
gratifying to his vindictive nature, to bo able to look down
from his throne in heaven, and behold their writhings, and
listen to their wails of anguish, for ever : and Popery, still
faithfully reflecting the image of her God, not only follows
unbelievers in her dogmas to the very boundaries of this
world, torturing, and even burning them when circum-
stances favor her kindly intentions; but she also pursues
them into the world to come, hands them over to the
custody of an amiable and kindhearted being called the
Devil, and assures those whom it may concern that they
u shall without doubt perish everlastingly !"


These are a few points of resemblance between Popery
and the God she adores. It would be as easy as it would
be edifying to trace the likeness in other particulars, but
time forbids. It will thus be seen that in speaking of the
resemblance of a people to their God, Dr. Vaughan
uttered one of the strongest condemnations of his own
system that has ever been passed upon it. And I will just
add, that Popery will never be anything but a curse to the
world, till she grasps a nobler idea of the Supreme Being,
and exhibits that idea in a more humane and tolerant
spirit. <
2. Having thus expressed my views of the Archbishop s
remarks on Paganism in its relation to God, I will
now briefly notice what says of it in its relation to man.
(1.) He first speaks of the religion of the Pagans. If
we are to believe him, they had no “ love and reverence
for their Gods, and “no sense of guilt, or sin, or repent-
ance, or supernatural love they were full of *“ hypo-
crisy, the cringing of sycophants, and the credulities of
fear and apparently had no idea of a state of conscious
existence beyond the grave. Here the disposition to un-
derrate and misrepresent other systems than his own
betrays itself again. Unfortunately we have not all the
materials that could be desired to enable us to form a
correct and impartial judgment. Paul’s description of
them, to which the Archbishop refers, must be accepted
with" caution ; for it was that of an enthusiast, who depre-
cated other systems that his own might appear to better
advantage. Pagan writers themselves do not warrant the
sweeping condemnation of the Archbishop. The more
ignorant and degraded Pagans could hardly be expected
to have a very keen sense of guilt, or clear perception of
religious obligations. Nor could they entertain very
elevated and purifying notions of their Gods. The Beings
they worshipped were not worthy of human homage;
they were well calculated to fill their devotees with that
credulous fear and cringing sycophancy just spoken of.
But surely there was something brighter and better than
this in the religions of Greece and Rome, of India and
China, of Persia and Egypt; and I will prove this by ex-
tracts from their Sacred Books in a lecture by-and-bye. In-
deed Paganism was as distinctly a system of Supernaturalism ,
though of a somewhat different and inferior type, as the


system is which Dr. Vaughan designates by that term. It
recognised the spirituality of man’s nature, believed in the
intervention of Gods and other spiritual beings in human
affairs, and taught the existence of a state of rewards and
punishments beyond the grave. The more enlightened
Pagans had no sympathy witli the grovelling and super-
stitious parts of the system. Nor do I believe they would
have any sympathy with some things in connection with
what is claimed to be a Divinely given Supernaturalism,
as found in the Catholic Church. If one of those illus-
trious Pagans of olden times, for example, could enter a
Eomish place of worship, and see the people crossing
themselves with holy water, crouching before images of
wood or brass, counting beads and mumbling prayers 5 if
he could see them devoutly contemplating the mysteries of,
and extracting the virtues from, a fragment of the cross of
Christ, or the tooth of one saint, the toe nail of another,
a piece of rag that covered a third, or some other precious
relic which Popery has manufactured; if he could see
them at the Mass, and understand the significance of the
wafer they devour with such unctuous delight and abso-
lute completeness; and above all, if lie coidd see them
when kneeling in abject submission in the Confessional, or
when cowering under the frown of a priest, who is telling
them of the wrath and hurling at them the threatenings
of their God, for some offence they have committed, —if he
could see these things I say, would not that Pagan be
likely to rebuke Dr. Vaughan in terms like these ? “ Say
no more about the degrading superstitions of Paganism,
with scenes like these before you ; taunt us not with un-
reasoning credulity, when your own people display such a
capacious faith; dwell no longer on our cringing syco-
phancy, in view of these trembling, slave-like followers of
your own boasted system ; and hint not at our cannibalism,
when you Catholics actually profess to eat a part of your
God once a week!”
(2.) The Archbishop next speaks of the morality of the
Pagans. He asks—“ Had the Pagans then no code of
ethics.'”’ and answers, "None. Their mythologies and
legendary tales amused the multitude, but they had no
moral or dogmatic bearing.” And again he says—
‘ Paganism had absolutely no creed, no dogma ; it had no
sacred book : nothing resembling a Pentateuch, or Gospel,


or even a Koran.” Shades of Buddha. Confucius, and
Zoroaster, rebuke this audacious slanderer ! Are not the
Vedas and Zendavesta “Sacred Books?” Are they not
to hundreds of millions of the human race precisely what
our Bible is to Christians ? Do not those vast hosts of
Pagans believe them to be Divine Revelations ? and what
is more, do they not conform much more strictly to the
requirements of those Sacred Books than the majority of
Christians do to those of the Scriptures they possess ? And
were not those Pagan Bibles in existence centuries before
at least the Now Testament portion of our own was
written? They had dogmas, though of course less
rational and humane than some of those which Popery
teaches. They had creeds, though not quite so luminous
and comprehensive as that of St. Athanasius. And as to
their ethics, they would in some respects bear a favourable
comparison with anything in this category that Dr.
Vaughan can produce. Nay, the brightest gem of the
ethereal part of the Archbishop’s Supernaturalism was
either stolen or box-rowed from the very Paganism he con-
demns. For the Christian’s “ golden rule” was taught by
Confucius five hundred years before Christ delivered his
celebrated Sermon on the Mount. And if Paganism had
produced no other moral code, this simple rule, if faith-
fully observed, is sufficient for all the practical purposes of
life, containing as it does the germs of principles for the
regulation of human conduct which are susceptible of the
widest application. If this Pagan rule of doing unto
others as we would they should do to us —or rather, of not
doing to others what we would not like them to do to us,
which is the better and more strictly Pagan way of putting
it —were universally acted upon, there would soon be such
a political, religious, social, and domestic state of things
as the wox-ld has never seen. That there was much immo-
rality of various kinds amongst the Pagans of the past,
and that there is much of the same undesirable thing
among them in the present, no one will deny ; it is exactly
what might be expected, if cei-tain views of humanity be
correct; but is there no immorality in Christendom, where
Dr. Vaughan’s vaunted Supernaturalism has held
triumphant sway for centui-ies ? Of course, he must
admit that there is a frightful amount of it, and that,
too, in some of its most revolting forms; and the princi


pies by which he will explain the prevalance of immo-
rality in Christendom, will in the main account for its
prevalence in Pagandom. It would be well for the
Archbishop to remember the familiar adage about those
persons who live in glass houses not throwing stones. I
believe that statistics will prove that the average morality
of the people under the Paganism of the present day, is
higher than it is among those who are under the dominion
of Christian Supernaturalism. Travellers have repeatedly
assured the public that there are many Pagan countries,
as we in our pharisaical self-righteousness call them, in
which, for example, if you were to land a total stranger,
and had occasion to leave your luggage unprotected for a
few hours, it would be safer than in Christian Sydney ;
nay, safer even than in “holy Rome” itself— the very
“ heart of the Supernatural,” as Dr. Vaughan designates
that ancient city!
3. Having thus noticed the Archbishop’s remarks on
r aganism in its relation to God and man, I must just
say a word or two upon his views as to its source, or
“ hidden spring.”
According to the Archbishop, ‘‘ it consists in that centre
of fierce lust in the. animal man, which, when the counter-
checks are taken off, gains mastery over the reason,
stains the imagination, and corrupts the Ueart.” In other
words, it is the intense animalism of human nature. But
I cannot regard this as strictly correct. I submit that the
real source of ancient Paganism may be indicated by one
word— ignorance. The very animalism which Dr. Vaughan
speaks of was itself an effect, and had its hidden spring
m that ignorance which enveloped the mind as a dense
cloud The mass of the people were ignorant of them-
selves, of their physical, mental, and moral constitution, of
the real end of existence, and the purest springs of con-
duct ; and they became to a large extent the sport of un-
bridled passion, the dupes of fantastic imagination, and
the victims of misdirected energies. They were ignorant
of nature, of its laws and forces; and in the play of its
elements, in the flashing of the liglitn ng, the pealing of
the thunder, the howling of the tempos , or the roaring of
the cataract, they beheld exhibitions of Deific displeasure ;
and in its milder and more lovely forms they joyfully road
the indications of his kindly will and intentions : and


hence, by degrees the forces of nature came to be personi-
fied and worshipped as Gods. They were ignorant of the
source and conditions of true individual happiness, and of
the best kind of preparation in this world for a state of
immediate peace and felicity in the world to come ; and
the consequence too often was, that instead of realising
the solid, enduring reality they were in quest of, they only
grasped an empty bubble, or fleeting shadow. In a word,
they were ignorant of many things which are essential to
the full and harmonious development of all man’s facul-
ties, to the proper regulation of his conduct in all the
relations of life, to his highest social and religious well-
being, and therefore, to the best interests of individuals,
communities, and nations. And the result was Paganism,
which, though not so dark and uninviting—so devoid of
any redeeming qualities, as the Archbishop has tried to
make out, was by no means the highest state that
humanity is capable of reaching, even in those countries
where physical and climatic conditions are not so favour-
able to human development and progress as in some parts
of the world. And this Paganism will continue to exist
until knowledge supersedes that ignorance which is its
hidden spring.
I have thus endeavoured to establish my first proposi-
tion, that Dr. Vaughan has underestimated and misrepre-
sented Paganism, in its relation to God and man, and as
to the source whence it sprung.
11. But I affirm as a second proposition, that if Pagan-
ism be the horrible thing the Archbishop declares, and if
his views of God in his relation to man and his govern-
ment of the world be correct, then God is much more to
blame for the existence and evils of this Paganism than man.
I am sorry that the time I allowed myself is so nearly
expired, that I can only say two or three woi’ds in support
of this proposition. I cannot at present enter into my
own views of the Supreme Being and his relation to man,
or I could easily shew that, looked at from the stand-
point of the “ Harmonial Philosophy,” Paganism is
easily accounted for, as a natural and necessary stage in
the career of Progressive Development, for which the
Creator destined humanity. But it is with the Christian
theory of God, and his relation to man that I have to do
on this occasion. Dr. Vaughan believes in the existence


of a personal God: and lie holds that this God is
the absolute governor of the world ; that he sustains in-
timate relations with man, and is able to make direct com-
munications to him; and that the superiority of Super-
naturalism to Paganism is owing to the fact that the
former is a direct revelation from this God, while the latter
is essentially a human product. My reason and conscience
alike condemn this view of God, as being false, unjust,
and blasphemous. If a Divine revelation was necessary
for the guidance, elevation, and happiness of one man, it
was equally necessary for all men; if God was able to
communicate such a revelation to a few persons, he was
able to communicate it to the whole human race; and if he
determined to give it to a portion of his intelligent crea-
tures, common justice, to say nothing of unbounded bene-
volence, required that he should give it to the whole, that
all mankind, for whose temporal and eternal welfare he is
said to be profoundly concerned, might enjoy a boon of
such unspeakable value. Who were the handful of Jews
that they should be singled out as the recipients and cus-
todians of such a precious treasure? and what had the
millions of Gentiles done, that this blessing should be with-
held from them ? What special claims had Matthew and
and Mark, Luke and John, Peter and Paul, that they
should be made acquainted wi h the secrets of the Most
High, and shown the way to heaven ; while Seneca and
Lycurgus, Zoroaster and Confucius, Socrates and Plato
should be kept in ignorance, and left to grope their way
to a blissful immortality as best they could ? The usual
orthodox cant about the “ mvsterioxis ways of Providence”
is not a satisfactory answer to these questions. Nor does
it meet the difficulty to allege that man had sinned and
forfeited his claim upon the goodness if God ; that the re-
velation vouchsafed to the Jews and Christians was purely
a thing of grace and not of justice ; and that, therefore,
the l’agans from whom it was withheld had no valid ground
of complaint. This is not only begging the qxiestion ; it
is placing an unsupported assumption against some of the
clearest dictates of reason, justice, and benevolence. We
have no evidence that the first human pair were created in
a state of innocence; and that they fell and lost the favour
of God, involving the whole humane race to the end of
time in the consequences of their trangression. This ap


pears to me to be a groundless fiction, invented for reli-
gious and theological purposes ; and as such, a rapidly-
increasing number of the master minds of the day and re-
iecting it. But if it were true ; if the first pair did fall,
and in some incomprehensible sense involve the unborn
millions of the race, it was because their Creator had made
them too weak to resist the temptation he so cleverly de-
vised and placed before them; and, therefore, if a reve-
lation became necessary as a means of restoring some of the
fallen, it was equally necessary for the restoration of the
whole of them ; and ought, as already urged, to have been
given to all alike as a matter of mere justice, to say
nothing of mercy and goodness. And hence, if Ur.
Vaughan’s views of God and his relation to man be cor-
rect, I cannot but regard him as being chiefly responsible
for the existence of Paganism, and its attendant evils ; but
as I dare not blaspheme the Almighty by attributing any-
thing of the sort to him, it follows as a necessary conse-
quence, that I am bound to reject the Archbishop s views
of God as being false in themselves, and mischievous in
their effects. . , . ~ ~
111. I affirm as a third proposition, that the Roman
Catholicism which Dr. Vaughan so loudly praises is to a
very large extent an embodiment and perpetuation oj that very
Paganism he so emphatically condemns.
It is surprising that a man of the Archbishop s know-
ledge and penetration should have indulged in such a
tirade of unqualified abuse of Paganism, seeing that his
own system is so largely indebted to it, and so striking y
resembles it. Popery in the main is but slightly trans-
formed Paganism. It is scarcely like the simple, and in
some respects beautiful, religion established by Christ in
anything but name. Any one with the New Testament m
his hand entering a Romish Church, and making himself
well acquainted witli the Romish system, will be amazed
at the audacity of men who claim that it is the religion
taught in that book. Whatever doctrinal and practical
errors there are in the Christianity of the New Testament,
it is a much better religion than that which under its name
bee ame the religion of the Roman Einpiie m the c aj-s ®
Constantine, and is now taught in Catholic churches, lhe
Paganism of the Roman Empire is supposed to have been
conquered and stamped out by Christianity ; butm reality


it was baptised and brought into the Christian Church,
but little changed except in name. Instead of being
swallowed up by the new religion, it well-nigh swallowed
it up, and formed by far the largest portion of the system
which became the religion of the state. Most of the rites
and dogmas of Paganism were incorporated with Chris-
tianity under Constantine, and became its distinguishing
characteristics.
Dr. Draper has shewn this very clearly in his excellent
work entitled “ The Conflict between Religion and
Science.” He says:—“Olympus was restored, but the
divinities passed under other names. The more powerful
provinces insisted on the adoption of their time-honoured
conceptions. Views of the Trinity, in accordance with
Egyjitian traditions, were established. Not only was the
adoration of Isis under a new name restored, but even her
image, standing on the crescent moon, re-appeared. The
well-known effigy of that Goddess, with the infant Horus
in her arms, has descended to our days in the beautiful,
artistic creations of the Madonna and child
Heathen rites were adopted; a pompous and splendid
ritual, gorgeous robes, mitres, tiaras, wax tapers, proces-
sional services, lustrations, gold and silver vases, were in-
troduced. The Roman lituus, the chief ensign of the
augurs, became the crozier, Churches were built over the
tombs of martyrs, and consecrated with rites borrowed
from the ancient laws of the Roman pontiffs ....
The virtues of of consecrated water were upheld. Images
and relics were introduced into the Churches, and worship-
ped after the fashion of the heathen Gods. It was given
out that prodigies and miracles were to be seen in certain
places, as in heathen times .... The apotheosis of
of the old Roman times was replaced by canonization ;
tutelary saints succeeded local mythological divinities.”
Bishop Newton held the same views as to the connection
between Paganism and Popery, and as quoted by Dr.
Draper, he thus summarises the points of resemblance
between the two:—“ls not the worship of saints and
angels now in all respects the same that the worship of
demons was in former times ? The name only is different,
the thing is identically the same, .... the deified
men of the Christians are substituted for the deified men
of the heathens. The promoters of this worship were


sensible tliat it was the same, and that the one succeeded to
the other,; and, as the worship is the same, so likewise it
is performed with the same ceremonies. The burning of
incense or perfumes on several altars at one and the same
time; the sprinkling of holy water, or a mixture of salt
and common water, at going into and coming out of places
of public worship; the lighting up of a great number of
lamps and wax candles in broad daylight before altars
and statues of those deities; the hanging up of votive
offerings and rich presents as attestations of so many
miraculous cures and deliverances from diseases and
dangers ; the canonization or deification of deceased
worthies ; the assigning of distinct provinces or prefectures
to departed heroes and saints; the worshipping and adoring
of the dead in their sepulchres, shrines,, and relics; the
consecrating and bowing down to images; the attribu-
ting of miraculous powers and virtues to idols; the setting
up of little oratories, altars, and statues in the streets,
highways, and on the tops of mountains ; the carrying of
images and relics in pompous procession, with numerous
lights and music and singing; flagellations at solemn
seasons under the notion of penance ; a great variety of
religious orders and fraternities of priests; the shaving of
priests, or the tonsure as it is called, on the crown of their
heads; the imposing of celibacy and vows of chastity on
the religious of both sexes—all these and many more rites
and ceremonies are equally parts of Pagan and Popish
superstition. Nay, the very same temples, the very same
images, which were once consecrated to Jupiter and the
other demons, are now consecrated to the Virgin Mary and
the other saints. The very same rites and inscriptions are
ascribed to both ; the very same prodigies and miracles are
related of these as of those. In short, almost the whole
of Paganism is converted and applied to Popery; the one
is manifestly formed upon the same plan and principles as
the other, so that there is not only a conformity, but even
a uniformity, in the worship of ancient and modern, of
Heathen and Christian Rome.”
It will thus be seen that what Dr. Vaughan calls
Paganism is in the main but the Popery of which he is a
representative; and not only are they identical in the
leading features of their doctrines and ceremonies, but
also to a large extent in the shocking effects they have


respectively produced; for many of the abominations of
Paganism have reappeared under Popery : and therefore,
in condemning the former the Archbishop virtually con-
demns the latter, whose praises he delights to sing.
I have thus, as far as time has allowed, endeavoured to
establish three propositions: first, that Dr. Vaughan has
underestimated and misrepresented Paganism in several
respects ; secondly, that if his view of God be correct,
that Being is chiefly responsible for Paganism with all its
evils; and thirdly, that the Popery which he commends is
little other than an embodiment of the Paganism he con-
demns. I must leave the consideration of other parts of
his lecture till next Sunday evening.
In conclusion, I would just say that I believe there are
“perils of the future” far more serious than those which
Dr. Vaughan has in the main conjured up from the
gloomy depths of his own imagination. There are
“hidden springs” .of danger, away among the hills of
"Rome—danger to civil and religious liberty, to mental and
moral progress; and it is those springs, hidden in the
Vatican, that I wish to see fully uncovered, and perma-
nently exposed to public view; that proper and timely
means may be adopted, by the friends of Liberty and
Progress, to defeat the ambitious and tyrannical designs of
Popery—the greatest enemy of mankind that has ever
cursed the world : and as a small contribution towards
this desired end, 1 have undertaken to criticise the x\rch-
bishop, as the most distinguished colonial champion of
this gigantic evil; and T trust that the humble effort will
not be altogether in vain.


SECOND LECTURE,
Delivered on Sunday Evening, 22nd October, 1876.
The Theatre was crowded to overflowing, and many
PERSONS HAD TO GO AWAY, UNABLE TO OBTAIN ADMISSION.
In entering upon my second lecture in reply to Archbishop
Vaughan, I would again appeal to the Roman Catholics
who may be present, to listen quietly to what I shall say,
though you will necessarily differ from many of my
remarks. I only ask for as fair a hearing as you desire
for your Archbishop, when he publicly assails those who
are opposed to him ; and my friends are determined that I
shall have it, and are strong enough a party to give effect to
their determination. I regret that one or two persons had
to be ejected for their unseemly interruptions last Sunday
evening, and trust that method of preserving order will
not lhave to be repeated on the present occasion. Ihe
Archbishop expected to be criticised; and his followers
should show their confidence in his supposed impreg-
nability, by allowing his opponents free scope in their
efforts to dislodge him. Besides, Catholics claim to be
Christians of the purest and noblest type,, and therefore
ought to be living examples of all that is decent and
orderly. 11l behaviour in Protestants would not be sur-
prising, seeing that they are only credited with the smallest
particle, if any at all, of the grace of God, to control the
evil passions of their corrupt nature; and as regards
us Godless Freethinkers, we are supposed to be so
thorouglilv under the dominion of all that is evil, that
nothing would be thought too bad for us to resort to, to
accomplish our designs. But as for you Catholics, claiming
as vou do, such a monopoly of Divine favour and help,
we have a right to expect that you will be embodiments of
all that is amiable, generous, and good. If your boasted


okf ’f 1 di f P ° 80 y< ? u to do t 0 others as
JOU would like others to do to you, it has not much in it
to recommend it to outsiders. I trust that at all events this
vemng you will so deport yourselves, that your conduct
will not give the lie to your profession. * *
l c °nfin ed m yself to a consideration
. ugh an s remarks on Paganism, and showed that
ftat as f matte. m, „fTT e v 6d “ “ many res P ecte ™d
wiat as a mattei of fact his own system emlWlloo and
stnkmgly resembles it in all its leading features-IWy
shalf a“ far °s k na “-n for Pa B anism - This evening I
siiall, as far as time will permit, examine his views on
Supernaturalism and Materialism, and his proposals for
checking and eradicating the latter. 1 P 1 tor
I. In the first place, then, I will notice Dr. Vauehan’s
views on Super naturalism. augnan s
tW ?^• e 1 is i EOt much in this branch of the subiect
ste 1 sLil
“ wider significance /but in reX“in his^usTof 6 theke™
he makes it synonymous with Christianity, and with that
form of Christianity known as Boman Cathol elm We
begins tile second part of bis theme by sayingXt “it
was the Supernatural that crushed that spring 8 ” namely
Paganism. This is startling news As t mnttpr nf f T’
ftT/oTp aHSm aS -r lly tIW hasis > centre > and top!
stone of Paganism as it is of Christianity, as I pointed
out in my last lecture; if it was of a little coarser C
vas essentially the same in essence : and to strike out tho
supemiitura l element would be to radically change its
oc character. And as to its being “crushed” that
tively few people. It still wields its sceptre in triumph over
I*YauXn SkT™ “T™ tte ° ne OTer "T-icb what
“ We ha ™ a right to do, the large province i“
the Pagan Catholicism of his own Church holds


tions ?” and proceeds to shew what he considers the contrast
between Pagan and Supernatural teaching on these
subjects. He first speaks of God, and gives Dr. Newman’s
definition of that Being. I need not quote that definition,
as it is lengthy, but would just remark upon it, first, that
though it is a noble one, it does not surpass some of those
given by Pagan writers, as quoted in my last lecture ; and
secondly, that the God defined is not the God actually
taught by Roman Catholic Supernaturalism, but is simply
the creation of Dr, Newman’s own brain. The God of the
Archbishop’s Supernaturalism is, as I shewed last Sunday
evening, the God of the Bible; or rather, the worst half
of the dual- God of that book. Dr. Newman’s lofty and
beautiful conceptions of the Supreme Being were not sug-
gested, because nothing corresponding to them was exhi-
bited, by that God. It was not the noble Being he
defines, who cursed the first human pair, because they fell
into a trap which he set for them, knowing when he set it
that they would fall into it; who wreaked his vengeance
on the work of his own hands, after it had disappointed
his expectations, by destroying the human family, save
eight persons, with a flood; who was ignorant of certain
matters on earth, and had to come down from heaven to
inform himself about them ; who spent a whole night in
a wrestling match with Jacob, and well nigh came off
second best, having to do Jacob a bodily injury before he
would relax his grip of him ; who got into a towering
passion, and allowed Moses to remonstrate with him, and
talk him out of certain murderous designs; who com-
manded the slaughter of thousands of human beings, and
sanctioned the enslaving of captive men, and the violation
of the rights of captive women; who hardened Pharaoh’s
heart to prevent him from doing a desired thing, and then
drowned him for having acted according to the promptings
of the heart he had hardened; who, of two brothers,
loved the worst and hated the best, and that, too, before
they were born; who authorised the numbering of the
children of Israel, and then slew seventy thousand of
them, because his directions had been faithfully carried
out; who elected a small portion of the human family to
the blessings of everlasting life, and pre-ordained the vast
majority to the eternal death, and that before
either class had done good or evil; and who describes


himself as being capable of sitting on a throne inheaven
beholding the heartrending sufferings of lost souls, ana
remaining unmoved, and refusing to put forth any effort to
save them to all eternity. No, it was not this Biblical God
of whom Dr. Newman wrote, in the words so approving y
quoted by the Archbishop. And yet this is the God wh
f. the centre of, and whose influence predominates m, this
svs tem of Supematuialism. The other and lovelier half
of the dual-God of the Bible occupies an inferior position,
and wields a very limited power, in the scheme he defends,
and with that better half 1 have nothing to.do m ftrscon-
troversv, as I said in my last lecture. The Archbishop
must have calculated upon an amazing amount °* ite-
rance and credulity in his hearers and readers w hen he
thought that Dr. Newman’s fine definition of Deity would
be geneially accepted as that of the God of Superna-
turalism, which, as he uses the term, is only another name
3 light in which he makes his Supernaturalism re-
present man is quite as objectionable as its views of God. It
?s the old theological libel upon humanity, which lias been
exposed thousands of times, and wiH be disposed of in two
or three words on the present occasion. Man ilfuL almna
tion from God, and the total depravity of his nature, are
assumed aeisual. A fall is invented to afford scopejor
a man-devised scheme of redemption to dispayite»gwg£
proportions. A moral malady is aggravated, that eccle
Seal quackery may point to the efficacy of . s vaunted
nostrums Man’s own helplessness, and his liability to
everlasting death, are insisted upon, that the mercy and
power of God in raising him to eternal life may bemagn -
fied Worship is enjoined, as being of far more impor -
ance than wort A Jraight
is pointed out to him, through which he will just be able
to squeeze by the help of ghostly fathers; andtemptm|
«reward” is dangled before his eyes, which will be bestowed
upon him when he has “ performed his mission on^earth
as a good Christian —that is, a good Catholic. Such in sub
stance is Dr. Vaughan’s Supernatural idea of nian.
IZcenceVthe 'prSg
hu^anity ma whe t n o nn^rverted 1 superstitions,


and favourably circumstanced for harmoniously developing
all its powers—these are things of which his Superna-
turalism takes no cognizance, and about which he is,
therefore, as silent as the grave.
4. The Archbishop next sketches at some length the
origin and history of Supernaturalism; but with that I
have nothing to do at present. It opens up points of con-
troversy between Catholics and Protestants, rather than
between Catholics and Freethinkers. Protestants will
certainly dispute his right to identify Catholicism with the
Christianity, whose history from the time of Christ its
founder he briefly describes; and they can easily prove
the groundlessness of most of the assumptions on which
he rests the towering superstructure, which he has under-
taken to guard from the assaults of Infidelity.
5. In tracing the history and progress of Supernaturalism
Dr. Vaughan could hardly help glancing at the Reformation
as he passed along. But his mode of dealing with it con-
veys the impression that he would rather have left it un-
noticed if the design of his lecture would have allowed
him. It was necessary, however, to refer to it; and how
much milder and more generous are the terms in which he
speaks of it, than are those in which his Church generally
describe it! There are even Ritualistic Protestants who
declare the Reformation to have been a terrible mistake,
and denounce the leading actors in that great drama in
unmeasured terms of abuse; and if Dr. \ auglian had
been addressing Catholics only, and had had a different
object in view from that which then inspired him, he
would doubtless have manifested a very different spirit
towards it; but as it was, he was courting the assistance
of the Reformed Churches for certain purposes, and in the
spirit of pure Jesuitism he adapted himself to existing
circumstances. And yet the admissions he has made re-
specting the state of his own Church at the time of the
Reformation indicate an extraordinary state of things. He
says ; —“ Then the wrench came of the sixteenth century.
Should he say it ? [ lie seems doubtful as to the wisdom of
his admissions, and I do not wonder.] Pride and sensuality
even at times within the sanctuary ; sloth, wealth, and
worldliness amongst a portion of the clergy; occasional
corruptions, and even scandals amongst religious orders;
ignorance, and that fierce bigotry which follows it as a.


shadow as well as the wealth daily spread out before
their eyes offered to those who had been (“becked by
the spiritual power for their vices, and who hated disci-
pline a pretext for confusing the evil deeds of a handful
of men with the guiding principles of the
which those men trampled under foot, and for bringing
about that great land-slip, which, when once effected,
became the cause of endless and multiplying revolutions
m Upon tlm e'xtract I will only make two remarks. First,
Church in the
sixteenth century, are quite sufficient to justify the attempts
'that were made to effect a Reformation of the at*°ali
If a dignitary of that Church, sworn to defend it at aU
times, and by all the means at his command, is
to admit that there was so much so j_i„»
ity,” “ worldliness,” “ bigotry,” “ ignorance, „ scandak,
and “ corruptions” “ within the sanctuary
a portion of the clergy,” and connected with ™bgio
orders ” what may we suppose the reality to have bee
We may reasonably believe that the dark and revolting
pictures" which various eeclestashcal have
drawn of the state of things, are but httle di at
coloured. And does not Dr. Vaughan see that Ins admis
sions wiU force the conviction on many muuh> th *‘ th
must be something radically wrong with‘ J“» systo
seeing that it failed to prevent such a deplorable*
things in Christendom, when it held absolu .
versal sway? Secondly, the Archbishop grossly misre-
nresents the great body of Reformers, when he says 1 1
it was because (they had been checked for their vim,
lied disciplin o', that they seized upon evils
Church as a pretext for their efforts! to bn 0
"nt state l of things. The Reformers were by no
means perfect as men ; but the marvel is, that they w _
as good as they were, the ignoianc
rupCthat Surrounded them. With all their faults
they were among the purest and noblest men of that
memorable epoch. It was not, therefore, because the}
had Cn “checked for their vices,” and “ hated
discipline,” that they pursued the course they did, it was
the glaring errors and reeking abominations of 1 opery


that fired them with indignation, and impelled them to
agitate and labour for the changes they deemed necessary.
When Luther, for example, visited Rome, and found,
not a paradise but a pandemonium ; when he discovered
that the nearer what Dr. Yaughan calls “ the heart of the
Supernatural,” the more deep-rooted and wider spread was
the corruption, we cannot w r onder that a nature like his
wus moved to its core, and that he determined to do his
utmost to bring about a better state of things. In speak-
ing thus, it must be understood that I am not vindicating
the Reformed religion. There is much in it that lam
compelled to reject as false and pernicious. But I
cannot do other than feel a deep interest in the Reforma-
tion, as marking an important stage in the career of
Progressive Development which humanity is destined to
run ; nor withhold my admiration from those heroic men,
who, if they had done nothing more than assert the right of
private judgment in religious matters, are entitled to the
esteem and gratitude of all true Liberals. For, having
once asserted this right, it is absurd and illogical to
attempt to limit its exercise by the sectarian boundaries
with which Protestants would fain fence it round. It
must be applied as fearlessly to the dogmas and customs
of Protestantism as to those of Popery; and what the result
is when so applied, the rapidly extending Freethought
movement is an evidence. This glorious principle of the
right of private judgment will sooner or later destroy
every dogma that is not founded on truth, and every
custom that is not of beneficial tendency, whether found
on the Catholic or the Protestant side.
6. It is at the close of this second branch of his subject
—Supernaturalism—that Dr. Yaughan makes the appeal
before referred to, to all Protestants to suspend hostilities
among themselves and against the Catholic Church, and to
combine with Catholics to defeat a common adversary—Mate-
rialism. He says : —“The Denominations, if they study
their own interest, and deeply prize the doctrines which
they still retain, will, so far as the Church teaches and
defends the cardinal principles of the Supernatural, look
up to her as the great heart of Christianity, as a sustainer
more potent than all of them together, of the fundamentals
of their own religion; and as an organised armywhich it
becomes their dearest interest to encourage and assist


against a common foe And though, so long
as a common enemy does not start up to make Christians
suspend hostilities and look to their mutual preservation,
there is little prospect of a laying down of arms; still, did
such an enemy present himself ; did his attack threaten to
he formidable and sweeping; did he approach the circle
of the Supernatural with set purpose of blotting out the
idea of God, of Providence, of Sin, of Grace, of [Redemp-
tion . . . and did he appear powerful enough to bring
all this about, —in such a case would not all within the
Supernatural circle stop their hands, and turn their eyes
in one direction ? and, conscious of their mutual peril, and
how, especially in such warfare as this, union is strength,
would they not, each circle independently, encouraged by
the strength of the Central Heart, turn upon, push back, and
slay if possible the monster, the enemy of our common
race ? All, surely, in any measure interested or
identified with the Supernatural, would for the time at
least, drop mutual hostilities, and combine, each, from
its independent point of view, against the destroyer of
the hidden spring of present and future happiness.” Under
such circumstances he holds it to be “a duty, and of para-
mount importance, for the army of the Supernatural to
leave alone comparatively minor and domestic differences,
and to advance in solid column against an enemy threaten-
ing the existence of them all.”
I cannot but regard this as an extraordinary, and, for
Dr. Vaughan, a humiliating, position to occupy. The
Catholic Church having exhausted the vocabulary of abu-
sive epithets, in denouncing Protestants; having perse-
cuted them with unrelenting ferocity, wherever she has
had the power ; and having persistently denied them ad-
mission to heaven, even through the gates of purgatory,
she now, as represented by one of her Archbishops, ap-
pears before them in a new character, with a peculiar
smile on her face, and her left hand extended to give them
a half-hearted welcome as being in some sense, for the
present, fellow-Christians. The scene is as melancholy as
it is instructive. Not a word is uttered, admitting that
she was in error in the past; not a sigh of regret is
breathed for the cruel persecutions she has inflicted upon
those heretics who happened to be at her mercy ; not a
hope is expressed for permanent union, on terms of


equality as Christians. Permanent union and co-operation
is not contemplated, because her spirit and principles,
which never change, render that impossible. She only
has a temporary object in view, and wishes to use Protes-
tants as tools to aid her in its accomplishment. She
studiously designates them throughout as merely members
of a “ Denomination” (according them, however, the
honour of a capital “ D”); she alone must be distinguished
by the name of a “ Church.” The u hidden spring 1 ’ of
her present condescension will be found in selfishness an d
fear, and not in magnanimity and love. Indeed, Arch-
bishop Vaughan, as her mouthpiece, in effect thus ad-
dresses Protestants :—“ We Catholics constitute the centre
of the Supernatural, you Protestants are in its outer circle ;
but, then, it is much better to be even there than away
outside, in the dark, barren region of Infidelity; we form
the heart of the mystical body of Christ, which sends the
life-blood of grace through all parts of the system, you are
the fingers and toes of the extremities ; but is it not a
greater honour to be any part —even the toe-nails —of this
glorious body, than to have no connection with it ? Ido
not deny that our Church sometimes speaks of you in
rather strong terms of disapprobation, but do you not re-
tort by calling her .the ‘ scarlet whore,’ the ‘ mother of
harlots,’ and similar complimentary names ? Nor do I
deny that our Catholic ancestors burnt as many of your
Protestant forefathers as they could lay hold of; but is it
not equally true that Protestants, copying the godly
example of our holy Church, returned the compliment, by
putting a few Catholics to death ? And did not both
parties do that for the glory of Almighty God, and the
salvation of immortal souls ? But look, my Protestant
friends ! Do j r ou not see those perils of the future which
are looming up, no great distance off ? Do you no: descry
through the gloom the dim outlines of a great army, pre-
paring for a desperate attack upon both our position and
yours ? And had we not better, for a time at least, forget
the past, suspend hostilities, and combine to drive back
this common foe, who, if not checked, may destroy us all ?
And if you will assist the Catholic Church in this work of
imperative and urgent necessity, I verily believe that, with
the help of Almighty God, the blessed Virgin, and all the
Saints, we shall be able to for ever crush this threatening


enemy; and then”—Yes, what then, Dr. Vaughan? Wouldnot
Popery show her sense of gratitude for the assistance ren-
dered, by turning upon and exterminating her Protestant
allies, if she thought herself strong enough to do so ?Of
course you know she would; and you, if an honest and con-
sistent Catholic, would vindicate her conduct by the prin-
ciples she professes. _ .
To show that I am not misrepresenting Popery m attri-
buting these persecuting and destructive designs to her, if
she ever regains her former ascendancy in Christendom, I
Mill quote an extract from an article in the Shepherd of the
Valley, which is published at St. Louis, America, and is
the organ of the Eoman Catholic Archbishop Kenrick.
The article was published so recently as November, 1875,
and shows that the pretensions and spirit of Popery are
the same to-day, as they were three hundred years ago.
The writer says :— ** We avow that the Roman Catholic
Church is intolerant, that is, that it employs the means that
are in its power to extirpate error and sin; but this in-
tolerance is the logical and necessary consequence of its infalli-
bility. It alone has the right to be intolerant, because it
alone is the truth, and possesses the truth. The Church, in-
deed tolerates heretics here, where she is under restraint,
but she hates them mortally, and employs her forces to secure
their annihilation. As soon as the Catholics are heie m
possession of a considerable majority —as certainly they
will be some day, although the moment may delay its
coming— then religious liberty will have come to an end in the
United States. Our enemies say so, and we agree with
them. Our enemies know that we do not pretend to be
better than our Church ; and as to what concerns that
Church, its history is open to the eyes of aIL They know-
how it acted with heretics in the middle ages, and how it
acts with them now wherever it has the requisite power. In no
way do we pretend to deny these historical facts, any more
than to blame God’s saints and the princes of the Church
for effecting or approving these events. Heresy is a
deadly sin; it kills the soul, and casts the whole man, body
and spirit, into hell. Moreover, it is a very contagious
malady, and propagates itself infinitely wherever it finds
a foothold, thus imperilling the temporal and eternal hap-
piness of the innumerable generations to come. This is
the reason why princes, truly Christian , extirpate heresy,


in their dominions to its very roots, wherever they have
the power. If at this moment we abstain from persecut-
ingl heretics here, it is solely because we are too weak to do it,
and in such a state of things we think that by the attempt
we should do more harm than good to the Church .” The italics
are mine. Now, here we have an exhibition of genuine
Popery. All her fiendish persecutions in the past are jus-
tified ; others quite as horrible and still more extensive are
threatened in the future, when he possesses the requisite
power to inflict them ; and all as the logical consequence of
her assumed infallibility, and consequent unchangeable-
ness, as represented by her head, the Pope. The writer
is at least candid, —much more so than Dr. Vaughan.
But then, he was not troubled with the alarm which has
seized the Archbishop ; and was not, when he wrote that
article, courting the assistance of Protestants for a tem-
porary purpose. *
I submit, then, that Protestants cannot consistently re-
spond to Dr. Vaughan’s appeal for help ; and warn them
that if they do sacrifice the grand principle of the right of
private judgment which they boast, and assist Popery in
putting down Freethought, they may expect, if the com-
bined effort succeeds, to receive that kind of Popish grati-
tude for their services which I have pointed out. 1 also
submit, that the Archbishop has ignored the traditions,
and trampled underfoot a fundamental doctrine of his own
Church, by recognizing Protestants as Christians ; and has
thus verified the truth which the history of Popery has
taught, namely, that her emissaries will, if needs be, give
their consistency and reputation to the wind, and resort to
* Since my second lecture was delivered a friend has kindly fur.
nished me with the following extract from a letter of La Chaise’s, Con.
fessor to the King of France, addressed to Father Petre, the Spiritual
Director of James 11. The confession is equally as candid as the one
given in the text, and still more redolent of the spirit of tit. Bar-
tholomew’s day:—“ By the power of the dragoon’s, we, the Jesuits
have converted many thousands of heretics in France in one year;
and by the doctrine of those ‘ booted ’ apostles, we turned more in one
month than Christ and his apostles could do in ten years. Your
heretics are too strong in the three kingdoms, and we may seek to
convert them by fair means before we fall upon them with fire, sword,
halters , gaols, and other like punishments. Lastly, surprise the here-
tics, and let zealous Catholics sacrifice them all, and wash their hands
in their blood , which will be an offering acceptable to Qod, ”


the most questionable means for the furtherance of am-
bitious designs- ge( , OE(l teanch of the Object-Super.
oial to the world ui mt jn * evidence is adduced
Not a Perhaps Dr. Vaughan will
m support ot tins assumpt w inrfi did not require
tltte« moZFtlm of his ass,lmp-
Uou. But TfulSthat, in claiming so much for a jrtjm
which im r°B® B which “
mon sense, and the • l ti f v with those he credits it
‘q Ihf ami that its— upon
r nkm llmhsmof Paganism, of Judaism, of Catholicism,
Supernaturalism oi x ’ „ , volitions is based
or of Protestantism for each of these
upon Supernaturalism. 1 reject, it m all • * God ,
following reasons. First, it exlu through
lliak^aila a imX g fulsome adulation in
sacnhciai cnanneis, au 6 - riresents man, and
the form of prarse iZS and elevation of
applies wrong means fm the develop oxisten „ e of a
his better nature; thirdly, it involve maB s 0 f
priesthood, which interposes i s , e 8 them the slaves
people and the Supreme Being and Xebt reve-
fifthly, it mates the acceptance of a sjs cm g
hensible, and often absurd, dogmas an absolut,>


history has been one of strife, intolerance, and persecution.
On a future occasion I will enlarge upon, and endeavour
to justify the seven reasons thus briefly stated.
(2.) The second assumption for which the Archbishop
offered no evidence, is, that Roman Catholicism is identical
with the religion of Jesus Christ. I have already touched
upon this point, in speaking of the resemblance between
Paganism and Popery ; and will just add that, if Christ
were to visit the Pope of Rome, he would probably ad-
dress his “Holiness” in terms not very dissimilar from
these “ Pope Pius IX. you claim to be my Vicar on
earth; where are your credentials ? and what likeness is
there between me and my religion, and you and your
system ? I had not where to lay my head; you have
several magnificent palaces to dwell in, and a thousand
servants to gratify your whims, and pamper your passions.
I had none of this world’s goods, and commanded my
followers not to lay up treasures on earth; you are rolling
in riches, and to sw'ell your coffers you keep your dupes in
poverty, and even rob the widow and thefatheidess. My wor-
ship was offered in Nature’s temple, and was of the simplest
possible character ; yours is performed in costly buildings
raised by human hands, and is chiefly remarkable for its
ostentatious display; My mission was one of peace and
goodwill; yours is to stir up strife and promote bitter and
irreconcilable divisions among those who ought, to be
affectionate members of one great family. My kingdom
was not of this world, it was spiritual in its nature and
objects; you claim to be a temporal monarch, nay, the King oj
kings on earth ; and because you have been justly deprived
of the dominions to which you had no right, and which
you shamefully misgoverned, your emissaries are inces-
santly plotting, and keeping Europe in a state of continual
uneasiness by their intrigues for the restoration of your
lost sovereignty. Pope Pius, you are a venerable old man,
and you occupy a splendid worldly position, but as my
professed Vicar, you are a detestable hypocrite. You have
only assumed my name to dishonour it. Arrant humbug,
avaunt! ” Or, even if Saint Peter were to meet Arch-
bishop Vaughan when he is dashing along, in his beauti-
ful carriage and pair, with driver and footman to boot,
may we not x*easonably suppose that he would rebuke this
ecclesiastical dignitary somewhat in the following mau-
I


ner :—“ Eoger Bede Vaughan, with a cross before youi*
name, you claim to be a successor of the apostles of Christ,
of whom I was one ; but what title to that claim can you
produce ? I certainly fail to perceive any evidences of
apostolic simplicity in your flowing robes and pompous
manner. When I and my brother apostles went out on
long journeys to preach the Gospel, we had to compass the
distance on foot; even our Master never rode but on one
occasion, and then only on an ass, which was not his own; but
you are conveyed, even to your church to worship God, in
a splendid carriage ; to take care of which your coachman
has to remain outside, as though he had no religious devo-
tions to pay, or spiritual wants to supply. ‘ Silver and gold
have I none, but such as I have, give I unto thee,’ was the
answer I was compelled to give to a poor cripple, who
asked alms of my fellow apostle, John, and me, as we
entered the temple of Jerusalem ; but you have many
things mounted with silver, and as for gold, you appear
to have so much, that you have had some of it manufac-
tured into a long chain, and a massive cross, which I see
you, in your great humility, are so afraid of the public be-
holding, that you modestly display it on your portly
shoulders and capacious chest wherever you go. We
produced certain signs and wonders as proofs of the
genuine* s of our faith, and Christ promised that similar
signs should follow all who believed through the preaching
of his Gospel; but I have not heard that you have shewn
any of them in Sydney, though some of your fellow church
dignitaries have invented a few, elsewhere, in the form
of winking statues, liquifying blood, and such like wonders.
We taught the religion of Jesus of Nazareth; you, in
his name, teach the system of the Pope of Eome. Eoger
Bede Vaughan, with a cross before your name, there are
many things in you as a man that I like ; but as an Arch-
bishop of what professes to be the Church of Christ, you
are an impudent pretender to the position of apostolic
succession, and the sooner you are unmasked, and appear
in your true character, the better it will be for the world.”
In speaking thus of the Pope and the Archbishop, I
wish it to be understood that I am not expressing any
opinion upon such questions as, whether the acquisition
and possession of earthly riches is in any case defensible;
and whether certain religious functionaries may justifiably


display gorgeous outward appearances of the kind referred
to : I have simply dealt with those ecclesiastics as avowed
disciples of Christ, who despised the things of this world,
and as boasted successors of his apostles, whose lot in life
was by no means to clothe themselves in purple and fine
linen and fare sumptuously every day.
11. Having said this much under the head of Super-
naturalism, I will, in the second place, notice some of the
Archbishop’s remarks on Materialism , which forms the
third division of this lecture.
We must now confront the enemy whose menacing atti-
tude has thrown Dr. Vaughan into such a fearful state of
perturbation and alarm. You will remember that he
based his appeal to Protestants for help on the ground
of their mutual danger, in the presence of a common foe.
Having made that appeal, he proceeds to ask:—“ But is
there such an enemy as this ? Does the future protend
any such great antagonisms as have already been fought
out between Paganism and Christianity ? . . . He
did firmly believe in the existence, the presence, and the
power of such an enemy; he felt deeply impressed by the
perils looming in the distance ; by the reckless aims of the
devastator who, even at this hour, had gathered his
strength together and had become a menacing danger
. . . . He looked upon the coming whirlwind as
promising to be more destructive and uprooting, than any-
thing that had occurred in Pagan times, or that had
threatened the stability of the Supernatural since the
Incarnation.” He appears to have suspected that some
persons might charge him with having raised a groundless
alarm, or at all events with having exaggerated the danger,
and, therefore, a little further on he endeavours to justify
himself thus :—“ It may be thought by some that Materi-
alism offers a terror merely to the professional alarmist,
and that in point of fact, there is no real occasion for
those within the circle of the Supernatural to combine in
self-defence against it, as a common enemy. Those who
carefully heave the lead, and scrutinise the current and
spirit of the age, those who interrogate the Zeit-geist, and
study the signs of the times, are not so sanguine in their
judgment. The longer they watch the growth of public
opinion, the stronger becomes their conviction that the
menace of the future is sufficiently alarming to create a


deep-set and terrible anxiety. And they do not hesitate
to declare that, unless something be done, and done
speedily too, the Supernatural, though m possession, and
strong'in the presto of so many centuries, and so deeply
rooted in the affections of the people and the habit of
their mind, will, unless she shew herself more resolute
and more masculine in the contest than she has done, lose
ground, and at length be relegated to sacristies and
vestries; and, finally, be reduced to such a ghost as
Paganism is amongst us at present. Such is the im-
pending danger which the Archbishop apprehends, and is
so anxious to avert. But this feeling of alarm, of
“ deep-set and terrible anxiety,” to which he gives expres-
sion, will strike most people as being a little surprising,
if his professed faith in his own system is sincere. It the
Supernaturalism he defends is founded on truth, it it is
intrinsically pure and good, if its influence upon society
is unquestionably beneficial, and if it supported by the
power of an Almighty God—all of which he assumes
what has it to fear, especially as those who believe in it
are as yet at least more than fifty to one against those who
are opposed to it?. This excitement and fear seems to me
to indicate a suspicion that his own side is not quite every-
thing that he claims for it. The fact is, Supernaturalism
not Truth—is in imminent danger; but the greatest danger
that threatens it is not of the character he depicts, nor
found in the quarter to which he points. Upon what JJr.
Vaughan says of Materialism, and the fearful conse-
quences with which it is fraught, I will observe that—
-1 In the first place he overlooks the most powerful and
dangerous phase of it, namely, the scientific and philosophic
Materialism of our time. Current science and philosophy
are extensively pervaded with Materialism, and are becom-
ing more thoroughly permeated with it every day. Many
of the master minds throughout Christendom are conscuen-
tiously Materialistic in their views, and are quietly diffusing
those views among all classes of the people. They see
little or no evidence in nature to support Supernaluralism,
but much that is in favour of Materialism. They fail to
discover those evidences of Providential interfence, thoso
proofs of Supernatural agency, which Christians so fondly
believe in. Indeed, the further they explore the domain
of Creation, and the more carefully they examine the laws


and forces that govern it, the fewer indications do they
find of the direct intervention of a personal God. And as
a consequence, the Supernaturalism they were educated to
believe in is gradually rejected; creeds and theories yield
one by one to the dominion of stubborn facts. And these
are the men, who will to a larger extent every year in-
fluence the masses beneath them, in intellectual and
religious matters; theirs is the Materialism which will
percolate through to the lowest stratum in society, unless
checked by another system, equally based on facts, and in
harmony with the laws of nature, like Spiritualism; and
this is the Materialism which Dr. Vaughan has passed
over entirely unnoticed, yet it is that phase of it which he
led us to expect he would grapple with, when ho said he
would treat his subject more as a “ philosopher” than as
a “ theologian.” This is the Materialism which is the
greatest danger to Supernaturalism ; and he
should wage war, if he wishes to prevent the catastrophe
to his system, which he so much dreads.
2. Secondly, the Archbishop classes very many persons
with Materialists who are no more correctly described by that
term than he would be. As though the Genius of Confu-
sion had seized him, he jumbles together a number of
individuals who possess but few principles in common,
swells the list to “ seventeen millions,” and brands them all
Materialists. Of course Freemasons are included, and yet
genuine Freemasons cannot be Materialists in the correct
sense of the term. They recognise the existence of God,
under the name of the Architect of the Universe; and as
a matter of fact, the majority of them are members of
various Christian Churches, and not a few of them are
ministers of the Gospel. All classes of Freethinkers are
also embraced in his sweeping assertion. But he ought
to know, and no doubt does know, that many of them liave as
firm a belief in the existence of a Supreme Being, and the
reality of a future state, as he has ; though their concep-
tions of the character of that Being, and their views of
the nature of that state, may differ widely from his own.
And hence, his conduct is the more extraordinary and un-
just in classing so many Freemasons and Freethinkers
with Atheistic Materialists.
3. Thirdly, Dr. Vaughan credits many of those who are
avowed Materialists with designs whieh they indignantly


repudiate. They are not the radical destruction^—the
red-handed revolutionists he supposes. If they see evils
and abuses in political, commercial, social, religious and
other departments, as is no doubt the case, they will use
legitimate and constitutional means to remove them. As
to the “ Throne ” and the. “Altar,” for the preservation of
which he manifests such profound, though slightly sus-
picious, concern, they have no intention of laying violent
hands upon, and by wanton physical force overthrow-
ing, either the one or the other. They may regard the
former as more of an ornament than a necessity m the
civil society of the present day, and the latter as a thing
which, though it has been somewhat useful in the past,
has fulfilled its temporary purpose in the religious world ;
as some of them candidly confess; but they have some
respect for the prestige which antiquity gives to institu-
tions, and for the honest prejudices of those whose mental
and moral powers ripen slowly : and, therefore, they wi
trust to the extension of education, the force of widely
diffused knowledge, and the development of true indivi-
duality of character, to silently but effectually bring about
the changes they desiderate. And I, as a Spiritualist,
thoroughly agree with them m this mild and rational
policy, as opposed to the programme of fire and blood and
wholesale destruction, which their ecclesiastical traducer
charges them with.
4. Fourthly, in presenting a few Materialists of the
extreme French revolutionary and communistic type, as fair
specimens of the whole body throughout Christendom, and thereby
trying to rouse public prejudice against them, the Archbishop
has been guilty of another reprehensible trick; and has
given additional evidence that he either has not form-
ed a just and comprehensive view of human nature,
and of current events in connection with religion, or else
he wilfully misrepresents them for ecclesiastical purposes.
Doubtless there are ignorant, badlv organised, and fanati-
cal Materialists in the world, who detest all priests and
parsons, as such; and who look with envious eyes upon
the possessions of the rich, and would, if circumstances
were propitious, make an onslaught upon them, in the
hope of securing and dividing the spoil; but assuredly,
the vast majority of Materialists are not of this class ; and
as for myself as a Spiritualist, J, have not the slightest


sympathy either with their object, or the means they
would employ to accomplish it. Still, the extraordinary
principles, and, as time will prove ; abortive policy, of this
party are not without significance, nor unsuggestive of
instructive lessons. They indicate a reaction, by no means
surprising to liberal students of human nature, against tho
unrighteous usurpations, the bloated monopolies, and the
grinding despotisms that have so long characterised the
temporal and spiritual departments of society. But the
Materialists of this extreme, red-handed type need not be
a source of serious, any more than they will be of perma-
nent, uneasiness to lovers of order and right. Their
present principles and policy are but the short-lived
excrescences usually incidental to certain transition states.
They will perform a temporary, and perhaps necessary
part in the progressive drama of social and religious de-
velopment ; and will then either disappear for ever, or
assume some other and nobler character. The intelligence,
sense of right, and humanity of the majoritv are a satis-
factory safeguard against any very mischievous and long-
continued excesses, and a reliable guarantee for the
ultimate triumph of the best interests of all.
In support of the accusation in question the Archbishop,
as a matter of course, referred to the “ French revolution”
of the last century. That well-known event naturally
occurred to him as a striking proof of the correctness of
his opinion, that Materialists are a pack of abominable
creatures, who wish to turn the world upside down, and
will stick at nothing that will further their infernal
designs ; forgetting, in his eagerness to make out his case,
that some of the leading actors in that bloody drama were
not Materialists. The “ horrors of the French revolvtion”
have long furnished a capital theme for the enemies of
Freethought and Progression, to fire their eloquence with
and vent their spleen upon. It has done duty for all
classes of Christians, from distinguished Archbishops down
to windy stump orators and sensational tract-mongers.
Indeed, the service it has rendered to the Churches in
their crusade against what they call Infidelity has been so
great, that it might fairly be pleaded in mitigation of
their severe sentence of condemnation! Far be it from
me to vindicate the horrible atrocities and wanton destruc-
tion of that dark period. Nor is it a part of my plan


to show that something may be said for the motives and
objects of the revolutionists, though not in favour of the
means employed to realise them. Suffice it to say that that
event was, no doubt, in some sense a natural penalty of
violated laws. And when Dr. Vaughan shakes it before the
public eye as a scare-crow, it would be well for him to ask
whether the very Supernaturalism he glorifies was not in
some measure responsible for it. Had not Supernatu-
ralism and Royalty long united tlieir forces in the interests
of the few, and against to the masses, whose rights and
liberties they trampled under foot ? And what was the
revolution but to a large extent a revolt against the
despotisms of priestcrft and kingcraft, by which the people
had so long been oppressed.”
5. Fifthly, the Archbishop declares that the “ hidden
spring ” of Materialism will bo found in “ Secret Societies
and with characteristic inconsistency, as the dignitary of a
Church which sanctions secret societies, he condemns them.
I have already expressed it as my opinion that the
“hidden spring” of the most dangerous form of Material-
ism— most dangerous to (Supernatural ism I mean —will be
found in the science and philosophy of our times ; but I
must now confine myself to it in its alleged connection with
“secret societies,” and its supposed revolutionary and de-
structive tendency. Whether secret societies are neces-
sary, and defensible on theif own merits, is an open ques-
tion. To me they do not appear to indicate a very perfect
or progressed state of humanity in its social relations.
They had their origin in barbarous and desperate times,
when certain parties deemed it necessary to band together,
to devise measures for checking the encroachments of their
rulers, civil and religious, and for their mutual good in
various ways. Everything for the real benefit of society
as a whole should be openly discussed, and known to
everybody ; and things will come to this in due time. At
present, however, I have only to deal with secret societies
as existing facts; and with the allegation that they are es-
sentially Materialistic in their character, and subversive of
the present civil and religious condition of nations in their
design.
The two principal secret societies which Dr. Vaughan
speaks of are those of the Freemasons and the Interna-
tionalists, which, with a strange want of discrimination,


he classes together and condemns wholesale; though I
believe there is little in common between them except the
fact that they both are secret societies. As to the Interna-
tionalists, it is within my personal knowledge that they are
not all Materialists ; and it is very questionable whether
the majority of those who are, harbour such foul designs,
and contemplate such diabolical means for carrying them
into effect, as he accuses them of. And even if they dp,
there are restraining and regulating forces in operation in
these advancing times, which I believe are powerful
enough to prevent them doing- anything like the mischief
that is apprehended. And with regard to the Freemasons,
I have already pointed out that they cannot be Material-
ists in the proper sense of the term; and that as a matter
of fact, the majority of them are professed Christians.
But what of the revolutionary and bloodthirsty designs
which he charges them with in common with International-
ists, with whom he so strangely confounds them ? I be-
lieve that this ecclesiastic never uttered a viler or more gra-
tuitous slander than the one lie has tried to fix upon the
respectable body of Masons. Masons themselves declare
that their Institution does not aim so much at political,
social, and religious ends as at promoting humane and
brotherly principles among all men, irrespective of creed
or country ; and, therefore, it has a much better title to be
called a Catholic or universal system, than the exclusive and
intolerant religion of the Romish Church. The two fol-
lowing simple arguments are a sufficient refutation of the
Archbishop’s unprovoked slander. The first is furnished
by the position and character of the great body of Masons.
You have but to know the men, to be convinced that they
cannot entertain such foul aims and intentions as his fears
have suggested. Some of the best men l know are
Masons, and would scorn the principles and schemes which
he attributes to Ihem. It is all very well for him to insinuate
that as the majority of them are only on the outer circle of
Masonry, they are ignorant of its real nature and design;
and that when they are initiated into its inner, hidden mys-
teries they will find it out to be as he alleges. L venture
to say that, if those I know may be taken as a fair sample
of the general body of Masons, as I believe they may, they
would sooner a thousand times throw Masonry to the wind
than be parties to the carrying out of its secret purpose,
G


if they found that purpose to be of the atrocious character
Dr. Yaughan asserts. My second argument is grounded
upon the history of Masonry. This is a case in which we
may pretty correctly judge a tree by its fruits. Masonry is
not a thing of yesterday’s origin, nor confined to some ob-
scure and limited place. It can boast an antiquity greater
than that of Christianity, and has representatives in nearly
all parts of the world. And what has been its history ?
If it had cherished the abominable spirit and principles
ascribed to it, it is morally certain that they would have
betrayed themselves before now. But has it ever been
discovered plotting for the overthrow of useful civil and
religious institutions, and using disreputable means to
effect its unholy purposes ? lam not aware that it has.
Can Dr. Yaughan say this much of Jesuitism ? Perhaps
he will kindly answer the question.
In thus defending Masonry, it is only right to say that
I am not a Mason, and therefore cannot be suspected of
speaking from interested motives. I only, as an outsider,
judge the Institution by its external appearance, by its
past history, and by the class of persons who belong to it;
and when I find that its appearance and history are credit-
able ; and above all, that it is supported by men, many of
whom I believe to be as pure and honourable in their
secret principles, as I know them to be in their public
character, I cannot allow a shameless slander against it,
even though it is uttered by an Archbishop, to pass unre-
buked, painful as the task of administering the rebuke
may be.
But the members of these secret societies bind them-
selves together by an “oath,'' and this fact is a terrible
aggravation of their guilt in Dr. Yaughan’s estimation.
This oath is as “abominable” as it is “criminal” in his
guileless eyes. Of course, he knows no more of oaths
than he does of secret societies! lie never in his life
bound himself to any definite line of conduct by an oath,
or anything resembling it! When he swore at his ordina-
tion as an Archbishop, that “ heretics, schismatics, and
rebels to our said Lord [the Pope of Pome], or his afore-
said successors, I [Roger Bede Yaughan, with a cross
before my name], will to the utmost of my power, persecute
and oppose," he did not take an oath; he only uttered a
few meaningless words, and took part in a purposeless


farce! And when a poor girl, of say sweet seventeen, has
had her natural instincts and aspirations so far repressed
by an artificial and imperious system, that she takes leave
of the society in which her Maker destined her to play a
part, and retires to the seclusion and loneliness of a Nun’s
cell, and makes a vow, which is, practically, only another
name for an oath, she does not, to use his own words, —only
substituting the feminine for the masculine gender —
“ enter on her career by loading her soul with the fearful
responsibility of an oath, binding her before her God to a
secresy, the bearings of which [upon her own mental and
physical system] she could not possibly define !” Oh no !
She only mumbles something which is as destitute of
significance or binding force as what the Archbishop
swore at his ordination. The less Dr. Vaughan rails
against oaths the better it will be for his own consistency,
seeing what a number his Church imposes, and of what
a fearful character some of them are.
In dismissing the Archbishop’s philippic against secret
societies, I cannot but ask,—Does his own system sanction
no secrets ? Is not the Society of Jesuits a secret society ?
and are not its emissaries secretly plotting and working
everywhere for the aggrandisement of Popery ? Are there
no secrets buried in those living tombs, called Nunneries ?
And what of the Confessional ? Are no secrets extracted
there Z Does not the priest demand, as a divine right, to
know the very thoughts of the mind and the feelings of
the heart, as well as the actions of life P And does he not
cling to those secrets, even when the most momentous con-
sequences are involved ? Yes, Popery believes in secrets,
but she must have a monopoly of them. If a society or
institution springs up, and imitates her holy example in
the matter of secrets ; or if she finds one that was in
existence before she established herself in the world, and
from which, perhaps, she caught the idea, she hurls her
anathemas at it with all the consistency of a Jesuit, and
the vengeance of a fiend.
6. Sixthly, In speaking of Materialists, the Archbishop
misrepresents them on some points in addition to those 1
have noticed ; while other things he attributes to them as
a ground of condemnation, , appear to me to constitute their
best claim to respect.
As to misrepresentations , I will only give two instances.


He seems to think that because they deny the existence of
a God, and of a Future State, they must necessarily deny
all moral responsibility, that as they believe there is no
“Judge to come,” and “no future punishment or reward,”
they feel no incentive to virtue and no restrint upon vice.
But this by no means follows. I believe it is a great
mistake, and is fraught with pernicious consequences, to
ground motives of conduct on a belief in a “Judge to
come,” and future rewards and punishments, rather than
on present duty, and the inherent principles of man’s own
nature. The Judge is so shaddowy a being, and rewards
and punishments are so distant, that the belief in them
may have little influence upon present conduct. And as a
matter of fact, many of those who believe most in such a
Judge, and such a Future State, evince by their lives the
least sense of moral resposibility ; some of the best illus-
trations of which are to be found among members of Dr.
Vaughan’s own Church. Teach a man to dread the judge
within him—his own conscience—rather than some Judge
external to and far from him ; teach him to fear the hell
of his own guilty and debased soul, and seek the heaven
that is found in moral rectitude of heart and life, rather
than a hell and heaven somewhere else; and you supply
him with adequate motives to correct and noble conduct.
The Archbishop also says that the “man who will not
acknowledge God as his chief and master, will never bend
to the authority or dictation of a fellow-man. This is anotliei
misrepresentation of Materialists. They may refuse to
acknowledge either the God of Popery, of Protestantism,
or of any other svstem as their “ chief and master,” and
yet be willing to submit to the “ authority and dictation of
a fellow-man.” This submission will depend on circum-
stances. A man’s authority is not necessarily entitled to
respect, because it is alleged to be founded in “ Divine
Eight.” It is very convenient for certain “ powers that
be” to claim that they’are “ ordained of God,” and therefore,
have an absolute right to obedience. Dr. Vaughan, of
course, claims Divine ordination for the ecclesiastical
position he holds ; and the members of his Church, admit-
ting that, “ bend ” to his “ authority and dictation as a
matter of religious duty, and become most obedient slaves.
It is the nature of despots —religious and political—to try
to “ bend” the people to their purposes, on the assumption


of their Divine authority, and to be very indignant, and
threaten dreadful things, when men refuse to be trampled
underfoot, and ruled with a rod of iron. Materialists no
doubt do, as far as circumstances allow them, refuse to
“ bend ” to the authority and dictation of their fellow-men
who are playing the part of despots, under the pretence
of Divine Eight, and I commend them for it. But let a
man shew a rational foundation for his authority; let him
prove his right to dictate to his fellow-man by some better
argument than an appeal to the Bible, tradition, custom,
or other conventional means, and they will submit to him :
and their obedience will be all the more willing and
cordial because prompted by an intelligent appreciation of
his claims ; while the obedience which Dr. A aughan wants
dares to ask no questions —it is the obedience of cringing
sycophants and degraded slaves.
Among the things for which the Archbishop condemns
Materialists, but for which I regard them as entitled to
respect , I would just mention the following. “ They
would organise society on knowledge , instead of on us age and
tradition as at present.” And this is a criminal intention!
One would have thought that a society organised on
knowledge would be better than one based on mere usage
and tradition. Usage and tradition would have kept from
us all the grand discoveries, inventions, and improvements
which have proved such a blessing to modern times; and
they would prevent any further progress, and keep the
world in its present condition for ever. But we must not
forget that “usage and tradition” form the chief argu-
ment that Dr. Vaughan can adduce in support of many of
the beliefs and customs of his own Church ; and, therefore,
we need not be surprised that he esteems them of greater
importance than “ knowledge.” Again, he tells us that
one of the cardinal principles of Materialists is “ absolute
toleration.' 1 ' 1 This certainly strikes me as an excellence
rather than a defect in their system. And if they are
logical and consistent in the application of it, they cannot
employ such means for the overthrow even of Popery as he
asserts; but will trust to the operation of those natural and
legitimate agencies before referred to. No wonder, however,
that absolute toleration should be condemned bv an Arch-
bishop of a Church which is unrelentingly intolerant, and
publicly boasts of the fact. Further, they claim “thatabso-


iw!' i? e^ and y nli 7 litef j fr eedom to do, say, or think any thing
hies, is the natural, inalienable right of event man ” This
is deemed a dreadful thing to claim it as a right; ” and
it « dreadful in the eyes of a system that denies all rights
to the people in religious matters, and simply enjoins
duties, especially the duty of allowing others to think for
them, and rewarding them with liberal “ devotions ” for so
But I am prepared to defend this right, with the
r tf°f, that i each , indlvidual exercises it with a due
egard for the rights of every other individual, which are
as natural and inalienable” as his own. Moreover,
the audacit y to dare to be their “ own
priests, and to dispense with the services of professional
priests m the matter of “baptism,” in the ceremony of
marriage, and in tunes of “ sickness” and “death” ! This
The^ril 7 / 011^ 8 a VC % S ° re plaCo in the Archbishop.
The priests of his own Church, and the parsons of other
hurches lor that matter, have long claimed the sole right
tn unite man and woman together as husband and
wfe arid have declared those unions illegal and
adulterous which they do not celebrate; they have
also dmmed the right to admit children into the family
of God and pretended to be able to impart a special
consolation in sickness, and to give departing spirits a
necessary certificate or passport to heaven. A?d it is not
much to be wondered at that they should give vent to a
great deal of resentment and wrath—though professing to
and fl tbn k ’ ° W J ’ + and for^ iyin & Christians—when thatrfght
denied ?nrT OnS ar6not ° nly challen £ e d but positively
snro T k lam not surprised at the present wide-
spread levolt against them. I deny the right of anv man
to interpose himself between God and another man, and
to exercise the functions peculiar to the priestlv office-
and 1 venture to think that society will move on quite as
well without the kindly offices of the priest in those
matters as with them. A marriage founded on mutual
love, is quite as true and sacred in the sight of God when
performed by a lay registrar as by a priest; and when not
ounrled on mutual love, a priest’s blessing cannot make it
anything more than legalised prostitution. A child is
W A ltaB mucdl , iu the great family of our Heavenly
snrinkled a TT" * 8 born ’ aS is after a has
sprinkled a few drops of water upon its face and signed it


witli the sign of the cross. A sick person will he far
calmer and more comfortable in the hands of a good nurse,
in the person of an affectionate mother, wife, or daughter,
than when agitated by the questions, and terrified by the
threats of a priest; and a departing spirit will be just
as sure of heaven—that is of happiness—if fit for it, without
as with a religious passport or certificate, even though it
were signed by Archbishop Vaughan, and endorsed by the
Pope of Pome; and if not fit for it, because his moral
condition renders him temporally incapable of it, he will
not realise it on first entering the other world, the Pope’s
certificate of eligibility for it to the contrary notwithstand-
ing. Pinally Materialists are accused of “teaching men
how to be virtuous without the stiinulous of hope or fear,
independently alike of heaven or hell.” And this is in-
tolerable! “What!” exclaims Dr. Vaughan in effect,
“ cease to excite man’s fears and flatter hishopGs? No
more dangle the reward of heaven and stir up the fires of
hell before his eyes, to get him to believe the Bible and
obey the Church ? Simply appeal to his reason rather
than to his prejudices? and trust to the natural and har-
monious development of all his faculties rather than to
praying and paying,, fasting and penance, to make him a
good man ? Perish the thought! It would have been a
thousand times better for him if he had never been born,
than'that he should trust to such devilish means as these,
to mould his present character and determine his future
destiny !” But, with all due respect to that Church digni-
tary, I firmly believe that the Materialistic principle of
making man “ virtuous” would if allowed a fair trial for a
hundred years, turn out a race of human beings, and
develop a state of society far superior to anything that his
cherished Supernaturalism has eve ’ produced.
These, then, are some of the features of Materialism
which Dr. Vaughan singles out, for special condemnation,
whether they deserve censure or merit praise most, let
unbiassed judges determine.
7. Seventhly, I intended saying something in reply to the
charge of “frightful immorality ,” which the Archbishop
levels at the whole body of Materialists, but my time has
gone. I can only remark that, no doubt there is more or
less immorality among Materialists, as there is among all
classes, open or concealed , but I believe observation and


statistics will prove tliat the average morality among
Materialists and Freethinkers generally is greater than it
is among average Roman Catholics; and if so, judging the
tree by its fruits, the system condemned cannot be such a
bad thing as its censor describes
111. Having taken up so much time in reviewing the
second and third divisions of the Archbishop’s lecture—
Supernaturalism and Materialism—l can only, in the third
place, say a word or two on his proposed means for arresting
the progress of and finally exterminating the latter—Material-
ism.
1. How to meet the “ perils of the future,” is the ques-
tion which Dr. Vaughan discusses in the fourth and last
part of his subject. Under this head he speaks of the
source of Materialism, the means to be used to extend it.
the method to be adopted for carrying out those means,
and what the Supernaturalists of all classes should do to
defeat its designs. As to its soiree, he has already in the
third division of his lecture said that the source, or “ hid-
den spring of Materialism is centered in, and derives its
main energy from the Sect, the Church of the Revolution,
the International Secret Society but he appears to have
forgotten himself, and in this last division he says “ the
hidden spring of Materialism is Pride of Reason or,
perhaps he meant that the latter hidden spring—“ Pride
of Reason”—is the source of the former hidden spring—
the “ International Secret Society.” It would have been
strange if pride of reason had not met with a rebuke at
the Archbishop’s hands. Reason, with its troublesome ob-
jections and pressing questions, is what Popery of all
things detests most. Faith is the virtue she delights to
honour; reason, except when under her absolute control,
is the vice she always affects to despise. The means Ma-
terialists rely upon are summed up, says I)r. Vaughan, in
“ Universal, Secular, Free, and Compulsory Education for
all classes of society their “ aim is to educate the intel-
lect of humanity and to take possession of its reason.” What
he suspects would be the result of this universal education
is betrayed by the nervous excitement and alarm with
which the contemplation of the prospect fills him. The
method by which they hope to effect their purpose is “or-
ganised activity which shall propose for its exclusive ob-
ject the furtherance of such an aim.” This is at all events a
legitimate method. And, considering the “ organized ac


tivity” of the Catholic Church, I do not think the Arch-
bishop should take exception to it. So far all is at least
clear and above-board as to the source, object, means, and
method of Materialism. But how is it to he met and crushed?
This is the vital question. “ The way to meet it most ef-
fectually is, first, to realise the momentous interests that are
at stake—the eternal interests of millions of immortal
souls ; and secondly, to adopt means for pushing back the
advancing tide, such as will be adequate to the task imposed
upon them.” Very good. Whether <£ the eternal interests
of millions of immortal souls”—in the sense of their
eternal well-being —are at stake, is certainly an open
question, but one that I cannot stay to discuss at
present. With regard to the means to be employed by
Supernaturalists, “ the Statesman, the Politician, the
Magistrate, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Soldier, men
in the civil service of their country,” and “ the Journalist,”
are all appealed to, to help in the great work of stamping
out Freethought and Materialism, and turning back the
tide.of many current opinions and purposes. “If the perils
of the future are to be met successfully, much of the
world’s thinking must be undone,” says the Archbishop.
That is, most of the really liberal, tolerant, humane, and
progressive principles of the present day, which are the re-
sult of much hard work and heroic fighting in the past,
must be swept away ; and a state of darkness, despotism,
and filth-breeding stagnation must be restored. And to
bring about the desired change, the classes of men just
mentioned are earnestly entreated to assist. But their
efforts are only to be regai’ded as subsidiary to the Arch-
bishop's main design. What he chiefly wants is that “ The
Church and the Denominations ” should each receive “an equal and
justly-divided assistance,” in the shape of State money, for the
education of their children in their respective sectarian reli-
gions ! This is the grand climax he has been aiming at all
through his long lecture, and he has reached it at last. State
money for sectarian education —and for sectarian education
of the most opposite and conflicting kinds—this is the
watchword he has given; this is the motto he has in-
scribed on the banner he has just unfurled amidst a
flourish of trumpets! If the State would accede to his
modest and consistent proposal, he says that “ two things
would inevitably follow ; first, that that great body of truth.
H


contained within the circles of the Supernatural, and which
tends so much to mould men’s minds to purity, honesty,
and courage, would he, more than ever before, brought
into immediate contact with the intelligence of the rising
generation ; and thus would arise a more profoundly Su-
pernatural people : and, secondly, that soreness and bit-
terness, which is the inevitable result of making one shoe
fit every kind of foot—of trying to force your own favourite
system upon people who do not want it, as well as on those
who do, would be wholly done away with.”
2. Upon this specious proposal and its expected results,
1 would briefly remark—First, Catholics cannot consis-
tently sanction the appropriation of any of their money
for the teaching of what they call Protestant heresy and
blasphemy; secondly, Protestants cannot consistently
sanction the appropriation of any of their money for the
teaching of what they call Popish errors and abominations;
thirdly, those—and they are a large and rapidly increasing
number—who do not believe the religion taught by either
side, cannot consistently sanction the appropriation of any
of their money for the teaching of systems they believe to
be productive of more evil than good to society, nor could
sectarians justly expect it; and fourthly, the flourish
about the second happy effect, namely, the removal of
“that soreness and bitterness which is the inevitable result
of trying to make one shoe fit every kind of foot,” is a
Jesuitical trick, utterly unworthy of the Archbishop as an
English Gentleman. Would he dare in a Catholic country
-say Spain—to propose that the State should support
Protestant as well as Catholic education, in order to re-
move the soreness and bitterness he speaks of ? It would
be as much as his position is worth, Not “ trying to force
your own favourite system of education upon people who
do it!” Why, what is this but the conduct of
his own Church, wherever she has supreme power in her
hands ? And if she were able, would she not “ force ”
her own “system of education” upon the many classes
of “people who do not want it ” in this colony? No one
knows better than Dr. Vaughan that she would. But in
reality no attempt is being made here to “force” a system
of education upon Catholics which they do not want.
They are at perfect liberty, like every other sect, to give
their children any kind of education they choose; only


they must do it at their own expense ; and this is the thing
that troubles the Catholic priesthood.
3. The Archbishop’s enumeration of “those binding
beliefs” which he says “the Church and all those systems
which profess to teach religious truth ” [he keeps up to
the last the distinction in name between his own and other
Churches, in a way that is very complimentary to the Pro-
testants whose aid he is courting! ] hold in common, and
ought to have State Aid to teach, is a genuine piece of
sophistry. He mentions “ the existence of God; His
attributes, His character as Judge and Rewarder; the
Immortality of the Soul; Heaven, Hell, the Incarnation,
Sin, Grace, and Providence.” But what different defini-
tions the Churches give of these fundamental doctrines!
For example, take ‘ ‘ Sin.” Catholics believe that there are
two kinds of it, venial and mortal, and that venial sin can
he forgiven beyond the grave ; Protestants brand this as
“ damnable heresy,” concocted by the devil for the ruin of
precious souls. Respecting “ Grace,” Catholics teach
that it flows into man’s soul through seven channels, called
sacraments; some Protestants hold that it can only be got
through two channels, whilst others do not think it can
come through any channel at all, but must flow direct
from the Divine fountain. With respect to “ Providence,
Catholics fancy it is always on their side ; Protestants are
quite sure that in the destruction of the Spanish Armada,
and in the late victory of the Germans over the French, they
see the intervention of Providence in their favour and
against Catholics. And so with “ Heaven and Hell,
Catholics have discovered a middle state between the two,
called purgatory, into which souls of a certain class enter
at death, and from which, after having been detained
awhile, and well-prayed and paid for—-especially the latter
—by kindly friends on earth, they will be released, and
admitted to heaven; but Protestants reject this as another
Popish fiction, and declare that at death saints go direct
to heaven and sinners direct to hell, and that between
them an impassable gulph will for yawn ever. And yet
the monstrous proposition is made that state tunas, to
which persons of all religions, and no religion at all con-
tribute, shall be expended in teaching these contrary views,
none of which may be true, and some of which must
necessarily be false, if their opposites are true \ And, of


course, the inevitable results of sectarian teaching would
shew, themselves. The divisions, jealousies, and ani-
mosities which characterise the different sects would be
impressed upon and perpetuated by the rising generation ;
children who ought to be trained in mutual kindness, and
with a view to future good fellow-citizenship, would be
taught principles that would make them despise and hate
each other as their fathers do, the children of each sect
thinking themselves better and surer of heaven than
those of its rivals : and a part of the Public funds is
asked for to assist in bringing about such a state of things
as that ! But I cannot think that the majority of the
people will ever sanction a proposal which is as iniquitous
as it is absurd. The broad and equitable principle is
taking a deep root and gradually spreading, that State
tunds, being raised from all classes, shall be devoted ex-
clusively to purposes in which all classes have an interest •
and that the religions of the different sects shall be taught,'
if at all,, in their own buildings, by their own agents, and
with their own money.
. thus dealt with the second, third, and fourth
divisions of the Archbishop’s pamphlet, as fully as the
limits of a single lecture have allowed. T regret that I
have not been able to deal with the Education question at
greater length. In conclusion, let me urge all true
Liberals to do their duty like men in the great battle over
the question, National Education, which has alreadv com-
menced, and in the contest that has long been ragino-
- Supernaturalism and Freethought. We have a
numerous, well organised, skilfully officered, and very
determined army to confront; but our members are rapidly
increasing; and believing that we have truth and right on
our side, we may look with confidence for the ultimate
triumph of our principles. The conflict will necessarily
be a protracted one; but when the curtain of mortality
falls across the stage of our earthly career, and hides us
from human view, if the notes of victory have not already
D6en heard in our ranks, we shall at least quit the scene
wiffi the happy consciousness that we have done some little
to hasten the day when they will be heard far and wide ;
and when the banner of Liberty, Progression, and Univer-
sal Brotherhood shall wave over every nation throughout
the world.


THIRD LECTURE.
DELIVERED (BY SPECIAL REQUEST) ON SUNDAY EVENING,
29TH OCTOBER, 1876. THE THEATRE WAS AGAIN DENSELY
CROWDED IN ALL PARTS, ALTHOUGH THE WEATHER WAS NOT
PROPITIOUS.
I did not intend taking any further notice of Archbishop
Vaughan’s pamphlet —“Hidden Springs,” having dealt
pretty freely with it in the two lectures already delivered.
But several of my most respected and influential friends
desired me to give a third lecture on the subject, in
order that I might notice some things not previously
touched upon for want of time, and enlarge upon others
that were merely glanced at, especially the Education
question ; and it is in compliance with their request that
I give this evening’s lecture 1
A friend said to me yesterday that he thought it was
in one sense hardly worth while wasting my time and
strength in replying to Dr. Vaughan, seeing that there are
so many others in the field against him : he thought that
that gentleman’s brother Christians were castigating him so
severely, that my efforts almost amounted to superfluous
if not unwarranted cruelty. It is no doubt a very edifying
sight to see the Revs. Beg, Dowie, Allen, the editors of
the Protestant Standard, and the Sydney Morning Herald,
and other liberal persons controversially belabouring
their brother Christian, with all their might, and showing
the wicked world how those brethren love one another !
I say brother Christian, because he claims to be a Christ-
ian, and so do his opponents alluded to; they all believe
the same Bible, accept the same Saviour, are working for
the same object —the extension of Christ’s kingdom, and
aiming at the same heaven as their eternal home. But of


course, the Archbishop is, in his own estimation at least,
the Christian of purest and noblest type, his assailants
being of very inferior stamp ; whilst they consider them-
selves Christians par excellence, and think it rather doubtful
whether he has even a legitimate title to the name. The
brotherly fray of these Christians strikes me as an apt
illustration of the truth of what their professed Master said
about a house divided against itself being unable to stand.
If Christ’s dictum is correct, we may reasonably expect
that the great Christian Institution or house, of which the
Pope of Pome claims to be the head, being so irrecon-
cileably divided against itself, will gradually tumble down,
and finally become a heap of useless ruins. In other
words, those devout brethren will probably go on scratch-
ing and rending each other till, like Kilkenny cats, they,
figui’atively speaking, devour each other, and leave only
their tails behind to prove the fierceness of the battle, and
the completeness of its work of destruction ! But gratifying
as it is to see his fellow Christians replying to Dr. Vaughan,
it struck me that at least one protest, exposure, and rebuke
should be given from the Freethought standpoint; and, in
the absence of any other advocate, I have undertaken the
task, and trust that my time and energies will not be
thought to have been altogether wasted on the effort.
The alarm which the Archbishop has tried to raise among
Christians of all sections, and the appeal he has made to
them to help his own Church in her endeavours to sweep
Freethought and Materialism from the earth, cannot fail
to be regarded by thoughtful observers as a most signifi-
cant and instructive phenomenon. What a marvellous change
is proved to have come over the fortunes of Popery!
How she has fallen from the position and power, dignity
and grandeur, she once occupied in the world ! There was
a time when she was mistress of Christendom, absolutely
ruling in religious, and virtually in civil and political
affairs. The law was simply her arbitrary will. She had
but to speak, and it was clone; to command, and it stood
fast. Her smile was heaven ; her frown was hell; the
shake of her lofty head struck terror into the breasts of
those who had incurred her displeasure. Troublesome
objections were met by silent contempt; probing questions
were answered by brute force; trenchant arguments
against her pretentions, dogmas, and practices were refuted


by the inexorable logic of the dungeon, the rack, or the
fagot; and protests and remonstrances were listened to
with the impatience of a self-sufficient egotist, and the de-
fiance of a securely guarded despot. Those were glorious
days for her, and afforded full scope for the display of
her unscrupulous tyranny. But they are gone . She still
retains some position, and wields some power, but nothing
compared with what she did in the past. Many ot those
who once courted her favour, and dreaded her antagonism,
now smile at her self-complacency, and treat her fulmina-
tions with derision and contempt. The temporal dominion
she usurped, and used for the replenishing of her coffers
and the aggrandisement of her position, lias been vrrested
from her grasp ; and her ecclesiastical authority is rapidly on
the wane. She still possesses some power for mischief in
the world, though but little for good. As represented at
Rome by her head, the Pope, she has become an impotent
old scold, who is incessantly screeching about her imagin-
ary wrongs, spitting her deadly venom through her tooth-
less laws, and hurling her powerless anathemas at her
enemies with all the blindness of age, the recklessness of
despair, and the feebleness of rapid decay. _ And as repre-
sented in this colony by one of her Archbishop s, she has
descended to the humiliating position of a crouching sup-
pliant, imploring help from those she has despised for
centuries, and cursed a thousand times. Verily, her once
irresistable power has been crippled, and the glory ot her
best days has vanished! She may well stir up those who
are still her faithful subjects to sigh and pray, plot and
toil for the restoration of her lost power and splendour,
and the return of those good old times when kings paic
her willing homage, when peoples were her obsequious
slaves, when the dungeon withered incipient doubt, and
the fagot consumed fullblown unbelief. But, happily for
mankind, those days are past, and will return no more.
She is now suffering a just retribution for the injury she has
done to the world; and she will either have to change
her principles and adapt herself to altered circumstances
or her power will decay and her glory fade till she entirely
disappears from the earth, and is only known to future
generations as a thing of history. ,
The longer I reflect on the Archbishop s lecture, the
more I am convinced that its delivery was a great blunder ,


so far as the interests of his own Church are concerned. He is
a bold, but evidently by no means a wise and skilful tac-
tician. He has misrepresented Pagans, and provoked the
retort that to see genuine Paganism you only need enter
his own Church. ‘‘Nova Cambria,” in the admirable
articles he has published in the Herald, has confirmed
what I have advanced on this subject, and supplied addi-
tional evidence, which the scope of my lectures did not
peimit me adduce. He has shown that we are largely
indebted to Paganism; that Paganism is in one sense the
father of Christianity ; and that it is as base as it is
undutiful for the child to turn against and vilify its
parent, as it has done through Dr. Vaughan as its repre-
sentative. The Archbishop has also abused Freemasons,
and passing over my own humble vindication as an out-
sider, he has received a severe, but deserved rebuke from
a gentleman, the Rev. I)r. Beg, who knows much more
about Freemasonry than he does. He has slandered
Materialists, and has evoked from thousands of honorable
men an indignant repudiation of the atrocious principles
and revolutionary designs he attributes to them. He has
recognised Protestants as fellow-christians, and has invited
their co-operation in an important work, in which he and
they are mutually interested; but he has done this with
such an air of affected superiority, and such an utter
o obviousness of the real genius and well-known history of
his own Church, that they have responded to his invita-
tion by administering a thorough good chastisement for
his arrogance, impudence, and hypocrisy! And he has
done all this with one ulterior object in view, namely, the
extension of the influence and the aggrandisement of the
position of the Roman Catholic Church, whose preten-
sions, hopes, and aspirations, he represents. Indeed, if I
may venture to so represent him, Dr. Vaughan has been
playing the part of an ecclesiastical spider. He has fixed
his eyes upon a number of Protestant and Freethought
les which buzz bef ore him, and like a cunning spider, dressed
up m attractive priestly vestments, and in plausible terms,
he invites them into his pretty parlour, to become what ?
his much desired prey, of course! He in effect thus
addresses the flies which buzz and frolic about him:—
‘ Walk into this parlour my dears. It is the finest place
ever entered. It is brilliantly illuminated, luxuriently


furnished, beautifully adorned, and abundantly supplied
with everything 1 necessary to make you happy; it is
capacious enough to hold you all without being crowded
uncomfortably, or there being any danger of your delicate
wings being crushed ; and above all, it is honoured with
the august presence of the representative of Grod himself,
in the person of his Holiness the Pope! Yes, this is a
pretty parlour, remember. Pagans live in filthy piggeries ;
Protestants have no better homes than dingy, ill-furnished
back-kitchens ; and as for Freethinkers, they have to be con-
tent with attics , whose only adornments are cobwebs, and
windows, rents in the roof! W e Catholics alone have the
honour and happiness to live in a parlour. Its door is now
wide open to receive you. I affeetionatelyi nvite you to
enter. Walk in my dears and be at home ! ” But the flies
are not such poor, silly, easily-captured things as'he took
them to be. They suspect his intentions, and do not ac-
cept his loving and disinterested invitation. In reply to
his coaxing little address they exclaim : —“We have seen
many flies enter your so-called parlour, but we never saw
one come out again as it was when it went in. If you could
get us inside you would suck our very life-blood —as you
have done that of millions —not the life-blood of our bodies,
but of our liberty, our independence, and our manhood.
Your magnificent parlour is a miserable prison; your
gorgeous possessions are tinsel shams ; your proffered free-
dom is positive slavery ; the honeyed words by which you
seek to decoy us to ruin are the utterances of profound
hypocrisy. We are free now, and free we will live and die.
Begone contemptible spider, bury yourself in the cobwebs
of sophistry you have spun, and show your hideous head
no more !” ‘ I think, then, that Dr. Vaughan’s lecture was
a great mistake. Instead of catching silly flies as he hoped
to do, he has raised a nest of hornets, under whose sting
he will smart for some time. I should not be surprised if
he were summoned to Rome to give an account of his
stewardship.
In surveying the present state of the religious world,
which is so unsatisfactory to him, and forecasting the
future, so pregnant with perils ; it is strange that the
Archbishop did not consider whether his own Church is not
largely responsible, both for the existing and the dreaded state of
things. If he had done so, and that impartially and fully,


1 fancy lie would have reached a conclusion by no means
soothing to his present excited feelings, or flattering to his
usual pompous self-sufficiency. T have often argued that
Protestantism is mainly answerable for the Infidelity which
exists in those countries where her influence predominates ;
and I believe the same thing applies to Popery. The Infi-
delity which is spreading in Catholic countries is mainly
the fruit of the Catholic Church. It is a most significant
fact the revolutionary Materialism which Qr. Yauglian
dreads so much is most rampant, and has done most mis-
chief, in some of the very countries over which his Church
has had the longest and completes! control. Nay, in
Rome itself, the very “ heart of the Supernatural,” it has
reached alarming proportions, and assumed a threatening
attitude. Bishop Quinn, in an address which he gave to
the Catholics of Forbes the other day, said that he had
recently witnessed atrocities in Rome, levelled against the
head of the Catholic Church, which it was not in the power
of words to describe. The Pope could scarcely ever make
his appearance in public without being subjected to in-
sults of the vilest order. Only a short time since, when at-
tempting to go across to Saint Peter’s by the balcony, he
was so derided that he was compelled to beat a hasty re-
treat. Now, this may be either a pure invention or a gross
exaggeration on the part of the Bishop, intended to rouse
the sympathy of the faithful in this part of the world, for
the Pope in his alleged afflictions. It may be deemed un-
charitable to hint at such a possibility ; but the history of
Popery warrants the belief that its emissaries will not be
very nice or scrupulous in the use of means to promote its
interests. But if Bishop Quinn’s statement be true, what
does it prove respecting his Church and its human head ?
It proves that many of those who are the nearest to the
Pope, and know him best, despise him most! that Popery,
as seen at head quarters, is so full of falsehoods, impos-
tures, and corruptions, that many of her own subjects are
disgusted with her! that the very children she has nursed,
and trained, and blessed repeatedly, have risen up in arms
against her, and are anxious to witness her complete
destruction. This is a condition of things in Rome
itself, which neither Bishop Quinn nor Archbishop
Vaughan can consider very creditable to their Church ;
but it need not be wondered at, when we con-


aider the state of Popery at Koine —“ the heart of Chris-
tianity,” and the doings of many of its emissaries abroad.
For example, it is constantly represented to the world out-
side of Rome that the Pope is a prisoner. But the people
of that city know this to he deliberate and wicked false-
hood They see that he is quite as free as themselves;
aye free to leave the place to-morrow if he chose, with-
out risking the slightest hindrance from Victor hmanuel.
And not only is lie free to go where he chooses, and when
he likes, but he is equally free to do all the good lie can.
If he suffers any restriction at all, it is only on his propen-
sity for mischief. Harrowing tales are also told to the
faithful at a distance about his poverty. He is often de-
scribed as being so poor, since he was “robbed of the
patrimony of Saint Peter,” that he has scarcely wherewith
hi purchase the necessaries of life 5. but the inhabitants of
flip “ Eternal City” know that he is rolling in wealth, that
aoonious stream of money, under the name of ‘ ‘Peter’s pence, ”
is incessantly flowing into his treasury, to say nothing of the
frequent “devotions of the faithful,” amounting in some
cases to ten thousand pounds and upwards, and that it he
had not a-penny to-day, he has plate jewellery, waidrobes,
estates &c , upon which he could realise a million or two
to-morrow, if he wanted the money. But the climax of
audacious imposture and insatiable greed is l eached, when
it is coolly asserted that lie has not a decent bed to he on and
bits of draw are sold to the benighted inhabitants of
Catholic countries, as having been part of u hat he has had
to lie on, as though he was treated like a veritable beast.
These and similar disgraceful fabrications are scattered
broadcast over the world, in order to excite the sympathy
and stimulate the practical devotion of < atholics, and m
the hope of bringing about a reaction of feeling, even
amongProtestaiits, in the Pope’s favour And when
people of Rome, in addition to the imposture and conup-
tion P they witness in their own city, become educated
enough to inform themselves, by means of the l iess
of the doings of Popish emissaries, abroad, need we
wonder at their wide-spread revolt against Papal decep-
tion and tyranny, at their Infidelity and Materialism,
and at their treating the Pope, as the head of the gigan ic
swindle, in the manner Bishop Qumn declares they have
lately done? The wonder is that popular indignation ha&


not swept the Pope, the College of Cardinals, the Society
of Jesuits, and all the Catholic fraternities from Rome
long ago. I, therefore, repeat, that when Dr. Vaughan
condemns Freethought and Materialism, deplores the pre-
sent condition of the religious world, and manifests such
terrible anxiety for the future of Supernaturalism, he
should consider how far hisj own Church is responsible
tor the present and prospective state of things ; and if she
is now, and has done in the past, what facts appear to me
to prove against her, he had better attempt her reforma-
tion, even at her “ centre ’’—Rome— before he tries to in-
duce those who stand aloof from her to join her as “ the
true Church of God.”
Haying said this much on certain general points con-
nected with the subject, I will now offer two or three yery
brief remarks on a few points of the Archbishop’s
pamphlet either not noticed or only glanced at be-
fore, and then say a little more on his Educational
proposal, in opposition to which I shall urge the claims
of .National, Secular, Compulsory, and Free Education.
1. In the first place, then, I invite your attention for a
moment or two to a few points which the Archbishop has
introduced, m addition to those that 1 have already dealt
with. . J
1. hirst, he' condemns “ Positivism ,” as one phase of
Materialism, because, having removed the God he adores,
it exalts “ Humanity ” to the position he occupied, and
invests it with divine attributes. At present I will only
observe on this point that, if I were compelled to choose
between the Ideal Divinity of Positivism and the God of
Roman Catholicism, I should certainly prefer the former;
for, 1 cannot think that the ideal Divinity of Positivism
would ever sanction tno cruelties, treacheries, and abomi-
nations which the God of Popery has repeatedly looked
upon with an approving smile.
'2. Secondly, the Archbishop asserts that good and
evil, right and wrong, the eternal principles of justice,
truth, holiness, and love,” have “no meaning when cut off
from God, their origin.'” This is to me an amazing state-
ment. If I had time to go fully into the question raised
I should ask, whose God, or ideal of God, does he mean ?
Suffice it that I affirm, in opposition to his unsupported
assertion, that these great principles are a part of the very


Constitution of things ; that they are ot natural and uni-
versal application ; and that they would exist and operate for
good, in proportion as their intrinsic requirements were
apprehended and appreciated, if all the Gods of the different
Christian sects—for each sect, including the so-callec
Catholic, has its separate God-ideal, whether it acknow-
ledges it or not —were swept away. The conscientious
denial of the existence of a God would not, in enlightene
and well regulated minds, relax the. obligations ol tru
and justice, nor diminish the beauties oi goodness and
love, nor make their opposites other than things to be
detested and shunned. These principles, and renditions
would, for their own sake, and with regard to tins woild
only, occupy the same position and exert the same influ-
ence as though they were associated with a belief in a
sectarian God, and a sectarian future sta <. -
;> Thirdly Dr. Vaughan lavs great stress on the assump-
tion that the teaching of his own Church is authoritative,
because regulated by an infallible head She l«ses a
Divinely-given and unerringly interpreted Revelation, and
is “an xinmoving Cathedra of certainty as to belief and
action.” But it is one thing to claim infallibility, and
make that the basis of desired authority; it is quite
another thing to prove the claim. Has the Church of Rone
ever proved^this* boasted claim? Were those anetent
Councils, with an alleged infallible Pope at then head,
rnfallibb in certain decisions they gave, which were
by subsequent councils, also presided ovei by an “taJlibie
Dope ? Which decisions were the infallible ones . Ca
be proved that any of them were? Did she unerring y
interpret” those passages in the Bible, which modern
science lias compelled honest theologians to give a very
different meanings to from those she attached to t f
Was she infallible when she denounced as damnable
as! «
tauo-ht ? Is she infallible in the condemnation she has, in
the person of the Dope, lately passed nrn modern scien e
civilisation and progressive thought? Is it not moraii)
certain iudging Horn the past and from present appear-
cuta ,1 r, b -p reverso rather than endorse her
ances, tliat tne iuxuie


verdict ? Her assumed infallibly never has been proved :
but as a matter of fact it has in several instances been
absolutely disproved: and, therefore, the dog-mat
authority that is founded upon it necessarily falls to th
ground ; and the less I)r. A aughan parades it before th
public, the better it will be for his reputation as a theolo
gian and a scholar.
fourthly, certain statements which he quotes froi
Materialistic Authors, on the one hand refute much that
says against them, and on the other justify them in their oppositio
to super naturalism, and their efforts to overthrow it. H
quotes their reason for the antagonism they manifes
towards the Supernatural, and the means they propose fo
destroying it. First, as to their reason. It is found in th
lollowing extract:—“Superstition has hitherto been th
mainstay of tyranny and deception, by means of which
princes and priests have drawn mankind into their net. Fea
ot a future life, of an eternity of punishment, has been
a motive powerful enough to hold weak minds, bowet
down the load of prejudices sucked in with their mother’s
milk, and to enervate the holiest spirits, rendering in
capable of any great action. This is the evil of Chris-
tianity, that it enslaves minds to such a point that they are
willing to endure any present suffering with the consoling
hope ot a life to come.” Now, it is because Christianity,
01 Supeinaturalism as he calls it, has produced such effects
tts tlithat Materialists and .Freethinkers generally are
waging war against it. And this appears to me to be a
sufficient and imperative reason for their action. Have
not “ princes and priests,” especially those of his own
( hurcli, used their religion for the purpose of enslaving
and degrading their people, as alleged ? While princes
and priests have been rolling in luxuries, have not the
down-trodden masses beneath them, received as their only
consolation in their poverty and misery, the shadowy
prospect of a better state of things in the next world ?
And have not many of the people become so enervated and
brutalized, that they are content with this poor consolation,
and continue to lie uncomplainingly under the feet of their
oppressors ? And hence, it is no wonder that those whose
eyes have been opened to see thesee vils, and who have the
ability and courage to grapple with them, should be doing
their best to sweep them from the earth. Secondly, with


regard to the means they rely on to accomplish this ; these
are indicated in the following words :—“ It would he un-
wise to engage in open warfare; the spread of freedom of
thought and independence of actien is the surest means of
undermining the gigantic monument erected by ambition.
And do not these very words which Dr. Yaughan quotes
contain a complete refutation of the violent and revolu-
tionary schemes he charges them with entertaining ? Is
“ open warfare” of the character he dreads contemplated ?
No! But on the contrary, the idea of any such a thing is
distinctly repudiated! The means relied upon consist
simply in “ the spread of freedom of thought and inde-
pendence of action.” And is not this a perfectly legitimate
way of trying to attain a desired end ? Let the Arch-
bishop and other Supernaturalists fight the enemy w ith
his own weapon. Let them trust to the diffusiofi ot op-
posite principles, and the development of a different kind
of action ; and if they have truth and right of their side,
they have nothing to fear in such a fair contest; but if they
are in the wrong, tune is against them and nothing tan
save them. At anv rate, the means which Materialists are
now employing, and which they say they will continue to
employ, are such as Supernaturalists ought not to complain
of ;*and the words Dr. Yaughan quotes ought to have been
quite sufficient to allay his apprehension of a violent and
destructive attack, in other words, of “ open waitare,
which is distinctly condemned. .
5. Fifthly, the alarm which the Archbishop has tried to
create by attributing the most atrocious designs to the
enemy,, is still further shewn to be unfounded by another
extract lie gives, in which the character of Materialists am
Freethinkers is a prominent feature. Having alluded to
the spread of Materialism in “ France, Spain, Italy,
[ countries in which his favourite Supernaturalism has long
exercised supreme control, and which it ought to have re-
generated if it is what he claims for it,] and (rermany ,
having admitted that it permeates “ every class m those
countiies, from “ the acute and active politician, the man
of science, the litterateur , and polemist by profession
down to “a swarm of intellectual adventurers ; and
having read the “portentous signs of a dark and dis-
tressing future” which are here exhibited, he comes
to “our own England,” and asks: —“What is the


mental attitude of her leading thinkers, and of thos
who form the hone aud sinew of the people, whos
mental labours those thinkers are ?” He answers th
this question by quoting W. R. Greg, whom he describe
as “ a keen observer of English intellectual life,” on th
spread of Liberal principles in our mother country. On he
“ leading thinkers ” Greg is quoted as follows :—“ I believ
that the. strongest mental power, the finest thought, th
highest intelligence amongst us, is yearly diverging mor
and more from Christianity, is discarding all faith in it
assuming towards it not so much a hostile, as an isolatec
neutral, almost supercilious attitude—an attitude whic
ma_\ pei haps best be described as one ot silent renuncia
tion and disapproval—of looking on and ‘ passing by on th
other side.’ The preponderant intellect in every line—
statesmanlike, legal, scholarly, scientific, literary, indns
trial—is no longer believing, is, as a rule, distinctly
unbelieving ” Of those who “form the bone and sineu
oj the people ” Greg thus speaks:—“ A very large pro
portion, probably the majority of the operative classes
m towns are total unbelievers; and these are not the
reckless and disreputable , but on the contrary, consist ot
the best of the skilled workmen, the most instructed ant
thoughtful, as well as the steadiest. The hard-headed indus-
trious, reading engineers and foremen, members of mechan-
ics institutes, the natural leaders of the artizans, are
sceptics intellectual!g, not morally; they disbelieve because
they have inquired , argued, and observed; and have been
unable to obtain from their Methodist fellow-workmen, or
even from ministers of the Gospel, satisfying answers to
their doubts. Amongst the manufacturing artizans, and
the highest description of citizen labourers , it may be stated,
with even more confidence than of the ranks above them in
the social scale, that the intellect of that body is already
divorced from the prevalent creeds of the country.” The
italics in the extract about the “operative classes” are
mine. And these are among the quotations the Archbishop
gives in the hope of benefitting liis own cause ! I ao-ree
with him that Mr. Greg is one of the most thoughtful "and
observant of living writers. And if the picture he draws
of the present religious condition of England be correct,
the outlook for Supernaturalism is certainly not encour-
aging; nay, it is dark enough to inspire its advocates with


fearful forebodings. But I am not now discussing the
ultimate Jate of Supernaturalism in all its forms. lam
quite certain that its doomed to complete destruction. In
these lectures, however, I am only dealing with the means
and methods alleged to be used to achieve that glorious con-
summation. I have before given the Archbishop’s quota-
tion from an avowed Materialist as to their policy; and
now I have given you his quotation from Greg, which not
only indicates the extent to which Liberalism has spread in
England, but also shows the character of those who are
described by that term. If you will reflect on the parts of
his quotation which I have emphasised (of course, I am
now writing instead of speaking, and what I have said of
italics in this and my last lecture will be understood
simply to mean those words or sentences which I wish
particularly to emphasise), you will see that not only is
there no reason to fear the employment of any severe
measures by the “leading thinkers” of England; but
even among the u operative class6s , there is no clangor of
such a sanguinary revolution as he seems to apprehend.
The former class consists of men of ‘ ‘ the strongest metal
power, the finest thought, the highest intelligence; the
“ preponderant intellect in every line—statesmanlike, legal,
schrolarlv, scientific, literary, industrial” is among them.
The latter class is composed of “not the reckless and dis-
reputable, but on the contrary, of the best of the skilled
workmen, the most instructed and thoughtful, as well as
the steadiest.” I appeal to you, and I would appeal to
the frightened Archbishop if he were present, to say
whether men of this character—the very cream of the two
classes—are likely to adopt such, indefensible and wicked
ways of realising their desires as he says they will do.
There is no sign among them of any conspiracy, or of
using unfair means and methoda for the destruction of the
present civil, social, and religious state of things. On
the contrary, the Liberals of all classes, including Materi-
alists, Atheists, Secularists, Freethinkers, Deists, Spiri-
tualists, &c., seem satisfied to let natural and legitimate
agencies take their proper course. Their policy in regard
to Supernaturalism —and with that only have I to do at
present appears to be to quietly withdraw from it; or to
use Greg’s words, it is the policy of “ silent renunciation
and disapprovalleaving it, if I may so express myself,


to fall at last by the weight of its own weakness, rather than
as the result of an organised and direct assault of its
enemies. Such is the state of things in England, and such
the policy of the Liberal party in relation to the religions
of that country, as described by one of her most intelligent
and conscientious thinkers. Of course there is some direct
and agressive antagonism towards the popular faiths, but
that is insignificant when compared with the indirect but
effectual opposition he speaks of. And I think we may
assume that the policy of the general bo ly of Liberals in
foreign countries is the same as that of the party in Eng-
land ; but even if that is not yet exactly their policy, we
may fairly hope that, as it is so reasonable and legitimate,
they will by degrees adopt it. Other nations have copied
England’s example in so many things, that I think they
are most likely to imitate the conduct of a rapidly increas-
ing number of her people in the means —so creditable and
judicious— they are using for the overthrow of Supernatu-
ralism in all its phases, and with all its errors, iniquities,
and abominations.
6. Sixthly, the Archbishop is very much concerned be-
cause the Liberal party will have nothing to do with priests,
especially in times of sickness and death. I glanced at this
point in my last lecture, but will just offer an additional
remark or two upon it. The determination of Freethink-
ers to dispense with priestly aid at trying and serious times,
is certainly not flattering to their priestly vanity and pre-
tentions. Dr. Vaughan quotes the words which certain
Freethinkers wish to have said of them after they are dead,
as a kind of panegyrical epitaph—“ He departed faithful
to his principles, and was buried without a priest ” —and he
thinks it dreadful that this should be said of any human
being. For my own part, I can only say that under the
circumstances supposed, I consider them a fine eulogium
on the memory of the departed. I have nothing to say
againstthose who believe in them, being visited by their reli-
gious teachers in their sickness, and desiring a Christian
burial for their bodies after their souls have gone to heaven.
Those who regard Catholic priests, as well as those who
look upon ministers of religion generally as being in some
sense God’s representatives on earth, and who accept all
their teachings as divine truths, will receive a consolation
and support from their ministrations in times of sickness


and approaching death which nothing else could give, and
I would by no means rob them of it; for they are not
capable, under the circumstances, of realising the comfort
which other, and as I believe more correct, views afford.
They may be in error, but they are sincere in their belief; and
the close of their earthly career is not the time to give it up,
and embrace another, though a better one; for the change
could not possibly be the result of sufficient inquiry and
thought to make it creditable. They will, therefore, die
all the more happily for having listened to the prayers of
their Protestant parson, or received “ extreme unction”
from their Catholic priest, as the case may be ; and will
enter the other world in the belief that their bodies will
sleep all the more soundly in their graves, for having been
interred according to the rites of their Church ; and I could
not be so cruel as to wish to deprive them of the consola-
tion they feel. But I do protest against priestly and
parsonic interference with avowed Freethinkers on their
death-beds, in the hope of inducing them to repent at the
eleventh hour, and seek the pardon of their sins and a
title to heaven; and if successful, being able to point to
other proofs of the efficacy of their religion, and supplying
pious tract-mongers with fresh sensational stories of
“ dhath-bed repentance.” Then is not the time to either
worr} r them with questions about the “ state of their souls,”
or try to frighten them with threats of impending “ damna-
tion.” Besides, I consider that what is called “ death-bed
repentance,” involving, as Christians believe it does, such
a mighty change in man’s moral and spiritual nature, and
in his mental convictions in the case of Infidels, is as great
an absurdity as it is an impossibility. So far as I can
see, there is nothing in nature, observation, or unbiassed
reason, to warrant the belief in the reality of those sup-
posed instantaneous and extensive changes. The sins of a
lifetime can no more be blotted out in the twinkling of an eye,
than intellectual convictions of years, growth can be got rid
of by a mere effort of the will, or a single stroke of Super-
natural power. The efficacy of “redeeming blood” and
“ purifying Grace,” is far more apparent on the lips of
religious teachers and the pages of theological works, than
in the hearts and intellects of repentant believers in Christ-
ianity, and recanting unbelievers in it. But it is with
the lat*er class that 1 am more especially dealing, and I


ask—ls it reasonable to expect that a man who has been,
say twenty or thirty years an intelligent and conscientious
Freethinker, will be able, in a state of bodily weakness
and pain, to perceive sufficient grounds for abandoning his
hitherto cherished convictions, and embracing the religion
he has so long deliberately rejected ? What weight would
a recantation and professed repentance, under such circum-
stances, have against the thoughtful conviction and honest
profession of his healthy days? If religious teachers
would reflect on this point, they would see that such
changes as they desire to witness in certain persons on
their death-beds, if effected, would, in ninety-nine cases
out of every hundred, be nothing more than a hypocritical
farce, reflecting no credit either on the subjects of them,
or the parties who instrumentally produce them. They
would discover that what is called death-bed repentance is
almost invariably the result either of physical or mental
weakness, or of an unmanly desire to escape a dreaded
hell and defraud a believed-in-devil of his due, than from
a wish to become good, and get to heaven from a proper
and heart-felt sense of duty. And they would, therefore,
prefer seeing a Freethinker die “ faithful to his principles,”
much as they might disbelieve in and detest those principles,
than desire to witness a change in his last moments,
which, if effected, would be open to such grave suspicion.
Personally, I shouid like everybody to die in the rational
and comforting belief of Spiritualism ; but I would much
rather that both Christians and Materialists, who remain
such till they are about to quit this world, should depart
in their respective beliefs and disbeliefs, than that they
should accept a better system than their own on insuffi-
cient evidence, and from questionable motives. Let a man
who is man enough to think out definite conclusions for
himself on religious questions in his healthy days, be man
enough to die in the profession of those conclusions,
whatever they may be, and trust to such a future state,
if there is on *, as a wise and benevolent God has prepared
for him. Then, if he enters another world and finds his
conclusions correct, so much the better ; but if incorrect,
he will change them as the result of such evidence as he
could not have grasped in the wexkness of dissolving
nature, and under such influences as a sick room could not
possibly supply. For my own part, even if my belief in


Spiritualism is ill-founded—wliich I do not for a moment
susoect —I would infinitely prefer having it said of me
after I have gone, that—“ he departed faithful to his prin-
ciples, and was buried without a priest, than that lie
recanted on his death-bed, and died a good Christian!
But if there is such a widespread and determined oppo-
sition to the kindlv offices pf the priesthood in times of
sickness and death, as l)r. Vaughan alleges, there must be
some grounds for it other than those he indicates. I be-
lieve there are several reasons for it, but I have only time
to mention two. First, the abuse of their office when visiting
the faithful at such times, of which they have often been
guilty, 'if general experience had proved that they bad
always confined themselves to administering what they call
the consolations of their religion to the sick and dying ; if
they had never taken advantage of their positionflo serve
their own selfish ends; if they had never played upon the
fears nor flattered the hopes of the dying—never stirred up
the fires of hell before them and shook the devil m their
faces on the one hand, nor depicted the beauties of heaven
and exhibited the blessed Virgin for their admiration on
the other, and all with one object in view, mainly, to get-
for themselves what, in moral right, near and dear relativ es
ought to have had-I cannot think there would have been
the inveterate dislike to, and deep distrust of them, on
such solemn occasions, as the Archbishop admits the exis-
tence of. But it is well known that they have frequently
degraded their office by wrongly directing the dying and
robbing the living; and hence one reason for the righ-
teous retribution they are now m some measure suffering—
a retribution that will become more widespread and
crushing as time rolls on, unless they try to avert it by
making^ honourable restitution for the past, and scrupu-
lously abstaining from such iniquitous conduct in the future.
Secondly, their treatment of the dead, who do not belong to
their Church, is another reason for the rejection of their
preferred services which the Archbishop deplores. It is
well known that Catholic priestsi will not bury'
die avowed Freethinkers; nor do I think they should, it
the departed have died in the belief of the principles they
professed whilst living ; but my reasons for saying this
fire very different from those which influence them in with-
holding the rite of Christian burial. I'hey do this to im-


press the living that as the souls o<* the departed have
without doubt perished, their bodies also must rest under
Divine curse, and rot in unconsecrated ground. In a
Catholic country, for instance, all the surviving relatives
of a departed Freethinker may be devout members of the
Church. He may have told them before he died that he did
not believe in priests, and that he considered the interment
of his body without the usual rites of the Church would
not make the slightest difference to him ; but they are the
slaves of religious superstition, and are terribly distressed
at the thought that no ghostly father shall commit his body
to the grave in sure and certain hope of a resurrection to
eternal life. They have immense faith in consecrated
ground, in sprinkled holy water, in white surplices, in
Latin prayers of which they do not understand a word,
and in nicely adjusted crosses ; and, therefore, they ask the
priest to perform the usual burial service over his mortal
remains. But the man of God indignantly declines. He
would sooner read the service over a dead dog, than over a
dead, and damned, Infidel. If the deceased had been a
liar, a robber, a drunkard, a libertine, or even a murderer,
and had sought absolution on his death-bed, evervthing
would have been made right both for the interment of his bodv,
and the admission of his soul to heaven—after a short so-
journ in purgatory, perhaps; but, though he may have
been one of the most pure, noble, and intelligent of men,
yet, having despised the Church while living, he shall not
have the shadow of its blessing now that he is dead. And
not only does the priest refuse to bury him, but if he can
he will surreptitiously make away with his body, and in-
crease the anguish of his relatives by telling them that the
deni has stolen it, and taken it straight to hell, without
waiting for it till the resurrection, to share with his soul a
righ'eous punishment for his Infidelity! And all this is
done in order to impress them and others with the impor-
tance of the Catholic Church, and exalt his own office as
one of her priests. And not only do (’atholic priests re-
fuse to bury I reethinkers, they punish those who do per-
form that last friendly office, wherever they have the
power; as is proved by the fact that some of them seized
the two men who.jburied Garibaldi’s wife, Anita, and cast
them into prison ; where they lingered some time, and
probably would have remained till death, but for the kind-


ness of some German gentlemen, who interfered ou their
behalf and secured their release.
In support of what I have said about priests sunep i-
tiously making awav with the bodies of Freethinkers rather
than‘interring them, I will give an instance related by
Miss Cobbe, in her interesting work entitled u Italics. in
this case, however, they were defeated in their wicket (e-
-sign in a way that ought to have taught them a salutary
lesson. The occurrence took place before there was a
united Italy. At Pisa there was a young student on his
death-bed. The priests visited him and proffered him the
“ consolations of religion but he was an “ Infidel, anr
absolutely refused them. He died “ true to his principles ;
but before he passed away he said to a dear friend, also a
Freethinker, “ I entreat you not to lose sight of my body
till it is in the Campo Santo. lam sure these priests will
play some desperate trick with it, lest it be thought that a
man may safely die without the sacraments „ Pl °™* B ®.™ e
that you will not let it be out of your sig , ,J
and his friend was true to his promise. ‘He remained,
says the writer, “with all constancy beside the coipse.
The priests remonstrated and bullied—all in jam. I
body was removed. He still followed it, and the last mght
he prepared to quietly sit up beside it taking with him,
par precaution, a revolver concealed in his breas .
night came, and with it sudden and awful noises and mys-
terious lights. Finally, from the gloom of the church,
emerged a terrific figure—horns, hoofs, tail and all co
pletef glowing with phosphoric light —that one cr na-
ture who combines the distinguishing features of a
Ruminant and the habits of the Felts Leo jo
shouted the student, ‘Do not go near that coffin.
The Prince of Darkness heeded not such paltry remon
strance, and visibly approached to- seize the
‘ Another step and I shoot you, said the student. 1
devil took the step ; the student fired ; and the fiend, wit
a howl of perfectly human agony, fell dead on the floo .
Then burst into the place a whole hand of P riests j fi®
been watching the transaction, and had hoped to see> the
body of the Infidel student brought off victoriously by their
accomplice-of course himself an ecclesiastic of the lower
What was to be done ? It would never answer to
bring to trial the young delinquent, and be obliged to pro-


duce in court the corpus delicti —the venerable Padre got up
as the devil. Tuscans are fond of jokes, and this joke
would be too good ever to be forgotten. So the body of
the Infidel student was decently buried after all, and the body
of the Padre Diavolo was put quite quietly into sacred
ground (we trust despoiled of his horns and tail), and the
Grand Duke himself came down privately to Pisa to decide
Avhat could best be done with the man who had shot the
devil. Of course, in Pome or Naples, it would have been
all plain sailing. No Pojie or King would have found the
least difficulty in making an end of such a case in the
most effectual manner. Tuscany’s prince, however, was a
man of other counsels, and the young student was allowed
privately to perform that judicious step which our American
friends denominate to ‘ skedaddle.’ From thenceforth, it
is a common saying, ‘ There is no devil in Pisa. He was
shot here some time ago ?” ’ Now, in this case, if the
pnest, dressed up to represent the devil, had scared the
young man away—and that was the first part of his design
—the body of his departed friend would have been borne
off in triumph by the help of his brother priests, who were
looking on ; and a clear case would have been made out
that the devil himself had taken an Infidel’s body direct to
hell, without, as I before observed, waiting for it till the re-
surrection. And the effect of such a story upon a priest-
ridden people can easily be imagined.
Seeing, then, the conduct that priests of his own Church
have been guilty of, as thus briefly described, first, in taking
advantage of their position and extorting money from
dying Catholics, and secondly, in using foul play with the
bodies of deceased Freethinkers, Dr. Vaughan need not be
surprised at the growing antipathy to them, which he so
deeply bewails.
11. In the second place, I will offer a few more remarks
on the Education Question.
The education of the rising generation is one of the
greatest questions of the day. It is attracting universal
attention, agitating all classes of men, and dividing them
into two great parties, namely, Ecclesiastics, who wish to
control htate funds, and make education subserve the interests
of then’ sectarian religions ; and Secularists, who hold that
the k fate should supply secular education only, leaving the
Churches to impart religious instruction in their own way,


and by their own paid-for a gencies. The Ecclesiastical
party is composed chiefly of Episcopalian Protestants and
Poznan Catholics. But what means the zeal for the educa-
tion of the rising race, which these Churches now display ?
Does it spring from a love of education for its own sake ?
I fear that in manv cases it does not. The education of
children of all classes has become one of the great demands
of the age ; and they see that unless they identify them-
selves with it, and try to control it for their sectarian pur-
poses, there is a danger of its becoming a power that will
speedily overthrow their already perilous position. The
Church of England did not take the interest in education she
now shews, till Dissenters and Freethinkers shamed
her out of her indifference. If a few of her children could
read and write a little, and were able to do a simple sum
two, what more did they need ? Anything beyond that
would be likely to diminish their reverence for their
superiors. Learning the Catechism was, in most cases, the
principal part of the education she gave. A knowledge of
that was indispensable, especially of the part—“To submit
myself to all my governors, teachers, spiritual pastors and
masters; to order myself lowly and reverently to all my
betters,” —and, therefore, those who could not read it for
themselves, had to learn it from some one who could.
Indeed, the less education, especially in country parishes,
the people had, and they more unquestioningly they would
take in, with gaping mouth and lack-lustre eye, the trash,
called religious truth, which the parish parson would drivel
out for their benefit Sunday after Sunday. She is doing a
little more now, but she insists that education shall be well
seasoned with her peculiar doctrines, or it will prove moreof
a curse than a blessing. And what did the Church of Rome
do for the education of the masses, when she had the thing
entirely in her own hands ? During the long ages that
she reigned supreme in Europe she did next to nothing for
them. Her priests were educated —and some of them not
very well—and a few of the wealthiest of her laity, but
the people were not cared for. Education is the key to
knowledge, and of all things knowledge among the masses,
except such as she imparts, is what she dreads most. It
was, therefore, not likely that she would put such a key
into their hands, so long as she could safely or prudently
withhold it. Hence, her present zeal in educational
X


matter has a very suspicious appearance about it. But
times have so changed, that her own interests now require
the education of her children. She sees that unless they
are educated, the children of Protestants and Freethinkers
i push ahead of them in the various departments of
rr ; “ her pride nor her self-interest could
tolerate that idea for a moment. She, therefore, now
sanctions and encourages the principle, that her people as
well as her priests must be educated. But, their education
must be under her own absolute control. It must be per-
meated with the religion she teaches. Secular and reli-
gious education must be inseparably united, and not
divorced, as some would have them. Indeed, I believe
that she would rather allow them to remain in the dense
ignorance of their forefathers, much as it might be to her
wor t y disadvantage, than have them educated without
her religion, and independently of her control. Now I
am not aware that any one complains of her desire to give
her children a religious training. She, like all other
Churches is at perfect liberty to educate them in the
belief of her doctrines. Nay, I will go so far as to say
that to be consistent it is her positive duty to do so, much
as I detest many of the tenets she will teach them. But
then, the question arises, with whose money, and whose
agencies ought she to give them such education ? This
leads us once more to Archbishop Vaughan’s proposal,
that,, so far as this colony is concerned, the State shall
subsidise the day schools of all the Churches ; and that,
ei e 01 e, y the aid of public money, the most contradictory
and antagonistic sectarian religions shall be taught. Upon
this point I am at direct issue with him, and pointed out
in my last lecture that neither Catholics, Protestants, nor
reethinkers can sanction his proposal, without a serious
sacrifice of consistency and honour. Nor would he have
ventured to make such a proposal in a country where
Catholics preponderate.. But in this colony they are in a
mmori y, and, audacious as the Archbishop is, his
audacity is not equal to proposing that his Church alone,
she bemg the only true Church of God, in his estimation,
shall receive State aid to teach religion; he sees that if
she is to have any aid from the State at all, it must be on
terms of equality with other Churches; and, therefore,
much as he at heart despises and condemns those Churches,


as heretical sects, he is quite willing to sacrifice principle
to policy, and allow them to have State aid m the teaching
of what he considers their soul-destroying errors, so long
as his Church shall he helped from the same reliable
source to teach the saving truths of Divine Revela-
tion ! History, what are thy lessons ? Consistency, whither
are thou gone ? Honour, one of thine professed defenders
has levelled a foul blow at thine heart; but thou shall yet
vindicate thyself, and blast the reputation of thy would-be
In a country all the inhabitants of which are of one
faith, Public funds may consistently be used tor the
teaching of its religion; but m a colony like this,
peopled as it is by members of a number of rival and
contending sects, and by persons of no religion at all, I
submit that the true policy of the State is to refuse pecu-
niary aid to all sects as such ; to protect each m the legi-
timate exercise of its functions; and to only supply to its
children such education as all have an equal interest in,
leaving their instruction in religious matters to be supplied
by the Churches to which they belong. ,
This leads me to notice the scheme of National,
Secular, Compulsory and Free Education as proposed by the
League. lam thorougly in favour of that but at
present I can only make two or three brief remarks upon
it; on a future occasion I will endeavour to deal with it
in a manner more commensurate with its men s.
1 First I hold that education should be National. This
is so much a truism as to hardly need arguing. Every
child in the State ought to have a certain amount of edu-
cation for the good of others, as well for its own beneh .
In the first place, it is necessary to the social well being
of the State. Ignorance is the mother of crimean
disorder, as well as devotion. It is often said that
cated persons commit crimes ; crimes, too which they c
not have committed but for their education. No doubt 13ut
that is because they have not been properly and completely
educated. Complete education embraces the harmonious
development of all man’s physical, intellectual, moral, an
so-ritual powers. Speaking generally, however, educa-
ca'nnot but have a beneficial influence att.
of crime and the preservation of order ; and m the prop
tion bi which it doe* this it saves State money. In the


being equal inevitabVbe
y:“~ r* r a “ ; fc —
estimable, mental iSLfZTth “? y
may abound in natural resources anri L ffi-}- ? Untr^'
properly used, would heln tWr ’ . 111 which, if
they cannot uLeThe but
and the forces of nature to account I ! l f advanta S es ’
can. It is, therefore, to the 'interest of thf
its people at least sufficient education J S^ te A° % lve
use the best available means wl T ® nable them to
manner, for her temporal prosperity * effective
be 8 ° ol r y P e thi9 ' sh ™ M
rages, and round which it will conSnueXb 1 b j tth
Religionists. The lattei consists of‘twoS''if' * Bnd
those whom T mil fV, Q t> t • ■ * 4VU parties. Ihere are
“ Bible Combination, to a \ represented b J the
Bible taught in all our sLTlnh , have a P art of the
note or comment, as anon-sectarhn°hn p Ver -L wit hout
indeed ! I know no book tS 1 ,
character and influence and whir p • sactanan m m its
of conflictingvieu^^Xt it
site theological doctrines and Jelimous * °? P ?'
erroneous in much of its science f„l? ■ Practices It is
indecent in parte ofits uS«ve „u“r 8 ° m ,7‘ h “ hietm >’
Of Its morality, misleading in seVeralof P °f tio “ s
exhibits, injurious rather than l i . characters it
the doctrines it teaches, and ignoble'"intoh “ f nu I mbor of
cutxng “in the spirit that predominates intosl ofits !?"
Of course, I cannot be expected +},;« • * ts Pa&es-
instances from it to proTe the fi o addu ce
number in the oTtlTZl 1 P? ?
delivered m this theatre some time i t \ ] vhlch 1
many more if necessary. Indeed th•* C ° ul ? Sup
portions of it which they propose’ is i?* 8 ° f °f taiu
ft » not such a suitable bU to’ £ “sodX


the religious instruction of the rising generation, as could
be desired If it were, throughout, the inspired and infal-
lible Word of God, it 'would contain nothing unfit tor
children to read. The Combinationists may say that they
do not propose to omit those parts in consequence of their
unfitness to he read, hut because of their unsuitableness
for children who are too young to properly understand
them ; hut that is only a contemptible quibble—a wretched
apology fora thing that could not be defended on broad and
righteous grounds. Then, there are the Ecclesiastics, w o
are chiefly found in the Church of England , and the Church oj
Rome. They would not, like the Combinationists, be con-
tent simply with the reading of a portion of the Bible evoiy
day; they would have Denominational schools, in w nci
they could teach their creeds and catechisms—m short
they would give dogmatic instruction iu their various
and opposing religions, and would draw upon t e
Public funds to assist them in so doing. Against these
two parties are arrayed the Secularists, who insist upon
the State limiting the appropriation of its funds ab-
solutely to the supplying of Secular education to
its children; leaving, as I have before said, the Churches
to impart religious instruction at their own expense. In
using the term “ Secularists,” I am not designating merely
those who are usually known by that name, as persons who
reject all the existing religions, and are, generally speak-
ing, Atheists; I refer to those, whoever they may be, who
are in favour of limiting the expenditure of State funds, in
educational matters, exclusively to the purpose just spoken
of. This term, therefore, comprises all the various classes
of Freethinkers, and a goodly number of < linstians, in-
cluding several able and well known clergymen.
The following are the only reasons I have time to men-
tion this evening, in support of Secular education.
(1 ) First, there are many persons in the colony who do
not believe in any of the religions taught and as they
contribute their fair share to the Public funds, it i a unjust
to devote any portion of those funds to the propagation of
views which they conscientiously reject; the State, there-
fore, should only supply Secular education, on the necessity
and importance of which all classes are agreed. State-aid to
Churches, as such, has been abolished chiefly on this
ground; and State-aid to religious education is quite as


indefensible as that was. It is grossly unjust to tax one
man for the support of another man’s views, which he not
only does not believe, but perhaps regards as a source of
incalculable mischief. If the case were reversed, our op-
ponents would see this at once, and give vent to their
imagination in an unmistakable manner. Suppose for
example, that we Spiritualists, or our Materialistic friends
were to ask for a share of the Public taxes to assist us in
educating children in our principles, would Catholics and
Protestants think our request a just and reasonable one ?
t ; they would be the first to cry out against the injustice
of employing any portion of their money in the diffusion
of views they abhor ; and they would have right on their
•ide. But would not the principle be the same as is in-
volved m their desire to use part of our money for the dis-
semination of their creeds and dogmas, which we detest ?
Ut course, every unbiassed reasoner knows it is. The onlv
difference is, that they are the majority and we the
minority for the time being; but if we wereVe maTority
I should resist such a proposal from our side, if it were
made as firmly as I now resist the one from their side
Let those parties who profess to be governed by the «rand
Jaw of doing to others as they would like to be done bv
at least ac t justly on this educational question
(2.) Secondly, it is to the interest of the State that its
subjects should regard each other as members of one grand
Commonwealth, rather than as belonging to rival sectarian
Communions. It is to me a matter of profound regret that
the religious and national differences and distinctions of
the old world should have been transplanted in this new
country; and should continue to be fostered with all the
111 ti! ° f the of misdirected
zeal These sectional differences are a relic of ancient bar-
barity, which the civilization of the future will either ob-
hterate or render harmless We ought not to know each
other here as Catholics or Protestants, Atheists or Spiri-
tualists, Englishmen or Irishmen, Scotchmen or Germans
but simply as New South Welshmen, or Australians if you
nay “ ( ? tizen * of the World-members of a
Universal Brotherhood! It will come to that in the end
Heaven speed the happy time ! “ Amen !” respond thou-
sands of cosmopolitan souls, who have burst the bonds of
narrow, cramping systems, and sent out their aspirations


. , iv a world i The best means for preventing
devoutly to be desired is U, educate
&&-«r‘}S
Les and for the common g^d.^to^maM
f eir d^Uo htUl On U reMhin g g maturity and passing through
little or nothing of the states
“dtSsies, . the divisions and es^whmh^enn-
influence and public
education of the character 8 P ok “ of J d °i“ e “a ei r de-
2T* «in d A B 'rls£
religious superstition , will no j . • -olicv Pro-
A"et trarrsTa&indVed! 1 and not
f rTefy time-serving Politicians, will take a ““f".
view of the Education t;U be'governed
desirefto'promote tlm rather than to serve
the interns of eipend p^Uc
(3.) Thirdly, i H | ious f y g temB 0 f the most opposite and
character.
" ist g and g eonsistent, assist>ll Churdiesintor -
gpective efforts of the same i • fearful sacrifice
have seen, consents to this, u t j ie Archbishop
of principle, consistency, an .' j j claims
of a P Chufch which has for age.> d ’ w Mch the State
in some countries, to be the o y Now what
ought to assist, I have a iea y q a j that t^e State
ahoSTassist alT the Sects' in teaching tneir distinctive doc-


tnnes. Why, the most monstrous absurdities , to sa -1
nothing of the baneful effects that would mar the civ
and social relations of life, as a few words will clear!
show. For example, Catholics would teach their childre
that theirs is the only true Church, that the Pope of Rom
is infallible, that tradition as well as Revelation is neces
sar y orm a perfect rule of faith, that Revelation is onb
to be accepted as interpreted by the Church, that priest
have power to forgive sins, that a piece of paste contain
the real body and blood of Christ, that it is no sin tobrea:
taith with heretics, that Protestants are heretics, and ar
sure to be damned, and so on. And for the further edifi
cation of their youthful souls, they will perhaps now and
then be taught as veritable truths such stories as the on
that Miss Cobbe relates, in the work already quoted from
A priest delivered a sermon some time ago, intended to en
force the duty and show the advantage of offering libera
donations to departed saints, which, being interpreted
I means living priests. A Catholic died in Naples not W
ago. In his lifetime he had offered “ a large amount of
candles and intercessions” to Saint Joseph, and after his
death his devotions were not forgotten by that Saint. The
man was so great a sinner that God would not forgive him
and sent him straight to hell ; but Joseph, remembering
the candles, and intercessions—especially the “candles”
they being a marketable commodity—which the poor
wretch had presented before his shrine on earth, went
down to hell after him, determined to bring him out
m . ®P xt ® ° f God and the devil. The Virgin Mary
quickiy followed him—she was not going to stay in heaven
without her husband Joseph; close on the heels of Mary
was < hrist—heaven was nothing to him without his “holy
mother and reputed father; trooping down after Christ
were all the angels and archangels—if he would not re-
rnam with them in heaven they would share his company
■nhell; andm theend heaven was completely deserted,
ind (Jod was “ obliged ” to forgive the sinner and admit
nm to paradise, m order to get Joseph, Mary, Christ, and
-he angels back again, so desolate and miserable was
leaven without them ! Now, what guarantee have we that
-malar blasphemy is not taught here for Divine truth?
ind 1. üblic money is asked for to pay for it! Again, the
afferent Protestant sects would teach‘that all those Popish


doctrines are mischievous errors and
differences
n °lutionof hh Till Trinitarians would inculcate the
execution ot Am x tof three distinct persons
doctrine of three God , i• . ITiress u , )o n them the
in one Godhead ; Unitarians Quakers and
idea ftat&ereM but .
Christian Desciples w P cler i ca i office. Jews would
other sects would uphol . . or at a p events only
declare that Christ was ould proclaim him a
a man ; all secfxons o a monuine nt of Divine dis-
God, and point to the J t he long-promised
pleasure, for h«ing flf j oseph
Messiah. Mormons * one man may k ave a
Smith, and say withou - without violating any
dozen wives, if he can keep of God .
law of nature, or comm £ ce '• Joe” Smith as a rank
Monogamists woxild d f husband
humbug and make «t£ o rd sanction,. The
is the only conjugal re r ; n kline with water is
majority would
enough as a sign of 1 0 immersion of the whole body
Baptists would a g r ee with them, if personal
is essential, and J s no © » faith. And, finally,
cleanliness was that the departed are able to
Spirituals would maintain tna y presence in a
return to earth, and in tLe ? Bible would
variety of ways; while m - authority 0 f that book
assure the chlldre £ °" utt erly impossible, and that
Sptitualismls all of the devh ! I W B * ld ’ to
& is .« »-


religion consists simply in being and doing good— leaving
euch speculative questions as the existence of God and the
immortality of the soul to be determined by the profounder
thought and clearer light of the future-it is as essentially
a religion as the others, only differing from them in some
differ from each other; and, therefore, the
Sta e ought to pay for the teaching of it as freely as it
would for the teaching of Protestantism or Popery. Now
these are some of the results that would follow if Dr
Vaughan s proposal were adopted. It will not meet the
difficulty to say that children would not be puzzled with
learned disquisitions on abstruse and dogmatic subjects
but be chiefly taught the practical duties of religion. 3 No
wv practltal dutiee \ ould be enjoined, but if sectarian
teaching were thorough, its chief aim would be to im-
press the dogmas of religion upon their tender minds : for
sectarian teachers depend mainly on their dogmas to de-
veloped character and regulate the conduct of those who
are under their tuition ; and, therefore, such subjects as I
wmVt fe T d 1°; - nd u many others of a eimilar mature
would be taught in the different schools as a matter of
course. And I appeal to disinterested thinkers to say
"“J 1 * tem of education is worthy of State
Aitf™ f StEte s T u PP° rt - The absurdity of such a con-
dition of things as I have briefly pointed out would only
~’^ o( e^ Ua le . d lts & ross and the deplorable
effects that would ensue. It is bad enough to find that
t 0 a considerable extent, the state of affairs when
vW s Ch W heB + } \°A Ut ? tate ' aid tea <* these opposite
£ would seriously aggravate and extend the
7 . tbe .tate rendered pecuniary assistance to all the
sects in their work, under the name of religious instruc-
tion, of sowing the seeds of strife, engendering feelings of
jeaiousy and hatred, and dividing the rising feneration—
— WOmeD 0f ,he c °W-intorival and
Beiore quitting the Secular branch of the Education
question, I intended noticing at some length a very com-
mon objection which sectarians—especially Catholics and
r Pl ’? testards orge against it, namely, that it
is a Godless and wicked system but as I have already
exceeded the limits I assigned for this lecture, I can only
make two bnef remarks in reply to it, First, the members


of the League, except the Freethought portion of them, do
not propose to confine the education of children
to secular subjects. They are decide lly m favour of reli-
e-ious instruction, and some of them are doing all they can
fo impart it; but they contend that it should be given m-
denendently of State support and control. They, theretore,
,a?to the sectarians referred to, “ We ame with yon that
religious instruction should form a part of education. By
all means let your children have as much of it as you think
thev ought ; but either give it yourselves or pay some
one else for doing so. Do not ask for Public money for thepur-
„ 1. • Secondly I submit that even purely secular educa-
tion is not such a Godless and wicked system as those eccle-
tmn is not suon has been go t up as a
contemptiblelriestly trick, intended to -rvean eccksiastrctd
„ * Thev thrust the “Godless and wickett tning
ra P bogiel tL te «f the delnded slaves of their sec-
tarianism, to fill them with alarm, and sscn«th«r hdp
n:__ \, a n\r tho advancing tide ot Jnoeransm, wmu
threatens to sweep away their antiquated,* cumbersome, and
threatens to sw p j measure succeeds
obstructive systems, « s education
b/flodC Intense th”tit Takes no cognizance of thdr
cdn“sS God, nor of the dogma.andc.isoms they
teach for religion. In p „ we rs are
grounded in secular know 8 > . e the wonders of
carefully cultivated, itw 111 re of
creation, and to a l'P r .{lcence that surround it; and
wisdom, power, and be f sectarianism in
though it may fail to God o we
the marvellous regions tha enab i e d to ascend
may reasonably hope that U reverently
stitutes righteous and be “ ,l “^ C CompAory and Fr<*
, 1 h b ,e TtU scheL, i 1 would
branches both defensible on broad, public
A suitable occasion for doing this, will prob-
ablLdoTwb"T,' three lecture, dent as full, with


Dr Yaughan s “ Hidden Springs ” as time has allowed me,
1 have but a few remarks to make in conclusion. If
I have said some plain and perhaps hard things of him
and his system, it is because I sincerely believe them, and
consider that the interests of society will justify them.
Whether I may or may not be mistaken, I leave others to
judge. Ihe Archbishop has spoken of Paganism, vet it
forms the principal part of his own system ; of Super
naturalism, which he has disingenuously tried to iden-
tify with Catholicism, and Catholicism with Christianity •
of Materialism, though his Mother Church is a prolific
source of it; of Liberty, whilst he and his fol-
lowers are intellectual and religious slaves; of Sedi-
tion, notwithstanding that the emissaries of Popery are
the most skilful and industrious disseminators of it; of
Loyalty, in the face of the fact, that he has sworn allegiance
to a foreign prince, who would absolve him from his alle-
giance to the British throne to morrow if he thought the time
ripe for such an act; of Revolution, knowing that Jesuits
are incessantly plotting and working to effect one, by
which they hope the Pope of Rome would be restored to
his former position of temporal sovereignty; and of
Morality, as though he were, innocent of the’ fact that
Catholicism, with its indulgences to cover all manner of
sins, and its easy method of getting rid of sins committed
without an indulgence, supplies the most powerful in-
centive to immorality that has ever blasted the reputation
and ruined the soul of man. And, hence, I regard Dr.
Vaughan as a misleading sophist, a dangerous intriguer,
an unscrupulous slanderer, an inflated egotist, an ambitious
pretender, a would-be unrelenting persecutor; and all
this under the deceptive mask of a meek and lowlv
Christian ! And it therefore becomes every honed man to
feaileslly expose his Jesuitical designs, and every coura-
geous man to uncompromisingly resist them ; till he is ren-
dered powerless for mischief, the system he repre-
sents is overthrown and relegated to the region of
harmless antiquarian relics, and the true principles of
Individual Freedom are established on a foundation that
can never be destroyed !


NOTES.
On reading: over the foregoing lectures since they were “ worked
off*' I have discovered several errors that escaped my notice
when correcting the “ proofs,” and certain faults and imperfections
in the literary construction of them which I should like to remedy, hut
it is too late. This is very annoying to me, as no doubt it wil e
to the careful, and critical reader; but I trust some allowance
will be made, on the ground that 1 had to write them out very rapidly
_i„ some cases not even having time to read what I had written be-
fore sending it off, in order to meet the Printer’s-for the time,
insai iable—demand for “ copy,” and hurry them through the Press
without subjecting them to as careful a revision as 1 could have
wished.
The Preface, the part of a work usually written last.'was, for the
convenience of the Printer, written before a third of the first lecture
T)rC narol or I should have said in it what I have to Say m these
note! I have there acknowledged the kindness of a friend in report-
big the third lecture. I then thought of sending his manuscript
to °the press, but on reading it over, I found I was reported m the
third person, and that, although, it was an excellent report, giving my
a <1 -,s far as 1 could recollect—for I only spoke from notes—
tncian b therefore re-wrote it, and made myself speak in
!" as in the other two lectures; hut this does not dimi-
. f i to that friend for his kindness and trouble.
: L «h»t, the lectures in then
prjntt™! lilt their defects, or merit. it they p— nny, ,
alone am responsible. *
Those who heard the lectures delivered will perhaps thudahem
ence. And 1 eater accuracy and clearness of
poraneous, lectures.
'November 21.






WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
1. GUIDE TO SPIRITUALISM. Price 35., by post, 3s. 4<l.
A Guide to Sriun r Aij.i.M is the title of a very candid, forcible, and, as we
think, exhaustive book, by J. Tyerman. . ■ Its ground is well
taken, and its reasoning straightforward and irresistible. — The Banner of Light,
Boston.
This is a valuable work, designed more especially for inquirers, or those just
commencing to investigate the claims of the Harmonial Philosophy.
It will certainly exercise a commanding influence. ■ •
Mr. Tyerman is also the author of several spicy and able pamphlets. 7he Beligio-
Philnsophical Journal, Chicago.
2. SHALL WE LIVE ON EARTH AGAIN ? or, the Doctrine of Rein-
carnation Examined' Price 1-. ; by post, is. id. (First Edition
sold out, Second Edition wiien required.)
Mr. Tyernn.n is a skilled and effective writer, and nothing we have met with
in the range of Spiritualistic literature at all equals his literary efforts. The Daily
Telegraph, Melbourne.
3. —SPIRITUALISM VINDICATED: being a reply to the Revs. J.
Graham, A. W. Webb, and D. Allen, and the “ Christian Advocate,”
of Sydney. Price is., by post is. 2d.
Spiritualism Vindicated is a cleverly-written and a highly argumentative
wor k . . . The writer keeps close to his subject, and holds Ins victim
with a strong hand, until he gives him the final blow which places him hors de
combat. His application of the three tests of a miracle, which tests were said by
the Rev, John Graham, of Pitt-street fame, to be infallible safeguards against
error, is a fine illustration of the Li (fu.oque iu reasoning. Having carefully redd
Mr. Tyerman’s pamphlet, and also some of the sermons and articles to wnich it
is a reply, we have come to the conclusion that the clergy generally acted rvith a
wise discretion in not accepting his offer to discuss the claims of that, particular
system of facts and doctiines which he so boldly and cleverly advocates. Ihe
Stockwhip, Sydney.
4—IS THERE A DEVIL? or, the Scarecrow of Christendom Un-
masked, Second Edition. Price, 6d; by post yd.
-. —IS THERE A HELL? or,the Doctrine of Eternal Punish-
ment Examined in the Light of Reason, Justice, and Benevolence.
Price, 6d; by post yd. (First Edition sold out ? Second Edition shortly.)
6. —CREEDS AND DOGMAS.—A Plea for Theological Re-
vision : Addressed to the Clergy and Christians of all Denomi-
nations. Price, 3d ; by post 4d.
y. —SPIRITUALISM IN ITS RELATION TO ORTHODOXY : or,
Rationalistic v. Christian Spiritualism. Price, id; yd per dozen :
ss. per 100.
8. —Contradictions of the Bible.—Substance of two Lectures.
Price, id.; yd. per dozen ; 3s. per 100.
y. —Hymn Book: Containing yo excellent hymns, compiled for the
use of Spiritualistic and Freethought Societies. Fourth Edition. Price,
fid ; by post yd.
To be had of the Author, 1.47, Woolloomooloo-street, Woolloo-
mooloo, Sydney; R.W. Skinner, 244, Pitt-street, Sydney; W. 11. Terry,
84, Russell-street, Melbourne; and all booksellers.
