

F£TH
TEMPERANCE
FRANCE, SWITZERLAND, ITALY,
ETC. ETC.
A SERIES OF LETTERS,
JAMES BON WICK, ESQ.,
Late Inspector of Schools, Victoria, ; '
Author of “Geography op Australia,” “Discovery and Settlement op Port Phillip,’’ &c.
REPRINTED FROM THE “ALLIANCE WEEKLY NEWS.”
MANCHESTER: UNITED KINGDOM ALLIANCE,
LONDON: JOB CARDWELL, Bf 3, STRAND.


Now Published, Cloth, 6s.
PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.
JAMES BONWICK, RR G.S.,
AUTHOR Oi' “THE LAST OF THE TASMANIANS,” &C.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“ The author has achieved a herculean labour in mastering the extra-
ordinary mathematical theories. The work is replete with information,
and will form one of the best contributions to the pre-historio branch of
Egyptian archaeology which we have had lately.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
“Mr. Bonwick’s little book on ‘ Pyramid Facts and Fancies’ is an ex-
cellent riswmS of the principal deductions and theories formulated by
Prof. Piazzi Smyth and others about the supposed object of the‘Great
Pyramid,’ and the details of its construction. It is assumed, not proved,
that the Pyramid was built by revelation, and that accepted, all con-
sequences are derived from it. The Great Pyramid alone, among the sixty
odd that are known, is in the hands of crotchety mathematicians, and
astronomers of pious tendencies. Mr. Bonwick’s book gives an impartial
account of all these theories.” — The Athenaeum.
“ Mr. Bonwick has produced a very interesting book. The Great
Pyramid—under the guidance of Mr. John Taylor and Prof. Piazzi Smyth
—has been made the starting-point of a new religion ; and the literature
of which it has been the subject is at once large and curious. This litera-
ture Mr. Bonwick has conscientiously studied.”- — Academy.
“ Clever and entertaining little book. The result is a book which isj
perfect of its kind. Mr. Bonwick takes care not to leave the readed
in doubt as to his own private opinion ; and while acknowledging Profl
Smyth’s services, does not feel able to receive his theories. This i.l
the utmost length to which Mr. Bonwick goes.”— Examiner.
“ The writer says he simply claims the merit of collecting intelligence
for those whose time and opportunities will not warrant research.”-*
Nonconformist. _ *
“ A great number of interesting details. An interesting collection of
facts and fancies relating to the Pyramids.”— lnquirer.
“ He discusses the contested points of when and by whom the Pyramid
was built. The most notable traditions and speculations belonging to
Egyptian antiquities, thus offering not only an interesting, but easily
grasped fund of pyramidal lore.”— Morning Post.
“ As to those deductions which depend on mathematical calculations—
some of which are very remarkable—he, with painstaking impartiality,
sets forth not only results, but, in a sufficiently lucid manner, the pro-
cesses by which they are reached.”' — English Independent.
“ Then come the lessons on astronomy taught by them, fifteen in all;
the lessons on religions, nine ; the lessons on science or mysticism, twelve
in all. The facts and fancies seem endless. But the facts are passing
strange.”— Freeman. I
“He has brought together and condensed a great deal of information
He pays a just tribute to the valuable and interesting discoveries and
interpretations of Mr. Piazzi Smyth.”— Record,
“ The book is admirably arranged and well printed, and as a reference
book in its own department is unequalled.”—The Watchman.
“Mr. Bonwick discusses the astronomical aspect of the subject, as well
as its religious, scientific and mystical teachings, a veritable multum in
parvo of Pyramidal information.” — Western Mail.
“A careful and exhaustive compilation of the various facts and fancies.”
(jf —British Mail.
' “In Mr. Bonwick’s book are collected, in a very painstaking manner,
brief/ accounts of all these theories.”— Dublin University Magazine.
“fcs work is a model of accurate fact, carefully and scientifically
artai^ed.” — Public Opinion.
‘'“Your work on the Pyramids was an excellent resume of the question.”
—Dr. 3-likch ( British Museum).
„ Loirotet ; C.. KEG AN PAUL & Co., Paternoster Square.


Now published. Cloth ICs. 6 d.
EGYPTIAN BELIEF AND MODERN THOUGHTS.
By JAMES BONWIOK, F.R.G.S.,
AUTHOR OF “ PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES,” &0.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“ A practical text-book of the religions and antiquities of Ancient Egypt
has long been a need in our general literature. Mr. Bonwick’s book is
learned and suggestive.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
‘ ‘ Information gathered from a great many sources, digested and
arranged in an orderly way. The subject is curious and instructive, and
the volume has the advantage of being thoroughly readable.”— Daily
News.
“ It is a very interesting volume, and full of tightly-packed information.
At the present time when the Science of Religion is attracting every year
a larger circle of students, such a volume cannot fail to be of value and
importance. The close connexion of certain dogmas of medieval
Christianity with the ancient creed,of Egypt is at first sight startling, and
can only be explained when we remember the part played by Alexandria
in shaping and modifying the Christianity of the first four centuries."—
Prof. Sayoe (Oxford).
" Curiously interesting volume on the religious theories, hopes, and
philosophies of the ancient Nile men as regards a Future Life In
search of his facts, he has gone to the very highest and best authorities
The sections which follow, all in their way abounding with curious
details, relate to the various forms of “ Cultus ” practised among the
Egyptians, such as animal worship, tree worship, serpent worship, and that
of the sun, the sphinx, obelisk, the pyramids, and the stars. Then come
equally careful notes upon sacrifices, prayers, the Unity of God, the Messiah,
jthe Sabbath-day, circumcision, baptism, and the eucharist. To all
thoughtful readers this volume will be very welcome, and especially to
those who take any vital interest in the history, faith, and law of the Jews,
las recorded in the Old Testament. The book is altogether above the
krdinary run of such essays, in fulness and variety of information, accuracy
Kf detail, and freshness of fact.” — Standard.
* “ The method observed by the author of this laborious work is to
place before his readers a truthful picture of Egyptian belief, and to allow
modern thought to draw its own deductions from the materials thus
afforded.” — Globe.
“It would scarcely be too much to say that nothing bearing upon the
religious beliefs of the old Egyptians has escaped his notice, that, in fact,
he has fairly exhausted the subject. Although he has not hesitated to
state some of the problems which are suggested by the facts of the ancient
religion of the Egyptians, he has wisely abstained from attempting their
solution. The work will be read with deep interest by students of com-
parative theology.”— Scotsman.
“The mere task of gathering these authorities together, and arranging
them in the order of proof, must have proved irksome to any other than
an enthusiastic labourer in the field of ancient Egyptian speculation.”—
\ Glasgow Herald.
“He gives a multiplicity of facts and opinions that enable us to see
what was the earlier religious thought of this very ancient people.”—
Leeds Mercury.
“We know of no other book written for the general public in which
so clear an account of the religions, and, incidentally, of a great deal of
the manners and customs of the old Egyptians can be found.”— Liverpool
Albion.
“ In this carefully written book we have the result of a considerable
amount of learned research, set forth in a style at once lucid and simple.
His information and language arc adapted to the requirements of those
who have neither leisure nor opportunity to make direct researches.”—
Manchester Examiner.
“ A complete compendium of all that has been said or written of the
least note about the religion of early Egypt Valuable as a skilful
epitome of results even to students of the science of religion, or to com-
parative mythologists, while the casual general reader, having once taken
up the book, will, we should think, not be inclined speedily to put it
down again.”— Nonconformist.
London; C. KEG AN PAUL & CO., Paternoster Squab .


PREFACE.
A trip upon the Continent for my health gave me the opportunity of making observations upon the social
condition of the people.
The following articles, strictly confined to the Temperance question, were addressed to the Alliance
Weekly News, the leading Temperance organ in England for the extent of its circulation. Conscious of defects
of style, from the circumstances in which they were often written, I commend them to the courteous charity of
Temperance friends, as an honest attempt to illustrate one phase of the moral state of our European neighbours.
No Temperance organisation is responsible for ray opinions. As a Teetotaler from the other side of the
world, and having been absent nearly twenty years from European civilisation, it is quite probable I may some-
what misjudge questions of social polity in the Northern Hemisphere. I have done what I could. If English-
born, I could not he English-blind to the virtues of other nations, nor the faults of my own countrymen. I
have seen among many different peoples —civilised and savage —that the use ot alcohol is the source of many
social evils, and the active encourager of the growth of all, —however “ Light ” the form in which the liquor is
presented.
JAMES BONWICK.
Manchester,
April 17th, 1861.


TEMPERANCE IN FRANCE, SWITZERLAND, AND ITALY.
LETTER I.
TEMPERANCE IN PRANCE.
Here am lin La Belle France. It is not that its phy-
sical features are more beautiful than those of England.
It is not that its foliage is more green, or that its native
flowers are of choicer grace. It is not that its daughters,
charming as they are, are fairer than our rosy ones of
hill and dale. For variety of scene we are more favoured.
Our meadows are fresher than theirs. Our gems of the
fields are dear to our hearts. And as for our ladies, we
see in them the excellence of all nations. There it is
again-as we are always told here—in our excessive
national pride, we are only looking at other countries
the more to extol our own.
Still it is La Belle France. But if the Swiss loves his
mountains, and the Briton his home and institutions, the
Frenchmen recognises in his beloved Paris his whole
country. And most assuredly no people have so great
a reason to be proud of a city as the French have of this
beautiful place. Like other Englishmen, I had read of
it, heard of it, imagined it; but I never realised one-
tenth of its attractiveness. Its tree-fringed Boulevards,
its numerous and magnificent public edifices, its treasures
of art, and its gardens of delight, combine to render it
the concentration of pleasures. Then the grace of its
women and the politeness of its men enhance the hap-
piness of the visitor. To the eye of those not much
accustomed to reflection —by far the majority of
humanity—there seems everything to soothe and please,
and nothing to shock or disgust. Vice is so garbed in
holiday attire, and her coarser features are so concealed
by tasteful drapery, as, if not quite admitted into good
society, not to be excluded from its repulsiveness of
appearance.
But my object is less to observe and describe the beau-
tiful, the romantic, or refined, than to deal with men
and women as they are, and tell that which I see. We
are not to look upon our neighbours here as our “ natural
enemies,” but as of the brotherhood of nations, and as a
people who are to be, and whom we wish to be, more
closly connected with ourselves; who will in future still
more powerfully affect our interests, manners, and ideas,
and so influence our very hearths and homes. I have
nothing to do with the question of politics, abstractly
considered. I might think that the French have a right
to be governed by whom they please, and that upon the
whole they are comfortable under that rule. My mission
is to learn the state of the population, their mode of
life, their social habits, their moral exponents, and their
probable future.
I came here, I hope, with no prejudice. I cannot, I
will not, assume a theory, and then work it out by
observations, seeing, as some do, what one wishes to see.
I enter into no philosophy. One simple thing I promise
faithfully to do—to tell a plain tale as Igo on, and
leave you to form your own impressions by my string of
unconnected and perhaps opposing facts. I simply
report. The impressions of to-morrow may differ from
those of to-day. Of all the enigmas of the world none
equal those of the social state. The constitution of
human society is a labyrinth. We cannot divine it,
and we have no wings to escape from it, as one did from
that of Crete. We have to blunder on the best way we
can. The best we can do is to mark and avoid the pit-
falls that lie in these bewildering paths.
It is especially needful that I notice those develop-
ments of progress which may be of use to my own
countrymen, and those exhibitions of folly which may
he as warnings. Then there are certain principles
whose operations here are to he observed. Inquiry is
to he made whether or no there are fixed relations of
morals according to the individual race, or universal
humanity; whether that which is evil in England
ceases to he so here, with similar causes operative ;
and if social aspects, abhorrent here, would be in-
noxious with you.
Much has been made of the influence of climate and
race. The virtues of the stern, cold North have been
thought foreign to the sunny South. The vices of the
barbarian have been held uncongenial with the habits
of the civilised. As I have lived half of my life in warm
latitudes, and half in cold, —as I have dwelt in the man-
sions of civilisation, and sojourned with the dark wan-
derer of the forest, —I have not been unprovided with
facts upon this subject. My simple reasoning upon
those facts has led me to this conviction—that man is of
one family, with strong family likeness of character and
tendencies. I have seen little or no difference between
vices and virtues among climates and races, however
opposing they may seem. I found lasciviousness in the
naked Australian on his sunny plains, and the same
among the well-educated peasantry of northern Scot-
land. Drunkenness abounds no less in the boudoirs and
work-shops of England than in the leafy Gtunyah of the
New Hollander.
But it has again and again been asserted that the
French, our nearest neighbours, are strangely different
from ourselves in natural principles of conduct. They
have been regarded as a people impracticable to govern-
ment and hopelessly immoral, and yet, at the same
tiime, so self-controlled, or so virtuous, that alcoholic
liquors, which lead the English and the Indian alike
into intemperance and misery, are used freely by the
people of France without danger; and that neither
drunkenness nor suffering exists from their indulgence.
Now, as there is said to be no rule without an exception,
there may be occasion to exclude them, and, perhaps,
the Italians, as nations, from the operation of the uni-
versal law, and to regard them as absolutely and
necessarily a sober people; and that they, having means
to procure and use a more powerful excitement, prefer
to drink a much milder and suitable beverage, and even
in the use of that to abstain from any indiscretion.
Now, it was to see for myself, and to announce the
result to others, that I came on this inquiry. I want to
notice the drinks consumed, and the extent of intem-
perance. I wish, also, to ascertain whether the use of
the more moderate in strength does or does not, if
opportunities serve, induce a desire for more potent
draughts, and lead to intemperate indulgence in them.
To do this, then, I have to inspect reports and observe
men. Again I declare my intention to write what I see
and what I read, when I see and when I read.
At present I shall describe the outward developments
of the city, and those only within the decent hours of
the day, and wholly belonging to the fashionable and
respectable quarter. I take that which is unveiled to
the passing stranger.
As Paris, or rather the better streets of it, may be said
to be the paradise of foreigners, there being there every-
thing to make life agreeable, I can easily understand
how our people, coming over from the fogs, and damp,
and business anxieties of Britain, to enjoy a week in this
charming place, may return with the notion that no
drunkenness exists, and that the wines of France are
delightful beverages. They walk along the Boulevards,
beneath the, shade of trees, amidst a throng of well-
dressed strangers like themselves, gazing upon the


choicest works of art so tastefully displayed* and in-
dulging in smiles of complacent pleasure. No beggars
or low dirty reprobates are permitted to annoy them by
their presence. They enjoy the outside life of the cafes,
and, after sipping a cup of delicious colfee, with a petit
verre de liqueur dropped into the same, they are disposed
to look most charitably upon all and everything. They
are content with the surface of society.
Still, how these persons can return and say, as we
know many do say, that they were so long in France
and never saw a drunkard, is a marvel to me. At any
rate, I have not been so fortunate, and I have not yet
gone in search of the moral deformity. Coming from
my hotel the first evening, a party of half-a-dozen noisy
tipplers passed me, taking up the width of the street.
In a few minutes, while standing at a fashionable corner,
I counted several reelers, to say nothing of many whose
eyes, more than limbs, told of the power of Bacchus.
It must be understood by the reader that the politeness
of the French, and especially when in the precincts of
refined society, exercises the same influence on them to
walk steadily as w§ know it ka§ wife OUT own respect-
able intemperates.
Passing a beer-tavern the other day, I saw a rather
amusing illustration of this remark. A man, apparently
an artisan, had evidently got more than he could carry
with propriety. But he seemed trying to do his best to
maintain the sober character. He was slightly tottering
as he stood at the counter, but, with his hand upon his
heart, he was engaged in making some desperate apology
to the landlady, or an ardent avowal of his sentiments
of regard. His studied politeness oddly contrasted with
his awkward tremor, and the senseless glare of his
drunken eyes. The barmaid quite appreciated his posi-
tion, and treated his remarks with the coolest indiffer-
ence. In a neighbouring bar I saw five men drinking,
and four of them were most unmistakably drunk. I use
the word advisedly, for I am aware that some esteem no
man really overcome until he goes to a pump to light
his pipe
It must be admitted, however, that the forms of in-
t3mperance here are less objectionable than across the
Channel. Frenchmen are uniformly more gentle, kind,
and agreeable than our people. Drink, therefore, does
not with them develop so much of the pugilistic charac-
teristic. On the contrary, they are more than usually
affectionate. Yesterday, I saw two fellows drunk in a
caffi, and such was their strength of attachment that
they held each other by the arm around the waist, and
kissed in lovers’ style.
I have seen no drunken women yet. But one would
no more expect to see such a sight in my quarter than in
Begent Street, London. Women I have seen drinking
at the cafes, inside and out; but they were almost
always mere girls, with their favourite beaux. The
absence of children on the occasion would lead one to
suppose that they were rarely married. Then, again,
the public females are here under the law. They do
not obtrude upon respectable society. Others, of no
greater virtue, of the Lorette class, form a peculiar
institution here, and pride themselves on their virtuous
and refined exterior. Keeping out, therefore, the low
women of the town, and the wretched poverty-stricken
females of married life, we can readily account for the
absence of positive intemperance among those seen in
the better streets and public gardens.
That there is, after all, less outward exhibition of
coarse drunkenness in the respectable parts of Paris, I
admit, and will proceed to state a few reasons for it.
I do not believe it is so much a question of the nature
of drink. Exhibited for sale, I find special prominence
given to brandy, rum, wine, and beer. But more of
this another time. There are other checks to open
drunkenness, which exist not to the same extent else-
where. The cafes and other places for the sale of drink
are furnished and adorned to such a degree as to give
some rather the aspect of an elegant boudoir than a
grog-shop. I refer to those in the respectable quarter—
the only one of which lam now writing. They do not
seem the places in which to get vulgarly drunk. The
superb mirrors tell folks the tale of approaching to the
inebriate condition; while the flowers, profusely scattered
about, would forbid excessive indulgence in their sweet
presence. These things act powerfully upon the sensi-
tive Frenchman, w'ho, if he knows not the hidden beauty
and meaning speech of Nature, has a strong delight in
in her outward manifestations. Then, again, elegantly-
dressed ladies preside at these places, while the company
is usually of a superior kind.
Moreover, the general associations of the neighbour-
hood are favourable to decorum. Around are museums
of paintings, gardens of taste, bazaars of elegance. The
mind gets accustomed to that elevated, comfortable,
self-respect, which acts powerfully as a check to excess.
The French are not a gross people in their pleasures.
The frail ones admit of no familiarity or rudeness, and will
resent the intrusion of vulgarity as quickly as the prude.
But as this outside delicacy proceeds from no inward
purity of thought, and is no evidence of the virtue of the
lady, so the exterior propriety of manners among drinkers
must be taken for no proof of their sober habits.
Though the parallel between the two vices cannot be
thoroughly maintained, as the one cannot be so con-
cealed as the other, yet, so far as expression can convey
it, the individual who has indulged will assume the
appearance of sobriety.
That men—any men—can sit for hours drinking
wine, of ever so moderate a percentage of alcohol,
without perceptible effect, no one can believe. When,
however, we find that the wine is not so moderate as
is commonly supposed, and that the stronger liquors
are pretty freely used, the effort to maintain a calm
exterior becomes a more difficult matter. Anyhow,
even within the early hours, the effect is apparent on
not a few; while, as evening advances, the reign of
Bacchus becomes more conspicuous.
If not drunk, they are excited. If stupefied, they
would be comparatively harmless. If maddened, they
would be shunned. The simple Boor sleeps after his
pot, and is wheeled to his bed. The whisky-loving
Irishman flourishes his stick, and makes a clear course
with all except another inspired one. The wine-elevated
Frenchman is raised to the dangerous point —dangerous
to and others. His passions are not drowned
or enfeebled, but developed and intensified. He has
had sufficient to silence conscience, but not to subdue
reason. He is not bestialised, but devilised. Such a
man requires not tq be placed within the sphere of
temptation to commit sin; he carries with him a defiled
moral atmosphere, and becomes himself the tempter.
The principles of true honour are forgotten, and the
claims of friendship and society are disregarded. He
is prepared to execute any evil to gratify his own un-
holy feelings, provided he does not place himself in
danger. Burning with base passions, he is not so lost
by the drink as to hazard his own person, or fail to win
his object by incautious haste. He is thus truly drunk
in the worst possible degree—in the most dangerous
sense. As I shall be hereafter able to prove, in my
subsequent communications, the sad moral state of
France, and other continental countries, is more owing
to alcoholic liquors, mild as they may be, than to all
other causes put together.
If it be the object of inquiry to learn, not the mere
extent of rolling intemperance, and the number of


infuriated men and women under its dominion, but to
ascertain whether the drinks in common use not only
induce the condition of inebriety, absolutely under-
stood, but engender that low tone of moral feeling
which leads the victim to the same crimes as more pal-
pable drunkenness will produce, then I hold that my
plan of observation while here—the noticing of all the
social exponents of the country—will prove the wise
and proper one, and will enable my countrymen more
philosophically to reason out the probable results of the
introduction of the French drinking system into our
fatherland.
LETTER 11.
I have referred to the comparatively few cases of in-
temperance observed in France, and to the assertion of
some of our own visiting countrymen that the vice does
not exist. I had mentioned that my eyes were not so
fortunate as theirs. A case in point. To-day I was
conversing with n minister recently arrived, and, like
others, rejoicing in the wine-drinking temperance of
the people. We walked out together, and in a few
minutes I turned his attention to a man whom he
acknowledged to be really drunk. A gentlemen stay-
ing in the hotel with me had his attention turned to the
subject. In four days he saw, he says, so many drunk
that he will not be deceived again by the cry. A cab
full of rioters passed him at one place, and shortly after
he came on a party of drunken Zouaves. He was
amused with a party of four, two of whom were women,
who, with changed head gear and vociferations, testified
to their condition. The other evening, between 7 and
8 o’clock, I counted five reelers. But still they were
not violent as our drunkards. They did not even court
publicity. One fellow I observed shake a little when
passing the shops, who, directly he came to a darker,
open spot, began to sing wildly and stagger at pleasure.
On Sunday evening, returning from church, 1 noticed
an inebriate near the Champs Elysees ; but he shunned
the frequented street, and rather decently promenaded
from side to side of a pretty wide pavement, in a retired
parallel thoroughfare.
I have before alluded to the strong sense of propriety,
ever the leading principle of action in this people. The
very drink-sellers will avoid having a drunkard in their
places, as a bad name would be the consequence. “ Be
a gentleman,” is an argument irresistible with a French
workman at his curs, but which would have no force
directed against our own. When even a common soldier
will take 'off his hat to a woman at the counter, as he
retires from his glass, the restraining influence of polite-
ness is evident. The external propre is lliG gOIUUS 01
Paris. . . , ,
But I have to speak of another principle at work,
operating most strongly in checking tendencies to
excess. My object in thus speaking of these restraints
is to show my countrymen that the different habits of a
people greatly influence the effect of similar exciting
causes. Alcohol, as such, is a poison which intoxicates
and leads to intoxication in all climates and with au
races. But its mischief can he, and is, much modified
hy various agencies. The French, then, are guarded
not only hy a sense of propriety, but by the influence of
woman, . „ ~ ,
I came here with the usual prejudices of an English-
man. With us, women are supposed to he queens, and
the sex elsewhere in a degraded position. They work
in the fields here, and our gallantry is shocked; they
do the same, however, in Britain, especially iri Scotland.
But here 1 find men taking their duties. One is my
chambermaid, and another scours the floor. Our women
are queens, certainly; but then it is under a respon-
sible government. They are privileged to bear the
name, but not to exercise the power of rule. We crown
them witb flowers, and pay them delicate attentions;
but we carefully preserve our own freedom action.
The dear creatures must not be told of our affairs, or a
compressed brow will spoil their heauty. _ They must
not venture advice, on suspicion of its being called a
curtain lecture. The horror of Mrs. Caudle’s image
makes many a wife sigh in secret over things she fears
to name. It is not proper, besides, for women to meddle
with men’s affairs. You know they must do as men do,
though often unpleasant and sad at home. The amount
of real tyranny, quietly exercised by the husband in our
private and respectable society, is enough to call forth
a regular revolution, did not woman feel her isolation
and weakness. ~, , ~ _ ,
Now all this is perfectly inappreciable hy the Irench
wcman. Even if she understood it, she would not be-
lieve in it. One thing I know, that man here dare not
attempt such tricks. Here woman is queen in her own
right, and takes good care to exercise her privileges. I
hope I have too much native gallantry in me to breathe
a word against the fair; but candour obliges me to say
that, in the little bodies I meet, with their neat, so neat,
and tasteful dress, and ready smile, there is in their eye
a calm smile of dignity, and an unmistakable bit of
maliciousness of independence, that be would be a bold
man indeed who would presume to dispute her sove-
reignty. Here she is not content, like her English
sister, to receive the homage of her lover; no, no, she
must manage him. Yes! and witb a sbrug of tbe
shoulders, he submits. It is true, there are some things
which he ventures to do; well 1 that can the helped—
everybody does the same. Then, you know, she has
tbe same liberty, and is not slow to use it. Tbis is tbe
voice of society wbicb rules both parties.
But, as she has not only tbis resolution of character,
tbis strength of will, tbis habit of command, but is
really, for all practical purposes, tbe better half, tbe
shop-president, tbe book-keeper, tbe cash-holder, the
hardest worker, tbe most interested partner in tbe busi-
ness, she has, on a higher ground, an influence over her
husband. More than tbis, contrary t© our system, the
women know ibe advantage of union. They live much
in society. They mix together. They support each
other in creating and maintaining that public opinion
wbicb shall secure to them their rights; that is, not
equality, but dominion. It is but right to say, that they
use their power judiciously, so as not to court rebellion.
They are very kind, very bland, very industrious, very
attentive; but they must_ be mistresses. Here no im-
proper word, or rude act, is ever directed to a woman,
however debased. . , ~
Just estimate the effect of all this upon checking
intemperance. Think you that a Pans wife would
allow her husband to come home nightly drunk, to
abuse her and the children? Not she, indeed. She
would raise all society against the wretch, and get nun
sent to Coventry. Then, in more respectable stations,
the ladv has her own circle, her own parties, her own
evenings. Would she endure the intrusion of a drunken
husband upon one of these select reunions ? Her friends
would make common cause with her, and soon restore
propriety. Intemperance, then, as such, is driven down-
ward among the very low. One may be excited, hut
his company is the better for it. He is more jolly with
men, more loving with women. But a step beyond
society does not sanction. The fellow must retire. This
is copied lower in the scale of manners. That which
the fine lady will not sanction with her Mr amt, the
demoiselle of the kitchen frowns on with her lover.
Thus it is that, with universal drinking, there is so
little rude drunkenness, It is less a matter of the


Produce of Alcohol.
Consumed.
Exported
1840..
984,835(?)...
731,105
... 300,689
1844,.
898,695 ...
703,810
... 144,885
1847..
830,465
... 213,393
1800,.
1,163,614 ...
875,330
... 288,384
1855..
886,780
... 153,111
1857..
1,189,411 ...
997,333
... 192,179
1858..
1,018,905
... 170,616
character of drink than the habits of society. Else-
where, liquor, far lighter in strength than they use,
produces tenfold the intoxication. Sottishness is incom-
patible with a people so living an out-door life, and who
are ardent followers of out- door social pleasures.
There is still another reason why the coarser features
of this vice are not to be expected in the French, as
with their neighbours across the Rhine on the one hand,
or the Channel on the other. This may seem ridiculous.
It is, that they have, generally, narrower heads than
their neighbours. I happen to believe in phrenology.
I look at folks’ heads as they pass by me. Here, especially
in Normandy, I find the heads much smaller in the
region of the animal propensities than with us; that is,
naturally they have less force of character. I own that
in a nation of soldiers I did not expect this. A people
So often at war, so loving war, ought to possess some
more combative organ than their neighbours. But they
have not. It is not quite difficult to reconcile this ap-
parent inconsistency. The Volunteers will be interested
in the question. The Frenchman fights not for mere
conquest, for dominion, for love of killing, but more
from a desire for glory. 11 La Gleifg” is his ever-pre-
vailing motive of action. To gain a name, to be talked
about, to exalt the honour of France—this leads him to
the trenches, to death. Otherwise a quiet creature,
touch him upon the Love-of-Approbation bump, and you
have him on fire. Physically much weaker than our
countrymen, less in stature, less in strength of muscle,
far less in powers of endurance, he is able, for a little
time, to accomplish under excitement what other nations
would not venture to attempt. But ordinarily he is a
quiet fellow. He has far more intelligence of look and
manner than our people ; but he has not that dogged-
ness, self-will, self-reliance, self-exaltation, that so dis-
poses the Englishman to do as he likes, and even to get
drunk as he likes, when he likes, and where he likes.
More than this, John Bull likes to get drunk. And
when drunk, his tendency of character is not only not
to conceal it, but most offensively to demonstrate his
condition. He will drink to intoxication, because he
cares for nobody, and will please himself. He will
parade his vice, because he says he is no hypocrite.
He resents every interference or expostulation, however
gentle, as an intrusion upon his sacred rights of British
freedom. If the pleader be one higher in station, he
will insult him; if lower, he will despise him; if an
equal, he will fight him. Should his wife add a word,
his indignation is boiling. Is he to be henpecked ? He
is master. He may give force to his convictions by the
strength of his blow.
Now, the Frenchman is not only restrained by
politeness and the influence of woman, but he has not,
from comparative deficiency of animal power, the temp-
tation to this excess; and if overcome, he is less violent
in his cups. Among the soldiers especially I have made
my observations. They are, generally, singularly
small-headed. Being, many of them, mere boys in
age, this deficiency of power is more manifest. Having
been lately at the review of the Scottish Volunteers in
Edinburgh, I could not help being struck with the
difference in stamina. There was in the tread of that
fine body of men a sense of resolution and strength that
never could be seen here. The cavalry are usually
superior to the infantry in physique. As to the Zouaves
—the dreaded Zouaves—an English lady here told me
with great glee that, though not very tall herself, she
hoped she had satisfied herself that she stood much
higher than most of this far-famed corps. But still, I
found among them, as I had expected to find, a greater
amount of the English development of force than with
others. This is to be expected, as they are gathered
from the most boisterous of the population. To carry
out my argument, I learnt from inquiry that they are
greatly more addicted to intemperance—rolling, riotous
intemperance—than any other division in the army.
But this very exception proves the rule of my argument
about the French.
Having thus, as an introduction, made, as it were, an
apology for the comparative temperance of France, by
an exhibition of restraining influences which do not
exist in England but to a much less degree, we may
now turn attention to the nature and consumption of
the drinks themselves, in order to discover if they really
are so weak and harmless as is generally supposed by
our countrymen. In doing this, I shall not take a
report of the enemy, but give you statements only
derived from their own official records. As the wine
question is so very important, and so complicated, I
may be excused leaving the treatment of that until I
get fairly among the vineyards. I have learned much
already, but wish not to commit myself by premature
statements.
LETTER 111.
Among the “ light drinks of France,” brandy occupies
no mean position. I know it is said that they only
grow that strong liquor to send over to England. We
will see. As many of our people still believe that the
French are a frog-eating race, we are surprised at no
other extravagance of opinion entertained of them.
One thing, however, is to be observed, that we often
form our impressions of persons and things from what
they were rather than from what they are. There is
little doubt that formerly these people were more tem-
perate in their use of alcoholic liquors. This is seen in
the remarkable growth of produce of this strongest of
all strong drinks—brandy. It proves one thing plainly—■
and I wish I could with trumpet-tones sound the fact
abroad, for the benefit of some of my worthy country-
men, —that the use of the much-vaunted light wines of
France has tended to the increased desire for a stronger drink.
Why this fact has come out so much in recent times
within the last half century, is simply because the in-
habitants of France have become so much better off, that
they can afford to indulge in that to which their tastes
direct. To this day, in the poorer parts, they are con-
tent with miserable wine or weak cider.
Now for figures. The brandy produce at the end of
the eighteenth century was only 369,000 hectolitres per
annum. A hectolitre is about twenty-two gallons. In
1812, it had reached to 650,000; in 1828, to 906,337 ; in
1840, to 984,325 hectolitres, valued at fifty-two million
francs, or £2,080,000. I now select a few years after
this date, and give produce; consumption, and exportation.
According to the official report, the produce of alcohol
for 1858 is put at 1,323,928.
This does not particularly prove that the French are
growing more temperate, even within the last twenty
years. As the population of France is some thirty-seven
millions, very little more than our United Kingdom, I
was not a little surprised at the report giving our manu-
factures at 1,068,000 hectolitres, and their own at
1,323,928. Prussia is the only country exceeding it,
having 1,530,000. To Belgium is given, 272,000; to
Denmark, 46,000; and to Austria, 840,000.
I could not get the number of distilleries in France.


1812
1824
1840
“ 3,880,365
((
1850
li
1855
“ 5.871,667
C(
In 1852 there were 1,438. My informant, M. Maurice
Block, says, in 1860, “ Since that time the number of
these establishments and the persons whom they em-
ploy, have been increased in a very notable proportion.”
The localities in which they are situated differ according
to the material from which the alcohol is produced!
Thus, that from the grape is made in Central and
Southern France; while that from the beetroot is pre-
pared in the North, where the vegetable is grown. The
proportions of these substances so employed appear
thus:—ln 1854, that from the beetroot amounted to
219,000 hectolitres; molasses, 187,000; grain, 72,000;
other substances, 7,140. Grape, 187,000. BouiUeurs de
vin, 247,000. Beetroot is being much more extensively
used, owing to the failure of the vines of late years.
Thus, we have the following numbers to illustrate:—ln
1852, the beetroot was 16,000; 1853, 66,000; 1857
429,000. The increase of “ other substances,” so called’
is a singular feature. The alcohol from that source was
1,296 hectolitres in 1852; 16,011 in 1855; and 35,379
in 1857.
In addition to eau de vie, or brandy proper, there are
several liqueurs. One commonly used here by the stu-
dents, and by hard drinkers in general, is absinthe. It
is prepared from a highly aromatic plant, having a hot
bitter flavour. In the process of distillation, it gives out
a considerable quantity of a green essence, which gives
the peculiar green colour and singular flavour to the
absinthe. Among the “ falsifications,” this liquor comes
in for its due share of attention. The addition of water
pales the drink. To bring up the green colour, that
highly poisonous compound, sulphate of copper, is freely
used. I had the curiosity to taste this much talked of
absinthe. As near as I can recollect my impressions of
whisky some twenty years odd, I should say it was so like
it as to be simply green whisky. To call this one of the
light drinks of France, is surely an absurdity enough.
As to its use, I had seen it frequently taken at the cafes
before I knew what it was. In the low quarters it is in
much request, and it produces the usual wild excite-
ment of intemperance. It is a drink, lam told, never
indulged in by women. In fact, an “ absinthe-drinker”
is as much a term of opprobrium as a “ gin-drinker” in
England.
Now for a word about the beer, the drink supposed
to be the heritage of the Englishman only, and not used
by the light-wine drinkers of France.
In my inquiries upon this head, I have been met with
the same appalling fact, to which I have before given
utterance, that France is given more and more to indulg-
ence. Well may the statistical authority say, “The
manufacture of beer has made very great progress in
France during the last sixty years”! Let us look at the
figures:—
Can England or Scotland show a corresponding in-
crease in forty years ?
But it may be said again, that much of this will bo
for exportation. To the figures again. In 1858, the
importations of beer from other countries was 761,616,
against an export of 864,381 only. The beer is not very
weak, but quite as good as yours. Thus, the Strasbourg
beer averages from sto 8 per cent; another from 3to 6;
and the double beer, so called, from 6to 8. I give my
authority for this statement—M. Heureux, of Paris,
author of “La Eeforme Pharmaceutique.” The aver-
age price of production is fifteen francs the hectolitre,
or sevenpence a gallon. According to the wine ratio of
sale, the wholesale dealer sells it from 25 to 35 per cent
upon cost of manufacture; and tho retailer at from 60
to 100 per cent upon the wholesale again. The propor-
tion of beer sale profit is far more. It is from 30 to 60
centimes a canette, or 3d. to sd.
The number of brewers I cannot get. In 1850, it was
3,227. The consumption of barley is estimated at
3,775,000 hectolitres, or 83 millions of gallons of grain.
Comparison is made with other countries. Though the
United Kingdom, of course, stands at the head of the
list, at 18,000,000 hectolitres, Trance, at 6,000,000, as a
wine-drinking country, is fast progressing towards our
habits. Prussia is set down at 2,890,000; Saxony,
1,072,000; _ Belgium, 3,116,675; Austria, 6,600,000; and
beer-drinking Bavaria, higher than our own in propor-
tion, 5,400,000 hectolitres. The favourite beers of Prance
are from the North, from Lille, Paris, Louvain, Lyons,
and Strasbourg. ’
So good a stuff must not be left without a little doc-
toring. The English like a good head to the pot, and
they get it; did they know how it was raised, they
would hardly like it so well. The French, with better
taste, and from loving the sparkling wine, wish for clear
beer; and they get it too. The manufacturer seldom
has it clear enough, but the retailer effects the desired
appearance with the aid of those agreeable compounds
not unknown to your own publicans. M. Heureux
gives the following list of “falsifications” or adultera-
tions of beer: —Poppy heads, flowers of box, flowers of
the linden or the lime tree, and gentian, give a colour to
the liquor. _Nux vomica, calcareous salts, poisonous
beans, Spanish pear, tartaric acid, grains of paradise,
sulphate of copper, sulphate of lead, and sulphate of
iron, with other equally deleterious substances are to be
recognised in French beer. As with us, the vendor is
liable to penalties for such adulterations, when detected;
but, as with us, such convictions are rare, while the
offence is universal.
Cider forms the drink of the people of Normandy and
Brittany. Vast orchards of apples are seen bv the tra-
veller, as vineyards in other parts. This 'liquor is
mostly consumed by the producers. What may be the
amount now I cannot ascertain. In 1840, it was
10,880,000 hectolitres, of the value of 84,422,000 francs,
or £3,376,800—an enormous sura for the inhabitants of
these very limited districts. They are not left without
the doctor’s art. To correct the acidity, and make the
cider otherwise more agreeable, the following substances
are used Chalk, lime, ashes, alcohol, litharge or pro-
toxide of lead, carbonate of lead, carbonate of copper,
carbonate of lime.
I B9V said so much about figures, and other dry
subjects, that your readers will be heartily glad that I
close this chapter. The student of the Temperance
question will, however, glean from the detail something
of interest, and something perhaps which he can apply
to the good of his British countrymen. At any rate,
such loose expressions have been used in relation to the
drinking habits of the French, that I wish to avoid most
jealously the intrusion of my own natural prejudices
in the pursuit of my object of inquiry. I desire to
regard the question philosophically, and as a man of the
world, believing that, in this way, I can not only arrive
at more correct conclusions myself, but more powerfully
influence the minds of calm and independent thinkers
in Britain.
LETTER IV.
A pew more words upon the much admired liqueurs of
France. These are not the “ light drinks” of the
country, but are most unmistakably strong, being either
brandy or brandy disguised.
There are a few curious questions about alcohol itself,


which may be interesting to your readers. In no part
of the world is this spirit more admired, studied, and
delicately handled. The researches of the chemist, and
the practical experiments of the liquorist, have nearly
exhausted the subject. The changes produced by the
ringing of church bells, the wondrous evolutions of a
few bits of glass in the kaleidoscope, or the celebrated
arithmetical question of the horse’s shoes and nails, would
give some idea of the transformations of alcohol here._
A few facts about the produce of brandy from similar
weights of various substances. From 2,000 kilogrammes
(each lbs. English) of the fecula of malted barley
have been produced 675 kilogrammes of alcohol. From
the same amount of sugar of grape, 588 ; from the raw
cane 447; honey, 250; malted barley, 216; fecula of
wheat, 190; fecula of sugar of potatoes, 179 ; dried figs,
171- bread of wheat, 110; dried cherries, 51; potatoes,
43. From 1,000 kilogrammes of the must of raisins, 89
kilogrammes of alcohol can be extracted, while from
that quantity of the must of cherries, at the same tem-
perature, but 50 can be procured. The famous “ Kirsch-
wasser” of the Germans, is tli6 illcbiibliG IiQUOr of
cherries. These cherries, not grafted, are extensively
grown for this manufacture. From a ton weight of
cherries, they get about fourteen gallons of alcohol.
The flavour is much admired, and great quantities of it
are consumed all over the Continent. The French dis-
tricts for cultivating such cherries, and making the drink,
are the Haut Saone, Vosges, and. Doubs, on the German
side. Similar liqueurs are made from the peach, prune,
and apricot. The brandy from apples and pears is not
admired. It has to undergo much rectifying. That
from beer has a very bad odour, and is very weak.
That from the skins of grapes, the common mode, or
even from grain, has a strong and disagreeable flavour,
the removal of which is difficult. Animal carbon relieves
it, but leaves another in its place, which can now be
driven off by the mixture of chloride of lime. As new
brandv is unpleasantly hard, it is made in few days
into genuine old mellow cognac with the assistance of
ammonia. This gaseous body is shaken into the bottle
briskly, and ages the liquor.
But to the liqueurs proper; —imported, alas! under
most seductive and protective appellations for the com-
fort of our own low-spirited and nervous ladies, and
most extensively used here. Let their character be
known. They are simply artful disguises of brandy, to
be treated as such, and denounced accordingly. The
history of their introduction is thus given by a French
chemist. “ According,” says he, “as the taste for
spirituous liquors was propagated, the pleasure of being
distinguished from the vulgar and sensual, or a fear of
hurting delicate throats little accustomed to the rude-
ness of brandy, suggested the idea of mitigating it with
water and sugar. Such was, after pure brandy, the
first liqueur that appeared upon well-served tables.
Little by little, and successively, it was thought that by
joining to this beverage, so very simple, some perfumes
which, in rendering it more delicate, soon made a drink
invented by luxury an object of necessity.” Again,
M The great talent of a liquorist consists in the choice of
aromatic substances, and in the art of discovering the
odours and flavours which mingle the best together, and
to avoid associating those which do not act with such
propriety.”
Now, as I have a far greater fear of the invasion of
these liqueurs, than of ordinary French wines, —and
they will come in with them to Britain, —as I should
regard their appearance at the confectioner’s, on the
table, and in the private closet, as a fatal injury to
the temperance of ladies, now, by the relative coarse-
ness of the drinks, kept from loving indulgence in
the bottle, —and as I have so lively a sense of their
mischievous character,—l am especially urged mors fully
to enter upon a description of these enchanters, that
fathers and brothers of Britain may he on the watch for
their intrusion, and resist their insidious approach.
These liqueurs, technically, are divided into “ ordin-
ary,” “half fine,” “fine,” and “superfine,”—the chief
difference in their manufacture being the greater quan-
tity of crystalised sugar used. Some, from their con-
sistency and colour, are called “ creams” ; while others
have the colour and appearance of olive oil, and are
termed “oils.” The lower class are the “waters.”
The “ratafias” form another distinction. They are
further coloured, if required; as cochineal for red, indigo
for blue, saffron for yellow, &o. Passing along the
streets I have caught my eye upon some of these liqueurs,
and give you their names: —■“Punch Grassot,” “ Rhum
de la Tamaique,” “ Elixir Calypso,” “ Liqueur de Gari-
baldi,” “ Liqueur Hygienique,” “ Liqueur de Man-
darine,” &c. But as I possess a liquonste manual, X
will give you further particulars of these compounds.
The full receipts I need not give; else, if distillation
were not a troublesome art, some would be tempted to
try the manufacture. .
To show the kind of mixture, I give doses or the
“Ban des Amis” (the “Drink of Friends”). Take of
the essence of cedrat twenty drops, and of the essence of
bergamot ten drops, and mix these with six kilogrammes
of alcohol and six of sugar. The “ Archbishop Water
is prepared from jasmine, molasses, orange flowers,
sugar, and alcohol. The “Water of the Chevaliers of the
Legion of Honour” has orange, sugar, and alcohol only.
The “ Cream of Barbadoes” contains citron, orange, cey-
lan, coriander, mace, and alcohol. The “ Maiden s
Cream” is from orange, roses, and alcohol a floral
mixture of rare delicacy, which will spoil the cream ot
enjoyment in many a British household, I fear. Xhe
“ Oil of Venus” is prepared from the flowers of carrots
and alcohol. The “Nectar of the Gods” has white
honey, orange, coriander, citron, benzoin, storax, and
alcohol. The gods who indulge in this would soon,
like the companions of Ulysses, he turned into swine,
in the development of animal propensities. The “ Nec-
tar of Beauty,” hut a cruel enemy to lovely woman, is
prepared from citron, orange, ceylan, coriander, mace,
saffron, &c., with alcohol. The “ Tears of Missolonghi”
drop from the mingling of hitter almonds, seeds of
angelica, mace, and alcohol. The fate of the author of
“ Don Juan,” who died at Missolonghi, may well call
for tears. But we need weep more for those who,
seduced by his praises of wine, have followed his terrible
example, and, in the indulgence of alcohol, have per-
verted g§flifl§, silenced conscience, loosed the bridle of
passion,“and remorselessly trampled upon the virtue and
happiness of others. “ Perfect Love” may be obtained
by the union of citron peel, cedrat peel, cloves, sugar,
and alcohol. The » Milk of Old Age” is manufactured
from orange flowers, tincture of balsam of Peru, and
alcohol. “Pleasure without End” may readily be
found in citron peel, orange peel, balm, and alcohol.
How many awake from its use to discover the birth ot
pain, the beginning of remorse! In this city of pleasure,
this sweet odoriferous excitant is a type of its joysit
is grateful to the sense, but destructive to the soul.
“Pleasure for Ladies” is too commonly found in
mingling bitter almonds, angelica seeds, ceylan, corian-
der, sugar, and alcohol. “ Love without End, in this
earthly paradise, means the union of citron, bergamot,
and alcohol. . .
We may smile over these names, and observe in tms
development of the poetry of strong drink an exponent
of French character; but we cannot disguise from our-
selves the effect of this upon society here. The well-
known and lamented dislocation of the family bonds


existing in Paris, as well as the tremendous force of more than this—away from the centre of that frowning
lascivious dissipation in a more public way, can only he circle of masonry, burdened with cannon. It has been
accounted for on the supposition of the influence of the policy of the Emperor to make himself master of
these and similar seductive and intoxicating beverages.
They induce idleness and sloth. They engender a love
of luxury and ease. They loosen the reins of self-
restraint. They present images of beauty and softness.
They soothe to slumber the voice of judgment and
virtue. They awaken the gentler emotions of passion.
They open the bosom to other charmers, and raise the
veil of chastity. Singularly enough, the vice, thef one
vice, of Paris is said to be about ten times that of the
country provinces, while the consumption of intoxicating
liquors is officially declared to bear nearly the very same
relative proportion ! I close these remarks by the
translation of a passage from Emile Deschanel. His
description of the lovely isle of ancient Greece may be
truly applied to Paris now. “The Isle of Lesbos,” he
tells us, “was fruitful in good wines and beautiful
women. There was a great trade there in both. Man-
ners were then very dissolute there. In that country,
so favoured of heaven, with a blood so fine, wines so
generous, climate SO rare, and the air so very languish-
ing, so charged with penetrating perfumes from the sea,
developed the sensual life quite naturally. When one
adds to this the multitude of visitors, one can easily
comprehend how this island quickly became the focus of
debauchery, or, to speak after the ancients, a school of
courtesans.” God forbid, then, that the women of Eng-
land should know much of the “generous wines” of
this modern Lesbos!
Let me now turn to a lighter phase of this Temper-
ance of France.
The other day, in passing by an estaminet, I observed
a placard that arrested my attention. Through the
courtesy of the landlord, I copied a part for the benefit
of your readers. Voila ! It is headed, “ Penal Code of
Bacchus.” Here you have some of the pains and penal-
ties ;—“ Absence from company when there is drink, 1
year; abandoning his post at the cabaret, in chains 6
years; cause of a disappointed debauch, death ; bringing
in a bottle of vinegar for the water, detention; draining
his glass in two drinks, prison 6 months; heating a
woman when drunk, death; any intercourse with water-
drinkers, death; kissing a publican’s wife when drunk,
prison 6 months; sleeping at table with wine before him,
irons 3 years ; enduring thirst, having money in his
pocket, perpetual imprisonment; paying a hill without
drink, irons 2 years; having a bottle of water under
the table, in chains 6 years ; to redden at the name of a
drunkard, in irons 20 years ; to go out of a public-house
without drinking, death; vowing not to drink, prison 2
tggjg; (jgegiyjng his comrade at drink, prison 2 years;
to empty his glass under the tdhlS, iIBH§ 20 j steal-
ing an empty bottle, irons 12 years; to give up good
drink, guillotine. Declared at our Palace of Pleasure,
this thirty-second of our honeymoon. Major, Chasse-
las ; Captain, Pimple ; Captain of Drinkers, Deink ;
Lieutenant, He-has-Deunk ; Chief of Drinkers, Vine-
Foot ; Lieutenant - Colonel, Deink-withotjt-Thiest ;
Colonel, Deink-Always.”
This is a description of a land without drunkards, tho
country of light wines and sobriety!
LETTER V.
A little better to comprehend the wonderful sobriety of
the people in visitors’ Paris, I would have you to know
that this is now a model city—a place of palaces, arches,
boulevards, and gorgeous shops, where visitors come to
live in enormous hotels and dine at sumptuous restaur -
ants. The people, Paris proper, may he seen still —hut
outside, away from the eye and nostril of the stranger;
Paris; knowing that he who holds that, retains France,
One means has been the embellishment of the capital to
a magical degree, and causing immense Government ex-
penditure therein. By this he conciliates, he pleases.
In doing this he accomplishes the other object—the
removal of the factious and troublesome, the Red
Republican workmen. By cutting through their old
quarters, and throwing open beautiful boulevards, he
has so enhanced the value of property that the poor
cannot pay rents there, and have to retire to a distance
off. There is where the squalor and intemperance
are to be seen, bat which our travellers never see as
they are whisked through by the rail.
If any of these “ roughs” find their way of an even-
ing into visitors’ Paris, the army of police are on the
look out for them, and speedily convey them to the
lock-up to sober them. They don’t wait here, as our
folks do, till the fellow makes a riot, hut they march
him off at once. It is true there is no morning fine.
He is dismissed in the grey dawn with a caution. Should
he, however, have been noisy, he is punished for the
nuisance ; should he have been violent, he would have
still further detention. Thus it is that social restric-
tions and judicial arrangements combine to keep intem-
perance out of sight.
That Paris itself, the model of temperance, is growing
more and more intemperate, is a fact admitted by the
authorities and confirmed by public records. One of
their reports states that the average personal amount of
wine-drinking per annum at Amiens is 20 litres, and
that that is much above that of the drinking of the
country around it; yet it also gives the average at Paris
at nearly six times greater, being 118 litres. Conversing
the other day with tbe esteemed President of the French
Wesleyan Conference, he told me that of late years ho
had seen drunkenness greatly on the increase. He said
that the Sunday and Monday riotous intemperance and
debauchery outside the harriers had become now an. in-
tolerable nuisance.
If free trade in drink he a blessing, the good ought to
he seen here, where facilities exist for the traffic, and
where the number of drinking-houses is so considerable.
Let me give a few figures of my own. I took one street
of shops, some of them very fine ones, and, from exami-
nation of 136 consecutive places of business, found 35
one-fourth—-selling alcohol. In a street of less preten-
sions, in the quarter of the Red Republican struggle of
1848, 1 took at random 10 shops following; six sold the
drink. Again, I passed 12 in succession, and saw one
shut, and nine for alcohol! It may be said that most
of these sold drink as eating-houses. To figures again.
6f ike §§ ill the first ease, only eight pretended to sell
solids. Of the other six and nine respectively, but OH§
in each lot was a restaurant. They were for the sale of
drink itself by itself.
Now I will ask any man of sense whether these parties
would continue paying heavy rates and duties, besides
keeping up expensive establishments, if no profit arose.
Does it not follow that the drinking habits of the people
must he had to support such an array of sellers of not
mere light wines, but brandy and beer ? The word
“cafe” deceives many at a distance. Let them come here
and count how many are drinking coffee compared to the
number consuming alcohol alone. Then let them take
the coffee-drinkers, and see if one in ten or twenty takes
his coffee without the accompanying glass of brandy.
The Englishman can get his Bass at the cafe, and the
German his beer.
Not content with these facilities, these provocations,
there are women licensed to retail in the streets. They


Years.
Paying Duty.
Consumed without Duty.
Total.
1830....
10,308,000
4,000,000
14,368,000
1835....
14,929,000
5,000,000
19,929,000
1810....
13,000,000
29,122,000
1845....
16,687,000
10,000,000
26,687,000
1849....
20,847,000
17,000,000
37,847,000
1850....
20,832,000
11,000,000
31,832,000
1851....
22,167,000
14,000,000
26,167,000
1852....
11,000,000
30,772,000
1853....
16,673,000
25,673,000
1854....
6,000,000
18,811,000
1855....
10,342,000
3,500,000
13,842,000
1856....
3,600,000
15,816,000
1857....
17,642,000
have their heads decorated with the brass words “ Can-
tiniere des Cantonniers.” They are brazen enough in
all conscience, without the brass over their foreheads.
I have observed them hanging about at the public water-
pipes tations, where men and women stand waiting for a
turn with their pails. There the seducer tempts with
her smiles and jokes, brandishes her little glass, and
swings round her little barrel of liqueur. Perhaps this
is a street imitation of the regimental “ vivandieres,” so
popular in song, so beautiful and charming in romance,
models of grace and virtue, but, like other dreams of
fancy, so different from the reality.
With the increase of consumption, the increase of pro-
duction has kept pace. I have already alluded to the
enormous development of the beer and brandy trade.
Just a passing notice of wine. Within 60 years, the
number of hectares (each 21, acres) planted with vines
has increased from 1,500,000 to 2,200,000. But this
little explains the wine growth, as so much of that
drink is simply manufactured from no grapes. But the
very great uncertainty of the grape crop of late has led
to the greater consumption of beer and liqueurs. In
addition to this, low-classed wines—mere refuse, for-
merly left to the poor peasants —arg now, by the modern
system of doctoring, made up tor sale, and will form no
small amount of that provided for the English market.
I find that, up to the passing of the treaty, the exporta-
tion of ordinary wines has fluctuated but little in amount,
though greatly in value. From 1848 to 1858, it has
run from 956,857 hectolitres to 2,262,159; while the
price has been between 41,840,567 francs at the lowest
and 198,433,936 at the highest. The ravages of the
oi'dium, or vine disease, have seriously injured the pro-
duce in some years.
I own I am terribly puzzled in the examination of the
official returns. Before coming, I was told thatthe French
were not up in statistics. But I find such difficulties in
the variations of returns, the mode of classification, and
the compilation of figures, as to be quite lost at times,
and despairing of finding my way out of the labyrinth of
figures. Nervously anxious to find the real truth, and
to tell the real truth, I am afraid of being misled, and so
misleading others. In the wine returns, I find some
confusion, or, in my stupidity, I cannot divine them. In
one place the record of produce is put for a certain year
at 10,780,000, and in another place at 18,000,000. For
another year the difference is nearly fifteen million. And
this in the same work, called “ Statistics of France.”
But I give you a connected series of figures, showing
the fluctuations of produce, and exhibiting the several
amounts consumed in the wine districts themselves, or
subjected to duty, by being brought to Paris and other
towns, where an impost is levied. The country people,
classed a§ a! mm pay m duty, as that is
charged as town dues. The increased amount of some
year’s_ imposts is accounted for by the fact that then
large importations of wine came from Spain, Sardinia, &o.
Now for the table.
I leave your light-wine drinking community to judge
how much chance they have now of getting the genuine
article at the cheap rate they were anticipating. They
had better have been content with their beer. They
know now, from the Lancet, the sort of stuff that is, and
the amount of tobacco juice, oocculus indicus, grains of
paradise, &0., that is administered to add to its virtues.
But of what they take in with the French wines, they will
be in utter ignorance. “ Where ignorance is bliss,” &c.
But just a little to refresh them, I will state a few things
about the matter. To be forewarned is to be forearmed,
and it will be easy to have with them sundry phials of
counteracting poisons, which they may use with, before,
or after the draught of Burgundy.
The first deceit is a very good one for the individual,
though a source of great grumbling. It is the loss of
alcoholic power, in quantity and quality. The merchant
finds this out; for, as M. Lebaud gravely tells us, “it
is a matter of infinite importance to the distiller to know
the degree of spirituosity of wines which he purchases,
because, if they be less spirituous, he would experience a
great loss in paying for them at the same prices as
better ones.” But another question is not so generally
understood—the richness of the alcohol itself. One of
my French chemical authorities thus treats of the
subject:—
“In former times, from the distillation of wines, two
weak kinds of alcohol only were procured—the one
marking about 20°, and known still in commerce under
the name of ‘ Holland proof,’ and the other from 22° to
23°, under that of 1 oil proof.’ Now, with the help of
new distilling apparatus, we obtain that marking from
28° up to 38°. In the laboratories of the chemist, to
obtain a higher point of rectification, they agitate it
with the dried powder of chloride of lime. At the end
of one or two days, they distil at a gentle heat. The
first part is a very concentrated or absolute alcohol,
which marks 41°, and of which the specific weight, at
20 cent, is, according to Eiehter, 0792, or with G-ay
Lussac, 0792, at 17°'88. The alcohol thus obtained is
colourless, transparent, of a particular colour, of a
burning taste, very volatile, of a refrigerating power
equal to 2-223°, and not congestable even at 68°. It is
a bad conductor of the electric fluid,” &c.
The density of alcoholic liquor has been obtained by
an alooometre, or measurer of alcohol. The curious will
see some difference. It ranges from density Ito density
0’795 ; through not less than 100 different degrees of
alcohol. A mixture of alcohol of one in various pro-
portions of water gives some curious results. Thus, in
grammes:—
Ale. Water. Ale. Sp. weight.
§2 wife §lB giro 12° and 9-919
310 “ 673 “ 16° “ 9-674
612 “ 370 “ 24° “ 9-199
795 “ 185 “ 31° “ 8-816
918 « 62 “ 36° “ 8-527
I beg pardon of the majority of your readers for the
intrusion of such dry matter ; but it will please a few.
Now to the alterations of wines. There are various
maladies to which the good liquor is subjected, sponta-
neously arising, and not often to be preventedor arrested;
but which serve to make it unwholesome or improper.
There is the astringency, excess of colour, deficiency of
colour, bitterness, acidity, inertia, alkaline, and troubled.
These are all bad enough, and make the wine bad; but
being simply the operation of natural causes, we pass
them by to go to other matters.
Voyages seriously affect wines, by inducing an extra
fermentation. An Italian gentleman, whom I met on
the other side of the globe, told me that, from love of
the luscious wines of his country, he had twice tried to


get some forwarded thence, hut that, in both cases, their
flavour was gone. The addition of brandy partly pre-
vents the effect. Then, certain kinds of wood for casks
exercise a mischievous influence. The oak is preferred.
Then, again, the cork often is very unfortunate, giving
a detestable flavour. Other accidents occur to damage
the drink. In fact, taking it altogether, it would seem,
by the wine authorities, a very difficult matter to get a
glass of good wine even from the most virtuous manu-
facturer in the world. But what can he said when the
adulterations are considered ?
Upon this subject, the learned author of the “ His-
toire des Falsifications ”is quite in despair. Hear him:
“An entire volume would not suffice to make known
the adulterations which have been tried or practised
upon wines.” The chemist, however, has some comfort
in his misery, as he looks upon “ the adulterators inti-
midated by the severity of the Administration, and by
the dexterity of perfected analysis.”
The most common falsification of wine is the addition
of water, alcohol, cider, and perry. Then come
sugar, molasses, with tannic, tartaric, and acetic acids.
Further on, we have chalk, alum, sulphate of iron, car-
bonate of potash, carbonate of soda, and foreign colour-
ing matters. Last of all, there are the preparations of
zinc, lead, and copper.
The mixture of alcohol with the wine is allowed by
law, to bring up weak liquors, on condition that the
proportion does not exceed five litres of pure alcohol to
the hectolitre, or one-twentieth ; and that the wine
submitted to that operation has not above 21 per cent of
pure alcohol. What is the consequence of all this ?
What kind of wine do even the Parisians get, much less
the London drinkers ? Listen to M. Bureaux:—“ It
is under the shelter of this law that commerce introduces
each day into Paris enormous quantities of wines
surcharged with alcohol. They increase the dimen siens
of this alcoholic mixture in the city with water, to
increase the quantity, twice, four or five times, or even
more. It follows thence that the consumers in Paris
drink, in general, only alcoholised water. Such they
call wine. They give the name of vinage to that universal
unnaturalising of wines, which tho want of forethought
in the authorities provokes to their own cost, and which
enriches the merchant at the expense of the publichealth.”
This is striking testimony, and weighty argument.
The authority is one bowed to here. Could not this
compound called wine be made after all cheaper in
England and Scotland ? But it would not be Bergundy,
Bordeaux, &o. Yet, surely there are means of getting
the right-shaped bottle, the true label, the proper
capsule, &(!. As to the colouring matter, the vinous
flavour, the sparkle, they may easily learn all about that
from the “ Liquorist Manual.” The French have little
wine enough now of their own to spare, and they are so
increasing in thirst that it seems a pity to rob them,
especially when we can make as good.
LETTER VI.
TEMPERANCE IN SWITZERLAND.
Beneath my window the Swiss maidens, in their
picturesque dresses, are despoiling the vines of their
treasures. As they ply their fingers, they raise their
sweet songs; for I am in the very land of harmony, the
region of popular choral sounds. While nimbly
moving about the stems, they take great care in the
plucking, as well as in placing the grapes in the slender
wicker baskets, or large-mouthed tubs. If bruised, the
fruit is liable to ferment before the time required, and
injury be done to the produce. Early in the morning,
and late in the day, the groups may be seen on the
slopes of tho hills at this harvest of the vintage, for the
sun resents the robbery of those luscious objects of his
warm attachment.
It is a joyous season—this egrappage, or stripping of
the vines. All hearts are merry. Even the children
sport about in unusual friskiness, and smiles beam from
faces everywhere. No fruit has ever been so admired in
all ages as the grape. The Bible especially places it and
its produce among the choicest of blessings. Those of
the cold and sterile North have little appreciation of the
charms of this cooling fruit beneath the scorching of a
more elevated sun, and the delight with which its
advent is hailed by the country peasant or the city lord.
Smiles beget smiles, and I feel my heart expand with
gladness in the pleasure of those around me.
Then comes the reaction upon me. Though I know
I am not among a people so delighting in potent liquor
as my own countrymen—though I know that their very
frugal habits are opposed to dissipation—though I know
that the vast majority of the wines produced for home-
consumption here will be little worse than the small-
beer of England—yet, when I see the introduction of
alcohol, that fierce destroyer of life and joy, in any
guise, in any quantity, I know it is SO §6tlUGtiV6 in
nature as to give honey to the lip, but gall to the heart;
and sadness comes over me then, amidst the laughter of
the vineyard, and I am almost tempted to applaud the
stern monarch of olden days who laid waste the vine
hills of his people.
Then comes another thought. What if these
gushing purple streams were to be converted into the
real offspring of the grape! What if, when the saccha-
rine liquor came oosing from beneath the press, so
joyously luscious in its prime, it should be preserved, in
the best sense of the term! What if, instead of per-
mitting, under the warm temperature and its more liquid
condition, fermentation, as a rotting, decomposing,
agency, to set in, the sweet juice were preserved in its
normal, safe, and nutritious state, for the food and
delight of man ! What if, instead of being dreaded and
feared by the good, and taken so carefully by the sober,
it should be so that we might have again the drink for
tender infancy, as wholesome and as welcome as milk;
and again the invigorating, strengthening, and beau-
tifying draught, the “ new wine for maids ” ! How,
then, should we all be gladdened when the fair bunches
plump forth their sweetness, and sing praises to our
Father for his gift of the vine !
And why cannot this be ? What prevents the indul-
gence of this pleasant dream ? Is it difficult to manu-
facture such a wine ? Not at all. We have but to
follow the ancient system —either reduce the liquidity, or
keep down the temperature—and the produce is there.
Why, then, is this not done, when its flavour is Coll=
fessedly so good, when medical men all agree that it is
so nutritious, and when the youngest may partake of it
with no more need of parental caution than when he
raises to his lips a bowl of milk ? The secret is this—
the wine-makers must regard the taste of the wine-
buyers, and these have no fancy for the juice in its
natural condition. It is not something nice and whole-
some only they require, but that which is stimulating to
excitement. The liquor must inflame the brain; it
must give a glow to the frame; it must rouse the animal
nature; it must raise the impulsive feeling; it must
enkindle the fire of those lower passions, in whose
gratification our greatest mere earthly pleasure exists.
It is found that above all substances, all poisons, that
which is most productive in these results is alcohol.
The mere brutal man will have it in its more undis-
guised form. He will bum his intestines with whisky,
gin, brandy. Others, who want the pleasure extended,


who will have quantity with quality, and who prefer
flavour in addition, will be content with alcoholic beer
and alcoholic wine. Some may be satisfied with hut a
slight percentage of the spirituous element, and desire
only an agreeable drink. These take the light beers and
wines. But with these there is still the fear, from the
entrancing nature of that alcohol, that in the increase
of taste, or in the growth of years, they may rise in the
scale of strength, till they plunge into the cup of ardent
spirits. Hence it is that wines must he fermented now.
But is there no probability of returning to the primi-
tive system, or of adopting the unfermented juice of the
vine ? I think there is. But then this must be done in
a wine country, and for a people who are what are now
denominated “Teetotalers.” On the Continent I see
little chance of such a drink being made for themselves.
Yet were there a demand for it in Britain, the wine-
growers would he too happy to provide a supply for the
rich islanders. There is no fear hut they would soon
know how to prepare it, and that in the best manner.
The cold French grape is not suitable. It must be the
richer juice from the warmer hills of Italy and Spain.
The limestone slopes of Palestine, Qijeg 10 renowned for
its would again be clothed with the clustering
tendrils, did such a market arise. Instead of Mr. Glad-
stone being the great lover of his species, in procuring
the introduction of cheap French wines, that man would
he the true patriot of Britain who should be the means
of bringing to the cottagers of his country so harmless,
and yet so luscious, a drink as we Teetotalers could take.
To do this, we know a taste must he awakened for it.
How is the time. The Temperance success has given
us ample materials. It is idle to say, as many do, there
is no occasion for it, and that a substitution for alcoholic
drinks is unnecessary. I contend that there is occasion
for it, and that a substitute is, with our growing taste
for luxuries, absolutely necessary. As I have lived
nearly twenty years in a warm climate, I know the
craving for something more than water, especially when
it is too often the case in warm latitudes that the water
is so indifferent as to compel one to adopt some means
of altering its flavour. Hence it is that in our colonies
so much tea is consumed, the cups being introduced at
every meal. But one is not always prepared for hot
drinks, and the convenience for procuring them is not
always at hand. Hence, as on the Continent, the
cheaper wines are so largely used; while, in Britain, it
is the beer, or the spirit put in to hill the water.
If, then, there is this natural craving, or, it may he,
an educational want, is it wise for us Temperance
Reformers sternly to rebuke the people for their lustful
propensities, or more philosophically and benevolently to
seek to satisfy this feeling in such a way as to promote
social enjoyment, without any risk to virtue ?
The next thing is, how is it to he done ? The drink
must he cheap, as well as agreeable. It must be easy of
access to the consumer. To accomplish this, capital is
requisite. The organisation must he strong and effective.
Relations must be judiciously entertained and main-
tained. The produce field will he, as I have said, the
shores of the Mediterranean. Spain, Italy, Greece, and
Syria, are all easy of reach hy our steamers. Their
present wines, from their very sweetness, are unpalat-
able to our English lovers of well-toned port; hut they
prove that the grape has pre-eminently the quality to
produce the luscious, tonic, and wholesome beverage
whose interests I plead.
I bring forward these views from the vine-clad borders
of Lake Geneva, in the hope that some united and
vigorous effort will he made to satisfy what I believe to
he a want of the present day.
That some danger is admitted in the use of the most
moderate of modern wines will appear from the follow-
ing testimony of a Swiss writer upon wines in the last
century. He says“ As the property of the spirit in
wine is to rarify in the different parts to which it is car-
ried, and to rarify the liquids which it finds there, it
follows that when it is in too great abundance, it dilutes
the parts beyond measure. They act no more with the
same ease as before; so much so that the equilibrium
which governs the solids and fluids would be deranged.
This is what one sees happening to those who drink too
much wine; their head becomes heavy, their eyes are
troubled, their limbs tremble, and their frenzies prove
only too much this disorder. But without drinking
wine to this extent, it always happens, when one drinks
much, that the membranes and vessels of the brain are
more extended than they ought to be, sinking at last, by
that reiterated effort, into a relaxation which will no
more permit them to recover their first action; that
which would necessarily interrupt the secretions and
carry much mischief to body and mind.” It is with
such a caution that Citoyen Eeymondin, of Lausanne,
introduces his subject of the manufacture of wines. If
such care be needed in the use of these light grape
wines, what should be said of those strong narcotic
excitants, called wines, but without the aid of the grape,
in common consumption with our countrymen ?
It is, therefore, on the highest moral grounds, that I
urge the adoption of that wine which is associated in
Isaiah with the blessings of the Gospel, in contradis-
tinction to that other wine even then associated with
what was vile and degrading. Instead, however, of
entering upon this vexed question of Scripture wines,
let us be at least content to follow such learned authors
upon wine-making as Pliny and Columella, and prepare
according to their recipes such drinks as cannot from
the nature of things be intoxicating, and yet be both
agreeable to taste and satisfactory to health. Let friends
of Temperance, and friends of humanity, seek to work
out this problem, so interesting to the real happiness
of our social state, and to the moral progression of our
people.
LETTER YII,
TEMPERANCE IN SWITZERLAND.
My first Sunday evening in this country gave me no
glowing conception of the sobriety of the "Swiss. More
than one group did I witness under spirituous influence.
As the people are more musical than quarrelsome, they
indulge more than ever then in song. Among a mixed
number^ standing outside a cafe, which they had been
patronising, I noticed two young men lay their hands on
each other’s shoulder (of course having the pipe in the
other hand), and commence, with bows and smiling
gestures, a German song. Had it been on another day,
and they in a different condition, I should have been
delighted with their harmonious measure. But they
were both advanced in liquor. One, at last, overcome
hy music and wine, reeled off the scene in a state of
stupor. In my first railway trip in this country, much
the same scene was enacted. Three in my carriage
were indulging in constant song, pleasing enough in its
way, for the three parts in music were well sustained ;
hut all had drank too freely. Gradually, as the good
stuff gained power, their melody declined, till sharps
and flats were very rudely confounded.
Conversing with two Swiss ministers in my travels, I
was sorry to hear from them testimony as to the intem-
perate habits of their people. One, however, described
it as pre-eminently the sin of cities, rather than villages.
He said that, at least among the Protestants, the pastors
possessed such influence in the rui al districts as to control
the public exhibition of this vice. The same remark,


doubtless, may apply to the influence of the priests
among the Catholic rural communities; for, be it under-
stood, religion in Switzerland is geographical a matter
of canton. Another minister, however, told me that he
had heard of it being a common practice for the farmers
to get drunk in their very cellars. Certainly, I saw no
man drunk in the agricultural parts; but my observa-
tion was a limited one.
Odd as it may appear, I heard a good man regretting
the failure of the wine crop this season, because it would
cause more intemperance. “The people,” said he, “will
now indulge more in spirits, which will be cheaper in pro-
portion to wine. They will set to making brandy from
potatoes, beetroot, and all sorts of things. In the Alpine
region they will gather the wild gentian, and convert
that root into alcohol, something like the Scotch whisky.
Herbs of all sorts are used for distillation here. I
tasted the celebrated liqueur of the Grande Chatreuse,
prepared from herbs of medicinal nature, growing in the
rocky desert, near that monastery: the good monks
sparing a little time from their prayers to manufacture
alcohol for the market. The drink is of the most potent
character, and my throat felt very uncomfortable for
some time after the taste. It is, however, much admired
in the boudoirs of ladies. I did not detect in its aroma
the odour of sanctity ; but it may be some sort of pious
sentiment which attracts these fair ones to the spirit of
the holy mountain.
It seems, after all, that I am mistaken in my suppo-
sition that it was smoke that kept men from going to
church. I had observed that in Protestant Switzerland
very few men went to church, and very few men were
very few minutes without smoking, so I rather hastily
drew the conclusion that their inability to pursue this
cloudy way in church, where they would have to abstain
from pipe for nearly two whole hours, was the reason
why they never went within those unfumigated walls.
They would never travel as they do if unable to smoke
in diligences and railway carriages—as I know too well
to my constant annoyance, being, unfortunately 7, un-
pleasantly affected in my head by the weed of others.
Yet it seems that I was not correct in my conclusions,
as I am informed that it is the habit of constant tippling
and sipping that empties the churches. How delighted
I am that the women here don’t like drinking any more
than smoking, else there would be vacant benches
altogether. It is not that men get drunk, absolutely
roaring drunk, so much as that they get excited or mud-
dled, according to whether the wine-bottle or beer-mug is
produced. This induces a general relaxation of man-
ners, a lowering of the moral sense, a growth of the
sensual nature, which militate against church-going
most seriously. I find folks more fond oi quoting
Luther’s jug of heer, than of imitating his virtues or of
adopting his sentiments.
In German Switzerland, much beer is drunk, as well
as wine and brandy. Their brandy, called cherry water,
is a failure this year, as well as the vintage. Usually,
this strong intoxicant is sold at two francs, or eighteen-
pence, a gallon. The cheapness of this spirit is a sore
temptation to drunkenness, like that of whisky in Scot-
land. Beer, however, is not so cheap as in Bavaria,
though still remarkably easy to the lightest purse. In
North Switzerland, that which costs 40 centimes, or
fourpence, a gallon, can he got for 28 centimes in
Munich. Double-heer, which is that prepared from
wheat instead of barley, ranks at 66 centimes a gallon
in the one place, and 42 in the other. The very cheap-
ness of the liquors tempts to their more frequent use as
beverages. Then, again, the high cost of coffee and
sugar, with the total ignorance of tea, leaves the people
absolutely dependent upon wine and beer for their
ordinary drinks. This system, in the end, is more
expensive to them than tea-drinking is with us. But it
does present a serious difficulty in the way of continental
adoption of Temperance principles.
The vineyards of Switzerland have the same origin as
those of Champagne—the good work of monks. Those
recluses of the convent of Haut-Cret planted the first
vines at Desalay, between Lausanne and Yevey, on the
north bank of the Lake Geneva. The Swiss historian
of the event adds: —“This precious plant especially
favours people whose art can correct the faults of the
soil and the inconveniences of climate. It must, then,
no more astonish ns if the vine has been cultivated in all
times, if it has been so much venerated among the
ancients, and if even now we seek to perfectionate its
culture.” The soil of some parts is not naturally
suitable to its growth, but is made agreeable by the skill
and industry of the vignerons. I was amused to read
this old Swiss’s account of wine. Although he grants
that Scripture shows its use by Noah, yet he affirms that
“ several authors believe that it existed a long time
before the deluge. Pluche says that wine is as ancient
as the world, and that Noah took care to communicate
to the human race this precious liquor.” His idea of
Bacchus is not a had one. Citoyen Eeymondin relates
of the ancients, “ they represented Bacchus as a young
man, to mark the joy of festivals; sometimes as an old
man, in order to teach us that wine, taken without
moderation, ruins the health, and makes us like old
men, incapable of keeping a secret. He was represented
with horns, because the horns of animals were the
drinking vessels.” The piety of this author of the last
century is illustrated on the title page, in the paraphrase
from Corinthians—“ He who plants is nothing, nor he
who waters, hut God who gives the increase.” He is
evidently a sort of man who would ask a blessing before
indulging in his cups.
Living, as he did, in Lausanne, at the time that Gib-
bon there wrote his “ Decline and Pall of the Eoman
Empire,” he puts forth an ingenious idea as to the cause
of that fall. It is his opinion that all the barbarians
wanted was a good glass of wine, and as Xerxes would
conquer Greece for a decent tig, so these rough foresters
saw no way of satisfying their vinous thirst hut in
seizing the country. As the Homans, in their Gallic
and other colonies, planted the vine where the climate
permitted, and now and then good naturedly gave a sip
to a passing savage, the woodmen were so enraptured
with the good liquor as to come down from their harsh
retreats to these lovely vales, and so across the Alps to
the vineyards of middle and southern Italy. This is an
odd conceit, hut it may have more truth in it than
appears at first sight
I found the favourite seats of the vine in Switzerland
to he the valley of the Ehine, the line from BSl§ t 0
Constance in the North, and thence on the low rises of
the country to the South, till the laud rises to the Berne
and Lucerne plateau, which is too severe a climate for
its growth. It reappears to the westward on the west
bank of the Lake Bienne, and thence all along the
charming Lake Neufchatel to Lausanne, spreading then
southward and westward to Geneva, and eastward to
Yovey, &o. At Zurich, I also saw vineyards ; hut the
wines are not highly esteemed. They are green, yet
will keep for 30 years without spoiling. The wines o
Neufohdtel are much admired for the manufacture of
champagne; but those of Grandson are thought too
strong. The Yaux wine of Canton Yaud is soft and
lively, as compared with that of De la Cote in the same
canton, which is said by the authority to he “ a better
friend of man.” One, the Chiarenne, is described as
being as strong as brandy.
I do not find the Swiss wines much commended by
travelling connoissieurs. Some are thought too light and


insipid, and many to taste of the ground. Those on th
Rhine for common drink are very weak in alcohol, and
almost colourless. The same may be said for North-
East Switzerland. They are exceedingly cheap. The
red wines of Yverdon,_ so celebrated as the place where
the excellent Pestalozzi kept his orphan school, are much
spoken of. In ear these, the Cortaillod red wine is put
upon an equality with the Bordeaux champagne. A
very strong wine is grown on a very steep slope of a hill
near Martigni, having an east and south aspect. The
doctors condemn that and the De la Marque, but praise
the Montreux, and declare the Baleyre of Lausanne to
be very healthy when old. But doctors’ opinions go
very much with their palates, and the palates of their
patients, in Switzerland as in Great Britain.
_ Much as I admired the situation of the Neufchatel
vineyards, sloping down to that lovely lake as if to
behold their beauty in its mirroring waters, as well as
those of the higher heights on the northern shore of
Lake Leman, the classic region of “Voltaire, Rousseau
Gibbon, and Byron, I still had a preference for those
hanging over the Rails of Schaffhausen. No object
except Mont Blanc itself, has so struck my igiagination'
in the of my rdtilUings, as this roaring cascade.
It was a glorious battle that between the rushing torrent
and the stern, rugged rooks. The one came on raging
and foaming iu its fury, and the other met the rude
assault in its passive resistance of strength. But I saw
by the strewn rocks below, that the stony bulwark must
yield at last to the liquid friction. Over all this strange
tumult the laden vines were suspended. They seemed,
in their quiet beauty and sweet treasure to present a
great contrast to this strange and destructive scene.
Yet X could not check the thought, that, ere long, from
those pendant purple branches, a stream would go forth,
whose noisy violence would exceed the roar of the
Rhine, and whose destructive vehemence would be
greater than the Ralls of Schaffhausen. And what
though some seek to withstand its force ? Like the central
monuments of that rapid river, they must yield in the
struggle, and sink broken and lost in ruin at the fall.
Then, as I saw the curling vapours rise from the seeth-
ing cauldron beneath, and linger among those vines,
they seemed to me like spirits of the stormy waters,
dancing exultingly amidst those glowing clusters, which
should yet produce spirits more wild than they. Yes,
and instead of dropping, as they at last, in refreshing
showers to the gaping soil, they wll terminate their
wild career in frenzied flames for the destruction of their
victims.
It was singular to see the steep hills traversed with
low stone walls from side to side, evidently for the pur-
pose of saving the thin soil, which would otherwise bg
washed off by rains from the limestone rock. Mountain
Streams of no ordinary force came dashing through these
vineyards, towards Lakes Bienne and Neufchdtel. The
soil was usually very stony, and the vines seemed stag-
gering midst heaps of rocks. Deep, wooden, basket-like
vessels, attached to the back by straps, conveyed the
grapes to the tub. Odd enough it seemed to observe
t v P ressln S going on, not in streets only, but in the
public roads. Long barrels of large size carried the
liquor to the ceLars. The “ marc,” stalk and refuse, is
jammed down into tubs by boys and girls, and is after-
wards used for manufacture into bad brandy. The
average price of wine of course varies with the season.
Thus, in 1859, a hundred gallons could be had for a
hundred francs; while this season it will be of so
wretched a character as to fetch only, perhaps, thirty
francs for one hundred gallons.
The expressed juice, as your readers may know, is
called “mout” or “must.” The Old Swiss writer
describes it thus“ All its parts are yet in great con-
fusmn; it takes the name of wine when it is exalted and
purified by fermentation.” Some of us, who regard the
saccharine and nourishing juice of the vine as a good
creature of God, and a wholesome food for man, would
hardly allow that it is exalted and purified when its
nutritious sugar is thus converted into the two poisonous
compounds of carbonic acid gas and alcohol. On the
banks of the Rhine, near Schaffhausen, I saw a verv
rough press, of home manufacture. The building was
formed of huge walls of limestone, to secure coolness.
In the interior, the vessels were of a simple order. But
the beam attached to the screw press was nearly thirty
teet long, and of enormous strength. Everywhere that
I had an opportunity of inspecting the processes of
manufacture in Switzerland, 1 found no such scientific
a ? < L delloate appliances as exist in the celebrated caves
01 Champagne.
The “ gasthaus,” or public-house of German Switzer-
land, is not such an obtrusive-looking building as the
English one. One misses the staring red blinds, broad
windows, and strong lights. They are comfortable-
looking places, clean, and decently furnished. Inside
one may see, as in France, a man making his dinner by
eating bread and cheese, or often only bread, with his
bottle of cheap vinegar wine or his mug of beer. Though
the people are sturdier and rougher than the French,
and more given than they to potations, I rarely wit-
nessed men in a state of intoxication. On no occasion,
at any hotel, have I been disturbed or annoyed. Every-
where have I been treated with courtesy and attention,
although travelling as a water-drinker. The landlords
are generally gentlemanly in deportment, and honour-
able in behaviour.
In Southern Switzerland, where the French manners
prevail, in spite of their violent anti-French prejudices,
the cafe system reigns. Many of these houses are
superbly fitted up. Flowers and finery, as in Paris, are
disposed therein as attractions. I did not, however
observe the sugared water, as in France. The disgust-
ing amount of smoking in the cafes considerably limited
tne scope of my observations.
. -p^ at which shocks the stranger most in this country
is the want of decent observance of Sunday. It is not
a business day, as iu Paris, but one devoted to lounging
and idleness certainly not devoted to church-going
The women may go if they will; but the men have the
chat, the pipe, the mug. Some idea of the proportion
may be got from this ;—I found in one Geneva Church
present at a service only forty-five females and five males,
besides the preacher and precentor. Last Sunday it was
the general election throughout Switzerland. Thanks
to the law and order ballot, which I am glad to see
adopted by this Republic, cases of violence, corruption,
and intemperance were not conspicuous as they are in
Britain, to its shame. Still there was great excitement,
from the strong natural feeling of alarm at the rapacious
policy of their French neighbour; and whenever the
passions are moved, the drink is not forgotten. It is
not surprising, therefore, that in the evening this old
city of Calvin was livelier than usual, even for Sunday
evening, the promenade of the week. The cafes had a
harvest that day. Men talked so much that their throats
were dry,—and water is no favourite liquor with civilised
folk. Strolling parties, therefore, kept the town alive
with song and laughter. One rather excited group I
saw, that, preceded by a lantern on a stick, were voci-
ferating national airs on their arm-in-arm march. Late
at night I was disturbed by these rambling, singing, and
drinking politicians. But to the credit of these intel-
ligent and well-behaved people, I must say that no in-
stance of a serious quarrel in liquor, much less fighting,'
have I ever observed. They have by no means, even in
tbe rudest villages, a populace so brutal and ignorant as in


some parts of Britain. In tire noble attention of Govern-
ment to national education, the drinking system is dis-
armed of half its misery and danger. The common
peasants here have as much regard to the proprieties of
social life, and are as courteous to each other, as people
of the respectable middle-class in England.
LETTER VIII.
TEMPERANCE IN SAVOY.
I have been about a week in Savoy. Although I passed
the dwellings of men, peeped in at their households,
conversed with them, and laughed with their little ones,
yet I was almost always in the company of my ever dear
friends, the mountains. These lofty solitudes have ever
been dear to me. lam not indifferent to historical
associations, nor insensible to garden charms, but there
is to me such an indescribable attraction in the ever-
lasting hills, that to look on their rugged crests I would
resign the gaze on lower gems.
You may well suppose, then, that when I got under
the shadow of that vast pile of Mont Blanc—which rises,
with its buttressing hills, the grandest fortress of nature,
armed with its artillery of rocks and its projectiles of
avalanches —I should forget my Temperance mission on
the Continent. I did for awhile lose sight of everything,
forget the world, my friends, myself, in contemplation
of the terrible and the beautiful. But I have a few
things to tell you about Temperance in Savoy. I did
look at its vines when out of sight of the Alps. I did
make inquiry among the people, and quietly observe a
few facts on the way. I give you what I have. One
thing, at least, will please your readers—an absence of
figures and dry calculations. But still they will find no
flowers, though I gathered some beside the very ice
chamber of the glacier.
They have an excellent plan here, and in some of the
neighbouring places, to prevent unworthy jealousies and
rivalries among masters, and unhealthy and impolitic
combinations and extortions among servants. It is not
uncommon in Britain to hear complaint s of men taking
advantage of the necessities of employers, such as on
occasions of press of work, harvesting, &0., and demand-
ing wages of an undue character, on pain of their with-
drawal from labour. Masters are then often obliged to
submit to unjust terms, to accept the lesser loss, but
with no pleasant feeling towards the exactors. Much of
the unhappy spirit of disunion in the field of labour is
owing to this cause. The same system cannot be
adopted in the vintage here. They manage things in
another way. There is, in the first place, a better
understanding among the neighbours, and a readiness to
co-operate for the common interest. No vine-grower
can engage labourers in some of these places at his own
will and risk, when and how he pleases. The commune
or parish decides the question. Officers are elected, who
go round from vineyard to vineyard, and decide which
is the most forward, and, therefore, the one first to be
permitted to receive persons on hire to gather the fruit.
They also adjudicate upon the rate of wages. This
saves masters much annoyance, and prevents discord in
the little community.
The vineyards are not so fine as those of the neigh-
bouring countries. This is to be ascribed not only to
inferiority of soil, and more inclement climate, but to
the want of enterprise among the inhabitants. Much of
the earth is a loose, rough detritus of old Palaeozoic
rocks, by no means forming the best constituents of soil.
Nor is there much improvement when it happens to be
the debris of granite rooks. The rich limestone of the
Rhine and Champagne is wanting here. The climate,
also, is not kind to the vine. The northern blasts on
the lake side, with not a little deprivation of sun by the
nature of that aspect, furnish a check in North Savoy;
while, in other parts, even sheltered from the Polar airs,
the warm season is short and uncertain, from proximity
to the vast Alpine chain. In fact, the Alps there being
the highest mountains in Europe, exercise no good influ-
ence upon agriculture in general, much less upon the
growth of so tender a plant as the vine.
Then, again, there is the status of the inhabitants to
be regarded. Those living on the Geneva border, coming
in contact with that very energetic and prosperous
people, cannot fail to be favourably affected. Yet even
there the traveller has no difficulty in telling when he
has reached the termination of Protestant Switzerland.
I hope I am above the vulgar prejudices of sectarianism;
but I could not help observing in Savoy a great want of
that activity, intelligence, cleanliness, and enterprise, so
prevalent not only to their westward, but to the north,
across the Lake of Geneva. The contrast between the
shores of Switzerland and Savoy is most remarkable.
I say not that there may not be compensations. I
heard the most favourable character of the honesty and
neighbourly kindness of the Savoyards. They may bo
quite as virtuous and happy as their fellow-mountaineers,
if not more so. It should be remembered that they have
to support not only themselves and families, but a large
number of persons, as priests, monks, and nuns, whose
labour is not of commercial advantage. More than this,
they have another apology—about one hundred and
fifty days in the year are Church holidays, when mass,
and not the field, receives their presence. These two
things being allowed to enter into the calculation, they
may possibly work as hard as the Swiss, and have less
to show for it.
Let us add to all this, their very marked inferiority
in point of education, their comparative ignorance of
literature, their want of the press, their isolation from
the rest of the world; and we find a sufficient reason for
their being quite content with the customs of their fore-
fathers, and sufficiently indifferent to ideas of progress.
An American remarked to me—“ I guess if we had this
country, we would make a pretty considerable change
here sharp.” Ido not doubt it. Many anticipate good
things from its annexation to Prance. Material im-
provements must come in. The presence of that active
race is already apparent. Great advantages are spoken
of. It is very probable that, though their own country
parts are so lamentably backward, the French will,
from the very novelty of the thing, give a greater
attention, for a while, to the general progress of Savoy.
It appears that French money bought a sufficient
supply of good liquor to make the Savoyards remarkably
merry and idle during the election excitement. The
two strongest tendencies of their native character were
thus brought to play—religion and drink. It is true a
few other necessities were supplied; thus, some hundreds
of pairs of boots were forthcoming for those who thought
their lower substantial interests should be respected, in
thus bartering their country. But as to drink, as a
resident told me, it was everywhere. Of course, the
Savoyards are not more ungrateful than other men.
They drank the health of those who gave the liquor,
and swore to vote for—the drink. Some of the knowing
ones, however, took the brandy, shouted for France, but
resolved to vote for Piedmont. A little contrivance met
this fancy. They were under the delusion that if they
put a green card (the Piedmontese colour) into the urn,
they would be quite safe. But they who shuffled the
cards were aware that the words “ yes” and “ no” solved
the question. To accommodate the conscientious, there-
fore, “ yes” was printed on the green card. The rude
peasants did not see through the dodge for two reasons—


they were mostly ignorant of letters, and they were too
drunk to read if they had had the knowledge.
Though the church holidays, which so interfere With
labour, might not he so morally prejudicial in some
countries, they are hot favourable to Temperance in these
Alpine regions. A mountaineer explained the reason
to me. “ Men,” said he, “ come down from their hilly
chatlets to church. When mass is over, they would be
able to do little if they returned, and, meeting others,
also from a distance, they must have a drink together.”
Thus is time not only wasted, hut the means of the
family are squandered, and had habits receive an unfor-
tunate impetus.
Strange to say, here, and in Switzerland, temperance
is in an inverse ratio to prosperity. In many parts,
where men do well they spend much. Here the well-to-
do are the little farmers on the better land. These,
anxious to preserve their little property, accumulated
after much struggle and privation, are careful not to
expend much at the public-house. On the contrary, the
poorer mountaineers are disposed to spend more while
having less. They, when visiting towns, are often found
taking too heavy a draught at the cafe. They are rather
fonder of brandy than wine. The Savoy wines are not
much in request: Tkgy Blg for home consumption.
They are esteemed ill made, from ignorance and neglect.
In Chamouni, at the hotels, all sorts of wines are to he
had as elsewhere. My fellow-travellers there, however,
preferred what was called Mont Blanc champagne.
This was a sparkling liquor, hut it was manufactured a
few hundred miles from the snowy mountain.
The vintage was later in Savoy than usual, even for
that backward place. On the Ist of November the grapes
were not gathered. The vines on the hills were small,
and the bunches of grapes were neither large nor many.
Against several farm-house walls I noticed some very
extensive vines. The produce was black. The pressing
of the juice, and the whole manufacture, in fact, is of a
simple character. The Savoyards extract a powerful
spirit from various herbs of their hills and valleys, and
this is relished by the Alpine people, like whisky in the
Scottish Highlands.
Cider is the great drink of the Savoyards. Apple trees,
to use an American friend’s remark, seem to be an “in-
stitution” of the country. For several hours our diligence
passed through orchards laden with fruit. As no hedges
or walls protect the fruit, the pendant, rosy-cheeked
apples were handy to all comers. I could not help
thinking how the London and Manchester hoys would
like to spend a half-holiday here. What an easy feast
they would have ! There would be no occasion to knock
down the apples (though that would he rare sport for
the lads), for all about the very public roads they lie so
thickly that the wheels of carriages passing crush plenty
of them. I must confess that I did not greatly admire
them myself, after our own delicious fruit in Australia,
and my AmgriGSU fliGßli tlißligM th§Bi very inferior to
those of the States. Still they did for cider. On my
asking the conductor of the diligence if the liquor was
considered good, he made a very wry face, shrugged his
shoulders, and replied that he never drank it if he could
help it. No one who looked at his face would accuse
him of indulging in so very moderate a beverage. He
laughed at my insinuation, and declared that really the
cider was very miserable stuff. I inquired if any was
exported, and was informed that none was delivered
elsewhere. Upon expressing my astonishment how such
a large quantity, judging from the immense orchards,
could be consumed, I was set right with the information
that the winter nights were long, and that the cider
could not go far enough for the people.
I was pained to hear of one class of men being accused
of a little indulgence. These are the celebrated guides
of Mont Blanc. During my stay among the mountains,
I was very much interested in them. They are intelli-
gent, gentle, simple, and courageous. Their life is one
of constant peril and excitement. As explorers and
hunters, they tempt the snow-drifts to betray them, and
seem to rush to the yawning chasms of the glaciers.
For gain at one time, from necessity at another, and
often from enterprise, they undertake perilous excursions,
and endure not a little suffering. It is too commonly
believed that the ratified air, the piercing cold, the vio-
lent exertion, experienced among the lofty hills, require
the presence of brandy or whisky. No party, therefore,
goes out without being well furnished with this auxiliary.
In Norway, Scotland, Switzerland, Savoy, it is all the
same. They tell you they could not live without it, and
that no one can sustain that inclemency, or dare those
heights, without it. It has sometimes puzzled me to
account for the existence of these people on these prin-
ciples ; for it is the opinion of many that folks used to live
in those elevated wildsin former times, audit is quite certain
that they had no brandy orwhisky, as such a thing was not
in existence. Even history, if it he not mistaken in telling
the tale, does not seem to describe the mountaineers then
as being a very enfeebled, degraded race. We read of the
rough miners from the ice-bound hills of Daleoarlia
driving out the Danes from Sweden, and placing the
brave Gustavus Yasa upon the throne. We read of a
mere handful of Swiss contending with the powerful
Dukes of Austria, at the call of the heroic Tell, and
against tremendous odds securing victory, and bequeath-
ing independence to their brandy-drinking descendants.
We read of clans, amidst those rocky fastnesses in
which raw mists and biting blasts are nurtured, rising
in their sturdy strength, to vindicate the honour of their
country, and cleave their chains at Bannockburn. All
this was done upon the snow-water-fed rills of their
mountain home. Are we moderns so excessively de-
clined in physical power of endurance as to believe
alcohol necessary for the performance of feats of daring
and danger ? How came the sailor company of Captain
Boss to keep out the cold of four 3’ears’ freezing up in the
ice, when allowed no spirits ? How do the Thibetians
manage, who dwell on the northern side of the Himalaya
glaciers, and am ng whom neither wines nor strong
drinks are to he found ? How is it that the tribes living
amidst the snows on the other side have never yet been
subjugated by the British arms, when their only drink
is water ? Shame on us, therefore, to give any heed to
the sentiment, that alcohol is essential to the endurance
of cold or fatigue !
They who attended the lectures of the late Mr. Albert
Smith, up n the ascent of Mont Blanc, will recollect how
much was made of the provision question. A full detail
was given of the supply taken—not consumed. But
most of all appeared the formidable list of bottles of
various liquors required for the occasion. People inno-
cently inquired whatever they could have done with
such a lot. I talked with one of the guides who went up
with him. I asked if he ever thought such a burden
was necessary. He laughed, and said, “ Mr. Smith was
a grand man.” He liked to do things of that sort on a
grand scale, and was extraordinarily liberal in the drink
way among the people of Chamouni.
Other people— our countrymen, of course—act in the
same way. If they go up a hill 2,000 or 3,000 feet above
the valley, one article must not he forgotten. Then,
after return from the excursion, the guides must he
treated at the hotel. No wonder, then, if some of these
men imbibe a taste for alcohol, and deem it necessary or
nice when the stranger is not in the valley. It must
not he supposed, however, that I charge the guides with
being an intemperate class. I would rather say that
they are sober in spite of their temptations. Among


them are men of superior powers—men of reflection, and
men of right feeling. I shall ever esteem as one of my
most pleasing memories my acquaintance with Auguste
Balmat, the guide and friend of Forbes and Murchison,
and one of the most interesting men I ever knew.
I know that men who drink will drink anywhere. In
the marshes of Sierra Leone, on the arid sands of the
desert, on the sweltering plains of India, in the pine
forests of the mountains, in sweet vales, lying, like rosy
Cashmere, in the lap of beauty,—in these places, and at
all seasons, men who drink will drink. No scene is so
lovely, no spot is so sacred, that it has not been defiled
by the fragrance of alcohol, if visited by Europeans.
But yet I cannot help feeling—from my love of moun-
tains, and especially since I stood surrounded by the
domes and aiguille* of the Mont Blanc chain, when, in
the stillness of midnight, and a cloudless sky, the full
moon sent down her silver rays to play with the glisten-
ing snow—l could not but feel that in such a scene as
this, the throne of majesty and the realm of beauty,
intemperance could never come. It may reel in crowded
streets, it may shriek in haunts of vice, it may laugh
amidst the vines; but here, where the spotless snow is
the eternal mantle of the mountain virgin breast,—
where the mysterious glacier glides from the cloudy
land,—where the stern, calm, pinnacles lose sight of
earth in their ceaseless gaze into the blue vault of
heaven,— here it seems impossible to realise the buffoon-
ery, the bestiality of drunkenness. And yet the whole
earth is robed with the air of God, and every part of it
is his temple.
LETTER IX.
TEMPERANCE IN NORTHERN ITALY.
A snow-storm introduced me to the soft airs of the
Southern land. The Alpine stream, whose progenitor is
the mountain snow, and which issues from the womb of
the glaciers, sparkles joyously in the sun-light, and
laughs amidst the floweis of the valley. Such is the
transition to the traveller over the Alps.
When we rattled down the Simplon into Domo
d’Ossola, we found the snow whitening the autumnal
tints of the Vine-leaves. But the warm breath of the
South resented this rudeness of the mountain blast, and
kissed the cold tears from its favourite plant.
The vines here presented quite another aspect to those
of the Savoyard or Swiss. Instead of rising up a little
bare stick, in a very rigid and restraining position, the
vine was allowed to run at greater length and freedom.
It gratefully rewarded the indulgence of the Italian
peasant by arching his pathways, to screen his laughing
little ones from the fierceness of the sun. In some places,
the trellis was supported by fir-poles from the mountains.
For miles along the base of the Lombard Alps, where
granite quarries have been for ages, blocks
of this stone are erected as standards in the vineyards.
Their obelisk appearance, in irregular rows, struck my
fancy. It was a glorious temple this, with its thousand
granite columns supporting a roof of spreading foliage.
I saw it hut in ruins, for the canopy was sadly rent and
worn. How lovely is it in its day of prime, when the
rosy beauties blush in the presence of their solar lover,
or coyly hide their charms amidst the foliage, or seek to
cool their ardent glow in the pressure of their cheeks
against the granite pillar!
In Tuscany, the vines are very fine. Some I noticed
among the branches running 20 and 25 feet, with stems
two and even three inches thick. They are not much
on the low lands, hut are abundantly cultivated on the
higher region about and beyond Florence.
The public-houses are the “caffe,” the “osteria,” the
“albergo,” the “trattoria.” Some places are of mixed
character. Thus, one reads “Yendita di Vino, Olio, ed
Altro,” —seller of wine, oil, and other things. The
“albergo” is like a roadside inn. The “osteria,” “trat-
toria,” and “ albergo,” are names indifferently applied
to the same things. “Osteria e Locauda” implies that the
public-house has a locanda, or furnished rooms, like our
common taverns, for the night. The “caffes” sell wine,
spirits, and coffee. They are frequented by all classes,
and ecclesiastics go to “caffe” who would not be seen in
an “osteria,” where beer and wine are preferred to
coffee. The “ caffe ”is most probably an importation of
the French “cafe.” The “spaccio del vino,” for the
sale of wine, may be ingrosso, or wholesale, or vendere a
minuto, to sell by retail. Not only have you the ancient
conjunction of “oil and wine,” but the more modern
and more civilised union of “ tobacco and wine,” signified
in shop signs. A notice of vini forestieri is that foreign
wines are there for disposal. The liquorista deals in
bottles of all alcoholic compounds.
These liquor establishments have nothing like the gay
attractive appearance they have in Paris, with their
marble statues, silver counters, gilding, glass fountains,
and vases of flowers. They belong to a graver people,
who have no fancy for tawdry finery, and do not connect
drinking with love of sight-seeing. Their respectable
places are clean, hut plain. The lower sort are pro-
foundly dirty and uncomfortable, made and kept for the
most degraded, and associated strongly with ideas of
bandits and stilettos. The hotels, properly so called,
are often magnificent edifices, hut are rarely conducted
by Italians; Germans, or French, or perhaps Swiss, form
the majority of the owners. At the “table d’hdtes,”
a simple vin ordinaire is provided, as in France; hut
some guests prefer calling for more expensive wines.
In the common room, before or after dinner, liquors may
he sent for.
The Italians seem in ignorance of that perfection of
British civilisation, better understood in Scotland than
England, called the “night-cap,” before retirement.
But they know enough of our habits to despise us for
our drunkenness, and to fix the opprobrium “as drunk
as an Englishman.” They amuse themselves at our
expense in this way. For instance, I saw the following
illustration on a shop-window in Florence. There were
three English tourists in Italy. They had been in a
vineyard, and were passing along a vine trellissed walk.
They had evidently been for something more than grapes
somewhere. One was intoxicated to sickness, another
was holding on to a post, while the third, with his cigar,
was looking remarkably stupid. Some peasant lads and
lasses are gazing at this very impressive evidence of our
superior civilisation.
Another pictorial illustration seems to he a favourite,
for I have met with it repeatedly on the Continent. It
describes the tour of a cockney. It is quite in Punch
caricature. The vulgar conception of continental wines
being so plentiful is happily hit off, for fountains in the
streets are seen playing before our countrymen, and
ladies, as well as gentlemen, are helping themselves
freely to the purple stream. The effect upon some is
held forth by the artist, who places them in ludicrous
attitudes of intemperance around the fountain. The
return home, by the “train indirect,” as it is there
called, is quite in keeping with the rest. There is a
group of three, two gentlemen and a lady. One English-
man is very drunk, the other is making silly efforts to
support him. The lady (I blush to write it, for the
honour of my countrywomen) is represented with her
head thrown hack, and her features bearing that idiocy
of expression so peculiar to the little drop. In the dis-
tance, the artist has a couple making towards home,
where the lady, finely dressed, is vainly attempting to
keep her husband steady.


But there are drunkards among the Italians. On my
first day in Italy, I saw a man decidedly intoxicated.
He had been drinking in some “ alhergo” on shore. I
was glad to see him viewed as an object of pity, though
his buffoonery occasioned a smile. One fetched him a
cup of coifee from the steward of the lake steamer, upon
his demand for vino. If inclemency of the weather were
an excuse for drinking, some apology could be presented
that day; for I suffered more from the cold then on
Lake Maggiore, than in crossing the Alps in the dili-
gence. The frosty air came down in a gale from the
snowy mountains that hung over this elevated water.
In Genoa, I saw another man a little, but a little, the
worse for liquor. About some trifle, he got into a dis-
pute with a comrade. Upon a word given in reply, he
rushed like a tiger upon him. It was no cool set-to with
the fists, as with us. No! One significant action of
the arm told me a tale of Italy. When the fellow darted
forth, he had a small stick in his hand, and this he thrust
at once under the ribs of the other. Fortunately, it was
but a frail cane, and not a stiletto. I understood at a
glance the frequency of cases of stabbing in the public-
houses in Italy. But tllo GrBHO6SO are Certainly a most
excitable people, and very unlike those of Milan and
Florence.
Yet intemperance is very rare in Italy. They have
one fashion here which I am sure no drink-seller in
England, Scotland, or Ireland, would ever dream of,
much less adopt. Think of a man asking for a mug of
beer, and having a glass of water brought at the same
time; or for a cup of coffee even, and having a tumbler
of cold water introduced also ! Why, the vendor would
be afraid of quenching the thirst too often, beside forming
the indulgence of a very prejudicial habit, as many affect
to believe—that of drinking water-. In England, a little
salt is thought to improve the nature of the beer; and I
have certainly bqen compelled to ask for a second cup of
coffee there, because the first rather provoked than
satisfied my thirst. But this water fashion does prevail
here. “ Poor wretches! ” I can fancy your portly hosts
exclaim, “ how ignorant they must be, to be sure! What
a pity! Why, there’s no enterprise, no ‘ nous ’ about
them. They don’t know the commonest principles of
political economy of supply and demand.” I can realise
their sentimental philanthropy about these vintners
here, and their Quixotic desire to come over and give
them a wrinkle or two upon trade.
I have not been unacquainted with Italians. At the
diggings of Victoria we have a large number. They had
found Italy, under the Austrians and the Pope, too hot
for them; so, to avoid the prison fate of their friends,
they glided to the fort of Genoa, g o t off tO Australia.
I know that me priests and old authorities will say these
were the scum of society, &o. About that I give no
opinion, for I have not to enter upon politics. One
thing I know, that they were well-educated men, and a
very fine-looking set of young fellows too. They were
said among the diggers to be mostly of the respectable
class.
Well, as to their habits, this much I can say for
them—that in spite of their isolation, of their exile, of
their removal from home and gentle ties, and of their
being suddenly thrown into a society which, I am sorrv
to say it, has few parallels for provocation to vice;—in
spite of all this, and of their being compelled, in a mea-
sure, to adopt the English customs of the place, the
Italians preserve a character for sobriety not belonging
to French and Germans. If in my wanderings at Bal-
larat, Ararat, or Bendigo, I came to a tent, apart from
others, unless with those of similar description, which
was protected by boughs from the sun, which was
clean swept and even adorned, and which was often
enclosed by a little fence—l felt sure that it belonged to
a company of these Italians.
Hereafter, I mean to enter at length upon the causes
producing this superior sobriety.
. Leghorn, drunkenness is to be found. But then
it is a port, frequented by the reckless of all nations.
Ihere, during nearly a week’s sojourn, I found not a
little degradation, but yet very few instances of rolling
intemperance. I observed that aniseed—a spirit—was
in common use amongst the lowest class. Bum was a
favourite liquor. Being a free port, Leghorn has it
cheaper than London. For three-halfpence, a man can
there get his tumbler of hot punch. The cabmen of the
port I regard as a disreputable set altogether. Asking
an Italian guide, who had lived in England and in
America, about the drinking habits of his people he
straightened himself, and said, “We are not like’the
English and Americans. If we do drink, we know
where to leave off A drunkard is despised in the
lowest rank; and no woman, however degraded, would
keep company with him. Our women, unlike yours,
never drink.”
LETTEE X.
TEMPERANCE IN ITALY,
I have been puzzling myself with the question—“ Why
are the Italians so sober?” Only a month here yet,
I have not failed to notice the extraordinary temperance
of the people. It is not that there are no drunkards, or
that there is no drinking. They are not a nation of
Abstainers, though water, not wine, as is commonly
supposed, forms the common drink. But instances of
inebriety are so rare among them, that I have been led
thus to dwell upon the probable causes of its absence. I
will treat the subject negatively and affirmatively.
It is not from their religion. This, if with any real
effect upon conduct, should restrain their licentiousness,
should check their violence, and should keep them
honest. Those who appear least under spiritual in-
fluence, and who are not slow to denounce priestcraft,
being the educated class, are the most sober. Again’
men of the same faith as the Italians—the Irish, for
instance—who are far more under the influence of the
clergy, and far more devout in church adherence, are
not famed for their sobriety.
It is not from climate. The ancient Cretans, dwelling
under the gentlest skies, had the greatest reputation for
intemperance. The English get quite as drunk in dog-
days as in winter; and they are as ready for their glass
in India as under the Arctic circle. The Scotchman,
UHEreF B 9 OMiige of place, loses his attachment to
whisky. If cold-* and damp induce this spirituous
thirst, I am sure that Borne this last week might emulate
Glasgow or Manchester. Then, my long residence in
Australia, possessing a far more genial climate than
Italy, with fewer clouds and less frost, has confirmed
me in the opinion that climate has not the influence
upon temperance which some suppose. In no country,
not even in Scotland, is so much drink consumed.
It is not from extra refinement. Some persons have
regarded the Italians, with their fine galleries, as
governed by the spirit of the fine arts to such an extent
that they could not degrade themselves by intemperance.
Alas ! the history of painters, sculptors, musicians, and
poets disproves this idea. It is a delusion, however, to
suppose that refined taste so influences the people here.
I have comparatively rarely seen the Italians in the
picture exhibitions.
It is not from having intellectual resources. “ Educate,
and you diminish the drinking,” say some. We do not
see this result as a matter of course. But here, at least,
where they are so innocent of Mechanics’ Institutes,


public lectures, circulating 1 libraries, soirees, and dis-
cussions, they are not seduced by intellectual excite-
ments from indulgence in the glass.
It is not because they are busy. On the contrary, no
one seems in a hurry; no one overworks himself; and
no one loves to rush into labour, as Americans and
British. With few manufacturers, with little trade,
with no enterprise, there is not much to do at all. But
with all their idleness and slothfulness, they do not
drink to excess.
It is not from other pleasures. The French are some-
times kept sober by the excitement of sight-seeing, the
love of society, the attraction of other sensual delights.
The Italians are not so gregarious. They are not given
to display. They are graver in deportment, and more
reserved in society. They frequent the caffes for idle-
ness and politics; but not like the Parisians, to laugh
with their friends, to please their wives, and to court
their sweethearts.
It is not from want of means. I observe that the very
poor are the most intemperate, and the well-to-do in
gi£i§s and in the country the most sober. It costs little,
in reality, to get drunk anywhere, if men are determined
upon it.
It is not from want of opportunity. They are not only
comparatively idle, and therefore able to spare time
for a debauch, but houses for the sale of drink are
abundant enough. It is not, again I say it, that they
do not drink, but that they do not get drunk.
It is not from having cheap wines. The French have
these, and yet are far from being so sober. If they
get a bottle of wine for a few coppers, do not fancy that
it is either port or sherry. Only let an Englishman
taste it, as I have done, and he will make a very wry
face. His cider is less sour, and his small-beer more
strong. It is quite as reasonable to expect the Londoner
to be sober, because he could get, if he wished, a very
harmless drink at a half-penny a pint. He has beers of
all varieties and prices at his selection, and yet manages
frequently to pay five shillings at the police-office.
It is not from peculiarity of race. The Italians are a
composite people. The stock is Latin, but the grafts
are Grecian, Celtic, and Teutonic. In Tuscany I observed
many fair-haired, illustrating their original Northern
blood. Even Naples, conquered by the Normans, is not
ignorant of the Teutonic type. But the Irish are Celts,
and the English are Teutons.
It is not because of their happy homes. A people so long
oppressed and neglected cannot be supposed either
comfortable in circumstances or peaceful in mind.
Their tenements are often inadequate to resist the rigour
gf and their clothes unsuitable for it. Their
sustenance is of the most meagre kind, and their food is
not abundant in nutrition or flavour; though well sup-
plied with water, their idleness and supineness make
them indifferent to its use for the purification of their
garments, or the cleansing of their skin. With small
remuneration for employment, and great uncertainty for
its exercise, the poor are not ignorant of anxiety nor
removed from indigence. Inhabiting, too commonly,
places devoid of sanitary attention, and habitually
neglecting provisions for health, they are exposed to the
ravages of disease and the sorrows of family bereave-
ment. If trouble and suffering be incentives to intem-
perance, there would be apology enough for the
Italians.
We turn to the affirmative side of the question.
Though unwilling to pronounce an absolute opinion, in
the rashness of hasty judgment, upon the manners of a
foreign people, I would venture upon the citation of a
few causes for this sobriety as they present themselves
before me.
The real philosophy of the drinking question is one of
deepest interest to the philanthropist, and of momentous
consequence to the statesman. As a people, we suffer so
much from intemperance that anything which throws
light upon its source or maintenance must excite atten-
tion. So many projects have been suggested for its cure
and abandoned with failure, that the public are tempted
to despair. Even we Teetotalers, in our struggle for the
reclamation of drunkards, and our greater labour to
preserve them afterwards, are often appalled at the
magnitude of opposing forces, and disheartened at the
extent of our actual progress. I have seen a crater-lake
in Italy, whose waters were constantly being removed by
an emissarium to the valley below, but whose level was
maintained by unseen springs of its lava sides. As
moralists, we often seem to be working to as little profit.
Could we reach the springs of intemperance, and arrest
their action, we should have more hope of exhausting the
strength of our national vice. Although I venture no
opinion upon English society, many more philosophical
than I may gather hints for the correction of home
abases from the details of my continental observations.
It is, then, may I say it, with this patriotic view that I
give the present article, so dry and Utiiflt§f§§tiflg,
perhaps, to your general readers.
This Italian sobriety may be partly from poverty. As
has been before mentioned, the social struggle for bread
is no uncommon one here. Even the industrious find a
difficulty in procuring subsistence ; there is little money
to spare for indulgences—for luxuries. The provident
and thoughtful form a larger proportion of the population
in Italy, probably from the necessity of their position,
than exists in England or Scotland, much less in Ireland.
These are not disposed to waste their little means in
useless expenditure.
It may be from ages of insecurity and discontent. Men
in ease and safety are more tempted to riot than those
who dwell under political tyranny, and whose necks
are galled with the yoke of bondage. Such has been the
condition of this country. I walked through the
deserted streets of Pisa, and recalled the time when its
merchants were princes and freemen. The stealthy step
and the averted glance recall centuries of fear; the
despotism of faith, and the inexorable and arbitrary
harshness of law, have checked exhilaration of spirit,
while controlling expression of opinion. A people who
were watched in meeting were not much disposed to
freedom in drinking. Again, the fear of incurring the
substantial censures of the Church, and the dungeon of
the State, would be no small obstacle in the way of that
indulgence which loosens the tongue.
It may be from hatred to their German oppressors. The
coarseness of manners and the beer-drinking propensity
of the German soldiery among them, were comtiiQfl
subjects of ridicule with the Italians. I was certainly
surprised to find in Lombardy and Tuscany, where,
directly or indirectly, the Austrian had so long ruled,
that his beer had made so little progress, and that beer-
drinking had not become an institution of the country.
Birr a was too associated with slavery to be an object of
regard.
It may be from the absence of congregating. With so
few and such insignificant manufactures, there are not
those assemblages of workmen as in Britian. As
such combination of artisans is found so prejudicial
to temperance with you, the isolation of the labourer
here is proportionably favourable. The advantages
are especially felt in relation to females. I read
to-day in an English paper that, in one week, at a
manufacturing town, more women than men were
brought up for intemperance. According to the law of
compensation, while Italy loses the profits of factory life.


it suffers not from its immorality. Women are preserved
here from the vice of intemperance.
It may he from the want of commercial enterprise in the
vendors of liquors. These do not seem to employ the
artifices and allurements practised in other countries.
The places are not so attractive in appearance, and the
excitements to drink, so common with others, are com-
paratively wanting here.
It may he from the practice of drinking water freely. This
pure element, regarded as next to poison hy some in
Britain, unless well disguised in a little “wholesome” wine
or spirit, is extensively drank here. It is not only the
chief drink of the poor, hut a common draught with the
rich. As I have stated before, at every caffe in Italy,
with every glass of wine or heer, and every cup of coffee,
is brought in a tumbler of cold water. People who are
thus accustomed so freely to use the safe beverage, are
not so exposed to excessive alcoholic irohibings.
It may be from the prejudice against spirits. Of late in-
troduction, they are regarded with jealousy and dislike
by a people so 6fiflsgfv§,tiv§ in tkgif 6ii§tSfflB as tbe
Italians. Sensible of their own quickness of temper, and
the readiness of the knife to move on occasions of anger,
they are justly alarmed at the liquor which is so hasty
in action, and so fiercely stimulative of the passions.
Public feeling has, therefore, pronounced against its use;
and none are found to partake of it except soldiers and
the roughest of the city. The exhibition of violence
under the intemperance of spirits has exercised a salu-
tary check, even in the use of more moderate excitants.
It may be from gentleness and politeness of manners. This
principle, which works so well in restraining the French,
has its influence here. The brutality, the coarseness,
the unmanliness of drunkenness, make the vice appear
degrading, even to the peasant; who, with all his ignor-
ance, has a character to maintain for propriety in man-
ners. In their physical organism, Italians have nothing
like the development of animal propensities to be found
in Britain and Germany; and they have, consequently,
less of that force of character which leads so many to
excess.
It may he from want of excitement and stimulus. They
lead comparatively, or have done so till very lately, a
dull, uniform life. They have not the stimulus of strong
competitive trade, nor political partisanship. In America
and in Britain, such subjects afford occasion for drink to
a considerable extent.
It may be from the example of priests. Though not
suspected hy their people of being, as a class, Teeto-
talers, it is well known hy them that holy men among
them and the monks have totally abstained even from
wine. The example pf .such men has always greater
weight than that of Ike likertine and luxurious
clergy. Their great saints were all water-drinkers. Their
holy hermits and martyrs were water-drinkers. Their
conception of a life of devotion is indissolubly associated
with water-drinking. Judge, then, the effect of this
upon those most influenced by religious feelings, and the
reflex action of it upon the community! lam not dis-
posed to regard the present Italian priesthood as models
of Temperance—far from it—as they are not esteemed
now hy thejr people as models of piety. But the abstract
idea of such temperance is associated with the notion
of their profession. And to he just to them, it must he
admitted that, as far as spirits aro concerned, they are
realjy Abstainers. Just imagine the consequence ot the
plergy of England, Scotland, Ireland, and America,
totally setting their faces against spirit-drinking alone.
Would not our national vice be considerably changed i
It may he from the example of women. I have been
repeatedly pained, while on the Continent, to hear allu-
sions to the English lady’s fondness for her glass. In
Italy, even more than in France, where women are so
sober, the female character is unstained by this charge.
Much of this may be the effect of habit. Women are
far more under the power of public opinion than men,
and are more conservative in their customs. The Italian
wives are peculiarly attached to the manners of their
ancestors. They retain their old dress, their old style of
food, their old mode of life. Their very babies —dear
little things!—are swaddled up tightly, like Egyptian
mummies, because that was the fashion two thousand
years ago. Even before that time, it may be remembered,
the public voice pronounced it indecorous and wrong for
any Eoman matron to drink wine—the light drink of the
day. Though this rule was subsequently relinquished,
yet the sense of propriety thus originated was retained.
It was even thought that water was more suitable to the
purity and gentleness of women, and that she who was
to be the mother of heroes and of virtuous matrons
should be an example of temperance. All honour to this
noble idea! As a lover of woman, and desirous for her
elevation in the best sense of the term, I delight in the
old Eoman theory of female excellence. No wonder that
for centuries there was no occasion for divorce, and that
a Eoman matron became symbolical of chastity and
honour. All this has not been without its influence
upon her degenerate daughters. If they become cor-
rupt in heart, they must still present the exterior of
purity and propriety. Hence I learnt, to my astonish-
ment, that the very prostitutes will not drink spirits,
and rarely, except among the more debased, will raise a
glass of alcoholic liquor to their lips. Such conservatism
of public opinion is most worthy of praise. I need not
extend a remark to show that the temperance influence
of women in Italy is important and satisfactory. When
will British ladies, who hold themselves so superior to
the unorinolined Italians, exercise so beneficial an influ-
ence upon the other sex ?
It may be from abstemiousness in eating. I regard this
as one of the most powerful of all reasons. Eich food,
and abundance of it, induces that thirst, and that love of
luxury, which are most fatal to the use of cold water as
a beverage, and most seductive friends of the stronger
drinks; whereas, simple aliment, and in moderate
quantities, would be gratefully satisfied with the more
harmless draught. The contrast is great between the
abstemiousness of Italy and the heavy meat-eating habit
of Australia, while the latter possesses the milder climate.
It is a matter of national custom. The Englishman will
have his beefsteak in India. The effect of this upon the
appetite for strong drink need not he described.
It may \>Qfrom national customs. The water-drinking
and vegetarian Egyptian settled Etruria, the parent of
Rome. The spirit-drinking and meat-eating Briton set-
tled America and Australia. The institutions at set-
tlement became the basis of permanent customs. While,
therefore, disgusting and brutal drinking usages prevail
among trades in the latter part, they are wanting in the
former. The Italians, though subjugated by the Ger-
man tribes, had been moulded on the old Eoman type
of temperance, and ever preserved their attachment to
the superior civilisation and laws of their ancestors. The
system of “treating,” so-called, is resented as an innova-
tion in society. Their very pride, or indifference, which
so obstructs their reception of many good things of our
modern civilisation, indisposes them to adopt those which
are prejudicial. Drunkenness, in its coarsest forms, be-
longs to the period of modern civilisation; for distilla-
tion itself is modern. Barbarians, as Indians, and semi-
harharians, as Russians, will, from their very rudeness of
manners and love of strong excitement, take ' o alcohol;
but civilised people, who are conservative in habit, and
inimical to foreigners, as Chinese and Italians, have no
sympathy with our drinking customs. I venture upon
a prophecy, that, within ten years after Italy is thrown


open to England and America, though. Protestant
churches may he planted along its shores, alcohol will
blight its fairest fruits of progress. Where one will take
a Bible to the Italians, 20 will convey drink. Thus it is,
to our shame, that wherever we carry our boasted civili-
sation, to make men richer and more enlightened, wo
desolate homes, deteriorate virtues, and blast popula-
tions, with our cursed cup of death. Such is to be the
fate of Italy.
LETTER XI.
TEMPERANCE IN ROME.
After my romantic indulgence on the subject of Italian
temperance, you will expect me to continue in my
laudatory strain. I am sorry to say, however, that I
find Rome neither so sober nor so virtuous as Northern
Italy. I seem to have got among another people
altogether.
Yes, it is a melancholy thing that, in this high seat
of European Christendom, as it is called, there should
be so much more destitution, social misery, ignorance,
slotti, violence, uncivilisation, and vice, than in France,
Switzerland, Lombardy, or Tuscany. Here, therefore,
I could not expect to find, in spite of national charac-
teristics and force of old habits, the exercise of that
temperance I found elsewhere. .
It is not that the educated and respectable are differ-
ent from Northern Italians, for I uniformly found them
moderate in their drink. Frequenting caffes, and ques-
tioning others, I was struck with the same temperate use
of alcohol, and free use of water, to which I have pre-
viously referred. Often have I seen half, and even
three-fourths, of the occupants of a caffe sitting without
a cup or glass before them. They had taken what they
required, and were now busy in chat, or engaged at
games. I do not think that one in ten took anything
stronger than coffee, and that without the French ad-
dition of brandy or liqueur.
I cannot say as much for the lower classes of Rome.
These I found frequenting houses for the consumption
of more potent liquors. The wines of Rome are said to
be considerably stronger than those of France. I hey
are always mixed with water by the respectable people,
and by women also, but are often taken by the others
as the English take their wine. More than this, they
indulge in liqueurs or spirits. Aqua vita, rosolio, and
rum are their favourites. I had the curiosity to taste
the much-admired rosolio. Of a beautiful colour and
scent, its flavour is decidedly what we should term
medicinal, from the distillation of certain herbs. It is,
however, potent in alcohol. The taste would not suit
the British palate. The aqua vita is colourless, like
yhisky or gin.
With all their indulgence, their idle habits, their
selection of strong drinks, there are but few drunkards.
An English sailor tried to explain this phenomenon to
me. “ You see,” said he, “ they drink wine when babies,
and get so used to it that it has no more effect upon
their heads than whisky upon a Scotchman.” Another
assured me that a Roman would walk very comfortably
with what would send an Englishman reeling. I have,
however, seen some of them overcome; but they have
always been among the most wretchedly poor. One
poor creature came out to the door of a liquor-shop,
glass in hand, stupid with drink. For a moment, as i
looked at his ragged dress, his idiotic face, and stagger-
ing gait, I thought I was in Manchester or Glasgow, so
true was the resemblance to* what is so common there.
The public-houses are various. Besides the hotel,
which is for families and visitors, the most reputable is
the caffe, though this has various grades. The
I have already described in a former letter. “ Antioa,
or ancient, osteria, is a common sign here. The “magaz-
zino del vino’’ is wholesale and retail. The “ magazzino
del spirit!” sells stronger liquids. The “spaocio del
vino” is simply a wine-shop. The wine here is in huge
glass bottles of a peculiar shape, and is retailed in
smaller flasks. Sometimes the consumer is favoured
with a tumbler, but often he has to drop the fluid down
his throat from the long-necked bottle. He has in this
process to hold his head hack, like a fowl drinking.
The liquorista sells all sorts of choice alcoholic mixtures,
which are ranged on his shelves in labelled bottles of
considerable swelling proportions. Then we have the
“ spaccio de aqua vita, liquori, ed altri generi, the
“caffe ed liquorista,” the “locanda,” the “magazzino
del rosolio,” &c. The “ osteria di cucina i.s an inn
with a kitchen, or a place where one gets something to
eat as well as to drink. They are generally very un-
comfortable-looking houses, not very attractive for
cleanliness. I have visited them from curiosity, hut
have not lingered long. There is a large caite for
hirra, or beer, in Rome, much frequented by soldiers
and others from Germany or Rhenish 1 i'a:ict.o I ho
company is not choice, and not conspicuous ior quietness
worat places are those resorted to by the low
people of the city. The assemblage and the harbour
are quite in character. The former are about the most
ruffianly-looking fellows I have ever soon; and the
latter is certainly the darkest, most dungeon-like,
filthiest hole that one can imagine. Nothing in the
worst parts of Manchester or Glasgow can at all com-
pare witn these dens of depravity and filth. No man
with any pretence to decency could possibly visit them.
With all my curiosity in the investigation of the drink-
ing habits of the people, I could not bring myself to
enter one of them. The smell was so intolerable,
although the windowless room had the door wide open,
that I could not even stand at observation. There is
another reason why I did not venture within. The
tenants are all profoundly afflicted witb tbe curoe of
low Italian society, the offspring of their filthy habits,
sufficiently conspicuous in their constant scratching*.
These “Scotch Greys,” as they are called by some
people, seemed always standing on guard at these
haunts, and so repressing impertinent curiosity. When-
ever I passed a knot of drinkers in these hovels, I shud-
dered at the consequence of the political emancipation
of such characters. They are not brigands in disguise.
Ignorant, dirty, brutal, neglected, oppressed, and hall-
starved, they form the moat striking exhibition of the
paternity of that G-overnment under whose care and
counsels they have been so well trained.
The French soldiers, as may be supposed, form the
majority of those frequenting the caffes. They seem,
too, to be about the only parties indulging m liqueur
with the coffee, or taking a glass of brandy with their
cigar. Drunkenness among them, though rare as com-
pared with Britain, was greatly in excess of that pre-
vailing generally in Italy. _ They are truly the de-
moralizers of the country. Soldiers, as a rule, are social
blights, because of the intemperance and licentiousness
attending their presence. Here their evil habits are
conspicuous. Still the majority go to caffes to idle away
time. They meet, like others, to chat, smoke, and play.
One Sunday afternoon, I took refuge from a shower,
and watched the habits of those about me in the caffe.
There were 31 present, of whom 11 were soldiers. Of
these, 4 were playing at cards, 8 at dominoes, and 6 at
draughts; the rest were simply smoking and conversing.
In another caffe I noticed one-half at cards, one-fifth
chatting, and the rest at dominoes, chess, or draughts.
Billiards I do not meet with so much as in France. At
a third, 25 of 30 were drinking coffee or nothing. At a
fourth, of six tables, four were empty of cups and glasses.


Of 25 persons, only two were drinking liqueurs. This
was, of course, a respectable caffe. Outside an osteria
I read the following prices of Roman red wines:—Ten
bajocchi a litre, and six for a foglietta or pint. A bajocco
is about a halfpenny. I heard great complaints of the
adulteration of liquor, and that the admixture was not
water only.
The vineyards of Romo had quite a charm for me
from their classical association. When, after crossing
the desert of the Campagna, once, under better rule, a
very home of fertility and plenty, we approach the walls
of Rome, we are suddenly brought into the midst of
population and cultivation; for, strange to say, the
country, as well as the town, is found within the walls.
It gave me a sad feeling of the desolation of this old
capital of the world to see fields amidst the ruins.
Enclosed within walls or fences, vineyards were com-
mon enough amidst the palaces of the Cmsars, the baths
of the Emperors, the temples of the Heathen. How
singularly must the laughter of the vine-dresser echo
amidst the deserted hills! What a contrast betv/een the
rosy cluster and the mouldering ruin! And can the
slavish Romans quaff th© GUp of merriment over the
graves of their mighty ancestors, and be as content with
a chaplet of vine leaves as their fathers with the laurel
of victory ?
I had once ascended from the catacombs of the
illustrious Christian dead to find myself amidst the
decaying foliage of a vineyard. My sadness of spirit
was increased. I had lingered by the cavity in which
the body of the martyred Cecilia was laid. I had
handled the bones of those of whom the earth was not
worthy. I had mourned, amidst those gloomy passages
of volcanic sand, for the fair and gentle ones whose
lovely forms were tortured to the agony of death by
brutal persecutions. I had looked upon this noble
symbol of Christian fidelity and holy purity. I came up
to behold the vine fed by the ashes of these worthy
martyred slain. The modern Romans lightly drink the
wine that perchance contained particles of such relics of
the past. It was an odd and somewhat revolting idea
that thus flitted across my mind. Here in the churches,
men bow in reverence before the dust of these saints,
and pray to the spirits of the departed; and there, in
the wine-shops, men mingle with their heated blood,
amidst the songs of revelry, the dust of these glorious
dead.
I visited Tivoli. I walked over the ruins of the
village of Hadrian. That luxurious emperor had there
constructed temples, theatres, libraries, barracks, baths,
as accessories to his sumptuous palace. Among other
enjoyments in this his country seat, he had aquatic
exhibitions. A large artiggiq{ form§dj 111
which vessels made sport for the monarch. In the
hollow, where water then appeared, I now found a
vineyard growing. Vines, too, trail about the ruins of
this luxurious seat of imperial pleasure.
The same day, I walked alone about the garden of
Horace. The vines, the praises of whose juice he had
so often sung, still decked the slopes of that lovely hill,
and still received the moist atmosphere from those
charming falls. I thought of the gay poet, and his
Bacchanalian verses, as I stood within his damp,
decaying cellars. By natural suggestion, the image of
Byron, singing the praises of wine, rose also before me.
Then Burns seemed to chant before me his merry note
of the joys of alcohol. Again, I dwelt upon the last
moments of these three sons of song, these three victims
of drink. I sighed as I considered the mischief of their
verses —the delight of tavern heroes, the sorrow of many
a home. I felt gratified that genius was not always
identified with wine, and that the voice of the good and
true was now so loudly raised to expose its fascination
aud its danger. Amidst the vineyards of Tivoli, the
beloved retreat of the Roman poet, with the sparkling
cascade before me, I resolved more than ever to labour
with those who seek to rid Britain of its greatest shame,
and man of his most entrancing foe.
LETTER XII.
TEMPERANCE IN NAPLES.
I am now in the gay city of Naples—the theatre of social
and political excitement, the very antipodes of gloomy,
brooding Rome.
They are a lively race, these Neapolitans, at the best
of times. You may judge, therefore, what they are
under the new regime. In ancient days, they had the
same reputation for vivacity. Southern Italy was
colonised by the laughing sons of Greece, which
accounts for their character. These shores are classic
indeed. Naples, Capua, Sorrento, Capri, Baias, Taren-
tum, and Pompeii are all associated with luxurious
gaiety in the annals of antiquity.
We need not go to the historian for a description of
the temperate habits of the ancients, though we hear
enough of the charms of the vineyards in that quarter.
A few hours among the frescoes and ruins of Pompeii
give us striking evidence of the pleasure-loving tastes
of the day. I went into a tavern that had sold drink
when the Temple of Jerusalem was in flames. I stood
by the counter of a shop which had retailed wine when
the Saviour walked on earth.
Yes, the excavations of Pompeii, partial as they are,
have revealed a sad story of the habits of imperial Rome.
I walked along the extensive cellars of a villa. There
were the amphorae, with their pointed ends inserted in
the ground. Instead of wine, however, they were filled
with volcanic dust. In that cellar many skeletons were
found. The parties had sought refuge there from that
fearful volcanic storm. There is a large tavern outside
the gate, with the “ chequers” on the sign posts, as
your publicans retain them to this day, and which were
originally connected with Osiris, the god of Egypt.
Horses were fastened to the rings in the yard at the
time of the eruption. The front room was the liquor •
shop; and in its rear was the snug parlour, with its
walls covered with indecent pictures. Quite in keeping
with the character of such establishments, we find the
adjoining house devoted to illicit pleasure.
The usual sign of a publican there was the representa-
tion of two men carrying an amphora of wine. Small
shops had capital cellars. A splendid amphora of blue
|lfi§§ ta§ l)88!i fOUfid. Drinking horns and basins were
used by the customers. One house had nine large jars
on the counter. A large quantity of money was dis-
covered there. On the wall was written the first line of
Virgil, “Arma virumque cano.” The very mark of
vessels on one marble counter may be distinguished.
Although the name of “ Thermopolium ” was applied to
those places selling hot drinks, yet it was very often
used for taverns in general.
antecedents, I did expect to find the Nea-
politans great lovers of pleasure, and rather fond of
their wine. But above a dozen centuries of oppression,
conflict, and poverty have moderated these characteristics.
The liveliness of the race was irrepressible; but the
appetite for vinous indulgence was not so great as I
had thought to observe. My previous remarks upon the
causes of the sobriety of the Italians, to some extent
only, apply to these warm Southerners.
They are a very different race, however, from their
Northern brethren, and have suffered far greater dete-


rioration of national energy. They have not the de-
cision, the industry, nor the morality to be found in Lom-
bardy. Some attribute this to their sunny sky and
fertile soil; their -wants are fewer, and are easily satis-
fied. They have that wretched content which checks
enterprise, and especially militates against the use of
soap, sheets, and small-tooth combs. Of course these
remarks do not apply to the educated class.
The Lazzaroni, or lowest class, though perhaps some-
what better than in the days of Masaniello, are de-
graded enough. They are under the dominion of three
tyrants—idleness, dirt, and superstition. Almost home-
less, and many quite so, they suffer often from privation
of comforts and necessaries. But from a sense of
their wretchedness they are not driven to those fits of
maddening intemperance or drunken stupor so often the
refuge of our own unfortunate poor. They are thoroughly
gregarious, and all seem to find excitement enough in
their out-door life. Their quickness of feeling, and
their dreadful propensity to the use of the long knife,
afb siiffldtefit reasons for public sentiment running so
high against excess. The women, more energetic than
the men, and, as usual, much more industrious, are great
checks to this evil. The honour of wife-beating and
wife-tyranny I find reserved for our own people and the
blacks of Australia.
But the Lazzaroni do drink, and appear almost the
only indulgers in drink. Their wine-shops and liquori
are, like as in Koine, very miserable dens. Windowless,
they are but dungeons; their uncleanliness is in keep-
ing with the tenants. The wine is served out in small,
narrow-necked flasks, and is said to be dreadful stuff.
But each of your Lazzaroni, like his fellow in London
and Glasgow, enjoys something stronger and shorter.
He has a substitute for gin and whisky, and not unlike
them in look. He has, too, his rhum and favourite rosolio,
to which I referred in my Roman letter. They are not
coffee-drinkers, as others are. And yet among these
poor, degraded, ignorant creatures, with so few com-
forts and advantages, as wayward and impulsive as
children, instances of brutal intemperance are rare.
Drunkenness I have seen, and much drinking I have
seen, but stupefied or raving men I have but once seen.
I am the more persuaded that it is not the mere
potency of drink, hut the social habits and condition
of the people, which may be regarded as the causes
of intemperance. The French are more intemperate
than the Neapolitans, and yet with wine which is as
water in strength to theirs. The Swiss are more
intemperate than the Italians, and with less potent
liquor. The Englishman will get drunk, even if he
can only get cider or small beer. Here, as elsewhere,
am I followed by the taunt, “No, our people never
make beasts of themselves, as yours do.” The habits
of our travelling English are a constant theme of
joking with them; they are too polite, however, to do
this before us. An English medical gentleman residing
here told me that he often blushed for his country as
he saw Britons disgracing themselves by drink in Naples.
He told me that instances of delirium tremens here
were confined to them. They came with the intention
of enjoying the cheap wines, and they go frenzied* One
man, of the British Legion, apologised for it by saying
that the wine was so haating and the rum so poisoned.
Alcohol is heating and poisonous at all times, and in all
disguises. When will Britain and America, the two
most Christian nations, arise to rid themselves of the
foul stain of being the most drunken ?
They have a very refined way of indulging an alcoholic
taste here. One buys a glass of water or a cup of coffee,
and gets a few drops of rum dashed into it from a
corked bottle, after the fashion of vinegar at an oyster
stand. To illustrate this, —six soldiers came into a caffe
where I was sitting. They had their coffee brought;
then one called out “Rhum!” The sprinkler came.
Three out of the number held forth their cups. At
another table of soldiers, one of four took it. At a table
of seven other persons, not soldiers, I found but one ask
for the rhum. One day I sauntered into a low caffe, to
see a little life. A rough-looking man came in, followed
by three women, and then by another woman; two of
these were aged. He called for coffee, and the waiter
came round afterwards, as a matter of course, with
these, and gave the droppings in each cup. It is in such
caffes, and with such people, that you see the Paris
fashion of liqueur glasses with the coffee. I have seen
low women drink their cup, and then toss off the alcohol.
Soldiers everywhere drink stronger fluids than others;
but here I have known them call for glasses of water
and cigars. Then they are invariably so gentle and so
polite, that I always felt myself safe and comfortable
with a common soldier beside me. Would such be said
in England ? I have not seen them treated here
by women, as is the custom so much in Paris aiid London*
The women, whatever be their character in other re-
spects, and they are not all nuns, are, at least, free from
the vice of their sisters in Britain, though I have seen
them in wine-shops at times. I had a good opportunity
of testing the habits of the people last Saturday. It
was a great fete in honour of the conception of the
Virgin. Sunday was nothing to it. The shops were
all closed, excepting those for the sale of bread, tobacco,
drink, and lottery-tickets, the four necessaries of life.
The streets were illuminated, the bands were playing,
the thoroughfares, caffes, wine-shops, and theatres were
crowded; and yet, with all the excitement, intemperance,
strictly so called, was absent.
The people are absurd enough to drink water here. I
know it is very dangerous for Englishmen, especially in
a warm country. It flies to their stomach, &c., &c.
The folks here are not afraid of it. Men, women, and
children in the streets indulge in a great luxury. They
go up to an “aquojolo.” This is quite a Neapolitan in stitu-
tion, like maccaroni. There is a gay stand at astreet
corner, with fine pillars, canopy, and paintings. The
Virgin and Child, of course, appear, as they do in every
shop and private house in the city. Two swinging tubs
contain the water. On the counter are lemons, whole
or halved. A glass of water is poured out, a few drops
of lemon squeezed into it, and the coin, about a farthing,
received in exchange. I noticed, however, even here,
the dashing bottle for the fastidious. There are also
some “ aquacedrataio,” or ambulant lemonade sellers.
At the theatres, during the pauses between the acts,
men serve round glasses of this safe and cooling liquor
to customers. Wine is not brought them. I know of
no hot brandy-and-water theatres, as are found in Lon-
don. One exponent of national tastes is seen in the
word used to express something given to the driver.
With us, the postilion or cabman touches his hat and
plainly asks for something to drink. In France, also, it
is so— pourboire. Here the word has no allusion to
liquor; it is simply, gift—a good for the hand—buono-
mam. I have not even seen the zampognari (bagpipers)
treated. They have come down from the mountains
this month to play on their bagpipes of goatskin, in
honour of the Virgin. They stop before her image and
picture, and play the very sweet and lively hymn.
They enter shops with this intent. They ask for
nothing, putting on their hats and walking off. Of
course, a copper is given them, but I saw no drink given
to these Christmas waits.
It has been a common remark that Englishmen parade
their drunkenness, and foreigners conceal it. So much


the better for the latter. But here, in a city of 600,000
inhabitants—larger than any town of Britain, London
only excepted—in a place without snug parlours, and
with a populace living out of doors, it would be difficult
to hide the drunkenness which exists. Certainly, the
few hundreds of English who came to help the Gari-
baldians here are not charged with concealing their
infirmities. Prom themselves, I learned some extraor-
dinary tales. If the half of their feats of drunkenness
are to be credited, my observation at the time has not
a little force : —“ The sooner the Italians get rid of you,
the better they will like it.” It is not quite reputable
to drive about drunk through a town, and pay the cab-
man with a knock of the head or a threat of cold steel.
The Naval Brigade has earned a great reputation in this
way. The pugilistic tendencies of our Jack, when the rum
gets in his head, are well known. These sailors have
been quite the terror of the sober and cowardly Neapo-
litans. Though the British Legion contains gentlemen,
not a few roughs among them have brought the corps
into great disgrace here. If an .excess be talked about,
or a mad freak of daring ltalian shl'UgS
his shoulders, gives his f ngers that peculiar curl, and
■with a piteous grimace exclaims, “ These English are
not men, hut devils.” Their conduct is held forth as a
great warning to the faithful of the sad consequence of
adopting Protestant principles. Unfortunately for the
mora l , however, the Irish Roman Catholic volunteers of
Pome quite outstrip them in their heroic qualities of the
bottle.
The vines of Naples are much more luxuriant than
those of France. They are longer, stronger, and higher.
They do not run up reeds, as at Rome, but up sticks,
just like hop-poles for size and appearance; or, climbing
a poplar-tree, stretch out their tendrils to clasp a neigh-
bour. Thus a vineyard is usually a sort of copse or
wood. The top is stumped off, and a few light branches
are suffered to throw a leafy shade over the juicy fruit.
I have passed for. miles through this tree vineyard.
Sometimes the vine runs 15 and 20 feet before crossing
to the next tree. These poplars are placed some four or
five yards from each other. Tf too wide apart, a stick
is put between to support the arching vine.
The vineyards which I saw near the Solfatara, and
those about the old crater of Lake Agnano, ought not to
he affected with the oidium, or vine disease, for the
sulphur, that great specific, so abounds as to make the
air most oppressive, even to half suffocation. The rich
volcanic soil is very favourable to the vine. But the
wine is so clumsily prepared as to he good for very little.
The grapes are suffered to lie for two or three days
before being pressed, to the great injury of their quality.
But, aa they are str Bß g, ftgy ffllfeg Well, and,
consequently, they are chiefly grown for that purpose,
and the export of that liquor is considerable.
I had a great curiosity to taste the “ lacrima Christi,”
or tears of Christ, the wine produced on the slopes of
Vesuvius. An adventurous fellow had climbed the
mountain with provisions for tourists; and there, on
that summit, I tasted it. It is no light wine. As I
stood there, on the lava, yet hot beneath my feet, the
thunder of the volcano crashed below me, and the wind
wafted the sulphurous fumes towards me. Half blinded
and suffocated, I seized the arm of the guide to hurry
from the spot, alarmed, in the sudden darkness, lest I
put my foot into any of the glowing chasms around.
I was satisfied with the horrors and dangers of an active
volcano. But what are the waves of that lava, compared
to the surges of intemperance ? Are the fumes which
rise from that awful pit so terrible in their effects as the
vapours of alcohol ? The desolations of all the volcanoes
Upon earth do not produce a tithe of the misery which
these drinks occasion. For one entombed in the ashes
of Pompeii, ten thousand are lost in the gulf of intem-
perance. The lava and the gas can but destroy the
frame, while the “ curse of Britain” sinks the immortal
soul.
LETTER XIII.
TEMPERANCE IN PRANCE (CONTINUED).
Although the monetary position of states, any more
than of individuals, is not in proportion to the amount of
virtue, yet it is generally to be assumed that the pre-
valence of social misery and poverty, in the midst of a
prosperous community, arises more from the indulgence
of vice than the action of human laws. As Frenchmen
are, after all, governed by the general principles of
humanity, and are not exempt from the operation of
causes existing elsewhere, I hold that, if I observe in
London, Manchester, and Glasgow that strong drink is
the great source of mendicity and physical want, so sur-
rounded by commercial activity and success, I should
not be far wrong in ascribing to a similar cause the vast
amount of personal suffering and distress in Paris. In
spite of all the developments of luxury here, there is a
degree of poverty which would doubtless surprise many
here who see nothing but gay equipages, splendid shops,
rich silk dresses, and fine broadcloth.
My own observations, limited as they have been, have
tended to take off much of the glitter of Paris from my
view. When I see poor creatures collecting potatoe
peelings, and the tops and ends of carrots and turnips,
to take to their wretched homes, I can estimate, to some
small extent, this miser}'. But no tale of mine can ade-
quately represent the state of things. I cannot forget
the old maxim of travellers—“ One sees what one wants
to see.” And as it may be thought, though it is not
true, that I came here to spy out the moral nakedness of
the land, I always prefer giving you the observations of
the French themselves, especially from their official
reports. We will, then, listen to the French calculator.
Notwithstanding the large number of institutions,
especially in connection with Sisters of Charity and
Christian Brothers, for the relief of misery and want
and the very prevention of distress, the Government
undertakes in the most liberal manner to look after the
poor. The little foundling is taken into an asylum.
The motherless one has shelter in the orphanage. The
boy is trained for work at one of the agricultural
colonies. Education is afforded him in infant and
primary schools. His interests are regarded afterwards
in the establishment of cities of houses, of a convenient
kind, wholesome and cheap. Baths and public washing-
houses are furnished him. Monts-de-Piet6 arise to
receive his pledges at a moderate rate, and so save him
from the usury of the pawnbroker. Municipalities not
only give him employment when idle, but, at bad
seasons, sell him good food at reduced prices. Again,
tender care is taken of him in many places, in times of
scarcity, by providing a sort of Bank of Credit for
bakers, so that in dear times they can lower rates, and
raise in better days. Then, if accident or illness
befall him, or old age overcome him, there are plenty of
hospitals to take him in. •
The female is equally favoured. If not liking tbe
trouble of her child, the Government takes it off her
hands. Plenty of maternal charities open their doors to
her in the hour of sorrow. Has she forsaken the path
of virtue, asylums are ready to receive her when
penitent. In destitution many modes of relief are
before her. While, apart from the State, she has ever
near her the ready hand and kind tongue of the Sisters.


Some establishments are under the control of the
parent State, others under the departments, and the rest
are managed by municipalities. The Emperor has
lately raised a refuge for convalescent workmen—for
those too weak to work, but discharged as cured by the
hospitals. This was done in 1855. At the same time
similar provision was made for convalescent females.
To sufferers from damages and accidents, not insured,
the State generously affords some compensation. Special
aid is granted to departmental funds—as, for instance,
about a million of francs a year to the repression of
mendicity alone. It is so with the communes and
the municipalities.
Private benevolence also is largely exercised, though
chiefly through the agency of the clergy and the Sisters
ot Charity, amounting to some thirty millions of francs
annually. In Paris alone about 120 private societies
exist for the good of the poor. Large grants are made
to all of these by the State. There are also public
Bureaux de Bienfaisance, which are civil institutions to
furnish succour at the homes of the poor. Of these
ikefe are about 12,000 in France. They receive funds
in a percentage upon the receipts of fetes, balls, and
places of public amusement. All this, in addition to
voluntary contributions, brings in an annual fund of
about twenty millions of francs, or £BOO,OOO. Then
there are Mendicity Depots, at once charitable and pene-
tentiary, where the profit of their labour is given to the
beggars.
Then, after all this parade of benevolence, we are
assured, upon official authority, that destitution is
rapidly advancing; that it has been found necessary to
raise the Bureaux de Bienfaisance from 6,715 in 1837 to
11,409 in 1853; that in other eighteen years the indigent
had increased nearly 25 per cent and beggars 70 per
cent. (') We also read that “the number of persons
treated in the hospital establishments has been growing
without ceasing.” In 1837, it averaged 14’32 upon
10,000; in 1849, it was 18 59. The number of insane
shows a similar mark of increase. The report gives this
sad record—in 1836, those poor creatures were 33 to the
10,000 population; in 1841, 41 ; in 1846, 51 ; in 1851,
60 ; being nearly doubled in fifteen years.
We sicken at these figures. It is enough to know that
there is in France a growth of misery, without a growth
of population; an increase of poverty, with an increase
of public resources. Even in Paris, where wealth is so
rapidly developing, where work is plentiful and wages
good, and where above any place charitable institutions
so abundantly exist—even here, the Mont-de-Piete tells
the uniform tale. In 1852, the articles left in pawn
were 1,022,109; in 1853, 1,131,548; 1854, 1,259,358;
1865, mm lii; 10M\ if.??; l;if?®
rapid growth of wealth of the city may meanwhile be
estimated in the large increase of its revenue from the
octroi alone, being 26,519,627 francs in 1848, and
50,309,563 in 1858.
Is there not a cause for this singular development of
distress, amidst the increase of material prosperity ? Is
not the solution of this enigma to be found in the corre-
sponding increase of use of intoxicating liquors, to
allusion has been already made ?
As in Britain and elsewhere the connection between
drink and poverty is well established, so should we con-
clude of this country, even if we had not been informed
of the increased expenditure in alcoholic liquors. That
which M. Audigaune calls “the irresistible taste for
dissipation ” among the Parisian workmen, is not con-
fined to labourers in the capital. Drinking is consuming
the vitals of the country. Here, as in England, there
has been much excitement about two or three gentlemen
being lost in the Alps; while here, as there, the stream
is carrying down its thousands of intemperate without a
note of alarm.
Further, upon this mendicity question, I may add
that the habit of drinking here tends, far more than
with yourselves in Britain, to the fostering, as well as
originating, of a spirit of idleness, the bane of any com-
mercial community. While the grosser forms of drunk-
enness are not so obvious as with you, every stranger
here is struck with the waste of time in drinking. Men
here sit for hours in a cafe, sipping their liquor. Those
who have shops leave them to their wives, while they
indulge in idle lounging at these drinking-saloons.
Merchants, unlike our own, must adjourn for hours
in the day to these places for a chat, a cigar, and a
drink. Working men, too, lose much time in the same
indulgence.
In America, in the colonies, and even in many parts
of Britain, it is the fashion to go to the counter, take
the dram, and proceed to business. But the worst fea-
tures of the English beer-shop system are here in full
force. An authority, nearly thirty years ago, speaks of
“ thriftless men, who on the Sunday and Monday spend
three-fourths of their weekly earnings in intemperance/’
and that these “form a considerable pari; of thd Palis
workmen.” But it is the waste of time to which I
direct attention now. The very low-classed drinks,
which are so vaunted as tending to sobriety, are the
occasion of these thriftless habits. As before intimated,
the inferiority of physical force and energy among the
French, as compared to ourselves, predisposes, doubtless,
to this long sitting at the cup. The weaker wine, for
the poor cannot buy the stronger, and the common beer,
serve to lengthen out the period of debauch. Thus it is
that France, a country needing the husbanding of its
wealth, and the active development of its resources,
because of its enormous public expenses, and the
gigantic growth of its powerful rival across the water,
is getting robbed of its physical vigour, robbed of its
money, robbed of its time, and so robbed of future
results, by this accursed drinking system.
Even granting, which must be done under protest,
that they confine their libations to a milder liquor than
the English, still there is not only far more liquor drunk,
and far more time consumed in the drinking, but a far
stronger prejudice in favour of drink exists here, and
the universality of the practice is more evident. This
tends the more to develop not only their taste for luxury,
and so far needless expenditure, but a love of ease and
self-indulgence, so fatal to the material progress of any
nation. They sadly want over here not only moral tone ,
but physical tone. Not long ago, I repeatedly watched
the turnout of workmen, at meal times, from the Wool-
wich dockyard. Here, as I observe the shuffling,
of the Parisian labourer, who walks with
slouching pace of the Parisian laUumt/
slow steps and bent frame homeward, I cannot help
mentally contrasting him with the erect figure, bold
and active movement, and the hearty tread of the arti-
san of Britain. Employers testify that an ordinary
Englishman does far more work than a Frenchman.
Travellers, having business at the banks here, are
astonished and annoyed at the lengthened time they are
detained. The other day I had three letters to post, of
various weights. The official, after a considerable while
hesitating as to their exact postage, coolly sat down,
dipped his pen in the inkstand, wrote down leisurely
the individual three sums, and at school-boy rate made
out the addition. Now, when I look at the habit of
long indulgence over glasses and cigars at the cafe, I
cannot help associating therewith that inaptitude for
exertion so painfully exhibited elsewhere.
Again, the drinking habit tends still further to cause
a deterioration of physical energy in another way. The


working man’s wages would, even at the present height
of meat prices, enable him to get a comfortable and a
substantial meal. But his love of drink, his habit of
much drink, interferes with this. Often have I lingered
about the restaurants used by the poor, to see what°food
they used; and often have I observed the mechanic con-
tent himself with a basin of cheap and inuutritious
vegetable soup and bread, so that he might have the
more for his wme or his beer._ A gentleman told me the
other day that, as he sat at his dinner himself, he took
note of two invalids, or old soldiers, near him. Instead
of enjoying a substantial meal, the veterans devoted the
greater part of their meagre purse to drink; for they
made their dinner of six bottles of wretched common
wine and two pennyworth of bread!
Without doubt another sad habit, the accompaniment
of drinking, and to a great extent originated by it, is an
enoourager of this sotting of the people. I allude to
gambling. Go where you will, especially of an evening
whether in a fashionable cafe or a low estaminet, there
you will see card-playing, dominoes, or billiards.
Throughout the day, in all quarters, noisy groups may
be seen at the billiard tables. Usually, the game is for
the payment of the glass ; Init angftgj p ffl g j § o{ eovffg§
expected by the loser, to give him the chance of revenge,
lims, time is consumed, pecuniary resources
are wasted, drinking habits are strengthened, and the
moral tone of society is lowered. The excitement both
oi drinking and gambling act and re-act upon each other,
a , ma L be Be ® n I . rl tJle “hells” of London, as well as in
the cafes of Pans.
LETTER XIV.
TEMPERANCE IN SOUTHERN FRANCE.
tw T i b ! remmded , as I landed at Marseilles,
that I had left the temperate laud of the Italian for that
of the less sober Frenchman. The contrast was striking
cnffl B a d<^T- ng ' Sa ' y ?° water-drinking and little
coffee-drinking at the caffes there, but a la?ge amount
ot coloured liquors in the glasses of a more potent nature
than wine itself. The caffes are upon a scale of unusual
splendour. As the gin-shops of London are supposed
to do a thriving trade from their extravagant demon-
strations of finery, I considered that the gorgeous dis-
play ot gilding, mirrors, paintings, and furniture of the
Marseilles cafes could not be paid for after the Italian
style of drinking.
. 11 m . ay be, however, that a people delighting so much
m society, living less for themselves than others, in
their excessive cravings of vanity, and having, besides,
more delicacy of taste and refinement of manners, would
prefer the brilliantly-lighted cafe, with its gay assem-
Evfn the° g 88 “- V ’ fcoiHluoil wine-tavern.
exquisitesaCr 011 W ° rkmen W WiU fr ® du ® nt th ® B ®
e * te pt, tbis is an advantage. Men are
stances anv 7 !! 0 Set (l lOt ° US y drunk under those cireum-
ttir lvTu y rit“Toudoirs ° BuTfv^ *
and p-pnHlifv „ ut thls ver 7 attractiveness
who , e tile th e more dangerous. Those
stroll into a b ® T , m . (iuced to enter an auberge will
it It a- S a Social baunt ’ a rendezvous, a
debatin'* sllon / eadln f r ° om . a lyceum, a club, a
keep them from drink otherwise
T he cafe induces ashameless waste of time. The French-
He is d rf a d°tA loVe WOT r f ° r it: - S own sake > as we English do.
then imihw esoa P e * r omwhenever ho can. Ho is,
then, unable to resist the charm of a place which offers so
; many animal enjoyments. He can read the paper, chat
, with a neighbour, or play at dominoes, cards, or bil-
liards. In the meantime, business is neglected, or left
tor another day. The people of the South, never too
industrious ai the best of times, need not the temptation
o. a cafe to increase their indifference to labour. An
S b merchant was telling me of his great surprise to
find the Southern merchants so little in their bureau.
I hey seemed so glad of any excuse to he off to a cafe.
tho c a ,ff n w ffi. tUr « Up i T hy could be arranged at
the caie. Had they finished some correspondence, they
were wearied and walked off with a cigar to the cafe.
S ad tbey b ad news by the post, they must console
themselves at the cafe. Were the tidings favourable,
they adjourn for indulgence of their joy to the cafe.
Wnli * S 1 f®* drunk ’ though,” said my friend.
ITud The f 7 d u s°*’ sail very close ‘a ‘he
wind. They get excited; and that I hold is more dan-
gerous to morals than right-down intemperance. But thev
do get drunk, though. Some people do not, and will
that to tk w’ , lbeyare 80 anxious to save themselves
that terrible temperance inquiry, that they try and
Sr Si Wln . e ' dnnkm S France must A
teeler, to their imagination, is as straight as a poplar
tree ; and the stupid song of the drunkard is hut a chant
ot a merry man.
In one town of the South I met with one of these
French apologists this week. “ How sober the French
are. said he; “ I have not seen a drunken man since
L h!i J e ~®?“ “® re - ’ “I am more unlucky,” said I; “for
the nrst object that met my eye as I entered this very
°| drunkards, reeling off together in a
maudlin ditty. I did not hunt for the sight; it came
in my way.
“Well, I must confess,” said another, “that Mar-
know S ’’ S VS plaC ° ; but then !t is a seaport, you
know. Truly, any amount of low public-houses may
he found in it. But sailors do not enter the cafes. 7
fl bn.T lSl +i. d the , Casmo there. There must have been
taXfnV °T nd PBrS ° nS preSent Tbe Ptace was most
tastefully and even extravagantly adorned. Singers
came forward occasionally on the stage; hut ifttle
attention was paid them, unless the performer was a
pretty woman. The occupation was smoking, ohattino-
and drinking. The company were of the respectable
class. There were no blouses there. The women of
course, were ladies of pleasure. I found them less
moderate in their selection of liquors than the gav
ZTewfs AU unco —y small per centage
cottee was to he seen on the little tables Sniri's and
water seemeii to be the favourite beverage. P lt might
not be vulgar gin or whisky, but one of the many Is
guises assumed by distillation in Prance 7
±!l6 people Of Marseilles are excessively fond of
pleasure. They are the Neapolitans of France. As the
land ot the Troubadours, the voice of song may he
expected among them. There exist among the work-
men many singing societies, called by fantastic names.
Iheir meetings are frequent, especially at the Church
festivals. They are excessively devout at all times; and
their churches have much more of the Italian type of
coarseness of image service, than would be found else-
where m France. They must have the tangible to suit
andftSnle ° n ’ B l ltafter this , demonstration of piety,
i perfo ™ anoe of sacred music, they ter-
minate the day in a _ debauch. The burlesque and the
serious singularly unite in their character. Their love
o finery and display is, I am sorry to say, so strono-ly
developed, that their tonepf morals is regarded as much
be 6 7a o e ih" ndai t' • H ° USe rent is doarfandlhe eW
Deis aio thronged in a manner prejudicial to decency
and modesty. But it is more from their love of amused


merit, their out-of-door life, their passion for excitement,
with all of which the glass bears a very prominent part.
Again did I see the illustration of the fact brought
before you previously—that a certain amount of alco-
holic stimulus is more provocative to licentious feelings,
in both sexes, than the ruder drenching of the cup.
As I advanced into the interior, I found the people
more sober. One may observe the absence of towns and
even villages for many leagues together. Fields there
may be, and houses scattered here and there; but a knot
ot half a dozen cottages is a rare sight in the South.
Certainly, the country for nearly 200 miles is little
better than a desert. Isolated, and generally very
poor, these little farming peasants have few temptations
to excess. They export little or no wine from their
homes, consuming what they produce.
Conversing with a priest, when among the extinct
volcanoes of Auvergne, about the habits of the country
Of the South and Centre, he admitted their igno-
rance, but praised their sobriety. “We cannot over-
take the towns,” said he, “but we take good care of the
scattered population. There is our kingdom. They are
too much under our influence to get drunk.” As the
French priests bear a much higher character for virtue
and piety than their brethren in Italy, I doubt not the
beneficial character of their example in some country
places. One argument they urge against popular in-
struction is, that when people are educated they get a
new taste for luxuries, and alcoholic indulgence is the
chief of them-. But here again comes the question of
race. In the Centre or South the peasants may be
sober, but in the North, and especially in Brittany,
where they are more than anywhere in France under
the dominion of the priests, the peasants are drunken.
The contrast between the vineyards of Italy and
France is considerable. The latter have nothing like
the beauty of the former. Even in Southern France,
the vines are feeble and diminutive compared with those
of Italy. It was interesting, however, to observe them
alternating with the pretty olive trees, or occasionally
rising amidst the mulberries of the silkworm grounds.
About Avignon they are stronger in stem, but are kept
cut down, much as we have them in South Australia.
They are able then to stand without the prop. Else-
where, sticks are used, of no great height, however. At
Auvergne three or four sticks are bound together at the
top, and furnish substantial support for the slender
plant in that elevated and windy region. Further
central, and coming northwards, I noticed the vines yet
feebler still, mere threads about the sticks. Of course,
at this season they were denuded of their leaves, and in
most places laden with snow.
The situation of the vineyards was often very attrac-
tive. Some ran along terraces on the limestone hills, or
crept in hollows of the mountains from the rough breezes.
Others rose amidst crags and loose stones, or found a
home in mere shingle. Rich soil is by no means plenti-
ful in the interior of France; it is well that the vine does
not absolutely require such for its growth. But, like as
in the neighbourhood of Vesuvius, or the old craters of
Home, vineyards are flourishing on the fine volcanic ash
of Auvergne, or sending their roots amidst the crevices
of decomposing lavas. The debris of granite gives sus-
tenance to others. The far-famed St. Peray vines grew
on gravel. Their rose-tinted grapes produce a cham-
pagne, without the auxiliary of sugar. Those of the
hermitage by the Ilhone are well known. They were
originally brought by a hermit from Persia. This pecu-
liar fruit is confined to a space of only three hundred
acres. At the foot of the ruins of an old fortified abbey,
of the olden turbulent times, I saw a pretty little vine-
yard. The grapes of the Yaucluse have been long
renowned. As I gazed from Avignon upon that moun-
tain home of Petrarch, when near the tomb of his beloved
Laura, I thought of his description of the papal court at
Avignon, its splendid pomp, and its luxurious vices.
The churchman, the noble, and the lady, were not then
indifferent to the juicy produce of the Rhone.
The wines of the South or South-East are much more
coarse, thick, and spirituous than others. These “light
wines” of France will reach 20 per cent of alcohol;
though they are admitted, strange to say, to be less
stimulative or intoxicating than some liquors of a lower
strength. The growers may naturally complain of the
new British tariff, which increases its burden according
to the alcoholic character of the wine, as in this way
their neighbours of the Garonne get an undue advantage,
from the accidental difference in the nature of their soil.
They would like all wines admitted on equal terms. The
consumers here are rather glad of the arrangement, as
more of the good stuff comes to their share. The
labourer is quite indignant at your impertinence in rob-
bing him of his glass. To him wine is of more conse-
quence than beer to the Englishman, a§ hg afford
to buy either tea or coffee, while sugar, being protected
as a home manufacture from beetroot, is a luxury to him.
The rising, then, of the price of wine by British im-
portation, is felt to be a great hardship by the peasants.
I took much interest in observation and inquiry about
the state of temperance in Lyons and St. Etienne—the
one the Manchester and Spitalfields of France, and the
other its Coventry and Birmingham. The Lyonese
weavers are renowned as given to democratic, socialistic,
and infidel principles. I forbear to enter upon their
social and political character—a most interesting sub-
ject—but will confine myself to the drinking question.
I rambled about the celebrated revolutionary quarter,
Croix Eousse, the home of the weavers. Their houses
are clean and comfortable, their persons are well clad,
and their appearance is that of gentleness and intelli-
gence. Their improved taste, as compared with other
artisans, leads them to prefer the cafe to the vulgar
cabaret. Though they indulge in wine, they are not
indifferent to brandy, and too frequently are remarked
leaving their work for a hasty draught.
They are a proud and vain people, and are upheld by
this characteristic from appearing in the grosser forms
of drunkenness. They spend much of their resources in
drink; and a great number of them, with all their
pride, do not disdain to depend upon municipal charity.
They are said to be much more degraded in their habits,
and far less sober, than they were twenty years ago.
Other portions of the Lyonese labourers are by no
means of the weavers’ comparative tone of sobriety, but
are sadly given to excess.
St. Etienne and its neighbourhood have eygQ IB9F£
points of interest to the Temperance inquirer. I was
sorry that my own personal rambles there were so
hindered by a day’s heavy snow storm; but I was
fortunate to meet information from others and read
something afterwards.
Some high land comes to divide the valley of the
Rhone from the waters of the Loire. About that tract
on the line of railway from Lyons to St. Etienne, three
distinct branches of trade are carried on—-ribbon-making,
coal mines, and iron foundries. The first class of workmen’
like their brethren of Lyons, are intelligent, though not
educated, and strongly given to extreme opinions in
politics. They work at home, and instead of the eight
hours’ labour system of Australia, permit only twelve
hours’ work, under penalty of window-breaking. They
are excellent workmen, and their tenements are com-
fortable, even to respectability. Though comparatively
sober, they are said to indulge too much in little drops,


too often stealing off to the cabaret or cafe. Like the
silk-makers, they are slight in frame, diminutive in
d^rtae e nt. Strongly to gentle^ 3
The eharhonniera or eoal-miners are certainly different
from these. -Their occupation and habits are different
la T°h Ur f T!- T aluable the French coal
fields. They form two distinct classes, however, among
themselves, with most remarkable peculiarities, highly
important for the ethnologist’s regard. In the
ground of the same coal basin, we have a short, stout
In rtfl h uf ople ’fi n the ,} ower > a tall, thin, dark race!
In the village of the one there are filth and disorder In
the settlement of the other there are cleanliness and
propriety. Ihe wives of the first are coarse to brutality
and dirty to offensiveness. The women of their neiah
hours, with their sparkling black eyes, are gentle in
manners and models of household economy. The men
of the elevated plateau are drinkers, while their fellow
workmen of the valley are sober. Their partners par
take of the intemperance of the one class, or the sobriety
of the other. Ignorant alike of letters—for but one out
ot ten adults can write-both of the same faith horn
under equal circumstances, and engaging in the
pursuit, they preserve such dtoito ; : s b §d ™
and habits A , St nc " vene3s °* feature
of differed origin A pbdoso P ber to re g ard them as
tenants of tbf- T r A lreacb , author suggests that the
“nic S etti e ers. HaPPy VaUey ” are descendants of
The forgemen of the romantic gorge of Terre Noire
are not unlike their fellow iron-founders of Britain’
m their robust frames, their rough manners, and their
intemperate propensities. As a passing traveller, I was
X t UCkwi , th i thelrfurnaces ’ and speaking of their
"T ln * ft Zr dS t t° a ra ‘ lwa >’ official > be remarked,
Those fellows there,—they are beasts for drink and
their wives are little better.” I trust the last remaric
was not quite correct. But I had been told thafthe
women of the coal fields were much given to intemper-
tolf h • autio £ of Phe Manufactures of France ” has the
following observations upon the social state of St.
Ltienne . Drunkenness is more common among the
workman of the Loire than with the weavers of Lyons
It forms the principa! vice of the workers of iron and
coal. They know no amusement but the cabaret It
is there one sees good humour making merry amon«-
them. Iho soul sparkles in their animated eyes, but to
he destroyed soon in that excess which extinguishes to
the last glimmer their moral activity.” It is iomewhat
strange that while a Frenchman can thus express him-
self so strongly about his own countrymen with whose
habits he might be supposed to be most familiar, an
English manufacturer should tell me that he spent several
days m that quarter, and yet saw no drinkina:
aferss i i? t- ues m v^ ces ’ beins deiighted wia
of p:SdW e - tienne and the oh ™ g -nplicity
Another curious social phenomenon has been recorded
of these rough miners and forgers. They are remarkably
religious. _ Absent at no fetes, diligent in their prayers
orthodox in faith and reverent to their priests, they Tre
quite a model set of men and women-only the,, will „et
drunk so. M. Audigaune thus describes this odd moon-
sistency.— Desolating contradiction! They carry
away from the temple no teaching for the conduct If
% e - The d ™Ws become not soher-the dissolution
of manners is not made to give place to the manly
domination of mind over sense-patience and resignation
enter not into their ulcerated souls.” °
T here are some people who are so fond of facts and
llgures, that they fancy they can build up a correct
theory from them without trouble. I wonder what they
ill make of some of the facta I have submitted in your
columns. Lor my part, I candidly confess my inability
form The'T, “ eb " 10 - “to any constancy of
m. The philosophy of Temperance, to which I have
paid some attention for the past 20 years, bothers me
more than ever. And yet, until we get at’it somehow
we are blundering about in a labyrinth of benevolence’
Inductive science, forsooth! I wish we could get it into
ethics, and I, for one, would be tempted to become an
optimist, and have a little more faith in the world's
improvement. The positive philosophy pretends to have
found the key. It admirably fits the theory, but it dels
of it‘ Ur Hf h ° ° Ck oi I human %- Men get drank in spite
snflWfo H loVmg SOul8 ’ burning with zeal for
suffering man, and constantly thwarted in their nhilau-
hropy, Sigh amidst the chaos of society, and wait for
one voice to say, “ Let there be light! ”
LETTER XV.
temperance in champagne.
’ he ? d! Ifc was that cursed champagne
2,5 V, -f° said a young man, as he appeared at the
breakfast table. What a frightful expenditure of the
wlw fc* ®?®? dshl | l kes P lace under its inspiration!
to il/ °f. these drafts upon affection are ever honoured
tb ® mornm g ■ How much honour, virtue, and happi-
ness have escaped with the gas of that sparkling bottle >
°hampagle U 10nS Wlth drmkS ’ the stron g est r s with
mS" ; “r«“. “ 1 -»■«• ‘-a. <■»
d . lstant lore3t bad taken the hues of Autumn
«™L landSCaP v- WaS °, pen and fair - Gentle rises, some-
times approaching to hills, leaned upon each other as a
Jeeping sisterhood. Their summits were usually fringed
with trees, whose erect forms and parallel lines but little
eartb°f ISed W v h i graceful con tour of those bosoms of
eurth from which they arose. Upon the slono<? nf
verging hills, which heaved toward the sun, rested the
far-famed vineyards of Champagne. I tried in va-m f
get up a poetical impulse at the sight. It would not
come. A mass of green and brown foliage, apparently
surface I should trees on their
” ' ’- -- ha»V6 thought them as beautiful as some
of the lovely downs of Western Victoria.
These hills run in irregular curves about the country
as elevated torrents petrified in their billowy course and
they inclose the most charming valleys imaginable.
I hese soft retreats, from having received from ages the
treasures of floods, are rich in fertility. They are highly
Ibi wu' + N ° I r B ’ gbt y fence cuts U P *be plain, and
to trav ?* ler ' All 13 °P ea to the roadfand open
to each other. No man rears a wall, or rail, or hedg e P to
mark his own field; a few stones or wooden pe^ra
smfn 6 bed m t “ eighb ° url y Strict, Here one sees a
small bed of cabbage, there a large extent of lucerne
and there, again, the stubble of a patch of corn. The
road, as it meanders through the vale, is shaded by rows
If COV6r the lads and maidens
the held partake of their simple meal, and whose
£ikgeS! s foliago danoes t 0 the song of those merr y


Few or no tenements are seen on plains below or hills
around. The homes are in the little hamlets about. I
have walked among these rural dwellings of the French,
and have been more gratified than when I wondered at
the gilded palaces of Paris. It was so pleasant to look
upon faces with a simple, natural expression. The little
villagers, with their rosy cheeks swelling out from their
clean, close-fitting caps, were my especial favourites.
They would give a half-wondering, timid glance at the
stranger, hardly assured of their safety even by his
smiles. Sturdy, stumping roysterers were some of them,
mingling with their as rosy as they, with
eyes lit up in their darkness by the sparkling of Cham-
pagne, but which were softened by a tenderer expression
than dwelt in the orbs of the noisier sex. The sun had
withdrawn its rays from the vale, but was still hesita-
ting to leave those voluptuous hills, when I was walking
homeward down from one of these villages reclining
on the heights. I heard a horn rudely blown. Look-
ing forward, I saw a group reminding one much more
of Arcadian innocence than modern France. A young
woman walking in front was the musician. She had
with her, straggling about, a lot of young laughing
idlers. Behind her was the town herd of cows, horses,
mules, asses, and goats. These had been assembled by
the horn, which now gave notice of their return from
the pastures. Bringing up the rear, leaning upon his
staff, was the aged herdsman. His dress was highly
picturesque ; and, bent as was his form, there was still
vigour in his step ; while his calm, set features and quick
eye spoke of a life as placid as the eve itself. No
greater contrast could I conceive than the peaceful
appearance of Cnampagne and its people, with the wild
orgies excited by the sparkling liquor. One thing I
knew. I hardly needed to be told, that very little of
this seductive and expensive beverage fell to the share
of these simple peasants. Their vin ordinaire is as harm-
less for strength as the small beer of England, and not a
whit better flavoured.
But for the history of Champagne wine. Some hun-
dreds of years ago a vast forest covered this celebrated
district. A company of monks, seeking a secluded
retreat, selected one of these many wood-crowned
heights, and reared an altar there. Now, however
devoted to piety, these folks are not accused of insen-
sibility to the pleasures of sense. It is not always fast
day with them. So these forest choristers cleared some
land for tillage ; and, among other things, planted some
vines. It was then observed that the wine prepared
from these grapes had a peculiar flavour, not known
before. The discovery was quickly revealed, and soon
the umbrageous shade gave place to open vineyards ; as
my French imformant expressed it, “ Wine and the
Gospel soon spread over the country.” I have visited
that monkish home. I have looked from their ancient
fane over a vast region of fertility and beauty. Were
these cowled ones to arise from their tombs, how they
would wonder at the change!
The district is all alive. Merchants are driving about
among the vineyards, bargaining with the proprietors
for sale by the acre, basket, or pipe. Mules from a
distance are waiting to be hired ; others are creeping
slowly, surely down the hills with their blushing burden.
Women and girls are in another place commencing the
egrappage , or plucking, of the pretty bunches; while
others are carrying the laden baskets to the mules.
Parties are laughing along the road with the teams, and
women are after the charioteers. Slopes, despoiled of
their luscious treasures, seem, in their desolation, like
forlorn and stricken widowhood. Unlike the oak, —
which in its seared autumnal state has the majesty of
fallen greatness about it, —the stripped vine, in its naked,
tremulous clasp of the bare stick, has a mean paltriness
about it which checks our sympathy for it in its decline.
Having had the pleasure, in a railway carriage here,
to make acquaintance with one of the first wine-makers
in Champagne, I have since been favoured with a full
insight into the mysteries of the manufacture, and have
once tasted, too, at his beautiful chateau, the real potent
draught. M. Canneaux, of European celebrity, is an illus-
tration of successful enterprise. Intelligent, courteous,
manly, he combines the chivalry of his ancestral home
with the honour and sturdy independence which he has
seen so often in the marts of Britain. He knows me as
the disciple of Father Mathew, and he indulges the
common feeling of detestation at the misery and vice of
our gin and whisky drinking community. He naturally
believes in wine, as the brewer has faith in beer.
The wine is of three classes— -first, second , and third.
Strange as it may seem to some, all these varieties are
from the same individual grape. Spread upon a raised
floor, covered by a flat table, and subjected to a gentle,
well-graduated pressure, the grapes yield their richest,
purest juice for the best quality of wine. A second,
severer squeeze brings out more juice, with some acrid
liquid from the skin and stalk ; and so til© IlUflll)©! two
is obtained, A regular crush then gets out the remainder
from grape and stalk, whose woody sap, flavoured with
some berry juice, constitutes the third or common class
of wine. Large vats for fermentation at first receive the
liquor from the tub underneath the tap of the press.
Men bear it thence in wooden vessels strapped to their
backs. The cashing follows. Within the staves it rests
for months.
At bottling time there is a great exercise of prudence
and taste. The distinction of flavours is made with
caution and judgment. When filled, the bottle is put
into a rack, with its neck inclined downward at a con-
siderable angle. Day by day the bottle is carefully
turned a little over. This is continued, perhaps, for six
weeks before the depot or sediment gathers, after a
spiral movement, and rests upon the cork. It consists
of the sand and dirt from the grape, with a slimy sub-
stance upon which the wine is said to feed. When ready
to be packed for exportation, it is necessary to throw off
this dirt. Such a process requires considerable skill.
A tub is set upright on a table, with a large cavity in its
side; the artisan stands in front, draws off the cork,
allows the sediment to fly off, and dexterously fastens
up before the wine can escape with it.
This bottling for the sparkling wine is generally about
April or May. It is after this, when the weather is
warm, that active after-fermentation takes place, to the
fearful destruction of glass and liquor. The explosions
in these cellars are often very dangerous. Men employed
there are obliged to wear leather guards and masks.
It is the most anxious and distressing time for th© ifldfili •
facturer, as he may even lose 20 per cent of his produce.
To remedy this, M. Canneaux has invented a bottle for
which he has a patent, and whose construction renders
explosions extremely rare. He noticed that, in the
cylinders of steam engines, safety lay in the uniform
pressure by means of the shape. As the explosions took
place in the foot of the bottle, that being uppermost, he
formed it of a cylindrical figure. Instead of the deep
indentations of the common bottle, his has a rounded-off
edge, with just sufficient flat surface to stand upon. The
academy has awarded him a medal of merit for tho
invention.
Of course, the main business of tho wine-maker is to
get cool cellars. I went down into a series of caves,
excavations in the rock, most gloomy abysses, of succes-
sive storeys in depth. Long chimneys give ventilation.
Above the surface they rise, like hooded well-covers.


Some are but covered with wire. Although accompanied
by the son of the proprietor in my descent, and each
provided with a candle, we were once fairly bothered to
find our way out fi om this labyrinth of caves, lined with
hundreds of thousands of bottles of wine.
Then the good stuff has to be prepared for the market.
. e English like it coloured and strong, while the Rus-
sians fancy it pale and sweet. An extra supply of
alcohol is given to the one, and plenty of sugar to the
other. The apparatus in the Dizy establishment for
putting this mixture into the bottles is very ingenious.
Nowhere but in this district can champagne wine be
made. The same vines planted in other parts of Prance
in Italy, Germany, and even Australia, may bear a
better grape, but will never give to wine that peculiar
flavour so admired. It is entirely owing to the con-
stituents of the soil, which is essentially calcareous, but
not chalky. This substance, too, makes admirable
carreau, »r sun-burnt brick, the material of which the
houses and walls of the country round are formed and
which last for centuries. The silicious (flinty) frao-’men-
tary stones are broken for road metal, like the auriferous
quartz of Victoria.
The Champagne merchants are princes. 51 Moet of
Epernay, realises a fefeulOUS ifiebihe. 51. Werle, the
possessor of the trade of Cliquot, for the name of which
he pays £12,000 a year, is said to have £40,000 annually
trom his business alone, and a larger sum from his in-
vestments. sladame Cliquot, now 80 years of age, is
declared to be worth two millions sterling. An inspec-
tion of the cellars and caves of these merchants will
convince one of the wealth of their possessors. What
geology does for Birmingham, Sheffield, Glasgow, and
Bendigo, it does for Champagne ; and accident, not
research of philosophers, reveals the treasure, and de-
velops the prosperity of the locality.
This year is very unfortunate for growers and manu-
facturers. Grapes there are, and of average quantity
and size; but the quality, from the excessive rain of the
summer, has suffered considerably. The grapes have
not ripened, the juices are not developed, and good wine
cannot be made. There will be plenty of inferior
liquor, sour and ligneous, but none of the admired cha-
racter. The only thing that can be done is to make a
wine to suit the market—to manufacture a champagne.
In 1846 and 1858, the grape was in perfection. The
wine, therefore, of those years must be mixed with the
present vinegar production, and helped by sugar and
brandy. Logwood, &c., will be in heavy requisition.
Sugar is so dear, being very much dearer in this pro-
tected country than in England, that it would be ruinous
to use much of that. Unfortunately, sulphate of lead
has the same property, and is thought in Paris to be
cheaper. Old wine, sugar, and brandy are put together,
in certain proportions, into a cask, rolled about few
thorough admixture, and the contents become ready for
assisting poor wines to lift their heads in the world
All this is very unfortunate for the first trial year of
French wines in England. Never mind-they on this
side will do the best they can for you. Be assured,
however, that the wines will be neither “light” nor i
cheap. For want of real wine, you must be content 1
with something called wine, and a good percentage of i
alcohol is necessary. Thus you may have the usual i
quality supposed to attend cheapness. True, better (
wines will be costly. You will, however, he in no want
oi champagne. Gooseberries, &c., will provide you with c
plenty. A difficulty may be supposed to exist, from the £
want of the true cork of the genuine champagne mer- i
chant; but this is got over by the careful purchase of "v
old corks from hotels, &c. Ingenuity, impudence, and r
fraud can supply the rest for the gents who must have t
champagne. s
LETTER XVI.
TEMPERANCE IN EASTERN PRANCE.
Eastern France has peculiarities of its own. In fact,
. -trance itself is so composite a nation that the Frenchman
- or one part is as different from his countryman of another
t district as from an Englishman himself.
; In the Central Eastern-so to speak—we have a people
: very dissimilar to the North-Eastern, Eastern Extreme,
or South-Eastern. Around Rheims, the ancient city, on
! the broad plains, an industrial agricultural population is
' scattered, contending with an ungrateful soil for their
, daily food, and reaping a better harvest on those ooca-
sionai rises which permit the growth of vines. They are
generally quiet, plodding, sober, conservative people;
regular at church, and exemplary in their conduct. The
inhabitants of the towns, especially of Rheims, have not
the same characteristics. Not better educated—or but
little better—they have not the same gentleness of
behaviour, and are not so submissive to authority, be it
legal °r clerical. The existence of manufactories among
them, chiefly of a spinning and weaving description,
gfves them many of those exponents of social character
found everywhere to prevail more or less among opera-
tives of their class. They congregate and talk, they
combine and act. If not given to reading, they are fond
of discussion; and their subject, as usual, is their real or
supposed grievance of position. The restrictions of the
press m France have not tied the tongues of Frenchmen:
and in Rheims, as in all manufacturing towns, the demo-
cratio spirit is rife, and the influence of religion but
The favourite place for the discussion of political
topics is the tavern. Sufficient excitement to this course
is given in the workshop, and they hail with pleasure
the evening hour, to enable them at leisure to carry on
the interesting conversation. But what may, in some
sense, have been originated from a love of talk, and a
passion for agitation, becomes at length a physical
necessity, and an inordinate craving. The cafe, the
auberge, the cabaret, is thus sought for its own gratifica-
tions, apart from the question of company. To use the
expression of a French political economist, “The cabaret
is tor them, above all things, a place where drink is sold.”
1 spent a week in that neighbourhood, and had the
opportunity of learning much from an English resident
conductmg an extensive fabrique. I got acquainted
Jt 6ry r mechaaic > a descendant of the
Huguenots of the South, and heard his opinions. Prom
/l Sult was obtained—that intemperance
prevailed, and that it was greatly on the increase. The drink
To » u ° means confined to wine, but included brandy
much as rtrofcTii Under the influence of as
... IteOligi the appeals of demagogues, the Rheims
men have proceeded on several occasions to riot and vio-
lence, particularly in the destruction of machinery, sup-
posed to invade the rights of home and free labour.
Unable to visit Lille, the North-Eastern seat of
factories, I found from inquiry that the amount of
intemperance there was productive of much social misery,
and was greatly in excess of previous times. The com-
parative dearness of wine drives the people there, it is
said, to other and worse liquors, “ which,” says one of
my French authorities, “gives to drunkenness a peculiar
character of heaviness and brutishness.”
At Rouen, the Northern manufacturing town, I
observed the vice. French authorities describe it as
given to “ much drinking.” One says that the work-
man “passes at the cabaret the greater part of his time
when not at work.” The atmosphere of their taverns is
mentioned as worse than Lille itself. The atmosphere
there is, if possible, attended with more degrading con-
sequences, A curious fashion, however, prevails with


what are called the better class of citizens. They are
thoroughly abstemious all the week, using only water at
their meals, and never taking alcohol in any shape while
at work; but compensate for this rigid sobriety by a
regular debauch on the Sabbath. One Parisian author
tells the following story:—Conversing with a very pretty
young lassie, engaged at a mill, he found out that she was
to be married to a young man whose principles were not
exactly of the Father Mathew standard. Deeming her
step one fraught with danger to her future happiness,
and being interested in her welfare, he endeavoured to
point out the indiscretion of her coarse. She received
the advice in good part, but, like in most similar cases,
was resolved to follow her heart in spite of her judgment.
The gentleman was urging his case with the rather
pouting damsel, who was most heroically defending her
lover, and he added, “ But he is a regular drunkard.”
“ Oh, no, no! ” she replied with great energy, “he only
gets drunk upon Sundays.”
Upon this large manufacturing population of North
and North-Eastern Prance, few moral agencies are
brought to bear. The men will not go to church, and
too generally ckerisli opinions of a sceptical nature.
But I was pleased to know that one auxiliary to virtue
was in active existence among them. The Order of St.
Vincent de Paul have extensive establishments there.
They educate the children, they relieve the distressed,
they visit the sick. If not decided missionaries of Tem-
perance, they assiduously direct their attention most
prominently to the prominent evil about them—drunken-
ness. I have been assured that they do inculcate the
duty and necessity of Total Abstinence as the remedy
for that terrible vice. They steal upon the hearts of the
inebriate. They make no platform addresses, and cir-
culate no printed appeals. But they take the occasion
of sickness, when they call to administer comfort; they
embrace the opportunity of distress, when they come
with relief ; they seize any chance, when the heart of
the proud mechanic is bowed and softened, and then
they employ their offices of gentle reproof and of per-
suasive appeal. I care not to be told that these Brethren
and Sisters of Vincent de Paul are allied now with the
designs of the hated Jesuits ; I see, at least, that, while
the poor and labouring classes of crowded towns are
unheeded by their fellows generally, these quiet men
and women are actively employed in the promotion of
their temporal good. 1 cannot, therefore, but hail their
philanthropic mission; and Ido hope and believe yet to
see that, when the claims of Temperance are more
recognised in France, these will be our efficient and
loving-hearted coadjutors in the Total Abstinence
movement.
When at Strasburg, I found myself among a strictly
German population. The province of Alsace has not
been long annexed to France, and its sympathies,
appearance, manners, religion, and language are wholly
German. In the event of any collision between Prussia
and France, serious inconvenience may be experienced
by the Emperor in this very district. It is the great
seat of Protestantism in France. The majority of
Frenchmen, so called, are there Lutherans.
The country people are, as usual, remarkably different
frem the Strasburg residents. They are rough, ignorant,
hardworking, but generally virtuous and sober, though
by no means so sober as the agricultural population of
Central and Southern France. It was with deep interest
I looked upon the Alsatian hills, running parallel with
the Ehine for eighty miles. There it was that the
benevolent labours of Oberlin were known. In those
pretty valleys his name is still a household word. Even
the memory of his brother, whose funeral monument I
saw, seemed more valued for the pastor’s sake. Among
those rural mountain haunts, also, were the remains of
the very peculiar religionists, known as the Anabaptists
of the Vosges. Simple in their habits, singular in their
attire, exclusive in their dealings, these remnants of the
persecuted preserve, with their faith, the esteem of all
for the sternness of their virtues. I was almost sorry,
then, to be told that the factories were increasing among
the mountains, as I feared the vices of the institution
would go thither also. But I heard of the zealous labours
of noble-minded manufacturers for the moral elevation
of their workmen, and I felt that Oberlin had not sown
seed in vain.
Circumstances are not so favourable in Strasburg
itself; and it must be with particular relation to that
city that the harsh language of M. Audigaune is to be
applied:—“ Drunkenness is the endemic vice of Alsace.”
The very fact that it is a common adage among them,
that “No man can be hard at work who is not hard at
the bottle,” would at once indicate the community to be
no sober one. Some persons assert that, within the last
few years, in some weaving localities on the Ehine, less
wine is drunk in cabarets, and more consumed at home.
Even this is some modification of the evil. But still it
is a recognised fact that, whether owing to the low price
of wine, the cheap rate of beer, or national taste, a much
more _ extended system of intemperance prevails tkfefe
than is to be found in most places out of Paris.
There is one evil connected with the manufactories
of France generally, to which my attention has been
directed, and which, if not the offspring of drinking
habits, is developed and maintained by their indulgence.
I allude to licentiousness of the sexes. A very low class
of morality prevails in all French manufacturing towns.
It is less the existence of a large band of prostitutes, as
in Britain, than of alliances of an illegal and improper
nature. Girls, working in the factories, attach them-
selves to mechanics, and live with them. Such unions
are of very uncertain tenure, and the bonds of fidelity
are by no means scrupulously observed. Many of these
young females come up from the country, leaving friends
and moral restraints, to be suddenly and violently
plunged into the excitement and vices of the town.
Friendless, they stand exposed to temptation, and per-
ceive themselves surrounded by a public opinion which
is antagonistic to virtue. For awhile they may main-
tain their better principles. At length, they gradually
slide into that looseness of habit which leads to open
profligacy.
But, as the best authorities assert, here, as in Britain,
such moral declension is occasioned and is accompanied
by indulgence in drink. It is that which lowers the
moral sense of the male workmen. It is that by which
he hopes to assail and undermine the virtue of his female
co-worker. It is that, little by little, which subdues
the moral strength of the girl. It is that which com-
pletes her ruin, and retains her in her shame, Thlg }§
forcibly expressed by M. Parent-Duchatelet, who thus
records the influence of drink upon his fair country-
women “ Sometimes it is a means to beat down the
resistance of young girls who have preserved their
virtue; sometimes, in developing and in taking the
proportions of a true passion; it carries these young
girls to prostitute themselves to procure the means to
satisfy a taste which becomes irresistible.” Thus it is
that, in manufacturing towns especially, the sobriety of
French women, elsewhere a proverb, yields to the
seduction and degrading influences surrounding them.
Their inebriety is at once a cause and an effect of the
intemperance so alarmingly spreading among the fac-
tory men of France.
If intemperance continue to grow in that country at
the_ rate acknowledged within the last ten years, the
claim of being the most drunken nation of Europe will
be soon contested with Britain by her ally across the
Channel, in spite of many opposing circumstances, and
notwithstanding the use of the “light wines of France.”


LETTER XVII.
TEMPERANCE AND CRIME IN PRANCE.
John Bell is generally regarded as the most conceited
fellow in the world, Jonathan excepted ; hut occasionally
he has morbid fits of dissatisfaction with himself when
he is disposed to think everybody better off than he
It is m such a humour that he looks upon France as the
Paradise of Sobriety, the Light-Wine Eden. Ao-ain as
the Times faithfully reports to him all the murders ’all
the thefts, all the abominable things done in corners
and the Paris Moniteur just don’t give all such precise
information of the Vineland,—poor John rails lustily
against the depravity of England, and extols the gentle-
ness and honesty of his neighbour over the Channel.
Well, we will take a glance at the official records and
see what the French say of themselves. Their mode of
keeping accounts is different from ours, and renniVoo „
little study. The leader must pick out the Sl af he
tbfnkf’+r W fv, haVO Assize Courts - We learn that,
thanks to the excellence of the police, cases of robbery
have decreased from 2,411 in 18-52 to 1,822 in
while those of violence have fallen from 232 to 115 It
must be remembered, however, that 1851 and 1852 Were
years of great misrule and excitement. But, on the
fStn IoT P d fraudulent bankruptcies have risen
rWf 10 i, s ' Poiso ™ n .? ha -s gone from 25 to 36 cases,
inranticides have received an accession from 184 to 206
Charges of rape upon adults are 188 against 228; but
that crime, when the victim has been a child, has in-
creased from 611 in 1852 to 650 in 1856. There has
therefore been little change for the bettor in morality
where the supervision of the police is not so near at
Crimes against property have fallen from 744 in 1826
to 659 in 1857. Ibis is directly owing to improved
p , o e „'„ Lut cnmes a s a,nsfc persons, which were as 256
m 1826, amounted to 393 in 1851, and 341 in 1857—a
terrible lesson. This bears more directly to show the
increase of drunkenness than anything else. Violence
ot this kind is more the product of that vice than is the
pursuit of theft. A man must be somewhat sober to
steal, but is in most cases excited by drink when led to
commit an assault. A proof of the connection between
crime and drink is seen in the fact that in France where
women seldom indulge, that sex only forms one-fifth of
the criminal class. Moreover, the proportion of unmar-
ried men is greatly in excess of the married.
A good deal of nonsense was written some years asa
mentsi^ 8 ® 8f -ore eLcated depart-
-1 ranee, as an evidence that school trainin g was
if such C mr a is y fa j vou ™ We t 0 vi riue. But it appears that,
seauence of th r ° dU i Ced ™ ost criminals, it was not in con-
sequence of their education, but rather because, as heino-
oh“foed Clal T ; b ntreS °« p ,°P u ' ation . more drink was to be
obtained. I bus we find that, of 7,317 persons 3 307
were completely illiterate, 2,630 had a slight knowledge
a or d T r in t ? ’» 1, ° 22 ° ould read and -rite and
eXiLtfon 6 ' tWentleth Part - had receh ' ed a ***
But there is a little more crime. In 261 Correctional
1 fb 8 ’ D? \T-, tha " 187,769 < & aire * wero brought
before them in 1807, affecting no leas than 229,467 per-
n D qno P f m 6Se Ca ffl 85,737 - ere simple robbery;
11,909 for blows; 46,759 for infraction of the forest
laws; illicit cafes, 1,604; false weights, 8,292; defama-
tion, 3,033 ; violence to functionaries, chiefly when in
liquor, 6,994; rebellion, 2,546, &c. Of these, 120 327
were punished with fines only.
Ihe Tribunals of Police of that year had a heavy list.
It was acknowledged to be a very great increase upon
former years, and included the majority of instances of
in t f?o P o eranCe- At the 2,681 tribunals there were settled
404,333 cases, concerning 636,834 accused. Of these,
ill * 1-. were an( i 30,542 were imprisoned.
Jo show the connection between crime and drink I
may here cite the statistics of Britain for 1857, There
were punished 54,982 drunken men and 20,877 drunken
women The list of common outrages for that year
stood thus .-dT.iee men, 13,529 women. The excess
pt female criminals over France is thus accounted for
m spite of the generally assumed lower tone of female
virtue among the French.
The Government at Paris are not blind to the fact
that intoxicating liquors are directly or indirectly the
cause of most cases of crime, and that the liquor-traffic
is a decided nuisance to any commonwealth. But with
a people like these, any interference with their pleasures
would be resented more fiercely than the infringement
ot their citizen rights. Taxes may be levied by a sham
liiruament, and scarcely a complaint be heard. The
press may he fettered, and few outward utterances urged.
But touch a Parisian in the freedom of his
and a revolution maybe expected. What was it that
precipitated the fall of Louis Philippe but his absurd
attempt to prevent a public dinner being celebrated?
Even the rule of Napoleon, strong and stern as it is,
dare not trench much upon the indulgences of the
people. Only the other day, the rise of duty upon
tobacco has excited such an unmistakable movement in
the faubourgs of Paris as to make the Government
uneasy.
How then, can it be expected that drinking-houses
would be checked, or too much burden laid upon the
liberty ot their evil practices ? Especially is this appa-
rent when one reflects that these places, in their multi-
plication and their infamous arts to promote the sale of
their liquors, are as prominent a source of the public
revenue as in Britain. But, notwithstanding all this
so urgent has been the call for some action in restraint’
that a prohibitory enactment has been issued. Although
. admit that it was not carried out very strictly, vet°it
is patent that it was held desirable and necessary for
I h® > 3ro y ern - I n e nt to possess more power over those resorts
or the idle and dissolute.
~d t ?k ay s a id > also, that one class of evil only was
W ° f ’ and that U was to that alone
that the measure was adopted. Still the fact and
principle remain the same. Napoleon saw the surging
*s,® revolution around him, whose tumultuous waves
=7 tbe de struoUon of the very pillar of State, and
not merelythe maintenance of his own personal autho-
rity. lie ascertained that the cafes were the hotbeds of
rebellion; that there the conspirators met to concoct
their plans; that, under the excitement of drink, every
kind of disorder was welcomed; and he determined to
charge these barricades against law and order. It was
under the peculiar circumstances of 1851 that this ruler
issued the following remarkable proclamation, which
tells some strange truths in its preamble. I try a trans-
lation ; ■
“ In the name of the French Republic,
“The President of the Republic,
“ Upon the report of the Minister of the Interior, —
“ Considering that the continually growing multiplicity
of cafes, cabarets, and other places of drinks, is a cause
oi disorder and demoralisation ;
Considering that, in the country parts especially,
these establishments have become, in great number,
places of meeting and affiliation for secret societies, and
have favoured in a deplorable manner the progress of
bad passions;—
“ Considering that it is the duty of the Government
to protect, by efficacious measures, public manners and
public health;—


“ Decrees;
“Art. I.—No cafe, cabaret, or other retail place of
drinks to be consumed upon the premises, can be opened
in future without the permission of administrative
authority.
“ Art. IX.—The closing of these establishments desig-
nated in the first article can be ordered by the authority
of the prefect, after condemnation for contravention of
the laws and regulations which concern these profes-
sions, as a measure of public security.
“Art. lll.—Any individual who shall open a cafe,
cabaret, or retail place for drinking to he consumed upon
the premises, without previous authorisation, or con-
trary to an arrest of closing, taken by virtue of the pre-
ceding article, shall he taken before the Correctional
.tribunals, and punished by a fine of from 25 to 600
irancs, and an imprisonment of from six days to six
months. The establishment shall he closed immediately.
. Art. IV. -The Minister of the Interior is charged
with trie exB6iiii6ii of the present decree.
“ Given at the Palace of the Elyscos, the 29th of
December, 1851.
“Louis Napoleon Bonaparte.
“A. db Morny.”
This will he admitted to he a remarkable document.
By some it will he classed along with Napoleon’s decrees
for the gagging of the press. There is one difference to
he observed, however—that the difficulty of carrying
out the first was greater than the last, as we find com-
paratively few instances of cafes being thus subjected
to law. Although there appeared in the decree many
line and proper sentiments upon the immorality of the
traffic, and the necessity of Government to shield the
people from moral evil, yet we know that we are not to
expect in Paris much official recognition of the abstract
principles of virtue, however much they may regard
public decorum.
LETTER XVIII.
TEMPERANCE IN PARIS
The longer I remain here, the more is the scope of my
observations enlarged, and the better am I able to
estimate the drinking propensities of the people. As
politics are prohibited and religion is despised, there is
nothing hut amusement to occupy the public thought,
and rule the public heart. Such may be said to consist
of two objects—women and wine. The theatres, casi-
noes, and other places of resort, are frequented for the
first, and cafes for the last. The pictures attracting the
attention of street strollers are delineations of enjoyment
with one or the other. But I always notice the glass
to he the prominent feature in association with lascivious-
ness. The favourite subject of the artist’s pencil seems
to be the connection of the two vices, so portrayed as
not to repel by the outrageous grossness of either, hut
certainly to stimulate the animal passions in the highest
degree. Over the walls of Paris now may he seen the
advertising illustration of a work on life in Paris.
There you have a company of young men and women
carousing and love-making. They are all elegantly
dressed, and the apartment is finely furnished. Various
degrees of intoxication are there exhibited. One poor
fellow is quite oblivious of what is passing; a belle dame
is exultingly emptying a glass of wine down his neck.
This is only one illustration of many.
They like to joke about drunkenness. One story I
heard the other day. A man was observed lying
down, very far gone, and muttering these words to him-
self: “They say a glass supports a man; here have I
been drinking forty glasses and cannot stand at all.”
I was amused by an advertising picture at a tobacco-
nist’s. A sottish-looking fellow is met by his wife,
who begins at once to charge him with having been
to the public-house. He defends himself, and says he
has only been to buy a Jean Nicot. “ What is that ? ”
inquired she. Her sober partner replies, “It is a pipe,
of such a kind that the smoker of it is never thirsty.”
“ Pray tell me,” says the anxious wife, “ where that
is to be got, and I will have a regular supply of it
for you.”
Yet, there is still the impression among travellers
that none are drunk here. One told me to-day that he
had been on the Continent for a year, and had seen less
drunkards than in one day in London. Taking this for
one of the current wholesale remarks, I quietly asked
him if he had ever seen ten men drunk any day in
London. He was a little brought up, and admitted
that he had not observed so many as that. “Nor have
I seen so many in Paris,” said I, “ but one evening here
I counted five drunk in the streets.”
interrogating a very sensible and pious Scotch me-
chanic, resident five years in Prance, I got this remark :
“ They are much the same as we are.” As to men of
his own class of labour, he considered those in France
as drunken as the artisans of Scotland. There was a
little difference between them, however; the one took a
glass, and went to work, while the other spent hours at
his tippling. Then, again, the British workman got on
the spree, and then wrought like a horse to make up for
lost time ; whereas his French brother never had such
an attack of industry before, during, or after a debauch.
They take Saint Monday, and often Tuesday, though
willing to work on Sunday forenoon, if not otherwise
engaged at the cafe. Brandy, he said, was the favourite
liquor with them. They drank wine when they wanted
to sit long and lazily at their cups. They lived more
miserably than their wages would suppose necessary, as
they wanted much for drink. My friend from the North
furthermore added, that being requested by his minister
to give his view of the drinking question, he had written
to say that the sober tale was a thorough delusion,
though he admitted that they showed less than the
English even if they drank more.
The married women of the lowest classes are, also, I
am sorry to say, addicted to intemperance. As their
London sisters, they like something short; but like
brandy instead of gin. A small glass of this liquor costs
a penny or three halfpence. At the dancing saloons for
the common people, intoxication is not unfrequently
seen among the females at the close of the exercise. Of
course, this is to be expected with the most degraded of
the class of prostitutes ; hut a sense of propriety, from
motives of worldly prudence, restrains others.
A large number of concert rooms, of the “ |fgp-and-
easy” character, flourish in Paris. They are in or in
connection with cafes. On a stage sit some beautifully-
dressed girls, who sing during the evening. At tables
the men place themselves to listen to them, chat among
themselves, smoke their cigars, and drink what they
prefer, from coffee to brandy, brandy being, by the way,
drank as well with the coffee aforesaid. At one of these
establishments I saw nearly a thousand persons. The
ladies, who were of a certain order, formed about a sixth
of the whole. Here the variation was dancing for sing-
ing. I well remember, at the introduction of the polka,
what a frightful cry of “ Shame !” there was in Britain ;
and yet, after awhile, it made its way into society, and
is now sanctioned in circles once resonant with condem •
nations of it. Whether the present popular dance of
the “ Rigolboche” here will get acknowledged among
you, time will show. Let me describe it for the benefit
of the curious, who are dying to know, but dare not ask.
First, then, as to the music; it is about the most odd,
eccentric sort imaginable, but really attractive from its


other traders'' Thu"- ° *** dnd «>£
„ , loTach ... *3,Too
Wholesale dealers . 50 « ... 15.881
very singularity and intensity. The sexes form two
long parallel lines. The gentlemen advance, throwing
their arms and legs about in the most grotesque and ex-
traordinary manner; at times squatting, springing up
jerking their arms, flinging their legs, and altogether
making themselves highly ridiculous. The finale of all
IS pitching one leg upward and onward. The ladies act
tbe sa “ e manner, aiming to destroy as much as
possible the charm of grace supposed to belong to
dancing. Some of them, I observed, well skilled in the
accomplishment of the projectile force of limb. One
succeeded in throwing her leg over a gentleman’s head,
which was slightly lowered for the dancing arch. She
could easily throw up her leg as high as her head, with-
disturbmg her equilibrium.
~ Ia tbe interval, the performers regaled themselves at
the tables, as the others. All sorts of liquors were to be
had, including also coffee and sugar-and-water. The
ladies chiefly seemed to confine their drink to these non-
mtoxicants and beer and wine. The beer is brought in
glass jugs, and drank from long narrow glass. Seltzer
water is often taken with the wine. I must confess that
during the two hours I remained with that large assem-
blage, I did not notice any great impropriety, beyond
some hifhlv°so' e b f^ 9f Many werlexcited,
’ but T none drunk in the English accepta-
for T llft in™.' , may be otherwise at°a later hour,
strioted the ntt° 9 lock ' , But tbe P rice °f admission re-
-8 attendance to respectable people, so called.
enfL ladleS m a i? pear to pay a hominal subscription for
a, na ®'. Tbe y aTe the seduction for the gentlemen to
spend their money there in drink.
visitor in Paris cannot but be painfully struck
with the dissipation of its inhabitants. And yet, over
all the scenes of laughing pleasure and Bacchanalian
extravagance, the shades of the past are hovering. But
“ d blood y reminiscences of history trouble not
the heedless crowd, bent on the enjoyment of the passing
hour. Vive la bagatelle!” is the motto of the Parisians”
.Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.” It was
always so. Amidst the massacres of the “ Reign of
terror” they danced, even though around the guillotine.
When, after the battle of Paris, the allied armies camped
for the night in the Champs Eiysees, the dance went on
Ihe cholera spread its black wings over Kotre Dame,
and its blasting breath sent many home to the tombs of
1 ere la Chaise, yet the Boulevards still echoed the
laughmg strain, and the jingling of wine glasses mingled
with the wailing of widows. And now, with a chained
press, a sham Parliament, a burdening debt, a decreasing
population, a dead faith, they quaff the cup that gives
oblivion to the past, a smile to the present, and for-
getfulness of the future. Even on the Sabbath Day
sacred to repose and piety, the Parisians will crowd in
many thousands to the Fete of Waters. Yes 1:1- u
28&5K % V* k *
eternity P y a daidc Passage to the gloomy sea of
of liAums - Here we have tbe tax u P° n vendors
t iquors, graduating according to the population of
the commune or district, those in the smaller paying less
than the retailers of larger places. The numhfr of
establishments for sale is also appended
Communes. ov
Under 4,000 pop u lati °n ... 6 each ... 223,754
From 4,000 to 6,000 ... 8 “ 11709
From 6,000 to 10,000 ~ 10 “ i
From 10,000 to 16,000 ... 12 “ 8 089
From 15,000 to 30,000 ... 14 “ 74m
From 20,000 to 30,000 ... 16 “ ’ y’vsq
From 30,000 to 50,000 ... 18 “ 7^22
From 50,000 upwards ... 20 “ is’964
Brewers 20 to 50 “ 3) ’ 16 g
■ p ans is not included in this account, as the tax there
is collected upon the drink consumed. But assuming
fw° p m ! T^ ere are 20 ’ 000 similar P laces sab
Wl tv t h tt Ve m rance a total of above three hundred
and thirty thousands establishments for alcohol.
The wine duty varies in the departments from 00
S f lXpence > *9 centimes, or one shilling,
ino right of consumption,” so called, subjects retailers
The f a sWUiogs a gallon for spirits.
~ of retail , 15 . 15 Per cent upon the value of
Cider nVrTtf preserved , ln brandy are subject to duty.
( from peara ), and hydromel (from honey),
Jw v * fivepenoe u P° n a hectolitre, or 22 gallons—a
57 OOo'ooo S f U °p' In „ 18 ® 6 ’ charges were made upon
67,C00,000 of gallons of these three light drinks valued
of retail” ? mepeac ? a g a lfon. In I 860; also, the “right
, W ll u P° n wme was as follows : —The amount was
levied upon about 83,000,000 of gallons. These were
valued at 340,722,435 francs, and the duty, at 15 per
cent, was 35,000,000, or about £1,400,000 sterling
Other payments upon this liquor brought the tax to
nearly double that sum. There is, also, a beer duty on
fabrication, or manufacture, amounting to two shillings
a hectolitre (23 gallons) for strong beer, and sixpence for
106 OMnnn f 6, ‘Hi dl i ty was levied upon about
106,000,000 of gallons of the first, and 35,000,000 of the
other. Then,_ again, there are “rights of entry,”
which are levied upon towns of less than 4,000 inhabi-
tants. Besides the tax on drink in Paris, the citizens
b y i 7Q« ntr Tm Ce P Uty- The , ootroi of Paris was established
1852 tint thi h V a r T® les . sen , ed b y the Emperor in
in L ?■ y fl “ ds rec .mved an ample compensation
n the extension of the city boundaries from the old
,wf 3 v th !-r lls ° fthe town ' Tbe octroi is u Pon all
■ ™K nab ! e articles—cattle, sheep, provisions, wood, iron
and furmture. For a beast, the charge is 435.; a cow
285., a calf, 95.; a pig, ll s .; an d a sheep, 3s. The
19 984 S OB9 aS f beelL Ter y co . nsldera bfo- In 1809, it realised
19,984,982 and in 1859, 53,863,487. Of the
atter, the sum levied upon drinks was 21,731,185 francs
brandvYoill 1 Pa tf S 4 *, d ;/ gallon > but in bottles, 7|d,
brandy, IOJd.; cider, l§d.; beer, Id. to IJd. *
ofL h gXns a erch th l follOWing qUantiti6S ’ in becto litres
gH|jBffMl6Bfi§Ußi P tion”: ’ '* ’’ 595,181 - Sfi
Duty of entrance at Paris 1,041,761 ... 21,005 rs’si2
Duty of entry 4,202,955 ... 1,245,655 " j 252,’838
14,874,872 4,828,251 1,021,233
The duty upon beer and its sale realised in 1856 the
sum of £5,900,000. Besides all this, there are licences
or patents in Paris, which in 18X6 came to 2,563,562
trancs, and rose in 1846 to nine millions of francs.
I feel strongly tempted to ask pardon for troubling
your readers to jump over so many figures; but I know
Manchester has the reputation of being not only learned
in arithmetic, but with a positive love for the numerals
especially when coming out strongly upon the credit
sub 0 the ledger. Suc£ folks may |
the interest with which social science men regard fio-ures
unconnected with their own profit, but indicating the
affairs of humanity. As I write for these gentlemen, as
well as for the general public, I will not apologise for
the occasional intrusion of statistics. ‘ °


LETTER XIX.
TEMPERANCE IN PARIS.
Previous articles have shown the serious increase of
intemperate habits in the manufacturing districts of
France, as well as in the capital. While the consump-
tion of wine has hardly kept pace with the population,
that of beer and brandy has more than doubled within
the last few years. France has by no means enlarged
its produce of wine compared with other countries, and
hence the dearness of that article there in comparison
with other parts. Beer and spirits prevail in places
where wine is less drank. Thus, we learn that 100 litres
of wine form the annual consumption per head in Por-
tugal, 57 in Austria, 56 in Switzerland, 35 in Spain, 2
in Prussia, 2 in the United States, and 1J in Holland.
The increase, therefore, of brandy-drinking in Paris,
B8H§B) IBS Lilte) is said to have arisen from the
want of wine; and yet we find that that article has not
by any means ceased to be in favour, though fluctuating
according to season and prices. _ The following figures
will show the relative consumption of wine in Paris; —
From 1781 to ’B6 it stood at 121 litres ; from 1801 to ’OB,
at 156 ; 1809 to ’lB, XU ; 1819 to ’3O, 120; 1831 to ’4O,
100 ; 1841 to ’6O, 100$; 1851 to ’54, 43 ; 1866, 99 ; 1857,
101; 1858, 126. Thus, we find that while the beer and
spirits have so greatly increased, wine has not been far
behind. The conclusion, then, is, that the French are a
more drinking people in spite of their light wines. It
might further be shown [that they are more drinking
than some of their neighbours whose wines are heavier
than theirs in alcoholic character. Habits of intem-
perance are greatly influenced by other causes than the
particular liquor in fashion.
For curiosity may be given other figures illustrative
of the fluctuations in wine-drinking in Great Britain.
From 1790 to ’99, the quantity stood at I'9o ; from 1800
to’o9, at 1-87; 1810 to ’19,1-64; 1820 to ’29,1-01;
1830 to’39, 1-09; 1840 to ’49, 1-05; 1850, 1-08; 1851,
105; 1852,1-05; 1867, 177; 1858, 1 01. We are not,
therefore, in Britain, quite so wine-drinking a people
as we were even fifty years ago. But, as M. Maurice
Block writes, “In consequence of the treaty of com-
merce recently concluded between France and Eng-
land, it is supposed that the English tariff will con-
tribute to develop this consumption, and especially will
have an effect to augment our importations of wine in
the United Kingdom.” Thus far, however, these
expectations have not been realised. The English still
hold to their beer, and the Scotch to their whisky.
They have no aspirations for the composition wines of
France. Even Champagne , “always charming for women
and youth,” fails to be greatly increased; although we
are assured by Dr. Gaubert that excellent wine of that
character can be made, without any juice of the grape , at
the small charge of sevenpence a bottle.
But to return to Paris. No one with the slightest
acquaintance with that city can fail to observe the
alarming development of licentiousness. It may not be
so obtrusive as in England, being robbed of its coarsest
and most repulsive characteristics by the superior taste
and refinement of society; but of its extent this much
may be said, in the language of one who knows the
Parisians well, “ The community is corrupt to its core.”
It permeates all classes, and influences the coteries of the
wealthy and educated as well as the resorts of the poor
and ignorant. As this evil is by no means greater, if
so great, in the country parts of France, as in the most
moral portions of Britain, we may at once assume that
the far greater consumption of alcohol in Paris may he
the provoking cause for its superior exhibition of the vices.
Reference has previously been made, in an earlier
article, to the effects of the stimulation of a partial
drunkenness in the production of a debauched moral
sense. Now we turn simply to the class professionally
belonging to the vicious circles.
M. Parent-Duohatelet says, “We must place at the
head of the faults of prostitutes gormandizing and the
love of wine and strong liquors. They contract this
taste early, and this taste finishes by plunging some of
them into the last degree of brutishness.” Alas !if such
can be said of the unhappy women on the streets of
Paris, who so seldom appear to the stranger under the
influence of liquor, what would our French author think
of the habits of that class in Loudon, Glasgow, Dublin,
Manchester ?
When reduced by necessity to live by this course, they
know the auxiliary of drink is essential to their means of
existence, and rely upon its aid as the chief provocative
of that demoralisation of feeling which shall bring them
at once victims and providers. “Hence we have seen that
in Pans the favourite liquor with the lowest of that class
is punch. As an aggravation of the misery of the
women, and a further plunging of them into intemper-
ance, a French writer tells us that they are constrained
to drink more than they would from another cause; for,
says be,_ “ men, knowing how strong drink aggravates
syphilitic disorders, imagine that the girl who does not
drink is only sober because she is ill; and they make her
drink to assure themselves of her state of health.” Need
we wonder, then, that the same author adds, “ Thus one
sees them often, unable to regain their lodgings, sleep
upon the steps of churches, under carriage entries, or
fall in the midst of streets. Those who have preserved
some trace of reason enter the guard-house, and are shut
up there for the night.” All this is certainly not appli-
cable to the higher class of prostitutes in Paris, who
know that excess would be prejudicial to their calling;
but it marks the condition of the mass, and tends to
destroy in them any hope of a return to the walks of
virtue.
Strong and continued efforts have been worthily made
to^ restrain this fearful evil in Paris. The order of St.
Vincent de Paul have especially directed themselves to
it. The male members of that community have sought,
by instruction, by literature, by personal appeal, to act
upon young men, particularly those of the working class.
The female members, on the other hand, by domiciliary
visits, endeavour to reach the hearts of the prostitutes
themselves. Asylums are ready to receive them, and
the language of affection and piety is employed to win
them, if possible, to virtue and to God. But what says
Duohatelet? “ Drink alone has rendered fruitless these
efforts of the Sisters of Charity.”
The destruction of life among these unhappy <nrl«
though unequal to that of our outcasts, is appalling in
magnitude If they suffer less, it is only because they
drink less than those in the streets of London. For the
same reason it is that their companionship, de°rading as
it is, is not so brutalising to youth as that of the more
drunken and swearing prostitutes of Britain.
The lowest, coarsest, and most self-deteriorating asso-
ciations of prostitution in Paris are found, as elsewhere,
with the public-house interest. The very facility of open-
ing such places in the capital of France increases the
temptation to tamper with this foul means of extending
business. In some parts of the city magnificent cafes may
be. seen, gilded and mirrored, in which men may call for
any liquor desired, and be waited upon by beautiful
women. These professed servants of the proprietor are,


in reality, of abandoned character. Their dress, man-
ner, speech, and general demeanour, form attractions to
the house, and provocations for expenditure. In all
other respects, the establishment furnishes proof of its
design. The cabinets noir of Parisian taverns have a
reputation that renders this city of palaces the hell of
modern civilisation.
The police view such places as the dens of infamy.
They are the refuges of blacklegs and thieves of all
descriptions. Many women in some of these haunts are
professed pickpockets, and add to the wealth of the
tavern establishment by the three-fold products of rob-
bery, drinking, and prostitution. We are assured that
these exist in all parts of Paris. One French author
says, “ They are, so to speak, innumerable ; but we find
them particularly congregated in parts where the me-
chanics and low people congregate.” He declares,
further, “ Drunkenness, which exists, so to speak, in
permanence, in these sorts of reunions, occasions them to
give themselves up to those disorders which would never
be allowed in the houses of ordinary prostitution.”
According to a politic Ir§S6h law, ¥BfflBn require to
be licensed before they can exercise the trade of the
streets. This enables the Government to enter their
houses for the restraint of disorder and the prevention of
disease. But in these taverns of Paris, called as they may
be after the names of cafes, estaminets, See., indulgence
in vice is unchecked, the grossest violations of public
decency are maintained, and the foulest of physical
affections is propagated in the community, because the
women there are masked as servants, though known by
the police to be employed in another character. Truly
has one remarked of these vile resorts, “ There exists
with regard to this an universal opinion, that the most
badly-kept tolerated house is a model place beside these
harbours of vice.”
No words can be too strong in condemnation of this
development of the licensing system of Paris. To those
who are so enamoured of free-trade principles as to admire
the English system of brothels and the French system
of taverns, we cannot but commend thispicture of the con-
sequences of almost indiscriminate sale of strong drinks.
With such an exhibition of Parisian life, how can we
wonder at the fact that marriages are so rare, that births
are so uncommon, and that the illegitimate children
about equal those of the legitimate! How can we help
a conviction that France is not only corrupt, but that,
decreasing in population as in virtue, it must gradually
lose its prestige among the nations of Europe, and fall,
in spite of its military glory, as a just retribution for its
neglect of the organic and moral laws.
LETTER XX.
TEMi'biiANCE in fkance.
In bringing my remarks to a conclusion, I must again
mention certain results of my continental inquiries upon
Temperance.
Drunkenness does not depend mainly upon the
character of the liquor consumed. The German-French
get crunk upon beer, the Breton and Norman-French
upon eider, and the Parisians upon wine. The Southern
French and the Italians do not get drunk, though using
a wine of twice or thrice the potency of that upon which
the Northern French will get intoxicated.
Drunkenness is chiefly confined abroad to the manu-
facturing districts with Teutonic, Latin, or Greek races,
and much less then with the last two than the first one •
while it prevails alike in the agricultural and manufac-
turing localities with the Celtic race, as the North-
West of France.
Drunkenness is decidedly upon the increase abroad,
according to statistics and the best social authorities.
This_ is the case not where strong wines are produced,
but in the region of the light, weak wines only. The
growth of the vice is accompanied with a great increase
of indulgence in beer and spirits; but this appears
rather as an effect than a cause of the demoralisation.
The evil is more deeply seated than the mere use of
brandy. Intemperance there, as in Britain, is more
from the operation of social circumstances, and, espe-
cially, the existence of drinking customs, so called, from
the congregation of masses, a low tone of morals, a
strong development of animal energy, and the want of
superior and suitable elevating agencies.
Drunkenness, though sustaining, and, to a great
degree, originating, the social evil, is not necessarily the
exponent of a people much given to incontinence; for
the Southern Italians, though more sober than the
Germans, are not, perhaps, equally virtuous in the
family.
Wine, on the'Oontinent, is necessarily an introducer
to the stronger fluids. Fortunately, abroad, public sen-
timent among the virtuous is set in against the use of
spirits; in this respect France and Italy present a supe-
rior moral development to North Britain. Where, how-
ever, that healthful and conservative influence is over-
whelmed by other and lower associations, brandy and
absinthe are used. It is found that wine, as the less
begets that alcoholic furor, only to be fully
gratified in the stronger drink. No drunken French-
man began upon brandy.
The extension of commerce, and the march of intel-
lect, seem to be connected abroad with the development
of intemperance. The most prosperous and the best
educated communities appear, unhappily, the most
drunken. This may prove that the common usages of
trade, and the ordinary character of instruction, are far
from being according to a perfect model.
Railways, everywhere the great levellers of society,
have not operated most favourably for the cause of
sobriety in France. They convey less of the simplicity
and virtue of the peasant to the town than of the
pseudo-civilisation of the city, with its refinements and
vice, to the rustic of the fields.
In the of Franco and the country parts of
Italy, by all testimonies, intemperance is little known ;
and yet there the common wine has twice and even three
times the alcoholic strength of the North French and
Rhine light wines. But two things must be borne in
mind in relation to this subject, the physical constitu-
tion ot the people, and the social circumstances of their
PSHUgi 1 IlOy aro gentle, and even weak to delicacy.
They are a sparse, scattered population, seldom meet-
ing in numbers. They are simple in manners, frugal in
fare, unostentatious in appearance. They are occupied
chiefly on their own little plots of land, which yield
them no great supply, but yet furnish their home. It is
true that their little farms excite the contempt of tra-
velling English squires, the lords of broad acres, and
brutish workmen; but if the small freeholder have not
the subsoil plough and the reaping machine, he has
independence, a coptented ruind, and a happy fireside.
With the natural bungling of fallen human nature,
we somehow manage to convert the blessings of a pro-
gressive civilisation into some rather unsatifactory social
results. _ I fear, from my long state of isolated bar-
barism in the Bush ot Australia, that I am no adequate
judge in such matters. But 1 cannot help expressing
my deep regret to find, after nearly twenty years’
absence from Europe, that, alongside of an almost in-


credible increase of wealth, I see a serious extent of
social degradation, a vast growth of insanity, and no
small amount of national unhappiness.
But to France again. Do I, from my experience in
this tour, recommend the introduction of French wines
into Britain ? Most emphatically, No! You have
seductive agencies enough, without adding to them,
though I do not believe for a moment that the sour
wines will ever he favourites with you, and the richer
port_ and Burgundy have not contributed to your
sobriety. Were you, having the same physical organism
and the same social condition as the Southern French-
men, to mix your wine with water, and drink no more
than they, and your women, like theirs, to he almost
wholly Teetotalers, I should see no great necessity for
Total Abstinence Societies; but until the circumstances
are parallel, I prefer that my countrymen refrain from
alcohol in any guise.
A word as to climate. I wholly and absolutely dissent
from the opinion of those who make climate the test of
temperance. It is rather a question of national physique
and customs. The French Canadians are more sober
than the British Canadians. The Spanish and Portu-
guese settlements of Asia and America have been in this
respect very different from the English homes there.
Ihe English, Scotch, and Irish, have a drunken cha-
uw »’ w , e ther *'he temperate, frigid, or torrid zone.
Ihe Americans of New Orleans—quite warm enough a
place—are proverbial for their excess. The Australians,
enjoying the mildest and most agreeable climate in the
world, are by no means the most sober of colonists. The
Englishman drinks to be cool in hot climates and warm
in cold ones. He needs the inspiration of the glass in
a damp and foggy region, and is provoked to excess by
the stimulating effect of a joyous atmosphere. Oh, that
we could, in the eyes of the world, recover from the
shame into which we are fallen ! Not all our commercial
success, our military prowess, our religious development,
will restore that national respect which we lose by our
drinking customs of society.
The intemperance of the Continent cannot be reached
by_ the samd agencies which operate so favourably in
Britain. For a long period, those countries have not
enjoyed the right of self-government. The very muni-
cipal system itself is with them an imperial organisation.
Public meetings, so common with us, are almost unknown
with them. Associations for the development of social
reform belong to the Anglo-Saxon alone—and to him
by the way, only during the last few years. The French
have not our sense of individuality. They do not stand
upon their personal dignity, nor have they a conception
of their personal independence. They move in masses.
Ihe Englishman can be acted upon by individual effort
icuuisf; toy private ttagfet: m a mode of
elevation is not open to his neighbour across the channel.
Temperance Societies, therefore, could not be worked
there, from the abridgment of political freedom of action.
Meetings, though avowedly for the prevention and cure
of drunkenness, would never he tolerated on the Con-
tinent. _ The want of experience in organisation, and the
sort of inadaptibility of the people for it, would he another
cause of failure.
Government is the source of all action abroad. If the
disseminator of evil, it can be the means of progress.
The fiat of the benevolent Alexander releases 20 millions
from chains. We so constitutionally disapprove of any
centralisation, that we dislike the bother of the Health
of Towns Commission, and grumble,at the payment of
two -pence a year tax for the public libraries of our towns
It is otherwise in continental Europe. They look to the
capital for the initiation of everything. The Govern-
ment of France is so paternal that it has lately taken in
hand the manufacture of lueifer matches, because they
are so carelessly made by private firms.
We can and must look, then, to legislation abroad,
where individual labour would perhaps satisfy at home.
But, even in Britain, people are gradually finding out
that private organisations and moral movements are
insufficient to accomplish the good desired; and they
are glad of an imperial Parliament to secure them a
Factory Bill, a Health of Towns Commission, public
instruction, and the punishment of vendors of unseemly
hooks and pictures. Some think, too, that as the
licensing system of drinking is the cause of more evil
than other things, the Government should be urged to
grant the people permission at least to restrain the mis-
chief in their own localities, if they pleased.
As the French look to Government for action, the
philanthropist must look thereto for social improvements.
The Emperor has already done something in the Tem-
perance line. He has expressed his disapproval of
the absinthe of students. This spirit, a coloured medi-
cinal brandj, is the curse of the lower classes ajiiJ ffig
wilder medical and law students. A further step might
be taken in restraining the number of drinking houses,
in placing obstacles in the way of the manufacture and
sale of the stronger forms of alcoholic drink, in reform-
ing the worst cabarets, and by some enactments to
elevate the tone of morals, as well as by official dis-
couragement of causes tending to degrade a people and
dispose them more to the indulgence of intemperance.
I am aware this may savour something of the despotic
character. But I am writing about Frenchmen. The
moral movement is unsuited to their state; and the
Permissive Bill, so agreeable to the British mind and
political condition, would not be comprehended in
France. A variety, so to speak, of the Maine Law
seems best adapted to the circumstances of the drunken
districts of France. I believe that, if Napoleon be ruler
for another_ ten years, some very stringent law will be
in exercise in the manufacturing towns of France, to
operate upon the growing national curse.
I conclude my series of remarks by the citation of
some passages from letters I received from French
clergymen, in answer to a circular of mine from Paris.
I sought to know their thoughts upon the Temperance
question, in relation to the present condition of their
own country.
A minister from the Southern Department du Gard
thinks that intemperance, little at the best of times, is
Jess than usual. This arises, he says, from that part of
the country being poorer, through the failure of the
silkworm; from the increased price of wine, through the
greater exportation by reason of the new railways ; from
1118 BXt§n§ioH Of Christian influence; and from thg aban-
donment of the cabaret for the more refined cafe He
expresses himself wholly ignorant of the nature of
temperance societies, and then he oddly remarks “I
shouldpreferthe establishment of Temperance societies of
which the drunkard would con sent freely to make a party ”
. The Eev. Louis Martin, of Calvados, declares of the
vice, “I do not think it diminishes.” He allows how-
ever, that m that season there had been less excess,
owing to the high rate of cider, the drink of the district
from the failure of the apple crop. With this admission
be is forced to exclaim of the drunkenness of his Ji<>ht-
qnuk country, “ But that which 1 see, and which
afflicts me, is that it reigns in so many places ; and
everywhere, more or less, it makes its ravages.” To
another of my questions, he writes, “ For many reasons
1 cannot enumerate, I have seen throughout France that
1 empcrance societies have not taken.” This is at least


an admission that some Frenchmen thought their people
in want of those institutions.
The good man bemoans the evils of the tavermsystem,
hut looks in vain for help except in political movement,
and in the authority of Government,— adding, “ But of{.
free action, public opinion, there is none; it is not ex-
erted, as in your happy country.”
The Eev. Eunier writes to me—“ Drunkenness is
fatally spread in the industrial parts of France that I
visit, and I believe the vice daily increases.” He places
drunkenness as the first and strongest of impediments to
his work of evangelisation in connection with the Pro-
testant Church of France. “ Sir,” he says, “ the vice
which forms the subject of your questions has conse-
quences so ruinous for the individual, for the family, for
society, that X am unable to write of them.” In his
despair, he tells me, “I do not think, sir, that it is pos-
sible to establish in France Temperance societies as in
England; that appears to me above everything impos-
sible here, people haying no d§§ii§ to fl§§ If B2l drunken-
ness.” How can the worthy man fail to he shocked
when he has an experience like the following; —“ I
know a little town of the Haute Marne, of 3,000 in-
habitants, where one can count more than 50 houses of
sale; it is a true calamity.” He then refers to the case
of a servant who went with 70 francs into a cafe, and
spent 60 in a few hours.
The next letter is from a clergyman of the Evangelical
Church of Lyons, and gives quite another version. He
is a type of a large class of ministers in England, who,
content with preaching the gospel, see no occasion to
step down from the pulpit to ameliorate the condition
of their fellow-creatures. He is, like them, quite indig-
nant at the condemnation of the “good creatures of
God,” and cannot possibly “ comprehend the anathema
launched against wine.” fie assures me that “ the wines
in France are a beverage, and not a liquid fire.” He
sees no difficulty in men drinking thereof who would be
disposed elsewhere to abstain from alcoholised liquor
(vin alcoolise). He has known hardly any cases for
church discipline from drunkenness. He says they “do
not drink as in England.” He is convinced, from in-
formation furnished him at the office of the prefecture,
that intemperance is less.
All this is from a man of considerable social eminence
as a Protestant divine, one of whose high character and
intellectual superiority we can entertain no doubt, and
whose opinion will carry great weight. We leave the
chemist to explain to him that French wine, running up
to 20 per cent, may be vin alcoolise. As to the increasing
sobriety of Lyons, upon the authority of the Prefect of
Police, all I can say is that authorities do not agree, and
that my own experience of that city’s temperance was
unfortunate. Eminent French, writers declare that
Lyons is not sober, and is growing more drunken . From
respect to the man, and in fairness to the other side, I
have given this clergyman’s testimony.
Among others, I wrote to a gentleman who, if not
French born, has been most of his life in France, and
who addressed me in English. He is attached to the
Wesleyan Mission there, and deservedly esteemed for
talent and usefulness.
He states that, from his experience in the South of
France, “ drunkenness is not a common vice in this
country, and interferes much less with our evangelical
efforts than immorality, the breaking of the Lord’s Day,
&c. Indeed, in the South, where the vine is grown, and
wine is the principal beverage of the country, drunken-
ness is almost unheard of, scarcely anything being drunk
by the peasant but the common wine, generally diluted
with water; but no gin, no spirits, no brandy. I have
heard the remark over and over again, ‘ one must be an
Englishman or a fool to drink such strong stuff as
brandy.’ In some villages, even the women will not
touch the wine, and drink nothing but water.”
This is a remarkable testimony. When removed, how-
ever, to the North of the country he finds the case very
different. The sobriety of France suddenly disappears ;
but this he ascribes chiefly to “ the presence of many
Englishmen of the working classes, whose drinking
habits are such that we have here a proverb, viz: —‘ to
drink like an Englishman.’ ”
His personal habits are referred to. I mention them
in the hope that the example of such a man may be
followed by others who cannot see their way all at once
to Teetotalism. These are his words “ I usually drink
at my dinner a little French wine mixed with twice as
much water, and find it a very cooling and refreshing
beverage; but whenever I get my foot in England for a
visit, I become there a practical Teetotaler, experience
having taught me that the wines drunk in that country
and tne beer are too strong for my head, not to mention
the brandy', gin, &c., which I never touch anywhere.”
I have now completed my sketches of “ Temperance
in France, Switzerland, and Italy.” Conscious of many
imperfections in my story, I feel that I have striven
honestly to set the truth before my fellow-countrymen.
Some of my expressions and conclusions may, perhaps,
be thought unreasonable or unsafe by some of my
Teetotal brethren. At any rate they are only personal
views, and were often received against my own precon •
oieved opinion. Facts, as they came before me, have
been simply told. How happy shall Ibe if anything I
have said shall excite in the patriotic breast a desire, by
personal effort, to remove the foul stain from our national
reputation—the intemperance of Britain !
TEMPEEANCE IN WINE OOHNTEIES ; A rpHE ALLIANCE PEIZE ESSAY: An Argument,
Letter by BDWAED C. DELAYAN, Esq., of X Historical, Legal, and Ethical, for the Prohibition
Albany, New York, United States. of the Liquor-Traffic. Price One Shilling.
*»* Three copies sent post-free for 6d. THE SEQUEL TO THE PEIZE ESSAY. Sixpence.
Now Beady, Fifth Edition, price Id.,
THE SCIENTIFIC ASPECT of the TEMPEE-
ANOE MOVEMENT : An Address to the Medical
Students of the Glasgow University. By J. M. M‘CUL-
LOCH, Esq., M.D., Dumfries.
*** Fifteen copies sent post free to any single address
for twelve postage stamps.
THE SEQUEL TO THE PEIZE ESSAY. Sixpence.
THE POLITICS OF TEMPEEANCE. Sixpence.
THE TEMPEEANCE SPECTATOE. Monthly. 2d.
THE ALLIANCE WEEKLY NEWS. Price Id.
Manchester: United Kingdom Alliance, 41, John
Dalton Street. London ; Jon Caldwell, 335, Strand.
Bekeseobd and Southern, Printers by Steam Power, 32, Corporation Street, Manchester.




