

PETITION.
of Olinda in the Brazils,
Humbly Sheweth,
To the Venerable, the General Assembly of-the Church of Scotland, the Petition
of the undersigned, John Dunmore Lang, Master of Arts and Doctor
of Divinity, Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and one of the
Representatives of the City of Sydney in the Parliament of New South
Wales; Honorary Member of the African Institute of France, of the
American Oriental Society, and of the Literary Institute of the University
I. That, after a curriculum of eight years of regular study at the University of Glasgow, your Peti-
tioner was licensed by the Presbytery of Irvine in the year 1820, and ordained by the same Presbytery, to
go forth, of his own accord and at his own charges, in the year 1822, when only twenty-three years of
age, to plant the Presbyterian Church, in connection with the Church of Scotland, in Australia.
11. That, for years after his arrival in New South Wales, your Petitioner had to struggle alone, and
without countenance or assistance of any kind from his mother-Church, with the Local Government and
the then dominant Episcopacy of the Australian Colonies; but that he succeeded notwithstanding in gain-
ing for the Presbyterian Church of these colonies, for all time coming, greater privileges and immunities—
including the recognition of the important right, which was long disputed, to solemnise marriage—than are
enjoyed by that Church in most of the other colonies of the Empire.
111. That, as the Church of Scotland at that period took no interest in the spiritual welfare and
advancement of the colonies, and had no machinery for its promotion, your Petitioner, finding the field of
labour exceedingly extensive and entirely unoccupied, had, at great personal risk and very serious expense,
to make not fewer than four voyages to Europe during the first fifteen years of his colonial ministry—
circumnavigating the globe on each of these occasions—to procure ministers and instructors of youth for
the colonial field; and that during that period he was directly and exclusively instrumental in carrying
or sending out to Australia—in several instances at his own private expense—and settling as ministers
of religion and instructors of youth in the higher branches of education, not fewer than thirty ministers and
licenciatcs, besides fifteen schoolmasters. For, in the year 1831, the Eight Honourable Lord Goderich, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, had, at the instance of your Petitioner, directed an advance to be made
from the Colonial Fund, to the extent of £3500, to assist in the establishment of an Academical Institu-
tion in Sydney, which was founded by your Petitioner, for the education of youth. And during the
period of its existence, from five to six hundred of the Colonial youth received a superior education for
the time in that Institution, under six different Licenciatcs of the Church of Scotland.
IV, That as there was a famine prevailing on the last of these occasions, during the winter of 1836-37,
in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, and a deputation, at the head of which was the Rev. Dr M'Lcod,
senior, of Glasgow, had gone to London to solicit aid from the Government to send a large number of the
starving Highlanders to Canada, (which they were told the Government had no power to grant, as there
were no funds available for the purpose,) your Petitioner suggested to the Government through the depu-
tation that the Highlanders should be sent to Australia, as there was a fund available for the purpose
in that country, arising from the sale of the crown lands ; and that this suggestion having proved well-
founded, about four thousand Highlanders were sent to Australia, passage free, during the three following
years, in eighteen different ships; and that in consequence of another suggestion of your Petitioner’s
to the Right Hon. Sir George Grey, several of the ministers above-mentioned, who could speak the
Gaelic language, were sent out with the Highlanders in some of these ships.


V, That on the same occasion your Petitioner, having failed in obtaining suitable missionaries from
Scotland, was enabled, with the assistance of the Government, to send out a large body of German mis-
sionaries, consisting of two ordained Lutheran ministers and a number of lay-brethren from Berlin, to the
Aborigines of Australia at Moreton Bay, now Queensland; and that certain of the lay-brethren having
been subsequently ordained, through the instrumentality of your Petitioner, in the Scots Church, Sydney,
have since successfully planted the German Lutheran Church in the Colony of Victoria.
VI. That although your Petitioner exercised the best of his judgment, and took the best men he could
find on all these occasions, he had to depend in great measure on certificates of character and qualifica-
tion from ministers of standing in the Church of Scotland; but as there was a great lack of a proper
missionary spirit among the licenciates of these times, the result was that a considerable proportion of
the whole number consisted of persons of very inferior qualifications for the work of the ministry, while
an unusual proportion proved of damaged reputation.
VII. That while your Petitioner was absent from the colony on the last of these four voyages, in the
vears 1836 and 1837, and while two of the four ministers remaining in New South Wales on his departure
for Europe were under charges of intemperance, and a third was too far distant to take any part in the
discipline and government ot the Church, the fourth minister, since deceased, applied to the Local Govern-
ment, ex proprio motu, and without the previous knowledge or concurrence of Petitioner, whose con-
gregation at the time was as large as all the other four put together, for a Parliamentary constitution for
the Church, which was granted accordingly, under the designation of the Presbyterian Church Temporali-
ties Act.
VIII. That through the passing of this Act, which was thus altogether objectionable in its origin
and totally unnecessary, and which entirely changed the character of the Colonial Presbyterian Church, a
state of anarchy and disorganization, extending over a period of four years, ensued; till in the year 1842, your
Petitioner, despairing of carrying out the objects of a Christian Church in such circumstances through the
Synod of Australia, which had in the meantime been formed under the Act referred to, and strongly per-
suaded that the politico-ecclesiastical system of the Australian Colonies, which extends its patronage alike
to truth and error, and comprehends within its pale, not only Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Methodists,
but Roman Catholics and Puseyites, Unitarians and Jews, was contrary alike to the Word of God and the
standards of the Church of Scotland, withdrew from the said Synod altogether—intending to proceed as
a Presbyterian Minister to the colony of New Zealand, which he had previously visited on one of his
voyages to Europe.
IX. That, after the passing of the Presbyterian Church Temporalities Act, and in consequence of the
state of things which it produced, your Petitioner made a fifth voyage to Europe in the year 1839, and
suggested, on his arrival in London, to the Right Honourable Lord Normanby, who was then Secretary of
State for the Colonies, that Her Majesty should be advised to disallow the Act which had been
passed in such extraordinary circumstances, as she had power to do within two years of its passing ; as
such a measure would at once heal the breaches which the Act had caused, and restore harmony to the
Church: but that this suggestion having been disapproved of by the General Assembly’s Colonial Com-
mittee, at the instance, as your Petitioner believes, of Alexander Dunlop, Esq., Advocate, now Member
of Parliament for Greenock, who was then the legal adviser of that Committee, the Act was accordingly
retained in operation, and has hitherto proved a source of weakness and inefficiency, of disunion and
division in both the Colonies of New South Wales and Victoria.
X. That your Petitioner announced his intention of withdrawing from the Synod of Australia, to
his congregation, in an Address from the pulpit of the Scots Church, Sydney, on the 6th February, 1842;
but that his congregation insisting very strongly on his remaining among them as their Pastor, he agreed
to do so—resigning his connection with the Synod of Australia on the first of March of that year, and
renouncing all claim to the salary of £3OO, which he had previously held for seventeen years from the
Public Treasury, and which Lord Glenelg had spontaneously directed to be augmented to £5OO, from
and after the first of April, 1842.
XI. That in thus withdrawing from the Synod of Australia, on grounds exclusively Colonial, and
bavin"• no connection whatever with the controversies of the period in Scotland, your Petitioner and his
congregation, had no desire or intention whatsoever to withdraw from the Church of Scotland ; the
ecclesiastical position of vour Petitioner being thenceforth precisely similar to. that of the Rev, D. K.
Drummond, of Edinburgh, and the Rev. Sir William Dunbar, of Aberdeen—two regularly ordained
Ministers of the Church of England, who finding, after having signed a bond of union with the Scottish
Episcopal Church, that they could neither exercise their Christian Ministry with the requisite freedom
nor maintain a safe conscience in that Church, withdrew from it altogether, and stood thenceforth on their
English ordination.


XII. That in proof of the extreme disorganisation of the Colonial Presbyterian Church under the
circumstances above recited, your Petitioner begs to submit that two other Ministers of that Church
withdrew from the Synod of Australia in the same year as your Petitioner; but instead of remaining in
communion with the Church of Scotland, as your Petitioner and his congregation continued to do, both
of these ministers—the Rev. James Allan and the Rev. John Gregor—declared, in the presence of an
Episcopal congregation in the City of Sydney, that they were moved by the Holy Ghost to renounce their
connection with the Presbyterian Church altogether, and to accept re-ordination at the hands of a Puseyite
Bishop.
XIII. That while no notice whatever was taken by the Synod of Australia of the grave and serious
offence thus committed by these two Ministers, a prosecution was immediately instituted against your
Petitioner, on the ground of certain expressions in his published Address to his congregation, (when
announcing his determination to withdraw from the Synod of Australia,) which, it was alleged, amounted
to “ slander.”
XIV. That this prosecution was not only originated and commenced, but conducted through all its
subsequent stages till it arrived at maturity in the Presbytery of Sydney, (to which your Petitioner had
previously belonged,) by two members ot that Presbytery and of the Synod of Australia, the Rev. John
Tait, of Parramatta, who, after three years of hesitation, subsequently joined the Free Church in the year
1847, and the Rev. James, now Dr. Fullerton, of Sydney, a licenciate of the Synod of Ulster—both of
whom were afterwards expelled from the Church ol Scotland, by the unanimous vote of the General As-
sembly of 1845, for having voted, in a majority of the Synod of Australia in October, 1844, approving of
certain resolutions strongly expressive of the desire of the said Synod to maintain communion with the Free
Church and the Church of Scotland at the same time—a proceeding which your petitioner humbly represents
as a sufficient and satisfactory proof of the utter incapacity of the men to guide the movements of a Chris-
tian Church,
The following extract of the evidence of one of these parties, the Rev. Dr. Fullerton, when recently
cross-examined upon oath, before the Master in Equity in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, will suffi-
ciently prove the truth of the preceding statement, as to the manner in which this prosecution of your
Petitioner was conducted, and shew, beyond the possibility of doubt, that the whole affair was a foul con-
spiracy to degrade and ruin your Petitioner, on the part of two thoroughly unprincipled men—a conspiracy
happily unparalleled for its enormity as an ecclesiastical proceeding in the annals of the Presbyterian
Church.
“Cross-examined by Mr Barker: When was the proceeding first instituted against Dr Lang ? In 1842. Was any com-
plaint made to the Presbytery by any person against Dr Lang ? I can’t say positively; but 1 think there was not. My
impression is, that the Presbytery proceeded without complaint. lam now quite clear that it was so. Who were the
ministers of the Presbytery of Sydney who were present at the meeting of Presbytery when Dr Lang’s case was first taken
up ? The ministers present were the Eev. John Tait and myself. Who was then moderator of the Presbytery ? Mr Tait
Who was then clerk of the Presbytery ? It was I. Then there were only two ministers present at this meeting of Presbytery ?
That is all. I think you have said that it was at this meeting that Dr. Lang’s resignation was tendered ? Yes. What was
done with reference to the letter of resignation? A committee was appointed to confer with Dr Lang relative to it. Does
not the law of the Church require that before the Presbytery can either accept or disallow the resignation of a minister they
should first cite the congregation ? In ordinary cases it does require it. Was that course pursueu in Dr Lang’s case ? No,
Who were the several ministers composing the Presbytery at this time ? Dr M‘Gar vie, Mr Tait, Mr Purves, Dr Lang, and
myself.* Was anything done at this first meeting besides appointing a committee to confer with Dr Lang ? Nothing more.
Who were the ministers present at the next meeting of Presbytery? The same ministers, Mr Tait and myself. Was Dr
Lang’s case brought up at the second meeting ? Mr Tait, as chairman of the committee, reported that Dr Lang declined to
receive them. What was done after that at that meeting ? The Moderator was instructed to summon Dr Lang to appear
at the next meeting of Presbytery on the first Tuesday of April next, to answer for his conduct in making charges against
his brethren, and for following divisive courses. By whom and in what manner was this matter brought before the
Presbytery ? I have no recollection. There were only two ministers present at this meeting of Presbytery. It was an
adjourned meeting of Presbytery, held on the following day after the committee were appointed. Is it not the regular course
for one of the ministers to address the Court in bringing any matter under their notice i 1 here are various ways ot bring-
ing a matter under the notice of the Presbytery—by petition, memorial, &c. I have no recollection of the matter, but if the
moderator did not do it, it was my duty, as the clerk, to do it Have you any doubt that it was one of them? I have no
recollection on the subject further than is contained in the minutes. Was there any notice given to Dr Lang of the resolu-
tion to libel him before the issue of the citation ? None. Was Dr M'Garvie present at the meeting of Presbytery at which
the resolution to libel Dr Lang was passed? No, his name does not appear on the minutes. Do the ministers state the
particular offence for which Dr Lang was to be libelled? lie was summoned to answer for his conduct in making charges
against his brethren, and for following divisive courses. Was anything more done at this meeting ot Presbytery with refer-
ence to the proceedings against Dr Lang ? No. When was the next meeting of this Presbytery held ? sth April, 1842, in
St Andrew’s Church. Who were the ministers present at that meeting? The Rev John Tait, myself, and Mr Atchison.
What was the first thing done at this meeting respecting Dr Lang? The moderator, Mr Tait, reported that Dr Lang had
been summoned to appear this day. What next? It was moved by Mr Atchison, and seconded by Mr D. Johnston, that
the whole of Dr Lang’s supposed delinquencies since January last be referred simpliciter to the Synod of Australia to
meet in Sydney in October next. It was moved by myself as an amendment, and seconded by Dr Hill, that the case of Dr
Lang be referred to the commission of Synod. Ihe amendment was carried. Who were the ministers who voted for the
amendment? I think Mr Tait and myself were the only ministers. The amendment was carried by the casting vote of the
Moderator. There were no other ministers present but Mr Atchison, who voted on the other side. There was nothing
further done at the meeting. What was the first step taken with reference to the libel ? It was read and considered, clause
by clause, and agreed to, there being no dissentients. Who were the ministers present at that meeting, the 12th July,
1842? Mr Tait and myself. What directions were given then ? That the libel should be sen ed on Dr Lang, with a cita-
Thero was another, Mr Atchison, of Wollongong. J.D.L.


tion and list of witnesses. Dr Lang was to appear on the 2d August. On the 2d August the Presbytery met again. The
ministers present as members of the Presbytery were the Rev Mr Tait, myself, and Dr M_Garvic, v\ hat was done at this
meeting? The Presbytery officer returned a certificate of execution properly attested. Dr Lang not having appeared he
was called three times and the Presbytery directed him to be cited to appear at next meeting which was to be held on the
23d August. Do the minutes show whether there were any dissentients on that occasion ? Iso; there were no dissentients.
At the meeting of the 23d August he was directed to be served with a peremptory summons to appear on the first luesday in
October. What was done at this meeting in October ? He did not appear, and the Presbytery held him guilty by confession,
and resolved to report this to the Synod of Australia, which was to meet next day. Who were the ministers of tho
Presbytery present when he was found guilty by confession ? The only ministers were Mr Tait and myself. Mr Tait, then,
was the only minister of the Church of Scotland who was then present ? Yes.”
XV. That the prosecution which was based on these proceedings, and which was conducted through-
out in the absence of your Petitioner, with an entire disregard of those principles of justice and equity that
characterize the entire legislation of the Church of Scotland in cases of process against ministers, issued in
the vote of a majority of the Synod of Australia, seven to four, to depose your Petitioner from his office
as a regularly ordained minister of the Church of Scotland; and that this act and deed was peipetiated
accordingly, and proclaimed forthwith with a zeal worthy of a better cause throughout the Presbyterian
Church both at home and abroad.
XVI. That the object of the two individuals who had thus originated and matured the prosecution in the
Presbyterv of Sydney—both of whom owed their position in the colony entirely to your Petitioner was,
first, to degrade your Petitioner in the estimation of the Colonial public, and then to seize upon the valuable
church property which he had created for the public, principally through the saciifice of his own.
XVII. That the former of these objects—the degradation of your Petitioner in the estimation of the
public—completely failed, while the very effort to effect it led to his almost immediate elevation to a posi-
tion of honour and influence in his adopted country, which he could never otherwise have either anticipated
or attained. For the Colony of New South Wales having obtained a semi-representative legislature in
the year 1842, the numerous Scotch inhabitants of Port-Phillip—who were generally well acquainted and
thoroughly disgusted with the proceedings of the Synod of Australia in the case of your Petitioner, which
was then quite recent and well known—elected your Petitioner one of the six representatives of their
district, now the great colony of Victoria, in the Legislative Council of New South And his fellow
colonists generally having been abundantly satisfied with the services of your Petitioner in that capacity,
after a trial of four years as one of the representatives of Port-Phillip, he has since been four times elected
to the Local Parliament for the City of Sydney, and always at the head of the poll, and once also for the
County 7 of Stanley at Moreton Bay, now the colony of Queensland; and that in consideration and requital
of the services of your Petitioner in founding the latter colony, he has recently been honoured with a
unanimous vote of thanks from its first Parliament.
XVIII. That your Petitioner has hitherto continued to dispense the ordinances of religion to the
congregation of the Scots Church in Sydney, although with the help of a colleague for the three past
years; and that the revenue of the church for the last of these years exceeded £1099, thereby affoidmg
a sufficient maintenance for botli pastors, and allowing your Petitioner to make occasional ministerial visits
to the more distant localities of the colony, and even to undertake his present voyage to Europe; but that
no step has ever yet been taken, either directly or indirectly, by the Synod of Australia, to cancel oi repeal
their own iniquitous proceedings in the case of your Petitioner, in the year 1842.
XIX. That, on the contrary, after the lapse of thirteen years, when certain parties connected with the
Synod who would otherwise have stood in the way had died, and when a race of colonists had aiisen who wore
altogether unacquainted with the real nature and character of the proceedings of 1842, a suit in chancciy
was instituted against your Petitioner by the Synod of Australia in the Supreme Couit of New South
Wales, in the year 1855, for the possession of the Scots Church in Sydney and the property therewith
connected, on the sole ground that the said Synod had deposed your Petitioner from the office of the ministry
as a regularly ordained minister of the Church of Scotland, which the constitution of the Scots Chinch re-
quired him to be ; and that this suit, as your Petitioner believes and knows, was instituted and commenced
at the instance of the aforesaid Dr James Fullerton of Sydney, w r ho, being himself a licenciate of the Synod
of Ulster, could have no standing in the Church of Scotland, but whose extremely malicious feelings towaids
your Petitioner have recently been clearly proved as already shewn by his own cross-examination on
oath, from the part he acted along with the Eev. John Tait of Parramatta, in the Presbytery of Sydney
in 1842.
XX. That your Petitioner, as the senior minister, and now the only surviving trustee of the Scots
Church, defended himself in person under this action; shewdng/rs*, that, in simply withdrawing from the
Synod of Australia, he had committed no ecclesiastical offence that could in any way affect his status as a
regularly ordained minister of the Church of Scotland; secondly , that, even if he had committed such an
offence, it was not competent for the Synod of Australia to deprive him of his status in the Church of
Scotland, consisting as that Synod notoriously did, to the extent of at least one-half of its members, of


men who were not themselves llcenciates of the Church of Scotland, and several of whom had never even
been within the walls of a college; and, thirdly , that even if the said Synod had been a court of compe-
tent jurisdiction in the case of your Petitioner, its proceedings were absolutely null and void, from their
gross irregularity, and from the malicious feelings that had evidently characterised and prompted the prin-
cipal actors.
XXL That whereas the parties concerned in the prosecution of your Petitioner, had, in their extreme
anxiety to ensure his degradation and ruin, forwarded an ex parte statement of the case of 1842 to the
Presbytery of Irvine, by which your Petitioner was licensed and ordained, and alleged that they had
received a document from that Presbytery, confirming the sentence passed upon your Petitioner as afore-
said by the Synod of Australia, your Petitioner pleaded that it was incompetent for any inferior Judica-
tory of the Church of Scotland to do any act or deed that could in any way affect the status of a licenciate
of that Church without having previously cited him before it in the manner prescribed in the Form of
Process, and thereby given him an opportunity to speak for himself and the right of appeal, and that as
your Petitioner had never been so cited by the said Presbytery, any such act or deed as was alleged to
have been done by that Presbytery was an unwarrantable and unlawful act, and consequently null and
void.
XXII. That all the three judges of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, being satisfied with these
pleadings on the point in question, declared their unanimous opinion, during the past year, that the status
of your Petitioner, as a regularly ordained minister of the Church of Scotland, had been in no way affected
by the proceedings of the Synod of Australia in 1842 ; that Synod not being a court of competent juris-
diction to deprive your Petitioner of such status. But as there was a difference of opinion between his
Honour, Sir John Dickenson, the Chief Justice, who was entirely in favour of your Petitioner, and the
two Puisne Judges, one of whom had been counsel for the Synod, as to the extent of jurisdiction which
the Synod possessed in a matter of Presbyterian Church-property, under a particular Colonial enactment,
an appeal was taken from the decision of the two Puisne Judges, who formed the majority of the Court,
to the Privy Council; and that that appeal is now pending, but cannot be heard till December next.
XXIII. That these proceedings, which have now been in progress in the Supreme Court of New
South Wales for six years, have occasioned great scandal, and proved a source of weakness and inefficiency,
of heartburnings and disunion, throughout that colony—paralysing the hands of the ministers of the Pres-
byterian Church, and exposing their entire denomination to scorn and contempt; entailing enormous costs
to no purpose whatever on all parties concerned, and likely to issue, in the present critical circumstances
of the colony, as regards religious denominations supported by the State, in no benefit to any.
XXIV. That a general and in great measure successful movement has been in progress for years
past throughout the Australian colonies for the entire discontinuance of all support of religion from the
public treasury; and, as this measure has been actually passed within the last few months, in the colony
of Queensland, recently the northern section of New South Wales, it is expected to be passed, also,
at the instance of the Local Government, during the present session of the Provincial Parliament, in the
remaining portion of that colony; the real character of the moral and religious interests involved in the
question being unmistakably evident from the fact that the Roman Catholics, who form upwards of a
fourth part of the general population, are the most strenuous and persevering advocates of the continuance
of the existing system.
XXV. That in the event of this impending change being effected, there is a noble prospect for the
Presbyterian Church in the Australian Colonies, if its present divisions, which have arisen entirely from
the impolitic advice of Mr Alexander Dunlop, in the year 1839, could only be healed, and the various
sections of its communion united on fair and equitable terms; but that your Petitioner can never be a
party to any such compi’ehensive union until the Act and deed of the Synod of Australia respecting himself
in the year 1842 is repealed, and every memorial of the discreditable transaction erased from its records.
XXVI. That in further evidence of the sheer malice in which both the ecclesiastical and the civil pro-
secutions of your Petitioner have originated, on the part of certain members of the said Synod, your Petitioner
begs to state that in the year 1854 an act was passed by the Legislature of New South Wales for the
establishment of colleges, to be affiliated to the University of Sydney; the Government giving a large allot-
ment of land for each college, and a sum equal to- the contributions of the public, up to £20,000, provided
these contributions should amount to £IO,OOO, with a salary of £SOO a-year for the Principal. Under
the provisions of the Act the college for the Presbyterians was to be open alike to all Presbyterians with-
out distinction ; and the first, and as yet by far the largest benefactor of the future Presbyterian College
was the late John Hunter Baillie, Esq., a brother-in-law of your Petitioner, and a member of his congre-
gation till his death, who left the whole of his property, subject to the liferent of his widow, for the endow-
ment of two professorships in the Presbyterian College—the one for the English language and literature,
and the other for the Oriental and Polynesian languages—Mr Baillie’s widow offering besides to supplement


his splendid donation with an immediate contribution of £SOO. But the parties who had been the principal
actors in the prosecutions above-mentioned, determined at all hazards to gratify their personal animosity
towards your Petitioner, held a whole series of private meetings on the subject in the City of Sydney; and
with the assistance of certain Free Churchmen whom they had invited to their councils, and who con-
descended to connive at their impotent malice, endeavoured to get the Presbyterian College established
on the principle that your Petitioner should be excluded from all connection with its management, as a
person whom they had pretended to depose from his office as a regularly ordained minister of the Church
of Scotland. But although the late Governor, Sir William Denison, it may be in ignorance of the real
character of the scheme, was induced to patronize it, and to preside at a public meeting in the year 1858
for carrying it out, the Parliament of the Colony, at the instance of your Petitioner, granted a Select Com-
mittee to inquire into the case of the Presbyterian College; and through that Committee the whole scheme
was forthwith foiled. The same attempt was repeated during the past year; but your Petitioner being
then a member of the Provincial Parliament, it was more easily frustrated on that occasion. The result of
this discreditable state of things is that while the Episcopalians, the Roman Catholics, and the Wesleyan
Methodists have each a college of their own, under the Act of 1854, the Presbyterians, who are, both
intellectually and otherwise, the body who could, in all probability, make the most of such an institution,
and turn it to the best account, have none.
Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays that, in order, if possible, to restore peace and harmony to
the Australian Presbyterian Church, and at the same time to render an act of justice to your Petitioner,
your Venerable Court will take the premises into consideration—recognising the status of your Petitioner
as a regularly ordained Minister of the Church of Scotland, who has not only never done anything to
forfeit that position, but has been honoured in his day and generation to render no small service both
to the Church and the State; expressing your opinion at the same time on the anomalous proceedings
of 1842, and indicating to those whom it concerns the course that ought to be pursued in future, both
generally, and with special reference to the still pending prosecution. For although the General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland has no judicial authority in the Australian Colonies, the mere expression
of its deliberate opinion on the case detailed by your Petitioner, in the whole of which he is prepared
with the requisite documentary evidence, will unquestionably serve as a law, not only to all members of
the Church of Scotland, but to Presbyterians generally throughout the Australian Colonies.
And your Petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c., &c., &c.,
(Signed) JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.
Glasgow, May 13, 1861.




