

POPULAR EDITION
OF THE
LAND ACT 1884
REGULATIONS AND SCHEDULES
ARRANGED
IN A MANNER EASILY UNDERSTOOD BY
INTENDING SELECTORS
WITH
FULL DIRECTIONS FOR ALL THAT IS NECESSARY TO BE
DONE TO SECURE LAND UNDER ANY OF THE
DIVISIONS OF THE ACT.
Melbourne:
A. H. MASSINA & CO PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS
26 LITTLE COLLINS STBEET EAST




A. H. MASSIM & CO.’S LIST OF PUBLICATIONS.
A.
TPJtAJgfSES JHB?fiLSB2**tfwr W.
everywhere. Bound in neat red cloth, price 9s. per volume,
everyivnere. MELODIST. Nos. Ito 15 now ready.
.A. A Collection of all the Newest and Most Popular Songs of t e ay,
Price 6d.; postage, Id. additional, t old everywhere. .
r i OBDON’S POEMS, New and Eevised Edition. Complete in one
Gb volume. StM cloth, neatly bound, 7s. 6d postage 6d. additional;
limp cloth, 55., postage 6d. additional; Pocket Edition, «8. 6d., pos g
TIRIENDLY SOCIETIES’ act. (January, 1878.) Price, paper
JA covers, Is.; cloth, Is. 6d.; postage Id-extra. upiTTNULY
rnTTi? "REGULATIONS UNDER THE FRIENDLY
T H JoCIEMES’ ACT 1878. Price, paper covers, Is.; cloth,
1 A : A Treatise, by J. E. Gbaham. The
A U SAe wtrk published on Australian Wools. Price 55.; postage,
vNEBAI ANATOMY OF THE HORSE. With Key.
(PKSto tai The most wonderful production of the day.
T ANm A b CT OSt K? re WITH REGULATIONS AND
L SCHEDULES, 161 pages. Demy Bvo. Price, 2s. 6d.
SHILLING SERIES OF STANDARD WORKS.
ntr a Q«ST"KT A’Q GUIDE TO MELBOURNE, containing all
to V&tor.-wtar. to «o -tat to do. Fop.
Bvo. Price Is.; postage included, Is. 3d. Eevised date. a-Km
APR DOCTOR" or, THE COLONIAL MEDICAL AND
O sUTRGI CAL ’HAkDYBOOK. Eull Instructions for Families
„d tboYeifSta in thtßusl to act. toS-WjdA Ao,a«to.»d
Common Sickness. Price Is.; postage included, Is. 3d.
m-cr-R' earM AND SELECTION. Third Edition. The
T H most F useful Handybook to the Farmer and Selector. By Abraham
Lincolne. Price Is.; postage,ls. 3d. cal Guide
A fpSny emptied and adapted for the Australian Housekeeper,
containing the Plainest and Most Eeliable Eecipes for . t is 3d.
Hut as well as the Most Fashionable Kitchen. Piice Is., by P *
TTQrrvn a t tan HOUSEWIVES’ MANUAL, a most Useful
AworkSS of either to Marry, or already Mamed, on
How to Furnish, Manage, and Make a Home Happy, and Save Mo
Small Weekly Sum. By the eminent Author of Men, and
Manage Them,” “ Little Suppers,* etc., etc. Price >ls^ , post
-n/TEN, AND HOW TO MANAGE THEM.,, By the popular
JVL Author of the “Australian Housewives Manual. Price, Is., y
post, Is. 3d. ~
In the Press, and will he published in about a month.: _
Conservatory, Lawn, and other Ornamental and Useful Home burrou g
By W illiam Clarson, F.L.S., &c. Price, Is.; by post. Is. 3d.


THE
LAND ACT 1884,
WITH THE
REGULATIONS AND SCHEDULES,
ARRANGED
IN A MANNER EASILY UNDERSTOOD BY
INTENDING SELECTORS.
WITH FULL DIRECTIONS
FOR ALL THAT IS NECESSARY TO BE DONE TO SECURE LAND
UNDER ANY OF THE DIVISIONS OF THE ACT.
Pflbmtnu:
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
26 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST.
1885.




INSTRUCTIONS TO SELECTORS.
A RESUMÉ OF THE LAND ACT AND REGULATIONS.
In placing before our readers the attached summary of the Provisions,
Regulations, Schedules, &c., in connection with the last Land Act that is
likely ever to be passed in Victoria, we would call especial attention to
the arrangement of the various details, so as to suit the convenience of
intending landowners, for to that condition they must come at last. It
is useless to think now of how much better the State might have done
with its landed property had wiser or less selfish counsels been followed.
In one way or another the “ eyes of the country have been picked out,”
and if fewer people are settled on the lands than might otherwise have
been, the blame only rests upon the elected legislators and those who
have sold their birthrights for a very inadequate mess of pottage. The
result is that the total area of land available for leasing, or, what is
known as selection, amounts to barely eighteen millions of acres of
different kinds of land, divided into classes, and with these classes
the Act and Regulations deal seriatim. As a guide to those who
wish to take up any of the lands so divided, the Government has
issued a pamphlet containing verbatim copies of the Act, the
Regulations, and the Schedules pertaining thereto, reprinted from the
Government Gazette.
As a perfectly accurate rescript of Parliamentary enactments and
Departmental regulations the Government Gazette is beyond all praise, but
the character and style of any production, as edited by the authorities, is not
always of the most intelligible nature. In this instance the intending lease
or license holder is first invited to take his breakfast off the Act, his
luncheon off the Regulations, and [a decidedly heavy dinner off the
Schedules. The consequence naturally is a fit of mental digestion not
lightly to be got over.


To avoid this very undesirable consummation, our pamphlet is arranged
as under. To every “ Part ”of the Act we append the Eegulations and
Schedules appertaining to it, chapter and verse, with appropriate references
attached thereto; while, in the preface, we give a brief resume of the whole
position as taken up by the man who elects to throw in his lot either as a
grazier or a tiller of the soil.
The first portion of the Act deals merely with preliminary details, and
the public may as well understand at the outset that the Eegulations framed
under the Act contain the real kernel of the matter. The Governor has,,
moreover, the power vested in him to alter or modify them whenever it may
so please him—that is to say, they are subject to any change of opinion on
the part of the Minister for the time being, subject, of course, to the very
elastic condition that they are within the four walls of the Act—walls
on which there are certainly no “ broken bottles” to prevent occasional
vaulting. Taken as rules and methods of carrying them out, both Eegula-
tions and Schedules are, of course, voluminous, verbose, and, at first glance,
not easy to understand. But a careful perusal shows that there is nothing
very terrible in their redundancy after all, and that, outside any chance of
Departmental or Ministeral fluctuation, the Act, Eegulations, and Schedules
may be regarded as fair fixtures.
With regard to the Survey Eegulations, they have been framed by the
best authorities in the colony, and the schedule of fees attached appear fair
and reasonable, the more so as, in the case of the residence and non-resident
licenses under Section 42 of the present Act (an extension of the 19th
Section of the Land Act 1869), selection before survey is virtually
abolished. There is paying of money certainly, but there is not quite so
much taking of choice, while, as the maps for reference will not, probably,
be ready before June, the Eegulations till then will not be of much
practical use except to ponder over.
The interpretation clauses of the Act itself are, as usual, wide enough
to embrace almost anything. Cattle takes in anything from bulls to goats,
and “ vermin ” from kangaroos to rabbits and dogs at large. But it is
specially provided that nothing in the Act shall apply to or affect the
lands comprised in the Mallee country, and dealt with by the Mallee
Pastoral Leases Act passed in 1883.
The unalienated lands at the disposal of the Crown, therefore, are
divided into 8 classes —pastoral lands, agricultural and grazing lands,
auriferous lands, lands which may be sold by auction, swamp lands, State


forest reserves, timber reserves, and water reserves. The respective areas
of these lands are to be distinguished by colours or fadings on official
maps, to be published from time to time as the Governor-in-Council may
direct, it being always understood that the Governor-in-Council has power,
whenever he may think fit, to reserve either permanently or temporarily
from sale, lease, or license any land that may be required for any public,
purpose, from a railway down to a wash-house, or from a State school down
to an aboriginal institute. In addition to this, any persons who hold
licenses under the 49th section of the Act of 1869, or leases under the 47th
section of the Act of 1862 —two of the most troublesome tenures ever
invented —are allowed the old privilege of the pre-emptive right of purchase
at a price to be determined by the Board of Land and Works, but not to
exceed the upset price of the nearest land sold by the Crown, the licensees
being also allowed to take a lease subject to the payment of the balance of
purchase money by instalments; while those in occupation of pastoral
licenses or grazing rights under the repealed Acts can remain in occupation
until the 30th of September, 1885, and after—should the land not be
required—so long as they pay fees for the grass as fixed from time to time
by the Minister.
PASTORAL LANDS.
So far as “pastoral lands” are concerned, all alienation in fee —so long as
they remain in that class —is forbidden. The applicant for such land can
obtain a lease for an area varying in size and having a grazing capacity of
from 1000 to 5000 sheep, or from 150 to 500 head of cattle, subject again to
such alteration as the inevitable Governor-in-Council may please, for any
term not exceeding fourteen years after the expiration of this Act, but no
man can hold more than one pastoral allotment lease. For this lease he is
charged at the rate of one shilling per head for sheep and five shillings per
head for cattle, calculated on a grazing capacity of not more than 10 acres
to a sheep and an equivalent number of acres for cattle. The conditions of
the lease thus to be issued, though voluminous, are nothing extraordinary,
merely providing for the payment of rent, non-subdivision or assignment,
except under certain circumstances laid down in the Act, the repair of
improvements, etc., the resumption by the Crown of any portion of the
area for certain purposes, except grazing, the right of entry to the Crown
to see if covenants have been executed, and the right of resumption of the
whole area after three years’ written notice on payment to the lessee for his
interest in the lease, plus the value of house and other improvements, to be
divided according to the Regulations and the Lands Compensation Statute


of 1869. When the lease thus issued has expired, the lessee or his legal
representatives will be recouped by any incoming tenant for improvements
specified in section 28 of the Act up to the limit of two and sixpence per
acre. He will also be allowed to select out of his pastoral allotment 320
acres for a homestead at one pound per acre, and there end his privileges.
In applying for this lease he must —Ist, lodge his application ; 2nd, stand
the chances of a sale of the lease by auction in case there are more appli-
cations than his ; 3rd, apply again should there be no bidder at such sale;
and, fourthly, if successful, pay a fee of £1 for preparing the lease,
remembering always that when he does get his lease he must neither cut
nor ring timber on the ground, except for fencing and building purposes,
unless he obtains the consent of the Board ( i.e ., of Land and Works) and
the supervision of an officer of the said Board to look after him. On the
whole, setting aside the limitation of area, the pastoral leaseholder is
rather better off than the old pastoral tenant.
AGRICULTURAL LANDS.
Part 11. of the Act, and Regulations attached, deal with what aro
described as grazing and agricultural land. For the former, leases can be
obtained for an area not exceeding 1000 acres, and for periods not exceeding
fourteen years after the date of passing of the Act. To obtain one of these
leases an applicant must be of the full age of eighteen years, which, so far
as the liabilities incurred under the Act are concerned, is regarded as an
arrival at majority. The form of the application to be made
by him is prescribed in Schedule VIII. of the Regulations,
and before lodging it he must pay to the nearest receiver of
revenue £1 for a certificate of registration, which, whether his application
be granted or not, will not be refunded to him. His application will
further be considered by a Local Land Board, against the decision of which
he can, if it be unfavourable, appeal to the Minister for a personal
hearing. The rent charged varies from twopence to fourpence per acre,
to be fixed by Government appraisers, and unless, within one month after
notice of approval, the applicant pays in the first half-year’s rent, £1 for
preparation of lease, survey fees, and valuation for any improvements
that may be on the land, his application is held to lapse. The lease
itself contains the usual covenants for payment of rent, non-assignment,
except in cases of death or insolvency, entry on behalf of the Crown,
resumption for certain public purposes, repair of improvements,
conservation of timber except for fencing or building, forfeiture for
non-compliance, and repayment for a certain class of improvements up to


10s. per acre at the expiration of the lease. In addition to this, the
leaseholder is allowed to select 320 acres under the residence or non-
residence clause, or, if he has already selected, the difference between
the area so selected and 320 acres; provided always that, should he be
guilty of any breach of the conditions of the license for such selection, his
lease, as well as his license, shall be liable to forfeiture. Should he be
inclined to put down artificial grasses, plant trees, or grow produce for his
own use, the lessee can have special conditions inserted in his lease, with
the approval of the Governor-in-Council. Under any circumstances the
land held under these leases must be cleared of “vermin,” to the satisfaction
of the Board, within three years after the issue of the lease, and must
be kept free of Bathurst burr, wild briar, and gorse.
GRAZING AND AGRICULTURAL LANDS.
Part 111. of the Act deals with what are known as grazing and
agricultural lands, the method of procedure being as follows: —Under
the new method of showing the available lands on the plans in the different
land offices the old practice of pegging and marking out is done away
with, and the intending selector will no longer have to tramp or drive
through the country loaded with pegs and mallets. He has simply to
choose his land, not to exceed 320 acres in area, and send in his application
as per Schedule X., and the fuller and more complete the information he
gives to the Department as to his personal position, and especially as to his
dealing with any other selections he may have held under previous Acts,
the less trouble he is likely to have in the future. Applications for
agricultural allotments are not sent to be heard by Local Land Boards,
unless specially ordered by the Minister, and when the applicant has paid
his first half-year’s rent, such survey fees as may be required, and a fee of
five shillings for the preparation of his license, his first trouble is over, and
he is at leisure to survey his advantages and disadvantages. Had Mr. Dow
had his way, an applicant’s wife would have been allowed to select as
well as himself; but the clause so providing was thrown out by the Upper
House, and no married woman can now select land unless judicially
separated from her husband.
Having secured a license for his land, the advantages to the selector
a^e —that his rent (one shilling per acre, payable half-yearly in advance)
counts towards the purchase money of his allotment; that the State, as a
rule, is a most lenient landlord in times of hardship; and that, when the
six years of the currency of his license are over, he can either pay up the
balance of the purchase money and obtain a Crown grant at any time


within twelve months after the date of the expiration of his license, or
a lease for fourteen years at one shilling per acre per annum, the fee simple
to be given either at the end of the fourteen years or at any time during
the currency of the lease at which the lessee may be able to pay up
the difference between the rent paid and the full sum of £1 per acre.
The disadvantages—if the term be applicable—are embodied in the
conditions of the license, as follows : —The licensee must reside on the land,
or within five miles of it (see Section 4 of the Act) for not less than five
years ; he must fence in the allotment within six years, unless sooner
called upon under the Fencing Act; he must pay his rent half-yearly in
advance ; he must keep his land clear of “ verminand he must put
improvements on the land to the value of £1 per acre before the end of the
sixth year. For a breach of any of these conditions the license is liable
to forfeiture, and should a selector at any time be found to have
acted as a “ dummy,” either in regard to his allotment under this Act, or
that held under any other, he forfeits, not only his license for the allot-
ment held under this Act, but all other lands of which he may be in
occupation by license or leasehold. Moreover, he must not assign his license
to any one for money or other consideration, and though, on application, he
can obtain leave to pledge his improvements to the extent of one-half
their cost after he has been in occupation two years, he has to pay
£1 for the permission, and if not paid off before the expiration of his
license the lien is transferred to his lease or grant as the case may be. In
case of death the license goes to the licensee’s heirs or assigns, minus the
condition of residence, and in case of insolvency it can be transferred to any
other person whom the official assignee may elect in the same manner. It
would be well also for intending selectors to remember that the residence
clause is strictly insisted upon, but that a licensee can obtain leave of
absence for three months in any one year by asking for it in a form pre-
scribed in Schedule XII. As for his improvements, his own statement is
generally accepted, but, if there be any doubt, it is settled by arbitration.
The Act also allows the issue of non-residence licenses, in which the
conditions are the same, except that the rent is 2s. per acre per annum,
and that the improvements must be up to £2 per acre —£1 in the first three
years of the license, and another £1 in the last three ; but in both residence
and non-residence licenses the Minister can at any time put up the land at
auction at the request of the licensee, should he give satisfactory reasons for
not being able to continue compliance with the conditions of his license, and
in such case the land is handicapped by a valuation for improvements
in the licensee’s favour.


Provision is also made for the change of residence and non-residence
licenses, and a special clause allows any licensee under Section 19 of the Land
Act 1869, whose license has been transferred to the Land Act 1878, to
revert to his original position.
Having obtained his grant, the selector can, of course, do what he pleases
with it, but while still a leaseholder the discovery of any previous
fraudulent or irregular transactions while a licensee brings with it a
risk of forfeiture; if he does not pay his rent he can be ejected, and if
he desires to give an order for the issue of his Crown grant to another
person, he must apply to the Department for it in the form prescribed
in Schedule 33. For the rest, he may mortgage his lease as he pleases,
subject to the usual registration at the Titles Office.
AURIFEROUS LANDS.
In the case of auriferous lands, residence licenses are issued for twenty
acres, but such licenses are only yearly, the applicant has to peg out as
of old, pay £1 for a certificate of registration, stand the ordeal of a Local
Land Board, and obtain the consent of the Minister before he can transfer
his interest. In addition, he cannot hold more than one license, nor can
the land be alienated in fee simple. (See Section 66 of the Act and Regula-
tions relating to Auriferous Lands.)
Grazing licenses on auriferous lands can also be issued renewable for
five years, rent to be fixed by appraisement.
MISCELLANEOUS.
A special provision is also made in the Act by which any selector under
previous Acts or any licensee or lessee under this Act can obtain a Crown
grant for any portion of his allotment that he may have cultivated or laid
out as a hop-garden or vineyard at any time during the currency of his
license or lease, provided the area does not exceed twenty acres, and that
he pays up the difference between the rent paid and the sum total of the
purchase money. In the Regulations will be found full details with regard
to sales by auction, swamp lands, timber reserves, sawmill licenses,
etc., and these subjects require no special notice ; and the only other point
requiring attention is that of application for the forfeiture of the
license or lease of any occupant on the ground of non-compliance
or violation. These applications must be made in accordance with


the regulations under that head. They will be heard by Local Land
Boards, which can, if they please, recommend the applicant for a prefer-
ential selection if the license or lease is forfeited, but in all cases an appeal
lies to the Minister personally.
Such is the most complete resume of the Act and Regulations our spac&
admits, and we recommend it to selectors accordingly.


INDEX TO ACT, REGULATIONS, AND SCHEDULES
Part I.
PAGE
INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL PRO VISIONS ... 9
Repeal of Acts ... ... ... ... ... 9
Existing Occupiers of Crown Lands ... ... ... 11
Interpretation of Terms ... ... ... ... 11
Act not to apply to Mallee CocSrtry ... ... ... 12
Division of Crown Lands ... ... ... ... 12
Governor to convey only under this Act ... ... ... 13
Land acquired by Crown or Board may be conveyed ... 13
Registration of Crown Purchases to have same effect as
enrolment ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Land reserved from Sale Leasing or Licensing—And excepted
from operation of the Mining Statute ... ... 13
Reserved Lands not to be Sold, Leased, or Licensed ... 14
Notice of Permanent Reservation of Land to be published in
Government Gazette before such Reservation ... ... 14
Notice of Temporary Reservation to be published in Govern-
ment Gazette after such Reservation ... ... ... 14
Escheated and Forfeited Lands may be conveyed ... ... 15
Grant by Governor on behalf of Her Majesty to be valid ... 15
Governor may divide Territory into Counties, Parishes, or
Townships... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Crown Grants and Leases to be ante-dated ... ... 15
Holders of certain Licenses and Leases have pre-emption ... 15
REGULATIONS FOR PART I
Preliminary ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Survey ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Field Notes, etc. ... ... ... ... ... 19
Plans... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Survey Fees ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Local Land Boards and Appeals ... ... ... ... 21
Appeals ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
SCHEDULE TO PART 1 23
Part 11.
PASTORAL LANDS—
Division into Pastoral Allotments ... ... ... 24
Alienation of Pastoral Lands in Fee forbidden ... ... 24
Term of Lease ... ... ... ... ... 24
Applications for Lease may be made ... ... ... 24
Highest bidder to be entitled to Lease ... ... ... 25
If no bidder, applications for Lease may be made ... ... 25.


PAGE
If no bidder, size of Pastoral Allotment may be altered and
right to Lease again offered ... ... ... ... 25
Pent to be reserved in Lease of Pastoral Allotment ... 25
Covenants, etc., of Lease ... ... ... ... 25
Payment for Improvements on expiration of term of Lease ... 27
Lessee of Pastoral Allotment may select not exceeding three
hundred and twenty acres as Homestead ... ... 27
REGULATIONS FOR PASTORAL LANDS—
Pastoral Lands... ... ... ... ... ... 28
SCHEDULES FOR PASTORAL LANDS ... 29 to 35
Part 111.
AGRICULTURAL AND GRAZING LANDS—
Division into Grazing Areas ... ... ... ... 36
Alienation of Grazing Lands forbidden ... ... ... 36
Lease of Grazing Areas... ... ... ... ... 36
Agricultural Allotment to New Selectors ... ... ... 36
Agricultural Allotments to Selectors under previous Land Acts 36
License for a Selected Portion of a Grazing Area ... ... 37
Persons over 18 years of age may take up Land under this
Part ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Rent to be reserved in Lease of Grazing Area ... ... 37
Covenants, etc., of Lease ... ... ... ... 37
Appointment of Land Office and Land Officer ... ... 40
Application for a Lease or License ... ... ... 40
Payment for Improvements on Expiration of Term of Lease 40
Licenses to occupy any of the Waste Lands of the Crown ... 40
Extent to which Lands may be selected ... ... ... 40
Licenses obtained in violation of Act to be fraudulent and void 43
Value of Improvements to be Arbitrated ... ... ... 44
Proceedings on neglect to appoint an Arbitrator ... ... 44
Death of Arbitrator ... ... ... ... ... 4*4
Improvement or Non-residence License ... ... ... 45
Provisions relating to Non-residence Licenses ... ... 45
Forfeited Lands may be Licensed or Sold ... ... 46
Assignment of License not allowed ... ... ... '46
Non-payment of Fees or Rent to be gazetted ... ... 46
Unsurveyed Lands licensed to be liable to have the Boundaries
fixed at any time during continuance of License ... 47
Selectors may at any time obtain a Crown Grant of 20 acres
of their Allotment for Vineyard or Orchard ... ... 47
Lessees may give order for Crown Grants to be delivered to
Mortgagees, etc. ... ... ... ... 47
After two years Licensee under this Part or under Part 11.
of No. 360 may give License Lien for Loan ... ... 48
Registration ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
Transfer of Lien to Lease or Grant when issued ... ... 48
Endorsement of Lien on Grant or Lease ... ... ... .48
Fee on Registration ... ... ... ... ... 49
Holder of License Lien to have no claim if License forfeited,
but may be repaid if Improvements sold and Minister
satisfied as to bona fides ... ... ... ... 49


PAGE
Rules Regulations and Orders ... ... ... •• ■ 49
■ Selector under Act No. 860 who has transferred to No. 864
may re-transfer ... ... ... •• • •• • 49-
REGULATIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND GRAZING
LANDS—
Grazing Areas ... ... ... ... ••• 50
Agricultural Allotments —Residence Licenses ... 51
„ „ Non-Residence Licenses... ... 51
Residence and Non-Residence Licenses ... ... ... 51
Vineyard, Hop Garden, and Orchard ... ... ... 52
License Liens ... ... ... ... ... •• • 52
Licenses may be changed ... ... ... ... 52
Leases and Crown Grants ... ... ... ... 53
Orders for the delivery of Crown Grants ... ... . . 53
SCHEDULES FOR AGRICULTURAL AND GRAZING
LANDS 54 to 92
Part IV.
AURIFEROUS LANDS—
License to use Auriferous Lands ... ... ... ... 93
Alienation of Auriferous Lands forbidden... ... ... 93
Annual Licenses for Grazing on Auriferous Lands Renewable
for Five Years ... ... ... ••• ... 93
Lands Alienated to be Subject to Conditions for Mining ... 94
REGULATIONS FOR PART IV.—
Auriferous Lands ... ... ... ••• ••• 94
SCHEDULES FOR PART IV 96 to 99^
Part V.
LAND WHICH MAY BE SpLD BY AUCTION—
Crown Lands Sold by Auction ... ... ... ... 100
Sales by Auction and Notice thereof ... ... ... 100
Conditions of Sale at Auction of Lands ... ... ... 100
Upset Price of Lands Unsold at Auction to be Reduced ... 101
Townships may be Sold by Auction ... .• • ■ •• • 191
Proclamation Town and Townships may be Rescinded ... 101
Exchange of Crown and Private Land upon Alteration of
Road 101
Detached Strips of Land may be Sold at a Valuation ... 101
Declaration to be made by Appraiser ... ... ... 102
Auction Moneys appropriated for Railway Purposes ... 102
REGULATIONS FOR PART V.—
Sales by Auction and Crown Grants ... ... ... 102,103
SCHEDULES FOR PART V 103 to 106-


PAGE
Part VI.
SWAMP LANDS—
Swamp Lands ... ... ... ... ... 107
Alienation only to be in manner expressed ... ... 107
Governor in Council may cause Swamp Lands to be Drained 107
Power to enter upon Lands and make Canals Drains &c. ... 107
Powers of Board for purposes of Drainage ... ... 108
Penalty for Injuring or Obstructing Drains ... ... 108
Governor may Lease Swamp Lands in lots of 160 acres for
21 years with Drainage Conditions ... ... ... 108
Parts VII. and VIII.
STATE FOREST TIMBER, WATER RESERVES, AND
LEASES AND LICENSES FOR OTHER THAN
PASTORAL GRAZING OR AGRICULTURAL PUR-
POSES—
State Forests—Alienation of State Forest Reserves forbidden 109
Licenses to cut Timber ... \.. ... ... ... 109
Timber Reserves —Alienation of Timber Reserves forbidden 109
Licenses to cut Timber ... ... ... ... ... 109
Water Reserves—Alienation of Water Reserves forbidden ... 110
Leases for other purposes than Agricultural or Pastoral ... 110
Conditions of Leases ... ... ... ... ... 110
Purposes for which Licenses may be issued ... ... 11l
Leases for Roads and Tramways... ... ... ... 11l
Conditions of Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 11l
Licenses for Water Easements ... ... ... ... 11l
Licenses may be granted to cut Races and divert Water for
Mill purposes ✓... ... ... ... ... 112
REGULATIONS FOR PARTS VII. AND VIII.—
Licenses —State Forests and Timber Reserves ... ... 113
Sawmill Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 113
Licenses to fell Eucalyptus Timber for supply of a Sawmill 113
Jinker Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 113
Splitters’ Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 113
Licenses to cut Timber for purposes other than Sawmill or
Splitting ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Licenses for felling Undergrowth ... ... ... 114
Forms of, and applications for, Licenses ... ... ... 114
Licenses for exclusive right to cut Timber ... ... 114
General Provisions ... ... ... ... ... 114
Grazing Licenses ... ... .. ... ... 115
Residence Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 115
Of Leases under Part VIII. of “ The Land Act 1884” ... 115
Timber Licenses—Licenses on Crown Lands (not being State
Forests or Timber Reserves)—Section 93 ... ... 116
General Provisions ... ... ... ... ... 117
Miscellaneous Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 117
Of Water Easements on Private Land ... ... ... 118
Of Race and Mill Licenses ... ... ... ... 119
SCHEDULES UNDER PARTS VII. AND VIII. 120 to 138


PAGE
Part IX.
COMMONS—
Common Lands ... ... ... 2°9
Saving of Existing Commons ... ... " 439
Governor in Council may proclaim Commons ... 439
Governor in Council to frame Regulations... ... 439
Powers of Managers of Commons ... ... 140
Governor in Council may decrease or diminish Commons ... 440
Lands taken from Commons ... ... 140
REGULATIONS UNDER PART IX.—
Of Commons ... ... ... 141
SCHEDULES UNDER PART IX. 143 to 145
Part X.
TRESPASSES AND PENALTIES—
Land Officer not to apply for an Allotment under a penalty of
£lOO and loss of Office ... ... ... ... 146
Penalty for False Statement ... ... ... 146
Bailiffs of Crown Lands ... ... ... 146
Authority of Persons appointed under Land Acts 1862 and
1865 and this Act ... ... 447
Penalty for Unauthorized Occupation or Depasturing on
Lands not Commonable ... ... ... 147
Penalty for other Trespasses on Crown Lands ... ... 147
Obliteration of Boundary Marks a Misdemeanour ... ... 147
Survey Officers may enter upon Private Lands ... ... 148
Penalties under No. 154 or No. 237 now enforced ... ... 148
Part XI.
MISCELLANEOUS—
Leases of Pastoral Allotments and Grazing Areas subject to
Right to Mine ... ... ... ... ... 149
All Crown Grants Licenses and Leases to contain a Condition
permitting Mining on Compensation for Surface Damage 149
Holder of Miner’s Right or Mining Lease authorised to enter 149
Warden to determine Claim to Surface Damage subject to
Appeal to Court of Mines ... ... ... ... 150
Applicants for Licenses before Commencement of Act if
qualified to have priority ... ... ... ... 150
Grazing Licenses ... .... ... ... ... 150
Rights of Licensee and Lessee against Trespassers... ... 150
Any unauthorized occupier under a forfeited License may be
forcibly dispossessed ... ... ... ... 151
Recovery of Rent and License Fees ... ... ... 151
Governor in Council may prohibit felling Timber &c. ... 152
Water Easements reserved upon purchased Land ... ... 152
How applications &c. to be heard ... ... ... 152
Previous declarations of forfeiture valid ... ... ... 152


PAGE
Governor in Council may withhold or withdraw Lands from
Sale Licensing or Leasing ... ... •• • •• ■
Travelling Cattle ... _ •••.
Notice to be given, to Occupier of Land of intention to drive
Travelling Cattle or Sheep ... ... ••• •••
Privilege of Public Officers on duty and of Holders of
Miners’ Eights ... ... ••• ••• •••
Proceedings not to be quashed or removed ... ...
Appeal given ... ... ••• ••• ••• io4 '
Board to make Eegulations for the Control and Management
of Public Parks and Eeserves &c. ... ... ••• 154
Trustees of Eeserves to he deemed Occupants for purpose or
agreeing in Line of Fence ... ... •••
IJnbranded Wild Cattle to belong to Crown ... ... lod
Governor may make Eegulations ... ... • ■ • • • •
Minister to lay an Annual Eeport before Parliament ... 155
EEGULATIONS UNDEE PAET Xl.
Miscellaneous—Applications for Forfeiture ... ... 155
Section 119—Grazing Licenses ... ... ••• •••
Fees lo ®
SCHEDULE UNDEE PAET XI. 156,157
SCHEDULES EEFEEEED TO IN THE ACT ... 158 to 160


THE LAND ACT
AND
REGULATIONS,
1884.
THE ACT.
An Act to amend and consolidate the laws relating to the Sale and Occupa«
tion of Crown Lands, and for other purposes.
Assented to 12th December, ISB4.
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with
the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same as follows:—•
PART I.
INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1. This Act shall come into operation on the twenty-ninth day of
December, One thousand eight hundred and eighty-four, and may for all
purposes be cited as “ The Land Act 1884,” and is divided into Parts, as
follows:
Pakt I.—lntroductory and General Provisions.
Part ll.—Pastoral Land.
Part lll.—Agricultural and Grazing Lands.
Part IV.—Auriferous Lands.
Part V. —Lands which may be sold by Auction.
Part Vl.—Swamp Lands.
Part Vll.—State Forests, Timber and Water Reserves.
Part Vlll.—Leases and Licenses for other than Pastoral, Grazing
or Agricultural purposes.
Part IX.—Commons.
Part X.—Trespasses and Penalties.
Part Xl.—Miscellaneous.
Repeal of Acts.
2. The Acts specified in the First Schedule hereto (see end of hook) shall be
and the same are hereby repealed, but nothing herein contained except where
otherwise expressly provided shall affect alter or repeal the “ Mining Statute


1865.” Provided that all proceedings matters or things lawfully had or done
and all reservations of land temporary or permanent other than those for
pastoral purposes and all proclamations regulations appointments or bye-
laws made or made valid before the commencement of this Act by under or
in pursuance of the said repealed Acts or any of them shall be of the same
force and effect to all intents and purposes as if the said Acts were still in
force except so far as they may be rescinded altered or amended by this
Act or may be inconsistent with or repugnant thereto ; and that no informa-
tion suit appeal or other proceeding criminal or civil at law or in equity
which at the time of the commencement of this Act may be depending in
any court or before any judge or justices arbitrator or other authority shall
abate or become discontinued or be in anywise prejudiced or affected, but
shall be proceeded with heard and determined and the verdict sentence
judgment order decision or award enforced as if the said Acts were still in
force; and that all offences committed and forfeitures and penalties
incurred before the commencement of this Act against any of the
said repealed provisions shall and may be tried punished inquired into
and enforced; and every conviction or order of any justice made or
given before the commencement of this Act shall and may be enforced
and proceeded with as if the said Acts were still in force. Provided
further that until and subject to the exercise of the powers here-
inafter contained all commons heretofore proclaimed shall continue to
be managed, and the managers appointed shall continue in office and may
be removed and their successors appointed, and the fees shall and may be
collected, with the same rights and powers to the managers and persons
entitled to commons respectively, and subject to the same rights liabilities
and restrictions as if the said Acts were still in force. And provided
further that notwithstanding anything herein contained all proceedings
civil or criminal of what nature or kind soever for the enforcement of any
forfeitures or penalties in regard to any land alienated demised or held
under license under the authority of the said Acts or any of them shall and
may be commenced and prosecuted as if the said Acts were still in force;
and the Governor shall in regard to all leases licenses and selections under
any of the Acts hereby repealed have and exercise the same power of
revocation and forfeiture, and every such power may be exercised and shall
be enforced and proved in like manner and every such revocation and
forfeiture shall have the same effect in every respect so far as may be as if
the said Acts had not been repealed; and nothing herein contained shall
except where otherwise expressly provided be deemed to affect any estate
right or interest created or existing under or by virtue of the said Acts or
any of them ; and the Board may, to every person holding or at the com-
mencement of this Act entitled to a license to reside on or cultivate any
lands on any goldfield or lands adjacent or heretofore dealt with as being
adjacent thereto under the provisions of the said Acts or any or either of
them renew and for such purposes issue yearly licenses whether the total
amount thereof be in excess of twenty acres or not or where two or more
licenses have been issued to the same person for adjoining lands one license
in lieu thereof for the land comprised in all or any number of them until
such person have been entitled to exercise and have exercised his right
under this Act to obtain a lease of or purchase the land held by him, unless
in the meantime such license be declared forfeited or cancelled by the
Governor; and the rights conferred by section ten of “ The Land Act
1878” upon licensees of residence sites whether such rights have
already accrued or would hereafter have accrued but for the repeal
of the Acts which are by this Act repealed shall be preserved


and remain as though, the said Acts had not been repealed; and
all the provisions of the Acts hereby repealed shall during the
continuance of this Act remain and be in full force so far as they
respectively relate or can be applied consistently with this Act to any lands
or allotments or subdivisions of allotments purchased selected or possessed
under the said Acts or any of them before the commencement of this Act,
and to any lands which may be held under license or be hereafter purchased
or possessed by any purchasers or licensees or lessees under the said Acts
or any of them, and to the issue of licenses to the holders of land under the
provisions of the said Acts and to the forfeiture or cancellation of any such
license, and all rights of selection and purchase and of obtaining licenses
and leases given under and by the said Acts or any of them together with
the obligations of selectors and licensees respectively are hereby confirmed
and continued; and when before the commencement of this Act any Crown
lands have been permanently reserved for any of the purposes mentioned in
section six of “ Tip* Land Act 1869” the Governor may convey any such
land in fee or for iffiy lesser estate to trustees for any of the purposes afore-
said. M f
Existing Occupiers of Crown Lands.
3. Persons in occupation at the commencement of this Act or any lands
of the Crown under the provisions of any of the Acts hereby repealed, and
who remain on such lands after the expiration of the term for which they
held the same under any such repealed Acts shall, if the holder of a
pastoral license or of a grazing right for the one year next preceding the
commencement of this Act continue in occupation of the same until the
thirtieth September one thousand eight hundred and eighty-five and shall
not so long as such lands are not required for the purposes of this Act and
so long as they pay fees under a grazing license issued under the authority
of this Act for the grass of such lands, which the Minister is hereby
authorised to fix from time to time and to levy and take, be treated as
trespassers thereon.
Interpretation of Terms.
4. In the construction and for the purposes of this Act, the following
terms shall, if not inconsistent with the context or subject matter, have the
respective meanings hereby assigned to them (that is to say): —
The words “ agricultural allotment” shall be taken to mean a quantity
of land not exceeding three hundred and twenty acres and not
embracing more than one-half of a mile of frontage, and like in
proportion for a lesser area, to any reservation (whether existing at
the commencement of this Act or thereafter made) along any lake
lagoon river stream or watercourse forming a boundary of such
allotment, measured in a right line from one extreme point of the
same to the other, and which is applied for by any applicant for a
license under this Act, whether the same may be surveyed or
unsurveyed Crown lands :
The words “ country lands” shall mean any lands not situate within
any city town or borough:
The word “ Board” shall mean the Board of Land and Works :
The word “ cattle” in Parts 11. VII. and XI. of this Act shall include
bulls cows oxen heifers steers calves horses mares geldings colts
and fillies :
The word “ cattle” in Parts IX. and X. of this Act shall mean and
include bulls cows oxen heifers steers calves horses mares geldings


colts fillies asses mules sheep and goats, and shall apply to any one
or more animal or animals of the said several kinds:
The word “ cultivation” shall include planting cereal or root crops
planting an orchard vineyard nursery shrubbery or wattles or
other trees or laying down land with artificial grasses :
The word “ fence” shall mean any fence of the kind mentioned and
described in section four of “ The Fences Statute 1874” except
those mentioned and described in sub-sections iv. to vi. and vm.
to x. (both inclusive) of the said section four :
The word “Minister” shall mean the responsible Minister of the
Crown for the time being administering this Act or the Part of
this Act to which the expression refers :
The word “ occupy” in Part 111. of this Act shall mean residence by a
licensee in his own proper person on or within five miles of his
agricultural allotment:
The words “ selector under any previous Land Act or Acts shall mean
any person who has selected Crown lands under Part 11. of “ The
Land Act 1862” or who has become a lessee of any Crown lands
under Part 11. of “ The Amending Land Act 1865 ” or who is or
has been a licensee under Part 11. of “ The Land Act 1869 :
The words “ substantial and permanent improvements ” shall mean and
include dams wells cultivation fencing clearing or draining of an
agricultural allotment and the erecting of a habitable dwelling or
farm or other buildings upon and permanently attached to the soil
of such agricultural allotment:
The word “ traveller ” in this Act shall mean a person travelling with
cattle or sheep for the bond fide purpose of taking the said cattle
or sheep to and leaving them at a market or some other appointed
place, but it shall not mean or include any person travelling or who
appears or shall be deemed hereunder to be travelling with cattle
or sheep for the purpose of depasturing the same upon or on either
side of any road or track commonly used as a thoroughfare or
leading to any auriferous Crown lands on which persons are
actually engaged in mining for gold or upon any common, and the
burden of proving such bond fide purpose aforesaid and of dis-
proving such purpose of depasturing aforesaid shall in all criminal
and civil proceedings whatsoever lie upon the persons so travelling
with cattle or sheep or upon the party who is interested in proving
that such person was a “ traveller” within the meaning of this Act,
and notwithstanding any law to the contrary such person shall be
competent to give evidence on his own behalf:
The word “vermin” shall include kangaroos wallabies dingoes or
native dogs dogs run wild dogs at large foxes rabbits and any other
animal or any bird which the Governor in Council may by procla-
mation in the Government Gazette declare to be vermin for the
purposes of this Act.
Act not to apply to Mallee Country.
5 Nothing in this Act contained shall apply to or affect the lands com-
prised in the Mallee Country and dealt with by “ The Mallee Pastoral
..Leases Act 1883.”
Division of Crown Lands.
6. The whole of the unalienated lands belonging to the Crown shall be
and are hereby divided into the following classes (namely):


(1.) Pastoral lands :
(2.) Agricultural and grazing lands :
(3.) Auriferous lands :
(4.) Lands which may be sold by auction :
(5.) Swamp lands :
(6.) State forest reserves :
(7.) Timber reserves ; and
(8.) Water reserves.
The area of land comprised within each of such classes respectively
is delineated by projections bearing a distinguishing colour or shading on
maps of the several counties in which such land is situated referred to in
the Second Schedule hereto and known as the deposited maps which have
been sealed with the seal of the Board and deposited with the Clerk of the
Parliaments. The Governor-in-Council may by proclamation. to be
published in the Government Gazette from time to time increase or diminish
the area of land comprised in any of the above-mentioned classes except
increasing lands which may be sold by auction.
Governor to convey only under this Act.
7. Under and subject to the provisions of this Act but not otherwise, the
Governor in Council in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty may grant
convey or otherwise dispose of lands for the time being belonging to the
Crown for such estate or interest as in each case is hereby authorised and
for none other.
Land acquired by Crown or Board may be conveyed.
8. Any land acquired by purchase or otherwise by the Crown and con-
veyed to Her Majesty or to the Board, except land acquired for railway
purposes, may be sold granted conveyed or otherwise disposed, of by the
Governor in Council in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty in the same
manner and form but not otherwise as if such land had never been
alienated from the Crown.
Registration of Crown Purchases to have same efect as enrolment.
9. Every registration heretofore made under the'' Real Property Statute
1864” or under any previously existing Act concerning the registration of
deeds and conveyances affecting land of a memorial of any grant conveyance
or surrender to Her Majesty of any freehold or leasehold land or any estate
or interest therein, and every registration heretofore made under Act Ho.
CCCXII. or under the “ Transfer of Land Statute” of any surrender or trans-
fer to Her Majesty of any estate or interest in any freehold or leasehold land
under the operation or subject to the provisions of the last mentioned Acts
or either of them, and every registration which shall hereafter be made
under the “ Real Property Statute 1864,” of any such memorials as afore-
said or under the “ Transfer of Land Statute” of any such surrender or
transfer as aforesaid shall respectively be deemed to have been and shall be
an enrolment of record of such grant conveyance surrender or transfer
respectively.
Land reserved from sale leasing or licensing—And excepted Jrom
operation of the Mining Statute.
10. The Governor in Council may from time to time either by a general
■or particular description reserve either temporarily or permanently from
sale or from being leased or from having a license granted in respect


thereof any Crown lands which in his opinion are required for any public
purpose whatsoever, or for quays docks landing places tramways railways
and railway stations roads canals or other internal communications, or for
reservoirs aqueducts or watercourses, or as a watershed or gathering ground
for water-supply purposes or as camping-grounds or for watering
purposes, or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants, or the sites
of markets abattoirs public baths or washhouses State schools reformatories
mechanics’ institutes libraries museums picture galleries schools of mines or
other institutions for public instruction, experimental farms agricultural
colleges and reserves of timber for sawing or splitting purposes and
reserves for the growth and preservation of timber, gardens parks or
hospitals asylums or infirmaries or places for the interment of the dead or
for a racecourse or for the recreation convenience or amusement of the
people and by the same or any subsequent notice may except from
occupation for mining purposes or for residence or business under any
miners’ right or business license any specific portion of Crown lands, or any
area of Crown lands ; and no land so excepted or included in any area so
excepted shall be occupied or continue to be occupied under any miners’
right or business license after such exception until such exception is
revoked. Land permanently reserved or purporting to have been
permanently reserved by the Governor in Council whether within the
powers of the Governor in Council under any previous Land Act
or Acts or in excess of the said powers shall be deemed to have been
permanently reserved for the purposes for which they may have been
reserved, although such purposes were not authorised by the said Act or
Acts, and to be permanently reserved for the said purposes under this Act.
Reserved Lands not to be Sold, Leased, or Licensed.
11. After any land has been temporarily reserved from sale or from being
leased or from having a license granted in respect thereof, the same shall
not be sold or leased nor shall a license be granted in respect thereof until
such temporary reservation has been revoked by the Governor in Council,
and after any land has been permanently reserved from sale every
conveyance or alienation thereof except for the purpose for which such
reservation has been made shall be absolutely void as well against Her
Majesty as all persons whomsoever.
Notice of Permanent Reservation of Land to be published in the
“ Government Gazette ” before such Reservation.
12. Before any land is permanently reserved as hereinbefore mentioned
notice of the intention to reserve the same shall be published in four
consecutive ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette before the same
is so reserved, and in every such notice the land proposed to be reserved
and the purpose for which it is to be reserved shall be fully described and
stated.
Notice of Temporary Reservation to be published in “ Government
Gazette ” after such Reservation.
13. When any land has been temporarily reserved as hereinbefore
mentioned, or excepted from occupation under the “ Mining Statute 1865,”
notice of such reservation or exception shall be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette, and before any temporary reservation is revoked notice of
the intention to make such revocation shall be published in four consecu-
tive ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette.


Escheated and Forfeited Lands may be conveyed.
14. When Her Majesty lias become or may hereafter become entitled to
any lands either by escheat for want of heirs or by reason of any forfeiture
or by reason that the same had been purchased or held by or for the use of
or in trust for any alien or aliens contrary to the provisions of any law for
the time being in force, if the Governor in Council thinks fit so to do, the
Governor in Council may grant such lands or any part thereof in fee simple
or for any less estate to any person for the purpose of restoring the same to
any of the family of the person whose estate the same had been or of
carrying into effect any intended grant or conveyance devise of such last
mentioned person in relation thereto or of rewarding any person making
discovery of such escheat or of Her Majesty’s right and title thereto, or in
default such land may be dealt with in the same manner as land not
alienated by the Crown.
Grant by Governor on behalf of Her Majesty to be valid.
15. Every grant or any instrument heretofore executed by the Governor
in Council on behalf of Her Majesty and purporting to be a grant shall
subject to the conditions thereof be valid and effectual as well against Her
Majesty as against all other persons any law to the contrary notwith-
standing.
Governor may divide Territory into Counties, Parishes, or Townships.
16. The Governor in Council may subdivide any county into parishes and
townships and by proclamation to be published in the Government Gazette
may define the boundaries of such parishes or townships and may distin-
guish each by a name; after such proclamation the territory comprised
within the boundaries of any of the said divisions shall thenceforward be
recognised as a parish or township by the name so given as aforesaid. The
Governor in Council may from time to time at the request of the council of
any shire or borough alter by proclamation to be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette the name of any such shire or borough and may also from
time to time by proclamation as aforesaid alter the name of any county
parish city town township land area goldfield river harbour lake bay lagoon
swamp mountain glen or other place or locality whatsoever within Victoria.
The Governor in Council may also by proclamation in the Government
Gazette diminish or extend the area of any county or alter the boundaries
or name of any county and add the territory taken away from one county
to any other adjacent county and divide any county into two or more
counties and give to each a distinguishing name.
Crown Grants and Leases to be ante-dated.
17. Notwithstanding any law or usage to the contrary, every Crown grant
and lease hereafter to be issued shall bear date on the day when the person
named therein as grantee or lessee respectively first became entitled to
such grant or lease, and the registration thereof under the “ Transfer of
Land Statute” shall be deemed to be an enrolment of record thereof, and
such enrolment shall relate back to the day of the date of the grant or
lease.
Holders of certain licenses and Leases have pre-emption.
18. When buildings or other improvements have been erected or made upon
any Crown lands held under Section 49 of “ The Land Act 1869 ’ or under
any lease issued under section forty-seven of “ The Land Act 1862 ’ and of
which land the licensee or lessee has been in possession for a period of at


least two years and a half, if it be proved to the satisfaction of the Board
that such buildings or other improvements have been erected or made and
that the licensee or lessee has been in possession of such lands as aforesaid
and that the conditions of such license or lease have been complied with, and
if there be no objection to the alienation of such lands on the ground of being
auriferous or other reasons of a public nature to be stated by the Board within
three months after being requested to do so by the licensee or lessee or
within three months after an application has been made to purchase as
hereinafter mentioned, the licensee or lessee shall have the exclusive right
of purchasing the allotment on which such buildings or other improvements
have been erected or made at a price to be determined by the Board not
exceeding the upset price of the nearest land sold by the Crown before the
issue of such license or lease, and it shall be lawful for the Board previous
to the purchase of any land under this section to grant to the licensee or
lessee a certificate specifying the amount of rent paid by him during the
period he may have been in possession of such lands and so much of the
amount specified in such certificate for every acre or fractional part of an
acre in such allotment shall be credited to the licensee or lessee in the
purchase-money of such allotment. Provided always that it shall be lawful
for the Governor in Council to grant a lease to such licensee of such allotment
as the Board allows to purchase the land comprised in such license whereby
the balance of the purchase-money may be paid and received by equal half-
yearly instalments.
REGULATIONS FOR PART I.
The following are the Regulations applying to the above general
provisions and miscellaneous requirements of the Act, including the
Special Arrangements as to Survey and. what is of chief importance
to the Selector, the Scale of Fees, with references to the particular
Schedule therein provided for ; the appointment of Local Land
Boards, their constitution, and the mode of appeal against their
recommendations :
Preliminary.
1. The Schedules hereto shall he taken to form part of these Regulations,
and may be modified by the Governor in Council.
2. For the purposes of these Regulations, unless the context be incon-
sistent therewith, the words “ agricultural allotment,” “ country lands,”
“Board,” “cattle,” “cultivation,” “fence,” “Minister,” “occupy,”
“selector under any previous Land Act or Acts,” “substantial and
permanent improvements,” “traveller,” and “vermin” shall have the
respective meanings assigned to them in section 4 of Part I. of The Land
Act 1884. The words “ large cattle ” shall mean, cows, heifers, oxen,
steers, horses, mares, geldings, colts, fillies, asses, and mules; and the
words “ small cattle ” shall mean sheep and goats.
The words “Secretary for Lands,” “Surveyor-General,” “Assistant
Surveyor-General,” “ District Surveyor,” and “ Land Officer ” shall mean
the persons for the time being holding such offices respectively, or
performing the duties of such offices respectively.


Survey.
1. The boundaries of every survey district shall be defined by the
Surveyor-G-eneral. Every surveyor, when making surveys, shall comply
with the following requirements, that is to say :
2. He shall use a theodolite in correct adjustment, the readings of both
verniers of which must be entered in field book on taking an observation or
laying out an angle ; and a chain maintained at the true standard length of
sixty-six feet by daily comparison, when in use, with a standard chain or
steel tape kept exclusively for such purpose, the standard itself to be
compared, at intervals, with a standard recognised by the Department.
3. He shall conspicuously mark on the ground by stakes (split from
sound timber and sawn on top), and trenches, all the boundary lines of
each allotment surveyed by him, and shall distinctly blaze all trees
within three feet of such lines, and at not less than two angles of such
allotment, if a tree is available within two chains radius, remove a
square of bark from it fifteen inches by fifteen inches, and grave with a
chisel in the solid wood a broad arrow four inches long, in width and
depth of arms one-third inch, the bearing and distance of such mark from
the angle peg being carefully entered in the field book. Such stakes shall
be not less than three inches square and twelve inches long when placed at
the corners of the allotment, and when placed as intermediate stakes shall
be of similar length, and not less than two inches square. Intermediate
stakes and trenches shall be placed at regular intervals of ten chains
along the lines on plains or flat country, but where hilly and undulating,
in such position that from each peg one other peg, at least, on either side
may be visible, the average distance apart in no case being more than ten
chains. In hilly and undulating country the surveyor shall also, at
each theodolite or transit station, drive a small peg four inches by one
nch, and enter chained position in field book. When the slope of
ground exceeds five degrees from the level, the angle shall be measured
on the vertical arc of instrument, and used for correction of chainage.
When practicable, these observations shall be made at even chains, thus
avoiding the trouble of log. calculations in reduction. In all cases the
measurements are to be reduced to the horizontal plane. All stakes shall
be driven into the ground so that one inch only shall appear above the
surface. Corner trenches shall be fifteen links long from the corner stake,
cut exactly in the direction of the several boundary lines, and the trenches
at the intermediate stakes shall be five links in length, cut in the direction
of the line on each side of the peg, leaving a spit twelve inches long
between the trenches, thus =. All such trenches shall be not less than
ten inches wide and six inches deep. In places where, on account of rock,
such trenches cannot be cut, the corner stakes and intermediate stakes shall
be protected by piles of stones placed around them.
_ 4. Every allotment shall, where it is practicable, contain at least two
right angles, and be quadrilateral. If a narrow strip of land be left
between any allotment and a water frontage, the shortest side of the allot-
ment shall front such strip of land, and where such strip is requird for a
roadway, it is to be not less than chains in width. If an allotment
abuts on a main road, the shortest side should face such road. The
boundary lines of allotments within a defined parish shall conform to the
locally established meridian of that parish, or as nearly thereto as circum-
stances will permit. Any departure from these instructions will necessitate
a special report to be sent in with the plan.


5. The surveyor shall in all cases chain the actual boundaries of allot-
ments unless there be insuperable difficulties in the way, such as a wide
river, lake, &c. In such cases the method observed in measuring the
distance and prolonging the line should be clearly shown in the field book.
6. When a creek is the boundary of an allotment, the traverse of the
creek is to form part of the geometrical figure used in calculating the area,
and the areas of the portions lying between the traverse lines and the creek
are to be computed from the offsets and insets.
7. In establishing a connexion with a previous survey, the most reliable
line of that survey shall be adopted as a datum for bearings, and the
surveyor will be careful to ascertain before adopting any line that its
bearing on the ground is relatively correct with reference to adjacent lines
of the survey. If no Government survey has been made in the immediate
neighbourhood of the site, the surveyor shall establish a datum for his
bearings, and shall connect his survey by traverse with some durably
constructed signal station, erected on or near the most remarkable topo-
graphical feature in the vicinity.
8. The subject of the selection of roads being one of vital importance,
the attention of surveyors is specially directed to the following instructions
in reference thereto:—As soon as a surveyor has been assigned a district, he
shall put himself in communication with the shire council or councils
exercising control within his district, and request the co-operation of their
engineer in selecting the best routes for leading lines of road through the
unappropriated portions of the district. In the event of any shire council
neglecting or refusing to comply with his request, after receiving twenty
days’ notice in writing, the surveyor shall proceed to select the best lines,
according to his own judgment; but the failure of the shire authorities to-
co-operate shall not relieve him from the responsibility of making proper
provision for all necessary roads ; and in no case shall he survey a detached
selection so as to block an existing track, or in a position likely to interfere
with the public convenience, or block access to back country, until he' has
satisfied himself as to the road requirements of the locality in these
respects, and made proper provision therefor. In cases where a difference
of opinion may arise between himself and the shire engineers, or where the
surveyor has doubts in his own mind as to the proper course to pursue, he
shall consult the District Surveyor, and be guided by his directions. As
soon as he has determined the approximate position of the leading lines of
road for any locality, he shall forthwith furnish the District Surveyor or
Land Officer with a rough diagram, showing the routes determined upon, in
order that they may be noted on the locality plans for the information of
intending selectors, and the main lines especially should be approximately
selected as far ahead of selection as possible, and when once marked on the
ground are not to be deviated from.
9. In addition to the necessary main roads, accommodation roads leading
thereto are to be provided for at intervals of from a mile to a mile and a
half in each direction.
10. Surveyors shall be held responsible for any inconvenience that may
arise either to the public or individuals through the improper blocking of
existing tracks, the omission of necessary roads, or the selection of imprac-
ticable roads where practicable lines are possible.
11. In making the permanent survey of a road, both sides are to be
marked by pegs and trenches and blazed trees as specified for boundary
lines.


12. Any previous surveyed blocks or allotments that may adjoin or
be contiguous to the area or allotment under survey shall be connected
by tie lines vith such survey, and be shown on the plan.
18. In all cases where his measurements differ from those of any
previous surveys, the surveyor shall furnish a special report with reference
thereto.
Field Notes , etc.
14. Proper field notes of all surveys are to be recorded in the form of
a diagram in books of a convenient size to be approved by the Assistant
Surveyor-General, and any correction in the entries made for practical
errors are to be shown in red, with an explanatory note on the page in
which it occurs ; such books to be the property of the Department, and
to be given up when asked for. The date on which survey was com-
pleted must also be entered in the field book. On the completion of the
survey the surveyor shall, on the next page of the field book, make a sketch
of the position of the various lines of the survey, showing the chained
lengths and observed bearings of each separate line. He must also
certify on the field book that his notes as recorded are the actual results
of his observations and measurements on the ground. With the plan
must be sent in a certified copy of the field notes, together with copy of
the computations of the figure and its area in the usual form adopted for
computation by reduction of traverse and double areas. The aforesaid
instructions will be most stringently enforced, affording as they do the
only assurance of probable accuracy to the Certifying Surveyor in
cases where he may not have an opportunity of making a personal
inspection.
Plans.
15. The surveyor shall supply a plan of the allotment, showing the
course within its boundaries of any stream, race, road, track, and the
position of any waterhole, dam, hut, fence, garden, old gold-workings,
and any other topographical information that may be deemed necessary
to be known in connexion with the application to select. He shall also
state on the plan whether the bearings of the boundary lines have
reference to the true or to the magnetic meridian, and how determined;
or if taken from an adjacent survey, the datum line adopted must be
shown on the face of the plan. The scale of the plan, where the. area
of the allotment is 100 acres or less, shall be eight chains to one inch ;
where the area is over 100 acres, twenty chains to one inch, unless a larger
scale be required to show distinctly the matters hereinbefore directed to
be shown. All plans shall be dated, below signature, as of the day when
the survey was completed, and be certified as follows : —“ I certify that
this survey has been effected on the ground in accordance with regulations,
and that this plan is correct.”
16. Plans are to be drawn in accordance with the specimen plans
Prepared by the Department for the guidance of surveyors, and are to
oe forwarded to the Land Officer for the district on completion.
SURVEY FEES.
1. Whenever it shall become necessary to survey and define on the
ground the boundaries of any allotment under the provisions of this Act, at
the expense of an applicant, lessee, or licensee, the fee payable for the
survey by such applicant, lessee, or licensee shall be in accordance with the
following Schedule of Fees and Scale applicable to the class of country


in which such allotment is situated; and the Surveyor-General shall
determine the scale which shall apply to each district or locality of the
colony.
2. Schedule of Survey Fees:—
Areas.
Graduated Scales for Areas Specified.
1st Scale.
2nd Scale.
3rd Scale. 4th Scale.
5th Scale.J6th Scale.
7th Scale.
When the area does
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
£
s.
A.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
not exceed —
20 acres (minimum)
3
0
0
3 13
0
3
19
0
4
5
0
4
10
0
5
8
0
6 13
0
40 „
3
10
0
4 8
0
4
16
0
5
5
0
5
12
0
7
8
0
9 3
0
60 ;;
3
18
0
5 0
0
5
10
0
6
2
0
6
16
0
8
19
0
11 2
0
80 „
4
5
0
5 10
0
6
2
0
6
15
0
7
14
0
10
5
0
12 15
0
too „
4
11
0
5 19
0
6
13
0
7
7
0
8
12
0
11
8
0
14 4
0
120 ;
4
16
0
6 7
0
7
2
0
7
17
0
9
7
0
12
9
0
15 10
0
140
5
1
0
6 14
0
7
10
0
8
7
0
10
1
0
13
8
0
16 14
0
160 „
5
6
0
7 2
0
7
19
0
8
17
0
10
15
0
14
6
0
17 17
0
240 ;;
6
1
0
8 5
0
9
7
0
10
9
0
13
1
0
17
8
0
21 14
0
320 ;;
6
r>
0
9 5
0
10
10
0
11
15
0
15
0
0
20
0
0
25 0
0
480 „
7
17
0
10 19
0
12
9
0
14
0
0
18
0
0
24
2
0
30 5
0
640 „
8
16
0
12 7
0
14
2
0
15
18
0
20
10
0
27
11
0
34 13
0
800
9
18
0
13 12
0
15
12
0
17
11
0
22
14
0
30
12
0
38 10
0
1000 ,, (maximum)
10
12
0
15 0
0
17
4
0
19
8
0
25
3
0
34
0
0
42 17
0
3. For the survey of an allotment the area of which exceeds 1000
acres, the survey fee payable shall be calculated at per mile of external
boundaries, and the rate per mile shall be one-fifth the maximum, or fee
for the survey of a 1000-acre allotment, according to the scale applicable
to the district or locality in which such allotment is situated. And, for
the purpose of estimating the total amount of the fee payable for the
survey of any given area, the following rule shall be adopted in computing
the length of the boundaries, viz.:—The total length of the boundaries of
any allotment shall be taken at four times the square root of its area in
links.
4. Whenever it shall appear to the Surveyor-General that the survey of
any allotment is exceptionally difficult or expensive from its isolated posi-
tion or any other cause, such extra charge as the Minister may deem fit
may be imposed for the survey.
5. No survey shall be held to be a survey under the direction of the
Board within the meaning of the 54tli section of The Land Act 1884 until
the Board shall be satisfied of its accuracy, and the applicant shall be
responsible for the payment of any further sum that may be required for
the survey of the allotment, or for any modification of the plan thereof,
where such modification is not caused by the neglect of the authorized
surveyor.
6. When the right of selection is exercised in any detached portions,
a separate survey fee, according to scale, will be required for each
portion.
7. Notwithstanding anything herein, it shall be optional for the lessee
of any grazing area or pastoral allotment, in conjunction with the lessees
of similar areas or allotments adjoining, to employ, at his or their expense,
any surveyor holding a certificate of qualification as a surveyor for the
colony of Victoria to define and mark on the ground, in such manner
as may be agreed upon by such adjoining lessees, the projected
boundaries of such grazing area or pastoral allotment; and the lessee,


so soon as the boundaries have been so defined and marked, shall furnish
the Surveyor-General with a plan or diagram of such area or allotment,
certified by the surveyor making the survey; and on such plan or
diagram shall be shown the area and dimensions of the allotment, and
and nature of the bound marks established on the ground.
And, in any case where a lessee shall avail himself of such option, the
collection of the prescribed survey fee may be dispensed with, or, if
lodged, shall be refunded, on the receipt by the Surveyor-General of
such plan or diagram. But such option shall be permitted with regard
to the survey of grazing areas or pastoral allotments only, and not to any
survey for the permanent alienation or appropriation of any agricultural
allotment.
8. For all other surveys, the fee for which is not provided for in the
preceding Schedule of Fees, the rates payable shall be in accordance
with a schedule of prices, to be approved by the Minister, to be called the
“ Departmental Scale,” in which the rates shall be expressed in some ratio
of the maximum or minimum rates fixed by the graduated scale in the said
preceding Schedule of Fees applicable to the district or locality in which
the surveys are required.
9. Immediately on receiving an application for a lease or license under
The Land Act 1884, the Land Officer shall, if a survey be required, notify
to the applicant that, on his depositing with a Receiver of Revenue the
amount chargeable to him for survey, and producing or forwarding the
receipt therefor to the Land Officer, an authorized surveyor will be
instructed to survey the land for and on account of the applicant; and
should the said charge not be paid within twenty-eight days from the date
of such notification, the application shall he deemed to be abandoned, and
the land shall be made available for other applicants.
10. All moneys payable on the orders of the Land Officers towards the
expense of surveys shall be deposited by tbe applicant for the laud at the
Treasury, and credited to an account called the “ Survey Fees Account.
11. Accounts passed against deposits placed to the credit of the
“ Survey Fees Account” shall be signed by the Land Officer ordering
the collection of the money, or his successor in office, and shall be
countersigned by the Inspecting District Surveyor.
12. In any case where the whole of the fee collected shall not have
been expended on the Survey, the Land Officer shall report the fact to the
Assistant Surveyor-General immediately on certifying the surveyor s
account, and such balance as may remain shall be carried to revenue or
otherwise disposed of as the Secretary for Lands may direct.
Local Land Boards and Appeals.
1. For the purposes hereinafter specified there shall be Local Land
Boards, and every such board shall consist of such person or persons as the
Minister shall from time to time appoint.
2. It shall be the duty of every Local Land Board to investigate
publicly all applications that are remitted for its consideration, as herein
provided, and all matters referred to it by the Minister, and to report
to the Minister its opinion thereon.
3. At least seven days before the sitting of any Local Land Board the
Land Officer shall insert in a newspaper circulating in the district where


such Board will be held a list of the applications and matters to be heard
at such sitting by such Local Land Board. The notice to he given herein
is to be in addition to the Gazette notice required by section 125 of The
Land Act 1884
4. No Local Land Board shall, unless by the authority of the Minister,
adjourn, except from day to day, until it has disposed of all matters that
are remitted for its consideration.
5. Within five days after the sitting of any Local Land Board the Land
Officer shall send to the Minister the report of such Board upon all such
applications, and upon the objections (if any) to such applications, and
shall also send the minutes of evidence (if any) taken before it, and any
objections that may have been lodged with him too late for consideration
by such Board.
Appeals.
6. Any person who may be dissatisfied with the recommendation of a
Local Land Board may appeal against the same to the Minister, provided
that the ground of appeal be set forth in writing and forwarded to the
Minister not later than seven days after the sitting of the Local Land
Board, with a request that such appeal may be heard. No appeal will be
entertained after the expiration of the said seven days, unless the applicant
show by a statutory declaration that he received no notice to attend, and
was not aware of the sitting of and did not attend the Local Land Board,
and further that he has a claim on the merits for re-hearing. No verbal
application will be entertained. The form of appeal prescribed in Schedule
I. hereto is given as a guide.
' 7. If the Minister be of opinion that the grounds of objection set forth
in such before-mentioned statement or statutory declaration are sufficient,
he may order the appeal to be set down for hearing by himself, or by
persons whom he may appoint to hear the same and report thereon in
writing to him, and due notice will be given to all persons interested in
such appeal.
8. In order to afford time for the collection and examination of papers
relating to the subject of appeal, and for the transmission of notices as
hereinbefore provided, no appeal, unless otherwise expressly directed by the
Minister, will be set down for hearing before the expiration of fourteen
days from the date of sitting of the Local Land Board.
9. Unless otherwise expressly directed by the Minister, an appeal will
only be allowed when based on the following or similar grounds, viz.
Ist. That the appellant had not received due notice to attend at, or
that a fair opportunity was not afforded by the Local Land Board
for statement of his case ; or,
2nd. That the Local Land Board refused to hear material evidence;
or,
3rd. That any member or members of the Local Land Board were
interested in the case.


SCHEDULE TO PART I.
LOCAL LAND BOAEDS AND APPEALS.
Form of Appeal against the Kecommendation of Local Land Board.
1. I, of object to the recommendation of the
Local Land Board held at on the day of a.d. 188 .
2. That at such Local Land Board I was (an applicant under
section of The Land Act 1884 for
and the said Local Land Board recommended that
should receive a license for the said land); or
3. That the grounds of my objection to such recommendation
are:—
(a.) That I have not received any notice whatever to attend the
said Local Land Board; or
( b .) That a fair opportunity was not afforded by the Local Land '
Board to state my case; or
(c.) The said Board refused to receive the evidence of
who could prove I was the first person to 1 j
the said land; or
(d.) That one of the members of the said Board
is interested in the decision of the said Board by reason
that he is
4. That I claim to have a j |pfg^ ge j granted to me for the said
land, inasmuch as I was the first applicant.
Given under my hand at this day of
a.d. 188
To the Honourable the Minister of Lands.
Note. —lf the appeal be lodged after the expiration of seven days
from date of the holding of the Local Land Board, a declaration in
the following form should also be forwarded :
Form of Statutory Declaration in support of Application for
the Expiration of Seven Days.
1. of in the colony of Victoria, do
solemnly and sincerely declare as follows :
!• That at a sitting of a Local Land Board held at on
the clay of 188 I was not present.
2. That I did not receive any notice to attend, nor was any notice
left at my address as furnished to the Lands Department, nor was it
left at my usual place of abode, nor was I aware that at the sitting of
the said Board the subject-matter stated in my application to appeal
would have been considered by the Land Board on the said day
of a.d. 188
3. That I have appealed against the recommendation made by the
said Local Land Board, and the grounds of my objections to such
recommendation above as stated in the appeal which is signed by me
are true and correct.
4. That I have good grounds for the re-hearing of this case on its
merits.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Par-
liament of Victoria rendering persons making a false declaration
punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.
Declared before me at in the said colony of Victoria
th is day of a.d. 188
Place where and
time when Local
Land Board was
held.
Here state the
recommenda-
tion objected to.
Describe the
reason why a
fair opportunity
was not afforded
Describe the
material evi-
dence rejected.
Appeal after
Name,address,
and occupa-
tion.
Place where
sitting' held
and date.


PART II.
PASTORAL LANDS.
THE ACT.
Division into Pastoral Allotments.
19. A plan shall be prepared of the lands comprised within the areas
described in the Second Schedule hereto as pastoral lands, and on such
plan there shall he projected boundary lines snowing the division of such
pastoral lands into allotments (hereinafter called “ pastoral allotments ’’)
varying in size and having a grazing capacity of from one thousand to four
thousand sheep or from one hundred and fifty to five hundred head of
cattle. The G-overnor in Council may before issuing a lease of any such
pastoral allotment alter vary or extend or adjust such boundary lines in
any way that he may think fit.
Alienation of Pastoral Lands in Fee forbidden.
20. No lands forming part of the lands described in the Second Schedule
hereto as pastoral lands shall while they remain in the class of pastoral
lands be alienated in fee simple, and every conveyance and alienation
thereof shall be absolutely void as well against Her Majesty as all other
persons whomsoever.
Term of lease. .
21. The G-overnor in Couneil may grant a lease for pastoral purposes
of a pastoral allotment to the person who in manner hereinafter provided
acquires the right to a lease in respect of such pastoral allotment for any
term of years provided that the term for which any land is so leased shall
expire not later than fourteen years after the commencement of this Act
and at the expiration of such term the land so leased and save as hereinafter
provided all improvements thereon shall revert absolutely to Her Majesty
her heirs and successors. Not more than one pastoral allotment lease shall
be granted to or held by any one and the same person.
Applications for lease may be made.
22. The right to a lease in respect of such pastoral allotment shall after
public notice be granted to the first person who after such notice lodges an
application for the same. If two or more applications be lodged on any one
day before the hour of two of the clock in the afternoon in respect of the
same pastoral allotment, the right to a lease of such pastoral allotment
shall be offered for sale by auction, and notice of such auction shall be given
in the same manner in all respects as notice with regard to lands to be sold
by auction in fee simple is to be given as hereinafter provided.


Highest bidder to be entitled to lease.
23. The person who bids the highest sum by way of premium for the right
to a lease of any pastoral allotment offered for sale by auction as aforesaid
shall be entitled to receive a lease of the same, provided he pay such premium
at the time of such auction, and in default of such payment the right to lease
shall be forthwith again put up to auction.
If no bidder , applications for lease may be made.
24. If there be no bidder a t such auction, the right to a lease in respect of
such pastoral allotment shall after public notice be granted to the first person
who after such notice lodges an application for the same. If two or more
applications be lodged on any one day before the hour of two of the clock in
the afternoon in respect of the same pastoral allotment, the right to a lease
of such pastoral allotment shall be put up to limited auction between such
applicants. The person who then offers the highest amount of premium and
forthwith pays the same shall be declared entitled to the lease.
If no bidder , size of pastoral allotment may be altered and right
to lease again offered.
25. If there be no bidder at such auction and if after public notice no
person lodges an application for a lease of any pastoral allotment within
one month after the date of such auction the Governor in Council may
subdivide any such pastoral allotment or add thereto any other pastoral
allotment not then leased anything in this Act to the contrary notwith-
standing, and in that case the right to a lease of such pastoral allotment
altered as aforesaid shall be again submitted to public auction in the
manner provided in this Act.
Rent to be reserved in lease of pastoral allotment.
26. The annual rent to be reserved in every lease of a pastoral allotment
demised under the provisions of this Act shall be computed at the rate of
One shilling per head of sheep and Five shillings per head of cattle, the
number of such sheep or cattle to be determined by the grazing capacity of
such pastoral allotment upon a basis of not more than ten acres to a sheep
and the equivalent number of acres thereof for cattle.
Covenants, fyc., of lease.
27. Every lease of a pastoral allotment shall be dated the first day of
January or the first day of July in any year, and shall contain the follow-
ing covenants (that is to say):—
(1 •) A covenant for the payment of the annual rent reserved in moieties
in advance with half-yearly intervals :
(2.) A covenant that the lessee will not assign except by way of mortgage
sublet or subdivide any land demised by such lease or any
portion thereof without the consent of the Board signified in
writing :
(3.) A condition that the lease shall become absolutely void on assign-
ment thereof whether by operation of law or otherwise save as
is in this Act otherwise expressly provided:
(4.) A covenant that the lessee will at once and to the satisfaction of
the Board commence and continue to destroy and will within
three years after the granting of the lease have destroyed to the
satisfaction of the Board the vermin upon such land, and that he
will keep the same free of vermin Bathurst burr wild briar and
gorse to the satisfaction of the Board during the currency of his
lease:


(5.) A covenant that the lessee will keep in good condition and repair
during the continuance of the term of the lease all houses fences
wells reservoirs tanks dams and all substantial and permanent
improvements situated on such demised land whether made
erected or constructed by such lessee or not, reasonable wear
and tear and damage by fire storm and tempest alone excepted,
and that the lessee will not remove fill up or render useless or
cause to be removed filled up or rendered useless any of the
same without first obtaining the permission of the Board signi-
fied in writing :
(6.) A covenant that the lessee will not during the currency of his lease
ring or destroy or except for the purpose of fencing or building
on the land demised by such lease cut down any timber in or
upon such demised land unless with the sanction of the Board
signified in writing and under the supervision of an officer
appointed in that behalf by the Board :
(7.) A condition that the lease shall be voidable at the will of the
Governor in Council in the event of any breach of or non-com-
pliance with the covenants thereof by the lessee :
(8.) A condition reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors a
right to resume possession at any time of any of the land demised
by the lease which may in the opinion of the Governor in Council
be required for the purposes of water supply irrigation works
races dams and ditches forest or timber reserves or for public
railways roads canals or for tramways or other internal commu-
nication through such lands or for mining purposes or for the
purpose of obtaining or removing therefrom guano or other
manure stone or earth or for sites of inns stores smithies
bakeries or similar buildings or of bathing houses bathing places
fishermen’s residences drying grounds fellmongering establish-
ments slaughter-houses limekilns bridges ferries toll or punt
houses tanneries factories saw or paper mills stores warehouses
or dwellings quays docks landing places or the deposit of
materials shipbuilding and repairing boatbuilding and repairing
or for the working of mineral springs or for the manufacture of
salt or for the purpose of erecting pumps or for the purpose
of cutting digging and taking away any live or dead timber
gravel stone ballast limestone salt shell seaweed and loam brick
or other earth:
(9.) A condition reserving to the Governor in Council the power to
grant in the manner and on the conditions prescribed in Part
VIII. of this Act licenses to any persons to enter upon any of
the land comprised in the lease and search for cut dig and take
away any live or dead timber coal and other mineral gravel salt
guano sand resin stone or limestone loam brick or other earth:
(10.) A condition that Her Majesty her heirs and successors may at
any time in accordance with regulations in that behalf to be
made by the Governor in Council under the authority of this
Act resume as sites for townships or villages or for mining
purposes and re-enter upon any lands forming part of the lands
leased upon payment to the lessee of the full value of all
houses fences wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial
and permanent improvements made erected or constructed by
such lessee on the lands so resumed. Nothing contained in any
of these covenants or in this Act shall be construed to give a


better tenure to the lessees in regard to tbe right of miners to
enter upon suck leased land in search of gold than was possessed
by pastoral tenants under “ The Land Act 1869.”
(11.) A ‘ condition reserving to each and every other lessee of any
pastoral allotment his agent and servants the right of ingress
egress and regress to and from his pastoral allotment through
from and to any public road or track, subject to regulations to
be made by the Governor in Council:
(12.) A condition that the Board or any person appointed in that behalf
by the Board may at any time enter upon the land demised to
ascertain if the conditions and covenants of the lease are being
performed by the lessee:
(18.) A condition reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors a
right to resume after having given three years’ notice in writing
addressed to the lessee and published in three consecutive
ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette possession of any
land demised by such lease upon payment to the lessee for his
interest in such lease together with the value of houses fences
wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent
improvements made erected or constructed by the lessee prior
to the date of such notice and during the currency of his lease
on the lands so resumed. Provided that the sum paid in respect
of such improvements by the Board shall not exceed the sum
expended thereon by such lessee, and that such sum shall be
determined in accordance with regulations in that behalf made
by the Governor in Council, and that the compensation to be
paid to the lessee in respect of his interest in the lease shall be
determined in manner provided by “ The Lands Compensa-
tion Statute 1869” or any Act amending the same.
And every lease shall contain such other conditions and provisions not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act as the Governor in Council approves
of and directs to be inserted therein.
Payment for improvements on expiration of term of lease.
28. Upon the expiration of the term of the lease of any pastoral allot-
ment the lessee thereof or his executors administrators or assigns shall be
paid by any incoming tenant the value of all fences wells reservoirs tanks
and dams made erected constructed or effected during the currency of his
lease on the land demised by such lease and calculated to increase the
capability of carrying sheep or cattle of such land: Provided that the
sum to be paid in respect of such improvements shall not exceed the sum
expended thereon by the lessee his executors administrators or assigns and
shall in no case exceed the sum of two shillings and sixpence per acre
of such land and that the sum to be so paid shall be determined in accord-
ance with regulations in that behalf to be made by the Governor in
Council.
Lessee of pastoral allotment may select not exceeding three hundred
and twenty acres as homestead.
29. It shall be lawful for the lessee of a pastoral allotment under the
provisions of this Act at any time during the currency of such lease, if the
covenants and conditions thereof have been fulfilled, to select a portion of
such allotment not exceeding three hundred and twenty acres in extent as a
homestead in one block on payment to Her Majesty at the rate of One
pound per acre for each and every acre comprised in such lot.


REGULATIONS FOR PASTORAL LANDS.
The following are the Regulations relating to Pastoral Lands,
including those Pastoral or Grazing Licenses held under The Land
Act 1869, and provided for in Section 3, Part IV., The Land Act
1884 :
1 Applications by pastoral or grazing licensees under The Land Act
1869 to retain possession of their holidings, for grazing purposes only, and
licenses therefor, shall be in the forms prescribed in Schedules 11. and 111.
respectively hereto. # . ini /-,
2. The fee for the preparation of such grazing license shall be One
Pastoral Lands.
(Part 11., Section 21.)
3. Every intending applicant for aright to a lease for a pastoral allot-
ment shall lodge an application in the form prescribed in Schedule II .
hereto, at a place and hour to be named in a public notice: and in the
event of two or more applications being lodged on any one day before the
of two o’clock in the afternoon in respect of the same pastoral
allotment, the same shall be offered for sale by public auction, ot which
due notice shall be given, and subject to the conditions prescribed m
Schedule V. hereto.
4. Leases for pastoral allotments shall be in the form and subject to the
conditions prescribed in Schedule VI. hereto.
5 Lessees of pastoral allotments who have complied with the covenants
and conditions of their leases, and desire to exercise their right, under
section 29 of The Land Act 1884, of selecting a portion of their pastoral
allotments, not exceeding 320 acres m extent, as a ho^ estead ’ must make
application in the form prescribed in Schedule VII. hereto.
6. The fee for the preparation of a lease for a pastoral allotment shall be
Two pounds.


SCHEDULES FOR PASTORAL LANDS.
SCHEDULE 11.
Application by a Licensee for a Grazing License uni>er
Section 3, “ The Land Act 1884.”
License described as 0^ Un *
Address —
Date—
Sir
Referring to the land licensed to me under Sectionf . Gf T \[ e
Land Act 1869, and more particularly prescribed in the margin, I hereby
apply, under the provisions of Section 3 of The Land Act 1884, to occupy
the same for grazing purposes only.
Herewith I return my license for the year 1884, and I hereby undertake
to pay the fees for the use of the said land for grazing purposes only for
the period above mentioned when demanded.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the President of the
Board of Land and Works.
* Strike out and insert such words as the case may require,
t Insert the figures 47 if a Grazing License, or 75 if a Pastoral License.
SCHEDULE 111.
V.
R.
Fee per annum —
£ s. d.
Receiver and Paymaster at
Grazing License under 3rd Section, “ The Land Act 1884.
j being the person duly
authorized inVat behalf in pursuance of The Land Act 1884 and in consideration
of the sum of duly P aid b y the P erson
* lnsert pastoral or hereinafter mentioned, being the holder of a
grazing, os the case ]; cense for one year next preceding the commencement ot Ihe
may he. iarw j Act i BB 4, and who was in occupation of the Crown lands
specified in the schedule hereto under such license, and who has remained on such
land after the expiration of the term for which he held the same, do hereby give to
0 f license and liberty to
enter with cattle, sheep, or upon the Crown lands specified in the
Schedule hereto, and therewith to depasture the same. This license continues in
force until next and no longer, and is issued subject to the
conditions on the back hereof.
Dated day of 188 .
Schedule.
All these Crown lands
•containing acres or thereabouts.


Conditions.
1. The issue of this license shall not prevent the land comprised therein or any part
or parts thereof being sold, leased, licensed, alienated, or dealt with under any of the
provisions of The Land Act 1884 except under the 119th section thereof,* or being
resumed by order of the Governor or Administrator of the Government of 'Victoria,
with the advice of the Executive Council, for any of the purposes for which land may
be reserved under section 10 of The Land Act 1884, or for mining purposes.
2. No licensee shall, in case of any resumption, be entitled to any compensation other
than the return of such portion of the fee paid by him as the responsible Minister of the
Crown for the time being administering The Land Act 1884 may think fit. This license
is also subject to the rights of the holders of miners’ rights or of mining leases now
issued or hereafter to be issued to enter upon the allotment hereby licensed, and to
search for gold and to mine thereon, and to erect and occupy mining plant and
machinery, without making any compensation to the licensee, his executors, adminis-
trators, or assigns, for surface or other damage.
3. No land comprised in roads from time to time surveyed and marked out within the
boundaries of the land comprised in this license shall be deemed within its operation.
4. This license entitles the holder thereof, during the period for which it is granted,
to use the land therein comprised for depasturing purposes only, but does not confer
any right to build thereon, or to cultivate, or to fence any portion thereof.
5. If the licensee desire a renewal of this license, notice to that effect must be given
to the Minister aforesaid one month prior to the expiration thereof, but nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to confer a right to any renewal.
6. The interest in this license may not be transferred without the consent of the
Minister aforesaid and the payment of a fee of £l.
7. No claim whatever shall be made or entertained by reason of this license not being
renewed or transferred.
8. This license is to be used under and in accordance with the regulations made or to
be made under the provisions of the said Act and for the time being in force.
9. The license may be forfeited if the licensee commit a breach of or neglect to
comply with these conditions.
10. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to declare that
the Governor or Administrator, with the advice aforesaid, has forfeited this license
shall be conclusive evidence that the license is forfeited.
SCHEDULE IV.
Form of Application for a Eight to a Lease for a Pastoral Allotment,.
Section 21, Land Act 1884.
Date —
In pursuance of the 21st Section of The Land Act 1884, I,
of. do hereby make application for a Lease of Pastoral
Allotment No. situated in the parish of county of
and containing about acres
of , do hereby declare that I am of the full
age of eighteen years ; that lam not the lessee of a Pastoral Allotment; and that
should I be granted the Pastoral Lease for which I now make application I will
accept such lease upon the terms, covenants, and conditions which may be lawfully
imposed.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at in the colony of Victoria,
this day of 188 ,
before me—
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
* Relating to temporary grazing licenses.


SCHEDULE Y.
Conditions of Sale of the Eight to Lease fob Pastobal Allotments.
1. The occupation of the pastoral allotments will be offered for sale at the
annual rents respectively stated and annexed to the description thereof, and the
bidder of the highest sum by way of premium will be declared the purchaser, pro-
vided he shall immediately pay down such sum and sign the description hereunto
annexed, of the pastoral allotment of the occupation of which he shall have become
the purchaser, thereby binding himself to the observance of the above and follow-
ing conditions; and, in default of such payment being immediately made, the
pastoral allotment shall again be forthwith put up to auction.
2. The annual rents determined by the Board of Land and Works to be paid in
respect of these pastoral allotments will be due and payable by the purchasers,
in advance, in two half-yearly moities, on the Ist January and Ist July in every
year, till the termination of the period of occupation so purchased.
3. Immediately after the biddings on each pastoral allotment are concluded, and
before another allotment is put up, the name of the purchaser will be entered, by
the officer conducting the sale, in the list of the descriptions of the pastoral allot-
ments annexed to these presents. If, previous to such entry, any question or
dispute shall arise between the seller and bidder, or amongst the bidders them-
selves, the allotment in question shall be put up for sale again. Subsequent to
such entry no dispute whatever can be admitted, nor can any alteration of names
or transfer from the actual purchaser be allowed.
4. The purchasers of the occupation of these pastoral allotments shall be
entitled to receive leases in the prescribed form to occupy the _ same during the
period assigned in each particular case, subject to the conditions contained in
The Land Act 1884, and such other conditions as may be lawfully imposed.
5. If the officer acting on behalf of the Government shall find reason to believe
that any pastoral allotment will not obtain its just value, or if he shall otherwise
think fit to withdraw the same from sale, he shall have full power to do so at any
time previous to its being actually sold.
6. Persons having affixed their signatures to the list of descriptions of the
pastoral allotments annexed to these presents, in token of their having become
purchasers or agents of purchasers of the occupation of the allotments to the
descriptions of which their signatures are so attached or affixed, will beheld to have
previously obtained all necessary information, and shall not be entitled to allege
ignorance or any other cause for their not fulfilling all and every obligation
incumbent upon them by these articles and conditions.
Note. —All offers and leases relative to these pastoral allotments will be held to
refer to the boundaries of same as projected on the public charts, and will accord-
ingly be described as containing an area more or less. Any future claim for com-
pensation as to any alleged difference in the area cannot therefore be entertained.
Declabation of Pubchasees.
We, the undersigned, do hereby acknowledge that we are the purchasers, or
agents of the purchasers, of the pastoral allotment to which our names are respec-
tively signed; and we do each of us severally for ourselves, or on behalf of our
constituents, ’undertake to make regular payments of the annual rent determined
by the Board of Land and Works to be paid in respect of the same and to pay the
charge for survey, and to fulfil each and all of the foregoing conditions, and to
execute the lease referred to in such conditions; and, failing our doing so, we do
hereby acknowledge that we have forfeited every claim to the occupation of the
said pastoral allotment or allotments and to the premium we have paid.
In witness whereof we have, on the day and year hereafter written, severally
signed our names at the foot hereof and at the foot of the description of each
pastoral allotment, the occupation of which has been so purchased by us.
Dated this day of 188 .


SCHEDULE VI.
Lease under Section 21 of “The Land Act 1884.”
This Indenture made the first day of in the year of our Lord One
thousand eight hundred and eighty- between Her Most Gracious Majesty
Queen Victoria of the one part and of
in the colony of Victoria hereinafter called “ the lessee” of the other part.
Whereas the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council has agreed to
grant this lease for pastoral purposes of the pastoral allotment hereinafter demised
for the term of years and
calendar months at the annual rent of
being the rent computed according to the provisions of The Land Act 1884
to the lessee who has acquired the right or become entitled thereto under the
provisions of the same Act and the lessee has paid half a year’s rent in advance :
And whereas the Governor with the advice aforesaid has approved of and directed
the conditions and provisions hereinafter contained to be inserted in this lease
framed in accordance with the regulations made in pursuance of the provisions of
the said Act: Now this Indenture witnesseth that in consideration of the payment
aforesaid and of the rent hereby reserved and of the covenants of the lessee
hereinafter contained Her Majesty doth by these presents grant and demise unto
the lessee his executors administrators and assigns all that pastoral allotment
situate in the parish of county of
in the colony of Victoria containing more or less
and delineated on the plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of the 19th
section of the said Act and thereon numbered in the said parish
and also delineated on the plan drawn in the margin of these
presents and therein coloured yellow together with the appur-
tenances : Excepting and reserving unto Her Majesty her heirs
and successors all gold and auriferous earth or stone and
all mines containing gold in and under the said demised
premises together with liberty for Her Majesty her heirs and
successors and her and their agents and servants at any time
or times during the said term to enter upon the said land and
to search and mine therein for gold and to remove therefrom any gold and any
auriferous earth or stone and for the purposes aforesaid to sink shafts and do any
other things which may be necessary or usual in mining : And also excepting and
reserving unto Her Majesty her heirs and successors by the Governor with the
advice aforesaid to grant in manner and on the conditions prescribed in Part VIII.
of the said Act licenses to any person to enter upon any of the land comprised in
this lease and search for cut dig and take away live or dead timber coal and other
mineral gravel salt guano sand resin stone or limestone loam brick or other earth :
And also excepting and reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors and
assigns and every other lessee of any pastoral allotment and her heirs and then-
agents and servants tenants and workmen liberty and right of ingress egress and
regress at all times through over and across the premises hereby demised with or
without horses cattle and other animals carts waggons and carriages to and from
such allotment or part thereof respectively from and to any public road or track
subject to the regulations to be made by the Governor with the advice aforesaid :
To have and to hold the premises hereinbefore expressed to be hereby demised
unto the lessee his executors administrators and assigns for the term of
years and calendar months from the day of the date of this lease:
Yielding and paying therefor during the said term the yearly rent of
by two equal half-yearly payments in advance on the first day of
and the first day of in every year clear of all deductions the first
of the said half-yearly payments having been made as aforesaid the next of the
said half-yearly payments to be made on the first day of
next and the last of the said half-yearly payments to be made on the first day
next preceding the expiration of the said term: And the
lessee doth hereby for himself his heirs executors administrators and assigns-
covenant with Her Majesty her heirs and successors that he the lessee his


executors administrators or assigns will during the said term pay the said rent
hereinbefore reserved at the times and in manner hereinbefore appointed for pay-
ment thereof clear of all deductions : And also will during the said term pay all
existing and future rates assessments and taxes for the time being payable either
by landlord or tenant in respect of the said premises : And also will not assign
sublet or subdivide or part with the possession of the land hereby demised or any
portion thereof without the previous consent of The Board of Land and Works
signified in writing: And also will at once after the granting of this lease
commence and continue to destroy and will within three years after the granting of
this lease have destroyed to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works the
animals and birds by the said Act included in the term “vermin” or which the
Governor with the advice aforesaid may by proclamation in the Government
Gazette declare to be vermin for the purposes of the said Act upon such land and
will keep the same free of such animals and birds Bathurst burr wild briar and
gorse to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works during the currency of
the term hereby granted : And also will repair and keep in good condition and
repair during the continuance of the term hereby granted all houses fences wells
reservoirs tanks dams and all substantial and permanent improvements situated
on the land hereby demised whether made erected or constructed by the lessee
his executors administrators or assigns or not reasonable wear and tear and
damage by fire storm and tempest alone excepted and that the lessee his executors
administrators or assigns will not remove fill up or render useless or cause to be
removed filled up or rendered useless any of the same without first obtaining the
permission of The Board of Land and Works signified in writing : And also will at
the expiration or sooner determination of the said term hereby granted peaceably
deliver up to Her Majesty or her successors the premises hereby demised together
with all houses fences wells reservoirs tanks dams and all improvements that now
are or may be made erected or constructed thereon in such good and sufficient
repair and order as aforesaid and in all respects in such state and condition as
shall be consistent with the due performance of the several covenants hereinbefore
contained: And also will permit any person appointed in that behalf by The
Board of Land and Works at any time to enter upon the premises hereby demised
to ascertain if the conditions and covenants of this lease are being performed by
the lessee: And also will not during the currency of this lease ring or destroy or
except for the purpose of fencing or building on the land hereby demised cut down
any timber in or upon such demised land unless with the previous sanction of. The
Board of Land and Works signified in writing and only then under the supervision
■of an officer appointed in that behalf by the said Board: And also that every
holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease shall have the right and shall be
allowed by the lessee his executors administrators and assigns to enter upon the
allotment hereby demised and search for gold and to mine thereon and to erect and
occupy mining plant and machinery without making any compensation to the lessee
his executors administrators or assigns for surface or other damage : And also that
these presents shall become absolutely void on any assignment thereof save under
the provisions of The Land Act 1884 : Provided always and it is hereby agreed and
declared that Her Majesty her heirs and successors may at any time and from time
to time during the said term resume possession of any part or parts of the land
hereby demised which may in the opinion of the Governor with the advice aforesaid
be required for the purposes of water supply irrigation work races dams and
ditches forest or timber reserves or for public railways roads canals or for tram-
ways or other internal communication through such lands or for mining purposes
or for the purpose of obtaining or removing therefrom guano or other manure
stone or earth or for sites of inns stores smithies bakeries or similar buildings or of
bathing -houses bathing-places fishermen’s residences drying grounds fellmongering
establishments slaughter-houses lime-kilns bridges ferries toll or punt houses
tanneries factories saw or paper mills stores warehouses or dwellings quays docks
landing places or the deposit of materials ship-building and repairing boat-building
and repairing or for the working of mineral springs or for the manufacture of salt
or for the purpose of erecting pumps or for the purpose of cutting digging and
taking away any live or dead timber gravel stone ballast limestone salt shell sea


weed and loam brick or other earth: Provided always and it is hereby also agreed
and declared that Her Majesty her heirs and successors may at any time and from
time to time during the term hereby granted in accordance with the regulations
aforesaid resume as sites for townships or villages or for mining purposes and
re-enter upon any lands forming part of the land hereby demised upon payment
to the lessee his executors administrators of assigns of the full value of all houses
fences (being fences within the meaning assigned to the word “ fence ”by The
Land Act 1884) wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent
improvements made erected or constructed by such lessee his executors adminis-
trators or assigns on the lands so resumed but nothing herein or in the said Act
contained shall be construed to give a better tenure to the lessee his executors
administrators or assigns in regard to the right of miners to enter upon the land
hereby demised in search of gold than was possessed by pastoral tenants under
The Land Act 1869: Provided always and it is hereby expressly agreed and
declared that neither of the preceding provisions shall prejudice or be construed as
restricting the generality of the covenant on the part of the lessee hereinbefore
contained conferring on the holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease the right
to enter upon the demised land and exercise the rights in such covenant mentioned:
And in case of any land being required to be resumed for mining purposes the
Governor with the advice aforesaid shall determine and have the election whether
it shall be resumed under the provisions of the 68th section of the said Act or under
the provisions hereinbefore contained and if so under which of such provisions it
shall be so resumed or taken : And it is hereby declared that in case possession of
any part or parts of the said land shall be resumed under either of the preceding
provisions the covenants provisions and agreements herein contained with
reference to the whole of the premises shall continue in force and apply to such
parts of the same as shall be left in the possession of the lessee his executors
administrators or assigns: Provided always and it is hereby also agreed and
declared that the term hereby granted may be determined by Her Majesty her
heirs or successors at any time by not less than three years’ previous notice in
writing of such intention addressed to the lessee his executors administrators or
assigns being served upon him or them or left upon any part of the lands
comprised in this lease and published in three consecutive ordinary numbers of the
Government Gazette and upon payment to the lessee his executors administrators
or assigns for his interest in this lease together with the value of houses fences
(being fences within the meaning aforesaid) wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all
substantial and permanent improvements made erected or constructed by the
lessee prior to the date of such notice and during the currency of this lease on the
lands so resumed provided that the sum paid in respect of such improvements by
The Board of Land and Works shall not exceed the sum expended thereon by the
lessee his executors administrators or assigns and that such sum shall be deter-
mined in accordance with the regulations aforesaid and every such determination
shall be binding and conclusive and the compensation to be paid to the lessee in
respect of his interest in this lease shall be determined in manner provided by The
Lands Compensation Statute 1869 or any Act amending the same : Provided always
and it is hereby agreed and declared and these presents are upon this condition
that if and wherever there shall be a breach of or non-compliance with any of the
covenants by the lessee herein contained and the Governor with the advice
aforesaid shall determine that this lease shall in consequence be avoided (and the
production of the minute of the proceedings of the Executive Council whereat
such determination was arrived at shall be conclusive evidence thereof) or if the
land hereby demised or any part thereof is assigned whether by operation of
law or otherwise except as hereinbefore mentioned or as in The Land Act 1884
otherwise expressly provided then these presents and the term hereby created
shall be void and of no effect and immediately thereupon it shall be lawful for
any bailiffs of Crown lands or for any other agents or officers authorized in that
behalf by Her Majesty or by the Governor with the advice aforesaid without any
demand whatsoever to enter upon the land hereby demised and the lessee his
executors administrators and assigns and all persons claiming under him or them
for ever to expel and remove therefrom without any legal process whatsoever and


as effectually as any sheriff might do in case Her Majesty had obtained judgment
in ejectment for recovery of possession of the said land or in an action for the
recovery of land and a writ of habere facias possessionem or writ of possession or
other process had issued on such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form
of law : And that in case of such entry and any action being brought or other
proceeding taken for or on account of the same by any person whomsoever the
defendants or defendant to such action may plead leave or license in bar thereof
and these presents shall be conclusive evidence of the leave or license of the
lessee his executors or administrators and all persons claiming under him or them
to any bailiffs of Crown lands and all persons acting in the matters complained
of in such action or other proceedings: And it is hereby lastly agreed and
declared that the term “ Governor ” in these presents shall mean the Governor or
the Administrator of the Government of the Colony of Victoria for the time being
unless such meaning shall be inconsistent with the context.
In witness whereof His Excellency
Governor and Commander-in-Chiel in and over the Colony of Victoria and its
Dependencies hath on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen caused this demise to be
sealed with the seal of the said colony and the lessee hath hereunto set his hand
and seal the day and year first above written.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-named]
in the(l.s.)
presence of )
SCHEDULE VII.
Application by Pastoral Lessee to Select a Homestead under Section 29 of
“ The Land Act 1884.”
Address—
Date—
Sir,
Being the lessee of pastoral allotment No. , county of ,
and having complied with all the conditions and covenants of my lease, I hereby
make application to select a portion of the said pastoral allotment, not exceeding
acres in extent, and described hereunder as a homestead, and
undertake to pay the sum of One pound per acre for every acre or fractional part
of an acre comprised in such homestead so soon as this my application shall have
been approved.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
The President of the Board of Land and Works.
Description of Land applied for :


PART III.
AGRICULTURAL AND GRAZING LANDS.
THE ACT.
Division into grazing arreas.
30. A plan shall be prepared of the lands comprised within the areas
described in Second Schedule hereto as agricultural and grazing lands, and
on such plan there shall be projected boundary lines showing the division
of such agricultural and grazing lands into “ grazing areas ” varying in size
not exceeding one thousand acres. The Governor in Council may before
issuing a lease of any such grazing area alter vary or extend or adjust such
boundary lines in any way that he may think fit.
Alienation of grazing lands forbidden.
31. No lands forming part of the lands described in the Second Schedule
hereto as agricultural and grazing lands shall be alienated in fee simple,
and every conveyance and alienation thereof save as in this Act otherwise
expressly provided shall be absolutely void as well against Her Majesty as
all other persons whomsoever.
Lease of grazing areas.
32. The Governor in Council may grant a lease of a grazing area to any
person for any term of years, provided that the term for which the land is
so leased shall expire not later that fourteen years after the commencement
of this Act, and at the expiration of such term the land so leased and save
as hereinafter provided all improvements thereon shall revert absolutely to
Her Majesty her heirs and successors.
Agricultural allotment to new selectors.
33. Any person not being a selector under any previous Land Act or
Acts shall be entitled to take up a grazing area, and such person may after
the issue of his lease of such grazing area select thereout an area not
exceeding three hundred and twenty acres (hereinafter designated an
“agricultural allotment”) which shall be in one block or shall consist of
adjacent blocks separated only by roads and subject to all the conditions of
this Part of this Act, and the same shall be excised from his lease and he
shall be discharged so far as regards the covenants of such lease with
respect to such excised land.
Agricultural allotments to selectors under previous Land Acts.
34. Any selector under any previous Land Act or Acts shall be entitled
to take up a grazing area the total acreage of which together with that of
the land previously selected by such selector shall not exceed one thousand


acres ; and any such selector so taking up a grazing area who has selected
under such previous Land Act or Acts an area of land containing less than
three hundred and twenty acres may after the issue of his lease of such
grazing area select thereout an area (hereafter designated an “ agricultural
allotment”) the total acreage of which together with that of the land
previously selected by him shall not exceed three hundred and twenty
acres, and such agricultural allotment shall be in one block or consist of
adjacent blocks separated only by roads and subject to all the conditions of
this Part of this Act, and the same shall be excised from his lease and ne
shall be discharged so far as regards the covenants of such lease with
respect to such excised land. , ~ ,
Not more than one grazing area leased shall be granted to or held by any
one and the same person.
License for a selected portion of a grazing area.
34 Any lessee who selects part of his grazing area as aforesaid shall
apply for a license to occupy such land, and the Governor in Council may
if he think fit issue to such lessee a license to occupy such and as herein-
after provided.
Persons over 18 years of age may take up land under this part.
36. Any person being of the age of eighteen years may any rule of law
or statute to the contrary notwithstanding take up a grazing area and
legally take a lease thereof and become the licensee of an agricultural
allotment, and thereupon every such person shall although such person be
not twenty-one years of age be in the same position with regard to Jus
liability under and enforcement by him of all contracts made with respect
to such grazing area or agricultural allotment in the same position as though
such person were of the full age of twenty-one years.
Bent to be reserved in lease of grazing area.
37 The annual rent to be reserved in every lease of a grazing area shall
be a sum per acre of not less than Twopence and not more than Fourpence,
and such sum shall be fixed after appraisement of the land by valuers
appointed by the Board in that behalf. Provided that if there be any
substantial and permanent improvements on any grazing area at the date of
the commencement of a lease of the same, an additional rent of Five pounds
per centum per annum on the capital value of such substantial and perma-
nent improvements shall be reserved in such lease.
Covenants, fyc., of lease.
38. Every lease of a grazing area shall be dated on the first day of
January or the first day of July in any year, and shall contain the
following covenants (that is to say):
(1.) A covenant for the payment of the annual rent reserved m
moieties in advance with half "yearly intervals :
(2) A covenant that the lessee will not assign sublet or subdivide
any land demised by such lease or any portion thereof without
the consent of the Board signified in writing :
(3.) A condition that the lease shall become absolutely void on assign-
ment thereof whether by operation of law or otherwise save as
is in this Act otherwise expressly provided: ...
(4.) A covenant that the lessee will at once to the satisfaction ot tJie
Board commence and continue to destroy and will within three
years after the granting of the lease have destroyed to the


satisfaction of the Board the vermin upon such land, and that
he will keep the same free of vermin Bathurst burr wild briar
and gorse to the satisfaction of the Board during the currency
of his lease:
(5.) A covenant that the lessee will keep in good condition and repair
during the continuance of the term of the lease all houses fences
wells reservoirs tanks dams and all substantial and permanent
improvements situated on such demised land whether made
erected or constructed by such lessee or not, reasonable wear
and tear and damage by fire storm and tempest alone excepted,
and that the lessee will not remove fill up or render useless or
cause to be removed filled up or rendered useless any of the
same without first obtaining the permission of the Board
signified in writing :
(6.) A covenant that the lessee will not during the currency of his lease
ring or destroy or except for the purpose of fencing or building
or domestic use on the land demised by such lease cut down any
timber in or upon such demised land unless with the sanction of
the Board signified in writing and under the supervision of an
officer appointed in that behalf by the Board :
(7.) A covenant that the lessee will, if not sooner called upon under the
provisions of “ The Fences Statute 1874,” within three years
from the date of his lease enclose the land demised thereby with
a fence and keep the same in repair:
(8.) A condition that in the event of the lessee becoming the licensee
of any portion of the demised land as an agricultural allotment
and his license thereafter being annulled for breach of any of
the provisions of this Act, or of the conditions of such license,
the lease shall be voidable at the will of the Governor in
Council:
(9.) A condition that the lease shall be voidable at the will of the
Governor in Council in the event of any breach of or non-
compliance with the covenants thereof by the lessee :
(10). A condition reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors a
right to resume possession at any time of any of the land demised
by the lease which may in the opinion of the Governor in
Council be required for the purposes of water supply irrigation
works races dams and ditches or for public railways roads canals
or for tramways or other internal communication through such
lands or for mining purposes or for the purpose of obtaining or
removing therefrom guano or other manure stone or earth or for
sites of inns stores smithies bakeries or similar buildings or of
bathing houses bathing places fishermen’s residences drying
grounds fellmongering establishments slaughter-houses lime-
kilns bridges ferries toll or punt houses tanneries factories saw
or paper mills quays docks landing places or the deposit of
materials shipbuilding and repairing boatbuilding and repairing
or for the working of mineral springs or for the manufacture of
salt or for the purpose of erecting pumps or for the purpose of cut-
ting digging and taking away any live or dead timber gravel stone
ballast limestone coal salt shell seaweed and loam brick or other
earth upon paj'ment to the lessee for his interest in such lease
together with the value of houses fences wells reservoirs tanks


dams and of all substantial and permanent improvements made
erected or constructed by the lessee during the currency of his
lease on the lands so resumed. Provided that the sum paid in
respect of such improvements by the Board shall not exceed the
sum expended thereon by such lessee, and that such sum shall
be determined in accordance with regulations in that behalf
made by the Governor in Council, and that the compensation to
be paid to the lessee in respect of his interest in the lease shall
be determined in manner provided by “ The Lands Compensation
Statute 1869 ” or any Act amending the same :
(11.) A condition that Her Majesty her heirs and successors may at
any time in accordance with regulations in that behalf to be
made by the Governor in Council under the authority of this Act
resume as sites for townships or villages or for mining purposes
and re-enter upon any lands forming part of the lands leased
upon payment to the lessee of the full value of all houses fences
wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent
improvements made erected or constructed bv such lessee on the
lands so resumed. Nothing contained in any of the covenants
of any such lease or in this Act shall be construed to give a
better tenure to the lessees in regard to the right of miners
authorized by the Minister subject to any conditions he may
think fit to impose to enter upon any portion specified by the
Minister of such leased land in search of gold than was possessed
by pastoral tenants under “ The Land Act 1869 ” with regard to
the right of miners to enter upon the lands occupied by such
pastoral tenants :
(12.) A condition reserving to each and every other lessee of any
grazing area his agents and servants the right of ingress egress
and regress to and from his grazing area through from and to
any public road or track, subject to regulations to be made by
the Governor in Council:
(13.) A condition that the Board or any person appointed in that
behalf by the Board may at any time enter upon the land
demised to ascertain if the conditions and covenants of the lease
are being performed by the lessee :
(14.) A condition reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors a
right to resume after having given three years’ notice in writing
addressed to the lessee and published in three consecutive
ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette possession of any
land demised by such lease upon payment to the lessee for his
interest in such lease together with the value of houses fences
wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent
improvements made erected or constructed by the lessee prior to
the date of such notice during the currency of his lease on the
lands so resumed. Provided that the sum paid in respect of
such improvements by the Board shall not exceed the sum
expended thereon by such lessee, and that such sum shall be
determined in accordance with regulations in that behalf made
by the Governor in Council, and that the compensation to be
paid to the lessee in respect of his interest in the lease shall be
determined in manner provided by “ The Lands Compensation
Statute 1869 ” or any Act amending the same.


Anri every lease shall contain snch other conditions and provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and not prohibiting the planting
of trees or artificial grasses or~the growth of produce for the use of any
lessee as the Governor in Council approves of and directs to be inserted
therein.
Appointment of land office and land officer.
39. There shall be one or more land officers and one or more land offices
appointed for the purpose of receiving applications for leases of pastoral
allotments grazing areas and applications in respect of the occupation of
agricultural allotments and payments on account thereof; and no such land
officer shall directly or indirectly become the lessee or licensee of any Crown
land within the district to which he has been appointed.
Application for a lease or license.
40. Any person may on any day during office hours deliver or cause to be
delivered his application to a land officer acting in the district for a lease of
a pastoral allotment grazing area or for a license to occupy an agricultural
allotment. Every application shall be received and entered in its order in
a book to be kept for that purpose.
Payment for improvements on expiration of term of lease.
41. IJpon the expiration of the term of the lease of any grazing area the
lessee thereof or his executors administrators or assigns shall be paid by
any incoming tenant the value of all fences wells reservoirs tanks and dams
made erected constructed or effected during the currency of his lease on the
land demised by such lease, and calculated to increase the capability of
carrying sheep or cattle of such land. Provided that the sum to be paid in
respect of such improvements shall not exceed the sum expended thereon
by the lessee his executors administrators or assigns and shall in no case
exceed the sum of Ten shillings per acre of such land, and that the sum to
be so paid shall be determined in accordance with regulations in that behalf
to be made by the Governor in Council.
Licenses to occupy any of the waste lands of the Crown.
42. The Governor in Council may if he think fit issue a license to occupy
any agricultural allotment not exceeding in the whole three hundred and
twenty acres for a period of six years at a fee for occupation of One shilling
per annum for each and every acre or fractional part of an acre to any
person who has applied for such license and who has paid a half-year’s fee
in advance for such allotment.
Extent to ivhich lands may be selected.
43. No person shall become a licensee either in his own name or in the
name or names of any other person or persons of an agricultural allotment
under this Part of this Act in respect of more than three hundred and
twenty acres of land. No license shall be issued to any person who under
the provisions of any previous Land Act or Acts has selected the maximum
number of acres allowed by this Act, or who has taken up a pre-emptive
right for such maximum number of acres, or who has made a selection
under any Land Act or Acts and whose selection has been forfeited or
cancelled for the evasion of the provisions of any such Act or Acts ; but a
selector under any previous Act or Acts may take up a sufficient quantity of
land to make up the maximum number of acres allowed under the
provisions of this Act; and no person shall become the licensee of any


agricultural allotment who is au infant under eighteen years of age or who
is a married woman not having obtained a decree of judicial separation
or who is in respect of the agricultural allotment for which a license has
been applied or in respect of any part thereof an agent or a servant of or a
trustee for any other person, or who at the time of the application has
entered into any agreement to permit any other person to acquire by
purchase or otherwise the agricultural allotment in respect of which such
application is made or any part thereof or the applicant’s interest therein
or the usufruct thereof; and all land applied for under this Act shall be so
applied for bond fide for the use and benefit of the applicant in his own
proper person and not as the agent or servant or trustee of or for any
other person. Provided that if any person in violation of any of the
provisions hereof become the licensee of an agricultural allotment
the Governor in Council may declare the license of any such agricultural
allotment and the lease of the grazing area of which such agricultural
allotment formed a part at the date of the granting of such lease to be
forfeited. And upon publication in the Government Gazette of notice of
such declaration the interest created by the said license and the said lease
shall cease and determine, and all the right title and interest of the licensee
in and to such license and in and to the agricultural allotment therein
described, and all moneys paid for fees in respect of such agricultural
allotment and in and to such lease and grazing area thereby demised and
all moneys paid as rent for such grazing area shall be absolutely forfeited.
Provided also that all contracts agreements and securities which are made
entered into or given with the intent or which (if the same were valid)
would have the effect of violating all or any of the provisions of this Part
of this Act or of any condition of a'license granted under this Part, and all
contracts and agreements relating to an agricultural allotment made or
entered into before or after the issue of a license and to take effect wholly
or in part before at or after the termination of six years from the com-
mencement of the said license, shall and are hereby declared to be illegal
and absolutely void both at law and in equity.
44. Every license shall be issued by the Governor in Council and shall
contain the following conditions :
(1.) A condition for the payment of the fee in moieties in advance with
half-yearly intervals:
(2.) A condition that the licensee will not during the currency of such
license assign the license nor transfer his right title and
interest therein or in the agricultural allotment therein
described or any part thereof nor sublet the said agricul-
tural allotment or any part thereof, and that the license shall
become absolutely void on assignment of such license whether
by operation of law or otherwise, save as in this Act is otherwise
expressly provided, or upon the said agricultural allotment or
any part thereof being sublet:
(3.) A covenant that the licensee will at once and to the satisfaction of
the Board commence and continue to destroy and will within
two years after the issue of the license have destroyed to the
satisfaction of the Board the vermin upon such land, and that
he will keep the same free of vermin to the satisfaction of the
Board during the currency of the license :
(4.) A condition that the licensee shall, if not sooner called upon under
the provisions of “ The Fences Statute 1874,” within six years
from the issue of such license enclose the land described in such
license with a fence and keep the same in repair :


(5.) A condition annulling the license in case of non-payment of the
fees or any of them in accordance with the conditions herein
mentioned or in case the licensee do not within twelvemonths
after the issue of the license and thenceforward during the
continuance of such license occupy the agricultural allotment,
or in case substantial and permanent improvements certified in
writing under the seal of the Board or under the hands of
arbitrators to be of the value of One pound for every acre and
* fractional part of an acre of the agricultural allotment shall not
have been made on the agricultural allotment by the licensee his
executors or administrators before the end of the sixth year from
the commencement of the license, or in case of the breach or
non-fulfilment of any of the conditions of the license or of the
violation of any of the provisions of this Act:
(6.) A condition that if the licensee during the said period occupy the
agricultural allotment for not less than five years, and fence and
make the improvements of the nature and value in the previous
conditions mentioned on the agricultural allotment during the
said period of six years and prove to the satisfaction of the
Board (to be certified under its seal) by such evidence as .the
Board may require that he has complied with the said conditions
and with all other conditions of the said license, he shall be
entitled at any time within twelve months after six years from
the commencement of the license to demand and obtain from
the Governor in Council a Crown grant upon payment of
Fourteen shillings for each acre or fractional part of an acre,
or otherwise he may obtain a lease of the said agricultural
allotment; and every such lease shall be for a term of fourteen
years at a yearly rent of One shilling for each acre or fractional
part of an acre so demised, payable in equal parts half-yearly
in advance, and shall contain the usual covenant for the
payment of rent and a condition for re-entry on non-pay-
ment thereof; and upon the payment of the last sum due
on account of the rent so reserved, or at any time during
the term upon payment of the difference between the amount
of rent actually paid and the entire sum of One pound for
each acre or fractional part of an acre, the lessee or his represen-
tatives shall be entitled to a grant in fee of the lands
leased, and every such grant shall be subject to such covenants
conditions exceptions and reservations as the Governor in Council
may direct. Provided also that if it be proved to the satisfaction
of the Minister by any licensee that owing to ill health he is
unable to reside on his agricultural allotment, or that for any
other reason it is expedient so to do, the Minister may cause the
said agricultural allotment to be put up for sale by auction.
Provided also that in the case of the insolvency or death of the
licensee during the currency of such license it shall not be
obligatory on the assignee or trustee in insolvency or on the
executors or administrators of such licensee to comply with the
said condition of occupation. Provided also, that in the case of
the insolvency or death of the licensee during the currency of
such license it shall be lawful for the assignee or trustee in
insolvency or for the executors or administrators of such licensee
to assign such license to any person who is qualified for becoming
a licensee under this Part, and such person shall thereupon be


with respect to such license in the same position as though he
had been the original licensee :
(7.) A condition that the Governor in Council or the Board may at any
time during the currency of the license enter upon the whole or
any portion of the agricultural allotment for the purpose of
resuming any lands comprised in such agricultural allotment
and required for reserves for public purposes roads railways
canals or for mining purposes. Provided that any moneys which
may have been paid by the licensee to the Crown in respect of
the lands so resumed or expended by him thereupon shall he
repaid to him together with such other moneys as compensation
for such resumption as to the Governor in Council seems fit.
And every license shall contain such other conditions and provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as the Governor in Council
approves of and directs to he inserted therein. Provided further that
before any license or lease under this Part is issued to any applicant such
applicant shall make a declaration before a justice in a form to he settled
by the regulations that such application is made by him in conformity with
and not in violation of any of the provisions of this Act. Provided further
that any licensee under the provisions of this section may in each and every
year during the continuance of his license apply to a land officer acting in
the district to register in a book to be kept for the purpose a notice in
writing signed by the said licensee of his intention to be absent from his
agricultural allotment for a period or periods not exceeding in the whole
three months (specifying the dates of commencement and termination of his
intended absence), and any absence between the dates thus registered
shall not be deemed to be a breach or non-fulfilment of the condition of
occupation contained in his license or a violation of any of the pro-
visions of this Act.
Licenses obtained in violation of Act to be fraudtdent and void.
45. If any person become the licensee or continue to hold a license of
any Crown lands in violation of or non-compliance with any of the pro-
visions of this Act, the same shall be a fraud under this Act, and such
license shall be forfeited and void; and if at any time it be shown to the
satisfaction of the Governor in Council that any licensee who occupies any
agricultural allotment under a license has been guilty of fraud illegality
under or a violation of this Act or has committed a breach of or not ful-
filled any of the conditions of his license, the Governor in Council may
revoke such license and resume possession of the land therein mentioned
and dispose of it as if such license had never been issued; and if at any
time a license of an agricultural allotment become forfeited or void or be
revoked as aforesaid and the licensee of such agricultural allotment is at
such time lessee of the grazing area of which such agricultural allotment
formed a part immediately before the issue of such license, the Governor
in Council may declare the lease of such grazing area void and resume
possession of the land thereby demised as if such lease had never
been made, and no claim at law or in equity under such license or license
and lease as the case may be shall be made entertained or enforced in any
court against such revocation and resumption, but such licensee shall be
taken to have forfeited all right title and interest under such license or
license and lease as the case may be and to he as against Her Majesty the
Governor in Council and the Board or any person claiming under Her
Majesty the Governor in Council or the Board as aforesaid as a mere
trespasser, and the production of a copy of the Government Gazette


containing a notice purporting to be signed by the Minister of the revocation
or forfeiture of any license or license and lease or that any such license or
license and lease has become forfeited and void shall be conclusive evidence
that such license or license and lease has been lawfully determined and
annulled.
Value of Improvements to be Arbitrated.
46. If it be proved to the satisfaction of the Board within sixty days after
the end of the sixth year from the commencement of the license that
substantial and permanent improvements of the value of One pound for
every acre and fractional part of an acre of the agricultural allotment have
been made on the agricultural allotment in terms of the conditions of his
license before the end of the sixth year aforesaid, a certificate under the
seal of the Board to that effect shall be given to the licensee his executors
or administrators. If the Board be not satisfied that substantial and
permanent improvements of the value aforesaid have been made within the
time aforesaid by the licensee his executors or administrators upon the
agricultural allotment, such improvements respectively may be valued by
arbitration within the periods and in the manner hereinafter mentioned. Bor
the purpose of such arbitration, one arbitrator shall be appointed by the
licensee his executors or administrators and another arbitrator shall be
appointed by the Board, and the two arbitrators so appointed shall by writ-
ing under their hands nominate and appoint a third arbitrator. Such three
arbitrators or any two of them shall make their valuation in writing within
six months after the end of the sixth year from the commencement of the
license ; and every such valuation shall be in the form contained in the
Third Schedule to this Act or to the like effect, and shall be transmitted by
the arbitrators to and be deposited in the office of the Board.
Proceedings on neglect to appoint an arbitrator.
47. Upon any valuation under this Part of this Act the Board on the
request of the licensee his executors or administrators shall appoint an arbi-
trator by delivering to the licensee his executors or administrators or by
leaving the same at his residence on the allotment an appointment of such
arbitrator under the seal of the Board. And the licensee his executors or
administrators on the request of the Board shall appoint an arbitrator by
delivering at the office of the Board an appointment of such arbitrator
under the hand of the said licensee his executors or administrators. If for
fourteen days after the delivery of any such appointment by either the
Board or the licensee his executors or administrators the party to whom
such appointment has been delivered fail to appoint an arbitrator, the arbi-
trator appointed by the party delivering the notice shall be deemed to be
appointed by and shall act alone on behalf of both parties, and shall make
his valuation in writing within such time and in such form as herein-
before provided in respect of valuations to be made by two arbitrators ;
and the valuation of any arbitrator or arbitrators appointed in pursuance
of this Part shall be binding final and conclusive upon the Board and
the licensee his executors and administrators to all intents and purposes
whatsoever. And every such valuation shall be in the form contained
in the Third Schedule to this Act or to the like effect, and shall be
transmitted by the arbitrators to and be deposited in the office of the Board.
Death of Arbitrator.
48. If before the making of such valuation as aforesaid any arbitrator
die or refuse or become incapable to act, the party by whom such arbitrator
was appointed shall appoint in like manner another in his stead: and if


either party fail so to do for the space of fourteen days after notice from
the other party in that behalf, the arbitrator appointed by the party giving
the notice may proceed alone ex jparte ; and every arbitrator so appointed
shall have the same powers and authorities as were vested in the arbitrator
in whose stead the appointment is made.
Improvement or Non-residence License.
49. The Governor in Council may if he think fit issue a license (herein-
after called “non-residence license”) to improve an agricultural allotment
for a period of six years at a fee for such license of Two shillings per
annum for each and every acre or fractional part of an acre to any person
who, being entitled to become a licensee of an agricultural allotment under
the provisions of this Part of this Act, has applied for such license and has
paid a half-year’s fee in advance, and every such license shall be upon the
like (save as in this and the next following section provided) conditions and
terms as licenses to occupy agricultural allotments may be issued under
this Part of this Act. Provided that no condition as to residence or occupa-
tion or as to the kind of improvements to be made by the licensee save as
regards fencing shall be contained in such license. Provided also that there
shall be contained in such license a condition annulling the same unless in
respect of every acre or fractional part of an acre of such agricultural
allotment substantial and permanent improvements be made before the end
of the third year of the currency of the license of the value of One pound,
and. before the end of the sixth year of such currency of the value of One
additional pound, and that the entire sum payable in respect of the pur-
chase-money for any such agricultural allotment shall be at the rate of Two
pounds for every acre or fractional part of an acre. Provided also that the
rent reserved in any lease obtained in pursuance of the conditions of any
non-residence license shall be Two shillings per annum for each and every
acre or fractional part of an acre. J
Provisions relating to Non-residence Licenses.
50. All the provisions of this Part of this Act which are applicable to
licenses to occupy and leases of agricultural allotments and to the persons
who hold the same including the rights and liabilities thereby conferred or
imposed shall except where it is otherwise in this Part of this Act expressly
provided apply and extend to non-residence licenses and to leases issued in
pursuance of the conditions of any such licenses and to the persons who
may hold such licenses or leases. Provided always that at any time after
the period of the currency of the license, and during the term of the lease
(such substantial and permanent improvements of the value aforesaid having
been made to the satisfaction of the Board), and upon payment of the
difference between the amount of license fees and rent reserved actually
paid and the entire sum of Two pounds for each acre or fractional part of
an acre, the lessee or his representatives shall be entitled to a grant in fee
of the lands so leased, and every such grant shall be subject to such
covenants conditions exemptions and reservations as the Governor in
Council directs. Provided also that during any one year non-residence
licenses shall not be issued under the provisions of this Act for more than
fifty thousand acres of Crown lands. Provided that the Governor in Council
may if he think fit at the request of any licensee under this Part of this
Act convert the license oi such licensee into a non-residence license, and
such non-residence license shall bear the same date as that of the original
license ; or if any such licensee hold a non-residence license the Governor
in Council may at the request of such licensee convert his non-residence


license into an ordinary license under this Part of this Act, and such
ordinary license shall bear the same date as that of the original non-
residence license. Provided further that when any license or non-residence
license is so converted the rent due shall be computed in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the original license up to the actual date of the
issue of the new license and thereafter in accordance with the terms and
conditions of such new license.
Forfeited lands may be licensed or sold.
51. If entry he made upon any agricultural allotment or allotments for
breach of or non-compliance with any of the provisions of this Act or of any
condition of any license or covenant of any lease, the Governor in Council
may direct that such agricultural allotment or allotments or any portion
thereof may be again licensed in the manner in this Part provided, or that
the same shall be sold by public auction in the same manner and on the
same conditions as it is directed that lands described in the Second
Schedule hereto as lands which may be sold by auction shall be sold.
Assignment of license not alloived.
52. No will or codicil or the granting of any probate or letters of admini-
stration shall be deemed to be an assignment or transfer within the
meaning of this part of this Act; and no person being a lessee or licensee
under this part of this Act to whom a lease of a grazing area or a license of
an agricultural allotment devolves or is transferred under the provisions
of any will or codicil or on the granting of any probate or letters of admini-
stration shall be deemed thereby to be acting in contravention of this Act or
of the covenants or conditions of his lease or license.
If any assignment or transfer by operation of law on the insolvency of
any lessee of a grazing area or licensee of an agricultural allotment or allot-
ment under “ The Land Act 1869 ” or any Act amending the same of any
such lease or license takes place, and if the assignee or trustee in insolvency
re-assign such lease or license within three months from the date of such
insolvency to any person who is qualified for becoming a licensee under this
Part of this Act, such assignment or transfer and such re-assignment shall
not be deemed an assignment or transfer within the meaning of this Part of
this Act. On any such re-assignment as aforesaid to any person qualified
for becoming a licensee under this Part of this Act, such person shall be
with respect to such lease or license in the same position as though he had
been the original lessee or licensee.
Except as hereinbefore in this section provided, no assignment or under-
lease or transfer of any lease of a grazing area without tbe consent of the
Board signified in writing or of any license granted under the provisions
aforesaid or of the right title or interest of the licensee therein or of the
land therein described whether by operation of any law now or hereafter to
be in force or by act of the licensee shall take effect or have any force or
validity either at law or in equity.
Non-payment of fees or rent to be gazetted.
53. The Board shall as soon as conveniently may be after the last days of
June and December in every year prepare a list of the names of all persons
from whom fees or rent have become due during the six months ending on
those days respectively on leases granted under the Acts hereby repealed
and on licenses or leases under this Part of this Act and who have not paid
such fees or rent, and the days on which such fees or rents became due ;


and every such list shall he in the form in the Fourth Schedule to this Act
or as near thereto as may be, and shall be forthwith published in the
Government Gazette; and the insertion in such list of the name of any
person from whom fees or rent became due during the periods aforesaid
respectively shall be jorimd facie evidence of the non-payment of such fees
or rent and shall be evidence of notice to the parties therein named that
such fees or rent have been due and that payment thereof where necessary
has been lawfully demanded.
Unsurveyed lands licensed to be liable to have the boundaries fixed at
any time during continuance of license.
54. If at the time any license be issued to an applicant for an agricultural
allotment under this Act such agricultural allotment has not been surveyed
under the direction of the Board, the temporary boundaries thereof shall be
marked and described by the applicant at his cost. Any dispute between
two or more licensees respecting temporary boundaries shall be settled by
the Minister, or as he directs. All such boundaries shall be liable to be
adjusted and permanently fixed by the Board at any time during the con-
tinuance of such license or before the issue of a lease or grant from the
Crown of such agricultural allotment.
Selectors may at any time obtain a Crown grant of 20 acres of
their allotment for vineyard or orchard.
55. For the purpose of enabling any selector under any previous Land
Act or Acts or any licensee or lessee of any agricultural allotment under
this Act to establish and cultivate a vineyard hop garden or orchard, any
such selector licensee or lessee at any time during the term of his license
or lease, upon payment of the difference between the amount of rent
actually paid and the entire sum of the purchase-money payable in respect
of any part of his allotment not exceeding twenty acres in extent, shall be
entitled to a grant in fee of such part of his allotment when so planted, and
every such grant shall be subject to such covenants conditions exceptions
and reservations as the Governor in Council may direct.
Lessees may give order for Crown grants to be delivered to mortgagees, etc.
56. With respect to any lessee of any agricultural allotment of land
•under this Act or of an allotment under Part 11. of “ The Land Act, 1869”
or any Act amending such last-mentioned Part who has obtained any
advance of money on the security of his lease, the following provisions shall
have effect: —
(1.) Such lessee may give to any person by whom such an advance was
made an order in writing under his hand (witnessed by any
justice of the peace) authorizing such person to obtain from the
Governor in Council the Crown grant of such agricultural allot-
ment or allotment so soon as the last sum due on account of the
rent reserved in such lease and all fees due thereon are paid :
(2.) If the Board approve of such order, the Crown grant shall be made
out in the name of such lessee and delivered to the person
named in such order, who shall have the same lien over such
grant as he had over the lease :
(3.) Where the lessee of any agricultural allotment or allotment has
executed a mortgage thereof to such person, the mortgage shall
by the operation of this Act be transferred and apply to such
Crown grant and to the land thereby granted in all respects as if


such Crown grant had been referred to in the mortgage, and a
memorial of such mortgage shall he endorsed by the Registrar
of Titles as an encumbrance on such Crown grant on his
registering such grant, and a memorandum stating the fact of
such transfer shall also be made by the registrar on the original
registered instrument of mortgage :
(4.) Every such approved order shall be registered in the Crown Lands
Office and shall remain in full force and effect until complied
with unless previously cancelled on the written request of the
person signing the same and the person named therein, and such
registration may be inspected by any person on the payment of
a fee of One shilling.
After tiro years licensee under this Part or under Part 11. of No. 860 may
give license lien for loan.
57. The licensee of any agricultural allotment under this Part of this Act
or the licensee of any allotment under Part 11. of “ The Land Act 1869 ”
or any Act amending the same may after the expiration of a period of two
years from the date of his license give to any person from whom he receives
an advance of money a lien to be called “ a license lien ” on his improve-
ments.
No license lien shall have any force or effect if given for a greater amount
than one-half the value of the improvements actually effected by the licensee
on his agricultural allotment or allotment as the case may be in accordance
with the conditions of his license.
No license lien given in respect of any license in accordance with the
provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a breach of the conditions of
such license.
Registration.
58. Every license lien shall be registered in the Crown Lands Office, and
unless previously cancelled on the production of the written request or of
the signed receipt or receipts for the amount of such license lien of the
person to whom the same was given shall remain and be of full force and
effect during the currency of the license in respect of which the same was
granted.
Transfer of lien to lease or grant when issued.
59. If the license lien on any agricultural allotment or allotment be not
cancelled before the of the issue therefor of a Crown grant or lease,
the Minister shall cause a memorandum thereof to be endorsed on such
Crown grant or lease before the same is issued, and such lien shall by the
operation of this Act be transferred and apply to such Crown grant or
lease and the land thereby granted or demised, and shall become and be
deemed to be a charge thereon and shall have the same operation and effect
in all respects as if such Crown grant or lease had been referred to in such
license lien.
Endorsement of lien on grant or lease.
60. Such license lien shall be endorsed by the Registrar of Titlesjyis an
encumbrance on such Crown grant or lease when the same is registers, and
a memorandum stating the fact of such transfer shall be made by the said
Registrar on the license lien, which shall then be registered in the office of
the Registrar of Titles.


Fee on Registration.
61. The Registrar of Titles shall demand jpid be paid the like fee for
registering a license lien as may for the time being be chargeable for
registering a mortgage.
Holder of license lien to have no claim if license forfeited, but may be
repaid if improvements sold and Minister satisfied as to bond fides.
62. Nothing in this Part of this Act contained shall prevent the forfeiture
of any license for a breach of the terms and conditions thereof, and no
holder of a license lien shall have any claim either legal or equitable against
Her Majesty or the Board by reason of the loss of his lien on the forfeiture
or abandonment of any license, but the Minister may if he thinks fit repay
to the holder of any such license lien (out of the moneys received in respect
of any improvements on the agricultural allotment or allotment) the sum of
money secured by such license lien. Provided that before any such repay-
ment is made the Minister shall be satisfied that the moneys secured by
such license lien were advanced and such license lien given bona fide and
without fraud or improper collusion on the part of the licensee or of the
holder of such license lien.
Rides Regulations and Orders.
63. The Governor in Council may from time to time make alter and
rescind rules regulations and orders for any of the following purposes
(that is to say):—For prescribing the form of a license lien; the conditions
upon which such lien will be allowed by the Minister ; the mode of valua-
tion of improvements actually effected upon any agricultural allotment or
allotment at the expiration of two years of such license; the giving of a
certificate as to the value of such improvements; the registration in the
Crown Lands Office of a license lien; the removal of such registration
when cancelled ; and the form of memorandum of the charge upon the
land by reason of such license lien to be endorsed on a Crown grant or lease
before issue.
Selector under Act No. 360 who has transferred to No. 364 may
re-transfer.
64. Any licensee under section nineteen of “ The Land Act 1869 ” who
has had the terms and conditions of his license altered so as to accord with
the provisions of “ The Land Act 1878 ” may make an application to the
Minister stating that he desires that the terms and conditions imposed by
the license as originally granted may be reverted to. On the receipt of
such application the Governor in Council may if he think fit cancel the
endorsement made on such license in accordance with the provisions
of section three of “The Land Act 1880.” From and after the date of such
cancellation the license shall be held upon all the terms and conditions of
such license as originally issued, and it shall thenceforth be construed
accordingly.


REGULATIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND
GRAZING LANDS.
Grazing Areas.
(Part 111., Section 32.)
1. Every intending applicant for a lease of a grazing area shall, during
office hours, deliver or cause to be delivered an application describing the
land applied for, in the form and accompanied by the declaration prescribed
in Schedule VIII. hereto, to the Land Officer for the district in which the
land is situated. The applicant shall, before lodging his application for a
grazing area lease, pay to the nearest Receiver of Revenue the sum of One
pound for a certificate of registration, which the said Receiver shall there-
upon hand to him, and such sum shall not in any case be refunded.
2. The applicant shall post or deliver to the Land Officer with his
application the said certificate of registration, and no application shall be
deemed to be an application for a grazing area lease under Part 111. of
The Land Act 1884 unless the said certificate be forwarded therewith.
The Land Officer shall enter the applications as received in the book kept
for the purpose. Applications received by the Land Officer upon one and
the same day shall be deemed to be equal so far as regards priority of
lodging application.
3. The Land Officer shall notify by post to every applicant and to every
person ,who in his opinion is interested for or against the application the
time and the place of the meeting of the Local Land Board at which such
application and the objections (if any) thereto will be heard ; but no
person shall be deemed to have any right to receive any such notice, and
any objection to any such application may be taken by any person, and shall
be considered at the hearing although no notice thereof shall have been
given. Except when specially ordered otherwise by the Minister, all
applications for land shall be brought before the Local Land Board sitting
at the locality nearest which the land referred to is situated.
4. After the consideration of the report of the Local Land Board and
approval of the issue of any grazing area lease the applicant shall pay the
rent for one half-year’s occupation of the land described therein, and a fee
of One pound for the preparation of the lease, also, if necessary, the charge
for survey, together with such other sums as may be required in special
cases for value of improvements. The applicant shall be advised to pay
the said sums within one month from the date of notification of the approval
of the issue of the lease. Every such lease shall bear date as of the first of
January or the first of July, as the case may be, next after the date on
which the issue of such lease shall have been approved and shall be in the
form prescribed in Schedule IX. hereto; but the diagram of boundaries
and statement of area shall be deemed as approximate and temporary only.
Provided always that the Governor in Council may, if he think fit, order
that a lease be subject to such special conditions as shall meet the circum-
stances of any particular case.
5. If any person whose application for a lease shall* have been approved
fail to pay the rent, sums, and fees as hereinbefore directed within one


month, of the date of the notice of approval, his application shall he liable
to be deemed abandoned, and the area applied for shall be liable to be
made available for selection.
6. Unless by the express direction of the Minister, all subsequent
payments of rent shall be made to the Receiver in whose district the land
is situated ; and no Receiver shall receive any moneys on account of leases
unless advised from the Department of Lands snd Survey so to do.
Agricultural Allotments.
Residence Licenses. —Part 111., Section 42.
1. Every application to select an agricultural allotment shall be in the
form and accompanied by the declaration prescribed in Schedule X. hereto,
and the same shall be posted or delivered to the Land Officer of the
district in which such allotment is situated.
2. Licenses for agricultural allotments shall be in the form and subject
to the conditions prescribed in Schedule XI. hereto, and shall also be
subject to such other special conditions as the Governor in Council may in
any particular case direct.
3. Any licensee under section 42 of The Land Act 1884 who may wish
to absent himself from his allotment for a period in all not exceeding
three months in any one year of the currency of his license shall apply to
the Land Officer for the district in which the land is situated, and fill up
and sign a notice in the form prescribed in Schedule XII. hereto.
4. The Land Officer shall register in a book, in the form prescribed in
Schedule XIII. hereto, to be kept in his office for that purpose, each notice
of intended absence, and shall transmit such notice to the Secretary for
Lands.
Agricultural Allotments.
Non-Residence Licenses. —Section 49, “ Land Act 1884.”
1 Applications for non-residence licenses shall be in the form and shall
be accompanied by the declaration prescribed in Schedule XIY. hereto,
and the same shall be posted or delivered to the Land Officer of the
district in which the land is situated.
2. Xon-residence licenses shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule
XV. hereto, and shall also be subject to such other special conditions as
the Governor in Council may in any particular case direct.
Residence and XTon-Residence Licenses.
1. Applications for agricultural allotments shall not be heard by a Local
Land Board, unless when so directed by the Minister.
2. After the approval of the issue of any license for an agricultural
allotment, the applicant shall pay to the proper officer the fee for one half-
year’s occupation of the land described therein, and a fee of Five shillings
for the preparation of the license, also, if necessary, the charge for survey,
together with such other sums as may be required in special cases for
value of improvements. The applicant shall be advised to pay the said


sums within one month from the date of the notification of approval.
Every such license shall bear date as of the first of January or the first
of July, as the case may be, next after the date on which the issue of such
license shall have been approved.
3. The fee for the preparation of a license for an agricultural allotment
shall be Five shillings.
) Vineyard, Hop Garden, and Orchard.
(Section 55.)
1. Any selector, under any previous Land Act or Acts, or any licensee or
lessee of any agricultural allotment under The Land Act 1884, having
established and cultivated a vineyard, hop garden, or orchard, and desiring
to obtain under the provisions of section 55 of The Land Act 1884 a Crown
grant for the area so cultivated, not exceeding 20 acres, shall make
application on the form prescribed in Schedule XVI. hereto.
» > V ! 4 Liens.
■ / (Section 57.)
1. The licensee of ,an agricultural allotment under Part 111. of The
Land Act 1884, or the licensee of any allotment under Part 11. of
The Land Act 1869 or any Act amending the same, desiring to register a
lien on his improvements must make an application in the form prescribed
in Schedule XVII. hereto.
2. A license lien will be registered in the Crown Lands Office, Mel-
bourne, upon the following conditions, viz.: —
1. That all tents or fees due to date have been paid.
2. That substantial and permanent improvements have been made
upon the land equal to twice the amount of the lien, which shall
be verified by a Crown Lands Bailiff, or other person whom the
Minister may appoint.
3. The license lien shall be endorsed upon the license in the form
prescribed in Schedule XVIII. hereto.
4. The memorandum of the charge upon the land by reason of such
license lien, when required to be endorsed on a 'Crown grant or lease,
before issue, shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule XIX. hereto.
5. The removal or discharge of any license lien shall be notified to the
Minister of Lands, in the form prescribed in Schedule XX. hereto, and the
license shall be forwarded therewith. Upon receipt of such notice (and
license) the endorsement on the license shall be cancelled and the lien
noted as discharged in the register.
6. The fee for the registration of a license lien shall be One pound.
Licenses may Tee changed.
(Sections 50 and 64.)
1. Holders of ordinary and non-residence licenses under Part 111. of
The Land Act 1884 desiring to avail themselves of the provisions of
section 50 of the said Act to convert their ordinary licenses into non-
residence licenses, or vice versa, shall make application in the form
prescribed in Schedules XXI. and XXII. respectively hereto.


2. Licensees under The Land Act 1869 who have had the terms and
conditions of their licenses altered so as to accord with the provisions of
The Land Act 1878, and who desire that the terms and conditions imposed
by the license as originally granted may be reverted to, as provided for by
section 64 of The Land Act 1884, shall make application in the form
prescribed in Schedule XXIII. hereto.
3. The fee for the preparation of any duplicate, modified, or consolidated
license under Part 111. of The Land Act 1884 shall be Five shillings.
Leases and Crown Grants.
(Sections 44 and 49.)
1. Every application by a residence licensee for a lease or for a Crown
grant of the agricultural allotment held by him under license shall be
in the form, and shall be accompanied by a declaration in the form
prescribed in Schedule XXIV. hereto.
2. The certificate for improvements issued by the Board of Land and
Works, with respect to applications undel* section 44 of The Land Act
1884, shall be in the form prescribed in XXV. hereto.
3. Applications by non-residence, a certificate of improve-
ments, at the end of the third and sixffi. years of the currency of the
license held by him, shall be in the form and accompanied by the
declaration prescribed in Schedule XXVI. hereto, and the certificate of
improvements issued by the Board of Land and Works with respect to
such application shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule XXVII.
hereto; and every application for a lease or Crown grant shall be
accompanied by the first of such certificates.
4. Should an arbitration be required under the provisions of the 46th
section of The Land Act 1884, the appointment of arbitrators shall be
in the forms prescribed in Schedules XXVIII., XXIX., and XXX.
hereto respectively.
5. Leases issued under section 44 of The Land Act 1884 shall be in the
form prescribed in Schedule XXXI. hereto, and shall be subject to such
other exceptions, reservations, covenants, and conditions as tp-overnor
in Council may in any particular case direct.
6. The fee for the preparation of a lease or certificate issued herein shall
be One pound.
Orders for the delivery of Crown Grants.
(Section 56.)
1. Every order by a lessee of an agricultural allotment under The
Land Act 1884, or of an allotment under Part 11. of The Land Act 1869,
authorizing any other person to obtain from the Governor in Council his
Crown grant, shall be given on the form prescribed in Schedule XXXII.
hereto.
"2. Approved orders to obtain Crown grants shall be registered in a book
in the form prescribed in Schedule XXXIII. hereto.
3. The Secretary for Lands shall forward to the Registrar of Titles, once
in each week, a copy of the register of approved orders, showing the
transactions for the week preceding.
4. The fee payable for the registration of an order authorizing any
other person to obtain a Crown grant shall be Ten shillings.


SCHEDULES FOR AGRICULTURAL AND
GRAZING LANDS.
SCHEDULE VIII.
Application for a Lease for a Grazing Area under Part 111. of “ The Land
Act 1884.”
* Here state fully the I, of*
place of abode and tbe hereby make application, under Part 111. of The Land Act 1884,
plicant. 10n ° e ap " for a lease for a grazing area described hereunder; and I
hereby request that (if necessary) an authorized surveyor be
instructed to make a survey for me and on my account of the
said grazing area, and to supply plan of same; and I under-
take to pay all duly authorized fees for the making of the said
survey and plan, or for any modification thereof, and to accept
a lease subject to the terms, covenants, and conditions which
may lawfully be imposed.
I, . of
hereby declare that I have not at any time held a lease for a
tlf applicant has not grazing area under this Act; f that I have selected under this
selected, h e may strike ant i previous Land Acts acres; and that the
ou ewor smi a ics. area j now q es i re to obtain would not, if added to the area
already selected by me under this or any previous Land Act or
Acts, exceed 1000 acres; that I am not under eighteen years
of age.
And that with respect to this application I am not an agent,
or a servant of, or a trustee, for any other person ; that I have
not entered into or promised to enter into any agreement to
permit any other person to acquire by purchase or otherwise
the grazing area in respect of which this application is made,
or any part thereof, or my interest therein, or the usufruct
thereof ; that I intend to occupy the said grazing area for my
own use and benefit solely; that if my application be granted
it is my intention to comply with the provisions of the 38th
section of The Land Act 1884; and that the statements made
by me in reply to the questions hereto subjoined are true and
correct in every particular.
N.B. —State here at what Money Order Office or Receipt and Pay Office you wish
to pay the survey charge for the allotment herein applied for.)
Questions and Statements referred to in the Declaration.
Questions.
Statements in reply.
1. What is your occupation, and where have
you resided during the last twelve months ?
2. Do you own any land in fee-simple ? If so,
state the number of acres, situation, and
purpose to which it has been applied.
3. Have you at any time obtained any land under
lease or license from the Crown ? If so,
Under what section and Act ?
Where situated ? ..
What area ?
What use did you make of it ?


. Questions.
Statements in reply.
4. Have you obtained a lease under Section 32,
Part III., of The Land Act 1884 ?
When?
In what parish is the holding situated?
Area ?
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true
and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria rendering
persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this day of
188 , before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
Situation and Area of
Allotment applied
for, if previously
surveyed.
Description of the Land
applied for, if previously
unsurveyed, or forming’
part only of a surveyed
allotment.
Report by Land Officer.
County—
Date and hour ofl Deport—
receipt of appli-1
Parish —
cation. )
Allotment —
Date of transmis- \
sion of order to 1
Section —
survey to autho-1
A. R. P.
rised surveyor. J
Extent —
Land Officer
at
* The magistrate’s sig-
nature is only required
here in cases where the
applicant is a marks-
man, and can neither
read nor write.
* I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
Note. — This application will not be received by the Land Officer unless accom-
panied by a “ Certificate of Registration,” which can be obtained of any Receiver
of Revenue on payment of a fee of One pound.
SCHEDULE IX.
Lease under Section 32 op “ The Land Act 1884.”
This Indenture made the first day of in the year of our
Lord One thousand eight hundred and eighty- between Her Most
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria of the one part and
of in the colony of Victoria hereinafter
called “ the lessee ” of the other part.
Whereas the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council has agreed to
grant this lease of the grazing area hereinafter described for the term of


years and calendar months at the annual rent of
being the rent fixed and reserved in accordance with the provisions of the 37th
section of The Land Act 1884 to the lessee who is entitled thereto under the
provisions of the said Act and the lessee has paid half a year’s rent in advance :
And whereas the Governor with the advice aforesaid has approved of and directed
the conditions and provisions hereinafter contained to be inserted in this lease
framed in accordance with the regulations made in pursuance of the provisions of
the said Act: Now this Indenture witnesseth that in consideration of such pay-
ment aforesaid and of the rent hereby reserved and of the covenants by the lessee
hereinafter contained Her Majesty doth by these presents grant and demise unto
the lessee his executors administrators and assigns all that grazing area situate in
the parish of county of
in the colony of Victoria containing acres
more or less and delineated on the plan prepared in accordance with the provisions
of the 30th section of the said Act and thereon numbered
in the said parish and also delineated on the plan drawn in
the margin of these presents and therein coloured yellow
together with the appurtenances: Excepting and reserving
unto Her Majesty her heirs and successors all gold and
auriferous earth or stone and all mines containing gold in and
under the said demised premises together with liberty for Her
Majesty her heirs and successors and her and their agents and
servants at any time or times during the said term to enter
upon the said land and to search and mine therein for gold or
to remove therefrom any gold and any auriferous earth or
stone and for the purposes aforesaid to sink shafts and do any
other things which may be necessary or usual in mining : And
also excepting and reserving to Her Majesty her heirs and successors and each and
every other lessee of any grazing area and her his and their agents and servants
tenants and workmen liberty and right of ingress egress and regress at all times
through over and across the premises hereby demised with or without horses cattle
and other animals carts waggons and carriages to or from such grazing area or
■part thereof from and to any public road or track subject to such regulation to be
made by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council as may for the
time being be in force: To have and to hold the premises hereinbefore expressed to
be hereby demised unto the lessee his executors administrators and assigns for the
term of years and calendar months
from the day of the date hereof: Yielding and paying therefor during the said
term the yearly rent of by two equal half-yearly
payments in advance on the first day of and the first
day of in every year clear of all deductions the
first of the said half-yearly payments having been made as aforesaid the next of the
said half-yearly payments to be made on the first day of
next and the last of the said half-yearly payments to be made on the first day
of next preceding the expiration of the said term:
And the lessee doth hereby for himself his heirs executors administrators and
assigns covenant with Her Majesty her heirs and successors that he the lessee his
executors administrators and assigns will during the said term pay the said rent
hereinbefore reserved in advance at the times and in manner hereinbefore appointed
for payment thereof clear of all deductions: And also will during the said term
pay all existing and future rates assessments and taxes for the time being payable
either by landlord or tenant in respect of the said premises: And also will not
assign sublet subdivide or part with the possession of the land hereby demised or
any portion thereof without the previous consent of The Board of Land and Works
signified in writing: And also will at once after the granting of this lease to the
satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works commence and continue to destroy
and will within three years after the granting of this lease-have destroyed to the
satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works the animals and birds by the said Act
included in the term “ vermin ” or which the Governor with the advice of the
Executive Council may by proclamation in the Government Gazette declare to be


vermin for the purposes of the said Act upon such land and will keep the same
free of such animals and birds Bathurst burr wild briar and gorse to the satis-
faction of The Board of Land and Works during the. currency of this lease: And
also will repair and keep in good condition and repair during the continuance of
the term hereby granted all houses fences wells reservoirs tanks dams and all
substantial and permanent improvements situated on the premises hereby demised
whether made erected or constructed by the said lessee his executors administra-
tors or assigns or not reasonable wear and tear and damage by fire storm and
tempest alone excepted and that the lessee his executors administrators or assigns
will not remove fill up or render useless or cause to be removed filled up or rendered
useless any of the same without first obtaining the permission of The Board of Land
and Works signified in writing : And also will not during the continuance of the
term hereby granted ring or destroy or except for the purpose of fencing or building
or domestic use on the land hereby demised cut down any timber in or upon the
land hereby demised unless with the sanction of The Board of Land and Works
signified in writing and then only under the supervision of an officer appointed in
that behalf by the said Board : And also will if not sooner called upon under the
provisions of The Fences Statute 1874 within three years from the date of these
presents enclose the land hereby demised with a fence of such kind as shall come
within the meaning aforesaid and keep the same in repair during the continuance
of the term hereby granted : And also will at the expiration or sooner determina-
tion of the said term hereby granted peaceably deliver up to Her Majesty her heirs
or successors the premises hereby demised together with all houses fences wells
reservoirs tanks dams and all improvements that now are or may be made erected
or constructed thereon in such good or sufficient repair and condition as aforesaid
and in all respects in such state or condition as shall be consistent with the due
performance of the several covenants hereinbefore contained: And also will
permit any person appointed in that behalf by The Board of Land and Works at
any time to enter upon the premises hereby demised to ascertain if the conditions
and covenants of this lease are being performed by the lessee : And also that every
holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease shall have the right and be allowed
by the lessee his executors administrators and assigns to enter upon the area hereby
demised and search for gold and to mine thereon and to erect and occupy mining
plant and machinery without making any compensation to the lessee his executors
administrators or assigns for surface or other damage: And also that these
presents shall become absolutely void on any assignment thereof save under the
provisions of The Land Act 1884: Provided always and it is hereby agreed and
declared that Her Majesty her heirs and successors may at any time and from
time to time during the said term resume possession of any part or parts of the land
hereby demised which may in the opinion of the Governor with the advice afore-
said be required for the purposes of water supply irrigation works races dams and
ditches or for public railways roads canals or for tramways or other internal
communication through such lands or for mining purposes or for the purpose of
obtaining or removing therefrom guano or other manure stone or earth or for sites
of inns stores smithies bakeries or similar buildings or of bathing houses bathing
places fishermen’s residences drying grounds fellmongering establishments
slaughter-houses lime-kilns bridges ferries toll or punt houses tanneries, factories
saw or paper mills quays docks landing places or the deposit of materials ship-
building and repairing boat-building and repairing or for the working of mineral
springs or for the manufacture of salt or for the purpose of erecting pumps or for
the purpose of cutting digging and taking away any live or dead timber gravel
stone ballast limestone coal salt shell seaweed and loam brick or other earth upon
payment to the lessee his executors administrators or assigns for his interest in
such lease together with the value of houses fences (within the meaning aforesaid)
wells reservoirs tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent improvements
made erected or constructed by the lessee his executors administrators or assigns
during the currency of this lease on the land resumed : Provided always that the
sum paid in respect of such improvements by The Board of Land and Works shall
not exceed the sum expended thereon by the lessee his executors administrators
or assigns: And that such sum shall be determined in accordance with regulations


in that behalf made by the Governor with the advice aforesaid: And that the
compensation to be paid to the lessee his executors administrators or assigns in
respect of his interest in this lease shall be determined in manner provided by
The Lands Compensation Statute 1869 or any Act amending the same : Provided
always and it is hereby also agreed and declared that Her Majesty her heirs
and successors may at any time and from time to time during the term hereby
granted in accordance with the regulations to be made by the Governor with the
advice aforesaid in that behalf resume as sites for townships or villages or for
mining purposes and re-enter upon any lands forming part of the land hereby
demised upon payment to the lessee his executors administrators or assigns of the
full value of all houses fences (within the meaning aforesaid) wells reservoirs
tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent improvements made erected or
constructed by the lessee his executors administrators or assigns on the lands so
resumed but nothing in this lease contained shall be construed to give a better
tenure to the lessee his executors administrators or assigns in regard to the right
of miners authorized by the responsible Minister of the Crown for the time being
administering The Land Act 1884 or Part 111. thereof subject to any conditions he
may think fit to impose to enter upon any portion specified by the said Minister
of the land hereby demised in search of gold than was possessed by pastoral tenants
under The Land Act 1869 with regard to the right of miners to enter upon the
lands occupied by such pastoral tenants: Provided always and it is hereby
expressly agreed and declared that neither of the preceding provisions shall preju-
dice or be construed as restricting the generalty of the covenant on the part of
the lessee hereinbefore contained conferring on the holder of a miner’s right or of
a mining lease the right to enter upon the demised land and exercise the other
rights in such covenant mentioned: And in case of any land being required to be
resumed for mining purposes the Governor with the advice aforesaid shall
determine and have the election whether it shall be resumed under the provisions
of the 68th section of the said Act or under the provisions hereinbefore contained
and if so under which of the provisions hereinbefore contained it shall be so
resumed or taken : And it is hereby declared that in case possession of any part
or parts of the said land shall be resumed as aforesaid the covenants provisions
and agreements herein contained with reference to the whole of the premises shall
continue in force and apply to such part of the same as shall be left in the
possession of the lessee his executors administrators or assigns aforesaid : Provided
always and it is hereby also agreed and declared that the term hereby granted
may be determined by Her Majesty her heirs or successors at any time by not less
than three years’ previous notice in writing of such intention addressed to the
lessee his executors administrators or assigns being served upon him or them or
left upon any part of the lands comprised in this lease and published in three con-
secutive ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette and upon payment to the
lessee his executors administrators or assigns for his interest in this lease together
with the value of houses fences (within the meaning aforesaid) wells reservoirs
tanks dams and of all substantial and permanent improvements made erected or
constructed by the lessee his executors administrators or assigns prior to the date
of such notice and during the currency of this lease on the land so resumed
provided that the sum paid in respect of such improvements by The Board of
Land and Works shall not exceed the sum expended thereon by the lessee his
executors administrators or assigns and that such sum shall be determined in
accordance with the regulations aforesaid and that the compensation to be paid
to the lessee his executors administrators or assigns in respect of his or their
interests in the lease shall be determined in manner provided by The Lands
Compensation Statute 1869 or any Act amending the same : Provided always and
it is hereby agreed and declared and these presents are upon this condition that
in the event of the lessee his executors administrators or assigns becoming the
licensee or licensees of any portion of the land hereby demised as an agricultural
allotment and his or their license thereafter being annulled for any breach of the
provisions of The Land Act 1884 or of the condition of such license or if and
whenever there shall be a breach of or non-compliance with any of the covenants
by the lessee herein contained and the Governor with the advice aforesaid shall


determine that this lease shall in consequence be avoided (and the production of
the minute of the proceedings of the Executive Council whereat such determina-
tion was arrived at shall be conclusive evidence thereof) or if the land hereby
demised or any part thereof is assigned whether by operation of law or otherwise
except as hereinbefore mentioned or as in The Land Act 1884 otherwise expressly
provided then these presents and the term hereby created shall be void and
of no effect: Ann immediately thereupon it shall be lawful for any bailiffs
of Crown lands or for any other agents or officers authorized in that behalf by
Her Majesty or by the Governor with the advice aforesaid without any demand
whatsoever to l enter upon the land hereby demised and the lessee his executors
administrators and assigns and all persons claiming under him or them for ever
to expel and remove therefrom without any legal process whatsover and as
effectually as any sheriff might do in case Her Majesty had obtained judgment in
ejectment for recovery of possession of the said land or in an action for the
recovery of land and a writ of habere facias possessionem or writ of possession or
ether process had issued on such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form of
law : And that in case of such entry and any action being brought or other
proceeding taken for oorn account of the same by any person whatsoever the
defendants or defendant to such action may plead leave and license thereto and
these presents shall be conclusive evidence of the leave and license of the lessee
his executors or administrators and all persons claiming under him or them to any
bailiff of Crown lands and all persons acting in the matters complained of in such
action or other proceedings : And it is hereby lastly agreed and declared that the
term “ Governor ’ in these presents shall mean the Governor or the Administrator
■of the Government of the Colony of Victoria for the time being unless such
meaning shall be inconsistent with the context.
In witness whereof His Excellency
Governor and Commander-in-Chief in and over the Colony of Victoria and its
Dependencies and Vice-Admiral of the same hath on behalf of Her Majesty the
Queen caused this demise to be sealed with the seal of the said colony and the
lessee hath hereunto set his hand and seal the day and year first above written.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-named )
in the >- (1.5.)
presence of I
SCHEDULE X.
Application foe an Ageicultukal Allotment undee Paet 111. of “ The
Land Act 1884.”
* Here state fully
the place of abode and
the occupation of the
applicant.
I> of *
hereby make application, under Part 111. of The Land Act
1884, for the allotment described hereunder; and I hereby
request that (if necessary) an authorised surveyor be instructed
to make a survey for me and on my account of the said
allotment, and to supply plan of same; and I undertake to pay
all duly authorised fees for the making of the said survey and
plan, or for any modification thereof, and to accept a license
subject to the terms, covenants, and conditions which may
lawfully be imposed.
I, of
hereby declare that I have not taken up a pre-emptive right;


+ If applicant has not
selected, he may strike
out the words in
italics.
J If the applicant be
a female, insert [as the
case may be] the words
“ that I am not a mar-
ried woman,” or “ that
I am a married woman,
but have obtained a
decree Of judicial sepa-
ration.”
t that I have selected under this and previous Land Acts
acres; that no selection made by me under this or any pre-
vious Land Act or Acts has been forfeited or cancelled for
the evasion of the provisions of any such Land Act or Acts ;
and that the area I now desire to obtain would not, if added
to the area already selected by me under this or any previous
Land Act or Acts, exceed 820 acres; that lam not under
eighteen years of age ; }
And that with respect to this application I am not an agent
or a servant of, or a trustee for any other person ; that I have
not entered into nor promised to enter into any agreement to
permit any other person to acquire by purchase or otherwise
the allotmeut in respect of which this application is made, or
any part thereof, or my interest therein, or the usufruct
thereof; that I intend to occupy the allotment for my own
use and benefit solely ; that, if my application be granted, it
is my intention within twelve months after receipt of the
license, and thenceforward during the currency of the same,
to occupy the allotment by residing thereon in my own
proper person, and to comply with the covenants and conditions
of the 44th section of The Land Act 1884; and that the state-
ments made by me in reply to the questions hereto subjoined
are true and correct in every particular.
N.B—State here at what Money Office or Beceipt and Pay Office you wish
to pay the survey charge to the allotment herein applied for.
Questions and Statements referred to in the Declaration.
Questions.
Statements in reply.
1. What is your occupation, and where have you |
resided during the last twelve months ? ..
2. Do you own any land in fee-simple? If so.
state the number of acres, situation, and
purpose to which it has been applied ?
3. Have you at any time obtained any land under
lease or license from the Crown ? If so,
Under what section and Act ? ..
Where situated ?
What area ? ..
What use did you make of it ? ..
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address —
Declared at in the colony of\
Victoria, this day of 188 ,
before me, Justice of the Peace V
in and for the Bailiwick of the colony S
of Victoria. /


Situation and Area of
Allotment applied for,
if previously surveyed.
Description of the Land
applied for, if previously
unsurveyed, or forming-
part only of a surveyed
allotment.
Report by Land Officer.
County—
Date and hour ofl
Report—
receipt of appli- l-
Parish—
cation j
Allotment —
Date of transmis-1
sion of order to 1
Section—
survey to autho- F
A. E. P.
rized surveyor )
Extent—
Land Officer
at
* The magistrate’s sig-
nature is only required
here in cases where the
applicant is a marksman,
and can neither read nor
write.
* I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of 188 .
Justice of the Peace in and for the
Bailiwick of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XI.
License under Section 42 of “ The Land Act 1884.”
This Indenture made this day of in the
year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred and eighty- between His
Excellency Governor and Commander-in-Chief
in and over the Colony of Victoria of the one part and
of in the said colony hereafter called “ the licensee ” of the
other part.
Whereas the licensee having applied for this license and made the declaration
required by the 44th section of The Land Act 1884 the Governor with the advice
of the Executive Council has agreed to grant the same on the faith that the
applicant does not by becoming the licensee violate or fail to comply with any of
the provisions of the said Act: And whereas the Governor with the advice afore-
said has approved of and directed the conditions and provisions hereinafter
contained to be inserted in this license framed in accordance with the regulations
made in pursuance of the provisions of the said Act: And whereas the licensee
has paid half a year’s fee for occupation in advance : Now this Indenture wit-
nesseth that in consideration of the payment aforesaid of the fee for occupation
hereby reserved and of the agreements by the licensee hereinafter contained the
Governor with the advice aforesaid and in exercise of the power given by the said Act
doth hereby demise and grant unto the licensee license and liberty to enter upon and
personally to occupy in accordance with the provisions of the said Act All that
agricultural allotment situate in the parish of county of
in the colony of Victoria containing acres more or less and delineated
on the plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of the
30th section of the said Act and thereon numbered
in the said parish and also delineated on the plan drawn in the
margin of these presents and thereon coloured yellow for the
term of six years from the day of the date of this license:
Yielding and paying therefor during the said term a yearly
fee for occupation of being calculated at the
rate of One shilling per annum for each and every acre or


fractional part of an acre contained in the said allotment the
said yearly fee to be paid in advance by equal half-yearly
payments on the day of and the
day of in every year clear of all deductions
the first of the half-yearly payments having been made in conformity with the
provisions of the said Act the next of the said half-yearly payments to be made on
ie day of next and the last of the half-yearly payments
to be made on the day of next preceding the expiration of
the term of this license. The licensee for himseif his heirs executors and adminis-
trators hereby agrees with the Governor as follows To pay the said license fee in
moieties in advance at the times and in manner hereinbefore appointed for payment
thereof clear of all deductions and also all existing and future rates assessments and
taxes for the time being payable by landlord or tenant in respect of the premises
Not during the currency of this license to assign the license nor to transfer his
right title and interest therein or in the allotment hereinbefore described and
herein comprised or any part thereof nor to sublet the said allotment or any
part thereof To at once and to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works
commence and continue to destroy and within two years after the issue of this
license to have destroyed to the satisfaction of The Board the animals and birds
by the said Act included in the term “vermin” or which the Governor with
the advice of the Executive Council may by proclamation in the Government
Gazette declare to be vermin for the purposes of the said Act upon such land
and to keep the same free from such, animals and birds to the satisfaction of the
said Board during the currency of this license To enclose within six years from
the issue of this license if not sooner called upon under the provisions of The
Fences Statute 1874 the land herein comprised with a fence of such kind as shall
come within the meaning assigned to the word “fence” by The Land Act 1884
and keep the same in repair during the continuance of this license Within
twelve months, after the issue of this license to commence and thenceforward
during of this license without intermission (except for any period
specified in a notice registered in conformity with the provisions of the 44th
section of the .said Act) to occupy personally the said allotment To make and
erect on the said allotment before the end of the sixth year from the commence-
ment of this license substantial and permanent improvements of the value of One
pound for every acre and fractional part of an acre of the allotment At all
times during the continuance of this license bond fide to comply with all and not
to violate any of the provisions of the said Act: The land comprised in this
license is subject both during the currency of this license and after the licensee
shall have acquired the fee-simple thereof to the right of any person being the
holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease to enter therein and thereon and to
mine for gold and silver and to erect and occupy mining plant or machinery
thereon in the same manner and under the same conditions and provisions as those
on which such person had at the time of the passing of the said Act the right to
mine for gold and silver in and upon Crown lands provided that compensation
shall be paid to the licensee by such persons for surface damage to be done to such
lands by reason of mining thereon such compensation to be determined as provided
by the 117th section of the said Act and the payment thereof to be a condition
precedent to such right of entry and this license is subject to the conditions that
the licensee shall at all times during the currency hereof permit every such person
to exercise the right aforesaid : The Governor with the advice of the Executive
Council or The Board of Land and Works for and on behalf of Her Majesty her
heirs and successors may at any time during the currency of this license resume
possession of all or any part or parts of the lands comprised in the said allotment
which may be. required for reserves for public purposes or for the purpose of water
supply irrigation works races dams and ditches or for railways roads canals or for
tramways or other internal communication or for mining purposes provided that
any moneys which may have been paid by the licensee to the Crown in respect of
the lands so resumed or expended by him thereupon shall be repaid to him
together with such other moneys as compensation for such resumption as to
the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council seems fit: The preceding


provision shall be construed as independent of and concurrent with the powers
conferred by the 68th section of the said Act : In case possession of any part
or parts shall be resumed as aforesaid the agreements and conditions hei em
contained with reference to the whole shall continue in force and apply to such
part as shall be left in the possession of the licensee : If and whenever any part
of the said fees for occupation shall be in arrear whether the same shall have been
demanded or not or if and whenever there shall be a breach °t any ot tne agree-
ments positive or negative by the licensee herein contained or if this license shall
be assigned whether by operation of law or otherwise save as in tle said Act is
otherwise expressly provided or if the said allotment or any part thereof is sublet
or in case the licensee do riot within twelve months after the issue ot this license
and thenceforward during the continuance of this license without intermission
(except as hereinbefore mentioned) personally occupy the said allotment or in case
substantial and permanent improvements certified in writing under the seal ot Ihe
Board of Land and Works or under the hands of arbitrators as provided by t re
said Act to be of the value of One pound for every acre and fractional part ot an
acre of the allotment shall not have been made on the said allotment by the
licensee before the end of the sixth year from the commencement o t is icense
or if it shall at any time be shown to the satisfaction of the Governor wit 1 the
advice aforesaid (and that it has been so shown the production o a copy o le
Government Gazette containing a notice purporting to be signed by tie lesponsi e
Minister of the -Crown for the time being administering the said Act or hart til.
of the said Act so declaring or notifying or declaring or notifying that t is license
has become forfeited and void shall be conclusive evidence) that the licensee
became such licensee or that he held or continued to hold this license in violation
of or non-compliance with any of the provisions of the said Act or t at t e
licensee has committed a breach of or not fulfilled any of the conditions o t is
license then and in any of such cases this license shall be void and ot no enect.
And as ancillary and without prejudice to the provisions of the 45th and JAlst
sections of the said Act it is hereby agreed that immediately upon this license so
becoming void and of no effect it shall be lawful for any bailiffs of Grown lands 01
for any other agents or officers authorized in that behalf without any demand
whatever to enter upon the said allotment and the licensee and all pei sons claiming
under him for ever to expel and remove therefrom without any legal process
whatsoever and as effectually as any sheriff might do in case Her i ajesty ad
obtained judgment in ejectment or in an action for the recovery of and and a
writ of habere facias possessionem or writ of possession or other process la
issued on such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form ot . law and that m
case of such entry and any action being brought or other proceedings taken tor or
on account of the same by any person whatsoever the defendants or c e^enc
such action may plead leave and license thereto and these presents shall be
conclusive evidence of the leave and license of the licensee and a peisons
claiming under him to any bailiff of Crown lands and all persons ac j' m g in the
matters complained of in such action or other proceeding: It is here y dec are
that if the licensee during the said period of six years occupy the salc | a lotment
for not less than five years and fence and make the improvements ot the nature
and value hereinbefore mentioned on the said allotment during the sai peno
of six years and prove to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and
Works (to be certified under its seal) by such evidence as the said Loaid
may require that he has complied with the said conditions and with ail other
conditions hereof he shall be entitled at any time within twelve mont , s a “ er
six years from the commencement of this license to demand and obtain 10m
the Governor in Council a Crown grant upon payment of Fourteen shillings for
each acre or fractional part of an acre or otherwise he may obtain a lease ol t e
said allotment and such lease shall be for a term of fourteen years at a, year y len
of One shilling for each acre or fractional part of an acre so demised payab e m
equal parts half-yearly in advance and will contain the usual covenants for the
payment of rent and a condition for re-entry on non-payment thereof : And upon
payment of the last sum due on account of the rent so reserved or at any time
during the term upon payment of the difference between the amount o len


actually paid and the entire sum of One pound for each acre or fractional part of
an acre the lessee or his representatives shall be entitled to a grant in fee of the
lands leased and every such grant shall be subject to such covenants conditions
exceptions and reservations as the Governor in Council may direct: Provided also
that if it be proved to the satisfaction of the responsible Minister of the Crown
aforesaid by the licensee that owing to ill health he is unable to reside on the said
allotment or that for any other reason it is expedient to do so the said Minister
may cause the said allotment to be put up for sale by auction : Provided also that
in the case of the insolvency or death of the licensee during the currency of this
license it shall not be obligatory on the assignee or trustee in insolvency or on the
executors or administrators of such licensee to comply with the said condition of
occupation : Provided also that in the case of the insolvency or death of the
licensee during the currency of this license it shall be lawful for the assignee or
trustee in insolvency or for the executors or administrators of such licensee to
assign such license to any person who is qualified for becoming a licensee under
Part 111. of the said Act and such person shall thereupon be with respect to such
license in the same position as though he had been the original licensee : Except
as herein otherwise expressly provided the word “ licensee” shall include his
executors and administrators and any person or persons in whom this license may
under the provisions of the said Act become vested. And it is hereby lastly
declared that the term “ Governor” in these presents shall mean the Governor or
the Administrator of the Government of the colony of Victoria for the time being
unless such meaning shall be inconsistent with the context.
In witness whereof the Governor and the licensee have hereunto set their hands
and seals the day and year first above written.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-named 1
in the - (1.5.)
presence of j
SCHEDULE XII.
Section 44, “ Land Act 1884.
Form of Notice of Intention to be Absent from Selection.
Extent of land— Sir, —Being the holder of a license under section 42, Land
A B p Act 1884, to occupy the land specified in the margin hereof, I
hereby notify that it is my intention to be absent from the
allotment so licensed for a period not exceeding
Parish— commencing on and terminating
Allotment on both inclusive, and that my address during
such absence will be at .
Section— And I request you to register such absence in accordance
No. of license— with the P rovisions of The Land Act 1884.
Bate of license— Signature—■
Address—
Bate—
Witness—
SCHEDULE XIII.
Begister of Notices of Absence from Selections.
Parish and
No. of License.
Name and Addre-s during
Absence.
*
Date of
Kegistration,
Particulars of A bsence.
From
To


SCHEDULE XIV.
Application for Non-residence License under Part 111. of
“ The Land Act.”
* Here state fully the
place of abode and the
occupation of the appli-
caut -
t If applicant has not
outthfwo^ e d“n y italics!
J If the applicant be
a female, insert [ns the
case may be] the words
“ that 1 am not a mar-
ried woman,” or “ that
I am a married woman,
hut have obtained a de-
cree of judicial separa-
tion.”
I, _ °f*
h ere ky make application, under Part 111. of The Land Act
f or the allotment described hereunder; and I hereby
request that (if necessary) an authorized surveyor be instructed
to make a survey, for me and on my account, of the said
allotment, and to supply plan of same; and I undertake to
pay all duly authorized fees for the making of the said survey
and plan, or for any modification thereof, and to accept a
license subject to the terms, covenants, and conditions which
may lawfully be imposed.
I, of . . ,
hereby declare that I have not taken up a pre-emptive right;
uj iat / ] lave selected under this and previous Land Acts acres ;
that no selection made by me under this or any previous Land
Act or Acts has been forfeited or cancelled for the evasion of
the provisions of any such Land Act or Acts; and that the
area I now desire to obtain would not, if added to the area
already selected by me under this or any previous Land Act
or Acts, exceed 320 acres; that I am not under eighteen years
Q | a „ e . +
And that with respect to this application I am not an agent, or
a servant of, or a trustee for any other person , that 1 have not
entered into nor promised to enter into any agreement to per-
mit any ot h er person to acquire by purchase or otherwise the
allotment in respect of which this application is made or any
part thereof, or my interest therein, or the usufruct thereof ;
that I intend to improve the allotment for my own use and
benefit solely ; that, if my application be granted, it is my
intention to comply with the provisions of the 49th section of
The Land Act 1884 respecting improvements to be effected
upon land held under non-residence licenses; and that the
statements made by me in reply to the questions hereto sub-
joined are true and correct in every particular.
N.B.—State here at what Money Order Office or Receipt and Pay Office you wish to
pay the survey charge for the allotment herein applied for.
Questions and Statements referred to in the Declaration.
Questions.
Statements in reply.
1. What is your occupation, and where have
you resided during the last twelve months ?
2. Do you own any land in fee-simple ? If so,
state the number of acres, situation, and
purpose to which it has been applied
3. Have you at any time obtained any land
under lease or license from the Crown ? If so,
Under what section and Act ? ..
Where situated ?
What area ?..
What use did you make of it ?


And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature-
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at in the colony of Victoria
this day of 188 before me, /
one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in t
and for the colony of Victoria, bailiwick of )
Situation and Area of
Allotment applied
for, if previously
surveyed.
Description of the Land
applied for, if pre-
viously unsurveyed,
or forming part only
of a surveyed allot-
ment.
Report by Land Officer.
County—
Parish—
Date and hour of
receipt of appli- L
cation )
Report—
Allotment—
Date of transmis-i
sion of order to
Section—
A. K. P.
Extent—
survey to autho- (
rized surveyor J
Land Officer
at
I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the declarant in my presence
this day of 188
One of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in and for the
colony of Victoria, bailiwick of
SCHEDULE XV.
Non-residence License under Sections 49 and 50 of “The Land Act 1884.”
This Indenture made this day of in the
year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred and eighty- Between His
Excellency Governor and Commander-in-Chief
m and over the colony of Victoria of the one part and
v . , . in the colony of
victoria hereafter called “ the licensee” of the other part.
Whereas the licensee being a person entitled to become a licensee of an agricul-
tural allotment under the provisions of Part 111. of The Land Act 1884 has applied
or this license and has paid a half-year’s fee therefor in advance : And whereas
tie Governor with the advice of the Executive Council has approved .of and
directed the conditions and provisions hereinafter contained to be inserted in this
license trained in accordance with the regulations made in pursuance of the
provisions of the said Act: Now this Indenture witnesseth that in consideration of
the payment aforesaid of the fee for this license hereby reserved and of the agree-
ments by the licensee hereinafter contained the Governor with the advice aforesaid
and m exercise of the power given by the said Act Doth hereby demise and grant


unto the licensee license and liberty to enter upon improve and occupy all that
agricultural allotment situate in the parish of county
of in the colony of Victoria containing acres
more or less and delineated on the plan prepared in accordance
with the provisions of the 30th section of the said Act and
thereon numbered in the said parish and also
delineated on the plan drawn in the margin of these presents
and thereon coloured yellow for the term of six years from the
day of the date of this license yielding and paying therefor
during the said term a yearly fee for this license of Two
shillings per annum for each and every acre or fractional part
of an acre contained in the said allotment the said yearly fee
to be paid in advance by equal half-yearly payments on the
day of • and the
day of in every year clear of all deductions
the first of the said half-yearly payments having been made in advance the next of
the said half-yearly payments to be made on the day of
next and the last of the said half-yearly payments to be made on the day
of next preceding the expiration of the term of this
license: The licensee for himself his heirs executors and administrators hereby
agrees with the Governor as follows To pay the said license fee in moieties in
advance at the times and in manner hereinbefore appointed for payment thereof
clear of all deductions And also all existing and future rates assessments and taxes
for the time being payable by landlord or tenant in respect of the premises Not
during the currency of this license to assign the license nor to transfer his right title
and interest therein or in the allotment hereinbefore described and herein comprised
or any part thereof nor to sublet the said allotment or any part thereof To at once and
to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works commence and continue to
destroy and within two years after the issue of this license to have destroyed to the
satisfaction of the said Board the animals and birds by the said Act included in the
term “ vermin ” or which the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council may
by proclamation in the Government Gazette declare to be vermin for the purposes
of the said Act upon such land and to keep the same free from such animals and
birds to the satisfaction of the said Board during the currency of this license To
enclose within six years from the issue of this license if not sooner called upon
under the provisions of The Fences Statute 1874 the land herein comprised
with a fence of such kind as shall come within the meaning assigned to the
word “ fence ” by The Land Act 1884 and keep the same in repair during
the continuance of this license To make and erect on the said allotment
before the end of the third year from the commencement of this license sub-
stantial and permanent improvements of the value of One pound for every
acre and fractional part of an acre of the allotment and before the end of the
sixth year from the said commencement of this license substantial and per-
manent improvement of the value of One additional pound for every acre or
fractional part of an acre of the allotment At all times during the continuance
of this license bond fide to comply with all and not to violate any of the provisions
of the said Act: The land comprised in this license is subject both during the
currency of this license and after the licensee shall have acquired the fee-simple
thereof to the right of any person being the holderof a miner’s right or of a mining
lease to enter therein and thereon and to mine for gold and silver and to erect and
occupy mining plant or machinery thereon in the same manner and under the
same conditions and provisions as those on which such person had at the time of
the passing of the said Act the right to mine for gold and silver in and upon Crown
lands provided that compensation shall be paid to the licensee by such persons for
surface damage to be done to such lands by reason of mining thereon such com-
pensation to be determined as provided by the 117th section of the said Act and
the payment thereof to be a condition precedent to such right of entry and
this license is subject to the condition that the licensee shall at all times
during the currency hereof permit every such person to exercise the right
aforesaid: The Governor with the advice of the Executive Council or The


Board of Land and Works for and on behalf of Her Majesty her heirs and
successors may at any time during the currency of this license resume posses-
sion of all or any part or parts of the lands comprised in the said allotment which
may be required for reserves for public purposes or for the purpose of water
supply irrigation works races dams and ditches or for railways roads canals or for
tramways or other internal communication or for mining purposes provided that
any moneys which may have been paid by the licensee to the Crown in respect of
the lands so resumed or expended by him thereupon shall be repaid to him together
with such other moneys as compensation for such resumption as to the Governor
with the advice of the Executive Council seems tit: The preceding provision shall
be construed as independent of and concurrent with the powers conferred by the
68th section of the said Act: In case possession of any part or parts of the said
lands shall be resumed as aforesaid the agreements and conditions herein con-
tained with reference to the whole shall continue in force and apply to such
part as shall be left in the possession of the licensee : If and whenever any part
of the said fees for this license shall be in arrear whether the same shall have
been demanded or not or if and whenever there shall be a breach of any of the
agreements positive or negative by the licensee herein contained or if this
license shall be assigned whether by operation of law or otherwise save as in
the said Act is otherwise expressly provided or if the said allotment or any part
thereof is sublet or in case substantial and permanent improvements certified
in writing under the seal of The Board of Land and Works or under the hands of
arbitrators as provided by the said Act to be of the value of One pound for every
acre and fractional part of an acre of the allotment shall not have been made on
the said allotment by the licensee before the end of the third year from the
commencement of this license or in case substantial and permanent improvements
oertified as hereinbefore mentioned to be of the value of One additional pound for
every acre and fractional part of an acre of the allotment shall not have been
made on the said allotment by the licensee before the end of the sixth year from
the commencement of this license or if it shall at any time be shown to the satis-
faction of the Governor with the advice aforesaid (and that it has been so shown the
production of a copy of the Government Gazette containing a notice purporting
to be signed by the responsible Minister of the Crown for the time being
administering the said Act or Part 111. of the said Act so declaring or notifying
or declaring or notifying that this license has become forfeited and void shall be
conclusive evidence) that the licensee became such licensee or that he held or
continued to hold this license in violation of or non-compliance with any of the
provisions of the said Act or that the licensee has committed a breach of or not
fulfilled any of the conditions of this license then and in any of such cases this
license shall be void and of no effect: And as ancillary and without prejudice
to the provisions of the 45th and 121st sections of the said Act it is hereby
agreed that immediately upon this license so becoming void and of no effect
it shall be lawful for any bailiff of Crown lands or for any other agents or
officers authorized in that behalf without any demand whatever to enter
upon the said allotment and the licensee and all persons claiming under him
for ever to expel and remove therefrom without any legal process whatsoever
and so effectually as any sheriff might do in case Her Majesty had obtained
judgment in ejectment or in an action for the recovery of land and a writ
of habere facias possessionem or writ of possession or other process had issued
on such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form of law and that in case
of such entry and any action being brought or other proceedings taken for or
on account of the same by any person whatsoever the defendants or defendant
to such action may plead leave and license thereto and these presents shall be con-
clusive evidence of the leave and license of the licensee and all persons claiming
under him to any bailiff of Crown lands and all persons acting in the matters com-
plained of in such action or other proceeding : It is hereby declared that if
the licensee fence and make the improvements of the nature and value hereinbefore
mentioned on the said allotment during the said respective periods of three and
six years and prove to the satisfaction of The Board of Land and Works (to be cer-
tified under its seal) by such evidence as the said Board may require that he has


complied with the said conditions and with all other conditions hereof he shall be
entitled at any time after the period of the currency of the license or during the
term of the lease hereinafter mentioned to demand and obtain from the Governor
in Council a Crown grant upon payment of Two pounds for each acre or fractional
part of an acre or otherwise he may obtain a lease of the said allotment and such
lease shall be for a term of fourteen years at a rent of Two shillings per annum for
each acre or fractional part of an acre so demised payable in equal parts half-yearly
in advance and will contain the usual covenants for the payment of rent and a condi-
tion for re-entry on non-payment thereof: And upon payment of the last sum due
on account of the rent so reserved or at any time during the term upon pay-
ment of the difference between the amount of rent actually paid and the entire
sum of Two pounds for each acre or fractional part of an acre the lessee or
his representatives shall be entitled to a grant in fee of the lands leased and
every such grant shall be subject to such covenants conditions exceptions and
reservations as the Governor in Council may direct: Provided also that m
the case of the insolvency or death of the licensee during the currency of this license
it shall be lawful for the assignee or trustee in insolvency or for the executors or
administrators of such licensee to assign such license to any person who is
qualified for becoming a licensee under Part 111. of the said Act and such person
shall thereupon be with respect to such license in the same position as though he
had been the original licensee : Except as herein otherwise expressly provided
the word “licensee” shall include his executors and administrators and any
person or persons in whom this license may under the provisions.of the said Act
become vested: And it is hereby declared that the term “ Governor ”in these
presents shall mean the Governor or the Administrator of the Government of the
Colony of Victoria for the time being unless such meaning shall be inconsistent
with the context.
In witness whereof the said Governor and the said licensee have hereunto set
their hands and seals the day and year first above written.
Signed sealed and delivered by the above-named)
8 in the L (ms.)
presence of — /
SCHEDULE XVI.
Application to Purchase, Section 55, “ Land Act 1884.
Address—
Date—
Sir, 1869
Being fh e *pcensee of an allotment under The Land and
bavin" established and cultivated a ’’'vineyard, hop-garden, orchaid, embracing
acres within the boundaries of the said allotment, I hereby apply for a
Crown grant for the land so cultivated as * vineyard, hop-garden, orchard, and not
exceeding 20 acres; and, upon approval of this application, I am prepared to pay
the difference between the amount of rent actually paid and the entne sum payable
in respect of the said 20 acres.
For particulars of cultivation, &c., see within.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
The Honorable the President
of the Board of Land and Works.
* Here strike out the words or figures not required, as the circumstances of the case may
demand.


Particulars of Cultivation .
Number of Acres Cultivated.
Cost per Acre.
Nature of Crop.
Yield per Acre.
Cost.
•p
£ s. d.
c3
&
Q
S
>
Hop-garden.
Orchard.
-
All Other Improvements.
Description.
Cost.
• ‘
£ s. d.
Total Cost
... £
SCHEDULE XVII.
Application to Register a License Lien.
Address—
Parish— Date—
Extent of land— Sir, —Being the holder of a license No. , under
section / 19 of The Land Act 1869, ) + ’. ■
a* R. p. (420r49 of The Land Act 1884 / OCCU Py the iand
specified in the margin hereof, having held such license for the
period of two years, and having effected improvements to the
t- . „ value of £ ,as per schedule hereto, I hereby
Date of license— make application to register a “license lien” on the said
improvements in favour of of
for the sum of £
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
The Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works.
DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
x , , being the holder of a license to occupy
the above-mentioned allotment, declare as follows J


1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license to this date.
2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any part
thereof, or transferred my interest or any part of my interest therein.
3. That within twelve months from the issue of the said license I commenced to
reside and have continued so to reside in my own proper person upon the said
allotment.
4. That I have complied with all the other conditions of the said license.
5. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.
6. That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars ” hereto subjoined are true and correct in
every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. .. .. .. £
Cultivation
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water storage
All other improvements
Further Particulars to be furnished by Licensee when making Application
for the Registration of a License Lien under Section 57 of “ The
Land Act 1884.”
Fencing.
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Dost per chain.
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed ?
(See paragraph marked * on page 72.)
Post and 3-rail, split stuff
Post and 2-rail, ditto
Post, rail, and wire
Post and wire
Stone wall ..
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with occupiers of
adjoining lands for payment of any
portion of the above fences ?
Who are the occupiers of the adjoining
lands?
Cultivation .f
Number of Acres Ploughed and Cultivated.
Cost per
Acre.
Nature of
Crop.
Yield per
Acre.
First year
Second year only, not in-1
eluding the first .. )
Third year only, not includ-1
ing the first and second .. j
How many acres in all, 1
without showing the same >
land over again ? .. )
t In filling up the column headed “ Cultivation” it should he understood that only the cost
of cultivating new land for the first time will be allowed for; repeated cultivation of the same
piece of ground should not be included. Ploughing alone, without cropping the land, is not
deemed to be an improvement.


Buildings.
Description.
Dimensions.
Materials.
Total Cost.
£ s . d .
Water Storage.
Description.
Dimensions, &c.
Dam
Reservoir
Well
All Other Improvements.
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
•
Total Cost of Improvements ... ... £
How many rooms does your dwelling-house contain ? ..
Is it permanently attached to the soil of this allotment ?
Have you resided here continuously ?
Have you any other place of abode ? If so, where ?
Where does your family reside ?
Have you or do you follow any other, if so, what busi-)
ness or employment ? .. .. .. .. j
Do you own any land in fee-simple? If so, state thel
number of acres, situation, and purpose to which it -
has been applied .. .. .. ..)
Do you hold any land under another license or lease 1
from the Crown ? If so, state the number of acres, 1
situation, and purpose to which it has been applied .. J
If in either of the above two last-mentioned cases the
land has been cultivated, state the particulars thereof
as fully as hereinbefore required, and also the distance
in each case from this allotment .. .. ..)
If the condition of residence has not been complied with,)
state the reason why not .. .. .. .. )
If the condition of cultivation has not been complied)
with, state the reason why not .. .. .. j
* If the land is not enclosed as per licensed boundaries,)
state the reason why not .. .. .. f


And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true,
and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria rendering
persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address-
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this
day of 188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
t The magistrate’s sig-
nature is only required
here in cas*a where the
applicant is a marksman,
and can neither read nor
write.
11 hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence, this day of
188 .
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XVIII.
Foem of License Lien. —Section 57 “ Lane Act 1884.”
A lien on the improvements made on the land represented in this license for the
sum of pounds in favour of of has
this day been registered in the Crown Lands Office, Melbourne.
Date — 188 .
Secretary for Lands.
SCHEDULE XIX.
Encumbbances.
Description.
Names of the Parties thereto.
Amount.
License lien —
.
!
SCHEDULE XX.
Date—
Place—
L of being registered
as the holder of a license lien for the sum of pounds on the
improvements made on the licensed holding of
being acres roods perches in the parish
of hereby notify that the said lien has been
discharged and desire that the registration may be cancelled.
Signature—
Address—
Witness to signature—


SCHEDULE XXI.
Application by Licensee under Section 42 of “ The Land Act 1884” for
Conversion under Section 50.
Address —
Date—
Extent of Land — ~, ,
Sir,— Being the holder of a license under section 42 of The
A . B . p. Land Act 1884, to occupy the land specified in the margin
: hereof, and desiring to avail myself of the provisions of section
Parish— ' 50 of the said Act, I hereby apply that my present license may
. , be converted into a non-residence license under section 49;
Aliotmen an q should such conversion be granted, I undertake to carry
Section — ou t all the conditions imposed on licensees under section 49 of
Date of License— The Land Act 1884.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
j 0 f being the holder of a license to occupy the above-
mentioned allotment, declare as follows :
1 That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.
2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any part
thereof, or transferred my interest or any part of my interest therein.
7. That I have complied with all the conditions of the said license.
8. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.
9 That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars” hereto subjoined are true and correct m
every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. • • • • .. £
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water Storage .. .. • • • •
All other improvements .. .. •• '
L^ote. —District surveyors, land officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors in filling up this application and
declaration. No fee to be offered or accepted for such assistance.
The form of application, when filled up, to be handed to the nearest land officer
or Crown lands bailiff, who will forward it to the Secretary for Lands.


Further Particulars to be Furnished by Licensee under Section 42 of
“ The Land Act 1869 ” when Making Application for Conversion under
Section 50.
Fencing.
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Cost per Chain
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed as per licensed
boundaries ?
(See paragraph marked * on page 76.)
Post and 3-rail, split stuff
Post and 2-rail, ditto..
Post, rail, and wire ..
Post and wire
Stone wall ..
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and Log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with occupiers of
adjoining lands for payment of any
portion of the above fences ?
!
Who are the occupiers of the adjoining
lands ?
Buildings.
Description.
Dimensions.
Materials.
Water Storage.
Description.
Dimensions, &c.
Dam
Reservoir
Well ..
♦
All other Improvements.
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
Total Cost of Improvements
£
How long have you resided on this land continuously \
during the currency of your license ? .. .. j
Where does your family reside ? ..


Have you or do you follow any other, if so, what busi- j
ness or employment ? .. .. .. .. j
Do you own any land in fee-simple ? If so, state the ~|
number of acres, situation, and purpose to which it -
has been applied .. .. .. .. j
(1) Do you hold, or have you at any time held, any\
land under another license or lease from the Crown?
(2) Do you still hold it ? If not, state why you [
parted with it, and to whom. (3) If still held, state ‘
the number of acres, situation, and purpose to which
it has been applied .. .. .. -.,
If in either of the above two last-mentioned cases the!
land still held by you has been cultivated, state the [
particulars thereof as fully as hereinbefore required, f
and also the distance in each case from this allotment j
If the condition of residence has not been complied 1
with, state the reason why .. .. .. j
* If the land is not enclosed as perlicensed boundaries, |
state the reason why .. .. .. .. j
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address —
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this day of
188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
f The magistrate’s
signature is only re-
quired here in cases
where the applicant is
a marksman and can
neither read nor write.
f I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XXII.
Application by Holder of Non-residence License for Conversion under
Section 50 of “ The Land Act 1884.
Address —
Date —
Extent of Land — Sir, —Being the holder of a non-residence license under
a. r. p. section 49 of The Land Act 1884, for the land specified in the
: : margin hereof, and desiring to avail myself of the provisions
Parish — of section 50 of the said Act, I hereby apply that my present
Allotment license may be converted into an ordinary license under
section 42 ; and should such conversion be granted, I undertake
Section t 0 carr y o ut all the conditions imposed on licensees under
Date of License— section 42 of The Land Act 1884.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.


DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
I, of being the holder of a non-residence license for the above-
mentioned allotment, declare as follows:
1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.
2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any part
thereof, or transferred.my interest or any part of my interest therein.
7. That I have complied with all the conditions of the said license.
8. That I make this application in confcanity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.
9. That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars” hereto subjoined are true and correct in
every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. .. .. .. £
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water storage
All other improvements
Note. —Districts surveyors, land officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors in filling up this application and
declaration. No fee is to be offered or accepted for such assistance.
The form of application, when filled up, to be handed to the nearest land officer
or Crown lands bailiff, who will forward it to the Secretary for Lands.
Further Particulars to be furnished by Non-residence Licensee when
making Application for Conversion under Section 50 “ Land Act 1884”.
Fencing.
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Cost per Chain.
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed as per licensed
boundaries ?
(See paragraph marked * on page 78.)
Post and 3-rail, split stuff
Post and 2-rail, ditto
Post, rail, and wire
Post and wire
Stone wall ..
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with occupiers of
adjoining lands for payment of any
portion of the above fences ?
Who are occupiers of
lands ?
the adjoining
Buildings.
Description.
Dimensions;
Materials.


Water Storage.
Total Cost.
Description.
Dimensions, etc.
Dam
Reservoir
Well
£ s. d.
All other Improvements.
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
Total Cost of Improvements
£
How many rooms does your dwelling-house contain ?
Is it permanently attached to the soil of this allotment ?
How long have you resided on this land continuously during)
the currency of your license ?.. .. .. .. J
Have you any other place of abode ? If so, where ?
What distance is it from the land the subject of this applica-)
tion ? .. .. .. .. .. .. J
How long have you continuously resided thereon during thej
time of your license for the land referred to in this j-
application for lease ? .. .. .. .. J
Where does your family reside ?
Have you or do you follow any other, if so, what business or)
employment ? .. .. .. .. .. J
Do you own any land in fee-simple ? If so, state the number")
of acres, situation, and purpose to which it has been l
applied .. .. .. .. .. ..)
(1.) Do you hold, or have you at any time held, any land'
under another license or lease from the Crown ? (2.)
Do you still hold it ? If not, state why you parted with
it, and to whom. (3.) If still held, state the number "
of acres, situation, and purpose to which it has been
applied .. .. .. .. .. .. ;
If in either of the above two last-mentioned cases the land)
still held by you has been cultivated, state the particulars [
thereof as fully as hereinbefore required, and also the I
distance in each case from this allotment .. .. J
* If the land is not enclosed as per licensed boundaries, |
state the reason why.. .. .. .. .. j
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria


rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this
day of 188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
f The magistrate’s
signature is only re-
quired here in cases
where the applicant is
a marksman, and can
neither read nor write.
f I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188 .
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XXIII.
Application by a Licensee to Revert to “The Land Act 1869.”
Address —
Date—
Extent of Land— Sir, —Being the holder of a license, No. originally
a. r. p. granted under section 19 of The Land Act 1869, to occupy the
: : land specified in the margin hereof and having had the terms
Parish— and conditions of the said license altered so as to accord with
Allotment — the provisions of The Land Act 1878, I hereby make application
Section— that the terms and conditions imposed by the license as
Date of License — originally granted may be reverted to.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
Note. —If the licensee is not in a position to declare to clauses 3,4, and 5, he
is at liberty to strike them out, and to explain fully the causes of his non-com-
pliance with the conditions therein specified.
I f of being the holder of a license to occupy the above-
mentioned allotment, declare as follows :
1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.
2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any par
thereof, or transferred my interest or any part of my interest therein.
3. That within years from the issue of the said license I enclosed the
said allotment with a good and substantial fence.
4. That during the currency of the said license I cultivated at least one acre out
of every ten in the said allotment.
5. That within months from the issue of the said license, and thencefor-
ward during the continuance thereof, I resided in my own proper person for a
period of not less than upon the said allotment.
6. That before the end of the year from the commencement of the said
license I made upon the said allotment permanent and substantial improvements
of the value of One pound for every acre and fractional part of an acre contained
therein. _ .
7. That I have complied with all the other conditions of the said license.
8. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.


9. That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars ” hereto subjoined are true and correct in
every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. .. .. .. £
Cultivation
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water storage
All other improvements
Note.— District surveyors, land officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors in filling up this application and
declaration. No fee is to be offered or accepted for such assistance.
The form of application, when filled up, to be handed to the nearest land officer
or Crown lands bailiff, who will forward it to the Secretary for Lands.
Further Particulars to be furnished by Licensee when making Application
to Revert to “ The Land Act 1869.”
Fencinq.
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Cost per Chain.
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed as per licensed
boundaries ?
(See paragraph marked * on page 82.)
Post and 3-rail, split stuff
Post and 2-rail, ditto
Post, rail, and wire ..
Post and wire
Stone wall
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with occupiers of
adjoining lands for payment of any
portion of the above fences ?
Who are the occupiers of the adjoining
lands? ..
Cultivation, f
Number of Acres Ploughed and Cultivated.
Cost per
Acre.
Nature of
Crop.
Yield per
Acre.
First year
Second year only, not including
the first
Third year only, not including
the first and second *.
Fourth year only, not including
the previous years
Fifth year only, not including
the previous years
Sixth year only, not including
the previous years..
How many acres in all, without
showing the same land over
again ?
1
f
l
t In filling up the column headed “ Cultivation ” it should be understood that only the
cost of cultivating new land for the first time will be allowed for; repeated cultivation of the
same piece of ground should not be included. Ploughing alone, without cropping the land,
is not a compliance with the cultivation condition.


Buildings.
Total Cost.
Description.
Dimensions.
Materials.
£ s. d.
N
Water Storage.
Description.
Dimensions, &c.
Dam
Reservoir ..
Weil
All other Improvements.
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
Total Cost of Improvements
£
How many rooms does your dwelling-house contain ?
Is it permanently attached to the soil of this allot-)
ment ? .. .. .. • • • • j
How long have you resided on this land continuously )_
during the currency of your license ? .. .. j
Have you any other place of abode ? If so, where ?
What distance is it from the land the subject of this )
application ? .. .. .. .. .. )
How long have you continuously resided thereon )
during the time of your license for the land referred j
to in this application for lease ? .. • • '
Where does your family reside ? ..
Have you or do you follow any other, if so, what)
business or employment ? .. .. • • )
Do you own any land in fee simple ? If so, state the \
number of acres, situation, and purpose to which it >
has been applied .. .. • • )
(1.) Do you hold, or have you at any time held, any\
land under another license or lease from the
Crown? (2.) Do you still hold it? If not, state!
why you parted with it, and to whom? (3.) If still j
held, state the number of acres, situation, and pur-
pose to which it has been applied ..


If in either of the above two last-mentioned cases the\
land still held by you has been cultivated, state the
particulars thereof as fully as hereinbefore re- i-
quired, and also the distance in each case from this
allotment .. .. .. .. .. J
If the condition of residence has not been complied \
with, state the reason why .. .. . . j
If the condition of cultivation has not been complied )
with, state the reason why .. .. .. j
Have you assigned this selection for the benefit of ,
your creditors, or have you become insolvent since /
the date of your license for the land referred to (
herein ? .. .. .. .. .. )
* If the land is not enclosed as per licensed boun- 1
daries, state the reason why .. .. .. I
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this day of
188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
.Jl p l ® magistrate’s
S?h™ ff’SJS
where the applicant is
a marksman, and can
neither read nor write.
t I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188 .
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XXIV.
Application for Lease or Crown Grant by Licensee of an Agricultural
Allotment under “The Land Act 1884.”
Address—
Post Town—
Date—
Extent of Land— Sir,
a. R. p. Being the holder of a license, No. under section 42
‘ •of The Land Act 1884, to occupy the land specified in the
Parish— margin hereof, and having occupied the said land for a period
of at least years, and having complied with the con-


Allotment—
Section —
Date of License —
* If a Lease be ap-
plied for, the word
Grant should be struck
out, and vice versa.
*Lease
ditions of such license, I hereby apply for a Q of the
said land, and for the certificate of the Board of Land and
Works for the improvements thereon; and I send herewith,
in support of such application, my declaration that I now
make the said application in conformity with and not in
violation of any of the provisions of the said Act.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
Note. — If the licensee is not in a position to declare to clauses 3,4, and 5, he is
at liberty to strike them out, and to explain fully the causes of his non-com-
pliance with the conditions therein specified.
I, of
being the holder of a license to occupy the above-mentioned allotment, declare as
follows:
1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.
*2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any
part thereof, or transferred my interest or any part of my interest
therein.
3. That within years from the issue of the said license I enclosed the
said allotment with a good and substantial fence.
4. That within months from the issue of the said license, and thence-
forward during the continuance thereof, I resided in my own proper
person for a period not less than upon
the said allotment.
5. That before the end of the year from the commencement of the
said license I made upon the said allotment permanent and substantial
improvements of the value of One pound for every acre and fractional
part of an acre contained therein.
6. That I have complied with all the other conditions of the said license.
7. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.
8. That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars” hereto subjoined are true and
correct in every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. .. .. .. £
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water storage
All other improvements
Note. —District surveyors, land officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors in filling up this application and
declaration. No fee is to be offered or accepted for such assistance.
The form of application, when filled up, to be handed to the nearest land officer
or Crown lands bailiff, who will forward it to the Secretary for Lands.


Further particulars to he furnished hy Licensee when making application for Croiun
Grant or Lease under Section 44 Land Act 1884.
Fencing:—
Buildings:—
Water storage:
All other im-
provements :
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Cost per Chain.
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed as
per licensed boundaries ?
(See par marked * on page 82.)
Post and 3-rail, split stuff...
Post and 2-rail, ditto
Post, rail, and wire
Post and wire ,
Stone wall
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with
occupiers of adjoining
lands for payment of any
portion of the above
fences ?
Who are the occupiers of
the adjoining lands ?
Description.
Dimensions.
Materials.
Description.
Dimensions, &c.
Dam
Reservoir
Well
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
Total Cost of Improvements £
How many rooms does your dwelling-
house contain ?
Is it permanently attached to the soil
of this allotment ?
How long have you resided on this
land continuously during the cur-
rency of your license ?


Have you any other place of abode ?
If so, where ? ..
What distance is it from the land the
subject of this application ?
How long have you continuously
resided thereon during the time of
your license for the land referred
to in this application for lease ? ..
Where does your family reside ?
Have you or do you follow any other,
if so, what business or employ-
ment ?
Do you own any land in fee-simple ?
If so, state the number of acres,
situation, and purpose to which it
has been applied
(1.) Do you hold, or have you at any
time held, any land under another
license or lease from the Crown?
(2.) Do you still hold it ? If not,
state why you parted with it, and
to whom. (B.) If still held, state
the number of acres, situation, and
purpose to which it has been
applied
If in either of the above two last-
mentioned cases the land still held
by you has been cultivated, state
the particulars thereof as fully as
hereinbefore required, and also
the distance in each case from this
allotment
Have you assigned this selection for
the benefit of your creditors, or
have you become insolvent since
the date of your license for the
land referred to herein ?..
If the land is not enclosed as per
licensed boundaries, state the
reason why
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the. same to be true,
and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria rendering
persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and coirupt perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address —
Declared at in the colony of Victoria, this day of
188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the
Bailiwick of the colony of Victoria.


* See Note on next page.
* The magistrate’s sig-
nature is only required
here in cases where the
applicant is a marksman,
and can neither read nor
write.
* I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188
Justice of the Peace in and for the
Bailiwick of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XXV.
No. of Certificate
Certificate of Improvements.
The Land Act 1884—Section 44.
Office of the Board of Land and Works,
Melbourne.
This is to certify that substantial and permanent improvements to the value of
One pound for every acre and fractional part of an acre contained in
allotment of section in the parish of containing
acres roods perches, held under license by
since 188 have been made on the said allotment, and that the said
has proved to the satisfaction of the Board that he has complied
with all other conditions of the said license.
The Common Seal of the Board of Land and Works was hereunto affixed this
day of 188 in the presence of the undersigned two
members of the said Board.
President.
Member.
SCHEDULE XXVI.
Application for Certificate of the Board of Land and Works by Non
RESIDENCE LICENSEE UNDER SECTION 49 OF “ The LAND Ad 1884.”
Address—
Post Town—
Date—
Extent of Land— Sir,— Being the holder of a license, No. under section 49
A E p of The Land Act 1884, to occupy the land specified in the
. margin hereof, and having held the said land for a period of
Parish— at least* years, and having complied with the conditions
Allotment 0 f sue j l ii censej as f ar as required for the* rs *\ term of three
Section second.
years, I hereby apply for the certificate of the Board of Land
Date of License— and Works for the improvements thereon ; and I send here-
with, in support of such application, my declaration that I now
make the said application in conformity with and not in
violation of any of the provisions of the said Act.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
DECLARATION BY LICENSEE.
I> °f being the holder of a license to occupy the above-
mentioned allotment, declare as follows :
1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.


2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any part
thereof, or transferred my interest or any part of my interest therein.
3. That before the end of the* year from the commencement of the said
license I made upon the said allotment permanent and substantial improvements
of the value of* pounds for ever y acre fractional part of an acre contained
therein.
4. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, and not in violation of any of them.
5. That the statements made and the answers given by me in reply to the
questions in the “ Further Particulars ” hereto subjoined are true and correct in
every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to.
Value.
Fencing .. .. .. .. .. £
Cultivation
Buildings attached to soil, farm, or other
Water storage
All other improvements
Note. —District surveyors, land officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors in tilling up this application and
declaration. No fee is to be offered or accepted for such assistance.
The form of application, when filled up, to be handed to the nearest land officer
or Crown lands bailiff, who will forward it to the Secretary for Lands.
Further Particulars to be furnished by Non-residence Licensee when
» si* THREE
making Application, at the expiration of* gjx years of the term
for the Certificate of the Board of Land and Works.
Fencing.
Description thereof.
No. of Chains.
Cost per Chain.
Total Cost.
Is the land all enclosed ?
Post and 3-rail, split stuff
Post and 2-rail, ditto
Post, rail, and wire ..
Post and wire
Stone wall
Stub or picket
Log
Chock and log
£ s. d.
Have you arranged with occupiers of
adjoining lands for payment of any
portion of the above fences ?
Who are the occupiers of the adjoining
lands ? .. .. ..
* The applicant is directed, when making an application for a certificate after the first
three years’ occupancy, to strike out the words “ six,” “ second,” and “ Two pounds,” and
vice versa when applying at the end of the sixth year.


Cultivation.*
Number of Acres Ploughed and Cultivated.
First year ..
Second year only, not including)
the first .. . • • •j
Third year only, not including)
the first and second _..)
Fourth year only, not including 1
the first, second, and third.. /
Fifth year only, not including!
the first, second, third, and r
fourth .. • • _ • •)
Sixth year only, not _ including |
the first, second, third, fourth 1
and fifth.. .. _ • • j
How many acres in all, without!
showing the same land over J-
again ? .. .. • • J
Cost per
Acre.
Nature of Yield per
Crop. Acre.
Total Cost.
£ s. d.
Buildings.
Description.
Dimensions.
Materials.
■ ,
Water Storage.
Description.
Dimensions, &c.
Dam
Reservoir ..
Well
All other Improvements.
Particulars of Nature and Cost.
•
Total Cost of Improvements .. .. £
* In filling np the column headed “ Cultivation ” it should be understood that only the cost
of cultivating new land for the first time will he allowed for; repeated cultivation of the
same piece of ground should not be included. Ploughing alone, without cropping the land,
is not deemed to he an improvement.


And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be
true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Parliament of Victoria
rendering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and corrupt
perjury.
Signature—
Occupation—
Address—
Declared at
day of
t The magistrate’s sig-
nature is only required
here in cases where the
applicant is a marksman,
and can neither read nor
write.
in the colony of Victoria, this
188 before me,
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
t I hereby certify that this declaration was read to the
declarant in my presence this day of
188
Justice of the Peace in and for the Bailiwick
of the colony of Victoria.
SCHEDULE XXVII.
No. of Certificate
Non-Residence License.
Certificate for Improvements.
The Land Act 1884.—Section 49.
Office of the Board of Land and Works,
Melbourne.
This is to certify that substantial and permanent improvements to the value of
One pound for every acre and fractional part of an acre contained in allotment
of section in the parish of containing
acres roods perches held under a non-residence license
by since 188 have been made on the said
The words in brackets
to be struck out when
the certificate is for im-
provements after the
first three years.
allotment, before the end of the third year of the currency
thereof [and before the end of the sixth year of such currency,
of the value of One additional pound] and that the said
has proved to the satisfaction of the Board that
he has complied with the conditions of the said license.
The Common Seal of the Board of Land and Works was hereunto affixed this
day of 188 in the presence of the undersigned two
members of the said Board.
President.
Member.
SCHEDULE XXVIII.
Form op Appointment of Arbitrator by Board of Land and Works under
Section 46 of “ The Land Act 1884.”
In the matter of The Land Act 1884, and of the improvements made on allot-
ment by of in the colony
of Victoria, the licensee of such allotment, under the 42nd section of The
Land Act 1884, which license is dated on the day of
188
Whereas the Board of Land and Works is not satisfied that substantial and
permanent improvements to the value of One pound for every acre and fractional
part of an acre have been made on the above allotment before the end of the third


year from the date of the said license : And whereas the said is desirous
of having the said improvements valued by arbitration in the manner provided by
the said Act: Now therefore the Board of Land and Works doth hereby appoint
0 f in the said colony as the arbitrator on
its part and behalf, with all the powers conferred by the said Act, to value the said
improvements.
The Common Seal of the Board of Land and Works was hereunto affixed this
day of 188 in the presence of
(n.s.) President.
Member.
SCHEDULE XXIX.
Poem of Appointment of Arbitrator by Licensee under Section 46 of “ The
Land Act 1884.”
In the matter of The Land Act 1884, and of the improvements made on allot-
ment by of . in the colony
of Victoria, the licensee of such allotment under the section of the said
Act, which license is dated the day of 188
Whereas the Board of Land and Works is not satisfied that substantial and per-
manent improvements of the value of One pound for every acre and fractional part
of an acre have been made on the above allotment before the end of the third year
from the date of the said license: And whereas the said is
desirous of having the said improvements valued by arbitration in the manner
provided by the said Act: Now therefore the said doth hereby
appoint of in the said colony, as the arbitrator
on his part and behalf, with all the powers conferred by the said Act, to value the
said improvements.
As witness his hand this day of 188
Witness —
SCHEDULE XXX.
Form of Appointment under Section 46 of “ The Land Act 1884” of a third
Arbitrator when Board and Licensee cannot agree.
In the matter of The Land Act 1884, and of the improvements made on allot-
ment by of in the colony of
Victoria, the licensee under the 42nd section of The Land Act 1884, and
which license is dated the day of 188
We of in the colony of Victoria,
the arbitrator appointed by and on behalf of the Board of Land and Works, and
of in the said colony, the arbitrator appointed
by the above-named do by this writing under our hands, signed
by us, nominate and appoint of in the said
colony, to be the third arbitrator to value the improvements on the above allotment,
pursuant to the above Act.
As witness our hands this day of 188
Witness —
SCHEDULE XXXI. |
Lease for an Agbiculturab Allotment under Sections 44 and 49 of
“The Land Act 1884.”
Entered in the Begister Book, Vol. Fol.
Registrar of Titles.
This Indenture made between Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria of the
one part and (hereinafter called the “ lessee”)
of the other part: Witnesseth that in consideration of the rent hereby reserved


and the covenants and conditions herein contained and on the part of the lessee
his executors administrators and assigns to be observed and performed Her Majesty
doth by these presents grant and demise unto the lessee all that piece of land in
the colony of Victoria containing and
shown with the measurements and abuttals thereof in the map or diagram drawn
in the margin of these presents and in such map or diagram coloured yellow to
hold the said piece of land unto the lessee his executors administrators and
approved assigns from the day of in the year of our
Lord One thousand eight hundred and for the term of
years yielding and paying for the same unto Her Majesty the Queen her heirs and
successors during the said term the rent of shilling per annum
for every acre and fractional part of an acre of the said land such rent to be always
paid by equal half-yearly payments in advance on the first day of January and the
first day of July in each year: And the next payment thereof to be made on the
day of next Excepting however unto Her Majesty her
heirs and successors all gold and auriferous earth or stone and all mines containing
gold within the boundaries of the said land And also reserving to Her Majesty
her heirs and successors full liberty and authority for her her heirs and successors
and her and their agents and servants at any time or times hereafter during the
said term to enter upon the said land and to search and mine therein for gold
and to extract and remove therefrom any gold and any auriferous earth or stone
and for the purposes aforesaid to sink shafts erect machinery carry on any works
and do any other things which may be necessary or usual in mining Provided
that the said land is and shall be subject to the right of any person being the
holder of a miners’ right or of a mining lease to enter thereon and to mine for gold
and silver and to erect and to occupy mining plant or machinery thereon in the
same manner and under the same conditions and provisions as those to which such
person had at the time of the passing of The Land Act 1884 the right to mine for
gold and silver in and upon Crown lands provided that compensation shall
be paid to the lessee his executors administrators assigns and transferees. by
such person for surface damage to be done to such lands by. reason of mining
thereon such compensation to be determined as provided by section 117 of the said
Act and the payment thereof to be a condition precedent to such right of entry
And provided also that the said land may be resumed under section 68 of the said
Act And the lessee for himself his heirs executors administrators and assigns
doth hereby covenant with Her said Majesty her heirs and successors that he
the lessee his executors administrators or assigns will during the said term
pay unto Her Majesty her heirs and successors the rent hereby reserved by equal
half-yearly payments in advance on the days hereinbefore appointed for the payment
thereof And also that the lessee his executors administrators and assigns will
not at any time during the continuance of the term
hereby granted without a license from the Governor
search in the land hereby demised for or take therefrom
any metal or mineral Provided always and these
presents are upon the condition that in case the rent
hereby reserved or any part thereof shall not be paid in
accordance with the covenant for payment hereinbefore
contained although no demand for payment shall have
been made or in case the lessee his executors adminis-
trators or permitted assigns shall not faithfully observe
and perform all and every the covenants and conditions
herein contained and on his or their part to be observed
and performed it shall be lawful for Her Majesty to
enter forthwith or at any time thereafter upon the
land hereby demised and the same to repossess and
Note. The bearings and
measurements are approxi-
mately given in tbis plan.
The measurements are in
links.
enjoy and thenceforth the said term hereby granted shall absolutely cease and
determine. And it is hereby agreed and declared that in any such case it shall be
lawful for Her Majesty and for any bailiff of Crown lands or for any other agents
or officers authorized in that behalf without any demand whatsoever to enter upon
the land hereby demised and the lessee his executors or administrators and all


persons claiming under him or them for ever to expel and remove therefrom
without any legal process whatsoever and as effectually as any sheriff might do
in case Her Majesty had obtained judgment in ejectment for recovery of possession
of the said land and a writ of habere facias possessionem or other process had
issued on such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form of law And that
in case of such entry and any action being brought or other proceedings taken for 01
on account of the same by any person whomsoever the defendants or defendant to
sSch action may plead leave or license in bar thereof and these presents shall be
conclusive evidence of the leave and license of the lessee his executors or adminis-
trators and all persons claiming under him or them to Her Majesty and any
bailiff of Crown lands and all persons acting in the matters complained of or ot
any such bailiff for the entry or trespass or other matters complained of m sue
action or other proceedings. _
Note. This lease will also be subject to such special covenants and conditions
as may be applicable to each case.
In witness whereof His Excellency Sie Heney B bough am Loch Knight Com-
mander of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath Governor and Commander-in-
Chief in and over the Colony of Victoria and its Dependencies at Melbourne hath
on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen caused this demise to be sealed with the seal ol
the said colony and the said lessee hath set hereto his hand and seal.
Signed sealed and delivered by the
presence of ’
SCHEDULE XXXII.
“ The Land Act 1884.”—Section 56.
Order to Obtain a Crown Grant.
t of having obtained from of
(whose signature the margin) an advance ot on the secun y o .
Sfe tte said to obtain from the Governor in Council the
Crown grant ot the said allotment so soon os the lost sum due on account ot the
rent reserved in such lease is paid.
Given under my hand this day of 18(3
, . , Signature—
Witness to signature— °
Postal Address —
Justice of the Peace _ Date
Bailiwick.
SCHEDULE XXXIII.
The Land Act 1884.— Section 56.
Registee of Appboved Oedees foe Ceown Geants.
Date
of
Order
Date of
Appro-
val.
Lessee.
Land referred to.
Person authorised to
obtain Crown grants
Name of Mortga-
gee (if any) and
Registration of
Mortgage.
County.
Parish.
Allotm’nt
Name.
Address.


PART IV.
AURIFEROUS LANDS.
THE ACT.
License to use Auriferous Lands.
65. The Governor in Council may from time to time grant licenses for
any period not exceeding one year which shall entitle the holders thereof
respectively to reside on or to cultivate any lands comprised within the
areas described in the Second Schedule hereto as auriferous lands not
comprised within any city or town and not exceeding in extent twenty
acres, subject to the payment of such license fee and upon such terms and
conditions as are approved of by the Governor in Council and set forth in
such license. Provided that not more than one such license shall be granted
to or held by any one and the same person.
Alienation of Auriferous Lands forbidden.
66. No lands forming part of the lands described in the Second Schedule
hereto as auriferous lands shall be alienated in fee simple, and every convey-
ance and alienation thereof shall be absolutely void as well against Her
Majesty as all other persons whomsoever.
Annual Licenses for Grazing on Auriferous Lands Renewable for Five
Years.
67. The Governor in Council may issue to any person or persons annual
licenses to occupy for grazing puiqioses the surface of any of the lands
described in the Second Schedule hereto as auriferous lands, and which are
not at the time of the issue of any such license required for mining purposes.
Such licenses shall be renewable annually at the option of the licensee for
a period not beyond five years from the date of the first issue of his license,
but nothing in this section or in any such license contained shall be deemed
to in any matter affect the right of any person to enter upon the said
land for the purpose of searching for digging taking and carrying
away of gold silver and other minerals or to dig take and carry
away the same. And no such license shall be deemed to prevent the land
granted under any such license being licensed under Part IY. of this Act
being proclaimed a common or being occupied by virtue of any miner’s
right or business license. Provided that no such license shall be for a
greater area than one thousand acres and that no person shall hold more
than one thousand acres of such auriferous lands.
The annual rent per acre to be reserved in every such license shall be a
sum fixed by appraisement of the land by valuers appointed by the Board
in that behalf.


Lands Alienated to be Subject to Conditions for Mining.
68. All lands alienated under the provisions of this Act shall be liable to
be resumed for mining purposes by the Governor in Council on paying full
compensation to the licensee lessee or purchaser in fee simple thereof for
the value other than auriferous of the lands and of the improvements so
resumed “ if such value be not ascertained by agreement within one month
from the date of the notification by the Governor in Council of his intention
to resume the same, then the lessee licensee or owner thereof may proceed
before a warden or in the Court of Mines of the mining district in which
the land resumed is situate and in manner provided by the ‘ Mining
Statute 1865 ’ (but without assessors) to ascertain the amount of compen-
sation to which he may be entitled under the provisions of this section ; and
such lessee licensee or owner shall lodge with the warden or the clerk of the
said court as the case may be two copies of his claim; and every Court of
Mines held under the provisions of the ‘ Mining Statute 1865 ’ shall have
original jurisdiction to hear and determine any claim made for the value as
aforesaid of any such land and of the improvements thereon, and every warden
shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any such claim which the
Court of Mines is hereby empowered to hear and determine. Provided
that where any such claim is heard and determined by a warden an appeal
shall lie to the Court of Mines in whose mining district the resumed
is situated, and the provisions of the ‘ Mining Statute 1865 ’ with regard
to appeals from a warden to a Court of Mines shall be deemed to be
incorporated with this section for the purpose of the bringing hearing and
determining such appeal and enforcing the decision thereon; the terms
conditions and events upon which such lands may be resumed shall be
determined by regulations in such manner as the Governor in Council from
time to time directs.
REGULATIONS FOR PART IV.
Auriferous Lauds.
(Section 65.)
1. Every intending applicant for -a license under section 65 of The
Land Act 1884 shall, between the hours of Nine a.m. and Four p.m.,
place a conspicuous post, or a cairn of stones, at each corner of the
allotment, or, if such allotment consist of more than one parcel of land,
at each corner of each parcel, and shall affix to each of such posts or
cairns a notice in writing setting forth that he is an applicant for such
allotment, the approximate area thereof, and his name and address, and
from such post or cairn dig a trench at least two feet long, six inches
wide, and four inches deep in the direction of the containing sides.
The applicant shall, before lodging his application for a license, pay to
the nearest Receiver of Revenue the sum of One pound for a certificate
of registration, which the said Receiver shall thereupon hand to him,
and such sum shall not in any case be refunded. All applicants who
mark out the same allotment upon one and the same day shall be
deemed to be equal as far as regards priority of marking out.
2. After defining the boundaries as aforesaid, the applicant shall,
within one week, post or deliver to the District Land Officer his appli


cation, together with the certificate of registration, and such application
shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule XXXIV. hereto; and no
application shall be accepted unless the said certificate be forwarded
therewith; but at the hearing of such application the failure to comply
with the provisions hereof respecting the time of delivering the appli-
cation shall not be deemed to be a fatal objection where the applicant
can prove the existence of some reasonable ground of excuse, which
shall be recorded by the Land Officer upon the application.
3. All the provisions of sections 3 to 6, both inclusive, of Chapter V.
of these Regulations shall apply to applications for licenses under this
section of The Land Act 1884, so far as the same are applicable to
an application under the said section, but the declaration on oath and
the form of application shall not apply.
4. Except as hereinafter provided, licenses shall not be granted for
occupation of —
Lands comprised within proclaimed reserves, cities, or towns, or
within a distance of twenty chains from sold building lots in
boroughs, townships, or villages, or within a distance of twelve
miles from the Post Office, Melbourne.
Lands so situated that the occupation thereof would obstruct the
holders of miners’ rights, sawmill licenses, wood or other licenses,
in their access to timber or water.
Lands situated on both bants of a river or creek containing permanent
water.
Lands required for mining purposes, or if included in any mining
claim, unless with the consent in writing of the mining manager of
such claim and of the Minister of Mines first had and obtained.
5. Licenses shall be in the form and subject to the conditions specified
in Schedule XXXV. hereto. Provided always that the G-overnor in
Council may, if he think fit, order that a license may bear such date and
be subject to such special conditions as shall meet the circumstances of
any particular case.
6. Every such license shall bear date as of the first of the month next
after that in which the issue of such license shall have been approved, but
the diagram of boundaries and statement of area shall be deemed as
approximate and temporary only.
7. The fees to be paid for a license to occupy land under this section for
residence or cultivation shall be as follow :
For occupation of an allotment situated at a greater distance from the
Post Office, Melbourne, than twelve miles, Two shillings per acre or
fractional part of an acre per annum; unless the area of such
allotment be less than ten acres, in which case the fee shall be One
pound per annum.
For occupation of an allotment situated within a borough, township, or
village, Four shillings per acre o-r fractional part of an acre per
annum, but no license shall be issued for a less fee than One pound
per annum.
8. Upon the expiration of any license under this section, the G-overnor
may, if he think fit, issue a new license for the same land to the holder of
the expired license upon the same or such other terms and conditions as
may be deemed necessary, and may authorize the District Receiver of


Revenue to endorse by stamp on the back of the expired license a notifica-
tion in the form of Schedule XXXYI. hereto, and such endorsement shall
have to all intents and purposes the effect of a license under this section.
9. Assignment of the licensee’s interest, either by operation of law or by
consent of the Minister, must be registered in the Office of Lands and
Survey, Melbourne.
10. The following fees shall also be payable under section 65 of The
Land Act 1884 :
. £ s. d.
Tor a license issued under section 65 of Part IY.
of The Land Act 1884 ... ... ... 026
For a transfer of a license issued under section 65
of The Land Act 1884 ... ... ... 010 0
(Section 67.)
11. Applications for licenses and licenses to occupy for grazing purposes
the surface of auriferous lands shall be in the forms prescribed in
Schedules XXXYII. and XXXYIII. respectively hereto.
12. The fee for the preparation of a license under section 67 shall
be One pound, and for every renewal Five shillings.
SCHEDULES FOR PART IV.
SCHEDULE XXXIV.—AUEIFEEOUS LANDS.
Jf oem of Application foe a License to Occupy Land undee the
65th Section of “ The Land Act 1884.”
In pursuance of The Land Act 1884, I, the undersigned, being of the full age
of eighteen years, do hereby make application for a license under the 65th section
thereof to occupy the land marked out by me on the day of
and specified hereunder; and I request that (if necessary) an authorized surveyor
be instructed to make a survey for me and on my account of the said allotment,
and to supply a plan of same; and I undertake to pay all duly authorized fees for
the making of the said survey and plan, or for any modification thereof, and to
accept a license subject to a condition that should the said land or any part thereof
be required for the use of any projected railway, or for mining purposes, I shall
relinquish possession of the land in respect of which such license may be issued, or
any part thereof that may be required for any such purpose, subject to such con-
ditions regarding compensation as may be prescribed by Eegulations.
Signature in full—
Occupation—
Address, post town—
If owner of land in fee simple, state extent..
If now or previously the holder of a license )
under The Land Act 1884, state particulars j >
If a selector under previous Land Acts, state )
particulars .. .. .. ]
Have you at any time selected or applied for )
land under section 65, The Land Act 1884? f


Situation and Extent of
Land applied for.
Description, containing the
lengths and bearings of
the boundary lines of the
site applied for, and its
connexion with a fixed
point in a Goverment
survey, as shown on plan
herewith.
Land Officer’s Eeport
County of
Land Officer.
Parish of
Allotment
Section
Area—
A. R. P.
Note. —This application will not be received by the Land Officer unless accom-
panied by a “ Certificate of Registration,” which can be obtained of any Receiver of
Revenue on payment of a fee of One pound (£1).
SCHEDULE XXXV.
Section 65 of “ The Land Act 1884.”
Residence and Cultivation License on Aueifeeous Lands.
Know all men that I, the Governor of Victoria, in pursuance of the provisions of
The Land Act 1884, and in consideration of the sum of pounds
shillings paid by of
to the Receiver and Paymaster at # or other officer
authorized to receive the same, and subject to the terms and conditions specified
on the back hereof, do hereby give to the said full license
and authority to reside on or to cultivate all that piece or parcel of auriferous Crown
land more particularly described in the Schedule hereto, which land is within the
areas described in the Second Schedule to the said Act, and is not comprised within
any city or town, for one year from the date hereof, unless the same be forfeited in
accordance with the said conditions.
• Dated this day of a.d. 188 .
Schedule.
About acres.
Allotment section parish of county of
Conditions.
1. This license only gives to the licensee the right to use the land for the purposes
for which the license has been granted, and for no other purpose whatsoever.
2. The licensee will not be permitted to assign or sublet the land or any part
thereof, or to part with the possession thereof, or of his interest therein, without the
consent of the Minister of the Crown for the time being administering Part IV. of
The Land Act 1884, hereinafter called the Minister, first had and obtained.
_ 3. The licensee is required to reside on the land during the continuance of this
license or within a period of four months from the date hereof to enclose the same
with a good and substantial fence, and cultivate at least one-fifth portion thereof.
4. Nothing contained in this license shall prevent the persons or persons seized of
the right, title, and interest in any claim or claims which were taken up under
miners’ rights prior to the date of this license from entering upon any portion of the
land the subject of this license and holding and occupying the same for mining
purposes, without paying any compensation whatsoever; and all such claimholders


and their workmen, with or without carts or vehicles, shall at all times have free
ingress, egress, and regress to, out of, and upon the said land to and from such claim
or claims.
5. It shall be lawful for the Governor or Administrator of the Government of
Victoria, with the advice of the Executive Council, from time to time and at all
times during the continuance of this license, to resume any portion of the land
hereby licensed, to be set out by the said Governor or Administrator, with the
advice aforesaid, if the same shall be required for any of the purposes for which land
may be reserved under the 10th section of The Land Act 1884, or for mining purposes,
on paying to the licensee such compensation as the Minister may think fit in respect
of such land so resumed, but the licensee shall not be entitled to receive or be paid
any compensation for severance.
6. The license may be forfeited if the licensee commit a breach of or neglect to
comply with any of these conditions.
7. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to declare that
the Governor or Administrator, with the advice aforesaid, has forfeited this license
shall be conclusive evidence that the license is forfeited.
SCHEDULE XXXVI.
Form oe Endorsement on issue of new License under Section 65,
“Land Act 1884.”
His Excellency the Governor has granted a new license to the person and for the
land and subject to the conditions described in the document to which this is affixed
for one year ending 188 and no longer (see Government
Gazette dated 188 page ), ajid the sum of pounds
shillings and pence has been received as fees for the same.
A separate receipt for this amount has also been given.
Dated at this day of 188
Beceiver of Bevenue.
SCHEDULE XXXVII.
Application under Section 67 of “ The Land Act 1884 ” for a Grazing
License to occupy Auriferous Land.
Address —
Date —
Sir,
I hereby make application for a license to occupy, for grazing purposes, the
surface of the undermentioned auriferous lands, viz :
County.
Parish.
Extent.
%
.; /
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
To the Honourable
The President of the Board of Land and Works.
SCHEDULE XXXVIII.
Bent per annum, £ s. d. No.
Grazing License under 67th Section “Land Act 1884.”
Know all men that I, the Governor of Victoria, in pursuance of The Land Act
1884, and in consideration of the annual rent of , fixed in


accordance with The Land Act 1884, duly paid by the person hereinafter mentioned
do hereby give to of license and
liberty to occupy for grazing purposes the surface of the auriferous Crown land
specified in the schedule hereto, and which land forms part of the land described
in the Second Schedule to the said Act, and is not at the date hereof required for
mining purposes.
This license is to continue in force for one year from the date hereof, but may be
renewed annually, at the option of the licensee, for a period of four years from the
expiration hereof, and is issued subject to the conditions on the back hereto.
Dated the day of 188 •
Schedule.
All these Crown lands , ,
containing acre or thereabouts.
Conditions.
1. Nothing in the foregoing license shall he deemed in any manner to affect the
right of any person to enter upon the land specified in the said
nnrnose of searching for digging, taking, and carrying away of gold, silver, and other
minerals, or to dig, take’, and carry away the same and to erect and occupy mining
plant and machinery thereon.
2. Such license shall not be deemed to prevent the said land from being licensed
under Part IV. of The Land Act 1884, or of being proclaimed a common, or of being
occupied by virtue of any miner’s right or business license.
3. The issue of this license shall not prevent the land comprised therein or any
part or parts thereof, being dealt with under any of the provisions of The Land Act
1884, or being resumed by the Governor or Administrator of the Government of
Victoria, with the advice of the Executive Council, for any of the purposes for which
land may be reserved under the 10th Section of The Land Act 1884, such land to be set
out by the said Governor or Administrator with the advice aforesaid.
4. No licensee shall in case of any resumption be entitled to any compensation
other than the return of such portion of the rent paid by bim as the responsible
Minister of the Crown for the time being administering The Land Act 1884 may think
fit. This license is also subject to the rights of the holders of miners rights or of
mining leases.
5. No land comprised in roads from time to time surveyed and marked out within
the boundaries of the land comprised in this license shall be deemed within its
operation.
6 This license entitles the holder thereof, during the period for which it is granted,
to use the land therein comprised for grazing purposes only, but does not confer any
right to build thereon or to cultivate any portion thereof.
7 If the licensee desire a renewal of this license, notice to that effect must be
given to the said Minister one calendar month prior to the expiration thereof or of
any renewal thereof.
8 The interest in this license, or any part thereof, shall not be transferred or
parted with without the consent of the said Minister and the payment of a fee of £l.
9. This license is to be used under and in accordance with the regulations made or
to be made under the provisions of the said Act.
10. The license may be forfeited if the licensee commit a breach of or neglect to
comply with any of these conditions.
11. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to declare that
the Governor or Administrator, with the advice aforesaid, has forfeited this license
shall be conclusive evidence that the license is forfeited.


PART V.
LANDS WHICH MAY BE SOLD BY AUCTION.
THE ACT.
Crown Lands Sold by Auction.
69. The lands comprised within the areas described in the Second
Schedule hereto (see end of book) as lands which may be sold by auction
may be soid subject to such covenants conditions executions and reservations
as the Governor in Council may direct, in fee simple by public auction not
exceeding one hundred thousand acres in any one year at an upset price of
One pound for each acre or at such higher upset price as the Governor in
Council may direct, and before any country lands shall be sold a schedule
of such lands shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
Sales by Auction and Notice Thereof.
70. Any person authorized by the Board may hold public sales by auction
of lands in fee simple without having an auctioneer’s license or incurring
on that account any penalty; and notice of every such sale shall be
given in the Government Gazette within three months and before one month
thereof, and every such notice shall declare with all practicable precision the
time and place at which such auction will be held and the lands to be offered
for sale thereat and the lots in which the same will be offered and the upset
piice for each lot and the amount of the deposit required; and no upset
price shall be altered without as full notice of such alteration by advertise-
ment and otherwise being given as was or should have been given of the
original upset price.
Conditions of Sale at Auction of Lands.
71. It shall be a condition of sale at every such auction that the purchaser
pay the survey charge at the time of the sale and a deposit in cash of twenty-
five per centum of the whole price, and that the residue of the price be
payable in twelve equal instalments on the last day of each successive period
of three months from the time of sale or be if the purchaser choose payable
at any earlier time or times being one of such last days of any such period
of three months as aforesaid, and that such residue of the price shall bear
interest at the rate of Six pounds per centum per annum to be computed
with respect to each instalment for the period which has elapsed between
the time of sale and the time of the payment of such instalment, and on
failure of the payment of any instalment with interest at the time at which
the same becomes due the deposit and any instalment or instalments and
interest already paid shall be forfeited, and the contract shall thereupon be
void.


Upset Price of Lands Unsold at Auction to be Reduced.
72. When any lands have been put up to auction and remain unsold
thereat, the Governor in Council may subject to notice as aforesaid direct
that such lands continue to he set up to auction at any reduced price not
less than One pound per acre.
Townships may be Sold by Auction.
73. The Governor in Council may from time to time by a notice in the
Government Gazette proclaim as a street or road or as a township any
portion or portions of Crown lands, and the lands in such township or
within any city town or borough proclaimed before the passing of this Act
shall be sold by auction in the manner herein provided for the sale of
Crown lands by public auction, and the lands upon which such street or
road have been proclaimed shall be and be deemed to be thenceforward
dedicated to the public.
Proclamation Town and Townships may be Rescinded.
74. The Governor in Council may from time to time by a notice in the
Government Gazette annul and rescind any proclamation made under this
or any Act of Parliament hereby or heretofore repealed of any portion or
portions of Crown lands as towns or townships.
Exchange of Crown and Private Land upon Alteration of Road.
75. When the course of any road has been or is hereafter altered or is
about to be altered, if the owner of the land over which the road in its
altered state passes or is intended to pass be willing to exchange such land
or any part of it for the land traversed by such road in its former or its
then present state or for any part thereof, the Governor in Council may
upon such terms as are mutually agreed on accept such exchange, and the
Governor in Council may execute the proper conveyances accordingly.
Detached Strips of Land may be Sold at a Valuation.
76. Where in the opinion of the Governor in Council there is no con-
venient access to any portion of Crown lands, he may by notice in the
Government Gazette resume such land (not exceeding two chains in width)
as may be required for the purpose of giving access thereto, and the Board
shall thereupon enter upon and take possession of such land and proceed
as though such land were land which the Board were authorized by an Act
of Parliament to take compulsorily in manner provided by “ The Lands
Compensation Statute 1869,” and compensation shall be made to the owner
or owners of such lands and ascertained in manner provided in such last-
mentioned Act, and such compensation shall include the cost of fencing the
land so taken or where in the opinion of the Governor in Council there is no
convenient access to any portion of Crown lands, or where any such portion
is insufficient in area for sale under this Act or lies between and adjoins any
land and any highway which forms or should form the only convenient
approach to such land, or where buildings erected on lands alienated before
the commencement of this Act encroach upon any portion of Crown lands,
or where any other case of a like nature arises, the Governor in Council
may grant in fee such portion of Crown lands not exceeding ten acres to the
owner of such adjacent lands, at a price determined by an appraiser
appointed by the Board, and no owner shall be entitled to more than one
such block.


Declaration to be made by Appraiser.
77 Before any appraiser enters into the consideration of any mat ers
referred to him under this Act, he shall in presence of a justice make and
subscribe the following declaration (that is to say) .
«t do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have no
interest either directly or indirectly m the matters in question,
and that I will faithfully and honestly and to the best of my
skill and ability make any appraisement and valuation required
of me under the provisions of ‘ The Land Act 1884.
Auction Moneys Appropriated for Railway Purposes.
78 From and after the first day of July One thousand eight hundred
and eighty-five there shall be paid within each year out of the co nsolidate
revenue all moneys arising from the sale of Crown lands by auction under
Sis Act to the credit of a trust account, to be. called “ The Railway
Construction Account,” for the purpose of making provision for the
construction 1 of any railways which maybe hereafter anthemed by any
Act of Parliament.
REGULATIONS FOR PART V.
Sales Tsy Auction and Grown Grants.
i All sales of Crown lands by public auction shall be subject to
the' conditions specified in ScheduVXXXIX. hereto, and to such other
conditions as the Governor in Council may m any particular case direct.
2. Land sale reports, prepared for the Lands Department, shall be
certified by the officer appointed to conduct the sale, as well as by
the Treasury officer who attended to receive the money. They shall
S forwardS to the Secretary for Lands within forty-eight hours of
the termination of the sale. AIL moneys derived from auction shall
be included in the “ Bed-faced Deports.”
3 Every purchaser of an allotment .of Crown lands sold by public
auction shall, at the time of such auction, pay to the officer appointed to
receive the same a charge for survey of such allotment m accordance with
the following scale: —
For an allotment containing 20 acres, or a less area, One pound.
For an allotment containing an area in excess of 20 acres, One
shilling per acre, or fraction thereof.
Provided that in the event of a purchaser of any such allotment having
previously paid a charge or fee for the survey of such allotment, the
payment at the time of auction of the whole or any portion of the charge
for survey herein prescribed may be dispensed with.
4 Crown grants under The Land Act 1884 shall be in the form pre-
scribed in Schedule XL. hereto, and shall be subject to such other
exceptions, reservations, covenants, and conditions as the Governor in
Council may in any particular case direct.


5. The fees payable for preparation of any Crown grant, either on
parchment or paper, shall he as follow :
£ s. d.
For any Crown grant of purchased land not exceeding
in extent 50 acres ... ... ... ... 110
For any Crown grant of purchased land exceeding 50
acres and not exceeding in extent 300 acres... ... 1 6 0
For any Crown grant of purchased land exceeding in
extent 300 acres... ... ... ... ... 1 11 6
6. The fee for an authority for the issue of a Treasurer’s receipt shall
be One pound sterling.
For a certificate of search in connexion with a release of mortgage and
issue of a Treasurer’s receipt, the fee shall be Ten shillings.
7. The Governor in Council may, if he think fit, register the transfer of
the interest of any purchaser of an allotment sold by public auction, prior
to the final payment of the purchase money being made. The fee for such
registration shall be One pound eleven shillings aud sixpence.
SCHEDULES FOR PART V.
SCHEDULE XXXIX.—SALES BY AUCTION.
Articles and Conditions of Sale.
Conditions of sale by the public auction at the commencing at
o’clock, by (being a person authorized by the Board of Land
and Works), of the following portions of land advertised by the notification in the
Government Gazette of the day of 188 ,in
conformity with the provisions of The Land Act 1884, of which those more par-
ticularly necessary to be noticed are hereinafter mentioned, viz.:—
(1.) The land hereinafter described will be put up for sale at the prices respec-
tively stated and annexed to the descriptions thereof, and the bidder of
that sum, or the highest bidder above it, will be declared the purchaser,
provided he shall immediately pay down a deposit of twenty-five per cent, of
the amount of the purchase money, and pay also the charge for survey, and
sign a description hereunto annexed of the lot of which he shall become
the purchaser, thereby binding himself to the observance of the above and
following articles and conditions.
(2.) The residue of the purchase-money shall be paid in twelve equal instal-
ments on the last day of each successive period of three months from this
date, or be, if the purchaser choose, payable at any earlier time or times
being one of such last days of any such period of three months as afore-
said, and such residue of the purchase-money shall bear interest at the
rate of Six pounds per centum per annum, to be computed with respect to
each instalment for the period which has elapsed between the time of sale
and the time of the payment of such instalment; and on failure of the
payment of any instalment with interest at the time at which the same
becomes due, the deposit and instalment or instalments and interest
already paid shall be forfeited and the contract shall thereupon be void
and the land may be again offered for sale.
(3.) Immediately after the biddings on each lot concluded, . and before
another lot is put up, the name of the purchaser will be entered in the
list of the descriptions of the lots annexed to these presents, and the pur


chaser will be required to affix his signature to the description of the lot
so purchased by him. If previous to such signature any question or dis-
pute as to the last and best bidder shall arise between the sellers and
bidders, or amongst the bidders themselves, the lot in question shall be
put up again. Subsequent to such signature no dispute whatever can be
admitted, nor can any alteration of name or transfer from the actual
purchaser to another person be allowed. No bid made after the fall of the
auctioneer’s hammer shall be received. In cases of question or dispute
the decision of the officer conducting the sale on behalf of the Government
will be final and conclusive.
(4.) Deeds of grant will be completed and issued in each case as soon as practi-
cable after payment in full of the purchase-money, and will be delivered
to the grantee by the Eegistrar of Titles on payment in full of the
regulated fee. Each lot will be granted to the purchaser by deed poll,
under the hand of His Excellency the Governor and the Great Seal of the
colony, to be held in fee simple.
(5.) All offers, sales, and grants relative to these lands will be effected in
reference to the public chart, each portion being described by length of
lines run with a chain upon the bearing of a compass needle, which
needle is variously affected by magnetic attraction in the neighbourhood
of the colony of Victoria, and the land will accordingly be sold as more or
less. Any future claim for compensation as to any alleged difference in
the area will not therefore be entertained.
(6.) If the officer acting on behalf of the Government shall find reason to believe
that any lot will not obtain its just value, or shall otherwise think fit to
withdraw the same from the sale, he shall have full power to do so at any
time previous to its being actually sold.
(7.) Persons having affixed their signatures to the lists of the descriptions of the
lots annexed to these presents, in token of their having become
purchasers (or agents for purchasers) of the lots to which their signatures
are respectively so affixed, will be held to have previously obtained all
necessary information, and shall not be entitled to allege ignorance or
any other cause for their not fulfilling all and every obligation incumbent
upon them by these articles and conditions.
(8.) It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time within thirty days
from the date of sale to annul the sale of any lot or lots, and to repay to
the purchaser the amount of his purchase-money (or so much thereof as
shall have been paid by him), without interest, cost, or damages of any
description, in full satisfaction of all claims and demands whatsoever by
such purchaser; and the publication of a notice in the Government
Gazette to the effect that the Governor in Council has as aforesaid
annulled any such sale shall be conclusive evidence that such sale has
been completely and effectually annulled.
List of the Descriptions of the Lots and Declarations relative thereto.
We, the undersigned, do hereby acknowledge that we are the purchasers (or agents
for purchasers) of the lots to which our names are respectively signed, and
we do each of us severally for ourselves (or on behalf of our constituents)
undertake to make payment to the of the residue of
the purchase-money of the said lots respectively, in the manner prescribed
in condition 2 above, and to fulfil all and each of the foregoing articles and
conditions; and failing our doing so, we do hereby acknowledge that we
have forfeited all and every claim to the said lot or lots, and to the deposit
of twenty-five per cent, of the price thereof which we have paid. In
witness whereof we have, on the day and year above written, severally
signed our names at the foot of the description of each lot respectively
purchased by us.


SCHEDULE XL.
Fobm of Ceown Gbant in Fee undee “The Land Act 1884.”
Entered in the Register Book,
Vol. folio
Registrar of Titles.
Victoeia, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, to all to whom these presents
shall come, greeting—
Wheeeas in conformity with the laws relating to the sale and occupation of Crown
lands in our colony of Victoria the person hereinafter named ha in considera-
tion of the sum of which sum has been duly paid to us, become
entitled to a grant in fee simple of the land hereinafter described: Now know ye
that in consideration of the sum so paid and in pursuance of The Land Act 1884
We do hereby grant unto h heirs and assigns, All
that piece of land in the said colony containing
Original Crown Grant.
Not to be dealt with outside the Titles Office.
Note.—The hearings and
measurements are approxi-
mately given in this plan.
The measurements are in
links.
delineated with the measurements and abuttals thereof
in the map drawn in the margin of these presents and
therein coloured yellow
Excepting however unto us, our heirs and successors,
all gold and auriferous earth or stone and all mines
containing gold within the boundaries of the said land:
And also reserving to us, our heirs and successors, free
liberty and authority for us, our heirs and successors,
and our and their agents and servants, at any time or
times hereafter to enter upon the said land and to search
and mine therein for gold and to extract and remove
therefrom any gold and any auriferous earth or stone,
and for the purposes aforesaid to sink shafts, erect
machinery, carry on any works, and do any other things
which may be necessary or usual in mining. To hold
unto the said h heirs and assigns for ever :
Provided always that the said land is and shall be subject
to be resumed for mining purposes under section 68 of
the said Act, and provided also that the said land is and
shall be subject to the right of any person being the
holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease to enter
therein and to mine for gold and silver, and to erect and
to occupy mining plant or machinery thereon in the
same manner and under the same conditions and pro-
visions as those to which such person had at the time
of the passing of the said Act the right to mine for gold
and silver in and upon Crown lands, provided that com-
pensation shall be paid to the said
his heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, and trans-
ferrees by such person for surface damage to be done to
such lands by reason of mining thereon, such com-
pensation to be determined as provided by the 117th
section of the said Act, and the payment thereof to be
a condition precedent to such right of entry.
In testimony whereof we have caused this our grant to be sealed with the seal
of the said colony. Witness our trusty and well-beloved
Governor and Commander-in-Chief in and over the said
colony of Victoria and its dependencies, at Melbourne this
day of in the year of our reign and in
the year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred and eighty-
(L.S.)


Memorials of Instruments.
Nature of
Instrument.
Time of its Production
for Registration.
Names of the Parties to it.
Number
er Symbol
thereon.
The
day of
188 at
o’clock in the noon.


PART VI.
SWAMP LANDS.
THE ACT.
Swamp Lands.
79. A plan shall be prepared from actual survey of the areas known as
the Condah Koo-wee-rup Moe Panyabyr and Mokoan swamps, described in
the Second Schedule hereto (see end of book) as Swamp lands.
Alienation only to be in Manner Expressed.
80. Wo lands forming part of the lands described in the Second Schedule
hereto as swamp lands shall be alienated in fee simple, and every aliena-
tion save in manner hereinafter provided shall be absolutely void as well
against Her Majesty as all other persons whomsoever.
Governor in Council may cause Swamp Lands to be Drained.
81. The Governor in Council may if he think fit cause any of the swamp
lands to be drained and reclaimed by prison or other labour, and the Board
may for that purpose make construct erect and maintain all the proper
works engines buildings reservoirs tanks conduits valves sluices pumps
canals ditches drains cuts channels watercourses sewers embankments dams
and all necessary drainage works.
Power to enter upon Lands and make Canals Drains <j-c.
82. For the purpose of draining any of the said s vamps it shall be lawful
for the Board its successors deputies agents and workmen and all other
persons by them authorized without making any previous payment or having
the previous consent of the owner or occupier to enter into and upon the
lands and grounds of any person whomsoever and to survey and take levels
of the same and to ascertain and stake or set out take possession of and
appropriate for the purposes herein mentioned such parts thereof as may be
necessary and proper for the making and construction of canals ditches cuts
channels watercourses sewers embankments drains and all necessary
drainage works, and in or upon such lands to bore dig cut trench embank
and so remove or lay take carry away and use any earth stone timber gravel
or sand or any other materials or things which may be dug raised or obtained
therein in the making and construction of such canals ditches watercourses
sewers embankments dams and drainage works authorized, or which may
hinder prevent or obstruct the making maintaining altering repairing or using
the same respectively, and also to make or construct in upon across under
or over any lands streets hills valleys roads brooks streams or other waters
within such lands such temporary or permanent inclined planes tunnels
embankments aqueducts bridges roads ways passages conduits drains piers
arches cuttings and fences as the Board think proper, and also to alter the
course of any streams or watercourses for the purpose of constructing and
maintaining tunnels bridges passages or other works~over or under the same,
and for any other necessary purpose, and also to divert or alter as well
temporarily as permanently the course of any such streams streets roads or


ways, or to raise or sink the level of any such streams streets roads or ways
in order the more conveniently to carry the same over or under or by the side
of any such canal ditch watercourse or sewer, and also with the consent of
the council of any city town borough or shire to close any road in such city
town borough or shire which is impassable or useless. Provided always
that in the exercise of the powers by this Part of this Act granted the Board
and other person shall do as little damage as may be, and that it required
full satisfaction shall be made in manner provided by The Lands Compen-
sation Statute 1869 ” or any Act amending the same to all persons interested
in any lands or hereditaments taken used injured or prejudically aftected
for all damages by them sustained by reason of the exercise of such
powers. * . * •
Powers of Board for purposes of Drainage.
83. The Board may for the purpose of draining any of the said swamps
or of keeping any drainage works in good order and repair
Enter into and upon any land whatsoever within one hundred and fatty
yards of any canal ditch watercourse or sewer whether con-
structed or in course of construction for the purpose of deposit-
ing soil theron, or for the purpose of altering or repairing any
canal ditch watercourse sewer embankment dam or drainage
works, or for the purpose of carrying away therefrom materials
for constructing altering or repairing any canal ditch watercourse
sewer embankment dam or drainage works, or for any purpose
connected with the carrying out of the provisions of this Part ot
Cleanse repair or otherwise maintain in a due state of efficiency all
canals ditches watercourses sewers embankments dams and
drainage works subject to its control: ,
Extend lengthen widen strengthen deepen alter divert scour any canal
ditch watercourse sewer embankment dram and drainage work ;
Do all'such things and execute all such works as may be necessary or
convenient for the purposes of this Act.
Penalty for Injuring or Obstructing Drains.
84. Every person who wilfully dams up or in any way whatsoever injures or
obstructs any such canal ditch watercourse sewer or emban men °J! * all *
age work, and every person who wilfully hinders or preven s e
its successors deputies agents and workmen from carrying ou or per orm
ing any work undertaken under the provisions of this Part of this Act, shat
upon conviction thereof before two justices be liable to forfeit and pay any
sum not exceeding Twenty pounds.
Governor may Lease Sivamp Lands in lots of 160 acres for 2 l years with
Drainage Conditions. ■
85. The G-overnor in Council may if he think fit grant leases of any lands
forming part of the swamp lands so drained and reclaimed m alto men s no
exceeding one hundred and sixty acres for a term of twenty-one years.
Particulars of every such lease shall be laid before both Houses o ff, 13 ''
ment within one month of the execution thereof, or if Parliament be not then
sitting within one month after the next meeting thereof.
Every such lease shall contain a covenant inter aha on the part ot tlie
lessee to keep open all canals ditches drains cuts channels watercourses
sewers and works on the land thereby demised to the satisfaction ot the
Board during the term of his lease.
270 Regulations or Schedules under this Part of the Act.


PARTS VII. AND VIII.
State Forest Timber, Water Reserves, and Leases and
Licenses for other than Pastoral Grazing or Agri-
cultural Purposes.
THE ACT.
State Foeests.
Alienation of State Forest Reserves forbidden.
86. No lands comprised within tlie areas described in the Second
Schedule hereto (see end of book) as State forest reserves shall be alienated
for any freehold estate nor for any lesser estate save as hereinafter
expressly provided, and every conveyance and alienation thereof shall be
absolutely void as well against Her Majesty as all other persons whomso-
ever ; nor shall any license to graze sheep or cattle over any State forest
reserves be issued without the consent of the Governor in Council.
Licenses to cut Timber.
87. The Governor in Council may issue grazing licenses residence licenses
or licenses to cut timber in any State forest or any part thereof subject to
the payment of such license fee and on such terms and conditions as are
from time to time approved by the Governor in Council and set forth in
such license.
Timbee Eeseeves.
Alienation of Timber Reserves forbidden.
88. No lands comprised within the areas described in the Second Schedule
hereto as timber reserves shall save as hereinafter provided be alienated in
fee simple, and every conveyance and alienation thereof shall be absolutely
void as well against Her Majesty as all other persons whomsoever.
From time to time as any lands forming portion of the timber reserves
become denuded of timber and the same is notified in the Government
Gazette under the authority of the Governor in Council such lands so
denuded of timber may be added to the pastoral lands or agricultural and
grazing lands and dealt with under any of the provisions of Part 11. or
111. of this Act.
Licenses to cut Timber.
89. The Governor in Council may issue grazing licenses or licenses to cut
timber upon any timber reserve or any part thereof subject to the pay-
ment of such license fee and on such terms and conditions as are from time
to time approved by the Governor in Council and set forth in such license.


Wateb Besebves.
Alienation of Water Reserves forbidden.
90. No lands forming part of the lands described in the Second Schedule
hereto as water reserves shall be alienated in fee simple, and every con-
veyance and alienation thereof shall be absolutely void as well against Her
Majesty as all other persons whomsoever.
Leases for other purposes than Agricultural or Pastoral.
91. The Governor in Council may grant leases of any Crown land not
exceeding (except in the case of leases for guano or other manure) three
acres for a term not exceeding twenty-one years from the date thereof at a
yearly rent of not less than Five pounds for any of the following purposes
(that is to say):—
(1.) For obtaining and removing therefrom guano or other manure :
(2.) For obtaining and removing therefrom stone or earth:
(3.) For sites of inns stores smithies bakeries or similar buildings in
thinly populated districts:
(4.) For sites of bathing houses bathing places bridges toll houses or
ferries and punt houses :
(5.) For sites of tanneries or factories or saw or paper mill stores ware-
houses or dwellings :
(6.) For sites of quays and landing places or for sites for the depositing
of materials:
(7.) For the working of mineral springs :
(8.) For sites for ship and boat-building or repairing and marine and
general engineering works:
(9.) For the manufacture of salt.
Provided that in all cases where it is proposed to grant a lease for a longer
term than seven years notice of the application for such lease and of the
purpose and term for which it is proposed to be granted shall be published
in four consecutive ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette at least
one month before the grant of such lease.
Conditions of Leases.
92. Every lease so granted as aforesaid shall be subject to such covenants
and conditions and to the payment of such rent or royalty not being less
(except in the case of private bathing houses or bathing places when a fee
of One pound per annum only shall be charged) than the said sum of Five
pounds per annum as the Governor in Council may think fit to impose, and
shall contain a covenant that if the lessee his executors administrators or
assigns fail at any time during the term to use the demised land bond fide
for the purposes for which it has been demised the lease shall be voidable
at the will of the Governor in Council. The Governor in Council may
grant leases of any Crown lands to any person willing to make and con-
struct canals or docks. Provided that no such lease as last mentioned be
granted unless and until the conditions of such lease have been laid
on the Table of both Houses of Parliament for at least four consecutive
weeks.
Before any lease is granted for such purposes as aforesaid of any Crown
land situated within the boundaries of any city town or borough, the


right to such lease shall be offered for sale by auction, and notice of such
auction shall be given in the same manner in all respects as notice with
regard to lands to be sold by auction in fee simple is to be given as herein-
before provided. The person who offers the highest rent shall be entitled
to the lease.
Purposes for which Licenses may he issued.
93. The Governor in Council or any person duly authorized by him in
that behalf may from time to time grant to any applicant a license to enter
upon any Crown lands not under license or lease as an agricultural allot-
ment under Part 111. of this Act for any of the following purposes (that is
to say):—
(1.) To cut dig and take away any live or dead timber gravel stone
limestone salt guano shell seaweed sand loam brick or other
earth:
(2.) To occupy the site of fishermen’s residences and drying grounds :
(3.) To occupy the sites of fellmongering establishments slaughter-
houses brick or lime kilns :
(4.) To erect pumps :
(5.) To collect ballast:
(6.) To occupy areas not exceeding three acres in extent for the purpose
of gardening thereon :
(7.) Or for any of the purposes for which leases may be granted under
this Part of this Act.
Leases for Roads and Tramways.
94. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to grant leases of lands
forming part of any lands of the Crown or of any State forest timber reserve
or water reserve not exceeding three chains in width for the forming and
maintaining of roads tramways and crossings and such works of like public
utility, subject to such covenants terms and conditions as to the Governor
in Council may seem fit. Provided that notice of the application for such
lease and of the purpose for which it is proposed to be granted shall be
published in four consecutive ordinary numbers of the Government Gazette
before the granting thereof.
Conditions of Incenses.
95. Every license under this part of this Act shall bear date of the day
on which it is issued and shall except as in this Act is otherwise expressly
provided continue in force for a period not exceeding one year from such
date, and shall be subject to such restrictions limitations and conditions and
to the payment of such reasonable fee as the Governor in Council by
general regulations published in the Government Gazette thinks fit to
impose.
Licenses for Water Easements.
96. The Board may grant licenses to cut construct and use upon and
through any land described therein any race drain dam or reservoir or to
deepen widen clean repair or otherwise improve any such race drain dam or
reservoir or to take water therefrom in the same manner as if the same
were situated on Crown lands, and the licensee may by the authority thereof
and for the purposes therein expressed enter upon such land, but such
licensee shall make compensation to the owner of such land for any damage


occasioned by such entry, the amount whereof shall be fixed by arbitration
in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations to be made by the
Governor in Council, and may be recovered in a county court or before two
justices.
Licenses may be Granted to Cut Races and Divert Water for
Mill Purposes.
97. The Governor in Council may upon payment of such rent or fee and
subject to such conditions as may be determined by regulations from time to
time to be made by the Governor in Council grant for a term not exceeding
fifteen years a license which shall authorize such person his executors
administrators and assigns (except as against Her Majesty the Governor in
Council or the Board) to cut construct and use races through and upon any
Crown lands, and to take or divert water from any spring lake pool or stream
situated or flowing upon or through or bounded by any such Crown lands in
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by such
license and regulations for the purposes of supplying water-power to mills
or for any purpose, and it shall be lawful for the person to whom any such
license is granted to take or divert water to the same extent but no greater
than he might do if he were the owner of such Crown lands, and the right
conferred by such license and the property and interest in any race cut
constructed or used by virtue thereof shall be deemed to be a chattel
interest. If any person to whom any license is granted enter by virtue
thereof upon any land demised or licensed under the provisions of this or
any other Act now or hereafter to be in force or occupied by virtue of a
miner’s right or business license he shall make compensation for any injury
occasioned by such entry and by the cutting constructing or using of any
races on any such land, and the amount of such compensation shall be
determined by arbitration in such manner as may be prescribed by the said
regulations and may be recovered in a county court or before two justices.
Provided always that it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any
time to revoke any license granted hereunder on payment of compensation
to the person entitled to the benefit thereof for any outlay by such person
for or in respect of any such race and on paying to him in addition to the
amount of such compensation such percentage on such amount not exceed-
ing Ten pounds per centum as seems to the Governor in Council just having
regard to all the circumstances of the case, the amount of such compensa-
tion to be determined in manner directed by the regulations as aforesaid.


REGULATIONS FOR PARTS VII. AND VIII.
Licenses.—State Forests and Timber Reserves.
(Sections 87, 89, 93.)
Sawmill Licenses.
1. There may be issued yearly licenses to occupy sites for sawmills at
an annual fee of not less than Ten pounds. The area of any such site shall
not exceed three acres, and the boundaries thereof shall be described in the
license. Every such license shall be subject to the conditions specified in
Schedule XLI. hereto.
2. Applications for sawmill licenses shall be made in the form prescribed
in Schedule LYIII. hereto, and shall be accompanied in each case by a
deposit of Three pounds, to be applied as part fees for occupation in the
event of the application being approved; if not approved, the deposit, or
such portion thereof as the Minister may direct, to be returned to the
applicant. The payment of the deposit does not entitle the applicant to take
possession of the land. Every such license shall be in the form and subject
to the conditions prescribed in Schedule LIX. hereto.
Licenses to Fell Eucalyptus Timber for Supply of a Sawmill.
3. There may be issued licenses to fell eucalyptus timber for sawmill
purposes on such State forest or timber reserve as shall be specified
therein, and subject to the conditions provided in Schedule XLII. hereto.
Jinker Licenses.
4. There may be issued licenses to transport by j inkers or log-carriages,
to sawmills on public or private lands, timber cut within the boundaries of
State forests and timber reserves.
5. The annual fee for each such jinker or log-carriage, if it be engaged in
transport of timber to a licensed sawmill on Crown lands, shall be Twelve
pounds ; and if it be engaged in transport of timber to a sawmill on private
land beyond a distance of two miles from any licensed sawmill erected on
Crown lands, Sixteen pounds; but the Minister, if he thinks fit, may
dispense with the above condition with regard to distance.
Splitters' Licenses.
6. There may be issued to wood-splitters licenses to cut, split, and take
away when split, stringybark, box, messmate, ironbark, gum, or other kinds
of eucalyptus. The annual fee for every such license for ironbark and red
gum shall be Four pounds per annum, and for other kinds of eucalyptus
Two pounds per annum ; and the licenses shall be subject to the conditions
specified in Schedules XLIII. and XLIY. hereto respectively.
Licenses to Cut Timber for purposes other than Sawmill or Splitting.
7. There may be issued licenses to cut and take away eucalyptus timber
for purposes other than sawmill or splitting from such State forest or any
part thereof as shall be described in such license. Every such license shall
be subject to the conditions specified in Schedule XLY. hereto, and to pay-
ment of the following fees: —Red gum and ironbark logs not exceeding


twenty feet in length, Four shillings each; every additional foot, lineal
measurement, Twopence; other kinds of eucalyptus, one-half the above-
mentioned rates.
Licenses for Felling Undergrowth.
8. Licenses, available for three months, may he issued to fell and remove
undergrowth and timber, other than eucalyptus timber, at the under-
mentioned rates, viz. : £ s. d.
For undergrowths commonly known as hazel and dog-
wood ... ... ... ... ... 110 0
For other descriptions of undergrowth and timber other
than eucalyptus ... ... ... ... 5 0 0
9. Every such license shall he subject to the conditions specified in
Schedule XLYI. hereto.
Forms of and Applications for, Licenses.
10. Applications must be addressed to “ The Secretary for Agriculture,
Melbourne,” and must specify the kind of undergrowth or timber required
to he felled, and the forest or timber reserve in which it is desired to
obtain the same.
Licenses hereinbefore in this Chapter provided, except licenses for saw-
mills and felling undergrowth, shall be in the form specified in Schedule
XLYII. hereto.
Licenses for Exclusive Right to Cut Timber.
11. There may he issued, subject to the conditions specified in Schedule
XLYIII. hereto, licenses conferring the exclusive right to cut timber in
specified portions of State forests or timber reserves not exceeding in any
instance 1000 acres.
12. All licenses issued conferring the exclusive right to cut timber shall
be for a term not exceeding one year.
13. The amount of license fee shall be fixed in each case by the Minister,
and shall be paid in advance in respect of the whole period for which the
license is issued.
14. It shall not be necessary for the licensee, or any person employed by
bim in or about such land, to hold any other license mentioned in this
Chapter.
15. The non-compliance with, or the non-performance of any of the
obligations specified in the license, shall render such license null and void.
General Provisions.
16. Every license fee mentioned in this Chapter shall, except where it is
otherwise expressly provided, be payable quarterly in advance.
17. Every license mentioned in this Chapter shall be personal.
18. The interest of the Crown in any timber cut under a license shall not
cease until such timber has been transported to the nearest main road, and
if any timber cut by the licensee is transported by any other person, except
as provided in clause 11, such other person shall hold a license.
19. Every licensed jinker or log-carriage shall have painted thereon the
number of the license and the name of the owner of the mill to which the
timber is being transported.
20. No license for felling undergrowth or the exclusive right of cutting
timber, or for a jinker to transport timber to a sawmill on private land, or
to occupy a site for a sawmill, shall be issued unless and until the applica-
tion for it has been approved by the Minister.


Grazing Licenses.
21. Every grazing license shall be in the form and subject to the con-
ditions contained in Schedule LXX. hereto, and shall be subject to such
exceptions, reservations, covenants, and conditions as the Governor may in
any particular case direct.
Residence Licenses.
22. There may be issued licenses to occupy sites for residence purposes
at an annual fee of Five shillings. The area of each site shall not exceed
one-quarter of an acre.
23. Every such application shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule
XLIX. hereto, and shall be accompanied by a plan.
24. No person shall occupy more than two residence areas.
25. Residence licenses shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule L.
hereto.
26. Upon the expiration of any license for a residence area, the Governor
may, if he think fit, issue a new license for the same land to the holder of
the expired license, upon the same or such other terms and conditions as may
be deemed necessary, and may authorise the District Deceiver of Revenue
to endorse on the back of the expired license a notification in the form of
Schedule LI. hereto, and such endorsement shall have to all intents and
purposes the effects of a license.
27. The charge for survey of every residence area shall be One pound.
Of Leases under Part VIII. of “ The Land Act 1881.”
1. Every application for a lease under Part VIII. of The Land Act 1884
shall be transmitted to the Minister in the form prescribed in Schedule LII.
hereto.
2. Every application for a lease under section 91 of The Land Act 1884
shall be accompanied by a plan, showing the lengths and hearings of the
boundary lines of the site applied for and their connexion with some fixed
point of a survey made under the direction of the Board.
3. Every application for a lease under section 94 of The Land Act 1884
shall be accompanied by plans and sections. The plans shall show the
land proposed to be leased, and every proposed diversion of existing roads.
4. Where a line of tramway proposed to be formed under section 94
would cross an existing surveyed road, transverse and longitudinal sections
drawn to scale shall be given, whether such crossing be level or otherwise,
showing the manner in which it is proposed to obviate obstruction or
interruption of traffic on the said road, and the provision for the prevention
of accident at such crossing.
5. Notice of every such last-mentioned application shall, at the cost of
the applicant, be published in a newspaper circulating in the district where
the land for which application is made is situated, and in the Government
Gazette.
6. Every plan and every section accompanying any application under
this Chapter shall be drawn on a scale of eight chains to one inch by an
authorised surveyor, and shall be signed by him.
7. Every lease under Part VIII. of The Land Act 1884 shall, subject to
the provisions of the said part, be in such form and shall be subject to such
covenants and conditions and to the payment of such rent or royalty as the
Governor in Council may prescribe, not being less than the amounts
provided in the said Act.


8. The fee for the preparation of a lease of Crown lands issued under
Part VIII. of The Land Act 1884 shall he Two pounds.
Timber Licenses.
(See also State Forests.)
Licenses on Crown Lands (not being State Forests or Timber
Reserves). —Section 93.
1. There may be issued licenses to cut and take away from such Crown
lands as are specified therein, gum (excepting the kinds known as red gum
and ironbark), stringybark, box, messmate, and other kinds of eucalyptus.
Every such license shall be subject to the conditions specified in Schedule
LIII. hereto, and to a yearly fee of One pound.
2. There may be issued licenses to cut and take away eucalyptus
timber, including red gum and ironbark, from such Crown lands as are
specified therein. Every such license shall be subject to the conditions
specified in Schedule LIV. hereto, and to the payment of a yearly fee of
Four pounds.
3. There may be issued licenses to cut and take away from such Crown
lands, not being State forests or timber reserves, as are specified therein,
blackwood, pine, sassafras, beech, oak, or other valuable timber; and
every such license shall be subject to the payment of such annual fee as
the Minister thinks fit, but not less than Ten pounds.
4. Any person duly authorized by the Governor in Council in that behalf
may from time to time grant to any applicant a license to strip and remove
bark from any wattle trees on any Crown lands, not within a State forest
or timber reserve, specified in such license.
5. Every such license shall be available for the season commencing on
the fifteenth day of September in any year and ending on the fifteenth day
of January next following thereafter and no longer, and shall be in the
form and subject to the conditions contained in Schedule LV. hereto.
6. The fee for every such license shall be One pound ten shillings, and
shall be payable in advance.
7. The cutting of wattle trees on Crown lands within one mile from
the shores of Port Phillip Bay and its arms is prohibited.
8. There may be issued licenses to cut and take away live or dead wood
from Crown lands in cities, towns, or boroughs; and every such license
shall be subject to such conditions and such fee as the Minister in each
case thinks fit.
9. There may be issued licenses to occupy sites not exceeding three acres
for sawmills on Crown lands, not being State forests, at such annual fee as
the Minister thinks fit; but not less than Ten pounds.
10. Applications for sawmill licenses shall be made in the form pre-
scribed in Schedule LVIII. hereto, and shall be accompanied in each case
by a deposit of Three pounds, to be applied as part fees for occupation in
the event of the application being approved; if not approved, the deposit,
or such portion thereof as the Minister may direct, to be returned to the
applicant. The payment of the deposit does not entitle the applicant to
take possession of the land,
11. There may be issued licenses to transport to sawmills on public or
private lands, in jinkers or log-carriages, eucalyptus timber, cut as herein-
before mentioned upon Crown lands.


12. The annual fee for each such jinker or log-carriage, if it be engaged
in the transport,of timber to a licensed sawmill on Crown lands, shall be
Ten pounds ; and if it be engaged in the transport of timber from Crown
lands to a sawmill on private land, Fourteen pounds.
13. All licenses mentioned in this Chapter of these Regulations may be
issued by any person authorised by the Governor in Council in that behalf,
but no license to cut and take away any valuable timber or live or dead
wood in towns, boroughs, or townships, or to occupy a site for a sawmill,
shall be issued unless and until the application for it has been approved by
the Minister.
General Provisions.
14. Every license fee mentioned in this Chapter shall, except where it
is otherwise expressly provided, be payable quarterly in advance.
15. Every license mentioned in this Chapter shall be personal, and,
unless where otherwise provided, may be in the form prescribed in
Schedule LX. hereto, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit.
16. The interest of the Crown in any timber cut under a license to cut
eucalyptus timber, or to cut valuable timber upon Crown lands as herein-
before provided, shall not cease until such timber has been transported to
the nearest main road, and if any timber cut by a licensee be transported
by any other person, such other person also shall hold a license.
17. Every licensed jinker or log-carriage shall have painted thereon the
number of the license and the name of the owner of the mill to which the
timber is being transported.
18. A license under this Chapter is not operative in any area over which
an exclusive right to cut timber shall have been granted.
Miscellaneous Licenses.
(Section 93.)
1. Licenses under this Chapter, unless otherwise provided, shall be
classed in two divisions :
The first division shall comprise those licenses which confer the
exclusive right to enter upon any Crown lands not under lease or
licensed under Part 111. of The Land Act 1884, and shall be for the
purposes and subject to the payment of the fees and the conditions
specified in Schedule LVI. hereto.
The second division shall comprise those licenses which do not confer
any exclusive right, and shall be for the purposes and subject to the
payment of the fees and the conditions specified in Schedule LVII.
hereto. -cr-nr
2. The provisions of Chapter 11., and sections 1 and 2 of Chapter XIV.
of these Regulations, except as hereinafter provided, shall apply to appli-
cations under the First Division.
3. License fees shall be payable quarterly in advance, except where
otherwise specially directed.
The registration fee specified in section lof Chapter XIV. of these
Regulations is not payable under this section.
Applications shall not, unless specially ordered, be remitted to Local
Land Boards.
Application shall be made in the form of Schedule LVIII. hereto.
The Minister may, if he think fit, dispense with a plan, either
temporarily or wholly. . i n
Licenses under Schedule LVII. hereto shall be issued by the olhcers
appointed by the Treasurer for that purpose.


4. Licenses under the First Division shall be in the form and subject to
the conditions specified in Schedule LIX. hereto, and, if deemed expedient,
to all or any of the special conditions specified therein, and to such other
special condition as may be necessary in any particular case. Licenses
under the Second Division shall be in the form prescribed in Schedule LX.
hereto.
5. Licenses for lime sites north of and adjoining the Botanical Gardens
at Geelong shall be issued subject to the conditions prescribed in Schedule
LXI. hereto, and shall only be renewable annually on the said conditions
being fulfilled.
6. Applications for garden licenses shall be in the form prescribed in
Schedule LVIII. hereto.
7. The interest in a license issued for any of the purposes specified in
Schedule LYI. hereto may be transferred, with the consent of the Minister,
upon payment of a fee of One pound, and a new license shall thereupon
issue to the transferee.
Of Water Sasements on Private Land.
(Section 96.)
1. Every application for a license to enter under the provisions of the
96th section of The Land Act 1884 upon lands other than Crown lands
shall be addressed to the Minister, and shall be in the form prescribed in
Schedule LXII. hereto.
2. The applicant shall at the time of making such application send a copy
thereof to the proprietor of the land concerning which the application is
made, and to every person in occupation thereof.
3. The applicant shall send to the Minister together with every such
application a plan, description, and report relating thereto by an authorised
surveyor, and the sum of Fifteen pounds as a deposit to defray the costs (if
any) of an enquiry.
4. The report of the authorised surveyor shall contain definite informa-
tion as to the direction, dimensions, or capacity of the proposed race, drain,
dam, or reservoir, or as to the nature and extent of the proposed improve-
ments therein, and as to the discharge or the contents at different seasons
of the source of supply whenever it is proposed to divert the water, and
the maximum quantity of water which it is proposed to divert at a given
time.
5. If the Minister think that such an application ought to be entertained
he shall send it to the Land Officer for consideration by a Local Land
Board.
6. The Land Officer shall publish a notice of such application, and the
cost of such publication shall be taken to be part of the costs of the
enquiry.
7. The Land Officer shall notify to the applicant, proprietor, and person
in occupation, the time and place of the meeting of the Local Land Board
at which the application will be heard.
8. The applicant shall notify to every proprietor and occupier as afore-
said that his application will be heard at the time and place as aforesaid
by the Local Land Board, and shall require him or them, if they object
to such application, to be then and there present in support of their
objections.
9. The Local Land Board shall not consider any such Application unless
the parties to whom such notice ought to be given are the proper parties,
nor unless they are satisfied that such notice has beefi given, and if they


are so satisfied they may proceed with the case, notwithstanding the
absence of all or any such parties.
10. The Local Land Board shall state in its report the amount of money
(if any) that the objectors to the application ought to receive by way of
costs, and the Minister may direct such amount, or such other amount as
he thinks reasonable, to be paid to such objectors out of the deposit before
mentioned.
11. The balance (if any) of such deposit, after defraying all costs of the
enquiry as the Minister may direct, shall be returned to the applicant.
12. If upon considering the report of the Local Land Board the Minister
be of opinion that the license ought to issue, he shall direct the amount or
amounts of compensation to be ascertained by arbitration; and such
amount or amounts shall be determined by two arbitrators and an umpire
under and in accordance with the Common Law Procedure Statute 1865,
one arbitrator to be appointed by the applicant and one to be appointed by
the proprietor or occupier (if any), and the umpire to be appointed by the
said arbitrators.
13. When the money awarded has been so paid or tendered by the
applicant to the proprietor and occupier (if any), the Board may grant a
license in the form prescribed in Schedule LXIII. hereto, in accordance
with the provisions of the section before mentioned.
14. The provisions of this Chapter of these .Regulations, or any portion
thereof, may be dispensed with in any special case, if the Governor in
Council so direct.
0£ Lacs and Mill Licenses.
(Section 97.)
1. Every applicant for a license to cut a race and to take and divert
water for mill purposes under section 97 of The Land Act 1884 upon any
Crown lands that are not under demise or license shall mark out the
proposed line of race by posts not less than three inches square, at intervals
of not less than five chains, and standing at least three feet out of the
ground.
2. Every applicant shall affix a notice, in the form prescribed in
Schedule LXIY. hereto, on the post at the commencing point of the
proposed race, and a similar notice on the post at the end thereof, and
shall also publish such notice in three consecutive issues of a newspaper
circulating in the locality wherein the line of the proposed race is situated.
3. Within five days from the time of such marking out as aforesaid the
applicant shall give instructions to some authorised surveyor to survey the
proposed line of race and to prepare a plan, description, and report thereon.
4. The report of the authorised surveyor shall contain definite informa-
tion relative to the discharge, at different seasons of the year, of the stream
or other source of supply whence water is proposed to be diverted, and the
maximum quantity of water proposed to be so diverted in a given time.
5. Within twenty-one days from the time of such marking out as afore-
said the applicant shall send to the Land Officer his appliation, in the form
prescribed in Schedule LXII. hereto, and the plan, description, and report
of the authorised surveyor.
6. The Land Officer shall deal with all such applications as if they were
applications within the meaning of the Fifth Chapter of these Regulations,
and shall submit them to the consideration of a Local Land Board.


7. In cases where compensation may be payable under section 97 of The
Land Act 1884, the amount of compensation shall be determined by arbitra-
tion, and such amount shall be determined by two arbitrators and an
umpire under and in accordance with The Common Law Procedure
Statute 1865, one arbitrator to be appointed by the applicant and one to be
appointed by the person injured, and the umpire to be appointed by the
said arbitrators.
8. Licenses under section 97 of The Land Act 1884 shall be in the form
prescribed in. Schedule LXY. hereto, and shall be subject to the payment
of such rent or fee, and to such exceptions, reservations, covenants, and
conditions as the Governor in Council may in each particular case direct.
SCHEDULES UNDER PARTS VII. AND VIII.
SCHEDULE XLI.
Conditions of License foe a Site foe a Sawmill in a State Foeest oe
Timbee Eeseeve:
1. No building shall be erected outside of the boundaries of the licensed site.
2. No goats shall be kept by licensee or by person or persons in his employment
within the State forest or timber reserve wherein the mill is situated.
3. Licensee shall forward half-yearly to the Minister a statutofy declaration of
the number of men employed by him under licenses in felling and transporting
timber for feeding his mill, and that no unlicensed men have been so employed by
him.
SCHEDULE XLII.
Conditions of License to Fell Eucalyptus Timbee in a State Foeest ok
Timbee Eeseeve foe Supply of Sawmill.
1. The fee shall be £5 per annum, payable quarterly in advance.
2. No live trees of less diameter than eighteen inches shall be felled.
3. No tree shall be felled so as to obstruct any track in use for transport of
timber or stores.
4. Within a period of one month from the felling of any tree, the portion thereof
not required for use shall be so disposed of by the licensee as not to encumber the
ground.
5. This license is personal, and must be produced by the holder thereof when
asked so to do by any bailiff of Crown lands or police constable.
6. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to cut
timber shall have been granted.
SCHEDULE XLIII.
Conditions of License to Cut, Split, and Take away Eucalyptus Timbee
OTHEE THAN EeD Gum OE lEONBAEK FEOM STATE FoEESTS AND TIMBER
Eeseeyes.
1. No live tree of less diameter than eighteen inches shall be cut down.
2. Not more than three trees shall be felled prior to the cutting and splitting up
of such trees.
3. No logs shall be cut for supply of sawmills.


4. No live tree shall be used merely foi* the purpose of obtaining bark there-
from.
5. No tree shall [be felled so as to obstruct any path in use for transport of
timber or stores.
6. Within the period of one month from the felling of any tree, the portion
thereof not required for slabs, palings, shingles, posts, rails, props, or manufac-
turing purposes shall be so disposed of by the licensee as not to encumber the
ground.
7. This license is personal, and must be produced by the holder thereof when asked
so to do by any bailiff of Crown lands or police constable.
8. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to cut
timber shall have been granted.
SCHEDULE XLIV.
Conditions op License to Cut, Split, and Take Away Red Gum Timber and
Ironbark from State Forests and Timber Reserves.
1. No live tree of less than eighteen inches diameter shall be cut down.
2. Not more than three trees shall be felled prior to the cutting and splitting up
of such trees.
3. No logs shall be cut for supply of sawmills.
4. No live tree shall be used merely for the purpose of obtaining bark therefrom.
5. No tree shall be felled so as to obstruct any path in use for transport of
timber or stores.
6. Within the period of one month from the felling of any tree, the portion
thereof not required for slabs, palings, shingles, posts, rails, props, or manufac-
turing purposes shall be disposed of by the licensee as not to encumber the
ground.
7. This license is personal, and must be produced by the holder thereof when
asked so to do by any bailiff of Crown lands or police constable.
8. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to cut
timber shall have been granted.
SCHEDULE XLY.
Conditions of License to Cut Eucalyptus Timber in a State Forest or
Timber Reserve for purposes other than Sawmill or Splitting.
1. Payment of fees shall be made by licensee in advance.
2. No tree of less than inches diameter at a height of two feet from the
ground shall be felled.
3. No tree shall be felled so as to obstruct any track in use for transport of
timber.
4. Trees shall only be felled in such forest or part thereof as described in license.
5. Every tree felled shall have the name or initials of the licensee legibly
marked thereon.
6. No greater number of trees shall be felled than are necessary for supply of
the quantity of timber specified in license.
7. The receipt for payment of fees shall be produced by the holder thereof when
required by any bailiff of Crown lands.
8. No timber shall be removed from the forest until it has been examined and
branded by the forester in charge.
SCHEDULE XLYI.
Conditions of License for Felling Undergrowth in State Forests and
Timber Reserves.
1. The license fee shall be payable in advance.
2. This license is available only for the locality specified therein.
3. No fern trees shall be taken up or removed.


4. No blackwood or beech that measures less than 4 feet circumference, no pine,
sassafras, or wattle that measures less than 3 feet circumference, and no other
tree that measures less than 2 feet circumference, shall be felled. The measure-
ment in each of the foregoing cases shall be taken at 18 inches from the ground.
5. No tree shall be felled at a greater height than 18 inches above the ground,
and no undergrowth at a greater height than 12 inches above the ground.
6. No tree or undergrowth shall be felled so as to obstruct any track in use for
the transport of timber or stores.
7. No tree shall be felled merely for the purpose of obtaining bark or firewood
therefrom.
8. Every log and every stack of timber or undergrowth shall have the name of
the licensee or owner legibly marked thereon.
9. The interest of the Crown in any timber, undergrowth, or bark felled or
procured under the provisions of this license shall not cease until, such timber,
undergrowth, or bark shall have been removed from the forest, and if any timber,
undergrowth, or bark felled or procured by the licensee be. transported or removed
by any other person, such other person also shall hold a similar license.
10. Timber or undergrowth felled and not removed during the currency or
within fourteen days of the expiry of this license shall be deemed to be the property
of the Crown.
11. If the licensee do any act which, if it were done without license, would be
punishable as trespass, if he fail to produce his license when asked so to do by
any forester, bailiff of Crown lands, or police constable, he shall be conclusively
deemed to be a person not licensed or otherwise authorized to do such act within
the meaning of the 110th section of The Land Act 1884.
12. This license may be transferred on payment of Five shillings at the office
where the license fee was paid.
13. This license shall be liable to revocation at any time without any liability
to satisfy any claim by the licensee for compensation.
14. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to
cut timber has been granted.
SCHEDULE XLVII.
Fee per quarter—£
Y.
R.
VICTORIA.
No.
Sec. No. 93 of The Land Act 1884, No. 812.
State Forests. —Timber Reserves.
Know all men that I, being in that behalf duly authorized by the Governor of the
colony of Victoria, do hereby, in pursuance of The Land Act 1884, give and grant
to of • ***
consideration of the payment of the sum of . . ’ and s ? b i e< ?f
to the fulfilment of the conditions printed or written on the back hereof, lull
license and authority to enter upon, on and after date hereof, and to occupy for
three months and no longer, the Crown lands described in the schedule hereto for
the following purpose, that is to say:


Schedule.
All these Crown lands, situate within the State Forest of
Timber reserve.
Licensing Agent.
Countersigned—
Issuer authorized by the Treasury
This license shall have no effect until countersigned by the Issuer authorized by
the Treasury.
N.B.—Be careful to observe that this license expires on the
day of 18 .
SCHEDULE XLVIII.
Conditions of License for Exclusive Bight to Cut Timber in State
Forests and Timber Beserves.|
1. No tree of less diameter than eighteen inches shall be felled.
2. No greater number of trees shall be felled than is required for the current
supply of the mill.
3. All trees felled and not delivered at the mill at the expiry of the license shall
revert to the Crown.
4. No tree on the block under license shall be used merely for the purpose of
obtaining bark therefrom.
5. The licensee shall protect saplings and young seedling indigenous trees, and
neither he nor any other person shall depasture goats on the block under license to
him, or cultivate any part of such block.
6. Within the period of one month from the felling of any tree, the portion
thereof not required for use shall be disposed of by the licensee as not to
encumber the ground.
7. The license fee, amounting to pounds shillings
and pence, shall be paid in advance on to the
Beceiver and Paymaster at or to any other officer who may
be authorized by the Board to collect the same.
8. The license shall be produced by the holder thereof when asked so to do by
any bailiff of Crown lands or police constable.
9. Non-compliance with or non-performance of any of the foregoing conditions
shall render this license null and void.
10. This license shall be in force for from the date hereof, and
no longer, and shall be renewable by endorsement of the Secretary of Agriculture.
SCHEDULE XLIX.
Form of Application for Besidence License within a State Forest.
In pursuance of The Land Act 1884, I, the undersigned, do hereby make appli-
cation for a license to occupy for residence purposes the land of which a plan,
description, and report are hereunder given. And I declare that such a plan,
description, and report have been furnished to me, at my request, by an authorized
surveyor.
Signature in full—
Occupation—
If owner of land in fee simple, state extent—
Address, post town—
Date—
To the Secretary for Agriculture, Melbourne.


Situation and Extent of Land
applied for.
Description.
County of
Parish'of
(
State Forest
Area a. r. p.
* >
SCHEDULE L.
Residence License.
Know all men that I, the Governor of Victoria, in pursuance of the provisions of
The Land Act 1884, and in consideration of the sum of Five shillings to be paid by
of to the Receiver and Paymaster
a f or other officer authorized to receive the same, and
subject to the terms and conditions hereunder specified, do hereby, give to the
said full license and authority to reside on or to cultivate all that
piece or parcel of Crown land situated in State forest more particularly
described in the schedule hereto, for one year from the date hereof, unless the same
be annulled or revoked, in accordance with the conditions hereunder specified.
Dated this day of a.d. 18
Schedule.
acres roods perches
Allotment section parish
county
Conditions of Residence Licenses. —State Forests.
1. This license only gives to the licensee the right to use the land for the purposes
for which the license has been granted, and for no other purpose whatever.
2. The licensee may sublet any part of the land in respect of which this license
is issued, but shall not, without the consent of the Minister first had and. obtained,
assign such land or any part thereof, or part with the possession thereof or his interest
therein.
3. If in the opinion of the Minister the land in respect of which this license is
issued, or any part thereof, be required for railways, roads, telegraph lines, dams,
reservoirs, races, catchwater drains, pipe tracks, stone quarries, or any other public
purpose, the Governor, upon payment to the licensee of such compensation (if any) as
the Minister may think fit, may at any time during the currency of the license resume
the whole or any part of such land, and thereupon the license shall cease as to such
land or the part resumed.
4. Any person may at any time, with the written permission of the Minister,
enter for the purpose of mining and mine for gold, silver, tin, copper,, iron, or the
ores thereof, or for auriferous earth, or for coal or lignite, upon the land m respect of
which this license is issued, or such part thereof as the Minister may by such writing
allow, making such compensation to the licensee for the improvements (if any)
effected thereon and for the license and other fees paid in respect thereof as may be
agreed upon between him and such licensee, or in the event of a disagreement as may
be determined by the arbitration of three indifferent persons or any two of them,
one arbitrator to be appointed by the licensee, one by the Minister, and one by the
person to whom the permission to mine has been granted, the form of submission to


arbitration to be determined by the Governor in Council in case of any differences ;
and if the licensee obstruct any such person so entering or mining as aforesaid, the
Governor may revoke his license.
5. In case the licensee obstruct any holder of a miners’ right 30 entering or mining
as aforesaid, this license may be revoked.
6. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to declare
that the Governor has annulled or revoked this license shall be conclusive evidence
that the license was annulled or revoked.
SCHEDULE LI.
Form op Endorsement on Issue of New License for Residence within a
State Forest under Section 87, “Land Act 1884.”
His Excellency the Governor has granted a new license to the person and for the
land and subject to the conditions described in the document to which this is
affixed, for one year ending 18 and no longer (see Government
Gazette dated 18 page ), and the sum of pounds
shillings and pence has been received as fees for the same.
A separate receipt for this amount has also been given.
Dated at this day of 18
Receiver of Revenue.
SCHEDULE LII.
Application for a Lease of Land under Part VIII. of “The
Land Act 1884.”
In pursuance of The Land Act 1884 the undersigned, do hereby
make application for a lease of the undermentioned land for the purposes and period
set forth herein.
Signature in full—
Address, post town—
Date—
The Honourable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
Particulars of Laud and period
of Lease applied for.
Particulars of proposed Works,
and estimated Cost of the same.
♦Technical Description of the
boundaries of Land applied
for.
County of
1
Authorized Surveyor.
Parish of
Area a. r. p.
Period of lease— years.
* This must be supplied and signed by an authorized surveyor. Names and addresses of
authorized surveyors may be ascertained at the Crown Lands Office, Melbourne, or at any of
the District Land or Survey Offices.


SCHEDULE LIU.
Conditions of License foe Felling Eucalyptus Timber except Red Gum
AND IRONBARK.
1. That payment of the license fee be made by the licensee in advance at the
commencement of each quarter. - . . ,
9 Nn timber shall be cut or taken away with the exception of gum (no
including red gum and ironbark), stringybark, box, messmate, or o er 1
eucalyptus.
3. Rot more than three trees shall be felled before they are cut up.
from the place wherein it has been cut to the nearest mam road.
5. Licenses shall be liable to revocation at. any time ’akUicfnsees for compen-
Works without any liability to satisfy any claim by
S& T This license is personal, and must be produced by the licensee upon the
request of any bailiff of Crown lands or of any police constable. .
7. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to cut
timber shall have been granted.
8. Timber cut under this license shall not be removed to a sawmill escept on
a licensed linker or log carriage.
9. No tree shall be felled merely for the purpose of obtaining bark there rom.
(If license is issued for the cutting of timber on a Mallee block or allotmen
the following condition shall apply):
in Within the period of one month from the felling of any tree, the portion
ground.
SCHEDULE LIV.
Conditions of License foe Felling Red Gum and leonbaek Timber.
1. That payment of fee shall be made by licensee in advance. _
2. No timber shall be cut or taken away with the exception of red gum, iron ar ,
or other kinds of eucalyptus.
8. Not more than three trees shall be felled before they are cut up.
4 One nerson only shall cut or take away timber under this license, and
interest ofVe State in such timber shall not cease until it has been transpo
from the place wherein it has been cut to the nearest main roac.
5. This license shall be liable to revocation at any time by the:Boiof Land
and Works without any liability to satisfy any claims y
compensation.
6. This license is personal, and must be produced by the licensee upon
request of any bailiff of Crown lands or any police constable.
7. This license is not available for any area over which an exclusive right to cut
timber shall have been granted.
8. Timber cut under this license shall not be removed to a sawmill except on a
licensed jinker or log carriage.
9. No tree shall be felled merely for the purpose of obtaining bark therefrom.


Victoria.
Fee £1 10s. No
Sec. No. 93, Land Act 1884,
No. .
Wattle-Bark License.
Department of Lands
and Survey,
lB
Name of licensee „
Address
Schedule of Crown Lands for which
this license is not available.
Not available for State Forests
or Timber Reserves, or within one
mile of Port Phillip Bay or its
arms.
This lieense expires on the 15th
day of January, 18
SCHEDULE LV.
Fee £1 10s. Victoria. No
V.
R.
Sec. No. 93, Land Act 1884, No.
WATTLE-BARK LICENSE.
Department of Lands and Survey,
.’ 18
Know all men that I, being in that behalf duly
authorized by the Governor of the Colony of Victoria,
do hereby, in pursuance of the provisions of The Land
Act 1884, give to of
in consideration of the payment of the sum of One
pound ten shillings, and subject to the fulfilment of the
conditions printed or written on the back hereof,* full
license and authority, for a term of four months com-
mencing on the 15th day of September, 18 , and
ending on the 15th day of January next following, to
fell Wattle trees for the purpose of obtaining bark
therefrom, on the Crown lands within the
Survey District, except the Crown lands mentioned in
the schedule hereto.
Schedule of Crown Lands for which this license is not
available .f
Not available for State Forests or Timber Reserves, or
within one mile of Port Phillip Bay or its arms,
f This schedule will vary with the district.
Licensing Agent.
Countersigned
Issuer authorized by the Treasury.
This license shall have no effect until countersigned by
the Issuer authorized by the Treasury.
N.B. —Be carejul to observe that this license expires on the
15 th day of January , 18
Victoria.
1 Fee £1 10s. jy 0
1 Sec. 93, Land Act 1884, No.
!
Wattle-Bark License.
I
I
I
I
| Department of Lands and Survey,
j 18
: do hereby notify that a
license to strip Wattle-bark on Crown lands
within the Survey District, except
on the lands mentioned in the schedule hereto,
has been granted this day to
°f": The license has been issued
subject to the fulfilment of the conditions
printed or written on the back hereof ,* and will
expire on the 15th day of January next.
Schedule of Crown Lands for which the license
is not available.
Not available for State Forests or Timber
Reserves, or within one mile of Tort Phillip
Bay or its arms.
Signature
Issuer.
N.B. This notification must be forwarded to the
semor Crown lands bailiff of the district upon
the date of the issue of the license.
* See following page.


* Conditions.
1. The license fee shall be payable in advance.
2. This license is available only for the survey district specified therein.
3. No tree of less than five inches in diameter, when of the black or feather-leaf
species, nor less than four inches when of the golden or broad-leaf species, shall be
stripped of its bark. The measurement in each of the foregoing cases shall be
taken at two feet from the ground.
4. No bark shall be stripped from a tree until after the same has been felled.
5. No tree shall be felled at a greater height than two feet from the ground.
6. The licensee will be required to thoroughly strip the bark from the trunk and
branches of every tree felled, and to complete the stripping of one tree before com-
mencing to fell another.
7. No tree shall be felled so as to obstruct any track.
8. The licensee only shall strip bark under the authority of this license, and if
any bark stripped by him be transported from Crown lands by any other person,
such other person also shall hold a similar license.
9. All bark stripped under the provisions of this license shall remain the property
of the Crown until the same shall have been removed from Crown lands.
10. This license is personal, and must be produced by the holder thereof when
asked so to do by any Crown lands bailiff or other officer appointed to enforce the
regulations under which the same is issued.
11. If the licensee shall strip or remove bark from, any tree on any Crown lands
except in accordance with the conditions of this license, he shall be deemed to
have stripped or removed bark without a license, and, on conviction theieof, under
the provisions of The Land Act 1884, this license for the season during which such
conviction may have been made shall, from and after the date of such conviction,
become void and of no effect, nor shall any fresh license be granted to him during
such season.
12. This license shall have no force or effect except within the survey district
and during the season for which the same has been granted, nor shall it be of any
force or effect within any reserve specially made and proclaimed under the pro-
visions of The land Act 1884 for the preservation and growth of wattle trees.


SCHEDULE LYI.
Section 93. —Miscellaneous Licenses.
Licenses which confer the exclusive right to enter on Crown lands.
Purpose o f License
Fee to be paid.
Eight to be conferred by License.
For obtaining
and removing
guano
Not less than £10
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding six
acres in extent in a position approved by the
Minister.
For obtaining
and removing
stone
Not less than £10
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance, according
•to area and posi-
tion of land and
value of the stone
Within Sandhurst
Land Officer's dis-
trict.— Not less
than £4 per annum,
payable quarterly
in advance, accord-
ing to the area and
position of the
land and the value
of the stone
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding two
acres in extent in a position approved by the
Minister, and subject to the following condi-
tions :—
Enclosure of site by a substantial
three-rail fence, not removable by the
licensee at the termination of his
tenure thereof, but to belong to the
Crown.
If the site abut on a public road, the
slope of excavation from edge of the
road to the bottom of the quarry
must not be steeper than 1 to 1.
For obtaining
lime-stone and
erecting lime-
kilns
Not less than £25
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance; if kiln
site is a separate
site, £2 per annum
extfa for it
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding
three acres in extent in a position approved
by the Minister. Wood for fuel for the kilns
shall not be obtained on Crown lands unless
a “Timber license” be taken out by each
person employed by the licensee to procure
the wood.
For obtaining
brick-earth and
erecting brick-
kilns
Not less than £10
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding
three acres in extent in a position approved
by the Minister, and subject to the condition
that the site be enclosed by a substantial
three-railed fence, not. removable by the
licensee at the termination of his tenure of
the site. Trees on such site may be cut down
and made use of for the kilns by the licensee ;
but no wood beyond the boundaries of the
site shall be removed from Crown lands for
use at the brick-kilns unless a “Timber
license” be taken out by each person em-
ployed by the licensee in procuring wood.
For slaughter-
houses
Not less than £10
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding three
acres in extent in a position approved by the
Minister.
For building or
repairing ships
or boats
For landing-
places, or for
depositing ma-
terials
For a factory ...
To be fixed by the
Minister
Ditto ditto
Ditto ditto
■
Do enter upon Crown lands not exceeding three
acres in extent in a position approved by the
Minister.
To enter on Crown lands not exceeding three
acres in extent in a position approved by
the Minister.
Wood for a factory, tannery, or for a saw-
mill, or for a paper-mill, shall not be cut
from Crown lands beyond the boundaries of
the site specified in the license, unless a
“ Timber license ” be taken out by each
person employed by the licensee in cutting
and taking away wood for such mill.
For a tannery ...
For a paper-mil]
Ditto ditto
Ditto ditto


Purpose of License
Pee to be paid.
Eight to be conferred by License.
For erection of
£5 to £10 per annum,
To enter upon Crown lands the position and
pumps
payable quarterly
in advance
area of which to be approved by the Minister.
For working
Not less than £10
To enter upon Crown lands the position and
mineral springs
per annum, pay-
able quarterly in
advance
extent of which to be determined by the
Minister.
For bathing-
To be fixed in each
To enter upon Crown lands the position and
places, or for
boat-jetties
case by the Minis-
extent of which to be approved by the
ter. But when the
bathing-place or
boat-jetty is in
front of the pur-
chased land of the
licensee, a fee of
Is. per annum
Minister.
For the manu-
Not less than £5 per
To enter upon Crown lands the position and
.facture of salt
annum, payable
quarterly in ad-
vance
extent of which to be approved by the
Minister.
For an inn, store,
Not less than £5 per
To enter upon Crown lands in a position
smithy, bakery,
or similar build-
ing in a thinly-
populated dis-
trict
annum, ditto, ditto
approved by the Minister. The Crown lands
to be so entered upon, when comprised in
surveyed allotments, must be situated on the
road frontage of such allotments.
For sites for toll
Not less than £10,
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding
or punt houses
ditto
three acres in extent in a position approved
by the Minister.
For fishermen’s
£2 per annum if the
To enter upon unreserved Crown lands not ex-
residences
site be within seven
miles of the G-ene-
ral Post Office,
Melbourne; £1,
ditto, ditto, if the
site be beyond that
distance and with-
in a town, village,
or borough ; 10s. if
the site be from
seven miles to
thirty miles from
Melbourne and not
in a town, village,
or borough; and
5s. if the site be
more than thirty
miles from Mel-
bourne and not in
a town, village, or
borough
To be fixed by the
ceeding in extent twenty perches in a position
approved by the Minister, with use of ad-
jacent unappropriated Crown lands for dry-
ing nets. The licensee to have the use of
adjacent unappropriated Crown lands for
drying nets, and to take dead wood for fuel
for domestic purposes.
For licenses to
To protect the public reserve for the purposes
protect present
reserves
Minister
for which it may be reserved, and consist-
ently with the preservation of the public
rights thereupon to make such use of it as
may be described in the license.
For gardens
Ditto ditto
To occupy Crown lands not exceeding in area
three acres, for residence and garden pur-
poses only.
For collecting
£12 per annum, pay-
To enter upon Crown lands not exceeding in
ballast
able quarterly in
advance
extent one rood in a position approved by
the Minister.
For any other
To be fixed by the
For such purposes and at such places as shall
purpose not in-
cluded in above
Minister
be approved by the Minister and inserted in
such license.


SCHEDULE LVII.
Licenses which do not confer any Exclusive Right to enter on Crown Lands.
Purpose of License
Fee to be paid.
Eight to be conferred by License.
For removal of
5s. per
week, pay-
To enter upon such Crown lands as may be
stone
able in advance
allowed by the Minister to be made use of
Within city of Sand-
for the purpose of taking away stone there-
" %
hurst and borough
from, which must not be excavated to a
of Eaglehawk, £1
greater depth than twenty inches below the
per quarter, pay-
natural surface of the ground ; and no blast-
able in advance
ing operations shall be permitted under this
license, which is available for one person
only using one cart.
For removal of
Is. perlload
1. No sand shall be removed under any pre-
sand from un-
tence for purposes of reclamation or filling
appropriated
up.
Crown lands
2. Sand for building purposes may be removed
within Sand-
only from within the bounds of the ground
ridge Bend
specially set apart for that purpose.
3. The removal of sand is prohibited except
between the hours of 7 a.m. and 4 p.m.
4. Every person removing sand for building
purposes shall pay to the Crown lands bailiff
in charge of the site set apart for obtaining
such sand the sum of One shilling in respect
of each load of sand to be removed by him,
and shall receive from such bailiff a printed
permit for the same, which, on leaving with
his load, he shall deliver to the Crown lands
bailiff for cancellation.
5. Any person found removing sand without a
permit from the ground set apart for sand-
carters, and all persons found removing sand
from the unappropriated Crown lands at
Sandridge Bend beyond those bounds, with
or without a permit, shall be summoned by
any Crown lands bailiff or police constable
to appear before justices of the peace to
answer for such offence.
For digging and
5s. per
week, pay-
To enter upon such Crown lands as may be
taking away—
able in advance
allowed by the Minister to be made use of
Sand
for this purpose. Such license available for
one person only using one cart.
Salt
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
Loam
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
fBut if the
shells or
seaweed be
But the license shall be null and void
requiredfor
if the licensee traffic in any way with
purposes of
the shell or seweed dug or taken
Shells
Do., do.
manure on
Ditto, away under the provisions of the
Seaweed ...
Do., do. |
the licen-
'Ditto, license, or dispose of such shell or
see’s own
seaweed in any way other than as
land only,
manure upon the licensee’s own land
license fee
only.
to be Is.
per anuum
G-ravel
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
For any other
To be fixed by the
To be stated in license.
purpose
Minister


Conditions of above Licenses.
permitconditions of such licenses shall be as follows, so far as circumstances will
a. That payment of the fee shall be made by the licensee in advance.
b. The license shall be available for one person and one dray only, and shall be
produced by the licensee upon the request of any bailiff of Crown lands or
police constable.
c. The license shall be liable to revocation at any time by the Minister, without
any liability to satisfy any claim by the said licensee for compensation.
d. If the license be for the purpose of obtaining shell or seaweed, then it is
issued to the licensee subject to the provision that the license shall be null
n void it the licensee traffic in any way with the shell or seaweed dug or
a en away under the provisions of the license or dispose of such shell or
seaweed m any way other than as manure upon the licensee’s own land only.
e ‘ k. e f°, r .^ le purpose of obtaining and removing surface stone,
and specified in the license shall not be excavated to a greater depth
tnan twenty inches below the natural surface of the ground, and no blasting
operations will be permitted.
SCHEDULE LVIII.
The . hereby make application for a license, under
rWwwi 1884, to oecu Py the land marked out by me, and hereunder
described, for the purpose of
request that (if necessary) an authorized surveyor be instructed to make a
oairiQ f ° r 1 I ? e ° n m y account of the said allotment, and to supply a plan of
’ an , undertake to pay all duly authorized fees for the making of the said
La !!!’ ?}' or an y modification thereof; and if the issue of such license
1: f e ln ., e Government Gazette as approved, I hereby agree to accept such
nil liAAr. 101 ? j s P ec rded in such notification as the date thereof, and to pay
® cue or may become due with respect to such license or with
t 1S m y application therefor, and to accept a license subject to the
’ venants, and conditions which may be lawfully imposed.
Signature of applicant—
Occupation—
Address—
Date of signature—
Situation and Extent of Land
applied for.
Description of the Land, containing the lengths and bearings
of the boundary lines and their connexion with a fixed
point in a Government Survey, as shown on plan accom-
panying this application. »
•


SCHEDULE LlX.— License under 1 Div. s. 4. Miscellaneous Licenses.
Corr. No. Number of License—
Fee per annum, £
payable as follows :
V.
R.
VICTORIA.
Schedule of Payments.
This number should be quoted in
any correspondence relating to
this license.
On delivery of this
license
£
s.
d.
Initials of
Receiver.
Date of Rec’pt
On 1st April, 188
On 1st July, 188
On 1st October, 188 ...
Department of Lands
and Survey
(Occupation Branch),
Melbourne, 188
"When making- the last payment the licensee must state whether he
wishes the license renewed, and for what period.
Section 93 op “The Land Act 1884.”
This license, together with the receipt for the current quarter’s fee, must he produced at
all times when demanded, and must he produced to the Receiver whenever money is
being tendered on account hereof.
Know all men that I, the undersigned, being in that behalf duly authorized by
the G-overnor of the Colony of Yictoria, do hereby, in pursuance of The Land Act
1884, give and grant to of in consideration of the
payment of the annual sum of pounds
shillings pence, in instalments as specified in the schedule prefixed
hereto in advance, to the Receiver of Revenue at subject to the fulfil-
ment of the conditions printed or written on the back hereof, full license and
authority to enter upon on and after date hereof, and to occupy until
and no longer, the Crown lands more particularly described or delineated
in the schedule hereto, for the following purpose, that is to say :
Schedule.
Description.
Diagram.
Number of Office Plan—
All the Crown lands situate at
in the parish of containing
acres roods
perches, or thereabouts, as per
diagram annexed, subject to any modifi-
cation of boundaries of the site that may
be deemed necessary at any time during
the currency of this license.
Signature—
N.B.—Be careful to observe that this license expires on
day of 188
If a renewal is desired, the licensee should signify the same when making the last
payment hereon.
Conditions under which this License is Issued.
1. The land specified in this license shall be used solely for the purpose for which
it is granted, and shall not be sublet.
2. This license shall be produced by the licensee upon the request of any bailiff of
Crown lands or police constable.
3. When the holder of the license does any act which if it were done without license
would be punishable as trespass, if he fail to produce his license when asked so to do
by any bailiff of Crown lands or any police constable, he shall be conclusively deemed


to be a person not licensed or otherwise authorized to do such act within the meaning
of the 110th section of The Land Act 1884.
4. The non-compliance with or the non-performance of any of the obligations specified
in this license shall render this license null and void, and the Minister may thereupon
cause the land to be re-entered upon in respect to which this license has been granted,
and deal therewith as unoccupied Crown land.
5. If, during the period for which this license is issued the Governor shall deem the
resumption of the whole or any part of the land described in this license necessary for
public purposes, the Governor shall have power to resume possession of the land, or of
part thereof, without giving compensation to the licensee for so doing, after the
licensee shall have been served with a notice under the seal of the Board of Land and
Works of the intention to resume possession of the land, or of part thereof, three
months after date of such notice.
6. In all proceedings for any alleged breach of the conditions of this license, or of
the regulations under which it is issued, the burthen of proof of compliance therewith
shall rest with the licensee.
7. Subject also to the conditions in the several cases hereunder specified, and to the
special conditions (if any) prescribed by the Minister and written at the foot hereof.
Conditions in Cektain Cases.
If the license he for obtain-
ing and removing stone of
any description, and brick
or other earth
If the license be for fisher-
men’s residences
If the license be for brick-
kilns
If the license be for lime-
kilns
If the license be for a tan-
nery, factory, saw-mill, or
paper-mill
If the license be for a site
for a saw-mill in a State
forest
If the license be for obtain-
ing and removing surface
stone, at the rate of £3
per quarter
If the license be for a site
for a rural inn
The site herein licensed must be enclosed by a substan"
tial three-rail fence, not removable by the licensee at
the termination of his tenure hereof, but to belong to
the Crown.
If the site abut on a public road, the slope of excavation
from edge of the road to the bottom of the quarry
must not be steeper than Ito 1. Ground must not be
broken within 6 feet of road.
The licensee herein mentioned is permitted the use of
adjacent unappropriated Crown lands for drying nets
and to take dead wood for fuel for domestic use.
The site to be enclosed by a substantial three-railed fence,
not removable by the licensee at the termination of
his tenure of the site. Trees on such site may be cut
down and made use of for the kilns by the licensee,
but no wood beyond the boundaries of the site shall
be removed from Crown lands for use at the brick-
kilns unless a “timber license” be taken out by each
person employed by the licensee in procuring wood.
Wood for fuel for the kilns shall not be obtained on
Crown lands unless a “ timber license” be taken out by
each person employed by the licensee to procure the
wood.
Wood shall not be cut from Crown lands beyond the
boundaries of the site specified in this license, unless
a “ timber license” be taken out by each person em-
ployed by the licensee in cutting and taking away
wood for the use of the mill herein licensed.
No buildings shall be erected outside of the boundaries
of the site. No goats shall be kept by licensee or by
persons in his employment in the reserve wherein the
mill-site is situated. Licensees shall forward, when
called upon, to the Minister a statutory declaration
of the number of men engaged under licenses in felling
and transporting timber for feeding mill, and that no
unlicensed men have been so employed.
The land specified in the license shall not be excavated
to a greater depth than twenty inches below the
natural surface of the ground, and no blasting opera-
tions will be permitted.
This license only confers the right to occupy the land
as a site for a rural inn. Fermented or spirituous
liquors can only be sold thereat under the usual
publican’s license authorized by the licensing bench of
magistrates


Special Condition.
SCHEDULE LX.
Fee per
V.
E.
No.
VICTORIA.
Sec. No. 93 of The Zand Act 1884, No. 812.
Department of Lands and Survey,
188
Know all men that I, being in that behalf duly authorized by the Governor of
the colony of Victoria, do hereby, in pursuance of The Land Act 1884, give and
grant to of in consideration of the payment of the sum
of and subject to the fulfilment of the conditions printed or written
on the back hereof, full license and authority to enter upon, on and after the date
hereof, for and no longer, the Crown lands described in the schedule
hereto for the following purpose, that is to say :
To obtain and remove therefrom.
Schedule.
All these Crown lands,
Countersigned,
Issuer authorized by the Treasury. Licensing Agent.
This license shall have no effect until countersigned by the issuer authorized by
the Treasury.
N.B.—Be careful to observe that this license expires on the day of 188 .
SCHEDULE LXI.
Conditions of License for Lime Sites north of and adjoining the
Botanical Gardens at Geelong.
1. The portion of surface soil required to be removed shall be carefully preserved
and shall be placed apart by itself within the boundaries of the site, and all waste
soil and debris shall be deposited in such places as may be directed by the Town
Surveyor of Geelong.
2. The road may be diverted for the purpose of quarrying for limestone and
relaid with the concurrence and under the direction of the Town Surveyor afore-
said.
3. TCiln sites can only be obtained east of those now under license.
4. Quarrying operations shall not be carried on within the boundaries of the
land under license in such a manner as will in the opinion of the Town Surveyor
endanger the public safety.
5. Quarrying or other operations by the licensee must not in any way interfere
with or obstruct the public safety.
6. The licensee shall, within one month, commence to quarry the limestone on
the site for which he shall hold a license, and convert the limestone so raised into
good marketable lime, and shall, at the expiration of three months from the date


of his license, and during each and every week thereafter, while his license or any
renewal thereof is in force, make and produce from the stone so quarried 900 bags
(if required) of good marketable roche lime per week from each site; provided
that there shall always be on hand at the kiln ready for sale to the public, in the
order in which applications may be made or lodged, not less than 500 bags of
such lime to supply the demands of the public.
7. That each bag of lime shall contain not less than three bushels of well-burned,
screened, marketable lime ; and not more than two shillings and threepence per
bag shall be charged if delivery be required at the kiln, or into boats as is now the
practice in connexion with the Limeburners’ Company at Geelong; and three
shillings per bag if delivery be required at the wharf in Melbourne. The bags
shall be the property of the licensee, who will be entitled to charge one shilling
per bag, which amount will be refunded, provided the bags be returned in good
order within ten days.
8. That if at anytime during the currency of a license, or of any renewal thereof,
the licensee has not worked and is not working the lime site fully and fairly
according to his license, or has wilfully failed and neglected to have on hand at
the kilns not less than 500 bags of lime to supply the requirements of the public
as aforesaid, or that the lime prepared by the licensee is not good marketable
roche lime, pure in quality, and that the bags do not contain three bushels of lime
as aforesaid, due allowance being made for waste by transit to Melbourne, or that
more has been demanded for each bag of lime than two shillings and threepence
or three shillings at the respective places of delivery as aforesaid; then and in
such case, after the licensee shall have had an opportunity of showing cause
against such forfeiture, in the manner provided by the 125th section of The Land
Act 1884, the license may be forfeited, and thereupon all moneys previously paid
by the licensee, together with all erections, improvements, plant, and materials
then on the lands mentioned in such license, shall become and be the property of
the Board of Land and Works; and the production of a copy of the Government
Gazette containing a notice, purporting to be signed by the Minister of Lands, of
the forfeiture of the license shall be conclusive evidence that such license has been
lawfully determined and annulled.
SCHEDULE LXII.
Foem op Application foe a License undeb the 96th oe 97th Section op
“The Land Act 1884.”
Name, Address,
and Occupation of
Applicant and
every Proprietor
and Occupier.
Position and
Extent of Land
applied for,
and term (not
exceeding 15 years).
Report by Authorized Surveyor on
the discharge of the stream or
other source whence it is pro-
posed to divert water, and on the
maximum quantity of water per
diem proposed to be so diverted.
Report by
Land Officer.
Authorized Surveyor.
Land Officer.
To the Minister of Lands, Melbourne.
SCHEDULE LXIII.
Foem op License for Watee Easements.
Know all men by these presents that, in pursuance of The Land Act 1884, the
Board of Land and Works doth grant to of license to cut
and construct [or to deepen, widen, clean, repair, and otherwise improve, or to take


water from] a race, drain, dam, or reservoir in and upon the lands described in the
schedule hereto, subject to the provisions of The Land Act 1884, it shall be lawful
for the said by the authority of this license, to enter for the
purpose herein expressed, but for none other, upon the said land, compensation for
any damage occasioned by such entry having, before the issue of this license, been
determined by arbitration, in the manner determined by the Regulations made by
the Governor in pursuance of The Land Act 1884 and paid by the said
to or to the use of the parties entitled thereto, to hold the same for the term of
years.
Schedule.
The Common Seal of the Board of Land and Works was hereunto affixed on the
day of 188 in the presence of the under-
signed two members of the said Board.
President.
Member.
SCHEDULE LXIV.
Form of Notice of Application fob License under Section 97 of
“The Land Act 1884.”
I*] I, the undersigned, hereby give notice that I intend to apply to the Board of Land
and Works for a license, under the 97th section of The Land Act 1884, to cut a race
on the Crown lands defined by this and the adjoining posts, containing
more or less.
Length of proposed race—
Extent of land proposed to be used—
Quantity of water proposed to be diverted per diem—
Signature—
Occupation—
Date— Address—
SCHEDULE LXV.
Form of License for a Water Race.
Know all men that I, the Governor of Victoria, by and with the advice of the
Executive Council, and in exercise of the authority in this behalf given by the 97th
section of The Land Act 1884, in consideration of the rent reserved in the con-
ditions hereto and of such conditions, do hereby grant, for the term of
years from the day of the date hereof, to , of , full
license and liberty (except as against Her Majesty, the Governor or Administrator
of the Government of Victoria, or the Board of Land and Works) to enter upon
the Crown lands specified in the schedule hereto, and through and upon the same
to cut and construct and to use a race, and to take or divert water from the springs,
lakes, pools, or streams situated or flowing upon or through or bounded by
such lands for the purpose of in
manner prescribed hereby, and subject to the conditions hereto and to the regula-
lation for the time being in force relating to licenses of the like kind; but it shall
be lawful for the said to take or divert water only to the same
extent but no greater than he might do if he were owner of the aforesaid Crown
lands.


Conditions.
1. The rent shall be the sum of yearly, payable in advance
quarterly on the day of , the day of , the
day of , and the day of in each year, the first of such
quarterly payments to be made on the day of the date hereof ; and if and whenever
any part of the said rent shall be in arrear for six days, whether the same shall have
been demanded or not, it shall be lawful for the G-overnor or Administrator of the
Government of Yictoria by any person authorized in that behalf or for any Crown
lands bailiff to seize and distrain all chattels and effects in or about the said land
and its appurtenances, and every distress then made to sell and dispose of as
landlords may do for rent in arrear, and out of such distress or the moneys produced
by the sale thereof to retain the rent then due and all expenses incurred in or about
the said distress or in consequence of the non-payment of the said rent.
2. The water which shall be taken or diverted under the foregoing license to be used
for the purpose of , and for no other use or purpose
whatsoever.
3 If and whenever any part of the said rents shall be in arrear for six days,
whether the same shall have been demanded or not, or if and whenever there shall be
a breach of any of the conditions hereby prescribed or hereinbefore contained, or of the
regulations for the time being in force relating to licenses of the like kind, it shall be
lawful for the Governor or Administrator of the Government of Victoria to forfeit this
license and thereupon any person authorized in this behalf or any Crown lands bailiff
may re-enter upon any part of the lands in the schedule hereto, or of the works
constructed under the liberties hereinbefore contained, in the name of the whole ; and
thereupon the said term of years and the license and liberty hereinbefore
contained shall absolutely determine.
Dated the day of 188 .
(L.s.;
Schedule.


PART IX.
COMMONS.
THE ACT.
* Common Lands.
98. All commons heretofore or hereafter to he proclaimed shall subject to
the provisions of this Act be dealt with in the same manner as the other
portions of the areas of which they are respectively described in the Second
Schedule hereto (see end of book) to form a portion are dealt with.
Saving of existing Commons.
99. Nothing in this Act contained shall affect, except so far as may he
expressly provided herein, any commons proclaimed under the Act No.
CXVII., “ The Land Act 1862,” or “ The Amending Land Act 1865,” or
“ The Land Act 1869,” or the rights of any person entitled to common-
age under the authority of any of the said Acts to depasture cattle upon
any common from and after the passing of this Act.
Governor in Council may proclaim Commons.
100. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time and from
time to time under regulations to be made for such purpose to proclaim any
Crown lands as a common and place it under the management of any
borough or shire council or mining board, or any person or persons or any
two or more of the said councils boards or persons, and direct the manner
in which the fees shall be imposed paid collected and recovered for
depasturing thereon and how such fees shall be disposed of, and at any
time to alter add to diminish revoke or abolish such common or unite two
or more commons, or to add to such common any selection which may have
been taken up within the area of such common and subsequently aban-
doned. The managers of any common may sue and be sued in the name of
the managers of such common as though they were a corporation.
Governor in Council to frame Regulations.
101. The Governor in Council may appoint managers and frame regula-
tions for the management of any commons heretofore proclaimed or hereafter
to be proclaimed, for the eradication of thistles Bathurst burr wild briar
and gorse and destruction of vermin therefrom, and for defining the duties
rights powers and privileges of the managers of and the persons entitled to


the commons respectively, and for prescribing the penalties not exceed g
Twenty pounds for breach of such regulations and the mode of recovery ot
the same. Provided that all managers of commons shall retire from oflice
on the thirty-first day of December in each and every year.
Powers of Managers of Commons.
102 All commons proclaimed previous to the passing of or under this
Act mav be governed by managers appointed as herein provided ; and such
managers shall during their continuance in office have power to distrain any
cattle and swine trespassing on such common, and shall be taken tote
occupiers of the common within the meaning of any Act now or hereafter
in force relating to the impounding of cattle, and shall be deemed to be
owners within the meaning of “ The Rabbit Suppression Act 1880, or of
any Act amending the same, and shall be taken to have m respect of such
common the same power of preventing encroachment and trespass tlhereon
as any bailiff lawfully appointed may by law exercise m respect of any lands
of his employer. Provided that such managers shall not have or exercise
anv of the rights or powers hereinbefore mentioned in respect to any site
that may be occupied within the limit of the common under any lease or
license granted or issued under the provisions of either of the Acts hereby
repealed or of the provisions hereinbefore contained in this Act or in respect
to any timber stone loam clay sand brick and other earth within the limits
of the common
Governor in Council may decrease or diminish Commons.
103 The Governor in Council may from time to time increase and after
one month's notice in the Government Gazette diminish alter or abolish
any common heretofore or hereafter to be proclaimed or reproclaimed, and
mav from time to time reproclaim the whole or any part of any such
common for any of the purposes and subject to the provisions of this Act;
and nothing herein contained shall prevent the exercise of the powers con-
ferred by this Act with respect to the leasing or licensing any land com-
prised in any common.
Lands taken from Commons.
104. When a common is diminished altered or abolished by the Governor
in Council under the provisions of this Act the lands so ceasing to be or to
be included in a common may be disposed of in any manner authorized
under whichever of the Parts of this Act dealing with the class of lands m
■which such land is included.


REGULATIONS UNDER PART IX.
Of Commons.
(Part IX., Land Act 1884.)
1. Every farmers’ common and every town common proclaimed
previously to the passing of The Land Act 1884, or hereafter to be
proclaimed under the said Act, and every temporary and farmers common
proclaimed under the 66th section of The Land Act 1862, shall be managed
by the members for the time being of the council of the shire within the
boundaries of which any such common is included.
2. The council of the shire within the boundaries of which any common
heretofore proclaimed or hereafter to be proclaimed under the provisions of
The Land Act 1884 is wholly included shall be the managers of such
common. . ...
3. In all cases in which a common proclaimed as hereinbefore provided
shall be situate partly within any shire, or partly within two or more
shires, the council of the shire within the boundaries of which the largest
extent of such common shall be included shall be the managers of such
common. ,
4. Every goldfield common proclaimed as above shall be managed by the
members for the time being of the mining board of the mining district
within the boundaries of which such common is included, unless, owing te
the distance of any goldfield common from the office or place of meeting of
any mining board, such common can be more conveniently or efficiently
managed by other persons whom the Minister may appoint.
5. Every borough common proclaimed previously to The Land Act 1884,
or hereafter to be proclaimed under the said Act, shall be managed by the
members for the time being of the council of the borough in connextion
with which such common was proclaimed. _
6. All commons amalgamated previously to the passing of The lMnd Act
1884, or to be hereafter amalgamated, may be managed by the members tor
the time being of two or more of the before-mentioned councils or boards.
The Governor in Council may, however, place an amalgamated common
under the management of one only of the before-mentioned councils or
boards, or under management of delegates from each council of board..
7. The managers of commons wholly or partially comprised within cities,
towns, boroughs, or townships, and of goldfields commons proclaimed
under the-Act No. 117 or Ho. 145, may grant to butchers or to slaughter-
men special licenses to depasture, for such periods of time as may be
agreed on, cattle intended for slaughter, subject to the condition that the
fees shall not be at a proportionately less rate than Two shillings per head,
per annum for large cattle, and One shilling per head per annum for small
Ca 8. The Minister shall nominate, for appointment by the Governor in
Council, the persons who shall be managers of all farmers commons,
temporary commons, and town commons proclaimed previously to the
passing of The Land Act 1884, or to be hereafter proclaimed, outside the
boundaries of any shire, road district, city, or borough. 7 A ,
9. Applications for the proclamation of a common under The Land Act
1884 shall be made in the form prescribed in Schedule LXYI. hereto.


10. Application for an increase to the area of any existing common shall
he made in the form prescribed in Schedule LXVII. hereto, and shall
contain full particulars relative to the area of the common proposed to be
increased, the number of cattle depastured thereon during the year
preceding the date of the application, the number of persons whose cattle
have been depastured on the common during such year, the amount of
commonage fees received during that year, and the mode in which such
fees have been disposed of.
11. Ratepayers in shires and boroughs, holders of miners rights,
business licenses, or carriers’ licenses, and farmers, may respectively
depasture on a common proclaimed under The Land Act 1884, within a
distance of five miles from their places of residence, four head of large
cattle, or the equivalent of the whole or a portion thereof in small cattle, on
the basis that one head of large cattle be deemed equivalent to three head
of small cattle. A farmer having under cultivation not less than one-tenth
portion of the land occupied by him may depasture on such common one
additional head of large cattle, or the equivalent in small cattle, for every
ten acres of such land cultivated by him.
12. The fees for depasturing cattle on a common shall be paid in advance,
and shall not be less than at the rate of Two shillings per annum for eVery
head of large cattle, and One shilling per annum for every head of small
cattle. The managers of any common may, from time to time and at any
time, make alterations in the scale of fees, but not below the prescribed
limits, which alteration shall be subject to the approval of the Board, and
be published in the Government Gazette, and in a newspaper circulating in
the district wherein the common is situated.
' 13. The managers of a common shall have power to appoint a herdsman
to take charge of the cattle depastured on such common, and be responsible
for the efficient carrying out of the regulations framed for the management
of that common. The herdsman shall also conform to any special instruc-
tions issued to him by the managers of the common relative to the registra-
tion, custody, and delivery to owners of the cattle depastured thereon, and
to the prevention of trespass thereon of cattle other than travelling cattle
for which no commonage fees have been paid. Such herdsman shall be
remunerated for his services out of the fund derived from the commonage
fees, and he shall provide security for the honest and faithful discharge of
his duties in such famount as the managers of the common may deem
adequate.
14. The money derived from the fees received for the agistment of cattle
on a common may, after paying for the services of the herdsman, be
expended by the managers of such common on the publication of the regu-
lations for its management, including the cost of publication in the Govern-
ment Gazette, the purchase of account books, stationery, branding-irons and
tar. and on the eradication of thistles on the common. The surplus remain-
ing over after such expenditure may be applied, with the concurrence of
the Board, under its seal, to the formation of dams for storage of water on
the common, the improvement of natural water-holes, the construction and
repair of stockyards, and the improvement of such approaches to the
common as are not proclaimed roads or streets.
15. The managers of commons shall keep books in the forms prescribed
in Schedule LXVIII. hereto, in which books shall be recorded the descrip-
tion and brands of the cattle depastured on the commons, the money
received as commonage fees, the payments made from the funds derived
therefrom, the dates of such payments, and the authority for making them;


and the managers shall give, in the form prescribed in said schedule, printed
receipts consecutively numbered, the butts of which receipts shall he
retained for inspection.
16. The managers of every common shall, within one month after the
termination of each year, publish in a newspaper circulating in the district
wherein the common is situated a certified account of their receipts and
expenditure for the year, in the form prescribed in Schedule LXIX. hereto,
and forward copy thereof to the Board.
17. No animal affected with any contagious disease shall be allowed to
depasture on any common. \
18. Every person off ending"against any regulation for the management of
a common shall, on conviction before any justice, forfeit and pay a penalty
not exceeding Twenty pounds for each offence.
19. The managers of every common may sue for and recover any fees
overdue for depasturing stock on such common, or for any penalty for
breach of any regulation for management of such common.
20. The managers of any common may submit to the Board draft regula-
tions for the management of such common, provided that they be not
inconsistent with the provisions of the foregoing general regulations for the
management of commons, and such draft regulations, after revision by the
Board and approval by the Governor in Council, shall be published in the
Government Gazette, and by such managers in the newspapers circulating
in the district wherein the common is situated.
21. The Board may at any time direct a special audit of the accounts of
the managers of any common to be made by such persons as it thinks fit.
SCHEDULES UNDER PART IX.
SCHEDULE LXVL—COMMONS.
Application fob a Common undeb “ The Land Act 1884.”
We, the undersigned, do hereby apply for the proclamation of a common under
The Land Act 1884 as hereunder described.
Date —
Description of boundaries and approximate extent of the land \
for the proclamation of which as a common application is j
now made .. .. .. .. .. .. )
Distance and area of nearest common from that applied for
Estimated grazing capability of common applied for in acres )
to one head of cattle .. .. .. .. .. j
Signature of
Applicants.
Residence.
Extent of Land
held by each.
No. of Acres
cultivated by each.
Particulars of Qualification for Commonage
Rights.
[Insert here if the applicant is a ratepayer in a
municipal district, a holder of a miner’s right,
business license,or carrier’s license; or a far-
mer who resides on and uses for agriculture or
dairying land held by him in fee or und er lease
or license issued under Part Il.of The Land Act
1862, Part II. of The Amending Land Act 1865,
Division 1 of Part II. of The Land Act 1869, or
Part III. of The Land Act 1881.]
No. of Cattle belong-
ing to Applicants
depasturing on any
Common or Commons


SCHEDULE LXVII.
Application for Extension of an existing Common.
We, the undersigned, who have the legal right to depasture cattle on the
common at which common is now, in our opinion, inadequate for
the legitimate requirements of the persons entitled to commonage thereon, do
hereby apply for the proclamation of an extension (as hereunder described) of that
common.
Date—
Description and approximate extent of the land for the pro- \
clamation of which, as an extension of the common,
application is now made .. .. .. .. )
Estimated Grazing capability of same in acres to one head of 1
cattle .. .. .. .. .. .. J
Area of existing common
Grazing capability of same in acres to one head of cattle
Number of large cattle depastured on the common during the ) *
year commencing on and ending on )
Ditto small cattle ditto
Number of persons to whom the above-mentioned cattle 1
belonged .. .. .. .. .. .. J
Largest number of such cattle belonging to any one person ..
Amount of commonage fees received during the above- )
mentioned period .. .. .. .. .. /
In what manner disposed of
Signature of
Applicants.
Where Besident.
Extent of Land
held by each.
Extent of Land
under cultivation
by each.
Tf depasturing Cat-
tle on any Common
or Commons, state
No. of Cattle and
Name of Common.
Particulars of Qualification for Commonage Bights
[Insert here if the applicant is a ratepayer in a
municipal district, a holder of a miner’s right,
business license, or carrier’s license; or a farmer
■who resides on and uses for agriculture or dairy-
ing land held by him in fee or under lease or
license issued under Part II. of The Land Act
1862, Part II. of The Amending Land Act 1865,
Division 1 of Part II. of The Land Act 1869, or
Part III. of The Land Act 1884.]
SCHEDULE LXVIII.
Form of Book for issue of Licenses to Depasture Cattle on a Common.
Name of Common—
Date of issue of license
Name—
Large Cattle, at .. £ : ;
Small Cattle, at .. £ : :
Total .. £ ;
Description and brands of cattle.
Deceived from of
the sum of for the grazing on
the common, until next
ensuing, of large cattle and small
cattle as hereunder described, subject
to the regulations for management of
the said common.
Date —
Signature—
Description and brands of cattle.


Dr.
Fobm of Account Book.
Cr.
Bate.
Name.
Particulars.
Amount.
Total.
Bate
Name.
Particulars.
Amount.
Total.
Carr
ied forward
£
8.
d.
£
s.
d.
Carr
ied forward
£
s.
d.
£
8.
d.
SCHEDULE LXIX.
Abstract of the Accounts of the Managers of the above-named Common for the
vear for period] commencing on the day of 18 and
ending on the day of both days inclusive.
Dr. Cr -
Receipts.
Expenditure.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
To Balance
Fees for depasturing—
By Salary of herdsman..
Number.
head of large cattle
small cattle
Fees received for special
licenses to -
Slaughtermen
Butchers ..
Balance
£
£
We certify the above extract to be true and correct in every particular.
Managers.
I, the undersigned, having examined the accounts of the managers of the
common, being duly authorized ui that behalf, here y
certify that I find the same to be correct, and that the foregoing abstract is a true
statement of the accounts of the said common.
Date —
Signature—
Office
Address -


PART X.
TRESPASSES AND PENALTIES.
THE ACT.
Land Officer not to apply for an Allotment under a penalty of £IOO
and loss of Office.
105. If any land officer or tlie substitute of any land officer directly or
indirectly select or apply for a lease of any pastoral allotment or grazing
area or a license of any agricultural allotment of any Crown land within
the district to which he has been appointed, he shall thereby forfeit his
office and shall also forfeit the sum of One hundred pounds with full costs
of suit, which may be recovered by any person who sues for the same in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
Penalty for False Statement.
106. Any person who on making application for a license under Part
111. of this Act wilfully makes any false statement, or refuses to answer any
question relating to such application which may be put to him by the land
officer, or w’ilfully gives a false answer to any such question, shall forfeit
and pay a penalty of not less than Ten pounds nor more than Fifty pounds
or be liable to be imprisoned for not less than fourteen days nor more than
six months; such penalty may be recovered and enforced before and such
imprisonment may be inflicted by any two justices who shall have power to
hear and determine the matter in a summary way.
Bailiffs of Crown Lands.
107. The Governor in Council may subject to the provisions “ The Public
Service Act 1883” from time to time appoint a sufficient number of persons
to be bailiffs of Crown lands; and every such bailiff shall during his
continuance in office do on behalf of Her Majesty or on behalf of the
Board in respect of any Crown lands all acts for preventing intrusion
encroachment and trespass on such lands, or for levying or recovering the
rent or the license fee payable in respect thereof, or for taking and
recovering possession of any allotment or lands in case of forfeiture, or for
such other purpose as the Governor in Council by regulations directs;
and such bailiff shall have the like power and authority to do all such acts
as any bailiff lawfully appointed may by law do in respect of any lands
tenements or hereditaments of his employer; and every such bailiff may


prefer an information against any person who is in
whether under colour of any license or lease or otherwise of any Crown
lands, or whose right to occupy such lands has ceased, and may sue for
and recover any penalty from any person liable to forfeit the same.
Authority of Persons Appointed Under Land Acts 1862 and 1865,
and this Act.
108. Notwithstanding anything in “ The Land Act 1862” or in “ The
Amending Land Act 1865” or in this Act contained, the Governor and the
Board respectively may in all cases where power is given by the said Acts
or either of them to appoint or authorize any person for a particular purpose
or to do a particular act, appoint or authorize such person generally for
any such purpose or to do all acts of the same or the like nature ; and such
person may do all things within the scope of such general authority in all
cases to which his appointment or authority purports or can he construed to
extend. Whenever any person has been or may be appointed in pursuance
of either of the said Acts or of this Act as the person to perform any act or
with regard to whom any act is to be performed, it shall nevertheless be
lawful to appoint some other person to be the person to perform such act or
with regard to whom such act shall be performed.
• \
Penalty for Unauthorized Occupation or Depasturing on Lands not
Commonable.
109. If any person be found in unauthorized occupation of any Crown
lands or knowingly and wilfully depasture without authority in that behalf
any cattle or swine on any such land not being a common, he shall be liable
on conviction thereof to the penalties following (that is to say)—for the first
offence a sum not exceeding Five pounds, for the second offence after an
interval of fourteen clear days from the date of the previous conviction a
sum not exceeding Twenty pounds, and for any subsequent offence after a
like interval a sum not exceeding Fifty pounds; but no proceedings to
recover any such penalty may be taken except by some person authorized
in that behalf by the Board.
Penalty for other Trespasses on Crown Lands.
110. If any person not licensed or otherwise authorized under this Act
search upon any Crown land for any metal or mineral (except gold), or cut
dig or take from any Crown lands any live or dead timber gravel stone
limestone salt guano shell sand loam or brick-earth, or strip or remove
bark from any tree on any Crown lands, every such person shall in
addition to any punishment or penalty provided by any law now or here-
after in force for such offence on conviction of any of the said offences
forfeit and pay any sum not exceeding Ten pounds. Provided however
that it shall be lawful for any municipality with the consent of the Minister
to authorize any officer or other person to enter on Crown lands or remove
therefrom without fee or license any live or dead timber gravel stone lime-
stone sand loam brick or other earth for the purpose of forming or
maintaining any public road street or bridge within the municipal district
of such municipality.
Obliteration of Boundary Marks a Misdemeanour.
111. If any person wilfully obliterate remove or deface any boundary
mark which may have been made or erected by or under the direction of any
authorized officer of the Board he shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.


y- Survey Officers may enter upon Private Lands.
112. Any surveyor or officer acting under the authority of the Board, and
any other person acting in aid or under the orders of such surveyor or
officer, may from time to time without making compensation enter into and
upon any land not being a garden orchard or ornamental plantation of any
person or persons whomsoever for the purpose of making and carrying on
any survey authorized by any law heretofore in force or by this Act, or by
the orders of the Board, and for the purpose of fixing any object to he used
in the survey on any post stone or boundary mark whatsoever, and may fix
and place any such object post stone or boundary mark whatsoever in the
land or upon any wall tree or post in the land of any person whomsoever,
and may dig up any ground for the purpose of fixing any such object
post stone or boundary mark, and may'cut down and remove any scrub or
timber which may obstruct any survey line. Provided always that such
surveyor and his assistants and workmen shall do as little damage as may
be in the execution of the several powers to them granted by the said Act
or orders.
Penalties under No. 154 or No. 237 Now Enforced.
113. Whenever a penalty has been incurred by any person under section
one hundred and twenty-six of “ The Land Act 1862” or section seven of
“ The Amending Land Act 1865,” it shall be lawful for the Governor to
demand and receive the amount of such penalty in addition to the purchase-
money before issuing a Crown grant of any allotment in respect of which
such penalty has accrued to such person or his assignee. Provided that no
Crown grant of any such allotment shall be issued unless the person apply-
ing for such grant have proved to the satisfaction of the Board to be certified
under its seal that the provisions of section thirty-six of “ The Land Act
1862” or section seven of “ The Amending Land Act 1865” as the case may
be have been fully complied with in respect of such allotment, or in default
of such certificate have paid a penalty at the rate of Pive shillings for every
acre of such allotment.


PART XI.
MISCELLANEOUS.
THE ACT.
Leases of Pastoral Allotments and Grazing Areas Subject to Right to
Mine.
114. There shall be inserted in every lease of a pastoral allotment and in
every lease of a grazing area a covenant that the lands demised under such
leases are granted and held subject to a condition that the holder of a
miner’s right or of a mining lease shall have the right and shall be allowed
by such lessee to enter upon such pastoral allotment or grazing area as the
case may be and search for gold and to mine thereon and to erect and
occupy mining plant or machinery without making compensation to the
lessee thereof for surface or other damage.
All Crown Grants Licenses and Leases to contain a Condition
permitting Mining on Compensation for Surface Damage.
115. There shall be inserted in every Crown grant of lands alienated in
fee simple and in every license or lease of land demised with the right of
acquiring the fee simple thereof under this Act a condition or covenant
that such lands are granted or demised subject to the right of any person
beintr the holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease to enter therein and
to mine for gold and silver and to erect and occupy mining plant or
machinery thereon in the same manner and under the same conditions and
provisions as those to which such person has now the right to mine for gold
and silver in and upon Crown lands provided that compensation shall be
paid to the owner thereof for surface damage to be done to such lands by
reason of mining thereon, such compensation to be determined as herein-
after provided, and the payment thereof shall be a condition precedent to
s uch right of entry.
Holder of Miner's Right or Mining Lease authorized to Enter.
116. The holder of a miner’s right or of a mining lease is hereby author-
ized to enter in or upon such lands as aforesaid, and the portions of such
lands so entered in or upon shall for the purpose of regulating and
controlling mining thereon or therein be deemed to be Crown lands subject
to the provisions of the “ Mining Statute 1865” and of any Act amending
the same.


v Warden to determine Claim to Surface Damage subject to Appeal
to Court of Mines.
117. Every warden appointed under the provisions of the said Acts shall
sitting as a warden without assessors have jurisdiction to hear determine
and enforce any claim made for surface damage arising as aforesaid, and
any party feeling aggrieved at any determination of the warden may appeal
to the Court of Mines, which is hereby empowered to hear and determine
such appeal, and the Governor in Council may from time to time make alter
or amend regulations for prescribing the mode of procedure with respect to
any such claim.
Applicants for Licenses before commencement of Act if qualified to
have priority.
118. All persons who before the commencement of this Act have made
application under any of the Acts hereby repealed for licenses to occupy any
Crown lands shall in respect of the lands the subject of such applications
be if such persons were competent to hold such licenses under the said
repealed Acts entitled to priority over persons making application for
licenses under this Act or for leases under Part 111. of this Act.
Grazing Licenses.
119. The Governor in Council or any person duly authorized by him in
that behalf may from time to time grant to any applicant a grazing license
to enter with cattle sheep or other animals upon any park lands reserves or
other Crown lands not forming part of any common or held under lease or
license under any of the Acts hereby repealed or under this Act or taken
up or required for the purposes of this Act and therewith to depasture the
same, subject however in the case of any lands forming part of the
agricultural and grazing lands to the right of any person to come in upon
such lands so granted and to take up a grazing area. The Governor in
Council may from time to time make alter and repeal regulations with
regard to the calling for and receipt of tenders for and the issuing of grazing
licenses under this Part of this Act.
Rights of Licensee and Lessee against Trespassers.
120. The lessee and his assigns of a pastoral allotment or grazing area
under this Act and the licensee of an agricultural allotment under this Act
and his assigns and the person or persons in whom the interest or any part
thereof of any such lessee or licensee may at any time under this Act
become vested and the purchaser of any land under any &ct heretofore in
force shall have all the rights as against persons trespassing with any
cattle sheep goats or swine but not against other mere trespassers which at
law belong to the owner in possession of any land as against trespassers
thereon except the right of impounding such cattle sheep goats or swine;
and shall have the said last-mentioned right when and so soon as the
pastoral allotment grazing area or agricultural allotment or such part of
the pastoral allotment grazing area or agricultural allotment or of any
land purchased under any Act heretofore in force as may be trespassed
upon has been enclosed either alone or with any adjoining land in the
occupation of the same person with a substantial fence but not before.


Any Unauthorized Occupier under a Forfeited License may be *
forcibly Dispossessed.
121. When any person occupying any lands under any license which has
expired (other than a licensee under Part 111. of this Act who is entitled to
apply and who has applied for a certificate from the Board that he has
complied with the provisions of the said Part and pending the granting of
such certificate or the valuation by arbitrators as provided in the said Part
not exceeding four months from the expiration of such license) or become
forfeited or forfeited and void or has been revoked under this Act or in
virtue or under colour of any expired forfeited void or revoked license, or
otherwise remains in unauthorized possession or occupation of such lands
and refuses or neglects to deliver up possession of the same to any person
authorized by the Board in that behalf, such person or any other person
authorized by the Board may apply upon an information to be laid by him
in the form set out in the Fifth Schedule (see end of book) to this Act to
any justice for, and such justice shall issue a summons (which may be
served and the service proved in the manner directed by section sixty-five
of “ The Justices of the Peace Statute 1865” and subject to the like condi-
tions as if it were a proceeding under that Statute) in the form set forth in
the Sixth Schedule (see end of book) to this Act calling upon the occupier
of such lands to appear at a time and place to be therein specified before
any two or more justices one of whom shall be a police magistrate who may
hear and determine the matter of such information in a summary way ex
parte or otherwise and upon proof to the satisfaction of the justices one of
whom shall be a police magistrate then and'there present or present at any
adjourned hearing of the said information that the lands referred to in such
summons are the same as are referred to in the said notice, and on the
production of a copy of the G-overnment Gazette containing a notice that
such license has expired or been revoked or forfeited or that any license
has become forfeited and void, a warrant shall be issued by such justices or
any other justice or justices which may be in the form or as near as may be
in the form contained in the Seventh Schedule (see end of book) to this
Act; and every constable or bailiff to whom such warrant is directed may
forthwith execute the same according to the tenor and exigency thereof in
the same manner as any warrant of possession or writ of habere facias
possessionem may now be executed by the sheriff. Provided always that
the jurisdiction of such justices shall not be taken away or deemed to be
ousted by any claim of title question of property or suggestion of right
whether made bona fide or otherwise which may be raised at any such
hearing as aforesaid.
Recovery of Rent and License Fees.
122. The rent reserved in any lease granted under the forty-seventh the
forty-ninth or the fiftieth sections of “ The Land Act 1862” or under the
thirty-seventh thirty-eighth and fortieth sections of “ The Amending Land
Act 1865” or under the forty-fifth or forty-sixth or forty-eighth sections of
“ The Land Act 1869” or under any of the provisions of this Act, and the
fee payable in respect of any license granted under the fifty-third section of
“ The Land Act 1862” or under the thirty-ninth section of “ The Amending
Land Act 1865” or under the forty-seventh section of “ The Land Act
1869” or under any of the provisions of this Act, and the license fee men-
tioned in the eighth forty-first and forty-second sections respectively of
“ The Amending Land Act 1865” or under the forty-ninth or fifty-third
sections of “ The Land Act 1869” or under any of the provisions of this


&Act, may t, levied or recovered by or under tbe authority of the Board in
like manner as any rent or fine is or shall be leviable or recoverable by
law ; and in case the same shall be levied by distress an order under the
seal of the Board shall be a sufficient warrant and authority to distrain, any
law or enactment to the contrary notwithstanding.
Governor in Council may prohibit Felling Timber tyc.
123. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the Governor in
Council may by proclamation declare that no person although he be duly
licensed or otherwise authorized shall cut dig or remove live or dead timber
or particular description of timber or bark stone gravel sand loam brick or
other earth from such portions of Crown lands as are named in such procla-
mation or shall exercise on any such portions the powers or any of them
conferred by any license granted under the authority of Part Till, of this
Act.
Water easements reserved upon purchased Land.
124. When at the time of any conveyance under this Act or Act number
CXVII., “ The Land Act 1862,” “ The Amending Land Act 1865,” or" The
Land Act 1869,” any stream creek race or drain flows through or over the
land so conveyed or the bed or channel of any disused stream race or drain
or any dam or reservoir is upon the land so conveyed, although no reserva-
tion or exception thereof be contained in the Crown grant of such land, no
person unless specially authorized thereto by the Board shall obstruct
destroy or interfere therewith under a penalty not exceeding Twenty pounds
for every such obstruction or interference.
How Applications fyc. to be heard.
125. Whereas it is expedient that applicants for leases and licenses under
this Act should have an opportunity of showing the bona jides of their
applications, and that all objections to the issue of such leases and licenses
and to proposed proclamations alterations additions diminutions revocations
and unions of commons should be publicly heard and that all persons
whose leases or licenses under any Part of this Act or under any of the Acts
hereby repealed may be deemed liable to forfeiture for any cause except
non-payment of the rent or fees should be allowed to show cause to the
Minister against such forfeiture, it is hereby directed that notice shall from
time to time be given in the Government Gazette of a time not less than ten
days from the date of such notice and a place where applications for
leases and licenses and objections to such applications, and also objections
to any proposed exemption aforesaid and to any proposed proclamation
alteration addition diminution revocation or union of commons, and reasons
against forfeitures of any such leases and licenses for any cause except
non-payment of rent or fees, will be publicly heard by the Minister or by
persons appointed by the Minister to hear the same and report thereon in
writing to him.
Previous declarations of Forfeiture Valid.
126. All notices heretofore published in the Government Gazette purport-
ing to declare that the Governor in Council had revoked forfeited or
declared void any lease or license issued under any of the Land Acts here-
tofore in force shall be received in all courts of justice as conclusive
evidence that the lease or license was lawfully revoked forfeited or declared
void as the case may be.


Governor in Council may withhold or withdraw Lands from Sale Licensing
or Leasing.
127. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained, the Governor in
Council if he shall think fit may withhold or may withdraw from sale
leasing or licensing any land or allotment.
Travelling Cattle.
128. Notwithstanding anything herein contained, every traveller may
while he is travelling depasture his cattle and sheep unless the same be
affected with any contagious or infectious disease upon any unsold Crown
lands within one quarter of a mile on either side of any road or track
commonly used as a thoroughfare whether such lands be or be not comprised
in any common. Provided that such cattle and sheep shall be driven every
day towards the place of their destination the distance as hereinafter
provided.
Notice to he given to Occupier of Land of intention to drive Travelling
Cattle or Sheep.
129. Every person intending to drive cattle or sheep across the land of
any other person who is possessed of not less than five hundred sheep or
through any common shall not less than twelve hours nor more than
twenty-four hours before entering upon such land or common give or deliver
at the residence of the occupier of such land or at the residence of the
herdsman of the common or the manager (if any) residing on such land
or if there be no occupier or manager residing on such land then
shall post in some conspicuous place on such land a notice of his intention
so to drive such cattle or sheep, and shall by such notice state from whence
he has brought the same and whither he is driving them; and all cattle
shall be driven every day a distance of not less than eight miles and all
sheep shall be driven every day a distance of not less than five miles in the
direction of the place mentioned in the notice as the place to which it is
j ntended to drive such cattle or sheep respectively; and any person who
against any of the provisions of this section unless prevented by
soni e eause which appears satisfactory to the justice shall on conviction
befor\ ? . an y justice forfeit and pay for every such offence a sum not
exceeding Twenty pounds.
Privilbf e °f Public Officers on duty and of Holders of Miners'
Rights *
130. Where\ an y P erson . employed by the Board or is otherwise
engaged in any -public service, or when any holder of a miner’s right is
actually engaged if 1 searching upon (. rown lands for gold, if any such
person or holder have with him in pursuance and for the purposes of his
duty or in the reasonabifi prosecution of such search any cattle, he may
during the continuance of's uc^l employment or service depasture all such
cattle upon any Crown landti whether pastoral allotment or grazing area
commonable or otherwise and ifi a y encamp thereon.
Proceedings not to be quashed or removed.
131. No order or other proceedings ™ade touching or concerning the
matters aforesaid or touching or concerning the conviction of any offender
or offenders against this Act shall be quasfi.ed or vacated for want of form
only, or be removed or removable by ccrtioi'wi or any writ or process
whatsoever into the Supreme Court.


Appeal given.
132. Any person who feels himself aggrieved by any conviction or order
of any justice or justices under this Act may appeal therefrom to the next
court of general sessions of the peace having jurisdiction in the district
where such conviction has been made, and the execution of every such con-
viction or enforcement of every such order so appealed from shall be
suspended in case such person with two or more sufficient sureties
immediately before such justice or justices enter into a bond or recogniz-
ance to Her Majesty in the sum to be fixed by the justice or justices in
each case, which bond or recognizance respectively such justice or justices
is and are hereby authorized and required to take; and such bond or
recognizance sliall be conditioned to prosecute such appeal with effect, and
to be forthcoming to abide the determination of the said court, and to pay
such costs as the said court awards on such occasion ; and such court is
hereby authorized and required to hear and determine the matter of the
said appeal, and the decision of such court shall be final to all intents and
purposes.
Board to make Regulations for the Control and Management of
Public Parks and Reserves fyc.
133. The Board shall have power from time to time to make and alter or
rescind rules and regulations or to rescind any rules and regulations here-
tofore made for the care protection and management of all public parks
and reserves not conveyed to and vested in trustees, and for the preserva-
tion of good order and decency therein, and also for the collection and
receipt of tolls, entrance fees or other charges for entering in or upon such
public parks and reserves; and all such rules and regulations and all
rules and regulations made for the care protection and management of any
public park vested in trustees by the trustees thereof shall be published m
the Government Gazette , and shall be posted in soine conspicuous place m
every such park or in such reserve or park vested in trustees as the case
may be ; and every person offending against any such rule or regulation i
shall on conviction before any justice forfeit and pay a penalty not exceed-j.
ing Five pounds for each offence; and every person who knowingly antffi
wilfully offends against any such rule or regulation and who after he i&as
been warned by any bailiff of Crown lands, officer or servant ox < such
trustees as the case maybe or by any constable does not desist fij-om so
offending may be forthwith apprehended by such bailiff officer ojv servant
as the case may be or constable and taken before some justice offi the peace
and shall on conviction forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding /Ten pounds.
Trustees of Reserves to be deemed Occupants for purpose of agreeing
in line of fence. s
134. The word “ occupants” in section 6 of the Fences Statute shall for
the purpose of such section be deemed to include ''the trustees or persons
having the care control or management of any l and whether permanently
reserved or not.
Unbranded Wild Cattle to t 'belong to Crown.
135. All unbranded wild cattle above the age of twelve months which
shall at any time be depasturing on anry Crown lands and which have no
reputed or apparent owner shall be 'and shall be deemed and taken to be
the property of Her Majesty, 'and it shall be lawful for the Board to
cause the same to be sold anrt disposed of in such manner as the Governor
in Council may direct; andt the purchaser of such cattle on obtaining the


written authority of the Board for that purpose shall he at liberty within
such time and in such manner as may be mentioned in such authority with
necessary and proper assistance to shoot or take possession of such cattle,
and for that purpose to enter upon any Crown lands where the same may
be depasturing.
Governor may make Regulations.
136. The Governor in Council shall have power from time to time to make
rules regulations and orders for the purposes hereinbefore mentioned and
for the purpose of prescribing the mode of making applications under this
Act the endorsing of leases and licenses the registering of orders to obtain
Crown grants the notifying to the Registrar of Titles of incumbrances on
Crown grants to be registered by him and generally for carrying out the
provisions of this Act, to alter or rescind such rules regulations and orders
or any rules regulations and orders heretofore made to provide for the mode
in which any land or allotment shall be surveyed and boundaries adjusted,
for prescribing the form of and the conditions and mode of applying for
licenses and leases to be issued under this Act, and the conditions upon
which the same shall be issued, for imposing any reasonable charge for
surveys or fee for any Crown grant or other document issued or for any
registration made under the authority of this Act, for providing for all pro-
ceedings forms of grants leases licenses and other instruments and for the
execution of all other matters and things arising under and consistent with
this Act and not herein expressly provided for, and for the more fully
carrying out the obj ects and purposes and guarding against evasions and
violations of this Act: And all such regulations shall be signed by the
Minister, and upon being published in the Government Gazette shall be
valid in law as if the same were enacted in this Act and shall be judicially
noticed ; and all such rules regulations and orders shall be laid before both
Houses of Parliament within fourteen days after the making thereof if
Parliament be then sitting, and if Parliament be not sitting then within
fourteen days after the commencement of the next sitting of Parliament.
Minister to lay an Annual Report before Parliament.
137. The Minister shall annually lay before the Legislature a report of
the proceedings taken under the provisions of this Act up to the month of
December in the year preceding the date of such report.
REGULATIONS UNDER PART XI.
Miscellaneous.
Applications for Forfeiture.
1. Any applicant for the forfeiture of any lease or license issued under
The Land Act 1884 shall support his application by a statutory declaration
setting forth the grounds and particulars on which such application is made,
under the following heads, viz.: —
(a.) The time when the lease or license was issued, the situation and
area of the land, and the name of the lessee or licensee.
( b.) The nature of improvements (if any) on the land.
(c.) The name of the person or persons (if any) resident on the laud,
(d.) The use to which the land ha. been applied,


( e .) Particulars of the conditions of the lease or license which are
alleged to have been broken or not fulfilled, or of the acts of fraud,
illegality, or violation of the Act on the part of the licensee.
(f) The occupation of the applicant for forfeiture, and the extent of
land (if any) held by him in fee-simple or under lease or license, and
the use to which such land is applied.
2. The application for forfeiture with the declaration shall be forwarded
to the Land Officer in whose district the land is situated, who shall report
thereon to the Minister.
3. The Minister may, if he think fit, call upon the lessee or licensee to
show cause before a Local Land Board against the forfeiture of his lease or
license.
4. The Local Land Board may, if it recommend forfeiture of the lease or
license, at the same time recommend that the application of the applicant
for forfeiture to select the land be granted, or that it be heard at the next
succeeding Board, without the land being thrown open for general applica-
tion. If, however, any valid objections are raised to the applicant for
forfeiture, the Board may recommend that the land be made again available
for selection or be sold by public auction. In this case, the applicant for
forfeiture shall not be deemed to have any claim or prior right to the issue
of a lease or license for the land referred to.
5. The improvements upon any forfeited land shall be valued and disposed
of in such manner as the Minister may deem fit.
Section 119. Grazing Licenses.
6. Tenders for the right to graze on any park lands, reserves, or other
Crown lands not forming part of any common or held under lease or license
may be invited from time to time, and licenses shall be issued by any
person duly authorized by the Governor in Council to the successful
tenderers on the form and subject to the conditions prescribed in Schedule
LXX. hereto, and to such other special conditions as the Minister may in
any particular case direct.
7. The fee for the preparation of a grazing license under this section of
The Land Act 1884 shall be Five shillings.
Fees.
8. The following fees not otherwise provided for shall be payable under
these Regulations :
For any lease or license or transfer of any lease or £ s. d.
license issued under The Land Act 1884 other than
those specified ... •... ... ... 10 0
For a certificate issued by the Board ... ... 100
For any special deed ... ... not exceeding 500
SCHEDULE UNDER PART XI.
SCHEDULE LXX.—MISCELLANEOUS.
Fee per Annum, £ s. d. No.
Gbazing License under 119th Section “Land Act 1884.”
Department of Lands and Survey,
Melbourne, Victoria, 188 .
Know all men that I [the Governor of Victoria ],
(being the person duly authorized in that behalf) in pursuance of The Land Act


1884, and in consideration of the sum of
duly paid by the person hereinafter mentioned, do hereby give to
of license and liberty
to enter with* upon the park lands, reserves or
other Crown lands specified in the schedule hereto, not being lands forming part
of any common, or held under lease or license, or taken up or required for the
purposes of the said Act, and therewith to depasture the same. This license will
continue in force until the day of and no
longer, and is issued subject to the conditions on the back hereof.
Schedule.
All these Crown lands
containing acre or thereabouts.
Conditions.
1. The issue of this license shall not prevent the land comprised|therein or any
part or parts thereof being sold, leased, licensed, alienated, or dealt with under any
of the provisions of The Land Act 1884 except under the 119th section thereof,
under which the license is issued, or being resumed by order of the Governor or
Administrator of the Government of Victoria, with the advice of the Executive
Council, for any of the purposes for which land may be reserved under section 10
of The Land Act 1884, or for mining purposes.
2. No licensee shall, in case of any resumption, be entitled to any compensation
other than the return of such portion of the fee paid by him as the responsible
Minister of the Crown for the time being administering Part XI. of The Land Act
1884 may think fit. This license is also subject to the rights of the holders of
miners’ rights or of mining leases now issued or hereafter to be issued to enter
upon the allotment hereby licensed, and to search for gold and to mine therein,
and to erect and occupy mining plant and machinery, without making any
compensation for surface or other damage.
3. No land comprised in roads from time to time surveyed and marked out
within the boundaries of the land comprised in this license shall be deemed
within its operation.
4. This license entitles the holder thereof, during the period for which it is
"ranted, to use the land therein comprised for depasturing purposes only, but does
not confer any right to build thereon, or to cultivate, or to fence any portion
thereof.
5. If the licensee desire a renewal of this license, notice to that effect must be
given to the responsible Minister aforesaid one month prior to the expiration
thereof, but nothing herein contained shall be deemed to confer the right to any
renewal.
6. The interest in this license may not be transferred without the consent of the
Minister aforesaid and the payment of a fee of £l.
7. No claim whatever shall be made or entertained by reason of the license.not
being renewed or transferred.
8. This license is to be used under and in accordance with the regulations made
or to be made under the provisions of the said Act and for the time being in force.
9. This license may be forfeited if the licensee commit a breach of or neglect to '
comply with any of these conditions.
10. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to declare
that the Governor or Administrator, with the advice aforesaid, has forfeited this
license shall be conclusive evidence that the license is forfeited.
* Describe kind of stock.


SCHEDULES REFERRING TO THE ACT.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Number of Act.
Short Title.
Extent of Repeal.
No. 360
“ The Land Act 1869 ”
So much as has not expired or been
repealed.
No. 515
“ The Land Act 1875 ”
The whole.
No. 634
“ The Land Act 1878 ”
So much as has not expired or been
repealed.
No. 653
“ The Land Acts amend-
ment Act 1880 ”
So much as has not expired.
No. 681
“ The Land Act 1880 ”
The whole.
No. 774
“ The Expiring Laics
Further Continuance
Act 1883 ”
Section 3 and the Third Schedule.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
The area of land comprised within each of the following classes, viz. :
Pastoral land, agricultural and grazing lands, auriferous lands, lands which
may be sold by auction (not including portions of Crown lands which have
been or may be hereafter proclaimed townships, or agricultural allotments
forfeited and directed to be sold under Part 111. of this Act), swamp lands,
State forest reserves, timber reserves, water reserves, and all other reserves,
are delineated by projections bearing a distinguishing colour or shading on
maps of the following counties: —Anglesey, Benambra, Bendigo, Bogong,
Borung, Bourke, Buln Buln, Croajingolong, Dalhousie, Dargo, Delatite,
Dundas, Evelyn, Follet, Gladstone, Grant, Grenville, Gunbower, Hampden,
Heytesbury, Kara Kara, Karkarooc, Lowan, IVlillewa, Moira,* Mornington,
Normanby, Polwarth, Ripon, Rodney, Talbot, Tarnbo, Tanjil, Tatchera,
Milliers, Wonnangatta—which maps are in this Act referred to as “the
deposited maps,” and have been sealed with the seal of the Board of Land
and Works and deposited with the Clerk of the Parliaments.
THIRD SCHEDULE.
1. Form oj Valuation at the end of the Sixth Year.
fVe A.B. of &c. C.D. of &c. and E.F. of &c. have valued the improvements
of a substantial and permanent nature made by [the licensee
his executors or administrators] on agricultural allotment
in the district of at the sum of and we hereby
certify that the improvements aforesaid are of the value of
for every acre and fractional part of an acre of the said agricultural allot-
ment.
In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands the day of
A.B.
C.D.
E.F.
