

£j > r tKVV//M
An jdppeai iu |
.Eradication of j
Protni
1I
Promiscuity & Venereal
i
i
Disease — —-
| Sex-Training, Sex-Education
| ait#
I Parental Metaphylaxis
§ by
| MaMaa Md#iii||tii«i
I
Issued hp the Haber fie Id Class far Sex Training
Printed by the Peerless Press, 55&a George Street* Sydney


AN APPEAL.
TJ-DAY’S call to every parent and to
every potential parent to save the
coming, the present, and the future
children of the race from the scourge of
venereal disease transcends In urgency
every duty for which. parenthood has
hitherto held Itself responsible.
THE UNBORN.
No S.O.S. from drowning souls wrecked
on the wide waste■ of ■ ocean’s cruel avid-
ity of destruction could be more im-
pelling than the dumb appeal of those
not yet brought' to light "‘whose unborn
sorrow, ripe in Fortune’s womb, ’’ may yet
be frustrated of its dread realisation "by
timely consideration for their future up-
bringing. The rights of the tinhorn are
for mankind first to recognise, then to
safeguard.
THE BORN.
No voice of protest, to the sleeping con-
science of the community could he more
arresting than the appeal of children in
our midst whose inheritance is one of
blemished mental or physical health, as
a result of direct or indirect venereal
.milounce; stricken little ones, of whom
so many help to fill asylums, institutions
for deaf, dumb, and blind, mental hos-
pitals and general hospitals—these all
bespeak, a slumbering conscience in the
past, and make their mute axvpeal to save
other children from similar fates. Then
there are others for whom at a later
stage the State mast provide special
schools and teachers to draw from dull
brains whatever intelligence may he pos-
sible. In such schools, with consummate
skill and patience, little eyes, cars, and
hands are trained to regain in part their
stolen heritage. These children, whose
neglected forbears were victims- of an age
of Ignorance, accuse those who today
have knowledge, but do not apply it, of
wilful indifference for the welfare of
those who are yet to come.
THE ’ADOLESCENT,
No cry for mercy at the hands of dog-
ger or torturer can be imagined of greater
persistence than the unexpressed appeal
of the adolescents facing life to-day,
whose lack of sex training renders them,
ignorant of the temptations and dangers
confronting them in their every-day oc-
cupations and pleasures. Thrust into
the maelstrom of life nninst.roct.ed as to
their, share in protecting others, as well
as themselves, against promiscuity, clad
in the enticing garb of misnamed “Inno-
cence.” these neglected children become
first the prey and then the agents of the
curse of promiscuity, which has been pro-
nounced by medical science to he the
source from which venereal diseases
spring? and extend
BLOOD TESTS BEFORE MARRIAGE.
No summons to parental'concern could
be of more Importance than the chalenge
of the perils awaiting sons and daughters
who marry without any assurance of im-
munity for their children and themselves'
from venereal disease. A blood test be-
fore marriage can alone furnish a large
measures of security for health in enter-
ing married life.
CHRONIC INVALIDS.
No warning that those who Indulge In
promiscuous relations in early life*" will
later, on pay the penalty could, he more
impressive than, the sight of chronic In-
validism in middle age.
Owing to past sexual indulgence, or
even perhaps one lapse, individuals may
come to he classed as preventable inva-
lids, the direct and Indirect influences of
venereal disease being legion.
PATRIOTISM.
No persuasion to patriotism has ever
been more constraining than is the “call
to arms” to-day. The battle cry for
national preservation has roused the pas-
sions of men, women, and children to
protect their country from Invading foes.
No war as serious as the attack by vene-
real disease on the health of the nations
has ever occurred in the history of the
race, and. nothing but invincible determi-
nation on the parr of parents who would
be patriots and patriots who would he
parents, to attack this greatest of all
foes —the invader who hag dag itself into
the home life of the people-will extermi-
nate the insidious and undying enemy of
the whole human species.
“THE PLAGUE IS UPON US AND
UPON OUR-CHILDREN."
Parents and potential parents, the
crime of past silence and prudery im-
poses on you now the grave task of sav-
ing your children and their children’s
children from the ravages of venereal
disease. It is for you to safeguard those
now growing to puberty, to protect ado-
lescents. and to secure for marriage its
right to freedom from hereditary taint.
THE CIRCLE OF DAMAGE.
The circle of damage has continued too
long, and is daily widening its circum-
ference, There is no muscle, or tissue, or
nerve, bone, or organ of the body to
which the ceaseless blood stream cannot
carry its mortifying freight of infective
germs of venereal, disease.
THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM.
The solution of the problem of prostitu-
tion end general promiscuity is at hand
in the widespread application, of the new
principle of sex training. This is a sys-
tem of parents watching happily over the
habits of body and the development of
the mind from an early age in such a way
that there is no disturbance and arous-
ing of the sexual impulse, or emotional
disturbance of any kind. The parent
averts the unconscious beginnings of un-
toward habits, and satisfies, always as
an impersonal matter, the ordinary and
inevitable questionings of the child, with-
out dealing with the terms of sex during


the early years. By this parental phy-
C<U. t.v .) *.-<3 SO, X/<KX w,-v *"■*;
laxis the young of normal mentality can
oe trained to continence without repres-
sion, I've nmrviage continence will elimi-
nate pro'-timtioo ami promiscuity. Then,
and then md\. will early marriage he
safe. To vogge>.r early marriage at pre-
sent an a remedy for venereal disease
while promiscuity forms part of pre-
marriage practice is to delude the young
and the public into false security, and
-.further to extend the circle of damage,
“MEW OCCASIONS TEACH MEW
DUTIES,” .
The incidence of venereal disease
augurs ill for reduction in the financial
burdens upon society for the care and
upkeep of inadequate citizens. in a
crisis of world-wide contagion it becomes
u duty to consider ethical and physical
values in relation to the young generally,
and to the Immediate duty which parents
owe their children. To con centra be on
physical values alone - would impair -to
the mind of the young its highest powers.
How pour in objective would they be-
come whose only pursuit was selfish phy-
sical indulgence, regardless of others’
right, as well as their own, to real happi-
ness Band abiding love?
PARENTAL M ETAFHYLAXIS,
The ethical proposal of parental .meta-
phylaxis is offered in the earnest, hope
that due consideration will be given to
its particular purpose as opposed to the
unethical, ■ corrupting, and vitiating
method of medical prophylaxis. Meta-
phylaxis means after-guarding. Parental
metaphylaxis is the, after-guarding by
the parent against the infection of vene-
real disease of such adolescents as have
not been successfully warned- against
prostitution and other forms of promis-
cuity. Neglected children whose ignor-
ance of life and of sex subjects them to
temptation and consequent disease ought
surely not to he called upon to suffer
treatment, extending perhaps over years,
for the disea.se of syphilis, or doomed
after treatment for gonorrhoea to carry
within their bodies the scourge which
may reappear at any time In after-life.
The young 'who share in promiscuous
intercourse are in daily danger of con-
trading some form of venereal' disease.
This question should he asked of every
parent: If you had one hour in which to
save your son or daughter from sudden
death, would you not try to save them?
Your .children to-day are facing some-
thing more terrible than death, innocent,
or sophisticated, continent or sexually in-
dulgent—all are in the danger gone of
promiscuity. Parents have Just one hour
in which they may save a child who has
slipped from the cruel Invasion of vene-
real infection. Here metaphylaxis may
be used by parents to prevent an unjust
punishment from wrecking the health of
neglected adolescence, A disinfectant in
the possession of parents, applied within
an hour to that part of the body which
has been exposed to infection, will save
a, boy or girl from venereal disease. This
disinfectant, with the knowledge of Its
application, should he for parents only.
In an article read, by invitation before
the Yorkvilie Medical Society, MY., 11125,
Dr. Waiter Brunet says: “if every person
who has exposed himself to the risk of
syphilis or gonorrhoea could be persuaded
to report within an hour to a competent
physician to receive -effective prophylactic
treatment, the prevalence of the disease
would he enormously reduced,’'' If a
medical man can suggest that It might he
possible to persuade every individual who
has exposed himself to infection to re-
port for treatment within an hour for
metaphylaetie treatment, the suggestion
for parental metaphylaxis cannot be con-
sidered impracticable, for if, as is sug-
gested by medical opinion, the hoy or.
girl could report themselves for treatment
to a doctor, they could far more easily
report their lapse to parents alert for
their protection.
It is not for parents to adopt the last
refuge of the negative type of mind,
which believes it can frustrate any pro-
gressive measure by enumerating the
“ifs” and “bids.” and with characteristic
wave of the hand and complete satisfac-
tion finalise as “quite impracticable 55
every suggested reform. There will, of
course, be failures in metaphylaxis, as
there are in everything, but. there will
be no encouragement to promiscuity and
no false hopes raised to guarantee its
protection as is the case with medical
prophylaxis, Metaphylaxis is a tempor-
ary salvage measure until the time ar-
rives when sex training has taken ■ its
place in the life of the borne. Fathers
in future will cease to say, “Why should
I tell my son? I was never told.”
Mothers will no longer eulogise their
own ’‘protected upbringing.” Parental
anxiety will he keyed to its highest pitch
of guardianship to save their children
and grandchildren from promiscuity.
PARENTAL DUTY,
It is not true that parents do not want
to teach their children —thousands of
parents have sought and are seeking
knowledge. “Tell us more,” “Help us
to understand,” “How shall I explain to
my child?” are phrases frequently used
to teachers. The classes formed for im-
parting sex training to parents continue
for weeks, and even mouths. These
parents become in their turn not only
teachers of their own children, but active
field workers in forming new classes for
other parents.
THE T-RAQEDY OF INFECTION,
We are told on the highest medical


authority that gonorrhoea, although cur-
able from actual infectiveness, can remain
la the organism, and manifest Itself Inter
in life : that syphilis takes years to euro,
and marriage should uot take place, under
three years after infection. The public
is also’told that hundreds attending Y..D,
chutes give np treatment before they are
cured, or leave wrong addresses, and so
cannot be followed up; that men aud
women marry who are not definitely
cured of venereal disease, and conse-
quently infect one another after marriage.
Can the public with full knowledge of
the “destruction that wasteth at noon-
day” refuse to withhold the knowledge
of sex training aud metaphylaxis from
the parents of Australia?
OUT-OF-DATE AMD FUTILE
METHODS.
Parental metaphylaxls can never he as-
sociated with the tried-out ineffectual,
devitalising, and degenerative method of
medical prophylaxis. The proposal of the
latter will encourage youth of both sexes
to: seek promiscuity, : and will create the
attitude, of -inevitable defeat, in the mind
of the young, by advising the boy to carry
a rube of prophylaxis in. his pocket If
the adolescent ■ boy is to take this , pre-
caution in the belief that it will safe-
guard him from venereal Infection, the
adolescent girl tempted, and also tempt-
rose, will add the preventive method to
her vanity ease, Tims will the - wide-
spread promiscuity of tbe war’s after-
math become part of our established
social, customs. The encouragement tor
the acceptance of prostitution which the
die-hards pronounce everlasting because
Tt always has hee.n” Is the death-knell
-of all racial: Ideals, It means the con-
tinuance of parental helplessness. It .Is
the last 'word in the destruction of
spiritual and mental vigour in the mind
of rbo young, and forecasts the ultimate
downfall of the nee.
IMMEDIATE ACTION 8Y THE
PUBLIC,
To those who look open medical
prophylaxis with the aversion It deserves,
aud who. doubt the wisdom of the “one
hour” parental protection of adolescent
life, i would urge an Immediate drive for
sex {mining by training teachers first.
Isolated lectures are of use, hut quite
Insufficient. In contributing, adequate in-
forms lion to parents, and should be con-
sidered no part of a move for sex train-
lug.
Into every heme in Australia knowledge
of sex training should be brought, a w'
by this training every normal child 'will
he given its weapon of defence against
future promiscuity. Parental, metaphy-
taxis is the only protective method that
can go baud ia hand with sex training:-
wthouc destroying its influence. It does
-not defeat the ends of sex training:; it
merely helps- parents to -avert the -tragedy
which sex training in. thousands of canes
would bare, prevented. It Is for parents"
use only. When Territory preservation
was threatened iu the year 1914 and %vkr
the objective, every known principle qf
Christianity was - -scrapped in inciting, old
aud young to take part In legitimised
killing: racial conscience ia every conn-
try was for tbe time deed to all warning
against race suicide. The long aftermath
is here, with' its tragic results. No such
sacrifice of moral principle is asked of
parents in their “due hour vigil.” Parental
ameliorative measures may he sought in
any crisis without losing sight of tbe
goal which ail must wish to reach—a new
era, lu which youth may learn its .-re-
sponsibilities at an age when it can ab-
sorb racial Ideals without harmful effects
lu the nature of psychological or physical
disorders later In life.
TEACHING AMD TEACHERS.
It is to exeepUoual individuals In every
suburb, aud city. in Australia that the
public must look for help In the direction
of forming classes for sex training. This
drive has already begun, aud continued
classes for instruction are held regularly.
The germ of advance Is ■ ripening rapidly
in the fruitful soil of parental vigilance.
Parents are becoming teachers in their
own sphere of home life, and to these
must bv added teachers who will visit
every district that calls for series of
classes for parents, who may then learn
how to 'gain the confidence of their tiny
children, and of those adolescents whose
confidence they have never had, owing
to the neglect of sox treining.
A MESS ABE OF HOPE,
Parents will soon realise this vital obli-
gation! and train .their .ehildrento Indi-
vidual ■■responsibility, the keystone of
which is duty to one’s neighbour. From
this teaching a new race will evolve, fm
whom the Institution- of prostitution will
become a vanishing remembrance ami
the scourge of venereal disease unknown
CHAIM OF ASSOCIATED CLASSES
SEX TRAINING, SEX EDUCATION, AMD PARENTAL METAFHYLAXIS,
For mlormatifcm as to forming Classes apply too—-
Mre, Bartrop, “tGuealtojep” 20 Walker HeherßeldL
Mrs. Carwardl«e. 23S Concord Road, Concern<l West.
Mrs, Orr, 96 O&rley Road. Manly.
Mrs. Shatter, Freaelds Read, WlfleagMsy.
Mrs, FMclmgton, “CremerA PMllisp Street, City.
