

SIXPENCE
THE
GERMAN
WHITE BOOK
A Literal Translation of the
MEMORANDUM AND DOCUMENTS
CONCERNING THE WAR
As Published, by the
IMPERIAL PRESS, BERLIN
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane


A BOOK OF DOOM?
The “London Times” of August 20th,
1914, In reviewing the German White
Book, wrote under the above heading as
follows:
The German Memorandum and- Documents Con
cerning the War.” (Imperial Press, Berlin).
We described last week the White-book laid be-
fore Parliament in this country as a Book of Pate.
Is it tempting Providence to describe the White-
book issued in Berlin as a Book of Doom? Whorn
a god wishes to destroy he first makes mad. No-
thing else can account for the production by a re-
sponsible Government of such an amazing farrago
as the “Memorandum” by which the German Gov-
ernment professes to justify the kindling of a great
European conflagration.
British Ministers were content to let the official
correspondence speak for itself. There was no need
for any rhetorical summing up of its contents, or
for any' special pleading to justify the decisions
which events forced upon them —how reluctantly the
papers themselves show. The German Government
proceeds on different lines. It prefaces a meagre
collection of actual documents with a long and im-
passioned impeachment of Servian and Russian
policy. The procedure is in itself interesting, and


the line of argument pursued is more significant
than its-authors perhaps realized.
The Memorandum starts from the Serajevo mur-
ders, for which the whole responsibility is cast, as
a matter of course, upon Servia. They sufficed,
it declares, to illuminate the aims of Servian policy,
directed towards procuring “the gradual revolu-
tionizing (Revolutionierung) and the ultimate de-
tachment of the south-eastern provinces of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian Monarchy with a view to their incor-
poration with Servia.” On the mere assumption that
Servia could not “do this” unless she believed her
aspirations would, receive the support of Russia, the
Memorandum proceeds to expose the hidden
thoughts of Russian diplomacy throughout the Bal-
kan troubles.
Shortly after the events of 1908, which were
brought on by the Turkish revolution, Russian
policy addressed itself to the formation under
Russian _ patronage .of a league of the Balkan
States directed against Turkey. This league, which
succeeded in 1911 in driving Turkey
out of the greater part of her European dominions,
broke up over the division of spoils. This mishap
did not deter Russian policy from conceiving a
new Balkan league, directed no longer against
Turkey, which had already been driven out of
the Balkans, but against the existence of the Aus-
tro-Hungarian Monarchy. The idea was that Ser-
via should cede back to Bulgaria that part of
Macedonia which she had acquired after the se-
cond Balkan war and be herself compensated with
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the expense of Austria-
Hungary. To this end Bulgaria was to be brought
to a yielding mood (miirbe gemacht) by isolation.
Rumania was to be chained (gekettet) to Russia
by means of a propaganda conducted with the
help of France, and Servia shown the way to Bos-
nia and Herzegovina.
This makes no doubt a “good story,” but that, un-
supported by any evidence, it should be solemnly


presented by the German Government as a serious
chapter of recent political history would seem al-
most incredible. But still more incredible does it
seem that this is the basis, and the only basis, for
the declaration which then follows that “in these
circumstances” the dignity and even the existence
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy—and consequen-
tly its value as an ally to the German Empire—
were in such grave peril that she was bound to
take immediate action against Servia, even at the
risk of war- with Russia, and Germany was equally
bound to support her at the same risk.
Recognizing the vital interests of Austria-Hun-
gary which were at stake, we could not advise
our ally to make concessions incompatible with
her dignity nor refuse our support in that hour of
stress. If the Servians were to be allowed any
longer to imperil with the assistance of Russia and
France the existence of the neighbouring Monar-
chy, the result would be the gradual downfall of
Austria and the subjection of all Slavdom to the
Russian sceptre, which would render the position
of the Germanic race in Central Europe untenable.
An Austria morally weakened and breaking down
under the impact of Russian Panslavism would no
longer be an ally on whom we could depend, as
depend we must in view of the more and more
menacing attitude of our eastern and western
neighbours. Therefore we left to Austria a com-
pletely free hand in her action against Servia
without taking part in its preparation.
It is worth noting that the whole of this indictment
of Russia tacked on in the “Memorandum” to the
Serajevo murders is merely a rehash of the German
Press campaign against Russia and of the Chan-
cellor’s own speech when the last Army Bill was
being pressed through the Reichstag weeks before
the assassination of the Archduke! Again, if it was
admittedly action against Russia which Germany
and Austria had in their minds when the latter was
contemplating her ultimatum to Servia, with what


face could Germany contend, as she did all through
the crisis, that Austria’s action concerned only Ser-
via and herself, and in no way concerned Russia f/
This is the kernel of the German Memorandum.
For the rest it is a recital of Germany’s alleged
efforts to promote mediation—efforts carried on, we
are asked to believe, “ shoulder to shoulder with
England.” Also we are asked to believe that they
failed only in consequence of the aggressive military
measures taken by Russia—and France—which com-
pel the final rupture.
The “ documents” are extremely jejune. The
Austrian Note analysing the Servian reply to the
Ultimatum is of some interest as an illustration of
Austrian mentality. Again and again the chief Aus-
trian grievance is that Servia has the audacity to
ask for proofs of the allegations contained in the
ultimatum, and notably of the guilt of the Servian
officers and officials whose punishment has been
demanded. As to the Austrian “evidence” in sup-
port of the case against Servia, all that need be
said is that it consists entirely of Austrian allega-
tions (to which Servia was allowed no opportunity
of replying) and of the depositions attributed to
certain witnesses before Austrian courts —deposi-
tions of which there is no possibility of apprais-
ing the genuineness and the value, except
perhaps by bearing in mind the revelations of
the Priedjung trial with regard to the worthless-
ness of the “evidence” brought forward on a for-
mer occasion in Austria to bolster up another anti-
Servian case. Another significant point is that,
whereas Austria is ready to give assurances of her
intention to respect the “territorial integrity” of
the Servian Kingdom after her punitive expedition
has been brought to a conclusion, she carefully ab-
stains from any promise to respect the independence
of Servia, of which, moreover, the Austrian ultima-
tum was in itself a flat negation.
The telegrams exchanged between the Emperor
William and the Tsar have already in part been
published. In his first message, dated July 28, the


Kaiser appeals to the “common interests that all
Sovereigns have in bringing to punishment those
who are morally responsible for an atrocious mur-
der.” In his reply on the following day the Tsar,
on the other hand, lays stress on “the disgraceful
war declared upon a puny State.” In two further
telegrams the Kaiser, whilst protesting his great
anxiety to promote a direct understanding between
Vienna and St. Petersburg, warmly defends the ac-
tion of his ally, and finally throws upon the Tsar’s
shoulders “the whole responsibility for peace or
war.” In the last of these Imperial telegrams the
Tsar again pointedly remarks that what is wanted
to secure an understanding is the Kaiser’s “strong
pressure upon Austria”- —the one thing which was
never forthcoming.
Specially noteworthy is the absence of any sort
of communication with the Italian Government sub-
sequent to the German circular dispatch of July 23
defending and supporting Austria’s action against
Servia. Nor is there any reference in the German
dispatches to the warnings given by Sir Edward
Grey to Prince Lichnowsky that Germany must not
reckon on England’s standing aside' if the issue
spread so as to involve practically every European
interest. Indeed, the German White-book, which
closes with the declaration of war against Russia
and the rupture with France, contains absolutely
nothing to indicate the forthcoming breach with
England, though by that date Great Britain had al-
ready indignantly rejected the German offer to pur-
chase our neutrality and Germany had refused to
give us the same pledge that Prance had unhesitat-
ingly given us that Belgian territory would be re-
spected in the event of war between Germany and
Prance.
The German Government is the best judge as to
whether its credit with its own people is likely to
be served by the issue of this White-book. Its re-
putation for good faith will certainly not be en-
hanced abroad by a publication which attempts to
reconcile three contradictory propositions—the first,


that the action of Austria against Servia was by
the common consent of Germany and Austria di-
rectly aimed over Servia’s head at Russia; the se-
cond, that it nevertheless was no concern of Russia;
and the third, that the Kaiser did his utmost to the
very end to promote mediation between Austria and
Russia on an issue which Germany declared from
the very beginning must be left to be settled be-
tween Austria and Servia alone. This defence of
German diplomacy is even more clumsy than Ger-
man diplomacy itself was throughout that feverish
fortnight of crisis. No severer judgment can well
be passed upon it.
The full text of the German “White Paper” fol-
lows ;
MEMORANDUM AND DOCUMENTS WITH’ RE-
GARD TO THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR.
On June 28 last the successor to the Austrian
throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and his wife,
the duchess of Hohenberg, were assassinated by the
revolver shots of a member of a Servian band of con-
spirators. An investigation of the crime by Austro-
Hungarian officials has revealed that the plot to take
the life of the Archduke was planned and promoted
in Belgrade with the co-operation of official Servian
individuals and was carried out with weapons from
the Servian Government depot.
_ This crime was bound to open the eyes of the whole
civilized world, not only with regard to the object
of Servian politics as relating to the existence and
integrity of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, but also
with regard to the criminal means that the Pan-Ser-
vian propaganda did not hesitate to employ in order
to attain these ends. The ultimate object of these
policies was to revolutionize gradually, and finally to
bring about a separation of the south-western region


of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy from that empire
and unite it with Servia.
The repeated and formal declarations of Servia to
Austria-Hungary to bring about good neighborly re-
lations did not change this trend of Servian politics in
the least. For the third time in the course of the
last six years Servia has brought Europe to the verge
of a world war in this manner. She could only do
this because she believed herself supported by Russia
in her endeavours.
As a result of the developments of the year 1908
growing out of the Turkish revolution, Russian poli-
cies had begun to organize a league of the Balkan
States directed under the existence of Turkey, under
Russian patronage. This alliance of the Balkan
States which was successful in crowding Turkey out
of her European possessions in 1911, came to grief
over the question of the disposition of the spoils.
Russian policy was not, however, frightened by this
failure. It was the idea of Russian statesmen that
there should be formed a new Balkan League under
Russian patronage, whose activities should be directed
this time not against Turkey, which had been driven
from the Balkans, but against the existence of the
Austro-Hungarian monarchy. The idea was that
Servia should cede to Bulgaria the section of Mace-
donia that she had won in the last Balkan war and off-
set the loss by the acquisition of Bosnia and Herze-
govina at the expense of the Monarchy of the Danube.
For this purpose Bulgaria, by her isolation, was to
be made pliable, Rumania, as the result of a propa-
ganda undertaken with the aid of France, was to be
chained to Russia, and Servia was to be referred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In view of these circumstances Austria had to
admit that it would not be consistent either with the
dignity or self-preservation of the monarchy to look
on longer at the operations on the other side of the
border without taking action. The Austro-Hungarian
Government advised us of this view of the situation
and asked our opinion in the matter. We were able


to assure our ally most heartily of our agreement with
her view of the situation and to assure her that any
action that she might consider it necessary to take
in order to put an end to the movement in Servia
directed against the existence of the Austro-Hungar-
ian Monarchy would receive our approval. We
were fully aware in this connection that warlike
moves on the part of Austria-Hungary against Servia
would bring Russia into the question and might draw
us into a war in accordance with our duties as an
ally. _ However, recognizing the vital interests of
Austria-Hungary which were at stake, we could
neither advise our ally to a compliance that would
have been inconsistent with her dignity, nor could we
deny her our support in this great hour of need. We
were all the more unable to do this inasmuch as our
interests also were seriously threatened as a result of
the continuous Servian agitation. If Servia, with
the help of Russia and France, had been allowed to
imperil the existence of the neighboring monarchy
any longer, this would lead to the gradual downfall
of Austria and would result in submission to Slavic
sway under the Russian sceptre, thus making the
position of the Germanic race in Central Europe un-
tenable. A morally weakened Austria breaking
down as the result of the advance of Russian Pan-
Slavism would no longer be an ally on whom we
could count and upon whom we could rely, such as
we need in view of the attitude of our eastern and
western neighbors, which has constantly grown more
threatening. We therefore gave Austria an entirely
free hand in her action against Servia. We have
taken no part in the preparations.
Austria chose the way, laying before the Servian
Government in detail the immediate relation between
the murder and the general Servian movement, not
only tolerated by the Servian Government, but sup-
ported by it, which an investigation of the murder at
Serajevo had established. At the same time Servia
was asked by Austria to put an absolute end to these
activities and to allow Austria to punish the guilty
parties. Austria demanded as a guarantee for the


harrying out of the proceedings participation in the
investigation on Servian territory and. the definite
dissolution of the various Pan-Servian societies carry-
ing on an agitation against Austria-Hungary, The
Imperial and Royal Government set a time limit of
forty-eight hours for the unconditional acceptance of
her terms. One day after the Austro-Hungarian note
had been handed to it the Servian Government began
mobilization. When, after the expiration of the
time, limit, the Servian Government made a reply
which, while satisfying the demands of Austria-Hun-
gary on certain points, made known emphatically
with regard to the essential ones its intention to refuse
the just demands of the monarchy by means of tem-
porizing and the introduction of new negotiations,
Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Servia
without having recourse to further negotiations or
allowing herself to be put off by Servian assurances,
the value of which she knows well enough—-to her
sorrow.
Prom that moment Austria was actually in a state
of war with Servia, which was publicly proclaimed by
means of the official declaration of war on the 28th of
the month.
Prom the very beginning of the conflict we took
the stand that this was an affair of Austria which
she alone would have to bring to a decision with Ser-
via. We have therefore devoted our entire efforts
to localizing the war and to convincing the other
powers that Austria-Hungary was compelled to take
justified defensive methods and appeal to arms. We
took the stand emphatically that no civilized nation
had the right in this struggle against lack of culture
[Unkultur] and criminal political morality to pre-
vent Austria from acting and to take away the just
punishment from Servia. We instructed our repre-
sentatives abroad in that sense.
At the same time the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment informed the Russian Government that her
(Austria’s) move against Servia was entirely a de-
fensive measure designed to put a stop to Servian


agitation, but that Austria-Hungary was compelled
by necessity to demand guarantees of a continued
friendly attitude on the part of Servia toward the
Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Austria-Hungary, the
note to Russia stated, had no intention of bringing
about a disturbance of the balance of power in the
Balkans. Both the French and the English Govern-
ments, replying to our explanation that the German
Government wished and was trying to localize the
conflict, promised to work in the same interest. In
the meantime these efforts did not succeed in prevent-
ing Russia’s interference in the Austro-Servian dis-
agreement.
The Russian Government issued an official com-
munique on July 24, according to which it would be
impossible for Russia to remain indifferent in the
Servian-Austrian conflict. The Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sazonof, made this position
known to the Imperial Ambassador, Count Pourtales.
On the afternoon of July 26 the Austro-Hungarian
Government again explained through its Ambassador
in St. Petersburg that Austria-Hungary had no plans
of conquest, but only wished to have peace at last on
her frontiers. In the course of the same day the first
reports of Russian mobilization reached Berlin. On
the evening of the 26th the Imperial Ambassadors at
London, Paris, and St. Petersburg were directed to
call the attention of the English, French, and Russian
Governments energetically to the danger of this Rus-
sian mobilization. After Austria-Hungary had offi-
cially declared to Russia that she did not seek the
acquisition of any territory in Servia, the decision
for world peace lay entirely in St. Petersburg, The
same day the Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg
was directed to make the following statement to the
Russian Government:
/‘The military preparatory measures of Russia
will compel us to take counter-action which must con-
sist in the mobilization of the army. Mobilization,
however, indicates war. Inasmuch as we know
Prance’s obligations towards Russia, this mobilization
would be directed simultaneously against Russia and


France. "We cannot assume that Russia wishes to let
loose such a European war. Inasmuch as Austria-
Hungary will not impair the continuance of the Ser-
vian Kingdom, we are of the opinion that Russia can
adopt a policy of waiting. We shall be all the more
able to support Russia’s wish not to allow the inte-
grity of the Servian Kingdom to be called into ques-
tion, since Austria does not call this integrity into
question herself. It will be easy to find a basis of
agreement in the further course of the affair.”
On July 27 the Russian Minister for War, Suchom-
linof, gave the German Military Attache his word of
honor that no mobilization order had as yet been
issued. He said that for the present preparatory
measures were being taken, no horses being levied and
no reservists being called in. In case Austria-Hun-
gary were to cross the Servian boundary, the military
districts facing Austria, those of Kieff, Odessa, Mos-
cow, and Kazan, would be mobilized. Under no cir-
cumstances would there be a mobilization of the dis-
tricts lying on the German front: St. Petersburg,
Yilna, and Warsaw. In answer to the Military At-
tache’s question as to what was the object of mobiliza-
tion against Austria-Hungary, the Russian War
Minister shrugged his shoulders and referred to the
diplomats. Thereupon the Military Attache indi-
cated that measures to mobilize against Austria-Hun-
gary were also decidedly threatening to Germany.
In the following days reports concerning the Russian
mobilization followed each other in quick succession.
Among these were reports concerning preparations on
the German border, such as the declaration of a state
of war in Kovno, the departure of the Warsaw garri-
son, and the strengthening of the Alexandrovo gar-
rison. On July 27 the first reports of preparatory
measures by Prance arrived. The Fourteenth Corps
discontinued its manoeuvres and returned to garrison
duty.
In the meantime we continued to exert our most
energetic influence on the Cabinets to insure the local-
ization of the conflict.
On the 26th Sir Edward Grey had suggested that


the differences between Austria-Hungary and Servia
be laid before a conference of the Ambassadors of
Germany, France, and Italy, with himself presiding
over the sessions. To this suggestion we replied that,
while we approved his tender, we could not take part
in such a conference because we could not call upon
Austria to appear before a European court in her
controversy with Servia.
France agreed to Sir Edward Grey’s proposal, but
it was finally brought to naught because Austria, as
was to be expected, held herself aloof.
True to our conviction that an act of mediation
could not take into consideration the Austro-Servian
conflict, which was purely an Austro-Hungarian
affair, but would have to take into consideration only
the relations between Austria-Hungary and Russia,
we continued our efforts to bring about an under-
standing between these two powers. We were also
willing, after declining the conference idea, to tran-
smit a further proposal by Sir Edward Grey to
Vienna, in which he urged that Austria-Hungary
either agree to accept the Servian answer as sufficient
or to look upon it as a basis for further conversations.
The Austro-Hungarian Government, in full appre-
ciation of our mediatory activity, replied to this pro-
posal that, coming as it did after the opening of hos-
tilities, it was too late.
In spite of this we continued our mediatory efforts
to the utmost and advised Vienna to make any pos-
sible compromise consistent with the dignity of the
Monarchy. Unluckily, all of the mediatory acts were
soon overtaken by the military preparations of Russia
and France. On July 29 the Russian Government
officially announced in Berlin that it had mobilized
four army districts. At the same time, additional
reports reached us of rapidly progressing military
preparations by France on land and sea. On the
same day the Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg
had a conversation with the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs concerning which he reported as fol-
lows by telegraph;—
“The Minister tried to persuade me to agree in


behalf of my Government to a conversation of fonr
parties to devise means of moving Austria-Hungary
to give up those demands touching on the sovereignty
of Servia. While I agreed to a complete transmis-
sion of the conversation, I took the stand that, since
Russia had decided on the ominous step of mobiliza-
tion, it was difficult for me to exchange any opinions
on this subject, and it almost seemed impossible to do
so. I said that what Russia now demanded of us in
respect to Austria-Hungary was the same, thing of
which Austria-Hungary was accused regarding Ser-
via-—a usurpation of the rights of sovereignty; that
Austria-Hungary had promised to be considerate of
Russian interests by declaring her territorial disin-
terestedness, a great concession on the part of a nation
waging war. For this reason, I said, an opportunity
should be given the Dual Monarchy to settle her dis-
pute with Servia alone. There would be time enough
to come back to the subject of safe-guarding Servian
sovereignty when peace terms were to be concluded.
“I added very earnestly that at the present moment
the Austro-Servian affair was secondary to the danger
of a European conflagration, and I made every effort
to Hiow the Minister the greatness of this danger.
Ht was impossible to change Sazonof’s mind on
the point that Russia could not desert Servia now.”
Similarly the Military Attache at St. Petersburg
reported by telegraph on the 29th as follows, regard-
ing an interview with the Chief of the General Staff
of the Russian Army:—
The Chief of the General. Staff asked me to call
and informed me that he had just come from His
Majesty. He stated that he had been instructed by
the Minister for War to assure me again that every-
thing had remained the. same as it had been explained
to. me by the Minister two days ago. He offered me
a written confirmation, and gave me his word of honor
m tlie m ost formal manner that mobilization had be-
gun nowhere, that is to say, not a single man or. horse
had been levied up to that hour, three o’clock in the
afternoon. He stated that he could not answer for
toe future, but he could declare most emphatically


that no mobilization was desired by His Majesty in
the districts touching on our boundary. However,
many reports have reached here and also Warsaw and
Vilna of the levying of reservists in various parts of
the empire. I therefore told the General that I was
confronted with a riddle as the result of his announce-
ments to me. On his word as an officer he repeated,
however, that such reports were untrue; that a false
alarm may have been raised here and there. -
“In view of the positive, numerous reports before
me of actual levying, I am compelled to consider the
conversation as an attempt to mislead us with regard
to the extent of the measures that have already been
taken.”
Inasmuch as the Russian Government, in reply to
the several inquiries regarding the reasons for its
threatening attitude, several times alluded to the cir-
cumstance that Austria-Hungary had not yet begun
any conversations in St. Petersburg, the Austro-Hun-
garian Ambassador, at our request, was directed on
July 29 to begin the conversations with Mr. Sazonof.
Count Szapary was authorised to make known to the
Russian Minister the contents of the note to Servia
which had been, as it were, overtaken by the declara-
tion of war, and to receive any suggestions that might
still come from the Russian side, as well as to discuss
with Sazonof all questions touching directly on the
Austro-Russian relations.
Shoulder to shoulder with England we continued to
work without cessation for mediation, and supported
every suggestion in Vienna which we believed showed
hope of the possibility of a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. As late as the 30th we transmitted an Eng-
lish proposal to Vienna which established this basis
of negotiation, that Austria-Hungary, after succeed-
ing in marching into Servia, should dictate her terms
there. We had to assume that Russia would accept
this basis.
While these efforts of ours for mediation, supported
by English diplomacy, were being continued with in-
creasing urgency in the time from July 29 to the 31st,
there constantly, came new and increasing reports


concerning Russian mobilization measures. The
assembling of troops on the East Prussian border and
the declaration of a state of war in all important
places on the Russian western boundary no longer left
any doubt of the fact that Russian mobilization was
actively going on against us, while at the same time
all such measures were denied anew on word of honor
to our representative at St. Petersburg. Even be-
fore the reply to the last English-German mediation
proposal, the basis of which must have been known in
St. Petersburg, could reach Berlin from Vienna, Rus-
sia ordered a general mobilization. On the same day
an exchange of_ telegrams took place between his
Majesty the Kaiser and King and Czar Nicholas in
which his Majesty called the Czar’s attention to the
threatening character of the Russian mobilization and
to the continuance of his own activity as mediator.
On July 31 the Czar directed the following tele-
gram to his Majesty:—
“I thank you from my heart for your mediation,
which permits a gleam of hope that everything can
yet be settled peaceably. It is a technical impossi-
bility for us to halt our military preparations which
become necessary through Austria’s mobilization. We
are far from desirous of war. So long as the nego-
tiations continue, with Austria concerning Servia,
my troops will not undertake any challenging action’
I solemnly pledge you my word as to that. lam
ti listing in the grace of God with all my might and
hope for the success of your mediation in Vienna, for
the welfare of our countries and for the peace of
Europe. Your sincerely devoted
“NICHOLAS.”
To this his Majesty the Kaiser replied:—
Upon your appeal to my friendship and your
plea lor my help, I have undertaken a mediatory
action between yonr Government and the Austro-
Hungarian Government, While this negotiation
was under way your troops were mobilized against
Austria-Hungary, which is allied with me, as a con-
sequence of which my mediation was almost made


illusory, as I have already informed you. Notwith-
standing this, I continued it. Now lam in receipt
of reliable reports of serious preparations for war on
my eastern boundary also. Responsibility for the
safety of my empire compels me to take counter defen-
sive measures. I have carried my efforts for the
maintenance of world peace-to the utmost limit. It
is not I that bear the responsibility for the calamity
that now threatens the entire civilized world. Yet
at this moment it lies in your power to stave it off.
No_ one threatens the honor and might of Russia,
which might have awaited the result of my mediation’.
The friendship for you and your empire which was
bequeathed to me by my grandfather on his deathbed
has always been sacred to me, and I have been faith-
ful to Russia when she was hard pressed, especially in
her last war. It is still possible for you to maintain
the peace of Europe if Russia will decide to put a
stop to the military measures that threaten Germanv
and Austria-Hungary. ’ ’
Even before this telegram reached its destination
the mobilization of the entire Russian fighting force,
which had been ordered in the forenoon of the same
day, openly directed against us, was in full swing.
The Czar’s telegram, however, was sent at 2 o’clock in
the afternoon.
After the mobilization became known in Berlin, the
Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg was ordered
on the afternoon of July 31 to advise the Russian
Government that Germany had declared a state of
war as a counter move to the mobilization of the Rus-
sian Army and Navy, which would have to be fol-
lowed by mobilization unless Russia ceased her mili-
tary preparations against Germany and Austria-Hun-
gary within twelve hours, and so advise Germany.
At the same time the Imperial Ambassador at Paris
was directed to request an explanation from the
1 rench Government within eighteen hours as to whe-
ther, in the case of a Russo-German war Prance
would remain neutral.
The Russian Government destroyed the painstaking


mediatory work of the European State Chancelleries,
shortly before its successful outcome, by her mobiliza-
tion, which endangered the safety of the German
Empire. The mobilization measures, concerning the
seriousness of which to the Russian Government no
doubt was allowed to arise from the beginning, toge-
ther with her continued denial, show clearly that Rus-
sia desired the war.
The Imperial Ambassador at St. Petersburg de-
livered the message that had been given to him for
Mr.’Sazonof on July 31 at midnight.
After the expiration of the time limit set for Russia
without the receipt of an answer to our inquiry, his
Majesty the Emperor and King ordered the mobiliza-
tion of the entire Germany Army and the Imperial
Navy at 5 p.m. on Aug. 1. In the meantime the Im-
perial Ambassador at St. Petersburg had been in-
structed to hand a declaration of war to the Russian
Government in case no favorable reply was issued
before the expiration of the time limit. However,
before a report regarding the execution of this order
arrived, Russian troops crossed our border and ad-
vanced on German territory, namely, as early as the
afternoon of Aug. 1.
By this move Russia began the war against us.
In the meantime the Imperial Ambassador at Paris
put the question that he had been ordered to present
before the French Cabinet at 7 p.m. on July 31.
To this the French Prime Minister made an ambi-
guous and unsatisfactory reply at 1 o’clock in the
afternoon of Aug. 1. This does not give a clear pic-
ture of the French position, since if was limited to
the statement that France would do what her inter-
ests seemed to warrant. A few hours later, at sin
the afternoon, the complete mobilization of the entire
French Army and Navy was ordered.
On the morning of the following day France
opened hostilities.
Concluded on Aug. 2, noon.


THE AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN NOTE TO SERVIA.
From the Norddentsche Allgemeine Zeitung, July 25,
1914.
Berlin, July 24.
The Austro-Hungarian Minister at Belgrade at 6
o’clock last night handed to the Servian Government
a verbal note with the demands of the Austro-Hun-
garian Government. In the note the answer is re-
quested by 6 p.m., July 25. It reads as follows:
“On March 31, 1909, the Royal Servian Minister
at the Court of Vienna, at the order of his Govern-
ment, handed the following explanation to the Im-
perial and Royal Government: ‘ Servia admits that
her rights were not interfered with by the events in
Bosnia, and that she will in accordance therewith ac-
commodate herself to the resolutions which the Powers
will draw up in reference to Article 25 of the Berlin
Convention. Servia, in following the advice of the
Great Powers, pledges herself to give up the attitude
of protest and resistance which she has assumed in
regard to the annexation since October last, and she
further pledges herself to change the course of her
present policies opposed to Austria-Hungary and to
live in future with the latter as a friendly neighbor.’
“The history of the past few years, and especially
the painful developments of June 28, have indicated
the presence of a subversive movement in Servia, the
object of which is to separate certain sections of the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy from the Empire. This
movement which has arisen before the eyes of the
Servian Government, has resulted in acts of terror-
ism and a long line of attempts on human life, ending
in murder outside the territory of the Kingdom.
“Far from attempting to carry out the formal
pledges made in the declaration of March 31, 1909, the
Servian Government has done nothing to suppress
these activities. It tolerated the criminal acts of the
various societies directed against the Austro-Hun-
garian Monarchy, the unbridled utterances of the


press, the glorification of those committing crimes,
participation by officers and officials in subversive
intrigues; she countenanced an unhealthy propa-
ganda in the public schools and, finally, all manifes-
tations which could mislead the Servian populace into
hatred of the Monarchy and scorn of its management.
‘ ‘ This tolerance of which the Royal Servian Govern-
ment was guilty, continued even at the moment when
the events of June 28 showed the whole world the
terrible consequences of such toleration,
“It is made clear from the utterances and admis-
sions of the criminal authority of the attack of June
28 that the Serajevo murder was planned in Bel-
grade, that the murderers obtained the weapons and
bombs with which they were supplied from Servian
officers and officials, and, finally, that leading Servian
officials on the boundary sent the criminals and their
weapons to Bosnia under their auspices.
“The above results of the investigation no longer
permit the Austro-Hungarian Government to observe
the attitude of forbearance toward actions that for
years have aroused prejudice against it, actions which
had their centre in Belgrade and have been carried
over in the territories of the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy from that point. These developments make it
incumbent upon the Austro-Hungarian Government
to put an end to the revolutionary movements which
constitute a constant threat to the peace of the mon-
archy.
“In order to attain this end the Austro-Hungarian
Government finds itself compelled to demand an
official assurance from the Servian Government that
it denounce the anti-Austro-Hungarian propaganda,
that is to say, that it denounce every effort, the ulti-
mate object of which is to sever territory from the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and that it* pledges it-
self to do everything in its power to suppress this
criminal and terrorizing propaganda.
.“In order to give an official character to these pro-
mises the Royal Servian Government will publish the


following statement on the first page of its official
organ on July 26: —
“ ‘The Royal Servian Government condemns the
propaganda directed against Austria-Hungary, that
is to say, every activity the object of which is to sever
territories from the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and
it regrets sincerely the terrible consequences of these
criminal operations.
“ ‘The Royal Servian Government regrets that
Servian officers and officials have taken part in the
above-mentioned propaganda and thereby jeopardized
the pleasant neighborly relations which the Royal Go-
vernment formally pledged itself to cultivate, in its
declaration of March 31, 1909.
“ ‘The Royal Government, which disapproves of
and rejects every thought or every attempt to inter-
fere with the destiny of the inhabitants of any part of
Austria-Hungary, considers it its duty to call the at-
tention of the officers and officials and of the entire
populace of the kingdom most emphatically to the
fact that it will in future take the strongest measures
against individuals found guilty of such acts, to pre-
vent and to suppress which every effort will be made.
“ ‘This declaration will be brought to the attention
of the Royal Army by an order of the day from his
Majesty the King and will be published in the official
organ of the army.
“ ‘Furthermore the Royal Servian Government
pledges itself:
“ ‘l. To suppress every publication that incites to
hatred and contempt of the Austro-Hungarian mon-
archy and the general tendency of which is directed
against the territorial integrity of the latter.
“ ‘2. To proceed at once to the dissolution of the
Society Narodna Odbrana, and to confiscate all its
material for propaganda; also to proceed in the same
way against other societies and organisations in Ser-
via that are carrying on a propaganda against Aus-
tria-Hungary. The Royal Government will take the
necessary measures to prevent the dissolved societies


from renewing their activities under different names
or in other forms.
“ ‘3. To set aside everything in the public instruc-
tion of Servia, including the teaching corps, as well as
the teaching materials, that tends or might tend to
nurture the propaganda against Austria-Hungary.
“ ‘4. To dismiss from the military service and the
public service in general all officers and employes who
are guilty of propaganda against Austria-Hungary,
whose names, together with the accusations against
them, the Austro-Hungarian Government reserves the
right of making known to the Royal Government.
“ ‘5, To consent to the co-operation of representa-
tives of the Austro-Hungarian Government in Servia
to help to suppress the subversive movement against
the territorial integrity of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy.
“ ‘6. To institute a legal trial of the conspirators
in the plot of June 28 who are on Servian territory.
Officials delegated by the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment will take part in the proceedings.
“ ‘7. To proceed with all speed to arrest Major
Yoja Tankosic and a certain Milan Giganovic, Servian
State officials, who have been compromised as a result
of the investigation.
“ ‘B. To take appropriate steps to prevent assist-
ance by Servian officials in smuggling weapons and
explosives across the border, and to dismiss from the
service and severely punish those representatives of
the frontier service of Schabatz and Loznica who
helped those concerned in the crime of Serajevo to
cross the border.
“‘9, To make an explanation to the Austro-Hun-
garian Government regarding the not easily justifi-
able utterances of high Servian officials in Servia and
abroad who, regardless of their official positions, did
not hesitate to express themselves as unfriendly to
Austria in interviews after the crime of June 28.
MO. To advise the Austro-Hungarian Government
without delay with regard to the carrying out of the
measures outlined above.’


“The Austro-Hungarian Government awaits the
reply of the Royal Government at the latest by Sa-
turday, the 25th inst., at 6 p.m.
“A memorandum of the results of the investigation
of Serajevo, in so far as they concern the function-
aries mentioned in paragraphs 7 and 8, is inclosed
with this note.
“ [lnclosure.]
“The investigation by the court at Serajevo against
Gabrilo Princip and accomplices in the assassination
committed on June 28 of this year lias up to now es-
tablished the following facts: — '
“I. The plot to murder Archduke Franz Ferdinand
during his stay in Serajevo was planned by Gabrilo
Princip, Nedeljko Gabrinovic, a certain Milan Cigano-
vic, and Trifko Grabez, with the assistance of Major
Voja Tankosic.
‘ ‘ 2. The six bombs and four Browning pistols which
were used by the criminals were obtained for them
and handed to Princip, Gabrinovic, and Gabez in
Belgrade by a certain Milan Ciganovic, and Major
Voja Tankosic.
“3. The bombs are hand grenades coming from the
arsenal of the Servian Army at Kragujevac.
‘‘ 4. In order to make sure of the success of the at-
tempt, Milan Ciganovic instructed Princip Gabrino-
vic, and Grabez in the art of hurling bombs, and
taught Princip and Grabez how to shoot with Brown-
ing pistols in a forest beside the shooting grounds of
Topschider.
“5. In order to make possible the crossing of the
Bosnia-Herzegovina frontier and the smuggling in of
their weapons, a secret transportation system was or-
ganised by Ciganovic. The entrance of the criminals
with their weapons into Bosnia and Herzegovina was
carried out with the assistance of the frontier Cap-
tains at Schabatz (Rade Popovic) and Loznica, as
well as the customs officer, Rudivoj Gobic of Loznica,
and several other persons. ’ ’
The Fremdenblatt wmites, among other things, as
follows: “The crime of Serajevo has revealed to the


whole world the dangers that threaten ns, and has
directed our attention to the pressing need of insur-
ing quiet and safety to ourselves at any cost. The
Austro-Hungarian Minister at Belgrade to-day made
known to the Servian Government the demands which
we must make to it to-day. It is the result of long,
careful consideration and does not go any further
than absolutely necessary. We must insist on the de-
mands as they stand; for this is a matter of under-
ground passages extending from Servia directly to
the heart of our South Slavic territories. Conditions
that we cannot allow to continue have made them-
selves apparent on the threshold of our house as a
result of the encroachment of the Pan-Servian idea.
Servia has covered herself with a network of societies
which, with the pretext of fostering culture, preach
the doctrine of hatred of us throughout the country.
Emissaries are sent out to Bosnia, Herzegovina and
Crotia, to incite the populace to revolt and to picture
to them an imminent union of those territories with
the Servian Kingdom. The Servian Government, in
spite of its emphatic declaration, has done nothing to
stop this movement; its tolerance has had the effect of
silent consent. Anything that has been done has
been done only for appearances. There are many
persons of high military rank, or professors or teach-
ers in the service of the State who are among the
leaders of these societies. If one group hopes to at-
tain its ends by means of pacts and wars, the others
express their conviction that a terroristic and revolu-
tionary stage must precede the diplomatic and mili-
tary action. The event of Serajevo has demonstrated
that this plan of campaign is being waged against us
with terrible emphasis. It has been proved that the
murder of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his
wife was carried out with the support of the officials
of the kingdom. We have to deal with an irrecon-
cilable, bitterly hostile movement, which shows itself
in most varied forms, but which, in its entirety, keeps
our border populace in a state of excitement, shatters
the confidence of the various races in our monarchy
as to our ability to maintain peace with the outside


world, and is the main point for the beginning of all
efforts against ns, and causes much precious blood to
flow on our territories. The results of this agitation
have frequently been felt in our economic life. Thou-
sands of careers have been blasted as a result of the
alarming crises following the constantly recurring
Pan-Servian scare. Were we to endure all this with-
out stepping in to take decided action against it, the
same agitators who continually, for the sake of rhe-
torical effect, accuse us of the misuse of power, would
call this a sign of weakness, lack of will, and fear.
They would state that we do not dare to defend our-
selves, and in that way they would find new support-
ers and would feel encouraged to a doubly strong at-
tack. While we are making our will felt, we are bring-
ing the Servian people themselves to a realization of
their position. They will see that they have been de-
ceived, that the movement for a greater Servia will
break against an iron wall, that the monarchy is deter-
mined to spurn them. The feeling that we have to
deal with a condition that has become unbearable,
that a stop must be put to it, is so strong among our
people that complaints concerning the long delay in
dealing with the situation are getting louder. This
impatience and criticism can be understood. But
the Austro-Hungarian Government did not wish to
act in anger, not without the most careful testing of
every circumstance, not without making absolutely
certain what demands must be made. Servia has
been allowed a brief time in which to comply with our
demands. We do not wish to lengthen the period of
the crisis that weighs down our economic life and is
making all Europe uneasy. We want to adjust an
untenable relation as quickly as possible, convince
public opinion in Servia of our determination, and
finally come to a settlement. We hope that Servia
will bow to the desires that we have expressed within
the time set. There is no more reason to doubt our
determined will to maintain our position under all cir-
cumstances than to doubt our sincere wish that better
relations may be developed in the future between
Servia and Austria-Hungary.”


VIENNA, July 24. —The newspapers declare that
the note to Servia is the beginning of a defence
and is not an attack, that it shows the strong will of
the monarchy, but demands nothing from Servia ex-
cept what should have been done long ago for the
maintenance of its respect before Europe. The
entire press expresses the hope that Servia, by prompt
acceptance of Austria-Hungary’s terms, will remove
the suspicion of partnership with the murderers, and
that she will be far-sighted enough to choose peace
and not war.
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY AND THE SERVIAN NOTE
From The Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, July 20,
1914.
VIENNA, July 27. —The note of the Royal Servian
Government of July 25, 1914, reads as follows:
“The Royal Government has received the notifica-
tion of the Austro-Hungarian Government of the 10th
inst., and is convinced that its answer will remove
every misunderstanding that threatens to disturb the
pleasant neighborly relations between the Anstro-
Hungarian Monarchy and the Servian Kingdom.
“The Royal Government is certain that in dealing
with the great neighboring monarchy those protests
have under no pretext been renewed which formerly
were made both in the Skupschtina and in explana-
tions and negotiations of responsible representatives
of the State and which, through the declaration of the
Servian Government of March 18, 1909, were settled;
furthermore, that since that time none of the varions
successive Governments of the kingdom, nor any of its
officers, has made an attempt to change the political
and legal conditions set up in Bosnia and Herze-
govina. The Royal Government is certain that the
Austro-Hungarian Government has made no repre-
sentations of any kind along this line except in the
case of a textbook concerning which the Austro-Hun-
garian Government received an entirely satisfactory


reply. Servia, during the Balkan crisis, gave evid-
ence in numerous cases of her pacific and temperate
policies, and it will be thanks to Servia alone, and the
sacrifices that she alone made in the interests of Euro-
pean peace if that peace continue.”
On this the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy com-
ments :
“The Royal Servian Government limits itself to the
statement that since it made the declaration of March
18, 1909, no effort has been made by the Servian Go-
vernment or its officers to alter the position of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
“Thereby it consciously and wilfully evades the
grounds on which we base our course, since we did not
make the claim that it and its officials had undertaken
anything of an official nature along this line.
“Our grievance rather is this, that it failed to sup-
press movements directed against the territorial in-
tegrity of the monarchy in spite of the pledges made
in the note in question.
“Its pledge consisted of this, that the entire trend
of its policies was to be changed and pleasant, neigh-
borly relations with the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy
brought about; not merely to refrain from officially
taking up the question of Bosnia’s belonging to the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. ’ ’
The Servian note thereupon continued:—
‘ ‘ The Royal Government cannot be held responsible
for the utterances of a private character such as news-
paper articles and the peaceful work of societies,
utterances which are quite ordinary in almost all
countries and which are not generally under State
control, especially since the Royal Government, in the
solution of a great number of questions that came
up between Servia and Austria-Hungary, showed
much consideration as a result of which most of these
questions were settled in the best interests of the pro-
gress of the two neighboring countries.”


Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:—
“The contention of the Royal Servian Government
that utterances of the press and the activities of
societies have a private character and are not under
the control of the State is contrary to the practice
of modern States, even under the freest interpretation
of the rights of the press and societies, which are of
public legal character and both subject to State super-
vision. Moreover, Servian practice is to exercise
such control. The charge against the Servian Go-
vernment is that it has entirely failed to inspect its
press and societies whose acts hostile to Austria-Hun-
gary were known to it. ’ ’
The Servian note continues:—
“The Royal Government was therefore painfully
surprised to hear the contention that Servian subjects
had taken part in the preparations for the murder
committed in Serajevo. It had hoped to be invited
to co-operate in the investigations following this crime
and was prepared, in order to prove the entire cor-
rectness of its acts, to proceed against all persons con-
cerning whom it had received information.”
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government: —
“This contention is incorrect. The Servian Go-
vernment had been carefully advised as to certain
definite persons who were suspected, and it was not
only in the position but bound by its internal laws to
begin an action spontaneously. It did nothing at
all along these lines.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“In conformity with the wish of the Austro-Hun-
garian Government, the Royal Government is pre-
pared to turn over to the court, regardless of station
or rank, any Servian subject concerning whose par-
ticipation in the crime at Serajevo proofs may be
given to it. The Government pledges itself especially
to publish on the first page of the official organ of
July 26 the following declaration:


“ ‘The Royal Servian Government condemns every
propaganda that may be directed against Austria-
Hungary; that is to say, all efforts designed ulti-
mately to sever territory from the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy, and it regrets sincerely the sad conse-
quences of these criminal machinations.”
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:—
“Our demand read as follows;—-‘The Royal Ser-
vian Government condemns the propaganda that is
directed against Austria-Hungary. . . .” The
charge made by the Royal Servian Government in the
declaration demanded by us infers that such a propa-
ganda against Austria-Hungary does not exist or that
it is unknown to the Royal Government. This for-
mula is not sincere, and conceals something in order
that the Servian Government later may reserve an
avenue of escape, saying that in its declaration it did
not disavow the existence of the present propaganda,
and did not recognize it as inimical to the monarchy,
whereupon it could mislead further to the contention
that it would not be pledged to suppress a propa-
ganda like the present one.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“The Royal Government regrets that in accordance
with advices from the Austro-Hungarian Government,
certain Servian officers and functionaries are taking
an active part in the present propaganda and that
they have thereby jeopardized the pleasant neigh-
borly relations to the maintenance of which the
Royal Government was formally pledged by the dec-
laration of March 1, 1909.
“The Government (what follows here is similar to
the text demanded).
Comment of the Austro-Hungarian Government:—
“The formal declaration demanded by us was as
follows: ‘The Royal Government regrets that Ser-
vian officers and functionaries . . . took part in
. . Also in this choice of words and in the addi


tional clause ‘in accordance with advices from the
Austro-Hungarian Government, ’ it is shown that the
Servian Government is carrying out the object indi-
cated above —to allow itself free rein in the future.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“The Royal Government further pledges itself:—-
“1. To introduce a provision in the press law on
the occasion of the next regular session of the
Skuptschtina, according to which investigations to
hatred and contempt of the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy, as Avell as any publication directed in general
against the territorial integrity of Austria-Hungary,
shall he punished severely.
“The Government pledges itself, on the occasion of
the coming revision of the Constitution, to add to
Article XXII. a clause permitting the confiscation of
publications, the confiscation of which, under the pre-
sent Article XXII. of the Constitution, would be im-
possible. ’
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment :
“We had demanded: —
“ ‘I. The suppression of all publications that
arouse people to hatred and contempt for the Austro-
Hungarian monarchy and whose tendency is directed
against the territorial integrity of the monarchy.’
“We thus wished to obligate Servia to take mea-
sures for having such attacks in the press cease in
future; we wished, therefore, to be sure that Ave had
Avon certain success in this direction.
“Instead, Servia offers to make certain laAvs that
may lead to the above result, to wit: —
“ (a) A IaAV by which the individuals may be pun-
ished for above-mentioned statements of the press
hostile to the monarchy. This is nothing to us, espe-
cially as it is Avell known that the punishment of in-
dividuals for press misdemeanors is possible only in
very rare cases, and, under a correspondingly lax


handling of such a law, even these few would not be
punished. Thus this is a suggestion which in no wise
answers our demand, and therefore does not offer us
the slightest guarantee of the result desired by us.
“(b) An addition to Article XXII. of the Consti-
tution to the effect that confiscation be allowed—a sug-
gestion that likewise must fail to satisfy us, since the
existence of such a law in Servia is of no use to us.
What would be of us would be the promise of the
Government to enforce it, which promise is not made
to us.
“ Therefore these suggestions are thoroughly un-
satisfactory, all the more so as they are of an evasive
nature, since we are not told within what space of
time these laws will be enacted, and since if the enact-
ment of the laws should be refused by the Skupschtina
—to say nothing of the possible resignation of the
Government—all would remain as it was.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“2. The Government possesses no proof—and the
note of the Austro-Hungarian Government provides it
with none —that the ‘Narodna Odbrana’ Society and
other similar associations have up to tiie present com-
mitted any criminal acts through any of their mem-
bers. Nevertheless, the Royal Government will accept
the demand of: the Austro-Hungarian Government
and dissolve the Narodna Odbrana Society, as well as
all societies that may work against Austria-Hun-
gary. ’ ’
Observation of the Imperial and Royal Govern-
ment :
“The anti-monarchial propaganda of the Narodna
Odbrana and the associations affiliated with it fills all
public; life in Servia; it is therefore a finite unreliable
statement on the part of the Servian Government to
maintain that it knows nothing about this society.
“To say nothing of the fact that the demand made
by us is not entirely granted, since we furthermore
demanded*


“That the means of propaganda of these associa-
tion should he confiscated.
“That the reorganization of the dissolved associa-
tions under other names and in other forms should he
prevented.
“Concerning these two points the Belgrade Gov-
ernment preserves complete silence, so that we have
no assurance, in the partial agreement given ns, that
an end will he put to the anti-Austrian associations,
especially of the ‘Narodna Odbrana,’ hy their dis-
solution. ’ ’
Servia’s note continues:—
“d. The Royal Servian Government agrees to elimi-
nate forthwith from public education in Servia every-
thing that might help the propaganda against Aus-
tria-Hungary, provided that the Austro-Hungarian
Government gives it actual proof of this propa-
ganda.”
Observation of the Imperial and Royal Govern-
ment :
“Upon this point also the Servian Government de-
mands proofs’that, in the public instruction courses
of Servia, there is an anti-Austrian propaganda, al-
though it must be aware that the books employed in
the Servian schools contain such matter, and that a
great part of the Servian teachers are in the Narodna
Odbrana and affiliated associations.
“Moreover, in this case also, the Servian Govern-
ment has not met a part of our demands, since, in its
text, it left out this addition desired by us, ‘as well
as the body of teachers and the means of teaching are
concerned’—an addition which clearly shows where
the anti-Austrian propaganda in the Servian schools
is to be sought.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“4, The Royal Government is also ready to dis-
charge from military and civil service such officers—
provided it is proved against them by legal investi-
gation—who have implicated themselves in acts di-
rected against the territorial integrity of the Austro-


Hungarian monarchy; the Government expects that,
for the purpose of instituting proceedings, the Austro-
Hungarian Government will impart the names of
these officers and employes and the acts of which they
are accused.”
Observation of the Imperial and Royal Govern-
ment :—•
“In view of the fact that the Royal Servian Gov-
ernment makes the discharge of the officers and em-
ployes in question from military and civil service
dependent on whether they are found guilty after
trial, its accession to our demand is limited to those
cases where such persons have committed acts laying
them open to legal penalties. Since, however, we
demand the elimination of those officers and employes
who are making an anti-Austrian propaganda, which
in Servia is not usually punishable by law, it would
seem that in this case also our demands have not been
met.”
Servia’s note continues:—
“5. The Royal Servian Government must confess
that it is not quite clear as to the sense and scope of
the desire of the Austro-Hungarian Government to
the effect that the royal Servian Government bind
itself to allow the co-operation within its territory of
representatives of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment, but it nevertheless declares itself willing to
permit such co-operation as might he in conformity
with international law and criminal procedure, as
well as with friendly neighborly relations.”
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment: —
“International law has as little to do with this ques-
tion as criminal procedure. The question is purely
one of national policing, to be solved by special agree-
ment. Servia’s statement is, therefore, incomprehen-
sible and, on account of its vague form, would give
rise to insurmountable difficulties if an endeavor were
made to arrange the agreement.”


Servia’s note continues:—
“6. The Royal Government naturally holds itself
bound to institute an investigation against all such
persons as were concerned in the plot of June 15-28,
or are supposed to have been concerned in it, and are
on Servian soil. As to the co-operation of special dele-
gates of the Austro-Hungarian Government in this
investigation, the Servian Government cannot accept
such co-operation, since this would be a violation of
the laws and criminal procedure. However, in indi-
vidual cases, information as to the progress of the
investigation might he given the Austro-Hungarian
delegates. ’ ’
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment:—
“Our demand was perfectly clear and not to he mis-
understood. We wished:—
“(1) The institution of a legal investigation
against those implicated in the plot.
“(2) That Austro-Hungarian representatives
should take part in the investigation, (‘recherche,’ in
contradistinction to ‘enquete judiciare.’)
“(3) We did not desire that Austro-Hungarian
representatives take part in the Servian legal pro-
ceedings ; .all we wished them to do was to co-operate
in the police preliminaries, and help get together and
corroborate the evidence for the investigation. If the
Servian Government misunderstands us it does so
purposely, since the difference between ‘enquete judi-
ciare’ and the simple ‘recherches’ must certainly be
plain to it. Since it wished to be free of all control
in the proceedings to be instituted, which, if properly
conducted, would have results highly undesirable for
it, and as it has no loophole for plausibly declining
our co-operation in the police proceedings (analogous
cases for such police intervention exist in great num-
ber) it has taken a ground that gives to its refusal the
appearance of right and to our demand the stamp of
impossibility. ’ ’


The Servian note continues:—
“7. On the very evening on which your note ar-
rived the Royal Government caused the arrest of Ma-
jor Voislar Tankosic. But, regarding Milan Ciga-
novic, who is a subject of the Austro-Hungarian mon-
archy, and who was employed until June 15 (as can-
didate) in the Department of Railroads, it has not
been possible to arrest this man up to now, for which
reason a warrant has been issued against him.
“The Austro-Hungarian Government is requested,
in order that the investigation may be made as soon
as possible, to make known in the specified form what
grounds of suspicion exist, and the proofs of guilt
collected at the investigation in Serajevo.”
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment: —
“This answer is insincere. Ciganovic, according to
our investigation, went on a furlough three days after
the crime, when it became known that he was con-
cerned in the plot, and repaired to Rihari in the ser-
vice of the Prefect of Police of Belgrade., So that it
is incorrect to say that, between June 15 and 28, Ciga-
novic was already out of the Servian service. To this
must be added that the Prefect of Police of Belgrade,
who himself had brought about the departure of Ciga-
novic, and who knew where the latter was, declared
in an interview that there was no man of the name of
Milan Ciganovic in Belgrade.”
The Servian note continues:
8. The Servian Government will increase the se-
verity and scope of its measures against the smug-
gling of arms and explosives.
It goes without saying that it will at once start
an investigation and mete out severe punishment to
the frontier officials of the Sabac-Loznica line who
failed in their duty and allowed those responsible for
the crime to cross the frontier.
9. The Royal Government is willing to give ex-
planations of the statements made in interviews


by its officials in Servia and foreign countries after
the crime, and which, according to the Austro-Hun-
garian Government, were anti-Austrian, as soon as
the said Government indicates where these state-
ments were made and provides proofs that such state-
ments were actually made by the said officials. The
Royal Government will itself take steps to collect
the necessary proofs and means of transmission for
this purpose.
Observation of the Austro-Hungarian Government:
The Royal Servian Government must have per-
fectly good knowledge of these interviews. If it
requires that the Austro-Hungarian Government pro-
vide all sorts of details about these interviews and
demands a regular investigation, it shows that it has
no desire really to accede to this demand.
The Servian note continues:
10. The Royal Government will, in so far as this
has not already occurred in this note, inform the
Austro-Hungarian Government of the taking of the
measures concerning the foregoing matters, as soon
as such measures have been ordered and carried
out.
The Royal Servian Government is of the opinion
that it is mutually advantageous not to hinder the
settlement of this question, and therefore, in case
the Austro-Hungarian Government should not con-
sider itself satisfied with this answer, it is ready
as always to accept a peaceful solution, either
by referring the decision of this question
to the international tribunal at The Hague or
by leaving it to the great powers who co-operated
in the preparation of the explanation given by the
Servian Government on the 18th-31st March, 1909.
(Close of the note.)


ANNEX 1A.
FROM THE AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN MATERIAL.
VIENNA, July 27.—The “dossier” mentioned in
the Austro-Hungarian circular note to the foreign
Embassies concerning the Servian dispute is made
public to-day.
In this memorial, attention is called to the fact
that the movement originating in Servia, which has
as an object to tear away the southern portions of
Austria-Hungary from the monarchy and unite
them to Servia, strikes far back into the past. This
propaganda, always the same in purpose, chang-
ing only in means and intensity, reached its cli-
max at the time of the annexation crisis, and came
out openly at that time with its aims. While, on
the one side, the entire Servian press preached for
war against the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, asso-
ciations were formed—to say nothing of other means
of propaganda—which prepared such warfare,
among which the Narodna Odbrana was the most im-
portant. Originating in a revolutionary committee,
this association became entirely dependent on the
Servian Foreign Office, under the direction of states-
men and officers, among them Gen. Jankovic and
former Minister Ivanovic. Among the founders are
also Major Oja Tankovic and Milan Pribicevic. This
association had as an object the formation and
equipment of bodies of volunteers for the coming
war against Austria-Hungary. In addition to the
memorial, a quotation is given from the association’s
official organ, which bears the same name, Narodna
Odbrana, and is issued at the association’s headquar-
ters, wherein, in several articles, the activities and
aim of this society are set forth. Therein it is stated
that part of the main task of the Narodna Odbrana
is to effect union between its brothers far and near
on the other side of the border, and with all the
rest of our friends in the world.
Austria is mentioned as the first and greatest
enemy. Just as the Narodna Odbrana preaches the


necessity of war with Austria, it also preaches a
holy truth about our national situation. The clos-
ing chapter contains an appeal to the Government
and people of Servia to prepare in every way for
the struggle which the annexation foreshadowed.
The memorial tells of the Narodna Odbrana’s ac-
tivities at that time, as set forth in a statement of
a komitadji raised by the association; it maintained
a school under the direction of two of its principal
members, of whom one was Tankovic, for the in-
struction of bands of men—schools which Gen. Jan-
kovic and Capt. Milan Pribicevic inspected regu-
larly. Furthermore, the komitadjis were instructed
in shooting, bomb-throwing, laying of mines, blow-
ing up of railway bridges, &c. After the solemn dec-
laration of the Servian Government in 1909 it look-
ed as if the end of this organization also had come.
But expectations in this direction have not only not
been fulfilled, but the propaganda was continued
by the Servian press. The memorial adduces as an
instance of this how the attack on the Bosnian local
chief, Yaresanin, was utilized in the public prints,
which extolled the man responsible for it as a na-
tional hero and glorified his deed. These sheets
were not only circulated in Servia, but were smug-
gled into Austria-Hungary along well-organized se-
cret channels.
Under the same leadership as when it was found-
ed, the Narodna Odbrana recently became the cen-
tre of an agitation, to which the Schutzenbund, in-
cluding 762 associations, a Sokolbund, with 3,500
members, and various other societies belonged.
Appearing in the disguise of a culture association,
concerned only with the intellectual and physical
development of the population of Servia as well as
with its material strengthening, the Narodna Od-
brana betrays its genuine reorganized programme in
the above-mentioned quotations from its official or-
gan, in which “the holy truth” is preached—that
it is an inevitable necessity to carry on this fight
of extermination against Austria, the first and great


est enemy, with rifle amd cannon, and to prepare
the people in every wasy for the struggle to liber-
ate the oppressed territtories whore many millions
of enslaved brothers aire suffering. The appeals
quoted in the memorial, ;and addresses of a like char-
acter, cast a light on thee manifold foreign activities
of the Narodna Odbrama and its affiliated societies,
which consist of lecturce tours and taking part in
celebrations of Bosnian societies, at which members
for the above-mentioned Servian union are openly
recruited. At present am investigation is being made
of the fact that the Sokcol societies of Servia intend-
ed to unite with similar societies in Austria-Hun-
gary in a union kept secret up to now. Men of
trust and missionaries stirred up adults and un-
thinking youths. Thus Milan Pribicewitsch per-
suaded former ITonved (officers and a Lieutenant of
gendarmes to leave army service in the Austro-Hun-
garian monarchy under serious circumstances. In
the schools where teachers are educated an agita-
tion of wide scope was developed. The wished-for
fight against the Austro-Hungarian empire was also
prepared militarily to tlhe point that Servian emis-
saries were commissioned to destroy means of trans-
portation, etc., and to kindle revolts and panics, in
case of the outbreak of hostilities. All this is told
in a special inclosure.
The memorial tells fmrther of the connection be-
tween this activity of the Narodna Odbrana and
affiliated organizations with the attempts against
Cuvaj, the Royal Commissioner at Agram, in July,
1912; with the attempt of Dojcic in Agram in 1913
against Skerlecz, and the unsuccessful attempt of
Schafer on May 20 in tlhe Agram Theatre. It then
takes up the connectiom with the attempt on the
Crown Prince and his wife, and how even children
in school are poisoned with thoughts of the Narodna
Odbrana, and how the conspirators, with the aid
of Pribicewic and Dachc, secured the weapons for
the attack. Here special! stress is laid on the part
played by Major Tankoisic, who delivered the wea-
pons for the murder, ats also on that of a certain


Cifanovic, a former comitadji, now employed on the
Servian railways at Belgrade, who as early as 1909
figured as a graduate of the school for instructing
bands of men maintained by the Narodna Odbrana
of that time. Furthermore, it is told how bombs and
arms were secretly smuggled into Bosnia, which
leaves no doubt that this is a well-prepared and
often utilized road for the secret arms of the Narod-
na.
One inclosure contains a quotation from the min-
utes of the court-martial in Serajevo concerning the
investigation of the attack on the Archduke Francis
Ferdinand and his wife. According to this, Prin-
cip, Cabrinovic, Grabez, Crupilovic, and Papovic ap-
pear as having confessed that they, in company with
the fugitive Mehmedpasic, organized a plot for the
murder of the Archduke and that they kept watch
on him for this purpose. Cabrinovic is said to have
confessed that he threw the bomb and that Gabrilo
Princip carried out the attempt with the Browning
pistol. Both men acknowledged that in doing the
deed they premeditated murder. The other parts
of the inclosure contain further statements of the
guilty parties before the Judge conducting the in-
vestigation as to the origin of the plot and whence
the bombs came. These were manufactured for mili-
tary purposes and, judging from the way they were
originally packed, came from the Servian arsenal
at Kragujewac, Finally, the inclosure gives infor-
mation as to the transportation of the three conspira-
tors and their arms from Servia to Bosnia. From
further testimony of witnesses it appears that a sub-
ject of Austria-Hungary wished to give information
to the Austro-Hungarian Consulate at Belgrade that
he suspected a plan existed for an attempt on the
life of the Archduke during his stay in Bosnia. It
is alleged that this man was prevented from lodging
this information by Belgrade police officials, who
arrested him on some empty pretext just as he was
entering the Consulate. It is furthermore stated
that the testimony of witnesses shows that the said
police officials had knowledge of the attempt plan


ned. Since these statements have not yet been in-
vestigated no opinion can be formed for the present
as to their validity. In the inclosure with the me-
morial it is stated: Before the reception hall of the
Servian Ministry of War there are four allegorical
pictures, of which three are representations of Ser-
vian victories, while the fourth shows the realiza-
tion of Servia’s hostile dreams against the Austro-
Hungarian monarchy. Over a landscape that is
partly mountains (Bosnia), partly plains (Southern
Hungary), the Zora, the morning light of Servian
hopes, is dawning. In the foreground stands the
armed figure of a woman, on whose shield are the
names of the “provinces yet to be freed”—Bosnia,
Herzegovina, Wojwodina, Syrmia, Dalmatia, &c.
ANNEX 1B.
THE CHANCELLOR OF THE GERMAN EMPIRE
TO THE IMPERIAL AMBASSADORS IN
PARIS, LONDON, ST. PETERSBURG.
Berlin, July 2, 1914.
The statements of the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment as to the conditions under which the attempt
on the life of the Austrian Crown Prince and his
wife occurred make clear the aims of the Pan-Ser-
vian propaganda, and the means which it employs
to accomplish its ends. Also, in view of the facts
brought forward, there is no longer any doubt that
Belgrade must be looked upon as the centre of
action of the efforts to tear away the southern Slavic
provinces from the Austro-Hungarian monarchy
and effect their union with the Servian Kingdom,
and that these efforts develop there with the conni-
vance, at least, of officials of the Government and
army.
The Servian machinations go back many years.
Servian Chauvinism showed itself in an especially
marked form during the Bosnian crisis. That there


was no conflict as a result of Servians provocative
attitude toward Austria-Hungary at this time was
due to the moderation of the Austro-Hungarian Gov-
ernment and the energetic intervention of the great
powers. The assurances of future good behavior
which the Servian Government then gave have not
been kept. Under the very eyes, or, at least, with
the silent consent, of official Servia, the Pan-Servian
propaganda has continually grown in scope and in-
tensity; the latest crime, the threads of which lead to
Belgrade, must be placed to its account. It has
become unmistakably apparent that it is incompati-
ble both with the dignity and the self-preservation
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy that it should
continue to look on inactively at the plotting across
the border, which continually jeopardizes the integ-
rity of its territory. Considering the conditions,
the acts as well as the demands of the Austro-Hun-
garian Government cannot but be looked upon as
justified. Nevertheless, the attitude adopted re-
cently both by public opinion as well as by the Gov-
ernment in Servia, does not preclude the apprehen-
sion that the Servian Government will refuse to
comply with these demands, and that she is allow-
ing herself to be led into an attitude of provocation
toward Austria-Hungary. Unless the Austro-Hun-
garian Government wishes definitely to give up all
claim to its position as a great power there is no-
thing for it to do hut back up its demands on the
Servian Government by strong pressure and, if ne-
cessary, by recourse to military measures, in which
case the choice of means must be left to it.
I ask your Excellency to express yourself in the
above terms to the representative of (Mr. Viviani)
(Sir Edward Grey) (Mr. Sazonof) and to lay par-
ticular stress on the view that the above question is
one, the settlement of which devolves solely upon
Austria-Hungary and Servia, and one which the
powers should earnestly strive to confine to the two
countries concerned. We strongly desire that the
dispute be localized, since any intervention of ano-
ther power, on account of the various alliance obli


gations, would bring consequences impossible to
measure.
I shall await with interest a telegraphic report
from you as to the result of your interview.
ANNEX 2.
THE IMPERIAL CHANCELLOR TO THE CON-
FEDERATED GOVERNMENTS OF GER-
MANY.
Confidential!
Kindly make the following announcement to the
Government to which yon are accredited:
“In view of the facts which the Austro-Hungarian
Government has made known in its note to the Ser-
vian Government, the last doubt must disappear
that the plot to which the Austro-Hungarian Crown
Prince and his wife were victims was hatched in Ser-
via, with the connivance, at least, of officials of the
Servian Government. It is a product of the Pan-
Servian efforts which, during a number of years,
have become a source of lasting disquietude for the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and for all Europe.
“Pan-Servian Chauvinism showed itself in an es-
pecially marked form during the Bosnian crisis. Only
to the far-reaching self-control and moderation of
the Austro-Hungarian Government and the ener-
getic intervention of the great powers was it due
that the provocation which Austria-Hungary suffer-
ed at this time from Servia did not lead to war. The
assurances of future good behavior which the Ser-
vian Government gave have not been kept by it.
Under the very eyes, or at least with the silent con-
sent, of official Servia the Pan-Servian propaganda
has continually grown in scope and intensity. It
would be compatible neither with the dignity nor
the self-preservation of the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy if the latter continued to T ook inactively upon


the plotting across the border, through which the
safety and integrity of its territory are menaced. In
view of the conditions, the acts as well as the de-
mands of the Austro-Hungarian Government must
be looked upon as justified.
“The answer of the Servian Government to the
demands which the Austro-Hungarian Government
made on the 23rd of the month through its represen-
tative in Belgrade makes clear that those at the
head of Servian affairs are not inclined to give up
the policy hitherto adopted by them, nor their ac-
tivity as agitators. Therefore, the Austro-Hun-
garian Government, if it does not wish to give up
forever its position as a great power, has nothing
left to it but to back up its demands with strong
pressure, and, if necessary, by the adoption of mili-
tary measures.
_ “Certain elements in Eussia consider it a natural
right and the duty of Eussia energetically to take
the part of Servia in her dispute with Austria-
Hungary. In fact, the Novoe Yremya considers it-
self justified in making Germany responsible for the
European conflagration that might result from such
a move by Eussia, if it does not compel Austria-
Hungary to back down. Here the Eussian press
takes a wrong view. It was not Austria-Hungary
that brought on the conflict with Servia, but Servia,
which by unscrupulous favoring of pan-Servian
aspirations even in parts of Austria-Hungary’s ter-
ritory, has jeopardized the very existence of the lat-
ter, and created conditions which finally found ex-
pression in the dastardly crime of Serajevo. If
Eussia feels constrained to take sides with Servia
in this conflict, she certainly has a right to do it.
But she must bear clearly in mind that in so doing
she makes Servia’s aspirations to undermine the
conditions necessary for the existence of the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy, identical with her own, and
that she alone must bear the responsibility if a Euro-
pean war arises from the Austro-Servian question,
which all the rest of the great European powers


wish to localize. This responsibility of Russia is
perfectly apparent and is all the heavier since Count
Berchtold has officially declared to Russia that there
is no intention of acquiring Servian territory, nor
of threatening the continued existence of the Servian
Kingdom, but that all that is desired is to obtain
permanent relief from Servian machinations that
threaten Austria’s existence.
“The attitude of the Imperial German Govern-
ment in this matter is clearly outlined. The agita-
tion conducted by the Pan-Slavs against Austria-
Hungary has, as its principal aim, the dissolution
or weakening of the Triple Alliance by means of
the destruction of the Danube Empire, and, as a
result, the complete isolation of the German Empire.
Our closest interests, therefore, summon us to the
side of Austria-Hungary. The duty to save Europe
if possible from a general war demands also that
we support the efforts to localize the trouble, in
accordance with the policy which we have success-
fully followed for the last forty-four years in the
interests of the preservation of the peace in Europe.
But if, contrary to hope, the trouble should spread
owing to the intervention of Russia, then, true to
our duty as an ally, we should have to support the
neighboring monarchy with the entire might of the
German Empire. We shall draw our sword only
if obliged to do so, and we shall do it then in the
firm conviction that we bear no responsibility for
the calamity which a war must needs bring to the
nations of Europe.”
ANNEX 3.
TELEGRAM FROM THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
AMBASSADOR IN VIENNA TO THE IM-
PERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 24, 1914.
Count Berchtold to-day summoned the Russian
Charge d’Affaires in order to explain to him in de


tail and in friendly terms the position of Austria
regarding Servia. After going over the historical
developments of the last few days, he laid stress
on the statement that the monarchy did not wish
to appear against Servia in the role of a conqueror.
He said that Austria-Hungary would demand no
territory, that the step was merely a definite mea-
sure against Servian machinations; that Austria-
Hungary felt herself obliged to exact guarantees
for the future friendly behavior of Servia toward
the monarchy; that he had no intention of bringing
about a shifting of the balance of power in the
Balkans. The Charge d’Affaires, who as yet had
no instructions froin St. Petersburg, took the ex-
planations of the Minister ad referendum adding
that he would immediately transmit them to Sasa-
nof.
ANNEX 4.
TELEGRAM FROM THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG TO
THE IMPERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 24, 1914.
I have just availed myself of the contents of De-
cree 592 in a long talk with Sasanof. The Minis-
ter made wild complaints against Austria-Hungary,
and was much excited. _ What he said most definite-
ly was this: that Russia could not possibly permit
the Servian-Austrian dispute to be confined to the
parties concerned.
ANNEX 5.
THE IMPERIAL GERMAN AMBASSADOR IN ST
PETERSBURG TO THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR-TELEGRAM.
July 26, 1914.
The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador had a long in-
terview to-day with Sasanof. Both, as they told


me afterward, received a satisfying impression. The
assurance of the Ambassador that Austria-Hungary
was planning no conquests and simply wished, to
secure quiet at last on her boundaries visibly calmed
the Minister.
ANNEX 6.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN AM-
BASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG TO THE
IMPERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 25, 1914.
Report for his Majesty from Gen. von Chelins.
To-day the drilling of the troops in the Krasnoe
camp was suddenly interrupted and the regiments
are to return at once to their garrison _ The
manoeuvres have been given up, The military
pupils were promoted to officers to-day instead of
in the Autumn. Great excitement reigns in general
headquarters as to Austria’s proceedings. I have
the idea that all preparations have been made for
mobilization against Austria.
ANNEX 7.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN AM-
BASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG TO THE
IMPERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 26, 1914.
The Military Attache requests the transmission
of the following report to the General Staff:
“I consider it certain that mobilization has been
ordered for Kieff and Odessa. It is doubtful whe-
ther this is the case at Warsaw and Moscow, and
elsewhere it has probably mot been ordered.


ANNEX 8.
TELEGRAM OF THE HEAD OF THE IMPERIAL
GERMAN CONSULATE IN KOVNO TO THE
IMPERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 27 1914.
State of war declared in Kovno.
ANNEX 9.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN EN-
VOY IN BERNE TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN CHANCELLOR.
July 27, 1914.
( Have learned reliably that Fourteenth French
Corps stopped manoeuvres.
ANNEX 10.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN LONDON
Important!
July 26, 1914.
Austria-Hungary lias declared officially and
solemnly in St. Petersburg that she contemplates
no acquisition of territory in Servia, and that she
will not endanger the continuance of the kingdom,
but wishes only to secure quiet. According to re-
ports reaching here, Russia is about to summon
several bodies of reservists immediately, which
would be equivalent to mobilization against us. If
this news is corroborated, we shall be forced against
our will to take measures to meet it. To-day our
efforts are still directed toward localizing the trouble


and maintaining thee peace in Europe. For this rea-
son we ask that tine strongest possible pressure be
brought to bear in £St. Petersburg for achieving this
end.
ANNEX 10A.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN PARIS.
July 26, 1914.
After Austria-Humgary officially declared to Rus-
sia that she contemplated no acquisition of territory
and would not tamper with the continuance of the
Servian kingdom, tlhe decision of the question as to
whether there is t<o be a European war lies with
Russia alone, who Ras to bear the full responsibility.
We trust that Franice, with whom we know we are
agreed in the desire to maintain the peace in
Kurope, will use her influence in St. Petersburg in
a quieting manner.
ANNEX 10B.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG.
July 26, 1914.
After Austria formally declared that she was not
interested in acquiiring territory, the responsibility
for a possible disturbance of the peace in Europe
through Russian intervention lies with Russia alone.
We still trust that IRussia will take no steps that may
seriously endanger European peace.


ANNEX 11.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG TO
THE IMPERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 27, 1914—Military Attache reports concern-
ing talk with Minister of War:
“Said Sasanof had asked him to explain the
situation to me. The Minister of War then gave
me his word of honor that as yet no mobilization
order had gone forth, that for the time being mere-
ly preparatory measures were being taken, but that
not one reservist had been summoned nor a single
horse requisitioned. He said that if Austria should
cross the Servian frontier, the military districts in
the direction of Austria—Kieff, Odessa, Moscow,
Kazan—would he mobilized, that those on the Ger-
man front—Warsaw, Yilna, St. Petersburg—would
not be under any circumstances. He said that peace
with Germany was earnestly desired. To my in-
quiry as to the purpose of the mobilization against
Austria he shrugged his shoulders and referred me
to diplomatic channels. I told the Minister that
we appreciated the friendly attitude toward our-
selves but would look upon the mobilization against
Austria alone as very menacing.
ANNEX 12.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN LONDON.
July 27, 1914—-Nothing is known here as yet as
to a suggestion of Sir Edward Grey to hold a four-
sided conference in London. It is impossible for us
to bring our ally before a European Court in its
difference with Servia. Our mediatory activity must
confine itself to the danger of a Russian-Austrian
conflict.


ANNEX 13.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN LONDON.
July 25, 1914—The distinction made by Sir Ed-
ward Grey between the Anstro-Servian and Austro-
Russian conflict is quite correct. We wish as little
as England to mix in the first, and, first and last,
we take the ground that this question must be lo-
calized by the abstention of all the Powers from in-
tervention in it. It is therefore our earnest hope
that Russia will refrain from any active interven-
tion, conscious of her responsibility and of the seri-
ousness of the situation. If an Austro-Russian dis-
pute should arise, we are ready, with the reservation
of our known duties as allies, to co-operate with the
other great Poivers in mediation between Russia and
Austria.
ANNEX 14.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG.
July 28, 1914.
We are endeavoring continually to cause Vienna
to make clear in St. Petersburg the purpose and
scope of the Austrian action regarding Servia in
an indisputable and, it is to be hoped, satisfying
manner to Russia. The declaration of war made in
the meantime makes no difference in this connec-
tion.
ANNEX 15.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN LONDON.
July 27, 1914.
We have started the efforts toward mediation in
Vienna immediately, in the way desired by Sir Ed


ward Grey. Moreover, we have communicated to
Count Berchtold the wish of Mr. Sasanof for a
direct talk with Vienna.
ANNEX 16.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN AM-
BASSADOR IN VIENNA TO THE IMPERIAL
GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
July 28, 1914.
Count Berchtold requests me to express to your
Excellency his deep gratitude for communicating
to him the English mediation. He remarks, how-
ever, concerning it, that, after the opening of hos-
tilities by Servia and the declaration of war made
in the meantime, he must look upon England’s step
as belated.
ANNEX 17.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN PARIS.
July 29, 1914.
Reports to us of French preparations for war in-
crease from hour to hour. I request that you talk
on this matter with the French Government and
make it clear to them that such measures would lead
to precautionary measures on our part. We should
he obliged to proclaim the danger of war, and even
if this should not mean calling in reserves and mo-
bilization, it would nevertheless, increase the ten-
sion. We still hope uninterruptedly for the main-
tenance of peace.


ANNEX 183.
TELEGRAM OF THE GERMAN MILITARY EN-
VOY IN ST. PETERSBURG TO HIS MAJES-
TY THE KAISER.
July 30, 1914.
Yesterday Prince Troubetzfci told me, after he
had caused your Majesty’s Relegram to Emperor
Nicholas to be delivered at omce: “God be praised
that a telegram from your Empteror has come.” He
told me a little while ago thrat the telegram had
made a deep impression on the Emperor, but since
mobilization against Austria bad already been or-
dered, and Sasanof had doubtless convinced his
Majesty that it was no longeir possible to recede,
his Majestly unfortunately could do nothing to alter
matters. I then said to him tlnat the responsibility
for the unmeasurable consequemces lay on the early
mobilization against Austria-Hungary, who was in-
volved after all in a purely lo(cal war with Servia,
that Germany’s answer thereto) was just and that
Hie responsibility lay with Russia, as it had ignored
Austria-Hungary’s declaration tthat she contemplat-
ed no acquisition of territory from Servia. I said
that Austria-Hungary had mobilized against Ser-
via, not against Russia, and thatt there was no cause
for Russia to plunge into the question. I added that
in Germany we were unable, after the frightful
crime of Serajevo, any longer to understand Rus-
sia’s words to the effect that “we cannot leave our
brothers in Servia in the lurcih.” I told him in
conclusion that he must not hie surprised if Ger-
many’s forces were mobilized.
ANNEX 19.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN HOME.
July 31, 1914.
We negotiated continually wi'rth a view to recon-
ciliation between Russia and Auistria-Hungary, both


through direct exchange of telegrams from his
Majesty the Kaiser to his Majesty the Czar, as well
as in our relations with Sir Edward Grey. But all
our efforts are made much more difficult, if not im-
possible of realization, by Russia’s mobilization. In
spite of calming assurances, Russia, according to all
reports that reach us, is taking such far-reaching
steps against us also that the situation becomes con-
stantly more threatened.
ANNEX 20.
I. HIS MAJESTY TO THE CZAR.
July 28, 10:45 P.M.
With the greatest disquietude I hear of the im-
pression which Austria-Hungary’s action against
Servia is making in your empire. The unscrupulous
agitation which has gone on for years in Servia has
led to the revolting crime of which Archduke Fran-
cis Ferdinand was the victim. The spirit which al-
lowed the Servians to murder their own King and
his wife still rules in that land. Undoubtedly you
will agree with me that we two, you and I as well
as all sovereigns, have a common interest in insist-
ing that all those morally responsible for this ter-
rible murder shall suffer deserved punishment.
On the other hand I by no means overlook how
difficult it is for you and your Government to resist
the tide of popular opinion. Remembering the heart-
felt friendship which has bound us closely for a
long time, I am therefore exerting all my influence
to endeavor to make Austria-Hungary come to an
open and satisfying understanding with Russia. I
earnestly hope that you will help me in my efforts
to set aside all obstacles that may yet arise.
Your very sincere and devoted friend and cou-
sin. (Signed) WILHELM.


ANNEX 21.
II. THE CZAR TO HIS MAJESTY.
Peterhof Palace}, July 29, 1 P.M.
I am glad that you are back ini Germany. In this
serious moment 1 ask you urgenttly to help me. A
disgraceful war lias been declaimed on a weak na-
tion; the indignation at this, wlhich I fully share,
is immense in Russia. I foresee that soon I can no
longer withstand the pressure tluat is being brought
to bear upon me, and that I shall be forced to adopt
measures which will lead to war.*. In order to pre-
vent such a calamity as a European war I ask you,
in the name of our old friendship, to do all that is
possible to you to prevent your adly from going too
far. ' (Sign.ed) NICHOLAS.
ANNEX 22.
III. HIS MAJESTY TO THE CZAR.
Berlin.
I have received your telegram and share your
wish for the maintenance of peaice. Nevertheless —
as I said to you in my first teleg.’ram—l cannot con-
sider Austria-Hungary’s action “‘disgraceful war.”
Austria-Hungary knows by expedience that Servia’s
promises, when they are merely <on paper, are quite
unreliable. According to my op inion, Austria-Hun-
gary’s action is to be looked upon as an attempt to
secure full guarantees that Serwia’s promises shall
also be turned into deeds. I ann confirmed in this
view by the statement of the Austrian Cabinet that
Austria-Hungary contemplates no acquisition of
territory at the expense of Serv/ia. I think, there-
fore, that it is quite possible for Russia to remain
in the role of a spectator toward the Austrian-Ser-
vian war, without dragging Europe into the most
terrible war that it has ever seten. I think that a
direct understanding between your Government and


Vienna is possible and desirable, an understanding
which —as I already telegraphed to you—my Gov-
ernment is endeavoring to help with all its power.
Naturally, military measures by Russia, which Aus-
tria-Hungary might take as threatening/would has-
ten a calamity that we both wish to avoid, and would
undermine my position as mediator, which I have
willingly assumed after your appeal to my friend-
ship and help. (Signed) WILHELM.
ANNEX 23.
IV. HIS MAJESTY TO THE CZAR.
Berlin, July 30, 1 A.M.
My Ambassador has been instructed to call your
Government’s attention to the dangers and-serious
consequences of mobilization; I said the same thing
to you in my last telegram. Austria-Hungary mo-
bilized only against Servia, and at that she mobilized
only a part of her army. If Russia, as appears from
what you and your Government say, is mobilizing
against Austria-Hungary, the position of mediator,
which you intrusted to me in a friendly manner and
which I accepted at your urgent request, is jeopar-
dized if not rendered untenable. The whole weight
of the decision now rests on your shoulders; they
must bear the responsibility for war or peace.
(Signed) WILHELM.
ANNEX 23A.
THE CZAR TO HIS MAJESTY.
Peterhof, July 30, 1914, 1:20 P.M.
I thank you from my heart for your prompt an-
swer. I am sending Tatisheff this evening with in


structions. The military measurces now being taken
were decided upon five days ago) for defensive pur-
poses against Austria’s preparations. I hope with
all my heart that these measures will not influence
in any way your position as mediiator, which I high-
ly esteem. We need your stroiug pressure on Aus-
tria in order that an understanding may be brought
about with us.
NICHOLAS.
ANNEX 24.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG.
July 31, 1914.
In spite of still pending mediiatory negotiations,
and although we ourselves have up to the present
moment taken no measures for mobilization, Russia
lias mobilized her entire army amd navy; in other
words, mobilized against us also. By these Russian
measures we have been obliged, fo3r the safeguarding
ol the empire, to announce tluat danger of war
threatens us, which does not yet mean mobilization.
.Mobilization, however, must follow unless Russia
ceases within twelve hours all warlike measures
against us and Austria-Hungary and gives us defi-
nite assurance thereof. Kindly communicate this at
once to Mr. Sazanof and wire hoiur of its communi-
cation to him.
ANNEX 25.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN PARIS.
July 31, 1914.
Important!
In spite of our still pending mediatory action, and
although we ourselves have adapted no steps to


wards mobilization, Russia lias mobilized ber entire
army and navy, which means mobilization against
us also. Thereupon we declared the existence of a
threatening danger of war, which must be followed
by mobilization, unless Russia within twelve hours
ceases all warlike steps against us and Austria.
Mobilization inevitably means war. Kindly ask the
French Government whether it will remain neutral
in a Russian-German war. Answer must come with-
in eighteen hours. Wire at once hour that inquiry
is made. Act with the greatest possible dispatch.
ANNEX 26.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
CHANCELLOR TO THE IMPERIAL GER-
MAN AMBASSADOR IN ST. PETERSBURG.
Aug. 1, 1914.
Important!
In case the Russian Government gives no satisfac-
tory answer to our demand, will Your Excellency,
at 5 o’clock this afternoon (Central European time),
kindly hand to it the following declaration :
The Imperial Government has endeavored from
the beginning of the crisis to bring it to a peace-
ful solution. In accordance with a wish expressed
to him by His Majesty, the Emperor of Russia, His
Majesty, the Emperor of Germany,- in co-operation
with England, applied himself to the accomplish-
ment of a mediating role toward the Cabinets of
Vienna and St. Petersburg, when Russia, without
awaiting the outcome, proceeded to mobilize her en-
tire land and naval forces.
Following this threatening measure, occasioned
by no military preparation on the part of Germany,
the German Empire found itself confronted by a
serious and imminent peril. If the Imperial Gov-
ernment had failed to meet this peril, it would have


jeopardized the safety and even the existence of
Germany. Consequently, the German Government
was obliged to address the Government of the Em-
peror of all the Russias and insist upon the cessation
of all these military measures. Russia having re-
fused to accede to this demand, and having mani-
fested by this refusal that her acts were directed
against Germany, I have the honor, by order of my
Government, to make known to Your Excellency
the following:
His Majesty, the Emperor, my august Sovereign,
in the name of the Empire, takes up the defiance and
considers himself in a state of Avar against Russia.
I urgently ask that you wire the hour of arrival
of these instructions, and of their carrying out, ac-
cording to Russian time.
Kindly ask for your passports and hand over pro-
tection and business to the American Embassy.
ANNEX 27.
TELEGRAM OF THE IMPERIAL GERMAN
AMBASSADOR IN PARIS TO THE IM-
PERIAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR.
Aug. 1, 1:05 P.M.
To my repeated inquiry as to whether France, in
case of a German-Russian Avar, would remain neu-
tral, the Premier declared that Prance would do that
which might he required of her by her interests.




NOW READY
The Secrets
Of the
German War Office
By
Dr. Armgaard Karl Graves
SECRET AGENT
The Author was for twelve years a successful
spy in the Kaiser’s service. With characteristic
ruthlessness he exposes the details of secret
missions that have had a startling influence upon
the present war. He also reveals for the first time
the operations of the great German Spy System.
ILLUSTRATED 2S. 6d.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY PROPY. LTD.,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.


A Little Book of War Verses
mq§olcfier!
Dorofficj
Frances
M?Crae,
CONTENTS
The Empire’s Call.— War Time. Our Men. The Kit. —
Forward! —Geoffrey.—Light Horse.—The Wife Speaks.— On
Guard. —The Hour of Farewell. —The Girl Left Behind.—
War To-Night.—When They Come Back.
Artistically Printed in Two Colors
NOW READY PRICE, ONE SHILLING
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. Propy. Ltd.
And all Booksellers


An Amusing War Book.
After the Storm
(Nach dem Sturm.)
A Prediction of the Downfall
of the British Empire.
By ARABI PASHA.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN.
Arabi Pasha, as a prophet, is certainly an optimist. His
prediction of the downfall of the British Empire and the sub-
sequent alteration of the map of the world, will be read with
tolerant amusement by Britons who are closely watching
the progress of the great war in Europe. The Egyptian has
expressed in his lecture what were and are undoubtedly the
profound hopes of the Teutonic militarists.
With Illustration showing how Germany
proposed to alter the Map of the World.
Pictorial Coloured Wrapper. Price SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY Propy. Ltd.
And Abb BooKSKbhKRS


SPECIAL EDITION
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
OF
The Great War Novel.
A GRAPHIC ANSWER TO THE QUESTION-
What would Happen
if Two Great Nations
Should Go To War?
The Last Shot
By FREDERICK PALMER,
War Correspondent.
Author of “Over the Pass,” “The Vagabond,” Etc.
“War as he knows it is what the author seeks to paint;
war as it is, not as it was or ought to be The
portions in which he tells of the fighting between the two
armies are red with realism Mr. Palmer’s theme
is a big one, and his descriptions of modern warfare in its
various phases are vivid.” —New York Times.
“A picture of war as it is fought to-day in the nth
degree of its modern organisation and methods.
It is not necessary to recommend this book; it is sure to
be read widely, and more widely as discussion of it spreads.”
—New York Tribune.
Cloth, 3/6.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY Propy. Ltd.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
