

Extracts from the Local Press, Eulogising Mr. Wilson’s Pictures.
HERALD , September ist, 1892.
With a keen eye for the picturesque, which led him to apply his
talents for many years to stage work, Mr. Wilson has for the most
part chosen his subjects happily. There are no dull or uninterest-
ing subjects illustrated ; and if, at times, the artist’s fancy has lent
itself too readily to warm and vivid effects of colour, there is plenty
of good work in evidence to justify the high reputation of the
painter in this part of the world. Probably the most important
picture is No. 5 [now No. I, ist prize], showing the Coast of Kent,
near Folkestone, England. The composition of the painting is
very good, and the detail of the foreground bears the closest
scrutiny. The scene has for background low white cliffs, their
brilliancy partly softened by shadow ; a fishing smack is unloading
on the satid ; a great black cloud is spreading angrily overhead,
while already the distance is half obliterated by the falling rain.
This is one of the best of the pictures now on view. Cronulla
Beach, N.S.W., No. 33 [now No. 24 and 20th prize], disclosing a
wild coast scene, under a blue sky with softly rolling clouds, is
characteristic by a minuteness in the painting of the distance
which shows that the artist knows how to lay aside the broad
effects necessary for stage purposes when engaged upon finer work.
The Coast of Devon, No. 2 [now No. 11, 9th prize], is a pretty
scene in which the artist has caught the sombre tone of the heavy
English atmosphere. Crossing the Brook and “ Let me Pass,” No.
4 and 5 [3rd prize], companion pictures of English scenery. The
second, with its great forest trees opening to the park land view
beyond, with cottagers’ children meeting at the stile, is charming.
Naturally, amongst Mr. Wilson’s paintings are some of less merit
than these. The collection, as a whole, may be viewed with interest
for its own sake, as well as because it is from the brush of an artist
who now, for a long period, has done good work in Australia.
DAILY TELEGRAPH, September ist, 1892.
FROM STAGE TO STUDIO.
After many years scene painting and theatrical management, Mr.
W. J. Wilson, whose name is familiar to all supporters of the
drama in the colonies, has during a temporary “ spell ” of leisure
turned his attention to his first love in the art world —picture paint-
ing—and has produced a series of over 36 paintings.
In spite of his long rest from practical use of the art of picture
painting, Mr. Wilson has not allowed his right hand to forget its
cunning, nor his eye its sense of colour; and the works he has
produced give ample proof of this. Mr. Wilson has painted a set
of pleasing sea and land scapes, and in black and white he has
reproduced views of Brighton Beach, N.Z. Views in the Botanic
Gardens and around the Harbour, and Coogee, have been selected
for the N.S.W. pictures, the coast scenery being represented by
well executed paintings of W ilson’s Promontory, with early morning
effects, of the Skull Rock and Cape Schank. Examples of English
scenery, notably excellent in tone and effect, are the views near
Folkestone, and an old pier at Hull ; and Continental Europe is
represented by delicate little views of Venice and Italy. A minia-
ture of the well-known drop-scene at the Garrick Theatre —the
work of Mr. Wilson’s brush —entitled “ Lago d’Orta, Italy,” will
attract many admirers. There are many who will desire to possess
so pleasing a memento of a popular entrepreiieur as a picture
painted by himself, and with the many good qualities of the works
as artistic productions, added to the other attractions, Mr. Wilson
will probably find his collection all too small to satisfy the demands
of his friends and patrons.
EVENING NEWS, September 13 th, 1892.
Mr. W. J. Wilson has, since his relinquishment of thl? Garrick
Theatre, taken to his first love—that of picture painting—and has
completed thirty-six paintings of various dimensions and subjects,
English, Continental, and Colonial, principally from his own out-
door sketches. Amongst his best works in the present collection
is No. 5 [now No. I], “Near Folkestone.” The composition of
this picture, the detail and general effect, are true to nature and
thoroughly English in tone and colour. The heavy rain clouds
give a strong indication that a storm has just passed over, and the
sun is again breaking through and throwing its rays upon a portion
of the chalky cliffs. In the foreground on the right is an old boat,
together with fish, baskets, figures, &c., which are all carefully and
minutely painted. Another English subject, the “ Coast of Devon,”
also containing some charming bits of colour, is capitally worked
out. There are some very admirable bits in the collection, includ-
ing Brighton Beach, Vic., several views along the coast, “ Wilson’s
Promontory,” “ Skull Rock,” “ Cronulla Beach,” “ Botanic
Gardens,” and well known spots in the Domain, views in Venice,
Italy. We wish Mr. Wilson the success he deserves. We con-
gratulate him upon still having retained his eye for colour, and a
steady hand for fine work after so many years handling, the brush
for broader effects.
EVENING STAR , September ist , 1892.
Mr. W. J. Wilson, who is known as one of the oldest theatrical
managers and scene painters in this country, has turned his atten-
tion again to the art of picture painting, and at present he has on
view at his studio an admirable collection of oil paintings. The
subjects are mostly of colonial scenery, and these the artist has
treated most effectively, and with fine attention to colour and
general treatment.
BULLETIN , September 2nd , 1892.
Mr. W. J. Wilson has been for so long in theatrical management
that many people have probably forgotten that some twenty years
ago he occupied a prominent position in Australia as a scene
painter. Since he recently retired from active business, however,
he has been using his enforced leisure in painting, and has produced
a small gallery containing thirty-six works. The pictures embrace
a large variety of subjects, including views of English and Conti-
nental scenery; but the most interesting are those showing familiar
spots in the neighborhood of Sydney and Melbourne, which are
faithful transcripts from Nature. Mr. Wilson’s training as a scene
painter gives him the power of treating his subjects broadly, and
the presence of that power is particularly seen in the free handling
of the skies, which are full of variety.
TRUTH, September 25 th, 1892.
Possibly no name is more familiar to old and young residents of
Sydney than that of Mr. W. J. Wilson, who for nearly forty years
has been before the Australian public as a scenic artist, amateur
actor, and entrepreneur. Springing from a highly artistic family,
it may be said that what has been bred in the bone has come out
on the canvas. The other day we dropped into Mr. Wilson’s
studio, and were shown some thirty-six pictures in oil and black
and white. For one who has been so many years exclusively used
to the big brush for shape work, it is simply marvellous how well
Mr. Wilson has retained the art acquired in early youth. The
little gems —and they are a contrast to drop-scenes—are finished
with such accurateness of detail that they will bear The closest
scrutiny. We cannot go into details of each picture, but in “ Near
Folkestone, Kent” [ist prize], “ Williamstown, from Brighton,
Vic.,” “Beach at Brighton” [companion pictures, 2nd prize],
“ Cronulla Beach,” and “ Cronulla Beach,” Mr. Wilson shows the
qualities of a great artist. “ Lago d’Orta, Italy,” is a miniature of
the drop-scene at the Garrick Theatre, Sydney, which has been so
often admired. Mr. Wilson possesses the happy knack of treating
sea pictures with great effect. He catches on the varied tints
familiar to us all as we have stood on the beach and gazed out on
the balmy ocean.
PROGRAMME, September sik, 1892.
Mr. W. J. Wilson, having considerable leisure, has recently
devoted himself to that branch of his art which he practised prior
to cultivating a taste for scenic painting, to which he gave unusual
prominence. He has completed several marine and land scape
views, which, if they are of unequal merit, yet display artistic
capacity. Justice has been done as to colouring and draughtsman-
ship.
