

A CONTROVERSY >
BETWEEN
AN ENGLISH CATHOLIC
THE REV. JOHN M'GIBBON, 8.A.,
(PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER),
THE BIBLE AMI) THE REFORMATION,
originally published in the “empire” newspaper.
4 -
[The profits of the sale of this Pamphlet are devoted to a charitable object . j
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY
E. F. Flanagan, 594, George-strket, (Brickfield Hill) ; and
J. J. Hayes, 353, George-street, next New Telegraph Office.
1865.




i i4b /*
A CONTROVERSY
BETWEEN
AN ENGLISH CATHOLIC
THE REV. JOHN M'GIBBON, 8.A.,
(PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER),
THE BIBLE AND THE REFORMATION,
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN THE “EMPIRE’’ NEWSPAPER,
[The profits of the sate of this Pamphlet are devoted to n charitable object. 2
SYDNEY;
E. F. Flanagan, 594, George-street, (Brickfield Hill) ; and
J, J, Hayes, 353, George-street, next New Telegraph Office.
1865.


f; '/ >
■
SYDNEY:
Feinted at the Canton Steam Machine Feinting Office,
146, Pitt Steeet, opposite Moet's Buildings.


PREFACE.
When the English Catholic despatched his first letter to the Empire
newspaper, it was far from his intention to provoke a controversy—at
least, such a one as has resulted. And even afterwards, when the
Reverend Mr. M‘Gibbon invited him to a discussion of the “whole
question of versions and translations of the Holy Scriptures, both
before and after the Reformation —on two conditions,” he declined
those conditions in the hope of avoiding what ho conceived to be the
useless discussion. The sole desire English Catholic had was, to place
before Protestants a few facts and simple arguments, with a view to
removing from their minds some portion of those prejudices which
prevent them from fairly considering the beauty and truth of the
Catholic Church. He had himself been brought up a Protestant, and,
judging of Protestants by himself, reckoned that there were among
them many, who, if they could once only bo brought to see the ground-
lessness of some of their notions about Catholics and Catholic faith and
and practice, might bo led to inquire further. He wished simply to
excite investigation; and therefore he passed by Mr. M‘Gibbon’s chal-
lenge, and used the statements of that gentleman's first letter only as
pegs whereon to hang the few facts he was anxious to put before
the Protestant public.
But when that gentleman, in his second letter, made so fierce an
'onslaught on Catholicity, the English Catholic, in self defence, was
compelled to take different measures, and show up to the world the
entire groundlessness of Mr. M‘Gibbon’s accusations. This, to a
certain extent, diverted him from his first purpose ; and it accounts for
the printing, at the end of the pamphlet, of the additional chapter
“ On the Holy Scriptures,” which embodies the ideas English Catholic
would have published in the newspaper if his course had been
uninterrupted.
It only remains to remark, that the Rev. Mr. M‘Gibbon, in his last
letter of all, has again shifted his ground. Ho now asks for an
“ opportunity” to slander other Popes. What “ opportunity ” can ho
want ? Has he not the press at command equally with the rest of us ? It
would be better, however, that he confined himself to his pulpit, where
no one will interfere with him. It is only when he steps out from his
place in the ranks of his sect, and claims to lead the general public,
that he becomes an offence. If, nevertheless, he really mean what he
threatens, let him do his worst: it shall go hard if some one shall not
be found to expose him then, as effectually as it has been done now.
November 3, 18G5.




THE BIBLE
THE REFORMATION.
TO THE EDITOR OE THE EMPIRE.
Slß,—Recently the Rev. Mr. M‘Gibbon said, in yonr columns, that it was
to the Reformation we owed it that wo have the Bible to lead.
Perhaps, in the spirit of fair play, you will allow me, in refutation of
this assertion, to cite the following facts
In Germany, before tlie a§o of there had. been two
versions in the vernacular tongue, one of which was made under the
direction of Charlemagne. These were of course multiplied only in
manuscript, and the best evidence that the Church desired extend
a knowledge of the Scriptures to the greatest number possible, is to be
found in the circumstance that the Bible was in many cases chained
to the lecterns, and to the windows of the convents, as in the famous
case brought to notice by Luther. Immediately after the invention of
printing, as early as 1466, a translation from the Latin Vulgate was
published at Leipsic, which, before Luther appeared, passed, we know,
through at least 16 editions, one at Strasbourg, five at Nuremburg,
and ten at Augsburg, and four more are said to have been printed.
In Italy,' just before Wickliffe, a translation was made by the
Archbishop of Genoa (of course in MS), and generally circulated. And
near the middle of the fifteenth century, some time before Luther,
another translation was executed by Nicholas Malermi, a monk, and was
printed simultaneously at Rome and Venice. At the time of Luther s
outbreak, this translation had passed through thirteen editions, and
soon after passed through eight more, with the sanction, and, indeed, at
the expressed desire, of the Holy Office.
In France, according to Bishop Usher (Protestant), about the year
1478, a translation was made by Des Moulins; a new edition, revised,
appeared nine years after; and in half a century sixteen editions were
thrown off—four at Lyons, and twelve at Paris.
In Spain, the first translation into the vulgar tongue appeared
during the 12th century. The next is referred to the 13th century.
There is a third, bearing date 1407. Copies of all three are preserved in
libraries at Paris. About 1300, Alphonso the'Wise had the Scriptures


translated into Castilian, “to improve the language and exalt the
intelligence of his people." All this, of course, was before the invention
of printing. After that, in 1478, fifty years before Luther, and unS
? teTS ICeS - supervision of the Valentian Inquisitors, the first
v- Blb ? appeared, and passed through a second edition
alUhe ™ • SChl^.° l f There were ’ translations into
S dialects. In 1517, the great Cardinal Ximenes pub-
tVßbd " s fa mous polyglot, the first ever attempted, and which, to use
learning Vri i ’ resc .?. tt the historian, was a “ noble monument of piety,
the wh*CtaE™S" e ” titleS itS al '* hor ‘° the gratitudo ° f
instarice ° f St - Hedwige, Duchess of Lithuania, a
am trk wofl i OBl i < i' WaS madcaboilt the middle of the 14th century,
d this was followed ten years after by another by Andrew Jassowitz.
order Ca f y ™, th ® , 14th centm T, a translation was made, by
for the people of ttot Silly ““ ° entm7 another “ Iccli"'d-
oouniafSielt S™ S tranS ' ated ““ the lm 8 ua * e of th “‘
n . 4n Englaiid, Bishop Aidhelm and the Venerable Bede in the eighth
century; Alfred the Great and his bishops, in the tenth, and others
after them, persevenngly circulated a knowledge of the Holy Scriptures
°mthe Anglo-sTxonage
to Wickhffe, says Sir Francis Palgrave, “we in England can
noUoZ enuXT Slon ofbib M versions, in metre and in pJLe, as are
not to be equalled amongst any other nation of Europe. But we have
not yet produced our stores; nay, though the greater part of these
are in tbe hbraries of the University of Oxford, I regret to sav
lhe vS re SS t 0 ,Mg,ec ‘ ed »" d ifden^
shelves. (Hist._ Anglo-Saxons, p. 175.) Bishop Usher mentions one
translation made m 1210, of which seven editions were published before
English nml Luthei d In 1290 Bible was again translated into
English, and generally circulated; and twenty years before Wickliffe
John of Trevisa made and published another translation. ’
-p r U w P er eeive that I have confined myself to the period before
Mem riS’l r? hl V S necessar Y to refute Mr. M‘Gibbon’s
statement, and I did not wish to trespass on your space. But, I must
bnhfSVl 1 p haV6 . made ?° mention of the very general circulation of the
InZr P U^ S M Batin, which language, down even to the age of Lady
Jane Grey and Mary Queen of Scots, was the language of litfrature fZ
Lj! 1 ? 8 ’ A nd . ltj must be borne in mind that there never was any,
ea fß Restriction on reading the Scriptures in this the authorised
and authenticated version—the legislation of the Catholic Church for-
bade only the use of Billies in the vernacular tongues, which had not
first been certified by the Bishops to be correctly translated.
± * ut » kir, after all, this doey not touch the real question at issue
BflJpfq , rotGStants ?R d JBe Catholic Church, namely, whether the
ble is the sole rule of faith. _ I doubt if, since the foundation of the
British and Foreign Bible Society, in 1780, notwithstanding the millions
of money that have been spent in the effort, one authentic case of the
conversion of a heathen to Christianity by the mere reading of the
Scriptures, can be found. The operation J that society for ei|hty-five
years, has only served to vindicate the practice of the Catholic Church
as in perfect harmony with Holy Writ—“ Faith comes by hearing."
I am, &c.,
September 9th, 1866. • AN Em,LISH CATHOLIC.


THE ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
SIR, —I will be obliged to you, if you will allow me to intimate to the
writer of a letter in your issue on Saturday last, with the above anony-
mous signature appended, that I shall be happy to discuss with him
the whole question of Versions and Translations of Holy Scriptures,
both before and after the Reformation—on two conditions—first, that
he give me his name as a pledge of hona Jides ; and, secondly, that he
Erovide or secure me space. As to the first, it is only fan* that as he
as my name I should have his; and, as to the second, I cannot afford
the expense of costly advertisements.
I may now, however, be permitted to add that “ The English
Catholic ” has not fairly put the question before your readers. Protest-
ants do not say that the Church of Rome had not the Scriptures; nor
yet do they say that Catholics did not translate the Scriptures; nor yet
do they say, that Bibles—Translations and Versions—did not exist
previous to the Reformation. What Protestants charge the Church of
Rome with is that, having this key of knowledge, she kept it, not as a
faithful steward to open the door, and let the people in to an under-
standing of the doctrines and precepts of tha Scriptures, but as an un-
just steward, who knew quite well that if the door were opened, and
the people admitted to an understanding of the Scriptures, the dis-
honesty of his conduct and the groundlessness of his pretensions
would be immediately exposed. It was impossible for the Church of
Rome to prevent altogether the translation and circulation of Holy
Scripture. Powerful though she was for many ages, she never had
that power. There were always some, individuals and churches, whom
the Church of Rome branded and persecuted as “heretics,” who
laboured to translate and circulate the Scriptures. But, as the Church
of Rome could not prevent this, she diligently set herself to limit and
neutralise it. She first claimed the right to permit or forbid the circu-
lation of the Scriptures. She then claimed the right to translate them,
so as to make them speak the language most likely to countenance her
peculiar doctrines. She then claimed the exclusive x'ight to miderstand
them and interpret them. And then, by putting tradition on a level
with the Scriptures—-tradition known and explained by herself — she
denied that the Scriptures were of any avail unless as explained in the
light of her traditions. This was the policy of the Church of Rome,
and it was a far more seductive and successful policy than that of pre-
venting the translation and circulation of the Scriptures. For it was
quite clear that if her claims were admitted, none, except the few curi-
ous, would ever think of reading the Scriptures. And this we know
was exactly the result. The priests never taught the people to read
the Scriptures. They never encouraged the people to read the Scrip-
tures. Nay, the priests rather taught the people that they had
no right to read the Scriptures. They told them, too, that they had
no right to exercise their own judgments in understanding the Scrip-
tures. They told them, on the contrary, that it was heresy for a
man to exercise his own judgment on such a matter. In the case
of those who were permitted to read the Scriptures the priests told
them that the church was the only expounder of the meaning; and that
the Scriptures were the darkest, most difficult and most dangerous
of books, unless they were explained by the traditions of the church.
Does the “English Catholic’ - imagine that the Scriptures would be
read under such circumstances as these ? Why, under such circum-
stances as these (and these were precisely the circumstances of the


case), the Bible was as effectually withdrawn from the people, as if
every Bible had been consigned to the flames; so that, if “English
Catholic ' ’ were to prove that a thousand more editions and translations
than what he has mentioned, existed previous to the Reformation, it
would not avail his argument one whit, as a reply to the charge
which Protestants make against the Church of Rome, nor would it “re-
fute my statement, that the people are indebted to the Reformation
for the Bible; for, while the Reformation did not give existence to the
Bible, it asserted for the Bible the right to speak for itself, and it
asserted for every man the right to read and understand the Bible for
himself—the Reformation, in fact, was the wrenching of the key of
knowledge of Holy Scripture out of the hands of the priests, and the
opening of the door to every rational creature to understand for himself
what God had spoken to him in his Word. It is easy to know what
the fact w r as in the dark ages, with reference to the Bible, from what
we see at the present day. There are translations and editions of the
Scriptures in the Church of Rome at the present day, plenty of them ;
but will it therefore be said, that the Catholic people in the various
Catholic countries throughout the world, have the Scriptures ? In
Rome, in Spain, in tim States of the Chinch, in France, in America,
in England, aye, in this colony, it is the rare exception, and mot the
rule, lor Catholic people to have the Bible. And where are the
priests who press upon their people to read the Bible ? Nay, the whole
r cac^u B’ inevitably leads the people to treat the Bible as a
forbidden book, and to prefer the missal or prayer book, as far more
profitable to them. If this bo the case now—and it cannot be denied —
notwithstanding all the facilities of printing, and the diffusion of light,
and the general ability of the people to read—it is easy to see how the
Scriptures were dealt with and locked fast in libraries in those ages of
darkness and of papal rule, when even the nobles and the priests them-
selves were so sunk in ignorance as to have less education than the
little children at our primary schools. Only another Reformation Mill
give the Catholics the Bible.
ere 1 disposed to illustrate the fact that Catholics have not the
Bible, and that another Reformation is required to give them the Bible,
I should be quite content to take the “English Catholic” himself as
sufficient for my purpose. Whoever he is he is an intelligent man.
The style mid aim of his letter indicate that he is a man of some educa-
tion and intelligence. And yet, although he gives evidence in his
letter that he has read extensively about the Bible, and learned the
doctrine of the Catholic Church respecting the Bible, it is abundantly
clear from the last words in his letter, viz., “ Faith comes by hearing,”
that he knows very little about the Bible itself. And, if this can be
shown of intelligent Catholics, what are we to expect of the lower mul-
titudes? For example: he says, “Faith comes by hearing.” This is
a broken quotation from the Epistle to the Romans; and as its sound
seems to be in favour of his views, he makes it an argument without
ever considering what is its sense. He means by the quotation that
“Faith comes by hearing” and not by reading. 'He says this is the
doctrine of the Catholic Church, and “ in harmony with Holy Writ.”
We know quite well that it is the doctrine of the Catholic Church, but
we know just as well that it is not “in harmony with Holy Writ.” The
slightest attention to the passage will expose the error.' The passage
is: “ Who hath believed our report ? So then faith cometh by hearing
and hearing by the Word of God.” The mere reading of the words
shows that the term “hearing” is not the faculty of hearing as “English
Catholic means; for if 1 hearing ’ in the one clause means “hearum


with the ear,” then in the second clause the word must mean the same
thing; and then we have this beautiful commentary, which is well
worthy of an infallible church, “ Faith cometh by hearing with the ear,
and hearing with the ear by the Word of God.” The ridiculousness of
this expression is still more evident if the whole passage be considered.
The word “ report” in the beginning of the verse is the same word in
the original as the word translated “hearing” in the two other clauses
of the verse, and therefore, if “English Catholic” be right in his
meaning of the words “faith cometh by hearing,” we have this
supremely absurd translation of the passage, “Who hath believed our
hearing with the ear ? so then faith cometh by hearing with the ear, and
hearing with the ear by the Word of God!” This sufficiently shows
how totally unacquainted “English Catholic” is with the Bible which
he quotes, and at what straws an infallible church and its defenders
catch, to bolster up an indefensible cause. The Greek w r ord translated
“report,” and “hearing,” means report, or message, or thing heard,
not the act or iiearing THE message. The message may be spoken or
read; it may be written on tablets and exposed to the people, as many
of the messages of the prophets were, or as many of the proclamations
of kings and rulers used to be, or as all our newspapers do at the
present day, or as people do by word of mouth, in a less civilized state
of society than ours. What is meant is a message: “Who hath
believed our message ? so then faith comes by the message which is
heard, and the message comes by the command of God." Thus, then,
“faith comes” by the message or report, not by the hearing of the
report; for, otherwise, faith would be the result of exercising a physical
faculty, and not by receiving a divine message; and all who have this
physical faculty must have faith irrespective of a message, and those
wlio have no faculty of hearing cannot have faith, whatever message
they may see and read! So deplorable a thing is a Catholic's exegesis
of Holy Writ!
As to the other part of the question, “Faith comes by hearing,"
and not by heading, it is hard to find language to express anything so
totally absurd. Pharaoh heard Moses: did he believe Moses ? But
Belshazzar saw the handwriting on the wall: did he believe the
writing? It is a marvellous thing that reading a report I cannot have
faith in it, until some other person reading it makes me hear it! I
suppose that if any one gives “ English Catholic” a cheque for £IOO, he
will have faith in its writing and in the figures on the face of it, without
requiring some one to speak aloud its particulars, so that he might
hear the particulars. The Jews might have faith in the Ten Com-
mandments, if Moses spoke them; but if God wrote them with his own
finger on tables of stone, no faith could come from them. And if the
mail brings us the report that the Pope is dead, “English Catholic”
will refuse to believe it, until he hears some person publishing it with
an audible voice! Surely, a thousand transactions in our commercial
community proclaim the fact every day that there is more faith in
written documents than in words spoken and heard. Nay, if faith
cannot come by reading, how is “ English Catholic ” sure that the words,
“faith comes by hearing,” are words of “Holy Writ" at all? And
further still, the very passage which “ English Catholic” selects to tell
us that it is “hearing,” and not reading, which produces faith, teaches
the very opposite. The passage was written concerning those whose
special privilege it was to have amongst them “the oracles of the
living God.” The passage is an appeal to them—“ the Scripture saith.”
The passage was written that the Roman Christians reading it might
believe it, and be influenced by it. And in perfect “harmony” with


this, the Scriptures themselves urge us, over and over again, to read
and understand; to search and see—to inquire into and believe; nay,
and they pronounce a special blessedness on those who read, and in
whom the truth read is dwelling richly. All this is doubtless foreign to
the Catholic doctrine, but there are superabundant proofs that it is in
“ perfect harmony with Holy Writ.” It is no wonder, therefore, that
English Catholic ” should be sceptical of the power of Scripture to
produce faith, when the very passage which he brings to support his
view is not understood by him, and when he confounds in the most
simple and innocent manner two positions which are totally
distinct: that the Scriptures read cannot produce faith, and that no
heathen was ever converted by the mere reading of the Scriptures. If
he is to discuss the whole matter, I shall require exactness of thought
and clear definitions.
Yours, &c.,
„ , JOHN M‘GIBBON.
September 10th, 1865.
THE BIBLE AND THE REFORMATION.
TO THE EDITOR OE THE EMPIRE.
The Rev. Jolm M'Gibbon has noticed my letter to you on the
above subject, and invites me to a discussion of “the whole versions
and translations of Holy Scriptures, both before and after the Reform-
ation,” on condition that I give him my name and pay for his adver-
tisements.
. reply, I beg to say that I am not curious to learn the extent of
his acquaintance with the history of the Bible, and shall not be put
aside from the refutation of his stale calumny—“ that we are indebted
to the Reformation for having a Bible to read.” As to my name, it can
be of no consequence; the Rev. John M‘Gibbon being the challenger
from the beginning, cannot now, by any laws of the lists, refuse combat
to a comer with a nom de guerre, and my refusal to publish it may keep
personalities out of the discussion. With regard to the last, if the Rev.
John M'Gibbon could not, upon principle, subscribe to the rebuilding
of St. Mary s, he must feel that on the same ground I could not give
money that he may abuse my holy faith.
, , J 1? cv * J°h n M‘Gibbon’s second paragraph addresses itself to
the subject of my letter; but his method of treating it is in direct con-
trast to mine. My letter was nearly all taken up with a series of facts;
ms answer is entirely made up of assertions, without a single "proof.
Although I proved that from the earliest times the Catholic Church
had constantly promoted the multiplication of copies of the Holy
Scriptures, first in the language of the Roman Empire, and then, as the
moderii languages formed, by translations into the vernacular tomnios;
and although ho does not deny the facts, Hut rather accepts and° con-
nims them; yet he says that all this was done in every country, and a<m
after age, only, as the saying is, fora blinds- that Charlemagne, Alfred
the Great, the Venerable Bede, Alphonso the Wise, Cardinal Ximenes,
and all the other great and good men whose names have come down
to us as benefactors of their kind, were a set of low plotters, conspiring
together to keep mankind in ignorance even under the semblance of a
desire to enlighten them. Is it possible, one is led to exclaim, that a
man s mind can be so perverted as to read history in this Ihdit J And
yet it is so: it is only upon such a miserable basis that the°Protestant
tradition pan be kept up. Luckily for the world the mists of prejudice


and bigotry that so obscure men’s minds are beginning to be dispersed
before the modem facilities for acquiring true information. It is not
many years since the Rev. Mr. Maitland, librarian to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, wrote a work on the “ Dark Ages.” He made good use of
the materials which lay at his hand, and gave an impetus to the new
spirit of inquiry. Hear what he says on this subject.
Having cited instances to illustrate the amount of Christian know-
ledge just before Wickliffe's age, Mr. Maitland remarks —“ It would be
easy to multiply them, and not easy to escape the inference that a
familiar knowledge of the Word of God was possessed and valued by
many in those ages, which have been represented not merely as without
light, but as so fiercely in love with darkness that they were positively
hostile to the Scriptures. lam not such an enthusiast as to suppose
that I can do much to stop the perpetual repetition of falsehood long
established, widely circulated, and maintained with all the tenacity of
party prejudice. If I were, the occurrences of almost every day would,
I hope, teach me wisdom. While these sheets are going through the
press they have brought me a specimen quite worthy of ‘ Robertson,’
and so much to, our present purpose that I cannot help noticing it.
The head line of the page brought to me is—
d’aubigne’s eefokmation.
‘ The University. Discovery.
Luther’s Piety. The Bible.’
“ Among the contents of the page thus headed, and in the column
under ‘ Discovery and the Bible,’ we find the following passage relating
to Luther:— ‘ The young student passed at the University library every
moment he could snatch from his academic duties. Books were still
rare, and it was a high privilege in his eyes to be enabled to profit by
the treasures collected in that vast collection. One day (he had then
been studying two years at Erfurt, and was twenty years of age) he
opened, one after another, several books in the library, in order to become
acquainted with their authors. A volume he opens, in its turn, arrests
his attention. Ho has seen nothing like it till this moment. He reads
the title—it is the Bible ! A rare book, unknown in those days. His
interest is excited to a high degree; he is overcome with wonder at
finding more in the volume than those fragments of the Gospels and
Epistles which the Church had selected to be read in the temples every
Sunday throughout the year. Till then he had supposed these constitu-
ted the entire Word of God [and yet each one of these ‘fragments’ is
announced, when read, as having been taken from a certain chapter];
and now, behold how many chapters, how many books, of which he had
not before had a notion,’
“ Is it not odd that Luther,” continues Mr. Maitland, “had not, by
some chance or other, heard of the Psalms ? But there is no use in
criticising such nonsense. Such it must appear to every moderately
informed reader; but he will not appreciate its absurdity until he is
informed that, on the same page, this precious historian has informed
his readers that in the course of the two preceding years Luther had ap-
plied himself to learn the philosophy of the middle ages in the writings of
Occam, Scot, Bonaventura, and Thomas Aquinas. Of course none of
these poor creatures knew anything about the Bible.
“ After I had written this I was curious to see how Milner had stated
this matter; and I was surprised to find the following passage, with the
capitals as I have given them :— ‘ In the second year after Luther had
entered into the monastery he accidentally met with a Latin Bible in the
library. It proved to him a treasure. Then he discovered that there was
MORE Scripture passages extant than those which were read to the


people; for the Scriptures were at that time very little known in the
world.’
“ Eeally,” says Mr. Maitland, “ one hardly knows how to meet such
statements; but will the reader be so good as to remember that we are
not now talking of the dark ages, but of a period when the Press had
been half a century hi operation : and will he give a moment’s reflection
to the following statement, which I believe to be correct, and which
cannot, I think, be so far inaccurate as to affect the argument. To say
nothing of parts of the Bible, or of books whose place is uncertain, we
know of at least twenty different editions of the whole Latin Bible,
printed in Germany only, before Luther was born. These had issued
from Augsburg, Strasburg, Cologne, Ulm, Mentz (two), Basil (four),
Nuremberg (ten), and were dispersed through Germany. I repeat,
before Luther was born ; and, I may add, that before that event there
was a printing press at work in this very town of Erfurt, where, more
than twenty years after, he is said to have made his discovery. Some
may ask, what was the Pope about all this time ? Truly one would
think he must have been off his guard; but as to these German per-
formances, he might have found employment nearer home if he had
looked for it. Before Luther was born the Bible had been printed at
Eome, and the printers had had the assurance to memorialise his
Holiness, praying that he would help them off' with some copies. It
had been printed, too, at Naples, Florence, and Piacenza, and Venice
alone had furnished eleven editions. No doubt we should be within the
truth if we were to say, that besides the multitude of manuscript copies
not yet fallen into disuse, the Press had issued fifty different editions
of the whole Latin Bible, to say nothing of Psalters, New Testaments,
or other parts. And yet, more than twenty years after, we find a young
man who had received ‘ a very liberal education,’ who ‘ had made great
proficiency in his studies at Magdeburg, Eisenach, and Erfurt,’ and
who, nevertheless, did not know what a Bible was , simply because ‘the
Bible was unknown in those days.’ ”
Mr. Maitland also gives a strong proof that the Bible was well
known in those days, and was much read and highly appreciated. The
writings of those times, he says, “ are, if I may use the expression, made
of the Scriptures. I do not merely mean that the writers constantly
quoted the Scriptures, and appealed to them as authority on all occasions,
as other writers have done since their day—though they did this, and it
is a strong proof of their familiarity with them—but I mean that they
thought and spoke and wrote the thoughts and words and phrases of the
Bible, and that they did this constantly and habitually, as the natural
mode of expressing themselves. They did it, too, not exclusively in
theology, or ecclesiastical matters, but in histories, biographies, familiar
letters,' legal instruments, and documents of every description.” Pp.
468, 469, 470.
After the Eeformation, we know that Catholic translations of the
Bible were published as follows:
In Germany, under the auspices of the Archbishop of Mayence in
1534, which passed through twenty-one editions before the century was
completed. Another, by Drs. Emser and Eck, was published in 1537,
and had an immense circulation. Another still was made in the year
1630, and since then several more—some during the present century.
In Italy, between 1532 and 1779 four new translations were made
into Italian, of which the one under the Archbishop of Florence is re-
markable for being commended by the Pope (Pius VI), by the following
letter addressed to the Archbishop:—“ Beloved son, health and benedic-
tion—At a time when a vast number of bad books, which most grossly


attack the Catholic religion, are circulated even among the unlearned,
to the destruction of souls, you judge exceedingly well that the faithful
be excited to the reading of the Holy Scriptimes, For they are the most
abundant sources, which ought to be left open to every one to draw from
them purity of morals and of doctrine, and to eradicate the errors of
those corrupt times. This you have seasonably effected as you declare,
by publishing the sacred writings in he language of your country, suita-
ble to every one’s capacity”
In France, the translation by Le Fevre alone, after its revision by
the Louvain divines (1550), passed through thirty-nine editions before
1700. Since then there were at least six other new translations.
In Spain, in the years 1553 and 1567, two translations into Castilian
were published at Ferrara. Two years after, the translation of Cassiodoro
de Eeyna came from the press “in conformity to the decrees of the
Council of Trent,” and “under the high approbation of the court of
Eome.” Of this wo are told 2000 copies were immediately sold.
Between 1586 and 1662 five other editions are mentioned. In 1794, the
Bishop of Sevogia published his famous translation, which, we are told,
passed into “'repeated and copious editions, and spread over the whole
vast territory of the Spanish monarchy.” In the year 1807, the Bishop
of Barcelona “ was induced by the earnest solicitation of the whole
Government, ecclesiastical and civil, to commence and execute another
translation.” In 1823 his New Testament came from the press, and
received the distinguished acknowledgments o.nd approbation of the
Fope.” The Old Testament was loudly called for, and by the perse-
verance of the good bishop made its appearance in a very short time.
All the records of the day bear testimony that this version was brought
out at the express desire of the holy Father, and at the importunity,
under their own names, of seven archbishops, sixteen bishops, and a
Jong list of canons, priors, and parish priests, “'to promote the splen-
dour of religion, the purity of life, and the spiritual good of all the
faithful.”
In Poland, the old translation appeared in four editions, between
1561 and 1619, all bearing the express sanction of the Popes, after which
two other translations were made—one by Hyeronimus Leopolitanus,
the other by Justus Eabi.
The Bible has been printed at Eome and Venice for the various
Catholic missions. Among them we may notice that the four Gospels
in Chinese—the work of the Jesuits —received the approbation (!) of the
British and Foreign Bible Society; which, I may add, is more than
they can justly bestow on any Protestant translation into that language.
Indeed, i may as well say it here as afterward.?, the most correct versions
the Bible Society has issued in the Oriental languages, or for the use
of the heathen, have been those in which they have availed of the labours
of Catholic missionaries.
To conclude with England. After the Eeformation, her Catholic
children were, by cruel and oppressive laws, denied the enjoyment of
their Bible. To have published a Catholic Bible within the realm was
certain death; hence the first effort in this regard was made abroad.
A new Testament, translated by Cardinal Allen, Gregory Martin, and
Eichard Bristow, of the College of Eheims, in the year 1582, was the
first of the sacred volume published in English after the Eeformation.
It was with this book in their hands, that the Catholic priests, ordained
for the English mission, went to certain martyrdom. A new edition
of it appeared at Antwerp, in 1600. While the whole Bible, after the
restoration and removal of the college to Douay, was translated there
and published in 1610. Eevised by Bishop Challiner, and considerably


altered in its phraseology by others active under his authority, the
edition now used by those who speak English was published at London
in 17 ou. Numberless editions from this version have been published ;
in London, Edinburgh, Dublin, and Belfast. Father Matthew, the
apostle of temperance, published an edition in small numbers, and in a
form so cheap as to bring it within the means of everybody; and the
Bishop of Down and Connor, when publicly charged with opposition to
the circulation of the Scriptures, replied by an immediate and largo
issue from the press of the Douay Bible at his own cost. This Bible
had an immense circulation in Canada, where, however, the Archbishop
of Quebec caused a large edition of the New Testament to be printed in
Ironoh. The Catholic Douay Bible was the first Bible of any kind that
was published in America. Carey, Stewart and Co., of Philadelphia,
issued it in 1790. Since that time there have appeared editions by
sixteen different publishers, all with the express “ provision ”of the
Holy Catholic Church.
Dcma ,y Bible brings to my recollection a local anec-
Bev, Mr, Boyce, Wesleyan minister, whom we all remember
with the most kindly feelings, for his urbanity and gentlemanly man*
ners and conduct, was once present at a religious meeting when one of
his reverend colleagues made a statement somewhat similar to what
has now been asserted by Mr, M'Gibbon. Mr, Boyce immediately rose
and said, that nothing was more important than a strict adherence to
rtuth. It was not correct to say that Catholics did not read the Bible.
He had himself been convinced of the contrary. He had a short time
previously gone casually into a bookseller s shop in G eorge-street, when
they were unpacking some cases of books. Taking one m his hand he
discovered it to be a Bible —a Douay Bible, Thereupon he asked Mr,
Moore, the proprietor, what he was going to do with them. “Sell
them, was his reply, “But, said Mr. Boj’ce, “you never expect to
sell all these to Catholics? “Indeed I do," was the bookseller’s reply,
* and I wish I had double the number.' Mr. Boyce further said that
he took a copy homo with him, and out of curiosity examined it tho-
roughly, and he was able to assure the meeting that that copy was
word for word the same as the French Bible, which the Bible Society
had issued for circulation in France.
Oh, but, says the Bev. John M‘Gibbon, “ the priests never taught,
never encouraged the people to read the Scriptures.” Another local
occurrence here comes to my aid. At a Bible meeting in Tasmania, a
few years ago, the slanderers of Catholics were confounded by the pub-
lic exposition before them of certificates from the officials of that colony,
to the effect that the Catholic chaplains were in the constant habit of
furnishing the prisoners with copies of the Catholic Bible. And I
can assure Mr. M‘Gibbon that a young member of my family, having
been for some short time resident in a country part of this colony, was,
on leaving for Sydney, presented by the priest of the district with a
copy of the Bible, “as a token of affection and esteem.” And, that it
may not be objected that this takes place among Catholics only in
presence of Protestantism, I produce the evidence of Dr. Wolf, the
well-known Protestant missionary, who himself distributed thousands
of copies of the Holy Scriptures in the East, When he visited the
school of the Spanish friars at Damascus, he says, “To my utter aston-
ishment, I found that the pupils (several hundreds of them) had Arabic
Testaments and Arabic Psalters, printed by the British and Foreign
Bible Society; ” and a Spanish friar, who superintended the school, said
to him “ Thus we promote, and ever have promoted, the faith of the Holy
Catholic Apostolic Church.” (Trav. Dr. Wolff, ch. ix,. p. 181.) And


the Rev. James Connor, another Bible missionary, testifies, “I have
conversed with many Catholic ecclesiastics, and never have I heard
one voice lifted up against it (the Bible) : all they require is that the
edition be conformable to the authorised text.” (Joxvett’s App., p. 452.)
Indeed, “the best translations of foreign Bibles issued by our Bible
Society, are reprints from those made by the Propaganda at Rome.”
(Wolff, ch. ix., 182.) In 1818 the British and Foreign Bible Society
purchased 1500 copies of the Armenian Testament from the Catholic
college in the Island of St. Lazarus, Venice, and subsequently still
larger numbers. The Amharic version, the principal dialect of Abyss-
inia, was also purchased by them. The Arabic scriptures spoken of by
Dr. Wolff’ were reprinted from the “Propaganda edition.” To
Catholics the Bible Society is indebted for the Ethiopia version; for the
Tartar, which was published 500 years before Protestant missions
began; for the Chinese, two centuries before; for the Cingalese; for the
Persian; for the Russian; for the Polish, and oil European dialects; for
the Coptic, Tamul, Annamite, Malayalim, and many other Oriental
versions. (See Marshall’s Christian Missions.)
This is superabundant evidence to refute Mr. M‘Gibbon’s state-
ment, that “we owe it to the Reformation that we have a Bible to read.”
But, says that gentleman, I have admitted all that you say—“there
are translations and editions of the Scriptures in the Church of Rome at
the present day, plenty of them;” but, “while the Reformation did not
give existence to the Bible, it asserted for the Bible the right to speak
for itself.” Now, I would simply ask, is this answer altogether fair—
is it not, in fact, a shirking of the question ? Would not any Protestant,
hearing Mr. M‘Gibbon’s first statement, understand him as saying, as
in fact he says again in this letter, that Catholics “had no right to read
the Scriptures ?” and as he implies, when he says, “it is the exception,
and not the rule, for Catholic people to have the Bible ?” I would appeal
to every honest Protestant, is it not the common belief among them—are
they not taught, that the Bible has no connection with the Catholic reli-
gion—that Catholics follow the priests and not the Bible—that, in short,
“having a Bible to read,” is a peculiarly Protestant privilege ? Does not
what I have put before them come to them as news ? And would the
Rev. Mr. M‘Gibbon have given them this information, or even admitted
its existence, if I had not driven him into a corner by the force of my
facts and authorities '{ Let Mr. M‘Gibbon induce the Bible Society to
print in English the same version of the Bible that Mi'. Boyce describes
as being circulated in France, and that Dr. Wolff found the friar using in
the school at Damascus, and he will very soon find Catholics use them
as readily as the Bibles they have to purchase from other publishers*
But if we Catholics do not so frequently possess copies of the Bible as
Protestants, there are many ways of accounting for it. In the first
place, there is no Bible Society to give it to us gratis, and we cannot
use then' English version, because it is defective and faulty : it contains
only about two-thirds of the books of the Holy Scripture. Then the
printers of Catholic Bibles have to pay the paper duty, from which the
Bible Society is by special favour exempt, which makes the Catholic
Bible relatively dear, and, as a body, the Catholics are poor people.
Nevertheless, I venture to say, speaking from my experience in this
colony, that there are more Bibles sold to Catholics than to any other
class; and it is a pretty good proof that a man means to use a thing
when he goes to the trouble and expense of buying it.
But to return to Mr. M‘Gil feoffs excuse. He says “the Refoxmation
asserted for every man the right to read and understand the Bible for'
himself—tho Reformation, in fact, was the wrenching of the key of


knowledge of Holy Scripture out of the hands of the priests, and the
opemng of the door to every rational creature to understand for himself
what God had spoken to him in his word.” Now let us test this by the
facts. In the 15th century Luther, Calvin, Zuingle, and others, rebelled
against the spiritual authority of the Catholic Church, as, since their
day, many others have rebelled against the spiritual authority of the
Kirk of Scotland and the Church of England. To justify their rebellion,
the reformers said the Scriptures did not mean what the Catholic Church
Jhad always taught them to mean, just precisely as Dissenters in
England and Scotland have said in respect of the teachings of the two
established churches. What did the Catholic Church do ? Precisely
again what the Presbyterian Church has done time after time, and
would repeat to-morrow in the case of the Rev. John M‘Gibbon, or any
the most talented minister in her communion, who should venture
to teach in opposition to her doctrine. The Catholic Church cited
Luther to appear before a competent tribunal on a charge of heresy,
and condemned him after proof—-a process the Presbyterian Church has
repeated over and over again in regard of contumacious members.
Is it true, then, to say, that the Reformation “asserted for every man
the right to read and understand the Bible for himself?” The Reform-
ers, it is time, set the example, but they no more dreamed of allowing
ca ci y man to follow it, than does the Church of Scotland at this
very day. It is a historical fact that Calvin burned Michael Servetus
or teachoig a contrary doctrine to his; and Luther anathematised all
who differed from him. Having set this example, however, it was im-
possible to prevent others from following it, until at length the name of
the sects has become Legion. But let them divide as they may, they
cannot act up to the theory here put forward by Mr. M‘Gibbon, for in
practice each sect claims and exercises over its members as much
authority as the Catholic Church claims and exercises over her mem-
bers ; and the most the dissenting member can do is, to change his
sect or create a new one. 0
in Elating the Scriptures, the Church
™Pf ak tke , tanguage most likely to countenance her peculiar
lootlines. This is utterly false, as the adoption by the Bible Society
otov iT y Gat hohc translations must sufficiently testify, and is, raore^
1 f( f r ’ a wilful slander. To show, however, that so base a trick
p SSTvIrS q i° te at Luther said when convicted of per-
the teft ofS? P P w :» 1 kllow that this word only is not found in
bim TU. r li bU V f an Z 0110 P resses y°n upon this subject say to
! ’ D p Martin Luther has chosen that it should be so, and he says
that a Papist and an ass are the same thing I am sorrv
that! have not added other words. On this account the word only
shall remain m my New Testament, even if the Papists lose their spite-
ful spirit concerning it. (Andm s Life of Luther.) But perhaps this
is what the Rev. John M‘Gibbon means when he tells us the Reforma-
tion made the Bible “ speak for itself." Immediately upon the appear-
ance of Luther s translation the learned pointed out one thousand Sross
unders m it. Zumghus, himself a reformer, pronounced it a “corruption
of the \\ ord of God Martin Bucer, another reformer, said it was “ a
complete failure. Du Moulin says of Calvins version, that “he does
violence to the letter of the Gospel, and makes additions of his own to
. ’ f he Gei ™va divines at great pains produced a translation that was
to do honour to Protestantism, and the divines of James I. said of it
f d unfShl of S rot T esl sions that this was « the most wicked
and unfaithful of all. James I. s Bible, m its turn, is censured for
omitting many books as apocryphal which rest upon precisely the-same


authority as all the others, and for making many false translations
affecting the sense and doctrines of Holy Scripture. This is the Bible
in common use among English-speaking Protestants, and is not used
by Catholics simply because of these defects. See what a defect the
Rev. John M‘Gibbon has himself pointed out. Taking this Bible in my
hand, I read “ Faith cometh by hearing,” and as a matter of course
understood the words in their plain and unsophisticated meaning, when,
lo ! the Rev. John M‘Gibbon takes me to the original from which the
translation is made, and shows me that it does not mean hearing—that
is, “hearing by the ear,” but some other kind of hearing ; in fact, not
hearing at all, but reading. Well now, what sort of a translation is
this ? And how can he ever expect me to arrive at Presbyterianism by
a study of it ? Why, I shall never know, without reference to him,
whether lam safe in deciding upon the meaning of a single word; and
even when I have gone through the Bible from Genesis to Revelations,
and have applied to him for the true meaning of everything, he will
himself tell me that he nor his church is infallibly sure that they have
properly interpreted it. Surely my common sense, which my good
Creator has given me as my guide, must tell me that this is not the w r ay
His infinite wisdom has chosen for revealing Himself to man. Rather
will I believe the voice of that church, which, being established by the
Apostles, has existed until now by the confession of her enemies
unchanged — which during the whole period of her existence has alone
fulfilled the Divine commission of teaching the nations —which in this
age, as in the first and always, has so imitated her Divine master as to
pour oux her blood for love of the souls of men. “ That she,” says the
eloquent author of the Christian Missions, “ should not venerate the
Divine Scriptures, which are so absolutely her own that they were
abandoned by their Author to her sole authority both to define and
promulgate : that she should bo indifferent to that sacred deposit of
which during long ages she was the only guardian; which the incessant
and life-long labours of her own servants diligently preserved and
multiplied; upon which all her saints were nourished, and out of which
all her doctors taught; which are daily presented to her priests in the
most solemn function of their ministry, to be reverently kissed; and
which she offers at this hour, in every land, without stint or measure, to
all who can relish their sweet savour: this is evidently the dream of
the fanatic, or the calumny of the false prophet. She is guiltless,
indeed, of the cruel indecency of putting all the books of the Old
Testament into the hands of children, and has not read the words of her
first Pontiff (2 Pet. iii., 10,) with so little profit as to give the Epistles
of St. Paul, without note or comment, to women and peasants, or to
abandon the mystic Apocalypse to the crude fancies of every disorderly
dreamer, or the trivial exegesis of every inflated sophist: and though,
as the appointed Teacher of the Nations, she has other guides besides
the written Word, being the guardian of the apostolic traditions, and
taught directly and unceasingly by the immediate inspiration of the
Holy Ghost: yet the Church is, in fact and deed, the only time Bible
Society; and with such incomparable wisdom does she unfold to all her
children the mysteries of that Eternal Book, that even the unlettered
peasant, taught at her knees, though he has never learned to read,
attains a familiarity with its hidden truths, a keen and living perception
of its holiest doctrines, compared with which the superficial word
knowledge of the subtlest mind beyond her pale, is gross darkness.
Being a “Bible Christian” no less than the Rev. John M‘Gibbon,
1 am also, and therefore
AN ENGLISH CATHOLIC,
September 23, 1865.


THE ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
TO THE EDITOR 01' THE EMPIRE.
SI.U-, —Your laborious correspondent, “ English Catholic, declines to
accede to the conditions on which I offered to discuss with him the
whole question of versions and translations of the Bible, both before
and after the Reformation. He objects to pay for my advertisements,
because they “abuse his holy faith;" and he objects to give his name
“as of no consequence," and as the best security against personalities.
As to the first, it is no part of my purpose to “abuse his faith, but
only to prove the errors of his faith; and surely I have the choice, if
this is to cost money, to prefer the plan of publishing my own views
rather than of tracking and exposing his. As to the second, it is of
great consequence to have his name, for if I have “challenged any-
body 1 have never challenged a man of straw; and what is the use of
confuting an anonymous writer ? He loses nothing, and I can gain no-
thing, though I should demonstrate the irrcvelancy of his facts, and
the inconclusiveness of his reasonings. I will, however, continue in
my course of maintaining and proving that the “ Reformation won for
us the liberty to read the Bible.” If this bo supposed to be contrary to
the “ laws of the lists," it is sufficient for me that it is in perfect ac-
cord with all the laws of reason and literary warfare.
Although, therefore, I do not consider it necessary to give a formal
reply to “English Catholic,” I shall yet show him, and the public
generally, in a few remarks, how weak are his attempts to refute what
he calls “my stale calumny”—“That we are indebted to the Reform-
ation for having a Bible to read.” In my former letter I had occasion
to request that if “English Catholic” would discuss, he would use
“ exactness of thought and clear definitions.” This applied to the
whole first letter of “ English Catholic,” but especially to the conclusion,
in which ho stated that • • faith comes by hearing ” and not by reading,
and then he added, with great simplicity, as a proof, his doubt that
“ one authentic case of the conversion of a heathen to Christianity by
the were reading of the Scriptures can lie found," I saw at once
that “English Catholic” was a very weak, or a very subtle opponent,
in suggesting and assuming that these two totally distinct positions
were one, viz., that the Scriptures read cannot produce faith, and that
the mere reading of the Scripture cannot produce faith, and therefore I
require clear definitions. To my mind there is an immense differ-
ence between the two positions; and if “English Catholic” can-
not appreciate the difference, what would be the use of discussing with
him? In the second letter of “ English Catholic” the same confusion,
or subtlety, (I don't know which it is, since I do not know the writer)
appears. For example, my “ stale calumny ” is in my own words,
The Reformation “won for us the liberty to read the book"—that is
the Bible. The “ English Catholic ” changed this into another form,
in his words: “We are indebted to the Reformation for having a
Bible to read.” “English Catholic” may think that “liberty to read
the Bible,” and “having a Bible to read,” are the same thing; but to
my mind they are quite different—so entirely different that the line of
proof which' would establish the one would leave the other wholly
untouched. For example, if I wanted to prove the first, “that the
Reformation won for us liberty to read the Bible ” it would behove me to
show that before the Reformation that liberty was denied,* and had
denied, that the Reformation removed the hindrances out of the way;
but if I wanted to prove the second, that “we are indebted to the
* This is indeed precisely what Mr, M'Oibhop had to show,—JJ, C,


Reformation for having a Bible to read, tlie proof would be that before
the Reformation there was no such a thing as a Bible to read, and that
the Reformation gave existence to “ the Bible to read • hence the need
for clear definitions ; and hence the need in such a discussion as this,
that the words of the opposite party be fairly construed, and that truth
be the only object sought. Had “ English Catholic ” attended to this—
had he taken my own words, and not what he has been pleased to put
into my mouth—his course would have been different and his labour less.
All his “facts and authorities” go to prove that before the Reformation,
the Bible —versions and translations—existed; but his proof is as
irrevelant to the subject in hand, as if it had demonstrated that before
the Reformation writing existed and printing existed, Protestants never
denied, that before the Reformation the Bible existed; they never
denied, that before the Reformation translations were made and editions
printed; and so, to prove this, as “English Catholic” has done, is just
to prove what has nothing to do with the question in hand; and the
question in hand is simply this —not whether there were versions and
translations of the Bible previous to the Reformation, but whether or
not it was the Reformation which gave to the people the right and the
liberty to read the Bible ? To answer this question, it does not avail to
enumerate the editions and translations of the Bible which were made
between the 12th and 16th centuries, nor to enumerate the editions
which have been published since; for the liberty of the people to read
may be firmly denied even wßile there may be a multiplication of editions
and translations; but the answer is effectually given in the afßmativo
if it be conclusively shown that the Reformation asserted the right of
every man to read and understand the Scriptures for himself, and put
the book in his hand that he might read and understand. Now, this
was the answer which 1 gave before, and it is the answer which I will
give again, as the only one relevant. Observe, then, the point to be estab-
lished, not that the Reformation gave existence to the Bible, or versions
and translations of the Bible, but won for the people the right and liberty
to read the Bible. I suppose “English Catholic” will admit that as the
Roman Church is an “ unchangeable church,” what it did and said at the
Re formation was but the gathered expression of what it had always said
and done before. Well, first of all, the Council of Trent ordained that the
Latin vulgate should alone be held authentic in the public reading of the
Scripture, in disputations, in preaching and in expounding, and that no
one should dare to reject it under any pretext whatever. This is explicit
enough— the La tin vulgate is the only version of the Bible which the Church
of Borne has ever sanctioned. It has never sanctioned any translation of
that Latin version. No English version, or French, or German, or Span-
ish, or Italian, has ever been sanctioned by the Church of Rome, The
Church has never sanctioned any but the Latin vulgate. But the Latin
language, at the Reformation, and for centuries before, was a dead
language—the language of the learned indeed, but not the language of
any of the nations or peoples of the world; and so, in this effectual way,
the Bible was as much withdrawn from the people as if every Bible had
been consigned to the flames. The “ English Catholic ” will perhaps
tell me that Popes, Bishops, and learned Laymen translated the Bible
into some of the vernaculars of Europe—he will enumerate to me the
versions and editions, of which catalogues speak, which appeared between
the 12th and 16th centuries; and then ho will expect me to be simple
enough to infer that these are proofs that “the Catholic Church had
always promoted the multiplication of copies of the Holy Scripture, " and
that the people had always the right and the liberty to read the Scriptures.
Now, so far from that being the legitimate inference from the facts, this


is the only inference which the facts will bear; that while the Chv/rch
adhered to the plan of excluding the people, from the reading of the word,
there were always some individuals more liberal than the Church, who
translated the word for them into their own tongues. For it is as clear as
noonday that, had the Roman Church recognised the right and the liberty
of the people to read the Bible in their own tongue —had she been anxious
that the various peoples should road at all—she would not have left the
work of translation to unauthorised individuals, but she would have
made every translation into the tongues of Europe as certain and fixed,
by her “infallible decrees,” as the Latin vulgate itself. But this the
Church has never done—this the Church never did, and never will.
But what the Church did not do, the Reformation did. It began, and
continued, and spread, by the translations of the Scriptures into the
languages of the people. It was pre-eminently the purpose of the
Reformation to give the people the word of God; and it was for doing
this that Rome fulminated its hottest bolts against the reformers. Let
“English Catholic” produce, if he can, an English version of the
Scriptures, published by the Romish Church, before the Reformation.
Ho will tell mo of the New Testament, published at Rheims, in 1582,
but does he not know that before the Rheimists published their New
Testament several Protestant versions of the whole Bible had already
appeared? And does he not know that Allen, Martin, and Bristow (all
“ English Catholics ”) who published it, traitors to their country, and
the authors of murderous notes, were not the Romish Church ? And
does he not know that their professed design in publishing it was, as
their preface says, to counteract the spread of the Protestant translations?
“We have, at length,” say they, “finished all the New Testament .
. . which translation we do not publish upon erroneous opinion of
necessity that the Holy Scriptures should always be in our mother
tongue, or that they ought, or were ordained of God, to be read by all
indifferently, or could be easily understood by every one that readeth
or heareth them in a known language—pernicious and much hurtful to
many—or that we generally and absolutely deemed it more convenient
in itself, and more agreeable to God’s word and honour, or edification of
the faithful, to have them turned into vulgar tongues, than to be kept
and studied only in the ecclesiastical- learned languages ; not for these,
nor any such like causes, do we translate this sacred book, hit upon
special consideration of the present time, state, and condition of our
country, unto which divers things are either necessary, or profitable, or
medioinable now, that, otherwise, in the peace of the Church, were
neither much requisite, nor perchance, wholly tolerable.” This pretty
plainly tells ns what was the state of England as to transla-
tions of Scriptures into the vernacular loefore the Reform-
ation, when the Church was at peace —it was not “ much
requisite,” it was not “ wholly tolerable,” during those peaceful years,
to have the Scriptures in the English tongue ! The “ honour of God,”
and the “ edification of the faithful,” were most suitably conserved by
1 ‘ keeping” the Scriptures in the learned languages. Perhaps ‘‘ English
Catholic ” will tell me also of the Douay Bible,” published in 1609, and
which is still in use by English Catholics, authorised by bishops and
archbishops, with suitable notes and annotations; but docs he not
know that before the Douay Bible appeared many Protestant translations
had been published, that every succeeding edition of the Douay, from
1609 until now, has approximated to our English Protestant translation?
and that the bishops and archbishops who have given it their imprima-
tur, and the College at Douay that sent it forth, are not to be reckoned as
the Roman Church ? The fact is, the Homan Church has never given to


Any people, English, French, German or Italian, an authorised transla-
tion of the Holy Scriptures, in the vulgar tongue : it connived at trans-
lations by individual Catholics, at the time of the Reformation; but with
this purpose —to prevent Protestant translations falling into people's
hands; while, at the same time, it cursed and fulminated, it persecuted
and punished, in true Roman style, that the Protestant translators
might desist from their work. This we shall reckon as one proof that
the Reformation “ won for us the right and liberty to read the Bible,”
Next, the fixed law of the Catholic Church, with reference to the
reading of the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, is, what the Council of
Trent expressly decrees—viz., not the right and liberty of the people to
read, but the right of the Church to give permission, in certain cases,
of which the Bishop is the only judge: (Regula IV., list of prohibited
books ) —“Seeing it is manifest, by experience, that if the Bible be per-
mitted to be read everywhere, without difference, in the vulgar tongue,
more harm than good results thence, through the rashness of men; let
it therefore be at the pleasure of the Bishop or inquisitor, with the
advice of the parish clerk or confessor, to grant the reading of the
Bible, translated by Catholic authors, to those who, in them opinion,
will receive an increase of faith and piety. This license let them have
in writing; and whoever shall presume, without permission, to read or
possess such bibles, may not receive the absolution of his sins till he has
returned them to the ordinary.” This, then, speaks plainly enough in
denial of the right of the people to read the Scriptures. It claims for
the Church the right to permit the reading; the reading is granted and
refused at the pleasure of the bishop; it puts the people in the power of
the inquisitor and the confessor, and it commands that any who presume
to have and to read the Bible without the written consent of inquisitor
and confessor shall be denied, for the time being, the absolution of sins I
To imagine that people who own the authority of the Council of Trent
(as all Catholics do) will be very anxious and concerned about the
reading of the Scriptures, in the face of such an imperious and impious
decree as this, is just to imagine the absurdity that people will claim
ns a right what their priests and confessors distinctly toll them they
have no right to at all! Mr. “English Catholic” will perhaps reply to
me, in reference to this rule of the Council of Trent, the usual and
“stale" evasion of all Catholic disputants, that this rule does not forbid
the reading of the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, but only gua/rds it
against abuse, and properly limits it to “translations of Catholio
authors.” But the evasion is too palpable to escape detection. If I
am denied the right to read the Scriptures, if I am only permitted at the
pleasure of another—if that permission must be in writing else I shall
not receive the forgiveness of my sins—l am clearly just as much for-
bidden to read as if the prohibition were in direct terms. And, then,
mark that all this guarding, and permitting, and threatening has re-
ference to Catholic translations, not to Protestant translations; so that
according to this rule of the Roman Church, so much are Catholics
denied the “right and the liberty to read the Scriptures,” that the
church cannot trust them to read even the translations of Catholics,
without such guarding and threatening as practically amounts to a
positive prohibition. Strange that a Church which pretends to give the
people the Scriptures, should be unable to trust even Catholic transla-
tions in the hands of its people, lest in reading the Scriptures they
should get “ more harm than good! ” The Bible, even when translated
by Catholic authors, is so difficult a book, so dangerous a book, so liable
to turn away men from the Church of Rome, so liable to make men
question and reject the assumptions of the priests of Rome, that it must
pot be read without written permission I


Ue Reformers, however, acted upon a different plan. Acknow-
ledging the right of every man to read the Scriptures for himself, they
translated and published as fast as they could—they repudiated the
chum of any church to stand between God and his creatures to whom
he speaks—they rejected the impious assertion that by the people read-
ing the Bible they get more harm than good, and they urged the
people to read with intelligence, and honesty, and prayer, in the full
conviction that only good and not evil could result from such reading
of the word. This then we shall reckon as the second proof that the
*■ Reformation won for us the right and liberty to read the Bible.”
A ext, the Creed of Pope Pius IV. is as follows, on the subject of
ocnpture, and to this creed every Catholic bows:—“l also admit the
Holy Scriptures according to that sense which our Holy Mother the
C mi ch has held and does hold, to which it belongs to judge of the true
sense OMd interpreted ion of the Scriptures ; neither will 1 ever take and
interpret them otherwise than according to the unanimous consent of
the fathers.' The decree of the Council of Trent, on the same subject,
is as follows: The Council further decrees that in matters of faith
and morals, and whatever relates to the maintenance of Christian doctrine,
no one, confiding in his own judgment, wresting the sacred Scriptures
to his own sense of them, shall dare to interpret the Holy Scripture
xr S i contrary to that sense which hath been held, and is still held, by
Holy Mother Church, whose right it is to judge of the true meaning and
interpretation of Sacred V rit, or contrary to the unanimous consent of
the fathers, even though such interpretedions should never be published ;
if any disobey, let them be denounced by the ordinaries and punished
accoidmg to law. The meaning of these two authentic documents is
perfectly obvious. They proceed upon the ground that the people have
no right to read the Bible; they then deny to the people the rh>ht of
private judgment ; they then claim for the Church the exclusive right
°f.fdgmg and interpreting Scripture; they then prohibit all inter-
pretation, unless the unanimous consent of the fathers can be found;
they then shut the people up to an acceptance and belief, without quos-
lon, without thought, without appeal, to what interpretation the
Church may allege; and then they threaten pains and penalties if any
one dare to accept the Scriptures otherwise. I ask any reasonable man
it words more strict and exclusive could possibly be -written, to bring
the people under the dominion of the priests—to render them slavish
dependents on the assertions of the priests—and to cut them off from
all right and liberty to read and understand for themselves the word of
Cod. Blessed be God, the Reformation set us free from these atrocious
assumptions and priestly tyrannies! The mind, the conscience, and
the manhood of men were enfranchised when the reformers, in defiance
° c ? unci l s ’ priests, brought us into immediate contact
. e of truth, by putting into our hand his own revelation,
with his own positive command, ••'Search the Scriptures.” And this,
therefore, is the third proof which we give that the Reformation “won
for us the right and the liberty to read the Bible.”
I could now advance other proofs, from the laws which have been
passed against reading the Bible in the language of the people; from
the persecutions and murders with which the Roman Church has
marked its opposition to the reading of the Bible by the people; from
the humiliations of all the encyclicals of the Popes amiinst “Bible
societies as pestilences and heresies; and from the facte, which are
patent at the present day in Catholic countries—all demonstrating papal
hatred against the reading of the Bible by the people; but enough has
been stated at present; and I have a few other things to add on other
points m “English Catholic's” letter.


‘•'English Catholic” cites as a proof of the desire of the Roman
Church to translate and circulate the Scriptures in the tongue of the
people, the praise of Pope Pius VI. to the Archbishop of Florence, be-
cause he had translated the Sacred Scriptures into “the language of his
country, suitable to every one's capacity.” Well, suppose I give the
view of another Pope, no less a saint than Gregory VII., of the wrong-
ness of giving the people the Scriptures in their own tongue, we shall
have the edifying spectacle of Catholic unity in a Pope against a Pope !
Vratislaus, the Duke of Bohemia, desired leave from Pope Gregory VII.
to have religious service in the churches in his country performed in
the common tongue of the people: and Gregory sent the following
reply:—“As you desire us to allow divine service to be performed
among you in the Sclavonic tongue, know that I by no means grant you
your request, it being manifest to all who will but reflect that it
has pleased the Almighty that the Scripture should be withheld from
some, and not understood by all, lest it should fall into contempt, or
lead the unlearned into error. And it must not be alleged that all were
allowed, in the primitive times, to read the Scriptures, it being well
known that in those early times the Church connived at many things
which the holy fathers disapproved and corrected when the Christian
religion was firmly established. We therefore cannot grant, hut
absolutely forbid, by the authority of Almighty God and his blessed
Apostle Peter, what you ask, and command you to oppose to the utmost
of your power all who require it. Mr. “ English Catholic ” will surely
admit that the language of Gregory is a little different from the language
of Pius VI. Pius praises; but Gregory forbids and denounces; and
not only so, but, in blasphemous appeals to the God whom his assumptions
insult, he commands the civil power to use all its means to oppose the
reading of the Scriptures in the tongue of the people ! Gregory is as
much the Roman Church as Pius VI. But, if Gregory is not sufficient
to neutralise Pius, suppose wo take Pius to neutralise himself. When
the celebrated Charles Butler, and other Romanists in England, were
agitating for Catholic Emancipation, the people of England were un-
willing to give it, because it was alleged that one of the principles of
the Catholic faith was, that “ no faith was to be kept with heretics, and
that it was the right of the popes to depose kings, and absolve then*
subjects from allegiance to them.” Butler and the other agitators
denied that any such principle was held in the Catholic faith, and in
proof proposed to submit the question to certain foreign universities, for
the satisfaction of the Government and people of England. Accordingly,
all the universities answered, denying that there was any such princi-
ple in the Catholic faith, and Pius VI., well knowing the facts and
objects, allowed his cardinals, as in his name and with his approval, to
issue a document ostensibly approving of .the answers of the universi-
ties. This stroke of policy had the desired effect. The people of
England were wholly deceived, and put off to sleep. The Emancipa-
tion Bill passed. The catholics gained political power. They rapidly
and sedulously gathered strength; and then, when the end was gained,
this same Pius VI., in Italy, in a solemn bull, “ Auctorem fidei, ’ rep-
robated and condemned the denial that the pope has the power of
dethroning kings and absolving their subjects, as false, and scandalous,
and extremely injurious to the Holy See.” Such was Pius VI., who
praised the Archbishop of Florence for publishing the Bible in the
vulgar tongue ! As he cozened the people of England for the good of
the church, in the matter of deposing kings, could he not also cozen
the people of Florence, for the good of the Church, in the matter of the
Scriptures ? And so his praise of Martini’s translation in 24 vols., cost-


mg about £4, is completely neutralised, and is but a sorry proof of tbe
anxiety of tbe Roman Church to give the people the Bible to read! So
much for Pope Pius VI.
“English Catholic” then tells a story about the Rev. Mr. Boyce
finding, with astonishment, a parcel of Catholic Bibles at a Catholic
bookseller’s, in Sydney, and he appeals to this as a proof that the
Catholic people have the Bible to read. I don't know which to reckon
the simpler—Mr. Boyce, or “English Catholic.” It is not surprising
that Catholic should be found in Catholic bookseller’s, in Pro-
testant countries; but it would be surprising if Mr. Boyce or “English
Catholic ” were to find them in Catholic countries. If Rome itself be
searched, the “ parcel of Catholic Bibles ” found for sale to the people,
in their own tongue, will be mightily small indeed; for “English
Catholic ought to know that Pius VII. ordered into the Index
Expurgatorius the New Testament of the very Archbishop of Florence
(Martini) whom Pius VI. praised for translating the Bible. Pius VI.
praising and Pius VII. prohibiting! Beautiful infallibility ! And still
more beautiful unity in the desire of the Roman Church to give the
people of Italy the Holy Scriptures in their own tongue! Did “ English
Catholic ” ever hear of the persecutions of Pius IX. at Florence—the
imprisonment of the Madiai and others for reading the Scriptures ?
Florence, then, has been greatly favored by the reign of the Piuses !
( Mr. “ English Catholic ” then refers to Romish priests giving the
Scriptures to prisoners in Tasmania, as another proof of the anxiety of
the Roman Church to give the people the Scriptures in their own tongue.
He says that the statement of this fact “confounded” a Protestant
bible meeting, Protestants that are “confounded” by such a state-
ment, or who are convinced by it of the anxiety of the Roman Church
to give the people the Scriptures in their own tongue, have not yet
learned the rudiments of Popish policy. In 1863, because the priest of
Perth in Scotland did not supply the Catholic prisoners with copies of
the Catholic Bible in the general prison, the Protestants supplied his
lack of service, by giving them Bibles, and tracts, and other books,
for which the prisoners were very grateful. When the priest came to
know of this “ Protestant aggression,” and saw its results, he then
became very zealous about books and Bibles, and complained to the
authorities that the Protestant supply might be stopped for the future !
The policy is plain, and doubtless precisely the same in both cases.
They are poor Protestants who wonder at it at all.
Mr. “English Catholic” then promises on behalf of all Catholics,
and on behalf of the Roman Church, that if “ the Bible Society will
circulate the Douay Bible, the Catholics will very soon use them.”
How “English Catholic” can promise this Ido not know, but I know
quite well that not only has he no authority for it, but facts are wholly
against his promise. If he is an Englishman, he ought to know that
not many years ago, in London, some Protestant gentlemen proposed to
form a society, for the free distribution of the Douay Bible among the
Catholics of England and Ireland. They determined upon this, because
a certain “English Catholic r-a priest—made precisely the same offer
which “ English Catholic ”in Sydney has made to me. The following
are his words : —“ If any of the Bible Societies feel disposed to try our
esteem (that is, the Catholic esteem) for the Bible by presenting us
some copies of a Catholic version, with or without notes, we will grate-
fully accept them and faithfully distribute them.” The offer was
immediately accepted, and money was subscribed and plans adopted;
but when all things were ready, “ English Catholic” took another view
and declined the offer, on the grounds that “Catholics did not consider


in anywise the Scriptures necessary, and that they could not give the
Bible gratuitously, eren with notes, to every body who applied for it, but
only under the direction, and at the will of their superior.” This fact is
worth a thousand promises of “ English Catholic ”in Sydney. If, how-
ever, he thinks that his promise is better than the fact, and if ho will
give me security for the fulfilment of the promise, I will guarantee
£IOO for Bible distribution in Ireland and Rome, in the folio whig pro-
portion—£so for Ireland, and £SO for Rome; the Bibles to be freely
distributed; those for Ireland to be the Douay version, and those for
Rome to be the version of the Archbishop of Florence, which Pius VI.
approved, and both versions to be without notes.
Next, “ English Catholic ” gives us some reasons why “ Catholics do
not so frequently possess copies of the Bible as Protestants.” The
first reason is “because there is no Bible Society " among Catholics
“to give it them gratis!” This reason does not say much for the
concern of the Roman Church to give the people the Bible to read. I
thought “English Catholic” was attempting to prove by his long list
of authorities that the Roman Church had a special and superior con-
cern that the peoples of the world should “have the Bible to read.” I
thought he was attempting to prove that the concern of the Protestants
was as nothing when compared with that of the Roman Church to
translate and circulate the Scriptures in the languages of the people.
But here he destroys, with his own hand, all his laboured proofs! The
Church, which is especially concerned in giving the people the Scrip-
tures, has no society for this purpose; and the Protestants, who have
no such zeal in this work, have a society, not only for selling the Bible
at a small rate, but for giving it to the poorer people gratis ! Why has
the Roman Church no Bible Society t It has innumerable societies
for purposes far inferior to that of circulating the Scriptures ! Why,
then, has it none for this highest of purposes t The answer is so plain
that I will not give it. The next reason Mr. “ English Catholic” gives
is, that Catholics “cannot use the English version, because it contains
only two-thirds of the books of Holy Scriptures.” He alludes to the
rejection of the Apocrypha by the Protestants : and properly do they
reject it ; for although the Council of Trent declared the Apocryphal
books to be inspired, the proof is most overwhelming that they are not
a portion of the Word of God. But, if the omission of the Apocryphal
books be a reason why the Catholics cannot use the Old Testament of
the Protestants, it cannot bo a reason why they should not use the
New Testament of the Protestants; and besides, if the Protestants
have only two-thirds of the sacred books, it must surely be better to
have these two-thirds than to have none at all; for the two-thirds
cannot be different in truth and doctrine from the one-third left out.
“English Catholic,” however, knows quite well that the one-third
which Protestants reject, viz., the Apocryphal books, for which there is
not a tittle of proof as inspired writings, is of far more consequence to
Catholic priests and Catholic doctrines than the other two-thirds,
whoso inspiration is on all sides unquestionable; so much so, indeed,
that rather than not have the Apocryphal books a part of the Bible, the
Roman Church, her popes and bishops, would reject the whole ! How
singular is it that none should be reckoned better than some !
Mr. “ English Catholic” says, as another reason,'that Catholic
printers have to pay the paper duty, and so their Bibles are proportion-
ally dear, and the Catholic people are generally poor. The paper duty
is now repealed, and there is no Church so rich as the Catholic Church.
One-half of what she expends on her gaudy ceremonies every year
would provide a Bible for all her members who cannot pay: but to


light up St. Peter's, at Romo, and adorn in gold and velvet those who
pretend to be the successors of fishermen, is far more profitable, and
far more contributory to Papal power, than circulating the Scriptures
among the poor and ignorant in Ireland and Rome.
Lastly “ English Catholic ” says, that nevertheless, in this colony
there are more Bibles bought and sold by Catholics than by any other
class. If this be true, it is a cheering fact, and one at which every
Protestant will rejoice; for wilfully corrupt though the Douay version
is, the truth of Cod is still sufficiently plain in it, if Catholics will care-
fully and honestly read it, to lead them away from the false hopes of
Rome to the only hope of salvation, in Jesus.
Passing over now what “ English Catholic ” says about Calvin and
Luther as irrelevant and untrue, 1 come to a strong point in the estima-
tion of “English Catholic, ’ and affecting my own veracity as a writer.
I had said in my former letter that in translating the Scriptures the
Catholic Church “ made them speak the language most likely to coun-
tenance her peculiar doctrines.” This, “ English Catholic ” boldly tells
me, “is false, ’ and a “wilful slander.” I shall give a few instances
which will probably be sufficient to acquit me of this charge of “ false-
hood and slander.” First, it is a peculiar doctrine of the Roman Church
to glorify Mary, and to raise her to something like Divine Majesty.
There is nothing in Scripture to authorise this; but something may be
done in the way of translation to give it countenance, and accordingly
we find it so, in two very glaring and obvious instances. In Genesis,
where God is pronouncing the curse upon the serpent, and alludes to
the coming of the promised seed who was to bruise the serpent’s head,
instead of putting “ he shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his
heel; Romanists have it, “she shall bruise thy head and thou shalt
lie in wait for her heel. ’ The word of God, in Hebrew and Greek, and
in the Protestant version, refers the passage to Jesus Christ, the
promised seed, but Romanists make the passage refer to Mary, who iff
Romanists call the “ refuge of sinners.” Again, on the annunciation of
the angel to Mary, in Luke, the Greek and the Protestant version have,
“Hail thou that art highly favoured;” but this was not enough to
shadow the worship and service which the Roman Church gives to
Mary, and so the words are rendered thus, “ Hail, Mary, full of grace.”
And, first of all, the word “Mary ” does not occur in the passage in
the original; and next, the word rendered “full of grace” is properly
rendered in the Protestant version “highly favoured.” The proof of
this is, that the same word, Eph. 1-6, used in reference to the Ephesian
Christians, is translated as in the Protestant version, “graced” or
“ favoured.” Was there not, then, an obvious reason for translating
the word, in reference to Mary, “full of grace,” and the same word, in
reference to the Ephesian Christians, simply as “ graced” or favoured?
The reason is too plain.
Again, it is a peculiar doctrine of the Roman Church that images
and relics are worthy of a species of worship. There is nothing to
countenance this in the Word of God; but something may be done in
the way of translation to give the practice countenance. Hence, in
Genesis and Hebrews, we have, in the Douay, “ Jacob adored the top
of his rod.” Now the Hebrew and Greek and Protestant version have,
“ Jacob worshipped upon (that is, leaning upon) the top of his staff.”
It is evident that the old man, supporting himself, by leaning upon the
top of his staff, worshipped ; but that he worshipped the top of his rod
itself, is not only a monstrous but wilfully dishonest translation of the
original words. But it had an object to serve. Then in the Psalms the
Douay has “ worship His footstool; ” but the proper reading of the


Hebrew and Greek words is, “ before or at His footstool,” as in the
Protestant translations. But to “ worship his footstool” was more in
harmony with worshipping images, and pictures, and relics, than
worship before or at His footstool, ” and hence the former is adopted
by the translator of the Douay, in defiance of the plain words of Holv
Scripture. J
Again, it is a peculiar doctrine of the Roman Church, that “ pen-
ance must be offered. The Word of God gives no countenance to this:
but something can be done by means of translation, and hence the
Greek word which the Protestant version properly translates “repent ”
that is “change your mind,” the Douay has translated «do penance”—
altogether another and totally different thing, and not at all the mean-
ing of the word. The proof of this is, that the Douay correctly trans-
lates the word “repent” and “repentance” where it could serve no
purpose to translate it “do penance.” The Scriptures nowhere com-
mand the doing of “penance.” Jesus never required the doing of
“penance. ’ But it is commanded that men should “repent;” ami it
is abundantly plain that a man may live all his days “ doing penance,” and
yet never in one instance really “repent.” It does not require any great
clearness of vision to see the reason for this gross mistranslation
of the word of God. It suits better the purpose of Rome that men
should do penance than .simply repent.
Again it is one of the peculiar doctrines of the Church of Rome
that marriage is a sacrament. There is nothing in the Scriptures to
countenance this, but something maybe done in the way of translation ;
and so the Douay, in Ephesians, has this gross mistranslation of the
original Greek: “This is a great sacrament.” The Greek and the
Protestant versions have “ mystery [” and in every other place in which
the word occurs the. Douay itself has “mystery;” but in this one place
where marriage is spoken of it translates “ sacrament,” evidently for
the purpose to give some countenance to a peculiar doctrine.
. I could add a great many other instances of their “handling de-
ceitfully the word of God ” on the part of Catholic translators as given
in the Douay Bible in reference to the power and authority of the
priests—in reference to the church—in reference to the doctrine of faith
and works—in reference to the worship of angels, and to the doctrines of
purgatory and extreme unction ; but what I have given abundantly free
me from the charge of “ falsehood and slander” when I stated before
and state again that Catholic translators “ make the Scriptures speak
a language most likely to countenance their peculiar doctrines.”
I now, therefore, take my leave of “English Catholic,” with the
expression of a hope that hy reading the Bible he may be delivered
from the corruptions and mazes of Rome. If he read it with intelli-
gence, honesty, and prayer, he will soon find that the religion of Rome
is not taught there. If he thus read it, ho will soon find that “faith
cometh by reading” as well as by “ hearing.” The Scriptures require
I candid reading, and they deserve a candid reading. It will not do to
itch at a sentence, and break a sentence as “ English Catholic does,
hen he complains of the assertion that the expression “Faith comcth
j hearing” does not mean “ hearing with the ear,” but “by a mess*
;e heard.” The priests of Rome may have shown him the example of
ms “wresting the Scriptures,” for the “learned” are far more prone
this than the “ unlearned;” but let him bring to his reading of the
ible his common sense, his plain intelligence, and an honest cTesire to
jar God speak, not through the traditions and doctrines of the Church,
it through his own Word, and I am very sure he will soon experience
uit he is translated out of darkness into marvellous light. Yours, &<•,,
Woolloomooloo, 28th September. JOHN M‘GIBBON.


THE BIBLE AND THE REFORMATION.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE EMPIRE.
SIR? —If credit be given to the Rev. John M‘Gibbon for honesty and
good faith in what he writes in yonr issue of the 2nd instant, it is
impossible to avoid pronouncing him to be one of the most ignorant
men who has ever presumed to dogmatise on a subject which requires,
at least, some knowledge of languages, of theology, of ecclesiastical
history and law 7 , and of the principles of logic, to do it justice. That
Mr, M‘Gibbon has undergone a course of commonplace controversial
reading, on his own side of the question, is evident enough : it is not
less certain that he is profoundly ignorant of Biblical literature and
hermeneutics ; of the distinction between Catholic doctrine and disci-
pline—of the fixity of the one, and the mutability of the other; and
that his knowledge of ecclesiastical law (if he can be said to have any)
has been derived, not from the authentic sources of councils and canon-
ists, but from the garbled extracts of the puny controveitists of his sect.
The result is one of the most singular jumbles of fact and fiction which
can well be conceived.
If, in opposing the Catholic discipline with respect to the use and
abuse of the books of Holy Scripture, Mr. M‘Gibbon had asserted that
the Pope and other bishops of the Catholic Church have always claimed
the right of feeding the flock entrusted to them; of pointing out to
them the safe and the dangerous pastures, according to times andi cir-
cumstances ; of giving milk to the lambs, and strong food to the slice]);
no Catholic could have gainsaid this truth. If lie had asserted that in
Rome, and in one or tw o other States under its immediate influence,
there Avas at one time a law in existence regulating the reading of the
Scriptures by the laity, he Avould have stated the truth. But he should
have added in candour, if his second-hand reading had not misled him
as to the fact, that neither before nor after the Reformation was there
ever any general law of the Church forbidding the laity to read the
Scriptures in the vulgar tongue. Mr. M ‘Gibbon might with some slioav
of truth have stated—or boasted, if he chose—that since, and partly in
consequence of, that event, the Bible has been circulated to a much
larger extent than it probably Avould have been had there been no such
revolution in the Church. No Catholic need deny that assumption, or
that good as well as evil has been the result. Is there, on the other
hand, any candid Protestant who would deny that the commotions caused
by the Anabaptists in Germany, by the Calvinists in France, SAvitzer-
land, and Scotland, and by the Puritans in England, were well calculated
to throAV doubt on the propriety of allowing every man to read and
interpret the Scriptures for himself? Will any candid Protestant affirm
that the use made of the Bible in onr own time by certain German and
Genevan divines, by English essayists and reviewers, and even by the
Protestant Bishop Colenso, w r ho has found so many lay and clerical
sympathisers Avith his mode of interpretation-—will any one affirm that
this use, or abuse, of the Scriptures would have been tolerated by St.
Peter and St. Paul ? Would they have hesitated to stop the profanation,
if it Were possible ? Will Mr. M‘Gibbon himself say that it would not
be better for the souls of the unhappy men referred to, if they had
submitted themselves to the Reg Ula IV. of the Index, to Avhich Mr.
M‘Gibbon so triumphantly refers his readers, in proof of his baseless
assertion that the Church forbids the use of the Bible to the laity ? I
am not asserting the wisdom of any such veto or restriction on Bibio
reading, even if it Avore possible to enforce it; it might be questioned
On the score of expediency, as well as of impossibility. " On the contrary,


I consider that if any fears existed in the sixteenth century that the
reading of the Bible would promote Protestantism, the experience of the
last two centuries, during which, it is admitted by Ranke and others,
(among them our own Macaulay), that Protestantism has made no
advance in Europe, but has rather retrograded, ought to have long
since dispelled such fears. And such, accordingly, is the fact: there
is now practically no restriction whatever on the reading of the Scriptures
by the laity. On the contrary, the Bishops in France, Germany, Great
Britain, and America, encourage the publication of editions by every
means in their power. The number of editions of the English Catholic
Bible that have been published in America, greatly exceeds those that
have been published by all other denominations in that country put
together. It is stated to me, on unquestionable authority, that Mr.
Duffy, an eminent Catholic publisher in Dublin, issued in seven year’s not
less than 42,500 Bibles, and that another firm of publishers in Belfast
had issued, under the patronage of two successive Catholic Bishops,
540,000 copies. Yet the “simple” Mr. M‘Gibbon thinks, or affects to
think, that a gift of £SO from him for Bibles, will be a boon to Ireland!
A Catholic Bible in penny numbers was recently published in London,
under the patronage of the late Cardinal Wiseman. And I have heard
of still more editions in England and Scotland than I was aware of
when I wrote my last letter.
That the Bible was read in the middle ages by all who could read,
is demonstrated by all the religious books that have descended to us
from those ages. The mediaeval sermons in particular are saturated
with Scripture texts. Indeed, it is astonishing, seeing that printing
was not invented till the middle of the fifteenth century, how it was
Eossible to procure the number of Bibles that must have been in the
ands of every writer and preacher of those times. Many Protestants
have had the candour to praise the old monks, to whose piety and
industry we are indebted for the preservation and propagation of the
Scriptures in those dreary times. But the school to which the Rev. Mr,
M‘Gibbon belongs will not admit that any good thing comes out of
Nazareth,
Having made these general remarks on the subject of Mr.
M‘Gibbon’s letter, I will now proceed to notice a few of the more strik-
ing blunders into which his zeal has carried him in treating on this
subject. Some of them are ridiculous enough. For example, he admits
that “ before the Reformation, translations were made and editions
printed,” but he pronounces this to be foreign to the question, which is,
“ whether or not it was the Reformation which gave to the people the
right and the liberty to read the Bible.” He further adds, that “ the
liberty of the people to read may be firmly denied, even while there
may be a multiplication of editions and translations.” But did it not
occur to this gentleman that translators do not give their labour and
their time, nor printers their money, to produce books that people are
not expected to read ? Even before the Reformation, business men
like Faust, and Schoeffer, and Guttenberg, and their disciples, had a
little common sense, and were not likely to spend fortunes, as they did,
in printing books that nobody dared to purchase or read. Can Mr.
M‘Gibbon show that any one was prevented from purchasing those
various editions of the Bible in German, that were published before
Luther’s time ? I defy him. Can he show that any restriction existed
in Germany, either before or since the Reformation, as to the reading
of the Bible ? I defy him. What then becomes of his assertion that
it was the Reformation that gave a right which never was denied in
that country ? Surely the onus prohandi rests upon him. If the Refor-


mation broke the chain, let Mr. M‘Gibbon produce the fragment, that
we may estimate its original strength to hold men in bondage.
Mr. M ‘Gibbon seems conscious of his inability to do this, and
adopts this miserable expedient to supply the deficiency. He supposes
an “ English Catholic ” will admit that, as the Roman Catholic Church
is an unchangeable church, what it did and said at the Reformation
was but the gathered expression of what it had always said and done
before.’’ An “English Catholic” will admit no such fallacy. The
Roman Catholic Church, unchangeable in her faith, is avowedly change-
able in her discipline, and as the reading or non-reading of the Bible is
a pure question of discipline, it is changeable, and has changed, so far
as the limited regulation hereafter to be noticed ever had force. But
would it follow that because some restrictions were attempted after
the Reformation, in consequence of the outrages committed on persons
and property by Bible-reading fanatics that, therefore, the people were
forbidden to read the Bible before that event ? Surely such sophistry
must be apparent to the simplest reader. Of what value, then, is Mr.
M‘Gibbons misquotation of a decree of the Council of Trent, declaring
the authenticity for practical use of the ancient Vulgate edition of the
Bible ? (not “ that the Latin Vulgate should alone be held authentic,”
as Mr. M‘Gibbon, lam willing to believe, ignorantly asserts). If this
gross perversion of the decree of the Council were wilful, and not taken
at second-hand from some unprincipled scribbler, I should consider Mr.
M‘Gibbon out of the pale of controversy. Does Mr. M‘Gibbon really
suppose that the Council of Trent, in deciding which of the numerous
Latin versions should bo held authentic, condemned the Hebrew text,
or the celebrated Vatican Soptuagint, or the ordinary Greek testament?
Truly this gentleman's credulity is astonishing. Because the Council
pointed out to theologians, who then wrote in Latin almost exclusively,
the best version existing in that language, and declared it authentic, it
therefore censured the original Hebrew and Greek, and all existing and
future versions in other languages! It is difficult to bo grave and
respectful in noticing such folly.
Mr. M‘Gibbon defies me to produce an English version of the
Scriptures published before the Reformation. If Mr. M‘Gibbon means
MS. versions, he displays his usual ignorance, “ The hole Byble” (says
Sir Thomas More, who lived before, and was murdered by the Refor-
mation), “ the hole Byble was long before his (Wiclifie’s) dayes, by
yertuous and well lerned men, translated into the English tong, and by
good men and godly people, with devotion and soberness, wel and
reverently red,” If by “published,” Mr. M‘Gibbon means printed
versions, no doubt the versions referred to by Sir Thomas More were
not printed, any more than was the version of Wycliffe, which, like
Luther's in German, has ignorantly been held up as the first English
version. But I assert, and. am prepared to prove beyond question, that
in English (as well as in every other European language), the first
printed version, worthy of the name, was the Catholic version, printed
at Douay and Rheirns, in 1582-1609. The Protestant versions pub-
lished in the reigns of the Tudors were so infamously corrupt (like
some of the modern versions published by the Bible Society), that they
had to be suppressed, and the noble, though still inexact version, pub-
lished by King James, and now in use, was substituted for them; after
the Catholic version had been some years in circulation. It is true, as
Mr. MGibbon states, that recent editors of the Douay Bible have
adopted, in many places, the more elegant language of King James’s
Bible—a proof of their candour and good taste, as I conceive. The
Douay translators had been long banished from their country for con-


science sake, and lost its idiom in some degree. Their version, though
scrupulously exact, was rugged in style: and, having now done its work,
is about to be replaced by one equally faithful, and more elegant, under
the care of the most competent scholar now living, Dr. Newman.
A laughable blunder is committed by Mr. *M‘Gibbon in quoting
what he calls “the fixed law of the Catholic Church with reference to
the reading of the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue.” “ This,” he says,
“ is what the Council of Trent expressly decrees, viz., not the right and
liberty of the people to read, but the right of the church to give per-
mission/' Ac. This assertion one would expect to see supported by a
decree of the Council of Trent, and I am almost inclined to think that
Mr. M‘Gibbon really thought he was quoting the Council when he
gave us a translation of the obsolete Regula IV. of the Roman Index,
' which adopted certain safeguards against, not the reading, but the abuse
of the Bible. Indeed, it is almost certain that the poor gentleman
thought he was quoting a decree of the Council, for he afterwards
speaks of it as “the authority of the Council of Trent,” and as “an
imperious and impious decree ; ” it being all the while just as much a
decree of the Council of Trent, as the recent resolutions or rules of the
new Pi'esbyterian Assembly in Sydney are decrees of the “General
Assembly of Divines at Westminster,” who decreed Mr. M‘Gibbon’s
“ Confession of Faith.”
It is unnecessary after this, to add that Mr. M‘Gibbon is profoundly
ignorant of the facts well known to all educated Catholics, that the
Index never had any force in the principal nations of Catholic Europe.
(“ Index non übique viget,” say our theologians) ; that even where it
has any force, it is only partially admitted {non admittitur quoad omnia );
and that in Rome itself the celebrated Regula IV. no longer holds its
place. How far it may have been useful, in its day, in saving churches
and other monuments of piety in Italy from the fate which befol them
at the hands of Bible-reading fanatics in Scotland and elsewhere, I
shall not stop to inquire. Suffice it to say, that the Regula IV. is no
longer in Mr. M‘Gibbon’s way.
Nor is it so surprising as it may appear to some, that Mr. M‘Gibbon,
being totally unacquainted with the original documents, has been led
into so ludicrous a use of the garbled extracts usually presented in the
popular works of controversy in use, in the sect to which he belongs.
Catholics, no doubt, hold with the apostle, that there are men “who
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction,” and if it were possible
to prevent this abuse without inflicting a greater evil, the Church would
be bound to do so. But experience has proved that it is impossible to
have the use without the abuse, and after some slight attempts —of
which Regula IV. is the most noted—the matter has been long since
wisely left to the consciences of individuals, and the Catholic bishops
almost universally encourage the publication and circulation of faithful
versions in the vulgar tongue. They did so before the Reformation, as
the numerous editions in German, French, Italian, &c., prove. The
horrible abuse of the sacred text after that event led to the regulation ,
not the pi'ohibition of their use. The attempt was a failure, and never
became general; and we have returned to the earlier and better disci-
plixxe. Is there anything in all this that is not honourable to the
Chux-ch, or of which a Catholic need be ashamed i I tx’ow not. The
Reformation, therefore, could not give us the right to read the Scrip-
tures, but to a certain extent, and for a time, had a contrax-y effect.
And it did give, and still gives us, many false and spurious versioxxs,
which have helped to make infidels of Protestant Europe, and have
brought the Christian Religion into contempt in India and China,


1 am at a loss to conceive what the refusal of Gregory VII. to al-
low mass to be said in Sclavonic, instead of Latin, has to do with the
present question, even if I were to admit the correctness of the quotation,
which Ido not. It has the odour of Geneva rather than that of Rome.
This shifting of the ground is surely a proof of great weakness.
But perhaps the most extraordinary jumble in this or any other
production has yet to be noticed. The writer gravely tells us that the
English Catholics, while agitating for emancipation, obtained [he
should have said Mr. Pitt obtained] from the Catholic Universities of
Europe, a declaration denying that there was any such principle in the
Catholic faith as that “no faith was to be kept with heretics, and that
it was the right of Popes to depose kings, and absolve their subjects
from allegiance to them;” “that Pius VI. allowed his Cardinals os-
tensibly to approve of this judgment of the Universitiesthat the
“ people of England were wholly deceived and put off to sleep;” that
the Emancipation Bill passed, and the Catholics obtained political
power, and rapidly gained strength; and that “ when the end was
gained, this same Pius VI. in Italy, in a solemn hull (Auctorern Fidei)
reprobated and condemned the denial that the Pope has the power of
dethroning kings, and absolving their subjects, as false, scandalous, and
extremely injurous to the Holy See.”
A little chronology will be useful here. The judgments of the Uni-
versities were received by Mr. Pitt in 1789, the Bull “ Auctorern Fidei ”
was published in 1794, Pius VI. died in 1799, and “ the Catholic Eman-
cipation Act by Avhich the Catholics obtained political power ” passed in
1829, thirty-five years after the date of the Bull, and after its author
had been thirty years in his grave I ! ! This is what Mr. M ‘Gibbon
ostentatiously calls “ exactness of thought and clear definitions,” but
what I venture to call a jumbling together of impossible dates in com-
plete ignorance of the real facts.
After this specimen, the remaining facts referred to by Mr, M‘Gibbon
may be briefly disposed of. The London Catholic Bible Society fell
through, not from the cause he gives. A little more was effected than
he admits. An edition of the Eheims testament was actually stereotyped,
a copy of which is now before me, but it was (like the Dutch impression
of the English Protestant Bible solemnly burnt by order of the “ Reve-
rend assembly of Divines at Westminster”) so full of errors that the
Catholic bishops were reluctantly compelled to withhold from it their
sanction; the plates were broken up, and it is now generally admitted
that the undertaking was a blunder, ah initio.
With regard to MV'. M‘Gibbon’s liberal offer to distribute Catholic
bibles in Ireland and Rome, I may mention that I find they can be had
for a shilling apiece, in thousands, at the shop of Mr. Duffy, in Dublin or
London ; that they are printed at the Propaganda press in Rome, in, I
believe, every civilised language under Heaven, and, I dare say, can be
had very cheap in quantities for distribution. So that Mr. M‘Gibbon
may perform his act of charity with great facility and at small cost, if,
after the information now given, ho thinks that his drop in the bucket
will cause the vessel to overflow.
Upon what authority does Mr. M‘Gibbon state that Martini’s Bible
is in 20 volumes, and costs about £4 ? The first edition, as is usually
the case, may have been expensive. Even a translator of the Bible
must eat and drink, But I can assure Mr. M‘Gibbon that a friend of
mine purchased a copy for five shillings, and he thinks that it can be
had for even less than that small sum. I can get no information as to
any suppression of this Bible, unless Mr. M‘Gibbon refers to a spurious
and mutilated edition sent over by the Bible Society*


Mr. M‘Gibbon asks, why has the Roman Church no Bible Society ?
The reason is, that the Roman Church questions the utility of such socie-
ties ; or rather believes, with many Protestants, that any good they may
do is more than balanced by the evil. Moreover, the Bible is not to the
Catholic what the Protestant erroneously fancies it is to himself—“ the
sole rule of his faith and practice.” The Catholic Chui’ch existed before
the New Testament was written—she existed centuries before its canon
was fixed, and would exist if it were lost, or if it had never been written.
We reverence the Scriptures because the church has handed them
down to us as the word of God ; but, because of that very reverence, we
do not turn them into a hornbook, and employ illiterate missionaries
to translate them into languages which they do not understand, thereby
bringing ridicule on the book and on the Christian name in India and
China, and elsewhere, as the Bible Society has done. Would Mr.
M‘Gibbon like to see a few passages literally re-translated from these
spurious versions ?
Mr. M‘Gibbon assei’ts that certain books of the Old Testament are
apocryphal, but if he had been a logician he would have seen that
this assertion is a mer g petitio principii, and therefore valueless. Even
Dr. Colenso, who says that the Books of Moses are apocryphal; Bunsen
who says that the Book of Daniel is a fiction, written after the events
predicted; and Strauss, who says that the Gospel is a myth—all have
sufficient respect for their readers to attempt some proof of their res-
pective assertions. It is a little too much, therefore, to expect us to
prefer the bare assertion of a very shallow Presbyterian divine to the
decree of a General Council, supported by the general voice of antiquity.
The objections made by this writer to certain translations in the
Douay version exhibit great ignorance or Avant of candour. The “ gratia
plena ”of the vnlgate is faithfully rendered “ full of grace.” The
Ks%ccpiTw/ißvti of the Greek, as afterwards explained by the angel himself,
(xapiv, gratiam) has precisely the same meaning: “thou hast found
grace (or favour) with God.” Luke i, 30. The word “ Mary,”
Avhich Mr. M‘Gibbon says does not occur in the original, and which ho
accuses the Catholic Church of interpolating in the text as translated,
has no place in that text any more than in the original. He evidently
has not taken the trouble to refer to a Catholic Bible before making his
reckless assertions.
In like maimer, the passage “she shall braise thy head” is a literal
translation of the vulgate, “ ipsa conteret caput tuum.” Some of the
Fathers read ipsum, and the Hebrew texts have it both ways. The
sense is precisely the same, as all agree that it is by the seed of tho
woman, Jesus Christ, that she bruises tho head of the serpent. It is
a pure question of literary criticism, on which much may be said; but,
the texts and critics being divided, to accuse flippantly either version
of falsehood, is pure ignorance. But Avhen the accuser proceeds to
pronounce the translation “ Jacob adored the top of his rod” a wilfully
dishonest translation, it is difficult to alloAV the plea of ignorance, and
he affords room for severe retaliation. Tho top of Joseph’s staff or
sceptre (not Jacob’s, as Mr. M‘Gibbon ignorantly supposes: see the
Greek pronoun) is supposed to have represented a Tan, or cross, “ the
sign of the Son of Man,” with which His elect are sealed, and which
shall precede Him when He shall come in the clouds of heaven. At
any rate Joseph himself was a figure of Christ, and had been called
“ the Saviour of the World.” The action of the patriarch was therefore
a prophetic reverence of the Mcssias and the sign of man’s redemp-
tion. The Protestant “ leaning upon ” is a pure interpolation, a corrup-
tion of the text Avhich takes away all notion of the “faith" attribute^


to Jacob, and has no warrant whatever in cither the original Greek, or
in the Septuagint or Syriac of Genesis. It is hardly necessary to add
that the Rheims version is correctly given from the Vulgate.
Again, the words attributed to the Baptist—“ do penance ” —with
which Mr. M‘Gibbon finds fault, arc a correct version of agite
pcenitentiam, just as the Protestant “repent” is a con’oct version of
the Greek ptravolirt. If Mr. M‘Gibbon will admit that repentance
should be accompanied with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes—the repen-
tance which the Bible records of its penitents—l am quite willing to
admit that “ repent is the exact translation. To call either a “ gross
mistranslation is simply to proclaim one's own ignorance and pre-
sumption. The words in the ancient Vulgate, from which the Rheims
version is avowedly made, fully justify the term used in the Catholic
version, although, as I have admitted, the Protestant “repent” is
probably more correct, according to the Greek text. The question is of
no real importance, if the scripture notion of real repentance be kept in
view : that is, a change of mind accompanied with penitential austeri-
ties, as practised by David, the Ninevites, and even the Baptist him-
self.
The next alleged mistranslation: “ This [marriage] is a great
sacrament,” shows an extraordinary amount of ignorance in Mr.
M‘Gibbon, The Catholic version, I need hardly say, is a literal trans-
lation of the Vulgate, from which the Douay is avowedly taken. The
“ sacramentum ” of the Vulgate is the elegant Latin equivalent of the
jivrjrrjpiov of the Greek text. In other words what the Latin Church
calls sacraments, the Greek Church calls mysteries, and just as we
speak of the sacrament of baptism, the sacrament of the Eucharist, or
the sacrament of matrimony, they say the mystery of baptism, the
mystery of the Eucharist, or the mystery of matrimony. Even accord-
ing to the Protestant version marriage “is a great mystery.” I wonder
what mystery there is in marriage as practised in churches where it
may bo dissolved at any time, and new marriages contracted. In the
Catholic Church it is truly a great mystery, and a great sacrament; a
mystery as representing the indissoluble union between the Church and
her spouse, and a sacrament, or oath, binding the husband and wife as
Christ has bound himself to His Church. I maintain, then, that both
translations are perfectly accurate, and that if there were any doubt as
to what should be reckoned a sacrament, or how the Greek word
should be rendered in Latin, it would be safer to follow St. Jerome, the
translator of the Vulgate, than the Rev. John M‘Gibbon.
I have now done with Mr. M ‘Gibbon for the present. I trust I
may have taught him something of which he was ignorant. At any
rate, if I have unmasked his shallow, second-hand learning, and shown
the fallacy of his arguments, I may hope to prevent evil consequences
to persons who, even less erudite than he, may have been led to
place some reliance on assertions made with so much confidence, and of
which their own reading may not have enabled them to see the miserable
inaccuracy.
ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
P.S*—On again looking over Mr. M‘Gibbon’s letter, I notice that
Several matters which I had marked for criticism have escaped me in
what I have written above. At the risk of occupying still more of your
space and of the reader s attention, I cannot avoid bringing some of
them forward in a postscript.
Mr. M‘Gibbon in the heat and blindness of his zeal hurls con*
tradictory reproaches against the Catholic Church* In his first lettei‘


ho writes; “ She (the Church) then claimed the right to translate them
(the Scriptures), so as to make them speak the language most likely to
countenance her peculiar doctrines,” In the second he changes his
tune, and says: “ This (translate the Scriptures) the Church has never
done—this the Church never did, and never will.” Now, this reminds
me of both Luther’s and Voltaire’s advice as to the best method of
attacking the Church. Throw plenty of dirt: some will be sure to
stick, L’audace! Vauclace! toujonrs I’audace! And the Rev. Mr,
M‘Gibbon appears to appreciate the method.
The Rev. Mr. M‘Gibbon calls the translators of the Rheims testa-
ments “traitors to their country.” Traitors for what cause ? Because
they would not recognise Queen Elizabeth as the head of Christ’s
church upon earth? Fie, sir! there is question of tolerance, and of
the heart, here. Would you dare to say of the Covenanters, who with
arms in their hands resisted the lawful government in their zeal against
an Erastian church, that they were traitors ?
I come now to what would be intensely amusing, if it were not also
pitiable and pitiful. In my first letter I doubted if there was an
instance of a heathen having become a Christian through the mere
reading of the Bible, and said that the method pursued by the Catholic
Church, of preaching the Gospel by the mouths of living missionaries,
was in harmony with the words of Scripture ; and I then quoted the
first text on the subject that came to my mind—“ Faith comes by
hearing.” Upon which the Rev. John M‘Gibbon, whose theory is that
the Bible should be “left to speak for itself,” ridicules me for under-
standing the word “ hearing ” in its ordinary sense, that is, to use his
own words, as “ hearing by the ear,” and devotes three parts of a
column of the Empire to prove that “ the very passage which ‘ English
Catholic ’ selects to tell us that it is hearing, and not reading, which
J reduces faith, teaches the very opposite,” Now I take it, that the Rev.
ohn M‘Gibbon must either be very obtuse, not to see that the fact of
so common a word as “hearing” requiring to be explained and taken
as meaning “reading,” must of itself prove the need of an interpreter,
or he must draw very largely indeed on the gullibility of those who, if
they “ wonder at all,” are, as he says, “ but poor Protestants.” And it
is clear that there is no mistake about this, for he removes the slightest
chance of his being misunderstood when, in offering so generously as
he does to supply Catholics in Ireland and Rome with Bibles, he ex-
pressly stipulates that these Bibles shall be “ without notes. ’ So that,
although he finds me, an “intelligent” person on his own confession,
liable to make the mistake of understanding the word “ hearing ” as
meaning “ hearing by the ear,” whereas in fact it means “reading;”
and although so important a matter hangs upon a right interpretation
as the whole question as to whether the Protestant or the Catholic
method of spreading the gospel is taught by Holy Writ; yet he will not
consent that the poor ignorant Italians or Irish who are to read his
Bibles shall have the benefit (in a note) of the lucid exposition he took
such pains to bestow upon me. Can absurdity go further ? How the
poor fellows are to get at his exposition without being allowed to see it,
is something more than a puzzle.
The Rev. Mr. M‘Gibbon says ho does not know whether myself or
the Rev. Mr. Boyce is the simpler of the two. I confess, however,
that I would rather be classed with a honest straightforward Christian,
who loves truth for its own sake, and who, when he sees a fact, accepts
it and its consequences frankly, even though it run counter to his
previous opinions, than be in the category of those who, for the sake or
notoriety, thrnst aside common sense, and twist and distort words and
facts to make them serve their own party purpose.


But I must stop here. I had intended to remark upon tho cavalier
manner in which Mr. M‘Gibbon gets rid of my awkward facts about
Calvin and Luther, upon the case of tho Madiai, upon Mr. M‘Gibbon’s
assertion that the Reformation vindicated the “ manhood” of mankind,
in which he betrays an utter ignorance of tho relation between the
creature and the Creator, and consequently of the very first principles
of Christianity, and especially I had a good deal to say in reply to the
exhortation contained in his concluding paragraph; but I have made an
unconscionable postscript as it is, and I must take my chance of another
opportunity.
E. C,
Saturday, October 14, 1865,
THE ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE EMPIRE.
SIR, —For the sake of the many readers of your paper who are in-
terested in the discussions in which I have recently been engaged, I
wish to refer to one or two things in the letter of my opponent which
appeared to day. As I have no intention of formally replying to his
lengthy remarks, I shall occupy as small a space as possible.
“ English Catholic ” trusts that he has “ taught me something.”
So he has. He has taught me the wisdom of my rule, never to reply
to an anonymous winter. His first letter was expressed in such respect-
ful language, that although it was anonymous, 1 was induced to reply
to its statements and arguments. His next letter was equally tem-
perate ; yet, while complaining that it also was anonymous, I dealt
with its statements and arguments, for the sake of the public, who
might be interested in the question. His third letter, which appears
to-day, shows me that I did wrong in breaking my rule. Its language
and style are so complimentary—it is so thickly interspersed with
charges of “ignorance,” and something worse than ignorance, that
self-respect, if nothing else, compels me to leave its silly reasonings
and baseless charges unanswered. “English Catholic” is quite
welcome to infer that Ido not answer because I cannot; and those who
join with him in this opinion, are assuredly not those whose opinion is
of any value. A writer who writes anonymously on the pretext that it
will avoid “personalities,” and then is guilty of the gross personalities
and msolent language of “English Catholic’s” last letter, is beneath
contempt. I always reckon that there is conscious weakness in a
cause when its advocate indulges in such a style; and weak indeed
must be the cause of “English Catholic,” when, having begun his
letter with giving me the alternative that I am either a knave or a fool,
he marks in every paragraph, as he proceeds with his wordy and
inconclusive sentences, that lam “profoundly ignorant.” For example,
the first line of his letter, which is the key note to the whole, is as
follows:—“If credit be given to the Rev. Mr. M £ Gibbon for honesty
and good faith . . . it is impossible to avoid pronouncing him to
be one of the most ignorant men.” Then, in every succeeding para-
gragh, language to the same effect occurs. The censure of such a
writer is praise; but to argue with such a writer would be doing him
an honour which he does not deserve.
One of the things which have the appearance of damaging my
reply to “English Catholic’s” former letter is, what has reference to
the bull of Pope Pius YI. “English Catholic” shows in this matter
the triumph of a very minute philosopher, and yet the adroitness of a


practised Jesuit. I had been showing in my letter that Pius YL, who
had bestowed his praise on Martini’s translation of the Bible into the
Italian language, was unworthy of regard, as destitute of truth ; for he
could do one thing and mean another, I gave an instance in proof. I
showed that he hoodwinked the people of England by pretending to
approve of the opinions of the Catholic universities, which denied that
the Pope has power to depose kings and absolve their subjects from
their oath of allegiance; and then, after that little “ pious fraud ”of the
Pope and his cardinals had done its work, the same Pius VI., in his
bull “ Auctorem fidei,” expressly reprobated, and condemned that denial,
I stated this fact to show that, as Pius VI. had perpetrated, or con-
nived at, a fraud, so as to serve the Church in this English case, his
praise to Martini might be also a fraud —at least that the one case
fully neutralised the other and made it valueless. In connecting this
fraud, however, with the action of Butler and the passing of the
Emancipation Bill, I committed an anachronism, or error of date, by
putting the one thing before the other ! ! And so “English Catholic”
“ cannot contain" himself with joy, and vaunts his discovery as prov-
ing my ignorance of the “real fact! " I admit the error in date ; the
error occurred because, as the date was not of the slightest consequence,
I was simply concerned to state the facts. It was of no moment when
Pius VI. betrayed his untruthfulness; but it was quite in point to show
the fact of his untruthfulness. This I did; but because the when is
not clearly stated, “English Catholic” has the audacity to say that
the error in date proves ignorance of the facts. This want of candour
does him little credit; but everything is lawful which concerns the
Church, as Pope Pius VI. has shown him. The “ real facts ” are
undeniable, and “ English Catholic,” while he has quibbled at the date,
cannot deny the facts, although with a certain adroitness, worthy of the
Jesuits, he boldly insinuates as much. The “real facts ” are these: —•
As it is not possible to make a Jesuit speak the truth, nor to make him
ashamed when you convict him of suppressio veri, or suggestio falsi, I
give here, in a note, the whole of this precious case of Pins VI. over which
“ English Catholic ” glories, as showing my ignorance of the facts, to
show that I am well aware even of the dates, but that my error in the
date in no way affects my knowledge of the facts, or the truth of the
facts:—ln 1789 the answers of the universities were received. In 1791
was published the pretended approval of the answers of the universities.
And in 1794 was published the bull, Auctorem fidei, condemning those
answers. Be it noticed, however, that the answers of the universities,
and the Pope’s pretended approval of the answers, were published in
England, for the purpose of hoodwinking the people of England; and
that the bull, Auctorem fidei, was published in Italy against a Council
held at Pistoja, eight years before, viz., in 1786, under the famous
prelate, Scipio Eicci, the reformer of the immoralities of monks and
nuns. As this bull thundered at a small party in Italy, it lay unseen
by and unknown to Englishmen. Nor was it brought to light until only
comparatively recently the eminent French civilian, Dannow, revealed
the fraud. This bull being concealed, but the pretended approval of the
Pope of the answers of the universities being judiciously made use of by
Butler and others, the people of England were thoroughly deceived, and
passed the Emancipation Bill in 1839. Now r , these are all the dates in
their chronological order; but let the dates be given as confused as you
will, such confusion cannot alter the fact that Pius connived at one thing
in England, for the advantage of the Church, and did the very opposite
in Italy, for the advantage of the Church, proving his worthlessness as
a witness for truth; and this is all that my allusion to him showed.


Mr, “ English Catholic ” is quite welcome to rejoice in such fraudulent
schemers and heads of his Church as not only Pius VI,, hut many other
Piuses, may bo easily proved to be.
That the opinions of the Catholic universities were sought on the
question as to Avhether or not “ no faith was to bo kept with heretics,”
and, “the Pope has power to depose heretical kings, and absolve their
subjects from their oath of allegiance,” were principles of the Catholic
Church ; that these opinions were sought to quiet the fears of the people
of England when the Catholics were agitating for political liberty ; that
the universities answered, denying that these were the principles of the
Catholic Church; that Pius VI. allowed his Cardinals to issue, as in
his name, and with his approval, a document supporting and sanction-
ing that denial; that this same Pius VI. in his bull, Auctorem fidei, in
reference to the council hold at Pistoja, pronounced the denial “false
and scandalous, and extremely injurious to the Holy Seeand that the
English people, in ignorance of this bull, but relying on the document
already referred to, and on the opinion of the universities, yielded to
the bill for emancipation. These are the facts, even by the admission
of “ English Catholic and they were quite enough, without their date,
to class Pope Pius VI. with many other Popes, who were “ unscru-
pulous in everything which might help the Church.”
Next, the want of candour displayed in the above comes -again into
view, when “English Catholic” pretends to quote me. He says that
X “ defied him to produce an English version of the Scriptures published
before the Reformation.” Now, I never defied him to do anything of
the kind, What I defied him to do is, “to produce an English version
of the Scriptures, published by the Roman Church before the Reforma-
tion,” I again defy him to do this; and because he felt ho could not
do it, he has the coolness to tell mo of the version of Sir Thomas More !
Perhaps “English Catholic” imagined that, in my “profound igno-
rance/’ my “ usual ignorance,” I would mistake Sir Thomas More for
the “ Roman Church:'* In dropping from my words the ‘ £ Roman
Church” in his pretended quotation, “ English Catholic” did not show
“ ignorance,” but downright dishonesty, for on the words “ Roman
Church” hinged the whole weight of my challenge.
Finally, candour utterly forsakes “ English Catholic” when ho
attempts to dispose of my instances of the Roman Church “ translating
the Scriptures so as to countenance her peculiar doctrines.” For ex-
ample, I had said that in order to give countenance to the glory and
worship which the Roman Church gives to the Virgin, the passage in
Genesis is translated thus: — “She shall bruise thy head, &c,,” while
in the Hebrew it is “he shall bruise thy head.” What is the answer
of English Catholic ? ” Why, that “ she shall bruise thy head,” is a
correct translation of the Vulgate!! Of course it is, but what is the
Vulgate ? but the corrupt translation of the Roman Church to glorify
the Virgin ! How wonderfully “English Catholic” presumed on “ray
ignorance! ” Again, I had said that the translation of the Roman Ghv/rch
of the passage in Luke, “ Hail, thou that art highly favoured,” is express-
ly designed to magnify Mary, “full of grace ;” and I gave as the proof
that in another passage the same word, applied to Ephesian Christians,
is translated differently. ‘What is the answer of “ English Catholic ? ”
Why, that “ full of grace” is the correct translation of the words of the
Vulgate, “ gratia plena ! ” Of course it is; but what is the Vulgate?
but the corrupt translation of the Roman Church, to magnify Mary!
The “gratia plena” is not a translation of the angel’s word,
* “ English Catholic ” had never mentioned “ a version ” by Sir Thomas More-
There was no such thing.


Ktxapirw/xm;—but “highly favoured” is. As the word “Mary”
does not occur, “English Catholic” helps to convict the Church of
home of “ wresting scripture, or adding to scripture, for the words
are never out of her mouth as the words of the angel/’ “ Ave, Maria,
gratia plena! ”
A ext, I had said that the passage in Genesis* and Hebrews, is trans-
lated thus, to give the shadow of countenance to image worship,
“Jacob adored the top of his staff,'' while in the Hebrew and Greek it
is, “ Jacob worshipped upon his stuff.' What is the answer of “ English
Catholic (■ \\ hy, that the staff was not Jacob’s but Joseph’s, and he
refers me to the Greek pronoun; and then he tells me that the staff or
“sceptre of Joseph is “supposed/ to have represented a taw or cross I
This is supremely rich; the learning displayed in it is wonderful,
especially when compared with my “pure ignorance.” The Greek
pronoun, in the best rescensions, is dvrov and not dvrov, and this makes
the staff belong to Jacob, and not to Joseph. But, imagine old Jacob—
so old and infirm that he could, not see — adoring the top of Joseph’s staff
—or the top of his “ sceptre”—and that top so shaped as to be like a
cross ! Jacob, who could not see Joseph’s sons, could yet see the cross
on Joseph s staff, and as soon as he saw it he began to adore it, in proof
of “his faith ! ” But the resources of “English Catholic’s” learning
and ingenuity are not exhausted yet, for, as if ashamed of this prepos-
terous translation, he is ready “to suppose” another case. If the staff
of Joseph is not adored, as in the form of a cross, “ at any rate,” says
he, “ Joseph himself was a figure of Christ! ” All the same —Joseph’s
staff, or Joseph himself—either will do for Jacob to worship!”
“English Catholic has thus the same vice which “holy mother
Church has ; both will translate the Scriptures, not so as to give the
truth of the passage, but to make the passage countenance and support
their unscriptural doctrines. If “English Catholic” will refer to the
Greek, not for the pronoun only, but for the preposition Irri, he would
see that all his ‘ supposings ’ are driven to the wind, and his effrontery
put to the blush.
Again, I had said that the passage in Matthew is translated thus
by the Roman Church, to countenance the penances and fasts which
bring her gain —-“Do penance;” while in the Greek, the word is
“change your mind,” or, simply, “repent.” What is the reply of
“ English Catholic ? ” Why, he has the simplicity and assurance to
tell me that “do penance” is the correct translation of “ agito
poenitentiam ” of the Vulgate, just as “ repent ” is the correct transla-
tion of the Greek fitravoure ! Now, first of all, “do penance ”is not the
correct translation of “ agite poenitentiam,” but a monkish translation
of a Latin phrase which the merest tyro in Latin can correct. Other
phrases in the Latin idiom—“ Agere vitam,” to live ; “agere fugam,”
to fly; “ agerc cursum,” to run. All those, “ English Catholic” would
translate “do life—do flight—do a run”—if it could in any way
serve the purpose of the Church, like this single one, which will stand
the translation —“Do penance;” but further, if “do penance,” be the
correct translation of “agite poenitentiam,” “English Catholic” cannot
deny that “agite poenitentiam” is not the correct translation of the
Greek aravoiirs ; and yet while admitting this he has the coolness to
tell me that-the Vulgate fully justifies the translation “do penance I ”
How Catholic like is this I The Greek becomes a nose of wax in the
hand of a Catholic, if it stands in the way of the Latin Vulgate ; and
* Mr. M'Gibbon is really talking, not about Genesis, but Hebrews only. The Douay
Bible, in Genesis, reads “ turning to the bed’s head,” The word for bed and rod" is the same in
Hebrew. But St, Paul quoted from the Septuagint, and said rod. The texts have not
}et been reconciled by the best Biblical scholars,


yet, so learned and accommodating is this gentleman, that he makes
the following proposition to me, that he may stick to the Vulgate;
“If Mr. M‘Gibbon will admit that repentance should be accompanied
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes—penitential austerities—l am
quite willing to admit that ‘ repent ’ is the exact translation ! " Very
fine, sir ! But the question is not, what “ I will admit, ” but what the
Bible says. I know that Eome will accept the translation of even a
heretic, so long as it will countenance her unscriptural doctrines, and
contradict the Scriptures; but I cannot ‘•handle God's Word deceit-
fully.”
“ Lastly, 1 had said that the Church of Rome translates the passage
in Ephesians in reference to marriage, “ This is a great sacrament, ’
while in the Greek it is “ This is a great mystery. I had said that
this translation was purposely meant to countenance the Roman doc-
trine of the seven sacraments; and, in proof, I showed that in every
other place hut in this one, the word is translated “mystery, and not
“ sacrament.” What is the reply of “ English Catholic ? ” W hy, that
in this matter I am especially ignorant, because “ mystery and sacra-
ment” mean the same thing! If so, so much the more singular is it
that the word “ sacrament ” is reserved for this one passage, in refer-
ence to marriage, and the word “ mystery ” is_ applied to all the rest.
And, moreover, notwithstanding that “English Catholic” prefers to
follow Jerome rather than me, the two words do not mean the same
thing; nor, because the Greek church calls “mysteries what the
Roman church calls “sacraments,” is the equivalence of the word
established; for both churches are amenable to the same charge of
having grievously departed from the faith, and comipted the truth.
But “English Catholic,” as if to show conclusively the “shallowness
of the Presbyterian divine,” by parading his own universal knowledge,
not only asserts, what is not true, that “ sacrament and mystery are
the same thing; but also, so engrained is Popery in him, he as boldly
asserts that, in “the Protestant version, marriage is a mystery.” And
then he begins to wonder what mystery is in it, according as we prac-
tise marriage in our churches! Very likely ; and so will any one who
thinks that in marriage there is any mystery at all, and reads the
Scripture to so little purpose as “ English Catholic.” lie is so accus-
tomed to “hear,” and not to “read,” he thinks that “hearing” is so
much more effective in producing “faith” than “reading,” that he
prefers to hear, and depend upon others, and would think it heresy to
examine what he hears, “whether the things are so.” The priests tell
him that marriage is a “ sacrament; ” he, of course, believes them.
He learns that in the Protestant version this expression occurs, “This
is a great mystery; ” and then, as he shuffles a little about “ sacrament
and mystery ” being the same thing, he rashly concludes that “in the
Protestant version marriage is a mystery.” No such thing. The
Protestant version contains no such statement. Only “ shallow contro-
vertists” and “puny logicians” can draw such a doctrine from the
Protestant version;.and even such “miserable writers,” with their
“ second-hand learning,” cannot draw such a doctrine from the Pro-
testant version, without going directly in the teeth of the inspired
apostle, who distinctly says, that in speaking of “ mystery,”_ he was
“ speaking concerning Christ and his Church. The mystery is not in
marriage, but in the union which subsists between Christ mid his
people,°which is aptly illustrated by the union of marriage. Marriage
is a holy and honourable institution, far more holy' and honourable tlwm
the Church of Rome has ever regarded it —but there is nothing of mystery
in it; but in the union which Christ has formed with his Church —ail


intimate, lasting, and endearing union—fitly symbolised by the loving
union of marriage—there is mystery indeed; and it is to this that the
Apostle himself tells us ho refers when he uses the word, “ this is a
great mystery.”
These are all the points which it concerned me to notice, _ to free
myself from the aspersions of “English Catholic, ’ as to xnalafides and
ignorance, and to set myself right with those who have been interested
in this discussion. All the rest of the gentleman’s compliments I pass
over, as unworthy of notice, and shall henceforth leave him to rejoice in
the delusion that he has gained a victory! His anonymousness will
save him from the reproach he merits.
JOHN M‘GIBBON.
Saturday, 14th October, 1865.
THE BIBLE AND THE REFORMATION.
TO THE EDITOR OE THE EMPIRE.
SlR,—The Rev. John M‘Oil)bon, your readers will regret to observe,
has lost his temper. Yet he cannot complain that 1 have treated him
with unnecessary harshness. On the contrary, I was most anxious to
treat him with respect. His first production, replete as it was with
the defunct bigotry of a past age, had a degree of consistency, and
an adherence to principle, however mistaken, which commands respect,
and he admits that my first letter was expressed in respecthil language,
and that my second was equally temperate. If the last was not quite
so palatable, it was because the course of crimination pursued by Mr.
M‘Gibbon left me no alternative but to expose either his ignorance or
his bad faith. Still, I gave him the benefit of the doubt, and attributed
his enormous blunders to the course of second-hand learning, which it
was evident, and which it is now demonstrable, that he followed.
As Mr. M‘Gibbon repudiates this concession, and asserts a per-
sonal knowledge of the facts and documents, which 1 was willing to
exculpate him from wilfully misrepresenting, I must leave my readers
to form their own judgment on a question which is indeed of little
importance, except to Mr. M‘Gibbon himself and to those whom he
assumes to represent in this controversy. In like manner I pass by
the compliments which he lavishes upon me, of being a writer whose
“censure is praise,” “a practised jesuit,” whom “it is not possible
to make speak the truth,” whom “ candour utterly forsakes,” showmg
«down-right dishonesty,” “effrontery,” “assurance,” and I know not
how many other fine qualities with which this gentleman s vocabulary
is stored. There may be persons who take foul epithets applied to
the Church or her humble advocates for arguments, but they are not the
persons for whom I write.
Mr. M‘Gibbon, naturally enough, feels sore at the exposure I made
of his blunders respecting the Bull Auctoreru Fidei, and he makes a
desperate effort to extricate himself from the ludicrous position in which,
by a mere reference to the dates of the occurrences to which he
referred, I placed him. The result is, naturally, that he plunges still
more deeply into the mire. , ,
Let us’ revert a moment to his former letter. He had stated that
when the “ Romanists,” in England, were agitating for emancipation,
and the people of England were unwilling to give it because it was
alleged that one of the principles of the Catholic faith was “ that no
faith was to bo kept with and that u it was the light oi thej


dethrone kings and absolve their subjects from allegiance to
then!, the question was submitted to certain foreign universities, who
denied that there was any such principle in the Catholic faith; that
1 ms \ I. allowed his cardinals to approve of the answer of the universi-
ties in ins name; that this stroke of policy had the desired effect;
‘‘that the people of England were wholly deceived and put off to
sleep ; that“the Emancipation Bill passed,’’ and “that the Catholics
gamed political power; they rapidly and sedulously gathered
stiength; and i hen, when the end was gained, this same Pius VI.,
in Italy, in a solemn bull, Auctorem Fidei, reprobated and condemned
the denial that the Pope has the power of dethroning kings and absolv-
ing™®* I’subjects, 1 ’ subjects, as false, scandalous, and extremely injurious to the
Holy See.
It was surely a sufficient answer to this jumble of nonsense—this
malignant charge of bad faith in the Pope and the Catholics of Eng-
land to point out that when the bull Auctorem Fidei was published,
and when its author was dead and buried, and for many years after-
wards, the‘‘end had not been gained,” “the Emancipation Bill had
not passed, the Catholics had not gained political power,” nor
T Sphered strength, and that therefore Mr. M ‘Gibbon owed an
humble apology to the English Catholics and to the memory of the
dead. But no; this reckless defamer, while he is compelled to admit
that he was wrong in his dates, still insists that he was correct in the
facts! What, then? Were the members of the British Parliament
“ wholly deceived and put off to sleep” from 1789 till 1829, notwithstand-
ing that the bull Auctorem Fidei was published in 1794? Had the
end been _ gamed in 1794'? Had the stroke of policy produced
tlio desired effect in that year ? Had the Emancipation Bill
then passed? Had the Catholics obtained “political power?”
Nothing of the kind; and yet Mr. M‘Gibbon has the unparalleled
audacity to assert that though he eiTed in the dates, the facts are
undeniable, and that “‘English Catholic, while he has quibbled
at the date, cannot deny the fads." Why, the dullest must perceive
that the mere statement of the correct dates disproves the facts. But
Mr. M‘Gibbon here shifts his ground, and, with a want of caution
which his previous blundering should have cured, he makes the follow-
mg extiaoi dinary plunge. I quote the whole paragraph to avoid any
possible charge of misconstruction :
‘‘That the opinions of the Catholic universities were sought on the
question as to whether or not 6 no faith was to be kept with heretics*
and the pope has power to depose heretical kings, and absolve
their subjects from their oath of allegiance/ were principles
of the Catholic Church 5 that these opinions were sought to
quiet the fears of the people of England when the Catholics were
agitating for political liberty; that the universities answered, denying
that these were principles of the Catholic Church; that Pius VI.
allowed Jus Cardinals to issue, as in his name, and with his approval, a
document supporting and sanctioning that denial; that this same Pius
VI., m his bull, Auctorem Fidei, in reference to the council held at
Pis to] a, pronounced the denial ‘false and scandalous, and extremely
injurious to the Holy See;’ and that the English people, in ignorance
of tins butt, but relying on the document already referred to, and on the
opinion of the universities, yielded to the bill for emancipation : these
are the /acts, even by the admission of ‘ English Catholic,’ and they
were quite enough, without their elate , to class Pope Pius VI. with
many other Popes, who were unscrupulous in everything which might
help the Church. °


Now what will the unlettered reader think, when I inform him that
there is not a word of truth in the alleged facts here put forth by Mr.
M‘Gibbon, The bull Auctorem Fidel was extensively circulated all
over Europe, and discussed, at the time it was issued, it was frequently
referred to in the Parliamentary discussions in England; it is quoted
in every modern treatise of theology or Canon Law: its having been
brought to light “ comparatively recently,” as Mr, M‘Gibbon pretends,
is therefore a pure fiction. The bull is in every library worthy of the
name. It now lies before me, and I assert positively, and defy contra-
diction, that it contains no allusion whatever to the doctrine that “ faith
is not to be kept with heretics,” nor to the doctrine “ that the Pope
has power to depose heretical kings, and absolve their subjects from
their oath of allegianceand that consequently Pius VI. did not pro-
nounce the denial of these doctrines, or either of them, “ false and
scandalous, and extremely injurious to the Holy See,” as Mr. M‘Gibbon
repeatedly, and (as he will not accept my plea of ignorance in his be-
half ) falsely and maliciously, asserts.
The bull is very lengthy. It recites the errors of the Synod of
Pistoja in the very words of that assembly, and condemns them one
by one, but there is no allusion whatever to “ keeping faith with here-
tics,” or deposing heretical kings,” or “absolving their subjects from
their oath of allegiance ;” and, of course, no condemnation of any pro-
position on these subjects, or either of them, Mr, M‘Gibbon accuses
me of exulting over his errors in dates. I expressed no such feeling,
and I assure him I feel no joy at the present exposure, but x’eal sorrow
that any person moving in his sphere, and professing a real knowledge
of the facts, should have exposed himself to so severe, though so just,
a punishment as this statement must inflict on him.
The dexterity with which Mr, M‘Gibbon shifts his ground, when
it is no longer tenable, is remarkable. We have already noticed seve-
ral instances. Here is another. In answer to what I conceived to be a
challenge to produce a Catholic version of the Bible, published before
the Reformation, I produced the irrefragable testimony of Sir Thomas
More to the fact that such versions existed. But what says my adver-
sary : “ ‘English Catholic ’ says that I defied him to produce an English
version of the Scriptures published before the Reformation. Now I
never defied him to do anything of the kind. What I defied him to do
is ‘to produce an English version of the Scriptures published by the
Homan Church before the Reformation.’”
An English version published by the Roman Church ! Why
should the Roman Church publish an English version '{ Is it not
enough that the English Catholic Church published English versions,
the French Catholic Church French versions, the German Catholic
Church German versions, and the Roman Church versions in Italian ?
I believe few or none of the Popes (if wo except Nicholas Breakspearj
have ever known the English language. Certainly no reasonable per-
son would expect them to know every language in the world, or even in
Europe. What nonsense, therefore, to tell us of the Roman Church
publishing an English version! The Bishops of each country,
who know their respective languages, manage these things,
and accordingly there are Catholic versions in every language,
sanctioned by” the local ecclesiastical authority, and im-
pliedly, and often directly, sanctioned by the Pope, to whom all
bishops are responsible. Mr. M‘Gibbon says “on the words Roman
Church hinged the whole weight of my challenge.” What a heavy
weight that challenge must have been ! or, rather, what a wretched
quibble! I might, with more reason, challenge him to produce a


version published by his own church, or by any Protestant church.
There is, I believe, strictly speaking, no such version. There was an
old English version published at Geneva, now known as the “breeches
Bible.” Parker, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, published another ; and
the present “authorised version” was published “by bis Majesty’s
special command,” not by the English or the Scotch Church. _ One
really feels ashamed at dealing with this quibble, on which “ hinged
the whole weight” of Mr, M‘Gibbon’s challenge, \\ hat church in its
senses would become responsible for the correct rendering of a Hebrew
oi' Greek book 2
I was always prepared for a considerable amount of ignorant
presumption on the part of Mr. M‘Gibbon, but I confess I was not
prepared to see any person of education, at the present day, denouncing
the Vulgate edition of the Bible as the “corrupt translation of the
Eoman Church.” This he repeats ad nausemn, in ignorance or disre-
gard of the facts that this version was made in the fourth century
(except some parts that are still more ancient); that it was made by a
most holy man, St. Jerome, the most learned of all the ancient fathers
of the Latin Church; that it was made from copies of the originals
when they were much freer from corruptions than they are at present;
that this has been admitted by many of the most learned Protestant
critics, who great!}' prefer the Vulgate to the present Greek text. St.
Jerome had many advantages that no subsequent translator possessed.
He lived at Bethlehem, surrounded by the scenes described in the
books he was translating; he had the assistance of the most learned
Jews of Palestine; he had collected a magnificent library; he was
able to consult the Hexapla of Origen, since lost; and, if we add to
these advantages his unwearied labour, his solid piety, and his noble
independence of character, braving the unjust censures of the neigh-
bouring bishop of Jerusalem, as ho had previously braved those of his
former bishop in Dalmatia; if we consider these advantages of time,
place, and materials, in the hands of one of the noblest characters that
ever lived, we shall have little difficulty in estimating the “weight” of
poor Mr. M‘Gibbon’s criticism of the VulgatS translation.
The celebrated Dr. Mill, who spent his life in the study of the
manuscripts and texts of the Bible, professes the greatest esteem for
the Vulgate, and in his choice of readings often defers to it. Grotius
speaks of it in high terms, as do the learned Walton and Bengel. Many
other learned Protestants have spoken of it in the same terms, among
whom may be mentioned the learned Tischendorf, the editor of an
excellent Greek Testament, who does not hesitate to prefer the Vulgate
to the present Greek text, after all the unwearied labour of innumerable
Greek scholars to restore it. Yet so small a clerk as Mr. M‘Gibbon
dares to speak of this ancient and admirable version as “ the corrupt
translation of the Eoman Church to glorify the Virgin! ” He is forced
to admit that the passages in the Douay Bible at which he cavilled are
correctly given from the Vulgate, with the exception of the words “do
penance,” which I admitted were more correctly given from the Greek
in the Protestant version by the word “repent.” In truth, as Mr.
M‘G. for once correctly states, the Greek, and the Latin, and the
English expressions originally meant the same thing ; and I freely con-
cede that, as the two English expressions have come, through contro-
versy, to have a different shade of meaning, which originally they had
not, both the Greek and the Latin should be rendered by the word
“ repent.” But the charge of corruption is untrue and ridiculous.
Mr. M‘Gibbon does not attempt to defend the interpolation in the
Protestant version of Hebrews xi., 21, “ leaning on the top of his


staff,” and I defy him to produce a single instance of' such tampering
with the text in the Douay version. lie, however, ridicules the tra-
ditionary explanation of Jacob’s act of faith given by me, without
attempting any substitute for it. lam willing to accept any reasonable
explanation, but there is neither reason nor common sense, that I can
see, in leaning on the top of a common staff as an act of faith. At
least it is the Protestant, and not the Catholic translators that have
interpolated their explanation, such as it is, into the text. I had stated
that the Greek pronoun showed that the rod was not Jacob’s, but
Joseph’s. Mr. M‘Gibbon says the best rescensions show the contrary,
I have consulted three of these, and they are all against Mr, M‘Gibbon.
The preposition may have suggested the interpolation, but could not
justify it.
Mr. M‘Gibbon had accused the Catholic translators of interpo-
lating the word “ Mary” into the text of the Angel's salutation. I de-
nied the fact, and, as usual, Mr. M‘Gibbon does not confess his calumny,
but shifts the ground.
In noticing his objection to the translation “this [marriage] is a
great sacrament,” I pointed out to Mr. M‘Gibbon that the word
aacramentvm adopted in the Latin Church to express the Christian
signs of grace is, and always has been, considered as the equivalent for
the word gvartipiov, used from the beginning by the Greeks to express
the same ordinances. From this fact, known to all scholars, it follows
that the one word is correctly translated by the other when they are
intended to mean any such ordinance ; and I argued that, as marriage
was called a mystery in the Greek text, and a sacrament in the Latin,
and as the translator, St. Jerome, lived in an early age of the Church,
and knew both languages and the doctrines and practices of both
churches equally well, the fact that he translated by the word “ sacra-
ment ” was sufficient for me as against Mr. M‘Gibbon. To this Mr,
M‘Gibbon is content to answer, that both churches, Greek and Latin,
have corrupted the truth ; that marriage is no mystery at all—though
it is called “ a great mystery ” both in the Greek text and in the
Protestant version, as every candid person conversant with both
languages will admit—and that of course the Bible, which should be
read without note and comment, is unable to explain itself in this, as
in the case of “ faith comes by hearing,” without Mr. M‘Gibbon’s gloss,
(By the way, I wonder how faith, in the time of the Apostles, was to
come by reading a new testament which had not been written, except
in part, and certainly the parts written had not been collected ?)
As Mr. M‘Gibbon does not attempt to defend his position that,
although the early printers printed numerous bibles in German and
other modern languages, nobody was allowed to buy or read them; as
he does not attempt to excuse himself for asserting that the laws or
discipline of the Catholic Church are unchangeable, like her faith; as
he says nothing about the Eegula IV. of the Index which he had
ludici’ously quoted as a decree of the Council of Trent; as ho does not
now assert that the Council of Trent condemned the Hebrew and Greek
scriptures, and all translations except the Vulgate; as he does not now
seem so anxious to circulate £SO worth of Bibles in Ireland, where I
have shown him that 582,500 have been circulated by Catholic book-
sellers within a few years ; nor in Eome, where they may be had in
tons at the Propaganda; as he does not defend his consistency in
insisting on the Bible “without note or comment,” while he will not
allow the sentence, “ Faith comes by hearing,” to pass without his
strained interpretation, I have a right to conclude that on all these
points Mr. M ‘Gibbon admits that he is vanquished. It is, indeed, an


easy victory, but it may be a useful one; it may be a check on pre-
sumptuous ignorance for the future ; and it may convince Protestants
of limited reading that the Catholic laity are not necessarily so ignorant
about the Bible and its editions and translations, as some of those are
who blow the trumpet in the Protestant Zion. If so, my object will bo
gained, and I shall not regret any little trouble or cost that I have
borne, or may yet have to bear, in accomplishing it.
AN ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
P.S.—I would call attention to a work—“ The Sincere Christian,
instructed from the Written Word,” by Dr. Hay, as containing an
epitome of Catholic doctrine, and the Scriptural grounds on which it
is held. It is very cheap, and in great use among Catholics, and will
amply satisfy the curiosity of Protestants as to what Catholics really
do believe.
[To the foregoing letter, the Rev. Mr, M‘Gibbon vouchsafed no for-
mal reply; but the following advertisement appeared in the Empire of
the next day, over an address to the reverend gentleman from the
officers of the “ Grand Orange Lodge of New South Wales,” and his
reply thereto.]
FACTS on which the Rev. J. M‘Gibbon founds his assertion that Pius
VI., in his bull Auctorem Fidei, reprobated the denial that “No
faith is to be kept with heretics, and that the Pope has power to
depose heretical kings, and absolve their subjects from their oath of
allegiance ” are principles of the Roman Church.
In 1682, the clei’gy of France, under the famous Bossuet, agreed
to the celebrated declaration known as the “ Gallican Liberties,” in
which the following occurs:—“We declare that power over spiritual
things, and such as pertain to eternal salvation, but not over civil and
temporal things, was conferred by God on the blessed Peter and his
successors, in accordance with the divine declaration, ‘ My kingdom is
not of this worldand again, ‘ Render, therefore, unto Caesar, &c/
Upon this basis is founded the Apostolic declaration, ‘ Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers/ &c. Therefore, kings and rulers in
temporal things are not subjected, by the ordinance of God, to any
ecclesiastical power; nor can they, by the authority of the keys of the
Church, he deposed either by direct or indirect power; nor can their
subjects he exempted from the duty of fidelity and obedience, nor he
released from their oath of allegiance. We declare that this doctrine,
which is essential to the public tranquillity, and equally advantageous
both to Church and State, ought by all means to be maintained, as in
accordance with the Word of God, the traditions of the Fathers, and
the example of the Saints.”
In 1786 the Council held at Pistoja under Scipio Ricci adopted
and eulogised the above-named declaration of the French clergy in 1682.
In 1794 Pope Pius VI. speaks in his bull “Auctorem Fidei,” thus :
“ We must not pass in silence the famous and fraudulent rashness of
the Synod of Pistoja, which has dared not only to speak with eulogy of
the declaration of the French clergy, in 1682, long since censured by the
Holy See, but also undertaken to invest it with greater authority by
introducing it into a decree concerning the faith, openly adopting the
articles it contains, and sealing, by a public and solemn profession of
these articles, the principles scattered through the same decree;
whence it follows, first, that we have grounds to form against the said
synod complaints much more serious than those of our predecessors


against the Assembly of 1682; and we may add, that this synod
outrages also the Church of France, when it deems it worthy of being
invoked as the patron of the errors with which this decree is infected.”
“ In consequence, our venerable predecessors, Innocent XI. and
Alexander VIII. having, in fulfilment of their apostolic duties, disowned,
abrogated, and declared null and without effect the said acts of the
Assembly of the clergy of France, the pastoral solicitude exacts of us,
with much stronger reasons, that the adoption which has been recently
made of these acts in the Council of Pistoja be by us condemned and
reprobated as rash, as scandalous, and, after the decrees which have
emanated from our predecessors, as extremely injurious to the holy
see; and, accordingly, we reprobate and condemn it by our present
decree, and wo ordain it to be held as reprobate and condemned.”
The first of these documents distinctly denies that “ no faith is to be
kept with heretics,” and that “ heretical kings can be deposed by the
Pope, and their subjects released from their oath of allegiance,” are
principles of the Roman Church. But the last document condemns
and reprobates the first as “false, rash, and scandalous, and extremely
injurious to the holy see.” And therefore the conclusion is inevitable,
that Pius in his• bull Auctorem Fidei, although the words “no faith
is to be kept with heretics,” and “ heretical kings are to be deposed
and their subjects released from their oath of allegiance,” do not
appear, reprobates and condemns the denial of these as distinctly and
effectually as if mentioned in so many words. The public are left to
judge whether Mr. M‘Gibbon, in view of these facts and documents, is
chargeable with making “ false and malicious ” assertions, and whether
it is not the quibbling of a Jesuit to say that the bull of Pius makes
no allusion whatever to the doctrine that “ no faith is to be kept with
heretics,” and that “ the Popes have power to depose heretical kings and
absolve them subjects from their oath of allegiance.”
THE BIBLE AND THE REFORMATION.
TO THE EDITOR OE THE EMPIRE.
SIR,—-Convicted of a malicious libel on Pius VI. and the Catholics of
England, the Rev. John M‘Gibbon once more shifts his ground ; and,
as usual, in his endeavour to prop up one falsehood by means of another,
he plunges yet deeper in the mire. His ingenuity is rather remarkable,
but it shall not serve his purpose.
It will be remembered that in the letter to which I last replied, he
asserted in the most positive terms, that notwithstanding the previous
approval of Pius VI. of the declarations of the European Catholic
Universities that it is not a doctrine of the Catholic Church “that faith
is not to be kept with heretics,” or “ that heretical sovereigns may be
deposed by the Pope, and their subjects absolved from them oaths of
allegiance”—that same Pope in his bull Auctorem Fidei pronounced
that denial “ false and scandalous, and extremely injurious to the Holy
See.” My answer was, that the statement was untrue, and that there
was not a word about “faith with heretics,” or “deposing heretical
kings,” or oaths of “ allegiance,” in the bull.
Here was an issue to be tried as plain as ever was brought before
a tribunal. Either the bull contained what Mr. M‘Gibbon said it con-
tained, or it did not. It could be produced, and it could speak for
itself. By no principle of law or logic could Mr. M‘Gibbon “ travel
out of the record,” and introduce fresh controversial matter to prop up
his assertion, if it was false, as false he now admits it to have been, Still


less was he justified in taking a garbled extract from the Galilean de-
clarations of 1682, and a garbled and mis-translated extract from the
bull, and, applying the one to the other, contrary to the Pontiff” s
obvious intention, seek to support his false assertion by means so
unwarrantable.
That Pius VI., at the end of his bull, renewed the censures passed
by two of his predecessors on certain portions of the Gallican
declarations of 1682 is quite true; but Mr. M ‘Gibbon ingeniously, and
(if he was not following some other blind guide) most dishonestly
quotes the first of the Gallican declarations, which was not censured at
all, as if it were the sole ‘ declaration ’ of that body dealt with by the
three Popes ; and, applying the words of the bull to that sole declara-
tion, draws from these false premises what he calls the “ inevitable
conclusion ’ that “ Pius, in his bull Auctorem Field, although the
words, no faith is to he kept with heretics, tyc., do not appear, reprobates
and condemns the denial of them as distinctly and effectually
as if mentioned in so many words. - ’ Now, if I were to
admit for a moment the truth of Mr. M‘Gibbon's premises, the
“inevitable conclusion” which he draws would be no conclusion at all,
but a miserable non sequitur, which the merest dabbler in logic
would at once detect. Even as quoted by Mr. M‘Gibbon, the Gallican
declaration says not one word about “heretics,” or “heretical
sovereigns,” any more than does the bull. What then becomes of Mr.
M‘Gibbon’s “inevitable conclusion?” Ho may beg the question, by
saying that heretical sovereigns were meant, for no logical fallacy is
beneath him, but I deny it altogether. The sovereigns deposed by
popes, when they exercised that power, were usually Catholic
sovereigns. Even the deplorable case of Elizabeth is hardly an excep-
tion, as she had professed Catholicism—had sworn to her belief in it,
and took an oath to maintain it from a Catholic bishop at her corona-
tion. But bo this as it might, Mr. M‘Gibbon had no right to travel
out of the record, and I cannot allow him to interpolate the text of the
Gallican declaration in order to make out his false conclusion. There
is nothing, I repeat,' in that declaration about “ keeping faith with
heretics,” or “deposing heretical sovereigns.” Mr. M‘Gibbon has,
therefore, calumniated Pius VI. on his own showing.
But Mr. M‘Gibbon’s deception does not end here. What he calls
“ the celebrated declaration” is only one of four declarations issued
by the Gallican convention in 1682, and when published, these declara-
tions were accompanied by an edict of Louis XIV., comprised in seven
articles of a very arbitrary nature, forbidding any opposite doctrines to
be taught in France. It was in this shape that they were disapproved
by Innocent XI. at the time, and'certain portions of them afterwards
explicitly censured by Alexander VIII. But neither of these popes—
any more than Pius VI., in his bull Auctorem Fidei —says anything
about the declaration quoted by Mr. M‘Gibbon, or anything
about “faith with heretics,” or “deposing heretical sovereigns,” or
“ absolving their subjects from their allegiance.”
In the middle ages it was an acknowledged law in Europe, that
the Pope, as the general arbiter of Christendom, had the power of
deposing kings, and absolving their subjects from their obedience, for
great crimes and acts of grievous misgovernment. Kings and empe-
rors invoked this law against each other; and if it was sometimes abused,
it was not without its advantages at a time when Europe was Catholic.
The law is now obsolete. In modern times people have, without the
Pope’s authority, deposed their kings, and absolved themselves from
their oaths of allegiance. The reformers of Mr, M‘Gibbon’s school


were particularly expert, at “breaking faith” with Catholic sovereign!*
in this way, and absolving themselves from their oaths of allegiance.
Witness the repeated forswearing of- their allegiance to the Scottish
Queen Regent, and to Queen Mary, by Knox and the “Lords of the
congregation ” (a set of the greatest scoundrels, by the way, that ever
breathed.—See Tytler, Keith, Spotiswood, &c.) I need not allude to
the deposition and murder of King Charles 1., and the transfer of
allegiance to Cromwell, the deposition of King James 11., and the
introduction of William 111., of “ glorious and immortal memory.”
The deposing doctrine ought least of all to be found fault with by men
of Mr. M‘G.’s school. As formerly exercised by the Popes, it has
effected good and evil, and, whether for good or evil, it has long since
been a thing of the past, and neither Pius VI. nor any other Pope has
dreamed of its restoration.
The Gallican doctrines really censured by Pius VI. were of a very
different nature. Long before 1682, the deposing power had ceased to
bo exercised, although some trace of it was still to be found in the
books of old theologians and canonists. The first Gallican declaration
gave it its quietus, and no one has ever thought of reviving it since.
Not so the other questions treated of by the Gallican prelates, which
the Pope censures, and which Mr. M‘Gibbon dishonestly suppresses.
It has long been a question debated in Catholic schools whether the
infallibility promised by Christ to His church rests chiefly in the Pope,
or in a general council; or, in other words, whether the Pope is subject
or superior to a general council, and whether his decrees are reforma-
ble. There are other shades of opinion too minute for discussion here.
In general it may be said, that the Italian or Ultramontane divines
hold for the Pope on the question, and the French or Cisalpine divines
maintain the authority of the council. All admit that the question is an
open one; but the Popes, it must be admitted, have never failed to
assert their own superiority by every means short of condemning as
heretical the opposite doctrine, which, however, they never have done.
Such expressions as “injurious to the Holy See,” in the bull Auctorem
Fidei, hardly amount to a censure at all in the view of a Cisalpine
divine, although a genuine Ultramontane will, in argument, make
the most of them. To be brief, the Holy See, like other Sees, often
asserts its rights and something more.
Now the second of the Gallican declarations, which Mr. M‘Gibbon
finds it convenient for his purpose to suppress, maintains the doctrine
of the Council of Constance, disliked at Rome, which made the authority
of a general council superior to that of the Pope; the third declaration,
which Mr. M‘Gibbon also suppresses, maintains the authority of
certain canons and usages of the Gallican church which derogated from
the assumed rights of the Holy See, and which are expressly noted for
censure in the bull of Alexander VIII., Inter multiplices, referred to by
Pius VI., but suppressed in Mr. M‘Gibbon’s mutilated translation; and
the fourth declaration, also suppressed by Mr, M‘Gibbon, though perhaps
the most material of all, maintained the Cisalpine opinion—always so
offensive at Rome—that the Pope’s decisions in questions of faith “are
not irreformable without the consent of the Church.” These, then,
are the declarations, censured in general terms by Innocent XI.; more
explicitly by Alexander VIII.; and which Mr. M‘Gibbon suppresses,
quoting only the first declaration, which is not censured at all!
Does it follow, because the Pope condemned Luther’s doctrine of
justification, that he condemned also the Apostle's Creed held by
Luther ? that because the Pope condemned Quesnel’s doctrine of
irresistible grace, he condemned his many pious reflections ? that


because the Pope condemned the Jausenists of Port Royal on predes-
tination, he condemned their admirable treatise on the Perpetuity of
the Faith ? As well might I argue that because the Scots Confession
of Faith condemns “ all kinds of Papistry in general and particular,
even as they are now damned and confuted by the Word of God and
Kirk of Scotland,” that therefore the Confession of Faith condemns
the Trinity, which is the fundamental doctrine of “ Papistry or that
because Mr, M‘Gibbon probably condemns Colenso on the Pentateuch,
he therefore anathematises Colenso’s arithmetic! Yet such is the
logic taught by this Bachelor of Arts under the patronage —God save
us !—of “The Grand Master of the Grand Orange Lodge of New South
Wales ! ” Will the Protestant public generally receive this logic 2 I
feel certain that they will not. If we are to discuss the grounds of our
differences, let us do so with manly vigour, if needful, but let us avoid
the use of fraud and falsehood and sophistry, such as it has been my
task to point out in the letters of Mr. M‘Gibbon.
After what has been said, it is hardly worth while to dwell on the
false and mutilated translation which Mr. M ‘Gibbon gives of the
paragraph quoted by him from the bull Auctorem Ficlei, in which he
makes Pius VI. condemn “ the acts of the assembly of the clergy of
France” without exception, instead of “ those acts ” only which “on
their coming forth, soon after, our venerable predecessor Innocent XI.
disapproved, &c.;” in which version he also suppresses the reference
to the date and title of the Bull Inter multipLices, which last, being
merely adopted by Pius VI., and which points out what is really
censured, furnishes a complete key to Mr, M‘Gibbon's gross and
unpardonable calumny on the latter named Pontiff, and on the Catholics
of England, while they were struggling for their civil rights against
the misrepresentations of intolerant bigots like himself.
In conclusion, to use a logic which all will comprehend, and to
prevent any further shuffling on the part of Mr. M‘Gibbon, on this
point, I hereby undertake to acknowledge myself beaten, and to sub-
scribe £SO to the Bible Society, if Mr. M‘Gibbon will produce from the
Bull Auctorem Fidei , or from the brief of Innocent XI., or the Bull
Inter multiplices —-therein recited and renewed, any allusion whatever
to “keeping faith with heretics,” or to “ deposing heretical sovereigns,”
or “absolving their subjects from their oaths of allegiance.” And if
Mr. M‘Gibbon fail to do this, I call upon the public to remember his
repeated assertions on this subject, and to draw the “ inevitable con-
clusion,”
AN ENGLISH CATHOLIC.
October 28th, 1865.
ENGLISH CATHOLIC AGAIN 1
TO THE EDITOR OF TUB EMIUIIE,
SIR, —For his bravery in challenging me to answer bis anonymous
“shuffling” and “dabbling in logic” of Saturday last, when he
knows that I declined to answer an anonymous libeller, “ English
Catholic ” deserves a medal. The one that would suit him is the one
that doubtless he has often admired, which issued from the papal
mint in 1572, having on the one side the head of Gregory XIII., and
on the other an angel with a sword, and the following superscription—-
“ Hugonotorum strage, 1572.” Let “ English Catholic ” show himself
a man and publish his name ; if not, let him toss up his hat and shout
the victory; for to gain the victory over such a writer is no gain, and
to lose a victory over such a writer no loss. If he gives me ap


Opportunity I shall have groat pleasure not only in exposing his Jesuitry
and shuffling and dabbling in logic, hut in showing to the sleepy
Protestants of New South Wales, in striking contrast with that most
glorious man of his own age, John Knox, (whom “English Catholic”
reckons as one of “ a set of the greatest scoundrels that ever breathed,”)
those impersonations of everything infamous and vile, whom he calls
the heads of the Church, the popes of Pome. It will be greatly
amusing and instructive to the Australian youth to lift the veil from
the face of infallibility, and show them the truth, the purity, the
honesty of the vicars of Jesus Christ! John Knox was not a perfect
man, but he was perfection itself, when compared with some of those
vice-gods to whom “ English Catholic ” looks with reverence!
JOHN MJGIBBON.
October 31st, 1865,
ON THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.
In the estimation of Catholics, still more than in the estimation of
Protestants, the Bible is the “ Book of books; ” and they could better
afford to spare all other books, ancient or modern, than the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testaments. The Church has always encouraged
their reverential study and pious meditation. Taken as the original
medium of the revelation of God to man, as Protestants take them, they
lose much of their value, for they are then, to a great extent, especially
as to matters of doctrine, unintelligible. Even a superficial perusal of
them should suffice to convince the impartial, unprejudiced, and
passably-intelligent reader, that they could never have been designed
to teach originally and explicitly the doctrines contained in divine
revelation, because they nowhere contain those doctrines drawn out in
systematic form, and clearly and dogmatically stated. The Old Testa-
ment contains the earliest traditions of the human race, the laws, the
ritual, the history, the moral and devotional literature of a peculiar
people, living for two thousand years or more under the special provi-
dence of God. The New Testament contains brief synopses of the life,
the sayings, the doings, and the sufferings of our Lord while taberna-
cling in the flesh, —the Acts of the Apostles, or at least of several of
them, together with doctrinal, moral, and monitory Letters addressed
by St. Paul to several particular Churches and to the Hebrews, of St.
Peter, St. James, St. John, and St. Jude to the Christians at large, two
Letters to private individuals, and the remarkable book, which to most
minds is a sealed book, the Apocalypse. All the writings of the Old
Testament proceed from God through believers, and are addressed to
believers, and presuppose the Jewish faith as already known. The
writings of the New Testament, again, are addressed to believers in the
Christian faith by Christian Apostles and Evangelists, and, though
inspired writings, they presuppose the faith to have been already
revealed and received. Nowhere do they present themselves as the
original medium of the Christian revelation. They speak of it as
something already communicated, already believed; allude to it as
something known; and simply seek to explain it more fully, to confirm
it, and to induce its recipients to practice in accordance with its
requirements. Surely such writings were never designed to be the
immediate and direct source whence those who were absolutely ignorant
of revealed truth were to derive their knowledge of Christian faith or
of Christian duty.


The unintelligibleness of the Scriptures is not entirely owing to
the obscurity of their language, the nature of the subjects they treat,
the fact that they are inspired, and treat of the highest and sublimest
themes which can engage the attention of the human mind; but to the
fact that we come to them without the necessary preparation, without
the preliminary knowledge which they presuppose in the reader, and
without which their various allusions, hints, and illustrations cannot be
understood. Look at them in w r hat light we will, they are incomplete
in themselves, and can be understood only when read in the light of
the Christian faith as first orally taught, and as it has been preserved
in the tradition of the Church. Read, as they who reject that tradition
must read them, they are, to a great extent, unintelligible, and there is
scarcely any error conceivable that they may not be made to teach, or,
at least, to favor.
Take, as an illustration, the question we find put to the Apostle in
the Acts by one who felt it necessary to secure his salvation, “ What
shall Idoto be saved ? ” The Apostle answers : “ Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and be baptized: and thou shalt be saved.” Here is a
very plain question, put in the simplest manner possible: the answer
seems equally plain and simple. Two things only are required ; “to
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,” and “to be baptized.” But what
are we to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? “ Simply to believe,” says
the Unitarian, “that Jesus Christ was the Messiah promised to the
Bathers and foretold by the Jewish prophets; and therefore to have
the true faith,” he concludes, “it is simply necessary to believe that
Jesus was the promised Messiah.” We may accept the interpretation,
without accepting the conclusion. Suppose the inquirer, as was prob-
ably the case, to have been a Jew or a Jewish proselyte, and therefore
already instructed in divine revelation, the answer would be sufficient
and exact, because the two things named were all that he needed in
addition to what he already had.. But suppose the question to have
been asked by a Gentile or one absolutely ignorant of the faith of the
Synagogue, the answer would have been neither exact nor sufficient;
for such a one would require something more than simply to believe
that Jesus was the Messiah promised to the Jews, and to be baptized
in his name. So simple a faith accompanied by the mere external act
of baptism, any man’s reason tells him, could have in itself no necessary
connection with eternal salvation. The answer of the Apostle becomes
true, full, and adequate for all men only when we have the traditional
teaching of what it is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and to be
baptised. If we have not the true doctrine in our minds, we cannot
find it in the Scriptures; but when we have been taught it, when
we know what it is, we can then go to them and not only find it there,
but find it set forth in the clearest, the fullest, the most attractive, and
the most impressive form. The Scriptures are, therefore, for believers,
not for unbelievers, for those who, up to a certain point at least, have
already been instructed in the doctrines and precepts of the Gospel.
We have many instances of persons brought up in heretical com-
munions, but honest and candid, sincere and earnest, who have come
to the true faith by simply reading and meditating the Scriptures.
But this is because they had, not only Christian dispositions, but also
the elements of the Christian faith already in their minds, and those
seminal principles of the truth which the reading of the Scriptures and
meditation thereon are sufficient to cause to germinate, grow up, and
fructify. But we have no well authenticated instances of individuals
having no previous instruction in Christian doctrine or in Christian
modes of thought, who have, by simply reading the Scriptures, been


brought to the knowledge of the Christian faith, or who have been
aide to construct from them any clear, consistent, and definite system
of doctrine whatever.
Tradition, as all the world knows, is from the Latin verb tradere,
to deliver, or hand down. If all the world would reflect on this, it
would help to straighten out some ideas. Tradition means, simply,
the handing down of truths, precepts, doctrines, facts, or customs from
one generation to another. The handing down may be by word of
mouth or by writing, but without tradition there could be no education.
A people without traditions is a new people, and has every thing to
learn de novo, and is like the child that is early severed from society
and grows up in the woods wild, and learns nothing from intercourse
with his race. Men become savages just in proportion as they lose
the traditions of the race. We modems profit by the ancient civiliza*
tion, the ancient wislom and philosophy, only through the medium of
tradition; and that people stands highest in the scale of civilization
that has the longest and richest traditions. It is singular that many
earnest believers in the continuous progress of the race, are yet noisy
declaimers against tradition. They seek at once to sever the present
generation from the past and the future, and therefore to break the
continuity of the life of humanity. Yet all growth, and therefore all
progress, is by accretion, by assimilation from without by force of an
internal law. The law of the oak is in the acorn; but deprive the
oak of all communication with the world without, place it in a condition
Where it can assimilate nothing from the world exterior to it, where it
can And no light, no heat, no air, no moisture, and it never will develop
into the plant or the tree. The law of growth in the natural world and
the moral is the same. Deprive the race of Divine inspiration on the
one hand, and of the traditions of the past on the other, and it could
make no progress from generation to generation. Savage tribes over
whose heads thousands of ages pass and bring no progress, show
us what all modern men would be without tradition.
The Bible Society circulates innumerable copies of the Holy
Scriptures among the heathen, but we have never heard that the
reading of them has brought any of the heathen to a belief, even a
human belief, in Christianity. In some instances, no doubt, the
reading of them has shaken their belief in the religion which they had
received from their fathers ; but instead of making them believers in
Christianity, it has made them disbelievers in all religion. Witness
the Taipings in China, and the Hau-haus in New Zealand. These
considerations alone are sufficient to prove that the Protestant doctrine
with regal’d to the sufficiency of the Scriptures is untenable. Even
Protestants themselves do not rely on their own doctrine, and, whenever
they can, they send with the Bible their missionary or doctrinal tract.
But taking the Scriptures as the Church takes them, and reading them
in the light of her teaching or the catechism, after we have been
instructed in the principles of our faith and in our duty, we shall And
them the best of all possible helps to the understanding of Christian
morals, and the most instructive, inspiring, and edifying of all
spiritual reading; we shall find them an inexhaustible fountain of
truth and wisdom, of moral principle, as of true and sublime devotion.
The doctrine of the Church with regard to the Holy Scriptures
has been much misunderstood and grossly misrepresented. She has
never objected to or discouraged the reading of the Scriptures, nor has
she ever regarded their reading as undesirable or unprofitable. She
approves, and always has approved, the use of the Bible, and objects,
and has objected, only to its misuse. She holds it to be written by


inspiration, and profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct
in righteousness, to perfect the man of God, and prepare him for every
good work. But she does not recognize it as the original medium of
divine revelation, or as sufficient to teach the true faith to one who has
received no preliminary instruction and no prior notice of that faith.
To put it into the hands of one who through the living teacher, or
through traditional instruction, had received no preparation for reading
and understanding it, would be as absurd as to put into the hands of
the student a book on algebra before he had learned the first four
operations of simple arithmetic. Tho principle on which she proceeds
is adopted and acted on by tho various Christian sects, as well as by
her, and to as great an extent, else why do they have their Sunday-
schools, their catechisms, their commentaries, their theological semi-
naries, their professors of theology, their preachers and teachers ?
The Presbyterian reads the Bible in the light of Presbyterian tradition ;
the Anglican, in tho light of Anglican tradition; the Unitarian in the
light of Unitarian tradition : the Methodist, in the light of Methodist
tradition: and hence wo find that the children of Presbyterians tend
naturally to grow up Presbyterians, of Methodists to grow up Methodists,
of Anglicans to grow up Anglicans, of Unitarians to grow up Unitari-
ans. The only difference there is between the Church and the sects on
this point is, that their traditions, in so far as they are peculiar, date
back only to the time of the Reformers, whereas her tradition dates
back from the time of the Apostles, and is Apostolic, and therefore
authentic.
The Evangelical sects, even while asserting the sufficiency of tho
Scriptures, do really recognize their insufficiency. They all recognize
the necessity of a guide and interpreter to the understanding of
Scripture not to be found in the Scriptures themselves; for they main-
tain that they are sufficient only when interpreted to tho understanding
of the reader by the interior illumination of the Holy Ghost. No man
goes farther in asserting tho weakness of the human understanding, or
its insufficiency by its own light to understand the Holy Scriptures,
and deduce therefrom the true Christian faith, than your stern, rigid,
arrogant, and inflexible Presbyterian minister. No man is farther than
ho from accepting the doctrine of private judgment as held by Unitarians
and Rationalists, and as ordinarily combated by our Catholic controver-
sialists. No man feels more deeply, or maintains more rigidly or
explicitly, the necessity of an infallible guide and interpreter for who-
ever would read the Scriptures with understanding and profit.
Thinkest thou that thou understandest what thou readcst ? ” —“ How
can I unless some one show me ? ” These questions are as significant
for him as they are for a Catholic, and he concedes that he cannot
understand what he reads, unless some one shows him or unfolds to
him the interior sense, the real meaning of the words he reads. This
some one he holds is the Holy Ghost, tho Spirit of Truth, who inspired
tho Scriptures themselves. The only controversy there can be between
him and ns, is on a question of fact, not a question of law or principle.
No doubt, if, as he supposes, he has the Holy Ghost for his illuminator
and instructor in reading the Scriptures, his understanding of them is
correct and worthy of all confidence. Let him prove the fact, and there
is no longer any dispute between us. But ho must excuse us, if we
refuse to accept it as a fact on his bare word, especially since we find
others, as much entitled to credit as he is, who claim to be illuminated
and taught by the Holy Ghost, and whose understanding of the Scrip-
tures is almost the very contradictory of his.
The principle insisted on by the Church is a very plain and a Very


reasonable principle, one that accords with the historical facts in the
case. The original revelation, she says, was not made to mankind by
writing, or through the medium of a book. It was made in the begin-
ning immediately by God himself to certain chosen individuals, who
communicated it to others. Mankind knew and believed the truth,
knew and believed the one true religion, at least in its substance, long
before any book Vas written, or letters had been invented. The primi-
tive believers, under the Christian dispensation, were taught the faith
orally by those who had 'been orally instructed by our Lord himself.
The faith thus orally taught and transmitted by the Apostles to their
successors, becomes the internal light by which the language of
Scripture is interpreted and understood. Something of this sort is
obviously necessary in the case of aR language, whether written or
unwritten. Written language is unintelligible to those who are
ignorant of the characters in which it is written, or who have not
learned to read. It is equally unintelligible to those who, though they
know the characters and are able to read, yet do not understand the
meaning of the words written. All words, whether written or un-
written, are signs or symbols; but they are signs or symbols only to
intelligence; they signify, they symbolize nothing to one absolutely
void of understanding. The interpretation of the sign or symbol comes
from within, not from without; and if the sense bo not, in some respect,
already in the intelligence, there is and can Ire no real or true inter-
pretation of the sign or symbol. Why, then, find fault with the
Church for adopting a rule which is universal, and which must bo
followed, or no instruction can be given through the medium of lan-
guage, either written or unwritten ? She has received the sense of the
Holy Scriptures from the Holy Ghost, and by putting the faithful in
possession of this, as she does, by means of analogies borrowed from
nature, and accessible to the reason common to all men, she supplies
the light and guidance necessary to enable them to read the Holy
Scriptures with profit, and without perverting or wresting them to
their own destruction.
The Church undoubtedly requires her children to read the Scrip-
tures with a reverential spirit, since they contain the revealed word ol
God, and it is God himself that is speaking through them. She also
requires them to read the Holy Scriptures under her guidance, her
direction, and not to interpret them in opposition to her teaching;
because, as her teaching is from the Holy Ghost, by His assistance,
and under His protection, any interpretation of Scripture contradicting
that teaching would necessarily be a false interpretation, since the
Scriptures are also from the Holy Ghost. But this does not mean that
no one can read the Scriptures unless a priest stands at his back with a
ferula in his hand, or that we have not the free use of our own reason
and understanding in reading them, and developing and applying their
sense. It does not mean that the errors of transcribers or of transla-
tors may not be corrected, or that we may not use all the helps to bo
derived from history and criticism, from science or erudition, in correct-
ing them. It docs not mean that w r e may not use profane science and
literature, the researches of geographers, the facts brought to light by
travellers and the students' of natural history, in illustrating and
settling the literal meaning of the Sacred Text. It does not mean, any
more, that we must understand and apply every text or passage, word
or phrase, in the precise sense in which we find it understood or applied
by the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, or even by Popes and
Councils. It means simply that wo are not at liberty so to interpret
Scripture as to derive from it any other doctrine that that which the


Church teaches, or to deduce from it any sense Incompatible with faith
and morals as she defines them. So understood, the doctrine of the
Church by no means cramps the intelligence, or restricts in any narrow
or unreasonable degree the free and full exercise of our highest and
best reason in understanding and applying the sublime truths the
Scriptures contain.
The abuse of the Holy Scriptures by the sects, and their exaggera-
ted notions about Bible-reading, have perhaps had an influence on
many Catholics, and tended, by way of reaction, to prevent them from
reading and studying them as much as they otherwise would. The
exaggerations of error tend always to discredit truth. The fear of
being Bible-readers in the Protestant sense has, not unlikely, kept
many from being Bible-readers in the Catholic sense. But it is high
time that such notions, if they exist, should be banished from amongst
us. Let us, at the invitation of our pastors, set ourselves to a reveren-
tial study of the Holy Scriptures—let us take in the sublime instruction
as it was dictated by the Holy Ghost, in language more beautiful and
more sublime than ever did, or ever could, originate with uninspired men.
Our faith will profit by it; it will become broader, purer, sublimer,
and more comprehensive; it will become more energetic and robust,
more able to withstand the insidious appeals of error and the tempta-
tions of vice. Our devotion will become more ardent and enduring;
our morals will conform to a higher standard; and we ourselves shall
become capable of greater sacrifices and more heroic deeds.
Printed at the Caxton Steam Machine Printing Office, 14C, Pitt-street,
opposite Mortis Buildings, Sydney.




