

SECRET
GOLD




I >










jf 1
' Mf
ff-H
• - --v Wj"^. J : « * B
~V. > '
’Jj** As. "■<£-• B \
EE HIS BROTHER STRUGGLING IN THI
A BIG MAN


SECRET GOLD
A STORY OF TWO BOYS WHO FOUND
WEALTH IN THE HEART OF THE
AUSTRALIAN DESERT
PAT MALVERN
LONDON
THE SHELDON PRESS
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.2


Printed in Great Britain


• • • 45
• 57
• 70
• 83
• 95
icy
. 119
• 131
. 142
• *53
• • • . 162
• i73
CONTENTS
I. All in the Air . . -
11. In Search of a Father ... 22
111. An Encounter with Blacks • - . 34
IV. Fresh Plans . . _
V. Nine Mile Spring
VI, The Goldfields • .... 70
VII. Monty Makes Friends .... 83
VIII. Proof Needed .
IX. The Secret Mine ..... lO y
X. Kelly Shows His Hand . . .119
XI. Raided by Blacks . . .131
XII. Disaster ... I
XIII. The Code
* * * * *53
XIV. Gold ! . c
XV. Captures and Rescues .
* * • 1 73
XVI. Explanations . tQ
* • • .1 04.




CHAPTER I
ALL IN THE AIR
Monty Rohan was enjoying himself immensely. He
should by rights have been about to begin a fresh term
at St. Augustine’s; but instead, he was occupying the
passenger’s seat in a Vagrant Bird aeroplane piloted
by his brother and flying over Central Australia.
Having nothing to do and no responsibilities, Monty
was at liberty to give full rein to his spirits, and he
whistled cheerfully, occasionally turning around to
grin at Frank, who smiled back. Sometimes he waved
in the direction of the Lark monoplane in which their
father sat alone, conveying the bulk of the stores for
the little expedition. Once Mr. Rohan saw him and
waved in reply, and Monty whistled louder than
ever.
Monty reviewed with delight the events of the
last few days. First of all there was the sudden and
unexpected invitation to join his father and brother
on their journey to the new goldfields in The Iron-
stones. Then had come the train journey from
Adelaide to Port Augusta, where the two others
waited with the ’planes and stores. Monty had
enjoyed the long flight—his first—over the great salt
lakes to Oodnadatta, which was a township consisting
mainly of canvas huts and offering no entertainment
of any sort to the ordinary mortal.
But Monty had an extraordinary capacity for getting
fun out of nothing, and he had roamed about the
town inspecting the odorous camps of camel-drivers,
jeering at the superior, sarcastic expressions of the
camels, teasing the chubby brown children who romped


in the hot sunlight, throwing sticks for skinny dogs to
retrieve, riding buckjumping donkeys in another part
of the settlement and, at night, playing his banjo to
an entranced audience of Afghans, Pathans, Assyrians,
Blacks, Chinese and Whites.
The whole township turned out to this free show—
they had never had anything like it. Gramophones
and wireless were commonplaces in the lives of many
of them, but a personal entertainment like this was
miles better. If Monty had cared to pass round his
cap after the show, he would have reaped a large
reward in the shape of coins Australian, Chinese and
Indian, small pieces of opal or ruby taken from folded
turbans, beautiful glass marbles that were long-
treasured possessions of blackfellows, or even chunks
of tobacco —the supreme tribute from the coloured
inhabitants of the Back-blocks, as the uncivilised
portions of Australia are called.
Of course, Monty had done no such thing, but had
returned to his hotel escorted by a motley crowd of
which dogs made up a goodly proportion, and listened
politely to his father’s wigging for “ making a silly
fool of himself.” Ordered the following morning to
leave the banjo behind until their return, Monty had
refused with the disarming smile that concealed an
iron determination. So the instrument lay at his feet
in the aeroplane while the boy tried to perfect, by means
of whistling, tunes that he would strum that night to
an unappreciative audience consisting of his father and
Frank.
Mr. Rohan had found his younger son’s antics
particularly annoying in view of the fact that Monty
was far from being a fool. He was usually among
the first three in his form, was centre-forward of his
House team and had acquitted himself splendidly
against the St. Kenelm Eleven, causing much trepida-
tion among the bowlers of the rival school in view of
the fact that the season was barely half over. But
nothing could suppress Monty—and, after all, what


normal, healthy boy of fifteen at the outset of an
unexpected and adventurous holiday would be capable
of taking seriously a parental scolding ?
Certainly not Monty Rohan, thought that young
gentleman, smiling over his shoulder at his brother.
“ Good old Frank! ” he said to himself.
He felt that nothing could go wrong while Frank
was in charge—steady, dependable Frank; always
reliable, never brilliant, a real good sort, a good pal
less than three years older than himself.
Frank’s position in his form had usually been about
the middle, and his size had compelled him to play
full back, where he seldom had a chance to distinguish
himself. At cricket he was only middling, though he
put up quite a good display at tennis. His masters
prophesied that he would never cut a great figure in
the world, but his mates declared that they would
rather have Frank Rohan with them in a tight corner
than anyone else they knew.
He spoke through the telephone now, asking how
his brother was feeling.
“ 0.K.! ” laughed Monty into the speaking-tube,
and Frank once more gave all his attention to the
machine.
The contrast between the brothers was more than a
mental one, Frank stood nearly six feet in his socks
and was broad in proportion; Monty was short, wiry
and slender, looking younger than he was. Frank had
dark, straight, untidy hair, blue eyes and a long, serious
face; Monty’s hair (which he detested), was wavy like
that of a girl, and several shades lighter than his
brother’s, while his eyes were brown and his face oval
in shape with—to his perpetual annoyance—a dimpled
chin.
But, much as he loathed it, Monty’s dimple was his
greatest asset, for it disguised the line of a firm, square
jaw. Many a bully, calling him “ Dimpled Darling! ”,
had been astonished to find himself biting the dust
the next moment and being instructed rather forcibly


as to the correct method of addressing Montague
Anthony Rohan.
“ Having much fim? ” asked Monty into the tele-
phone.
“ Rather! ” answered Frank, smiling contentedly.
Taking stock of the granite peaks of the Macdonnell
Ranges which were slipping slowly out of sight to the
south, Frank felt distinctly pleased with himself. Less
than a month ago, he reflected, he had been swotting
his brains out over examination papers for the Higher
Public in order to improve his matriculation pass. To
his own surprise, he had scraped through quite credit-
ably. It seemed years, instead of only a few weeks,
since he had sat in the shade of a huge gum tree in the
grounds of St. Augustine’s listening to his father out-
lining plans for an expedition into Central Australia.
And here he was now, not much past his eighteenth
birthday, piloting a Vagrant Bird aeroplane and
proving his skill by negotiating successfully the almost
unknown mass of canyons and escarpments lying
immediately to the north of Caroline Wells, the town-
ship which forms the last outpost of civilisation in
South Australia. He was justified in taking a pride
in the achievement.
Leaning out of the cockpit, he could see a few
small white specks which suggested the locality of the
township, but the mountains quickly blotted them out.
In all other directions there spread the Great Aus-
tralian Desert —that vast stretch of practically un-
explored country, consisting for the most part of
dreary, dusty plain, but rising at times into jagged
mountain ranges. Such trees as could subsist on
scanty rainfall were fairly plentiful, and greyish shrubs
appeared in scattered patches.
Not an inviting country, thought Frank, but one
never can tell. Who knew what adventures awaited
them away to the north ? Judging by what his father
had said, they promised to be many and somewhat
exciting.


Monty interrupted his reflections by calling through
the speaking-tube: “Dad wants you!” and Frank
saw that his father was signalling from the monoplane.
“ Going to land! ” the young pilot explained, and
began looking about for a suitable landing-ground.
He and his father having selected one, the two machines
came to rest within a few yards of one another in a
small clearing among gnarled gum trees and scattered,
dried-up scrub.
They all climbed from their seats, thankful to
stretch their legs. As Mr. Rohan approached the
boys his likeness to Frank became most apparent;
Monty resembled neither of them, having inherited
his looks from his dead mother.
“ I’m not satisfied with that petrol-feed,” said Mr.
Rohan. “ I thought we’d better have a look at it
now —there may not be another suitable landing-
place for miles.”
“ Right-o, Dad,” said Frank. “ I’ll give you a
hand, Mont, you make yourself useful by lighting a
fire. A spot of tea wouldn’t go amiss now, would it,
Dad?”
“ Guess we’ll be ready for it soon,” said Mr. Rohan,
glancing at the sun, whose heat was already intense.
While the other two busied themselves about the
Lark, Monty collected sticks and built a fire on either
side of which he planted two stakes, across which he
laid a green branch. On this he suspended the
“ billy ” —the tin can which serves so many purposes
in the Outback, from tea-making to bailing up water
from a spring or “ soak,” from cooking a stew to
serving as dinner-gong when beaten vigorously with a
spoon.
The two machines looked strangely out of place in
this forsaken spot. The monoplane was new —a
gleaming affair in white and red. The Vagrant Bird
had seen better days, and its blue and silver were
dulled and scratched. Whereas the bigger machine
had been recently built and equipped for such expedi-


tions as the present one, the other had been picked up
cheaply by Mr. Rohan when he decided to take his
son along as his assistant.
By the time his father and brother had completed
their inspection, Monty had tea made and food
spread out in the shade of a big tree.
Come to the cookhouse door, boys,’ ” he whistled
shrilly, and Frank took his head out of the machine’s
innards to say: “ All right! Won’t be a minute! ”
“You know, Dad,” said Monty as he munched a
sandwich as well as he could for the attentions of a
score of determined and apparently starving flies,
“ I’ve never heard the full story of this joy-ride of
ours. You dragged me off in such a hurry. Don’t
you think it’s time you explained? St. Augustine’s
don’t like to have their best pupils abducted without
due reason being given.”
Modesty’s your middle name, isn’t it? ” remarked
Frank, arresting the ascent of an ant to the brim of
his mug in which tea steamed invitingly.
“ Sure! Where’d I be without it? But come on,
Dad, spill the beans! ”
“ I suppose there’ll be no peace until I satisfy
you! ” sighed Mr. Rohan, “You might have waited
till I’d finished eating. What with the flies and the
ants and you, life’s a bit complicated at the moment.
Still ...”
He took a long drink of tea, passed his mug for
more, and proceeded to obey his offspring.
“You know, of course, where we’re bound for? ”
he asked.
“ The Ironstones, naturally! You did let that out —
in your sleep, I think it must have been. The beds at
Oodnadatta were a bit exciting, weren’t they? ” Monty
scratched himself suggestively.
“ The less said about Oodnadatta the better,” said
Mr. Rohan, his mind on the impromptu concert.
“ Well, you know all about the new goldfields in The
Ironstones ?” he continued, and Monty nodded. “ Very


little is really known about them in the cities, but men
have been working there, off and on, for several years.
Reports kept coming in to Adelaide of wonderful
finds made there, but there wasn’t any foundation for
them until about the middle of last year. Last July
news came of a claim called the Jumping Jimmy
which really seemed to be the goods.”
“ I know! ” broke in Monty, “ Read about it at
the time—we’re quite advanced at St. Augustine’s,
though you mightn’t think it. They believe in living
up to the School motto, and hand us out the most
harmless parts of the newspapers —that is, the papers
with the really interesting bits cut out.”
“ Bloodthirsty little beast! ” commented Frank, but
his voice was absent, for his memory was straying in
the grounds of his old school, seeing once more the
massive stone porch with “ Tolle, lege ” cut deeply
above it —the “ Take up, and read ” which had first
inspired the Saint from whom the college took its
name.
“Go on, Dad! ” urged Monty.
“ Well, to make a long story short, a company was
formed to work the Jumping Jimmy, and after a few
months ugly rumours began to leak out, with the
result that the city shareholders asked me to go and
look into them.”
“ And here we are! ” exclaimed the younger boy.
“ Right in the middle of Nowhere, complete with two
’planes, a lot of food, a quantity of petrol, and some
mysterious cases that you seem to love better than
your life.”
“ And a useless scamp of a fellow who doesn’t care
if his father dies of thirst,” added Mr. Rohan, turning
his mug upside down, to the great delight of a dozen
ants, who raced for the tiny sweet pool that formed
in the dust.
“Do you think the Jumping Jimmy really is a
fake? ” asked Monty as he refilled the mug.
“ Can’t say till I’ve had a look at it.”


“Well, that won’t take long,” lamented the boy,
who had been looking forward to an extended holiday
in the air.
“ It’s not so simple as you think,” said his father.
“ There are men working the mine—or seeming to
work it—and it won’t be to their interests to have
me poking my nose in. We’ll have to be crafty about
it. We’re going to be three prospectors come out in
the hope of striking it rich on our own. I shall have
to wait my chance of getting a look at the Jumping
Jimmy or taking samples of the gold in it, and that
won’t be at all easy.”
Monty’s eyes shone.
“ Sounds more interesting,” he observed. “Do you
think there’ll be trouble with the miners? ”
“ Can’t say, but I shouldn’t be surprised.”
“Fighting? Eh, Dad?”
“ Frank’s quite right when he says you’re blood-
thirsty,” laughed Mr. Rohan. “Where would you
be in a fight with men twice your size, I’d like to
know? ”
“ Oh, I dunno! I laid out Hefty Harris quite neatly
at gym the other day, and he wasn’t fooling either.
Reckon I’m handier than I look. When it comes to
brains versus brawn, it isn’t always the brawn that
wins,” he finished modestly.
Frank threw a lump of dirt at him.
“ Quit skitting! ”he ordered. “ Get to it and clear
up this mess. Dad and I are going to have a smoke,
aren’t we, Dad ? ”
“ It would be nice,” admitted his father, feeling for
his pipe.
“ It’s not fair,” complained Monty. “You two will
get out of the work every time at this rate. Think
I’ll take to a pipe myself.”
“ You just let me catch you, that’s all! ” threatened
his father, and the boy grinned and began to pack
away the food that remained and to wash the mugs and
billycan.


“ I’ll get even with you yet,” he announced. “ You
wait!”
They were not left long in suspense as to what form
of torture Monty intended to inflict upon them; for
he soon finished his task and, running to the small
’plane, dragged out his precious banjo. Settling him-
self comfortably with his back against a tree, he
began to play.
“ Oh, for Heaven’s sake shut up! ” roared Frank.
An angelic smile wreathed Monty’s face, and he
played still louder.
Oh, there’s a land of sunshine,”
he sang,
“ Where it hardly never rains,
Where kangaroos go hopping
Across the burning plains.”
Frank threw another chunk of dirt, and missed.
“ You! 11 never play against England,” jeered Monty,
pausing to return the offering, landing it accurately in
the bowl of Frank’s pipe. Then he resumed his song:
“ There dingoes chase the emus.
And emus chase the ’roos,
And cockatoos fly screaming
Those Never-Never Blues.”
“ Suppose you think that’s clever? ” commented
Frank, cleaning out his pipe.
“ Not so bad for a youngster,” admitted Monty
with all the humility of a budding author.
“ You’ll come to a sticky end,” his brother prophesied.
“ You’ll become a crooner and write popular drivel.”
“ Crooners don’t write songs —they sing ’em,”
Monty corrected, and went on with his original
composition:
“ The parrots all fly backwards,
So dust won’t fill their eyes,
And camels never have the hump
Where water never lies.
“ There dingoes chase the emus.
And emus chase the ’roos . .


The other two gave him up and managed to snatch
a brief sleep while he played and sang to himself,
impervious alike to heat, flies, ants and other hindrances
to invention and musicianship as supplied gratis in the
desert.
“Well, we must be off!” exclaimed Mr. Rohan,
suddenly sitting up after half-an-hour’s nap, “ Come
on, Frank —get going! ”
Frank stretched slowly and thoroughly before rising
to his feet.
“ Phew! Isn’t it hot? ”he exclaimed, mopping his
face. “ I’ll be glad to be up in the air again.”
“ From the look of things, it won’t be any cooler
up there,” remarked his father, regarding the clear
sky gloomily. “ Not a trace of cloud, and probably
no wind.”
“ Cheer up! ” mocked Monty from under his tree.
“ It may be blowing big guns up aloft for all we can
tell from here.”
“ If you don’t get a move on, you’ll be left down
below,” warned his brother, going over to the ’plane.
“ Keep an eye on me, Frank,” instructed Mr.
Rohan. “ I may want to land at any time and
reconnoitre. I couldn’t get any clear directions about
the country from here on, but I understand that I’m
to look out for three tall mountain peaks with a range
of hills showing through behind them. The peaks
are in the Ronald Ranges, and the hills behind are
The Ironstones. But it won’t do to show ourselves
too plainly.”
, , t ' . . . - I « • • t /-» t 11 'A M
“ Then we’d better land this side of the Ronalds? ”
Frank suggested, and his father nodded.
“ And keep your eye skinned for blacks,” he advised.
“ There’s no knowing what scouts may be watching
for us, and they can convey news in the most amazing
way in these parts.”
“ But no one’s expecting us,” interposed Monty,
“ so how can they be on the look-out? ”
“You never can tell, my boy! There’s a man


named Stingaree Kelly in charge at the mine, and
he’s got a pal who’s known as Wild Cat Larrigan.
I’ve heard that there’s no telling what those two
might get up to.”
“ Stingaree Kelly! Wild Cat Larrigan! ” repeated
Monty. “ Nice names, I must say! Well, we’ll twist
their tails for them before they’re much older if they
try any funny business with us, won’t we, Dad? ”
“You’ve said it, youngster!” replied his father,
climbing into the cockpit of the Lark.
“Hop in, Monty!” commanded Frank. “We
can’t moon about here all day! ”
First carefully disposing of the banjo, Monty obeyed
the order and settled himself in his seat, while Frank
swung the propeller and listened to the hum of the
engine.
Mr. Rohan started first, and the boys watched the
monoplane taxi and take off, rising above the trees
and heading due north. Frank followed his father’s
lead, and soon the two machines were floating slowly
in the direction of the hills which hid the abode of
the two gentlemen with such charming names.
The Macdonnell Ranges were the merest smudge
upon the southern horizon when Monty looked back,
and ahead lay a monotonous stretch of desert, with
here and there a scraggy tree rising from the sparse,
scrubby vegetation. A little to the east, a thin straight
line indicated the position of the Overland Telegraph,
by which they were taking their bearings, since the
Ronald Ranges lay a few miles to the west of it.
Flocks of parrots wheeled below, and Monty could
imagine their hoarse, terrified shrieks. Once a drove
of emus ran helter-skelter across the plain, necks
stretched to the fullest extent and long legs striving to
escape from the throbbing horrors moving above them.
The two boys watched the flight of the awkward,
ungainly birds, so badly handicapped by their lack of
wings—that is to say, wings that were of any practical
use.


“ Rum-looking beggars! ” remarked Frank, and
Monty agreed.
Frank, steering for the mountains he could not yet
see, did not feel so happy as he had done before their
halt. His father’s mention of Kelly and Larrigan had
reawakened fears that he had forgotten for the last
few days, and he began to wonder anew if they had
been wise in bringing the younger boy with them.
Mr. Rohan had talked openly to Frank during their
preparations for the journey, and had said that, while
his instructions were to avoid trouble if possible, he
would not be surprised to meet with it at the diggings.
“ This Kelly is a tough customer,” he had said once.
“ I don’t like the sound of him. He didn’t earn that
nickname for nothing. I’m not keen on Wild Cat
Larrigan either; but the wild cat is a notorious coward
after all.”
“ That may not be the meaning of his handle,”
Frank had replied. “He may have earned it through
floating £ wild cat ’ schemes, or something of the sort.”
“ Then it will be most appropriate if the Jumping
Jimmy turns out to be nothing but a wild cat con-
cern ! ” laughed his father.
This conversation recurred to Frank now as he
flew over the desert, at the same time endeavouring
to keep a look-out for native encampments.
“ I wish we’d left Monty behind,” he said to him-
self, and smiled at the lad, whose cheery grin did
nothing to reassure his brother.
“ It’s all very well to bring him along for a treat,
but, after all, he’s only a kid,” mused Frank gloomily.
“ If anything happened to him . . .”
His thoughts refused to carry the situation further,
for, though silent and undemonstrative, he was
extremely fond of his young brother. In Monty’s
early days at school, Frank had stood between him
and the worse bullies, although he let the boy take
such punishment as he thought might serve to harden
him. For three years now he had watched over the


younger boy’s career, thoroughly though unobtrusively,
Monty being utterly unaware of his vigilance. Their
father was frequently away in the Outback for months
at a time, engaged upon survey or mining investiga-
tions, so that Frank felt responsible for the lad.
“ Stingaree Kelly!” muttered Frank. “Wild Cat
Larrigan! ” And his jaw squared and his mouth set
in a manner that boded ill for those gentlemen if they
should ever interfere with Monty.
Monty, on the other hand, was whistling gaily and
chanting the two names to himself like an incantation.
“ There ought to be good prospects for a bit of a
dust-up,” he reflected, and his eyes shone in antici-
pation.
Although he was Australian-born, like his brother,
there was nothing his Irish ancestry loved better than
a good fight. He had the quick, soon-burnt-out
temper of his father’s race, with all its capacity for
running into trouble and enjoying it thoroughly. The
noise of a dog-fight was music in his ears, and the
midst of a football scrum was the place in which he
was happiest.
Frank was not at all like that. He loved peace
above all things, though when he had to fight he did
it thoroughly. In fact, his nature might have been
summed up in the words of the old song:
“ We don’t want to fight,
But, by jingo, if we do ! ”
The ’planes hummed along smoothly, their passage
causing a welcome, cooling wind. The sky was
cloudless, and on the desert the trees stood still as
sentinels. There was no sign of aboriginals or of
anything calculated to give alarm. They made
another landing after two hours’ flying, and Monty-
got lunch while the others looked to the engines and
petrol tanks.
“ I m in no hurry to get there,” explained Mr.
Rohan. “As long as we camp at the foot of the


Ronald Ranges to-night, I’ll be satisfied. We ought
to sight them any minute now. We’d better fly low
in case we’re spotted through the gaps, though the
ranges should form an effective screen. Be careful,
won’t you, Frank? ” , . .
“ All right, Dad. I’ll be O.K. Even if this is my
first long flight, I’m not ignorant altogether.”
“ I’ll signal you when to look out for a place to
land,” continued his father. “ A little before sun-
down, I think. That will give us plenty of time to
get settled before dark. There will be hardly any
twilight in these parts, you know.”
“ 0.K., Chief! ” laughed Frank. “ Wave your
lily-white hand three times up and down when you’re
going to land, and we’ll circle round and look for a
spot.”
Conditions were perfect throughout the afternoon,
and in his delight at feeling the machine responding
to his control, Frank forgot the fears that had beset
him earlier in the day. He began to wish that he had
persuaded his father to change places with him —he
could have managed the Lark easily enough.
“ It must be lonely for Dad over there with nothing
but a lot of canned food and flour and stuff,” he
thought, “ while I’ve got Monty as well as a few tins
of petrol and some grub—not forgetting the banjo ! ”
At that moment Monty spoke through the telephone.
“ Land ahead! ” he announced.
Following the direction in which the boy pointed,
Frank saw three faint shadows against the sky, like
the spires of a distant church.
“ The Ronald Ranges,” _he remarked. Looking
about him he noticed, low in the west, a thin black
bank of cloud.
“ Rain somewhere! ” he surmised, and Monty
nodded.
“ No bigger than a man’s hand,” thought Frank,
glancing once more at the minute black island floating
in a pale green sea immediately above the sun.


“ That’s nothing! ” he told himself, concentrating
on bringing those three spires into clearer focus.
“ It’s nothing! ” also remarked Mr. Rohan to him-
self, observing the stain on the sky. The distant peaks
filled his mind, and he signalled to Frank to speed up
a bit.
The engines roared as the throttles opened, and
soon the mountains were clearly visible, their ridges
and valleys showing up between the three tall peaks.
Frank began to sing, badly out of tune, and Monty
whistled gaily.
Away in the west, unobtrusive yet menacing, the
black cloud spread like a blot of ink on a clean page,
and its shadow crept over the desert.


CHAPTER II
IN SEARCH OF A FATHER
Before they realised that anything more than a shower
of rain was approaching, the storm broke. Thunder
roared and crashed, and vivid flashes of lightning lit
up the lurid landscape. Rain and hail lashed their
faces, and wind fought for control of the machines.
The curtain of rain was so dense that Frank early lost
sight of the monoplane, while thunder completely
drowned any sound from it that might otherwise have
reached his ears.
The afternoon soon developed into a nightmare
which neither boy ever forgot. Rain shut them in on
every side, hail battered them, and terrified birds
crashed against the machine, while Frank lived in
terror of a particularly large one flying into the pro-
peller. Wind tore past, only to return and buffet
them anew. They could see nothing whatever —
nothing but rain and dense black clouds and, when
lightning provided brief illumination, torrents of rain
hurling to the earth.
Frank, with his short experience of flying, was at a
loss to know what to do. He feared that, if he con-
tinued to go straight ahead, he would crash among
the Ronald Ranges, the height of whose triple peaks
he had not been able to estimate. Afraid lest his
father should be similarly bamboozled, he dreaded the
two machines colliding in mid-air. Pulling the joy-
stick back, he watched the altimeter anxiously and, as
the machine began to climb, glanced at the compass.
The needle pointed due north. He decided to keep on
climbing, hoping to rise above the storm, but apparently


it extended high into the atmosphere. Anyhow, he
reflected, there was not a great deal to be gained by
continuing to climb. He might, with luck, manage to
clear the heights of the ranges; but to do that would
be to go against his father’s explicit instructions to
camp that night on their southern side.
Finally, realising that they were now in the rain-
shadow of the Ronalds, he resolved to make a volte-
face and turn the nose of the ’plane southwards, thereby
eventually flying out of the track of the storm. Such
fury, he reasoned, must soon wear itself out, and he
could return to the foot of the ranges when the sky had
cleared.
Accordingly, he pulled the joy-stick to the right,
keeping one eye on the compass. To his horror, he
found that the needle remained stationary. The
instrument was useless. They had not thought to test
it, as Frank had intended to rely entirely on his father’s
guidance, and the machine, being an old one, was not
equipped with the devices for blind flying that the
monoplane boasted.
“ The compass is busted! ” he yelled above the
clamour of the storm.
“ Never mind,” replied his brother, “ Storm came
from the west. Take your bearings from that.”
In spite of his fears, Frank grinned to think that he
could have overlooked such an elementary point. He
therefore banked until the wind was blowing great
guns into his right ear, and concentrated on the level
indicator. But he had reckoned without the particu-
larly malicious type of tropical cyclone peculiar to those
latitudes. Almost cheerfully he steered the ’plane,
completely unaware that he was still at the mercy of
the gale.
For over an hour the lashing wind and rain con-
tinued, varied occasionally by hail which tore at their
coats and battered their faces, one large stone leaving a
nasty cut on Monty’s cheek. Gradually the thunder
diminished, but the boys were almost inclined to be


sorry for that, since it deprived them of the lightning
and reassuring glimpses of the ground. Flying blind,
they came slowly out of the storm-belt, and found
themselves once more in calm air, with a pale greenish
sky above and the reflection of the vanished sun, like
an enormous blood-orange, low in the west.
But at the sight of that flaming ball both boys
uttered an exclamation of dismay. Instead of being
on their right, it lay to the left.
Deceived by the fact that the storm was travelling
in a circle, Frank had done the same, attributing the
frequent need for banking to the force of the gale
blowing the machine out of its course. Had they
remained in the grip of the storm they would eventually
have returned to the direction they sought. As it was,
they were now many miles north of where the trouble
had started, instead of to the south, as Frank had
supposed. Glancing at Monty, he received an
especially cheerful grin.
“ Hang that kid! ” he muttered. “ I believe he’d
laugh at anything.”
He did not realise that the younger boy was as much
alive to their danger as he was himself, and merely
trying to keep both their spirits up.
A glimpse of the pressure gauge sent his thoughts
racing in another direction, and he forgot the short-
comings of his companion in a fresh anxiety.
“ Running out of juice! ”he informed Monty. “ I’ll
have to land. Look out for a place.”
For some minutes the ’plane dipped and banked,
until Frank spotted a likely landing-ground, and
shortly afterwards the Vagrant Bird taxied across a
rather bumpy surface and came to rest.
“ Phew! That wasn’t any joke! ” exclaimed Frank,
pulling off his helmet and wiping his face.
“Wonder where we are?” pondered Monty. “I
couldn’t see a blooming landmark just now.”
“ No—the rain’s blotted out everything that might
help—it’s still as thick as a curtain back there. I


wonder if we’re north of the ranges, or if we were led
away to the west or east.”
“We might even have worked round to the south
and turned north again,” suggested Monty.
“ I don’t think so. In that case we’d surely have
seen some familiar mark by means of the lightning.”
“ It would depend on how far out of our course we
were, wouldn’t it? ”
“ Probably! But I wonder where Dad is? ”
“ Oh, Dad ’ll be all right! ” said Monty easily. “ I
expect he’s camped at the foot of the ranges, worrying
about us.”
“ Well, we’d better fill her up and go and have a
dekko for him,” said Frank, climbing out of the
cockpit.
“ There won’t be much chance of that,” remarked
Monty. “It will be dark in a few minutes.”
The false sun had disappeared, and night was coming
on almost as quickly as the storm had done.
“ I think we’d better camp here,” the boy continued.
“To look for Dad now would be like looking for a black
cat in a dark room. After all, if we can’t fly, neither
can he. I’ll bet you he’s snug and comfortable at the
foot of the Ronalds.”
“ Don’t be too sure of that,” cautioned Frank. “ I
don’t feel too happy about him myself. He’s an
experienced pilot and the machine’s equipped for blind
flying, but still . . . Well, it was a dickens of a storm,
and anything might have happened.”
“ Oh, cheer up, old misery! Develop a bit of faith
in your parent, can’t you? The main point is that
we’re stuck here for the night. Let’s light a fire and
have a spot of grub. My inside thinks my throat’s
cut.”
He set about gathering twigs for a fire and Frank,
realising that his suggestion was really a sensible one,
started to retrieve the billy and food from the ’plane.
Suddenly he gave a cry that made Monty look up
from setting the fire to ask: “ What’s the matter? ”


“ Poor old Dad! ” said Frank. “ We’ve got all the
bedding as well as the tent.”
Monty looked grave.
“ Gee! That’s bad luck for Dad! If it keeps fine
he won’t need the tent, but I’ll bet he could do with a
blanket. Funny how cold it gets at night, although
you may roast in the daytime.”
“ It may still be raining on the other side of the
ranges,” said Frank as he filled the billycan from their
water-supply.
“ Even if it is, he may be able to take shelter in a
hollow tree or make a bit of space for himself in the
cabin. But Ido wish the old man had a blanket! ”
Monty’s comfort-loving soul was genuinely concerned
about his father’s discomfort,
“ Good job he’s got plenty of tucker,” he continued.
“ And if the worst comes to the worst, he’ll have to
keep a fire going all night to warm himself.”
“ But he particularly didn’t want to show a big
light. Remember what he said about signals.”
“ Oh, I expect the ranges will hide the light from
anyone in the neighbourhood of The Ironstones!
Come along —the water’s boiling. Let’s eat. We’ll
find Dad in the morning, don’t worry! ”
Frank smiled wryly at such easy optimism.
“ Well, I don’t suppose we can do anything for him
to-night,” he conceded, “ so we might as well feed and
turn in early, ready to start at daybreak. I only hope
Dad isn’t worrying too much about us.”
“ He’ll know that you’re all right, seeing you have
the mascot with you,” grinned Monty.
“I’d sooner have a compass that wasn’t busted,”
remarked Frank, reaching out for some food.
When they had cleared away the traces of the meal,
Monty fished out his banjo and began to take it from
the case.
“You can put that away,” said his brother.
“ Why? A spot of music will cheer us up a bit.”
“ It’s not the noise you make that I object to —it’s


the fact of making any noise at all. You don’t appear
to realise that we haven’t the faintest idea of where we
are. Do you want to bring all the blacks in the
neighbourhood about our ears? ”
“ What’s it matter? Music soothes the savage
breast, doesn’t it? ”
“ That’s all very well! These chaps may prefer
their own particular kind of noise. But we don’t want
to draw attention to our presence.”
“ They might be able to tell us where we are,”
argued Monty, fingering the strings softly.
“ Oh, yeah! And how much of their lingo do you
understand? ”
Frank’s voice was heavily charged with sarcasm.
“ If we’re not far from a station or the goldfield, we
might discover a blackfellow who can speak a little
English,” said Monty hopefully.
“Well, we’re not chancing it! I’d prefer to deal
with any blacks that we may happen to meet in the
daylight. So put that darned thing away, and don’t
be an idiot.”
“ 0.K., Chief! ” sighed Monty, returning the banjo
to its case and stowing it in the cockpit.
Meanwhile, Frank stamped out the last embers of
the fire and went over to help his brother get out the
blankets, in which they presently rolled themselves,
lying near the aeroplane.
Each kept his electric torch close at hand in case
any sudden noise should require its use, but Frank did
not light his pipe for fear of betraying their presence to
wandering black scouts.
“ It’s rather silly to be taking all these precautions
when, if there are any blacks about, they must have
seen us land,” observed Monty.
“ I hadn’t thought of that,” Frank admitted. “ Still,
if they had intended attacking us, they’d have been here
by now. Ergo—they don’t know we’re here, and it’s not
our place to advertise the fact. Now look here—you try
to get some sleep and I’ll keep ‘ cave ’ for a while.”


“ Which means that you’ll stay awake all night,” said
Monty. “None of that, my old scout! Ton go to
sleep and Vll watch —I don’t have to drive the bus
to-morrow, and you do.”
“ The last time we went camping together, I seem
to remember a chap who hadn’t even the gumption
to slacken the guide-ropes. And it rained ! ”
Monty blushed in the darkness at this unkind
reference to an incident in his early scouting days with
Frank, as his patrol-leader.
“ You needn’t hold that against a fellow all his life,”
grumbled the boy, “ I was only a kid in those days.
So you just go to sleep, and don’t worry.”
There was a welcome note of confidence in his voice,
so that Frank agreed willingly to his plan, and was soon
sleeping soundly.
The night was uneventful, though several times
Monty started into strained attention at some sudden
sound. But nothing more dangerous than a bat
disturbed their solitude. The moon rose very late
and Monty’s eyes had scarcely become accustomed to
its light than the sky began to show the first pale glimmer
of dawn.
Before waking his brother, Monty rose, stretched
thankfully, and silently got a fire going with a billycan
of water above it and breakfast cooking.
“ Rise and shine! ” he cried, stirring the sleeping
form with his toe.
Frank moved and opened one eye.
“ Noisy beggar, aren’t you? ” he remarked, adding:
“ What’s that smell? ”
“ Get up and you’ll see,” advised Monty.
Frank sat up and looked over at the fire.
“Bacon, by all that’s holy! Gee! I’m hungry!”
Monty looked critically at the strips of bacon which
he had placed in a pan over the twigs.
“Get a move on, then, or it’ll be burnt! You
might cut some bread and make yourself generally
useful.”


The sun rose as they were finishing breakfast, and
Frank attended to the ’plane while Monty packed
away the things they had used overnight.
“ We’ve only enough juice for three hours’ flying,”
announced Frank as they got into their seats. “ We’ll
have to find out where we are and locate Dad as quickly
as possible. He has the rest of the petrol.”
They took off into the early morning, missing an
anthill by inches as the machine rose.
“ That was a close shave! ” remarked Monty, leaning
out to look down at the red sculptured heap, standing
like a miniature tower where they had so lately been.
He knew quite well that a collision with the anthill
would have been the end of their flight for some hours
at least, since these heaps are extremely hard, being
built of earth cemented with a substance that produces
a solidarity equal to that of concrete.
Now that they were able to take their direction from
the newly-risen sun, they did not feel so utterly lost.
A search of the landscape revealed a low, rounded
range of hills lying a good distance to the south, and
behind those, thinly etched against the skyline, three
sharp peaks like the spires of a cathedral.
“Crikey!” exclaimed Frank, “I’m hanged if we
didn’t cross the Ronalds in the storm, and The Iron-
stones as well! We’re miles to the north of them —
or north-west, to be exact. Where’s the telegraph
line? ”
“ Can’t see it anywhere,” said Monty.
And no amount of searching and straining their
eyesight revealed the narrow cleared strip that indicated
the presence of the Overland Telegraph Line, from
which Frank concluded that he was many miles west
of his correct route, since, on the previous day, the track
had wound like a long snake below them until the
storm blotted it out.
To the north, west and east stretched an apparently
endless desert, thinly sprinkled with trees and scrub.
The only break in the monotony was in the south.


where the hills rose up. The sky was as blank as the
earth, and no dark speck betokened the presence of
Mr. Rohan’s monoplane.
They spent a good deal of time searching for it and
at last, having regard to the limited supply of petrol,
Frank decided to land and consider calmly what it was
best to do next. After some difficulty in finding a large
enough clearing among the anthills that infested the
apparently innocent-looking plain, he brought the
Vagrant Bird to a standstill and Monty leaned on the
windscreen, ready for the discussion.
“ I think we’d better go back and look for Dad,”
said Frank. “ With any sort of luck, we’ll just about
clear the Ronalds before the juice gives out.”
“ Yes —and show ourselves to Stingaree Kelly and
Wild Cat Larrigan,” said Monty sarcastically. “ Even
if they are not expecting us, our appearance would be
fishy, to say the least of it.”
“ Oh, hang them! It’s Dad we’ve got to consider.”
“ I don’t think there’s much need to worry over him.
He’s sure to have got through the storm all right. I
think we’d better try to find a station with a wireless
transmitter, so as to get a message through to Caroline
Wells. Dad’s sure to go back there to see if there’s any
news of us.”
“ A fine plan if there were any way of carrying it
out! Do use what brains you’ve got! What sort of
station do you expect to find in these parts? There
isn’t enough grass to keep a goat alive, let alone a herd
of cattle. And as for water, there doesn’t seem to be
any for hundreds of miles. All the creek-beds I could
see were dried up.”
“ There may be wells and soaks.”
“ Cattle stations don’t depend entirely on them! They
need something with a decently steady supply, such as
a lake or river. No—get that idea out of your
head. There’s no sort of settlement hereabouts. Try
again! ”
“ Well, since you seem to think you saw all that was


to be seen, didn’t you notice a white speck out west?
Looked like a settlement to me.”
Frank regarded him scornfully.
“If you’d ever learnt geography,” he observed,
“ you’d know that the further west we go from here the
less chance there is of finding water. Therefore, what
stations there are lie in the direction of the New South
Wales border, which is due east. What’ve you got to
say to that ? ’ ’
••r • n n
“Only that I’m positive I saw some signs of life,”
repeated Monty obstinately. “It appears to be our
one chance; we haven’t enough juice to go on explor-
ing indefinitely. Even if they haven’t a wireless, they
may have some spirit. Let’s investigate.”
“ Might be only a Chinese mining camp, and they
never have anything but rice.”
“ Oh, all right! Stop here and rot if you want to!
You make out you want to find a settlement, and when
I find one for you, you don’t want it. Even if it is
Chinks, they may be able to help somehow. Do what
you like —I don’t care! ”
Settling in his seat and closing his eyes, Monty started
to whistle,
“ Sorry, old chap,” said Frank presently. “ Guess
I’m too worried about Dad to think straight. Still,
we can’t go on looking for him until we have more juice.
I’ll give this idea of yours a go, and Heaven help you
if it’s a mirage! ”
“ It’s no mirage, you can take it from me,” mur-
mured Monty sleepily.
“ Well, get out and give her a swing if you want to
be on the way! ”
Monty obeyed languidly, and climbed back into the
passenger’s seat.
When they had risen clear of the trees, Frank admitted
that his brother was right. Away to the west certainly
lay something that indicated human habitation. He
turned the nose of the machine towards it, peering
eagerly through the heat haze that rose up from the


ground. They were only a few miles from their
objective when the pressure gauge began to fall swiftly.
Staring at it in alarm, Frank realised that there was a
leak somewhere and that the precious liquid was mois-
tening the arid land, drop by drop. There was nothing
for it but to land and endeavour to effect some sort of
repair.
“ Though if it’s the tank, we’re done in the eye,”
said Frank through the telephone.
“ Let’s hope it isn’t,” Monty replied. “ There’s a
likely spot —drop down and let’s have a good look
at it.” j
“ While we’re at it,” he said, when they stood once
more on terra firma, “we may as well eat. It’ll save
time later.”
“ Oh, all right! But I wish you’d think less about
your inside.”
“ I’m thinking of yours too, as it happens. You get
on with your job. Yell out if you want me to give you
a hand.”
Frank’s head disappeared into the machine and
Monty busied himself with his usual task.
“ It’s a petrol pipe union,” announced Frank
presently. “ I’ll be able to patch her up with adhesive
tape. Got anything to catch the drips ? ”
“ Only the billy, and that’s got tea in.”
“ Well, pour the beastly stuff out and get a move
on.”
Monty filled the two mugs with tea and they placed
the can under the leak.
“ Better have the tea while it’s hot,” suggested Monty.
“ Oh, all right! ”
Anxiety not being an improver of tempers, they
drank and ate in silence, after which Frank started his
job.
“ Poor old Dad will be having forty fits,” remarked
Monty after a while. “ I wish we could meet up with
him. He’ll be thankful to have a blanket to-night.”
As Frank made no answer, he rattled on:


“ If they can fix us up where we’re going, we ought
to find him quite soon. I won’t half be glad to see
his old phiz again, won’t you? ”
“ Oh, shut up! Do you think I have no feelings!
Give me a hand here —and be careful of that can.
We’ll need all we catch if we’re to get anywhere at all.”
Monty, feeling thoroughly depressed, took up a roll
of copper wire which Frank required, dropped it,
grabbed at it in the air, missed —and saw it strike the
edge of the billycan and overturn it.
“ That has tom it! ” remarked Frank when he could
find words in which to express himself. “ We’re here
for ever now —there’s precious little left in the tank.
You’d better make some more tea —it’s all you’re good
for.”
Monty could find no reply to this well-merited rebuke.
He stood staring at the can as if a magician might
suddenly spring out of the ground and refill it.
Frank went on with his job mechanically, in order to
save what petrol remained to them, though it would
hardly be enough to raise the ’plane over the trees.
No sound other than those of his occupation broke the
silence for a full ten minutes, till Monty suddenly
exclaimed:
“ Well! Look who’s here! ”


CHAPTER 111
AN ENCOUNTER WITH BLACKS
Frank taking no notice of the remark, Monty enlarged
on it.
“ The King of the Cannibal Isles,” he said, adding as
he caught sight of dark forms moving among a small
patch of bushes: “ And staff! ”
Frank looked round suddenly, and discovered staring
at him a tall, powerful blackfellow with a fine curly
beard but, apart from that, no superfluous bodily
covering. In one hand he carried a nullah-nullah, or
club, while the other grasped a long spear, one end of
which rested on the ground.
“ Looks as though he’s grown there, doesn’t he? ”
remarked Monty, rather proud of his exhibit. “ But,
as a matter of fact, he’s only just come.”
“ Then he’d better clear off,” said Frank. “ Hop
it! ”he added, waving a spanner expressively. “Go
on! Impshi! Vamoose! Get!”
The blackfellow making no movement, Monty
commented:
“ It’s a stuffed one out of the Museum —they’ve
lent it for the occasion.”
“ Oh, stow it, you ass! Don’t take any notice of
him, and perhaps he’ll go.”
“ He’s come for the day,” said Monty. “ You can
see that by his restful pose.”
For the black had now hitched his right foot over
his left kneecap and was standing on one leg, which was
equivalent to “ stand at ease ” to his way of thinking.
Frank returned to his work, and Monty and the
visitor stared at one another in silence.


Suddenly; “ Gib it bacca,” said the black.
“ Gee! It talks ! ” exclaimed the boy.
“ Tell him we haven’t any,” Frank instructed.
“No bacca! ” said Monty, shaking his head, spread-
ing out his hands, and going through the motion of
displaying empty pockets.
“ Gib it sugar,” said the black impassively.
Monty regarded him reproachfully.
“ You ought to be ashamed of yourself—really you
ought! It’s begging, no less! Most degrading for a
king. Anyway, we haven’t any sugar. No sugar!
he repeated loudly.
“ Gib it flour,” said the native.
“Not a bit particular, are you, so long as you get
something ? If you’ve got much of a shopping-list in
that woolly head of yours, this conversation is going to
take some time. No flour! ”he said finally.
“ Gib it tea,” said their visitor.
“ Your remarks lack originality, old man. We have
no tea.” .
The black pointed to the billycan, which lay on the
ground.
“ Billycan make tea,” he observed.
“No tea,” repeated Monty firmly. “ And no sugar,
flour or tobacco. So you can hop it.”
“ No bacca, no go,” said the black.
“ Then you can stop where you are.”
“ We’ve got to get rid of him somehow,” said Frank.
“ I don’t see that it matters. We’re stuck here for
ever and a day, so we might as well have company.”
“ Don’t be such an idiot! If once he sees that we
have some food, he’ll call his pals and attack us and
take the lot. We’ve got to get them away so that we
can pack up and make for that station of yours on
foot. Better give him some tobacco. Here —give
him a handful out of this ! ”
Monty obeyed instructions, and the black’s eyes
gleamed when he saw the tin, and he stood on both legs
again. Opening the tin, Monty approached with a


handful of tobacco, but the man grabbed at the tin
and secured it.
“ Your manners are simply awful! ” commented the
boy, . . ...
The shadows among the bushes materialised into
four stalwart warriors, who gathered round their
leader and obtained their share of the prize.
“ Now get out! ” commented Frank, but the blacks
did not move.
“ Gib it flour,” demanded the chief.
“ I tell you, we have no flour! Now hop it! ”
Frank was losing his temper.
The blacks threw themselves into menacing attitudes,
spears pointed towards the boys, and the leader said
in his own language something that needed no inter-
pretation.
“ We’re in a fine mess! ” Frank remarked.
“ Perhaps if we gave them a few supplies they’d clear
off,” suggested Monty, much as he hated being bullied
by natives.
“ Gib it flour—go fly,” explained the chief, flapping
one arm to indicate the motion of the Vagrant Bird.
“No such luck! ” muttered Frank. “ It’s Shanks’s
pony for us in the future. Give them a spot of flour,
Monty, and a little sugar. But go steady—we’ve none
too much for ouselves.”
Monty measured out small quantities of these goods
and laid them in little heaps on the ground, judging
that the blackfellows wouldn’t mind a peck of dust with
their food. At a signal from the chief, one of his
followers scooped up the offerings and placed them in
small hide bags that hung from his shoulder.
“ More! ” demanded the leader when this was done.
“ But we can’t,” said Frank to his brother. “We
must keep what remains—it’s no use us relying on
securing supplies at this settlement, because there may
not be any there. If only we could get out of this ! ”
He looked at the ’plane regretfully.
“ And I let us in for this! ” mourned Monty.


“ Never mind, old chap! I suppose you couldn’t
help it —but I wish you hadn’t dropped that roll of
wire.”
At that moment the blacks, grown tired of waiting
for their demands to be fulfilled, made a forward rush,
spears poised and nullahs waving threateningly.
** Look out! 55
Frank grabbed his brother and pulled him down in
the shelter of a wing. The blacks, however, took no
more notice of them, but concentrated on rifling the
load carried in the cockpits.
“My banjo! ” cried Monty, and before Frank could
prevent him, he leaped from his concealment and
clambered up to rescue his treasure.
“ Gome back, you fool! ”
“Wait a jiff!”
As Monty grabbed the case, the native chief caught
at his arm.
“ No, you don’t! ”
Monty turned swiftly as he called out, to see an
upraised nullah. Lunging out, he caught the black
in the solar plexus. With a low howl, the fellow
doubled up and collapsed.
“ That’s done it! ” cried Frank as the other four,
seeing their leader fall, dropped what was in their hands
and rushed for their weapons.
In a second, Monty was in their midst, striking out
in all directions. It took the blacks some moments to
realise what was happening, and by the time they did,
Frank had joined the fray. It was a good fight while
it lasted, and ended with the blacks prostrate on the
ground, Frank with sundry scratches and bruises, and
Monty with a rapidly-growing lump on his head where
a nullah had caught him.
“ We’d better go while the going’s good,” said Frank,
making for the shelter of a cluster of anthills.
“ Hi! ” yelled Monty. “ Come back! We’ll get
her going.”
“ You fool! There’s hardly anything there.”


“ It’ll get us out of this, anyway. Come on! ”
Monty swung the propeller while Frank started the
motor, and the younger boy sprang into his seat.
“ It’s suicide,” said Frank. “We’llcrash as sure as
the Lord made little apples.”
“ If it only takes us a couple of miles it’ll be some-
thing,” persisted Monty. “ They won’t know which
way we’ve gone, anyhow.”
The machine rose into the air, Frank watching the
pressure gauge anxiously. As they cleared the tops of
the trees by a few inches, Monty began to exult.
“ So that’s the end of that! ”
But he was never more mistaken.
Once in the air, Frank sighted the clearing again and
headed for it, about ten miles away; but he became
more and more obsessed with the fear that Monty’s
landmark might turn out to be nothing better than a
deserted mine or an outcrop of white rock on the face
of the red desert, such as they had already seen several
times.
The heat was terrific. Wiping the moisture from his
face and glancing over at Monty, Frank was horrified
to see that his head sagged forward on his chest.
“Monty!” he shouted through the tube.
“ Monty! ”
There was no movement.
“ It’s that bang on the head,” said Frank to himself.
He never forgot the few minutes that followed, with
the gauge dropping to zero, Monty fainting and
unconscious, and the direct rays of the sun scorching
them both. One crumb of consolation he did gather—
Monty’s “ station ” materialised into a distant cluster
of buildings, though of what type Frank was unable
to judge.
“ Looks pretty good,” he soliloquised. “ Seems as
though someone does live there.”
But his cheerfulness was short-lived, for he realised
in that moment that he must make a forced landing.
“ I’ll have to chance the anthills,” he decided,


diving earthwards at a place where, luckily, there were
n °Even then the landing would have been perfect had
the machine not chosen to bury her nose deep m an
anthill, in which position she came to rest, with the
propeller hopelessly smashed and the tail tilted i
Frank looked anxiously at Monty, who sat slumped
forward in the cockpit, his breathing very heavy.
With great difficulty, Frank released him and laid him
on the ground, where he used the last of their scanty
water-supply to bring him back to consciousness.
“ Do you feel better, old man? ” he asked anxiously
when at last the boy’s eyes opened. , r , v
“ Can’t you let a chap sleep? demanded Monty
j *1
r ° Mont! ” cried Frank, shaking him. “ Look here,
Mont—you’ve got to wake D’you hear . You
must! We have to get out of this. The blacks may
be after us at any moment.” ,
“ Good old Blue Beard! I biffed him good and
proper, didn’t I? ” . . , .
“Mont, stop talking drivel and wake up. its
about three miles to the clearing, and we ve got to
make it. Rouse yourself ! ” ,
By dint of much coaxing and exhortation, he made
Monty understand what was wanted of him, and the
boy struggled to his feet.
“ We’d better take some grub,’ he murmured.
“ Oh, never mind that! Those beggars didn t leave
much, anyway. Most of it is scattered about on the
ground seven miles back. Come along. It they \ e
planned to pay us out, they’ll catch us before we reach
the settlement.”
“ Right-o! Just as you say, old man! But let me
get my banjo!”
“ And while we’re about it, we may as well take the
First Aid outfit. That head of yours needs attending
to, but I don’t want to stop and do it now—it 11 be


better to wait till we’ve put some distance between the
’plane and ourselves.”
Monty seized his banjo, whose case had been some-
what battered when the machine stood on its head, and,
Frank carrying the Red Cross case, they plunged into
the scrub.
The timber here was quite thick, but they kept as
much as possible to the bare outcrops of rock where
roots had not softened the ground, so that their tracks
would not betray them to their pursuers.
“ Though these chaps can track an ant on a sheet of
glass,” commented Frank. “ Still, we may as well
make it as hard as possible for them.”
Monty kept up pretty well for almost half the dis-
tance, when without warning he slumped to the ground.
Frank, trying vainly to restore him, heard a sound
like a snapping twig.
Here they come! ”he said half aloud, looking over
his shoulder anxiously. But he could see nothing.
“ Keeping under cover most likely,” he decided.
Determined that they should not be caught like rats
in a sewer, he lifted Monty on to his back and set off
again. When he had gone a few yards he missed
something. The banjo.
“ Better bring the darned thing along,” he grumbled.
“ It’d break the kid’s heart if he lost it.”
He retraced his steps and laid Monty down gently
while he attached the case to his belt. Then, again
taking up the unconscious boy, he set off on the last
stage of his journey.
It was terribly hot and he was frightfully thirsty,
though he did his best not to think about that.
“ It can’t be much further! ” he kept telling himself
as he staggered along, but it was extraordinary how the
distance stretched itself. He heard no more alarming
sounds and gathered comfort from the fact, although
he knew perfectly well that a blackfellow can move
through the Bush absolutely soundlessly.
Had he but known it, “ Blue Beard ” and his com-


panions were totally uninterested in his movements,
being entirely engrossed in the stores they had stolen
from the ’plane before it took off. They were so happy
in the possession of several pounds of sugar, tea and
flour —to say nothing of three tins of tobacco —that they
had forgotten all about their recent injuries. After all,
a blackfellow’s skull is pretty thick, and it takes a good
deal to give him a lasting headache.
Monty became flushed and began to mutter and
struggle, so that Frank was obliged to put him down
several times and resume when he grew quieter.
Presently there came to his ears a steady, rhythmic
sound that had a familiar ring about it. Cop! Cop !
Cop! Cop!
“ Someone felling timber, by golly! So the place is
inhabited after all! Heaven be praised! ”
Frank’s fatigue fell from him miraculously and he
stepped out with renewed vigour. The sound grew
closer and was unmistakably the ring of an axe at work
upon a tree.
“ Hope it’s not a Chink mine,” said Frank to himself.
“ That doesn’t sound like a black at work —too
energetic.”
He began to look forward eagerly to the sight of a
member of his own race —a hospitable Australian, full
of offers of help.
Quite suddenly he emerged from the Bush into a
clearing in which lay several newly-felled trees. The
blows of the axe sounded on his right, and Frank saw
that a tree was more than half chopped through and
might fall at any moment.
“ And it’s coming this way, too,” he reasoned,
suddenly feeling too tired to take Monty and himself
out of its way.
“ Hi!” he yelled. “Coo-ee!”
The noise ceased at once and at the same moment
Frank stooped to lay his brother in the shade. When
he straightened up, the tree-feller was coming towards
him.


Approaching, axe in hand, was neither Chinaman nor
blackfellow nor typical burly Australian backwoods-
man—but a tall, slim man in shirtsleeves who, even to
Frank’s tired eyes, was obviously a man of refinement.
His face was clean-shaven and cheerful and his voice,
when he spoke, cultured and pleasant.
“ You seem to be in trouble, my boy,” he observed
quietly, looking at the prostrate Monty. “ You’d
better come along to the house. No —I’ll carry him!
You look all in.”
He gathered the boy up in his arms as easily as if he
had been at least five years younger, and led the way
across the clearing, Frank following in silence. In fact,
he had not spoken since he had first beheld his host.
He felt that he should have known the man —that he
did, in fact, know him quite well—but the machinery
of his mind refused to link up the vague ideas to form
a complete picture.
As they came in sight of a group of low buildings he
managed to find words.
“ I say,” he began.
The stranger glanced briefly over one shoulder.
“ You can tell me all about it when w T e get inside,”
he said. “ Too hot to talk now, don’t you think? ”
Frank obeyed gratefully and spent the next few
minutes in turning over in his mind the facts of this
unexpected meeting. Suddenly enlightenment came
—the memory of things he had heard and read.
“I say!” he exclaimed again. “You’re Mr.
Martin, aren’t you? ”
“ Right first time! ” laughed the other without
turning round.
“Gee! What luck!”
Frank was indeed thankful for the fact that they had
fallen in with the famous missionary. He had heard a
great deal of this man who lived in the Outback, seldom
coming into civilisation, and hiding his light as much
as possible under a bushel. But gleams escaped in spite
of him, so that from time to time news came to Adelaide


of things he had done—how he had driven thirty miles
in his old car through a terrific storm to the aid of a
miner in the throes of delirium tremens; how he had
arbitrated between whites and Chinese over some matter
of mining leases and saved much bloodshed; how he
had battled through a sandstorm to bring consolation
to a dying woman and afterwards brought her orphaned
children into Caroline Wells and seen them safely on
the way to an Adelaide Home; how he had worked
ceaselessly among the blacks for many years, con\erting
whole tribes at a time and bringing them as close to
being useful citizens as is possible with the Australian
native. These and other stories came thronging into
Frank’s mind, tired though he was with the day s
trials and misfortunes.
Reaching the verandah that surrounded one ot the
huts, Mr. Martin spoke.
“What’s the matter with him? ” he asked, with a
jerk of his head towards the boy in his arms.
“ Nullah-nullah,” explained Frank briefly.
“H’m! A nasty crack! ”
Frank entered the cool hut thankfully, and the
missionary laid Monty on a bed.
“ I don’t need any help,” he said as he straightened
up. “ There’s another bed in that room. You look
as though you could fill it quite well.”
Frank grinned.
“ I do feel a bit done up,” he admitted reluctantly.
“ But Monty—my brother —do you think it’s bad? ”
“ I can’t say yet, but even if it is, it won’t seem half
so serious after you’ve had a sleep. Now, trot along,
there’s a good fellow! You’ll really be doing me a
favour —I don’t want two invalids on my hands. But
bathe those cuts on your face first—you’ll find some
water in there. You have some iodine, I suppose? ”
he concluded, with a glance at the First Aid outfit.
“ And what’s that? ” he added, catching sight of the
banjo.
“ Only the kid’s banjo,” said Frank carelessly.


Mr. Martin’s glance softened.
“So you brought that along in spite of everything! ”
he commented, gently urging Frank towards the other
room.
The lad saw with gratitude a bed covered with a grey
blanket, and an enamel bowl and jug with a white towel
laid over them.
“ Sleep well! ” said his new friend softly as he pulled
the door to.
Frank obeyed instructions regarding the scratches on
his face, took a long drink of water, pulled off his boots
and tumbled on to the bed where, despite his anxiety
regarding Monty and his father, he fell asleep within a
minute.


CHAPTER IV
FRESH PLANS
Frank woke feeling that he had grown into his clothes,
but otherwise considerably refreshed, and was horrified
to discover that he had slept the clock round. It was
dark and cool in the little room and very still. But
from somewhere fairly close at hand came a strumming
noise that was distinctly familiar.
“ Monty! ” exclaimed Frank, leaping from the bed.
“ He’s better! ”
Wrenching open the door, he ran into the next room,
but there was no sign of his brother. The sound of the
banjo led him to the verandah, where Monty, with a
bandage about his head, reclined in a deck-chair.
“ Mont, old boy! It’s great to see you like this! ”
“ Oh, it wasn’t much after all,” said the boy casually.
“ I’ve got a decent bump of knowledge, all the same.”
“ Perhaps it’ll teach you to ignore trivial matters in
future when bigger issues are at stake.”
Monty grinned up at him.
“ Mr. Martin told me a yarn,” he said, resuming his
music, “ of a fellow who did just the same as me and
brought in the wounded hero at the same time. Know
him?”
“ Oh, stow it, Mont! ”
“ Certainly! But it was jolly decent of you, all the
same. Don’t know where I’d be without the old
fiddle. But you look like the Wreck of the Hesperus, I
must say! If that’s what twenty-four hours’ sleep does
for one, I’m not having any.”
“ Yes, I do feel a bit off.”
“ It seems as though you could do with a bath and a


change,” continued Monty, who looked the picture of
neatness in some garments that Frank had never seen
before.
“ Hi! ” he shouted suddenly, turning his head
towards the door. “ Air. Martin said I was to scream
for help as soon as you got up,” he explained; then, as
a black “ boy ” appeared in the doorway: “ Dio, get a
bath and clothes for gentleman, there’s a good chap! ”
“Me get bath quick!” grinned the blackfellow,
vanishing.
“ I say, what’s all this? ” demanded Frank. “ Have
we died and been translated to the Arabian Nights, or
what? Where did you dig up the dusky servitor? ”
“Oh, him! He’s Diogenes—the bloke that lived
in a tub, you know. He’s called that because it’s his
special duty to prepare baths for the guests and bathe
them if necessary. It appears that most of Mr.
Martin’s visitors arrive badly in need of a tub, and
quite frequently they object to having one, but Dio
sees to that. You’ll notice that he’s pretty hefty, so I
advise you to go quietly.”
“ I won’t need any persuasion,” laughed Frank.
“ Bath him ready! ” came a voice from within.
“ See you later! ” promised Frank, vanishing in its
direction.
He found Diogenes presiding over a large tub of hot
water in the lean-to kitchen. A cloth and nailbrush
floated on the surface, and the native stood by with a
towel and piece of soap.
“ You can buzz off,” Frank told him. “ I don’t
need any help.”
“ Me scrubbum back,” said Diogenes helpfully.
“ No, you don’t—not this time, anyhow! Just fade
away, will you ? ”
“ Clean clothes,” explained the black with a wave
of the hand towards a chair, across the back of which
lay a supply of garments. He went out, plainly regret-
ful, and Frank threw off the things in which he seemed
to have spent half his life.


Returning to the verandah clothed and, according
to his own statement, in his right mind, he found Mr.
Martin chatting with Monty.
“ Well, my boy, feeling better? ” he asked as Frank
appeared.
“ Yes, thanks, I feel fine! Managed to wash my
own back, too, in spite of Diogenes.”
“ That speaks volumes for your strength of character,”
laughed the clergyman. “There aren’t many who
manage to evade his attentions. Clothes fit all right? ’
“ Rather! But, I say, do you keep a stock of them,
or what? ”
The missionary laughed.
“ More or less! I acquire some of them in my
wanderings —and some of my visitors are unable to
leave,” he added gravely, with a gesture towards the
edge of the clearing, where Frank observed what was
unmistakably a small cemetery.
“ Well, it’s jolly good of you to take so much
trouble over us,” said the boy.
“ That’s my job,” replied the other. “ Besides, I’m
always out to help anyone from St. Augustine’s. I’m
an 4 old boy ’ myself, you know.”
“ Are you? How splendid! 1 didn’t know.”
“ Didn’t you? Oh, yes! I went there in the early
days. It’s nearly thirty years since I left, and twenty
since I saw the old place. Tell me what it looks like
now.”
“ I don’t suppose it’s altered much,” said Frank, and
for ten minutes the boys did their best to bring before
the dweller in the Outback a picture of their beloved
school.
At the end of that time, Diogenes announced a meal,
and they went indoors to have it.
“ Your brother’s been telling me something of your
adventures,” said Mr. Martin as Frank fell hungrily
upon his dinner. “ You seem to have struck it pretty
rough.”
“ Yes, I’m afraid we did. And that reminds me—


what’s become of the bus? I’d forgotten all about
her.”
He rose to his feet as if to go in search of the ’plane
then and there. Mr. Martin laid a hand on his
arm.
“ Sit down, my boy, sit down! The machine’s all
right. 1 had it brought in as soon as Monty explained
where it was. You’ll find the remains of it out at the
back—we’ll go and inspect it later. My boys were
thrilled to the marrow at the sight of it, and thoroughly
enjoyed forming themselves into a team to haul it
in.”
“ I’m afraid she’s just about finished,” lamented
Frank. “ But perhaps I’ll be able to fix her up. Have
you any petrol, by any chance ? ”
“ Not a drop ! I ran out a month ago and the team
won’t be here with fresh supplies for about a fortnight.
It comes by camel from Caroline Wells, and delivery
is by no means certain. It vanishes mysteriously on
the way, especially since the gold rush to The Iron-
stones. When I make inquiries, the drivers look
suspiciously at the camels, and the camels look down
their noses, and I’m left to assume that they have
drunk the petrol. One of these days I’m going to push
a lighted match into a camel’s mouth and see if he
blows up! ”
“ Then that’s the end of the Vagrant Bird,” said
Frank presently. “ Anyhow, I think the propeller’s
too far gone for me to do anything with it. We’ll
have to hoof it, that’s all! ”
“ What are your plans, then? ”
“ Oh, we’ll have to find Dad somehow. I—l
suppose you haven’t a transmitter? ”
The missionary shook his head.
“ There’s nothing nearer than Corrigan’s Station,”
he said. “ They transmit to Caroline Wells, you
know, and from there messages go by telegraph. But
I could send a boy over for you.”
“ How far is it? ”


“ A little over the hundred miles —a runner would
cover it in a few days.”
“ I don’t see that it would be any use going to so
much trouble,” said Monty. “ Dad’s sure to have
notified the police, or whoever you do advise in these
parts, and gone on to The Ironstones. I vote we
make for there on foot —we’re certain to find him
waiting for us.”
“ No,” said his brother. “ I think we should do what
we can from this end in case he’s had an accident.”
“ If you’ll explain, perhaps I can help you,” said
the missionary. “ Monty hasn’t enlightened me as
to what you are doing in these parts at all, and I’d
like to know. Suppose you light up and tell me the
whole story. But come on to the verandah! It’s
cooler. Diogenes, you may clear away now.”
Leaving the native to his task, they went outside,
where night had fallen, bringing with it a relief from
the heat of the day.
Frank lit his pipe and, to the accompaniment of a
soft twanging of banjo-strings and with frequent
interruptions from Monty, told Mr. Martin all that
he knew of Mr. Rohan’s plans and of the suspicions
regarding the Jumping Jimmy, not forgetting Stingaree
Kelly and his lieutenant.
“ H’m! A nice kettle of fish! ” commented the
missionary when the story was told.
“If one stingaree makes a kettle, it is! ” agreed
Monty.
There was silence wdiile Mr. Martin turned the tale
over in his mind, and at last he said:
“Well, it seems to me that to go in search of your
father would be rather like looking for a needle in a
haystack. If he were forced down on the southern
side of the Ronalds, he’d have left there by now. He
wouldn’t be far from the Telegraph Line so that,
provided he wasn’t injured, he would soon be able to
get in touch with civilisation. Drovers and camel
trains pass along the track quite frequently, and parties


of prospectors are fairly numerous these days. I
conclude that he carried a wireless? 55
The boys nodded assent.
“ Then, in the event of being unable to get away,
he’d have sent out messages which would have been
picked up long ago. I’m inclined to agree with
Monty that he’d continue to make his way to The
Ironstones, with the double intention of carrying out
his plans and picking up news of you. You know, I
suppose, that rumour travels swiftly in the Bush, and
he’d gather word of you more quickly there than by
returning to Caroline Wells.”
“But how can news travel in these parts?” asked
Frank.
“By a system of signals. The blacks use several
types of drums and various codes, as well as smoke
signals similar to those employed by Red Indians.
Your father probably knows by now of your encounter
with The-man-with-the-great-beard ...”
“ Who ? Oh—old Blue Beard! ”
“Yes! Monty told me you’d nicknamed him that
And, as I was saying, Mr. Rohan knows also that you
are safe here, and has ceased to worry about you.
Doubtless a message will come from him in a day
or so.”
“ Then what do you suggest? ” asked Frank, feeling
for once that the situation was a little beyond him.
Mr. Martin glanced at Monty, but the darkness hid
the anxiety in his eyes.
“ I suggest that you stay here for another couple of
days at least. The rest will do you both good, and I’d
like you to see the place. By then word is certain to
come from your father. Also, I’ll have my scouts try
to discover news of him.”
“ Do you run an intelligence service, then? ” asked
Frank.
“ More or less! I have to do it in order to get word
of those who may need me at any time. Without my
scouts I wouldn’t hear of half the poor fellows who are


staggering about the Bush half-dead with sunstroke.
We bring them in, and pull them through in nine cases
out of ten, and send them on their way rejoicing. There
are many signallers and runners among my flock, arid
I’ve done my best to impress upon them that practical
Christianity is the most important thing about their
religion. After all, the poor chaps can’t follow or
grasp great ideals, for their mental processes are of the
most primitive. But they can be Good Samaritans,
and I must say that they carry out this part of my
teaching splendidly.”
The two boys agreed, after prolonged discussion,
that the missionary’s advice was sound, and decided
to wait at least two more days at the Mission station.^
“ But if no word comes of Dad in that time,” said
Frank, “ we’ll have to be off. If you can send a runner
to Corrigan’s, though, I’ll be awfully grateful.”
So a black runner was despatched that night with
a message to Corrigan’s cattle station, asking them to
make what inquiries they could by means of wireless
to Caroline Wells regarding Mr. Rohan, at the same
time circulating the news that the boys were safe.
“If you want a reply, you’d better wait here for at
least a week,” said Mr. Martin, “ You won’t get one
much under that time. I don’t want to persuade
you against your will,” he added as he saw Frank to
his bedroom. “ Sleep on my suggestion and consider
it again in the morning. Monty isn’t sleeping in
here,” he concluded, “ because I know very well that
you’d talk till the small hours of the morning, and I
want him to have plenty of rest.”
“I don’t feel as though I’ll ever sleep again!”
laughed Frank. “ I’ve broken all previous records so
far as I’m concerned.”
But there must have been some hypnotic influence
about the sight of the comfortable bed, for he fell
asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow.
He always looked back upon the week that followed
as having been the longest in his experience, entirely


taken up with doing the hardest thing in the world—
waiting. When the runner returned from Corrigan’s
without any information regarding Mr. Rohan, even
Monty’s optimism seemed a little dashed.
Mr. Martin did his best to keep them both occupied
during those long days. They quickly became familiar
with the details of the Mission station, where families
of Christian blacks were housed. The parson himself
performed all the duties of teaching the natives to read
and write and work elementary sums, but their
intelligence was of so low an order that it was impossible
to make much progress. Even after several years’
tuition, they were prone to refer to any number over
five as “ big lot.”
However, there were among them several blacks
from Northern tribes, and these were distinguished from
their fellows by their magnificent physique, ready
intelligence and highly-developed moral sense. Such
a one was Diogenes, who combined with his ordinary
duties about the station assiduous attendance upon Mr.
Martin, whom he obviously idolised. Mary, in whose
hands lay the training of the young girls in household
arts, came of the same tribe, and a stalwart named
Pollux completed the trio.
“ Pollux was a small piccaninny when he came,”
explained the missionary. “He was a twin, and I
called his brother Castor. That was twenty years
ago, and their parents were among my first converts.”
“ Where’s Castor? ” asked Monty.
Mr. Martin looked grave.
“ Unfortunately, Castor ran away. I don’t know
what became of him, though I suspect Pollux of having
news of him—there are days when he is extremely
gay. You’ve probably noticed that he is very solemn
as a rule.”
The giant Pollux was at that moment engaged in
helping Frank with the Vagrant Bird, which he was
endeavouring to repair as a means of occupying his
mind, though he could do nothing about the propeller.


“Quite a decent sort, old Pollux! commented
Monty, and the missionary agreed heartily.
In 'the evenings they played cards or talked—at
least Mr. Martin and Frank would chat while Monty
played his banjo. On these occasions the natives
would squat on the ground beyond the edge of the
verandah and listen entranced, only too willing, when
invited to do so, to indulge in a little community
singing. Their voices were strong and sweet and they
had an excellent sense of rhythm. . tt .
“My ambition,” said Mr. Martin one evening, is
to see established before I die an efficient medical
service in the desert. Two or three aeroplanes woffid
be required, one at least being fitted up as an ambu-
lance. I believe that more settlers would then be
attracted to remote places and that the mineral resources
of the interior would be developed.” 9
“ Then you’d want doctors and nurses who weren t
afraid of the life,” commented Frank.
“I’ve always thought of being a doctor, put in
Monty.
Frank laughed.
“ What use would a scatterbrained young ass like
you be? ” he asked sarcastically.
“ Sez you! ” was Monty’s sole reply, as he prepared
to lead his black choir in a song.
Mr. Martin regarded him reflectively.
“ The boy has good stuff in him,” he remarked in a
low voice. .., ,
“ Good as they’re made,” agreed Frank, but mad
as a wet hen at present.”
“ He’ll grow out of that,” prophesied the missionary.
When the stipulated week was over and the black
runner had returned, Frank said one night as they
sat at dinner: „
“ Well, youngster, feel ready to hit the trail again? ”
Monty looked up with a cheery grin.
“Rather! When do we start? ”
“As soon as we can get going. How far are we


from The Ironstones?” he asked, turning to then-
host.
“ About forty miles as the crow flies.”
“ But we aren’t crows, though we may be Crow-
eaters,” he added, referring to the nickname usually
bestowed upon South Australians. “ How far would
it be for us ? ”
“ I believe it’s pretty good going,” said the mission-
ary. “ Allowing for detours to water-holes, it would
be about fifty miles.”
“ Then we’d manage that easily.”
“Think so? And what if you fall in with your
friend Blue Beard again? ”
“ We’ll have to chance that.”
“ Why don’t you content yourselves with returning
to Caroline Wells? I can let you have a guide as far
as the Telegraph Line,”
“ No! I’ve decided that if anything’s happened to
Dad, it’s our duty to carry on as he would have done.
You see, it isn’t as if we’ve only ourselves to think of.
There are all those people who have bought shares in
the Jumping Jimmy, and those who may even now be
buying fresh ones. If it turns out to be salted, they’ll
lose every bean. It’s up to us to do our best for them.”
“ And how do you propose to carry out your
plan? ”
“ Well, we can go and snoop around a bit. After
all, plenty of chaps like us have gone prospecting, and
there’s no reason why anyone should suspect us.
There’s a chance that we may find out more through
acting silly than an expert like Dad would learn.
Though, of course,” he added hastily, “ Dad may be
there all the time. Still, I think we’ll be off in the
morning.”
“ Then, since you’re determined, Pollux shall go
with you. No—l won’t take any thanks ! Pollux is as
good as an army in a crisis. He knows all the drum and
smoke signals of the blacks and several of their dialects
—that’s why I suspect him of being in touch with his


brother. I only want you to promise to take his
advice if you get into any tight corners. And now—
what about an outfit? 55 , . , ,
The brothers looked at one another and laughed
fU “ Doyou know,” confessed Frank, “ I was so worried
about Dad and those unfortunate shareholders that
I’d forgotten all about that! Gee! That s cooked
our goose properly. It’s no use trying to pose as miners
if we haven’t a shovel between us.” „
“ We could say they’d been pinched on the way,
suggested Monty. “There are sure to be plenty of
spares lying about, left by men who’ve given up the
struggle and gone home. We could use them.
Mr. Martin shook his head.
“ It’s no good trusting to luck like that, he said.
“ I can let you have an outfit. I have more than one
left here by poor fellows who didn’t get any further
not in this world, anyhow.”
The next morning they sorted out from the mission-
ary’s store two picks, two shovels, some pans for wash-
ing the dirt, and other necessary utensils of the prospec-
tor’s calling. They overhauled their own tent and
such things as they proposed to carry out of the Vagrant
Bird’s load. All this taking some time, Mr. Martin
prevailed upon them to postpone their start till the
following morning, rather than travel in the heat ot the
for Monty’s injury (which, however,
appeared to be quite better) led Frank to agree to this
plan, so that it was not until the next day, soon alter
sunrise, that the boys and Pollux took farewell of their
host at the edge of the clearing.
“ The best of luck! ” he cried. “ And the blessing
of God go with you! Don’t forget your way back—l
hope to see you again some day.”
“ You can bet on that! ” promised Monty. i m
coming back to run your hospital aeroplanes, you
know! ”


{£ Thanks, Monty! I’ll be expecting you.”
They paused at the edge of the forest to look back,
and the last they saw of Mr. Martin for some time was
his thin form against a background of station huts, one
hand upraised in benediction.


CHAPTER V
NINE MILE SPRING
Owing to the extreme heat, Frank decided that it
would be impossible for them to cover more than
twelve miles a day, allowing for four hours’ walking
daily—two in the morning and two in the cool of the
evening.
“There’s a decent moon,” he explained as they
followed Pollux on that first morning, “ so that we
sha’n’t have to stop at sundown.”
“ It seems such a waste, resting through the midday
heat,” objected Monty. “ People don’t usually bother
about that. I feel that we’re being horribly soft.”
“ It’s partly that I’m thinking of your head,” said
his brother. “ I don’t want you crocking up or getting
sunstroke, or anything of that sort.”
“ Oh, I’ll be all right! ” rejoined Monty jauntily.
“ You don’t have to worry about me. I’m anxious
to get to The Ironstones and see if Dad’s there, and
all that.”
“ You’re not more anxious about him than I am,
but I’m not going to land you there a wreck. Besides,
whether Dad’s there or not, we’ll both need all our
strength to cope with Larrigan and Kelly, so there’s
no sense in knocking ourselves up.”
“ I suppose you’re right, as usual, but it seems silly
to me,” grumbled Monty.
How right Frank was that very morning demon-
strated, when the heat about noon gave Monty a
raging headache and made him very glad of the halt
beneath a big gum tree.
“ Pollux,” said Frank as they ate their lunch, “ do


you know old Blue Beard? The-man-with-the-great-
beard. Is he a friend of yours? ”
Pollux grinned.
“Me know him,” he said. “ Him good man.”
“ If that’s your idea of a good man,” said Frank,
“ I’d hate to meet a real bad one. Don’t you know
that he tried to kill us, and stole some of our stores? ”
But the black merely shook his head and repeated:
“ Him good man! ”
“ Perhaps, seeing he’s black, his ideas of good and
bad are exactly the opposite to ours,” suggested
Monty.
“ That’s clever, that is! Pollux has been con-
verted.”
“ * Can the leopard change his spots,’ ” queried
the boy, “ ‘ or the Ethiop his skin? ’ ”
“ I’m sure I don’t know; but Mr. Martin guaranteed
Pollux, and that’s good enough for me.”
Hearing his name, the black looked up and smiled.
“ Pollux take care white boys,” he said genially.
“That’s decent of you!” said Frank, rather at a
loss to know how to reply.
Leaning back against the tree, he began to smoke.
The blackfellow lit a stubby, black, evil-smelling pipe
and spread unconsciousness among all the flies for a
radius of several yards. Left to himself, Monty took
out his banjo and the hot, breathless noon passed
slowly.
They had not gone very far that afternoon when
Pollux, who was walking ahead, turned and signed
to them to halt.
“ He smells danger, evidently,” commented Frank,
obeying the signal.
Certainly the black’s behaviour was very strange.
Crouching low, he vanished into a cluster of bushes
to the right, leaving the boys apparently alone in the
middle of the desert.
“ Thoughtful of him! ” murmured Frank. “ We’d
better get under cover ourselves.”


“ Here’s a hollow tree, all ready for us! ” remarked
Monty, and they managed to cram into the ancient
shell, although it was rather a tight fit with full packs
up.
The sudden noise of a dry root snapping underfoot
strung their nerves to the tautest extent.
“Blue Beard!” whispered Monty. “What’s the
bet?”
“ Shut up! Whoever it is, they may not have
spotted us.”
But it was not Blue Beard who presently came in
sight on the farther side of some low shrubs. Riding
slowly, the reins on their horses’ necks, went two
white men. They wore torn blue dungarees, and
bits of cork were strung around the brims of their
hats to keep off flies. Both were dirty and unshaven,
and the horses looked tired and ill-nourished.
One rode ahead of the other, so that it was necessary
for them to talk quite loudly.
“ When we strike the Line,” said the foremost,
“ we won’t half make it hot for that hobo.”
“Yeh!” agreed his companion. “Wild Cat’s
going to wish he’d never bin born.”
“Wild Cat!” echoed Monty, grabbing Frank’s
arm. “ Hear that? ”
Frank nodded, and both boys strained their ears
for what might follow.
“ A sight too smart jumping other people’s claims,
that guy is,” continued the stranger.
“ Good name for their rotten mine—the Jumping
Jimmy,” said his companion. “Of course it’s showing
colour —but it ain’t the colour wot comes out of its
own workings, take it from me! ”
“ Naturally it ain’t. What else would them two
want with a lot of other claims as well? ”
“ Well, they won’t get much out of mine, but we
needn’t let on about that. ‘ This was my claim afore
you ever saw it,’ ” says Wild Cat to me —me wot dug
the bloomin’ ’ole! ”


“ You’ve got me to back you up, old sport, in
telling how they drove you out. And if we don’t
have the cops down on them two within three months,
I 5„ 55
m. . .
What he was never transpired, because at that
moment the horsemen passed out of hearing, cutting
right across the track the boys had followed a short
time before.
Emerging from their concealment, they watched the
riders disappear into the distance.
“So that’s that! ” commented Frank. “ I wonder
if we should have shown ourselves and asked those
two guys to come back with us and prove their
story? ”
“ What? And missed all the fun? Not much! ”
“ All you live for is a scrap,” Frank told him.
“ Don’t you ever fancy a peaceful life? ”
“ Not me! Too monotonous! ”
“ Three months they reckoned it would take them
to fetch the police, and by then we should have found
out all we want to,”
“ I say, hasn’t it struck you that there must be a
good number of them if what those two said is true ?
Stingaree and Wild Cat wouldn’t be jumping and
working everybody’s claims if they were on their
own,”
“ I don’t expect for one minute that they are alone.
Dad never said how many men there were, but it’s a
cinch that there would be more than two working a
mine, you idiot! Haven’t you thought of that? If
they’re jumping claims, I guess it’s just in order to
get men out of the way whom they think know too
much.”
“ I’d imagined the Jumping Jimmy as a little tinpot
show —just a hole in the ground with a windlass over
it,” said Monty. “You see, I don’t know much
about mining.”
“ That’s obvious ! Well, I don’t suppose it is much
more than a hole with a windlass, but you can take


it from me that it’s a pretty deep shaft—big and
impressive enough to take in the Government inspector.
You can’t sell shares in a mine without some sort ot
guarantee that the mine actually exists, you know.
“ But you read ...” .
“No you don’t—not what you were going to say,
anyhow. In the yarns you read about bogus mines
that don’t exist there’s always some sort of working
to show, even if it’s a shallow trench like the Chinks
make. Where the gold comes from is another matter,
of course.” , j
“Well, what are you going to dor Go back ana
let these two chaps and the police do the dirty work,
or go on and see the fun? ” }}
“Go on, of course! Where’s Pollux.
The blackfellow appeared at that moment hot and
gleaming with sweat. In his pidgin English he ex-
plained that he had followed the horsemen until he
was assured that they had no intention ot turning
k ac k #
“ Good track now. Easy follow,” he said, indicating
the path that the horses had made.
“ But we don’t want to go that way,” Frank objected.
Pollux pointed in the direction from which the
strangers had come.
“ Big fella waterhole,” he said.
They followed the tracks throughout the afternoon,
and about sundown came to a big soak in the dry bed
of what must have been a creek in the rainy season.
Here they found ample evidence of abandoned camps
in the shape of empty tins and bottles, ashes and pieces
of newspaper. _ „ ...
“ Him camp here,” announced Pollux, indicating
one such deposit. “ Him sit down one hour, two
hour, three hour maybe.”
“ You mean the two men who passed us back
there? ”
“ Him burn paper,” added Pollux.
Frank strolled over to stand beside him, and noticed


among the ashes one or two pieces of half-burned
paper.
£ The plot thickens! ” exclaimed Monty in a melo-
dramatic tone. “ The villains burn incriminating
evidence before proceeding further. 55
He dug the toe of his boot into the remains of the
j t e k lts °f paper fluttered into the air.
Hold on! 55 cried Frank. “There’s something
written on this bit! &
Seizing one charred fragment, he read :
j NO, Then came a few printed words and
a date, followed by the name “ Frederick Matthews. 55
{ It s the poor beggar’s mining licence,” said Frank.
Destroyed it in disgust, I expect.”
More likely by accident,” said Monty. “ I vote
we keep that it may come in handy. Perhaps
otmgaree and Wild Cat won’t be very fond of the
name of Matthews. Let’s see if we can find anything
more that may be useful.”
But, although they searched the ashes thoroughly
they found nothing more of interest. Frank placed
the fragment in his wallet and fell hungrily upon the
meal which Pollux had prepared.
The next night they camped beside a waterhole in a
granite outcrop. The water was fresh and pleasant
to the taste, whereas that in the soak had been slightly
Drackisn.
<{ w ater Ironstones,” Pollux informed them.
Fill bags Nine Mile Spring,”
Frank nodded. Mr. Martin had warned them
that all wells would be low and possibly salt at this
time of the year, and that they might have to carry
water on the last stage of their journey; moreover,
that they might be obliged to return to Nine Mile
Spring each time they required a fresh supply
“ A nice little stroll of an evening,” Frank had
observed when the missionary explained that the name
of the spring referred to its distance from the diggings
at The Ironstones. 56 5


Presently Pollux, who had climbed to the top of
the clump of rocks that surrounded the pool, called
to them. ,
« Ironstones over there! ” he said, and the boys
scrambled to their feet and hurried to join him on his
lofty perch.
Away to the south they could see a low range ot
rounded hills, and behind them three peaks that
might possibly hold the secret of their father’s fate—
the spires of the Ronalds.
« How long will it take to get there? ” asked Frank,
nodding in the direction of the hills.
“ ’Morrow day,” said Pollux, adding with character-
istic caution, “ maybe.” .
“It can’t be far,” observed Frank, “judging by
how long we’ve travelled already. I think the best
thing we can do is to camp at Nine Mile Spring
to-morrow and go on to the mines in the morning.
You don’t need to come any further with us, Pollux—
wc can’t miss the way from here.”
The blackfellow shook his head.
“ Bad mans Nine Mile Spring,” he declared. “ Not
camp. Me go back bimeby.”
“He hates the thought of leaving us,” laughed
Monty, for his sojourn in the desert had taught him that
“ by-and-by ” when specified by a black might mean
anything from a few minutes hence to several months.
“ Well, it’s been a most uninteresting hike,” grumbled
Frank as they returned to their camp. “No attacks
by Blue Beard, no excitement of any kind —no nothing!’
“ And if the blacks had attacked us, you’d be moan-
ing over it,” said his brother. “ Only the other day
you were saying that you craved for peace, and when
you’ve got it, you aren’t satisfied.”
“ Bad mans Nine Mile Spring,” repeated Pollux in
the rear, as if he had understood their conversation
and washed to console them. Indeed his limited
vocabulary never enabled them to discover exactly
how much English he did understand, and they would


have been surprised to know that very few words
got the better of him.
They tramped the third day through a spinifex
plain, where the short spiked grass stabbed at them,
striking with uncanny precision immediately above
the tops of their boots. Added to this, the day was
terrifically hot, and Pollux insisted upon their march-
ing at noon in order to reach the spring by evening.
It proved to be farther away than Frank had calcu-
lated, being ignorant regarding to what extent Pollux
would deviate from the path of the flying crow.
The sun was very low when they came in sight of
a hummock on the other side of which Pollux told
them the spring lay.
“ Stoppem here !” he commanded abruptly. “Me
go see.”
He pushed them behind a clump of bushes and
went towards the hummock, dodging from one shelter
to another.
“ He’s evidently on the look-out for the bad mans! ”
laughed Frank.
“ Anyone would think to see him that he’d been
brought up on a diet of Tom Mix and Wild West
pictures,” Monty remarked.
“ Well, perhaps he’s right for once. There’s cer-
tainly someone there, though it looks more like an
Indian Dancing Dervish than anything else.”
“ Looks as though he’s been bitten by ants, or stung
by bees,” remarked Monty, following his brother’s gaze.
Close to the hummock they could see a weird figure
dancing and hopping about, gyrating more or less in
a circle.
“ I guess the heat has sent the poor chap mad,”
said Monty.
. “ Gee, Mont, I believe you’re right! He is mad and
it is the heat! I think he has sunstroke. That’s how
they carry on, you know—dancing about in circles.”
Even as he spoke, the restless figure dropped abruptly
to the ground. Frank sprang out of his concealment,
but Monty caught at his arm.


“ It may be only a dodge,” he cautioned, being a
closer student of sensational literature than his brother.
“ If Pollux is right, it may be a ruse to get us there
and attack us.” , . „
“ Ruse or not, I’m going to see what s the matter.
And Frank started to run towards the fallen figure.
Monty followed, so that they both reached the hillock
a few seconds before Pollux, who immediately ran
round to the far side of it in search of “ bad mans.
“Poor wretch!” exclaimed Frank, bending over
the man. “ I should say he’s pretty bad. Here—
help me lift him into the shade; the suns still pretty
hot. Steady now! Got him? Right!
Together they lifted the man into the shadow cast
by the mound. , , ,
“Get some water, Pollux,” commanded Frank.
“ Let’s get this thing off his back and make him
They managed to remove the rolled-up blue blanket
which the man carried strapped across his shoulders,
and then unfastened the torn and dirty blue shirt.
As they worked to restore him to consciousness they
observed him closely. . , A/f ec T
“He looks pretty harmless, said Monty. 1
shouldn’t imagine him to be a member of Stingaree
Kelly’s gang, for instance.” ,
He was a man of medium height, stocky and broad-
shouldered, with dark hair going grey and the usual
beard, since shaving is a rare pastime m those parts.
Strapped to his “ bluey ” were a pick and shovel, and
the clank of tin pans inside the bundle confirmed their
opinion that he was a prospector —one of the numerous
army that roams wherever there is any chance of
finding gold in the hope of discovering some of the
precious metal.
« Probably on his way to The Ironstones to try his
luck,” said Frank. “ But look here —I can look after
him’now. You see about getting the grub ready.”
But Monty was speedily engaged in a wordy warfare
with Pollux,
E


“No camp here,” said the black firmly. “ Bad
mans come. Camp way back.”
“ But, dash it all, Pollux, you can’t expect us to
tramp back a couple of miles to pitch camp ! If any-
one does come, they’ll see our fire if it’s anywhere
near, so we might as well stop right here.”
But Pollux insisted.
“ Come night fetch water,” he explained.
£ ‘ Hi, Frank! ” called Monty, going to the Court of
Appeal, “ Pollux says we’ve got to move back into the
Bush, What about it? ”
“ I suppose we’d better humour him. He seems to
know what he’s talking about. Light the fire over
behind those bushes and then come and give me a
hand with this fellow.”
But Pollux ran forward eagerly and lifted the un-
conscious man in his huge arms, carrying him swiftly for
some ten minutes before laying him down carefully,
“ Here’s something that’s dropped out of his pocket,”
said Frank as they followed Pollux.
He stooped and picked up a small wash-leather bag.
“What’s in it?” inquired Monty. “Let’s have a
look,”
“ It’s no business of ours, whatever it is.”
“ Oh, come on! Be a sport! The old chap won’t
know anything about it.”
Monty grabbed at the bag and his fingers caught in
the string which secured the neck. In another second
it had fallen open, and into the palm of Frank’s hand
poured a stream of gold varying in size from nuggets
the size of small shot to the finest dust.
“ Gee! ” Monty’s voice was hushed as he stared at
the golden cascade.
“ Gold! ” muttered Frank in hypnotised tones.
“ He must be on his way to cash in on it,” surmised
Monty when he had recovered from his astonishment.
‘‘Tough luck for the poor beggar, getting struck like
this. It’s a good job we came along when we did.”
“ I daresay this represents months and months of


patient prospecting,” said Frank, carefully pouring
the gold back into the bag, which he closed securely
and slipped into his pocket.
“ It’ll be safer there until he comes round, _ he
remarked. 44 Let’s see what Pollux has done with him.
They found that the black had laid the man on a
bed of small branches pulled from a gum tree and
had unrolled the blue blanket and made a pillow of it.
“Well done, Pollux!” exclaimed Frank. 44 Stout
fellow! Now, Monty, you see about getting some
grub. I’ll put the tent up. This chap had better
sleep under shelter to-night —a touch of moonstroke
on top of what he’s got would about finish him. As
it is, I shouldn’t like to bet that he’ll recover.” {£
44 Moonstroke! ” cried Monty scornfully. What
rot you do talk sometimes! ”
44 It isn’t rot. There is such a thing as moonstroke.
I had it myself one time when I was out with the
Paroka Patrol. It was just past full moon, and I
slept out in the open on account of the heat. I had a
headache for about a week after,”
44 Oh, well, have it your own way! I expect you
had sunstroke all the same.”
Monty and Pollux prepared a meal and Frank
erected the tent, by which time their patient showed
signs of returning to life.
They watched him anxiously as they ate, and
presently he began to move and mutter to himself,
but they could not catch what he said.
Suddenly Pollux stood up.
44 Me go back Mission station now,” he announced.
44 But you must stop and rest to-night,” protested
Frank. 44 You’ll be tired after travelling all day.”
The huge fellow laughed.
44 Me never tired,” he declared, giving an impression
of tremendous strength as he stood there in the dusk
with the firelight playing on him. 44 Me go now, he
added. 44 Meet again bimeby.”
Without further parley, he turned and left them,


walking with great, easy strides, and was rapidly lost to
sight.
“That was sudden!” exclaimed Frank. “No
sentimental farewells about friend Pollux.”
“It is a bit too sudden for my liking,” said Monty.
“ It looks like dirty work at the crossroads.”
“Rot! He’s a jolly decent fellow! Besides, if he’d
wanted to doublecross us, he would have done it long
ago. No —take it from me, Pollux is going straight
home like a good little boy.”
“ More likely going to meet that brother of his! ”
“ Och! By the little fishes of Saint Anthony, where
am I at all? ”
A strange voice interrupted their conjectures, and
the boys swung round to find their patient sitting up
holding his head and staring about him.
They saw now that he had grey eyes to match the
rich brogue in his voice.
“ You’re all right! ” said Frank reassuringly, spring-
ing up and going over to him, at the same time telling
Monty to bring a cup of tea. “ You’ve had a touch
of the sun,” he explained. “We came along a couple
of hours ago and found you by the spring. Here —
get this down; it’ll do you good.”
The man seized the mug and drank eagerly, but his
eyes never left Frank’s face save to stray for a moment
to that of Monty.
“ What may two young lads like yourselves be doing
in this place and it getting dark? ” he asked presently.
“Oh, we’re just mooching around!” said Frank
casually. “ Now, you he down again and we’ll give
you something to eat, and then you have to go to
sleep. You’ve had rather a bad time, you know.”
“ Who are you? What’s bringing you here? ”
“ I’m Frank Rohan and this is my brother Monty.
As for what brings us here—we’ll explain that in the
morning. You’ve been prospecting, I gather? ”
Monty had brought over some food, and the man
sat up and leaned against the tree as he ate it.


“ Prospecting! ” he repeated in a dazed tone.
“ What should I want prospecting about the country
and I sunstroked? ” ,
Frank cast an ominous glance at his brother as
though to say: “ He’s making this up—he’s a crook,
and Monty nodded agreement.
The man fell silent for a moment or two, then
suddenly burst out in urgent tones:
“Me name! Faix! I’ve forgotten me name!
“ Never mind,” said Frank soothingly. “ You 11
remember it all in good time. I’ll bet you haven’t
forgotten this, though! ” . ... .
He took the bag of gold from his pocket and held it
up by the string.
“ What’ll be in it at all? ” asked the stranger.
“ Gold —as you know very well.”
“ Gold? Did ye say gold? And I after seeking it
all me life! ” ... .
“ Well, you’ve found it, and this little lot will keep
the wolf from the door for a few months.”
The man shook his head dubiously.
“ I’ve not found any gold,” he said. “ Why do
you tell me that, and I not seeing the colour of it for
two years past? ”
“This dropped out of your pocket,” Frank told
him. “ Come on—don’t act silly! It’s yours—take
it. And if you don’t want to tell us anything about
yourself—well, it’s none of our business.”
“Where am I?” asked the foundling, going back
to his original question.
“Just back of Nine Mile Spring, near The Ironstones.”
“ Ironstones? Glory be—it’s coming back to me! ”
He clutched his hair desperately as if he would tear
the explanation out of his brain,
“ Ironstones! Ironstones! Gold in The Ironstones!
Secret it was, and I said I’d find it as sure as me
name was Mike . . .”
Abruptly he relapsed into unconsciousness and fell
forward on the ground.


CHAPTER VI
THE GOLDFIELDS
“ I tell you, he’s not a crook! ” cried Monty.
The boys were at the spring, filling their water-bags
for the last lap of their journey.
“He really doesn’t know who he is,” persisted
Monty. “ I’m certain that he’s speaking the truth.”
“ I wish I could share your childlike faith,” replied
his brother. “ But I can’t trust him. It seems mighty
fishy to me. We find a man nine miles from the
Ironstones, where there’s an alluvial deposit of gold, and
that man has a bag of nuggets and dust in his pocket,
and yet he says he doesn’t know anything about it.”
“But that just goes to prove his honesty! If he
were a crook, he’d grab that gold, no matter whom
it belonged to. As it is, he tells you to hang on to it
in case the rightful owner turns up.”
“ That’s what looks so funny to me. There’s some-
thing wrong with that gold, I’m certain.”
“ There doesn’t seem to be much the matter with
it —it looks like the real article to me.”
“ Don’t be an idiot! You know perfectly well what
I mean. He’s probably stolen it and is thankful to
be able to unload it on to someone else. I expect the
real owner will turn up during the day, thirsting for
his blood.”
“ You’re talking through your hat, Frank. If he
really had stolen the gold, why should he let you keep
it? When you offered to hand it over, he’d have taken
it and made a getaway.”
“You forget that he became unconscious before he’d
made his story good.”


“He wouldn’t have bothered about any sort of
story. Besides, he wasn’t unconscious all night and
he isn’t now. There was nothing to stop him from
saying he’d recovered his memory, claiming the gold
and doing a bunk. Now, was there?
“ No, I suppose there wasn’t!” agreed Frank
reluctantly. “ But, anyhow, we’ve got to get rid of
him. We don’t want him hanging about while we re
investigating the Jumping Jimmy.”
“ But we can’t turn a sick man adrift m the desert.
protested Monty.
“ He’ll be all right in a day or two, and he can camp
here till he feels like going wherever he was going when
we found him. You’re too soft-hearted, that s what s
the matter with you.” ,
“ I only believe in sticking by a man when he s m
trouble, that’s all.” 1 „
Monty smiled, and Frank noticed the firm, square
line of his jaw, and that the smile did not reach the
boy’s eyes. Monty’s mind was made up, and there
would be trouble if he didn’t get his way. The last
thing Frank wanted at that moment was trouble with
Monty. He sighed. . .
“ Well if you insist on being so beastly sentimental
.” he said. “ But I think it’s a fool idea bringing
Mike along —about on a level with dragging that rotten
banjo all this distance. If he’s as loopy as he makes
out to be, he’ll only get in our way. If he’s the crook I
think he is, he’ll doublecross us at the first opportunity.”
“ Supposing he does,” said Monty, “ he’s only little
X guess you and I know how to deal with any sort of
dirty game he might try to put over on us. But he’s
not a crook! ” he declared firmly.
“ Could ye be lending me a water-bag? ” asked a
voice from the top of the hillock. “ I can’t fill mine
at all and it having a hole in it.”
Mike waved an empty canvas bag at them.
“ Let’s have a look at it,” said Monty, and the man
threw it down to him. The boy examined it carefully.


“Why, it’s not much of a hole! We’ll have that
mended in two twos.”
Running to where their packs lay ready for the trek,
he rummaged until he found a needle and some coarse
thread, when he set to work to mend the bag. Mike
sauntered over and stood watching him.
“Well, if that isn’t a tidy job!” he remarked
admiringly. “ And I after thinking the bag was ruined
for life, Lord save me! ”
“Here you are!” cried Monty. “Go and fill it,
and we’ll be on our way. But I’d better warn you—
my brother thinks you’re a crook.”
“ Faix, and so I might be! I might be anything at
all and I not knowing. If I knew my name, perhaps
I’d know my nature,”
“ Well, if that’s how you feel about it, you’d better
keep it to yourself. But I warn you —if you ever do
try to put anything over on us, we’re ugly customers
in a fight.”
Mike’s eyes twinkled.
“Are ye, now? I think it’s meself could hold you
both down with the one hand, ye craythers! ”
Monty laughed.
“You’d better not try, that’s all! Go and fill your
bag. We must be off.”
Frank appeared at that moment, and the boys
struggled into their packs, securing the canvas bags
carefully and slinging the tools over their shoulders.
Hitherto, Pollux had carried Monty’s pick and shovel,
and now the boy found the burden embarrassing,
seeing that he already had the banjo.
Mike scrambled hastily out of the hollow that
sheltered the spring, slipped his arms through the
straps of his bluey, and announced that he was ready.
But as they moved off, without saying a word, he
relieved Monty of the pick and shovel.
Thank goodness it’s cooler this morning!”
exclaimed Frank as they walked at a good pace towards
the hills, which showed clearly a few miles away.


Certainly the fierce heat of the last few days seemed
to have abated, and there was a pleasant breeze, while
the previous night had been almost cold.
Monty was in fine fettle and seemed to have recovered
completely from the blow dealt by Blue Beard. He
whistled and sang as he walked, and Frank found
himself joining in, though his brother jeered at his
tuneless efforts.
It was not only the cool morning that worked this
improvement in their spirits. They were in sight of
their goal; the slow days of waiting for something to
happen were over, and by nightfall they would be in
the thick of their adventure. They longed to meet
Stingaree Kelly and his friend Wild Cat.
“ I’ll bet they’re a couple of tough customers,”
mused Monty, his eyes gleaming in anticipation of
trouble.
“ And as cunning as they’re made,” added Frank.
“Yes! I imagine them as big and burly and not
shaved for weeks and weeks —like Mike —and willing
to stop at nothing.”
“ As I’ve told you so often before, you read too many
sensational yarns. The villains in books simply don’t
exist —people are never as bad as authors make them
out to be.”
“ No? Well, these two must be pretty bad if they’ve
really salted the mine and sold shares in a concern to
dig for gold that doesn’t exist.”
“ They may be merely in the employ of the chap
who sold the shares in Adelaide —that fellow Copley
with the bow-window front and fat watch-chain.”
“ If Larrigan tries to put anything across me . . . ”
threatened Monty, and Frank threw back his head
and laughed.
“What could a kid like you do, anyway? You’re
not out of the nursery yet! ”
“ Sez you! You just wait, and I’ll show you what
a kid my age can do. After all, you’re not so much
older.”


“ Three years can make a lot of difference.”
“ Oh, yeah? ”
Monty started whistling again, and hostilities ceased.
The two boys walked together, Mike following rather
like a wistful, shaggy dog. He had not thanked them
in so many words for saving his life, but sometimes they
found him gazing at them with an expression in his
grey eyes that said much more than words could ever
have done. At such moments Frank almost retracted
the opinion he had formed of the man, though he did
not admit as much to Monty.
They halted for lunch, but did not need the usual
long midday rest on account of the comparative cool-
ness of the day. So, since Mike appeared not to be
suffering any inconvenience, they set off again after a
bare hsdf-hour’s break.
“ There’s the gold-field ! ” cried Frank suddenly, and
stood still so abruptly that Mike collided with him.
The boy turned around. “ Ever seen that before? ”
he asked.
Mike shaded his eyes with his hand and looked
towards the hills, which rose abruptly from the level
ground less than half a mile away.
It was evident now that they were not so smooth
and rounded as they had seemed from the distance.
They were as jagged as the edge of a broken saw, and
on their slopes were great gashes where shafts had been
sunk in the search for gold. On the lower levels and
on the plain, low hummocks appeared, indicating
where shallow diggings had been made. Rude dwell-
ings could be seen, some built of corrugated iron, some
of hessian, and some consisting merely of sheets of iron
or strips of sacking arranged slantwise against the
trunks of trees to form a primitive shelter. The occa-
sional outline of a windlass proved the existence of
shafts deep enough to necessitate drawing up the
mullock in a bucket or cage. Away to the right the
boys could see what looked like a collection of heaps
of scrap-iron, but was really the locality of the Chinese


diggings, where little yellow men scratched about
almost on the surface, seldom digging more deeply
than three or four feet, and huddling at night into
filthy, crowded huts and shelters; for the Chinaman
wastes none of his profits on creature comforts.
Mike studied this unsavoury collection of hessian
and ironmongery for some minutes before transferring
his gaze to the scarcely better habitation of the whites.
“ Well! ” said Frank impatiently. “Do you
remember it now? ”
Mike shook his head slowly. .
“ I may have seen it and I not remembering, he
said, “ but I don’t think so.”
Frank cast at Monty a look which indicated that his
worst suspicions were confirmed, and Monty grinned
broadly and said:
“ I told you so! ”
The innocent cause of their telegraphic conversation
continued to study the distant scene in silence. Soon,
however, he turned to them and said;
“It’s the kind young fellows you are the way you’d
be saving my life, and it’s not for me to see you go
into that terrible place alone. You’ve got me with you,
and I’m sticking. It seems that far back in my memory
there’s places like that, and they’re black wicked.
We’ll camp together, and I’ll see no harm comes to
you, God helping me.”
Frank was embarrassed.
“ We were thinking that perhaps you’d rather camp
alone,” he said awkwardly. “You see, we’re just
going to do a bit of prospecting and then push off
again—it isn’t a serious business with us.”
“You’re thinking that I’m up to no good,” said
Mike, and Frank coloured up, to his own intense
annoyance. “Now, let me tell you—there’s nothing
but kindness in my heart towards you both at this
minute. What there’ll be when I get my memory
back (Saint Anthony helping!) I can’t say. But just
now I’m a harmless old loony with a great pair of


hands and arms that’s aching to repay you. Though
it’s yourselves are the loonies, I’m thinking, if visiting
a mining camp is your notion of amusement.”
“ Of course we’ll camp together! ” broke in Monty.
“ We just thought . . . That is, Frank thought .. .
Oh, never mind what we thought! You come along
with us, Mike, and we’ll all mess in together.”
The unfortunate man smiled gratefully, and Frank
acted on a sudden impulse.
“Look here!” he said. “We’d better tell you
something. We’ve come here for a definite purpose—
what it is doesn’t matter at the moment —and when
we get to that place over there we’re going to say that
we’re prospecting, see? And we’ll do some prospect-
ing, too, just for the look of the thing. But if you see
us doing a bit more besides, you’re to look the other
way or be struck blind, because it’ll be none of your
business.”
“You have my word,” said Mike simply.
“ And I think we’d better work separately,” con-
tinued Frank, “ because Monty and I won’t be stopping
long. We hope to find out all we want to in about a
week or a fortnight at most —and it’d be awkward
you if we faded away and left you behind when
we’d given out that we were partners; because I
promise there’ll be something doing after we’ve gone,
and the miners might make it hot for you.”
“ Let you not be troubling your heads about me,”
smiled Mike. “ I may have forgotten a lot of things
for the minute, but I can take care of myself. You go
about your business, me bhoys, and I’ll go about
mine. But we’ll keep close together for all that,
especially if there’s trouble.”
“Thanks, Mike—you’re a good sort!” exclaimed
Frank, adding : “ Well, let’s be getting along. We
want to settle in before sundown.”
As they neared the camp a cloud of dust greeted
them, mingled with a terrible stench. The reason for
the latter they soon located, as it proceeded from great


heaps of refuse that had been left behind by the blacks
whom the prospectors had driven away. }j
“ It’s a wonder they don’t clear that stuff up,
remarked Monty as they hurried past.
“ I don’t suppose anyone has time, said frank.
“ They’re in too much of a hurry to get at the gold
and make their fortunes. Let’s hope the wind doesn’t
blow from this direction too often, that’s all! ”
« We’ll have to pass here every time we go to the
spring for water,” Monty reminded him.
“ Well, don’t let’s think about it.”
The dust, which grew thicker as they advanced,
rose up from a score of dry-blowing machines crude
arrangements of wood, wire and nails, with old kitchen
bellows attached to blow the loose dirt away in order
to reveal, perhaps, a few grains of gold lying on the
gauze shelf on which the crushed ore lay. At each
machine stood a man who shook the thing vigorously,
at the same time working the bellows by means of a
crude foot-pedal, so that the dirt fell through the gauze
of the shelf as well as flying into the air.
About half-a-dozen windlasses proclaimed a more
advanced stage of the industry, and the rough shanties
that stood close by were decorated with the names of
the claims. Two called themselves “El Dorado,” and
another, “What Luck.” “Three Pals,” shrieked
another board, and on the side of a hut was painted
in white: “ Still Hoping.”
The travellers paused on the outskirts of the settle-
ment and the boys studied the signboards.
“ There it is! ’’ exclaimed Monty excitedly, clutching
Frank’s arm and pointing.
“ Shut up, you ass! Don’t draw everyone’s atten-
tion to us. What are you talking about? ”
“ The Jumping Jimmy. Look —over there to the
right.”
Following his directions, Frank beheld a board on
which appeared the name of the mine they sought.
It was far more pretentious than anything else they


could see, the windlass being replaced by a winch
with a huge iron wheel, and close by were signs of
large quantities of dirt having been crushed and
washed.
“ Dollying and panning! ” commented Frank. “So
that’s as far as they’ve got! I thought we’d find some-
thing more elaborate than that—some sort of mach-
inery, anyway.”
“ I don’t see anything of Dad,” said Monty in a flat
voice.
“ No, it doesn’t look as if he’s here. But let’s find
a place and get the tent up. We can make enquiries
later.
Strangely enough, no one appeared to take any
notice of the new-comers. The dry-blowers went on
shaking their crazy machines, the diggers continued
to delve in their shallow trenches, those who were
crushing pieces of rock with heavy iron discs attached
to long handles did not pause for a moment in their
occupation, the horse that was working the winch at
the Jumping Jimmy moved back and forth without
check. So far as they could tell, the boys were un-
observed, though they had penetrated to the very
centre of all this activity.
“ Apparently there’s no time for anything else when
you’re looking for gold,” commented Frank.
He moved off, but Mike caught at his sleeve.
« * ot be cam P in § ov er there,” he said firmly.
Ihe Chinks are bad neighbours. It’s this way we’ll
be going.”
He led the way in the opposite direction, and
presently indicated a particular spot. Close by was a
shallow hole roughly eight feet in diameter.
“ He r e ’ s a claim that someone’s abandoned,” he
said. “It’ll suit your purpose well, I’m thinking.
i ou can get in there and dig and no one will interfere
with you.”
“ How do you know it’s abandoned? ” asked Frank.
,£ Someone would be here otherwise. A claim


either belongs to someone or it doesn’t —there’s nothing
in between.” J5
“ But the owner may have just gone away . . .
“You bet he has—and won’t be coming back!
Look—there’s no bucket and no tools. Jump it, ye
craythers, and be thankful it’s lying handy to your
purpose.” .
Frank knelt to look at the solitary boundary peg
which stood almost at the edge of the hole, and uttered
an exclamation.
“ Say, Mont, look at this! ”
Monty looked and whistled.
“Gee! Number 407! It must have belonged to
that chap on the horse—Matthews. So that’s why he
tore his licence up! ”
“ Maybe! But can’t you see it’s a great chance for
us? Don’t you remember what he said —that Wild
Cat and Stingaree had jumped his claim? ”
“ Why, of course he did! But how ...”
“ Well, don’t you see that if we take possession of it,
we’ll get in touch with Stingaree and his pal in double
quick time. They’re bound to pay us a visit soon.”
“ Oh, here’s a go! ” laughed Monty. “ We’ll have
them on a piece of string over this. Come on —let’s
get the tent up.”
Throwing down their things, they unrolled the tent
and began to erect it with the superfluous aid of Mike.
However, the man obviously meant to be helpful, and
neither of the boys had the heart to tell him he was not
required.
Still nobody appeared to take any notice of them,
and they finished their task and prepared a meal
unmolested.
“ We’ll have visitors after dark,” prophesied Mike.
“ Why after dark? ”
“ You don’t think anyone’s going to stop work to
talk to you now, do you, and the sun shining? But
once it sets, we’ll see.”
And they did. As soon as it became too dark to see


the hoped-for glittering specks in pan or gauze, the
prospectors ceased work, the clouds of dust dispersed
slowly, and camp fires sprang up every few yards.
The first man to finish his badly-needed meal strolled
over to the new outfit and stood staring at the strangers
in silence for a while. Then, without moving, he
shouted:
“ Hey, mates! Come and see the Boy Scouts! ”
Slowly his pals wandered up, but still no one spoke
to the boys. Mike, who was smoking at the back of
the tent, was invisible.
“Showing any colour round here lately?” asked
Frank.
“ Not what you make babies’ rattles of,” said the
first man contemptuously.
“ Well, I reckon weil be having a look round all the
same,” said Frank as casually as he could for his rising
anger.
Monty, acting on instructions, remained silent, but
he was too excited to keep altogether quiet. There-
fore he reached back into the tent and dragged out
his banjo, on which he was soon strumming softly.
“It ain’t the Boy Scouts,” said a miner, “it’s the
Christy Minstrels.”
“Or the Strolling Troubadours,” said a quiet,
educated voice, and a man thrust his way through the
crowd till he stood in the front rank.
He was of medium height and slight build and was,
surprisingly enough, clean-shaven and neatly clad in
a light suit.
“Good evening, strangers!” he said pleasantly.
“ Welcome to our happy home! ”
“ Thanks! ” Frank rose and accepted the hand that
was held out to him, but found himself overwhelmed
by an instant dislike for the man.
“ How did you get here? ”
“ We walked.”
“ Really? From Caroline Wells, I suppose? ” The
smooth voice was edged with sarcasm.


“ No. We got a lift part of the way.”
“ I see! And what do you expect to do now you’re
here? ”
“ The same as you did when you came, I suppose.
Any objections? ”
“Oh no —none at all! But I was just thinking that
you’d chosen an unfortunate spot. This claim isn’t
any good, you know.”
“Is that so? Well, if that proves to be true, we can
move somewhere else, can’t we? ”
“ It’s unhealthy, too,” added the other.
“ Any place would be that had those refuse heaps
so close,” observed Frank.
“ Well, you can form yourselves into a fatigue party
and clean them up if you want to —no one’ll stop you.
We’re all too busy, but you won’t be —not while you’re
working this claim. But if you’ll take my advice,
you’ll go while the going is good. This is no place for
a kindergarten.”
“ Och, is it kindergarten you’re saying? ” enquired
Mike, coming round the angle of the tent, lighting his
pipe. The match flared up, illuminating his face, and
the other stepped back with an exclamation.
“Mike Donovan! By all that’s holy! What’s
brought you back? You’ve got a nerve, I must say! ”
Mike looked at him innocently.
“You seem to know me,” he said, “ but I don’t
remember you.”
“No? And yet it’s only a few days since we
parted. You didn’t wait to say good-bye either,
Donovan.”
“ Now, wasn’t that unkind of me, and we so loving
and all! ”
Frank glanced sharply at the Irishman, but was
unable in that dim light to see whether he really
recognised the other man or not.
Suddenly there was a movement in the crowd as if
someone else were pushing through it.
“Say, Larrigan! Come here!” shouted the man


who had recognised Mike. “ Look who’s here —Mike
Donovan and the Heavenly Twins.”
Instantly the boys realised with whom they had been
dealing —the very man they most wished to meet —
Stingaree Kelly.
Wild Cat Larrigan appeared at the fringe of the
crowd, and they received an impression of a huge,
uncouth figure—a startling contrast to the dapper
Kelly.
“ Well, so it is! ” said the new voice. “ Mike, you
thieving devil, come out here till we deal with you! ”
“No, you don’t!” cried Monty, springing to his
feet. “ You leave him alone. He’s had sunstroke and
he isn’t well.”
Wild Cat surveyed the boy scornfully.
“You were wrong about the twins, Kelly,” he said.
“ This here’s Little Lord Fauntleroy —mother’s
Dimpled Darling.”
Frank never knew how he prevented Monty from
being slaughtered before his eyes. As usual at the
mention of the hated epithet, the boy went berserk,
and it took the combined efforts of Mike and his
brother to make him control himself.
The miners crowded in on them, laughing and
anticipating some fun, but Kelly and Larrigan pushed
them back.
“There’s nothing doing,” they said. “Clear out!
We don’t eat babies.”
Astonishingly enough, the men melted away and in
a few seconds the new-comers found themselves alone.


CHAPTER VII
MONTY MAKES FRIENDS
“You are an ass, Monty!” cried Frank, pushing his
brother into the tent. “ Why couldn’t you keep your
mouth shut? If you don’t learn to control your
temper you’ll never get anywhere—it will ruin you at
the start.”
“That’s right! Start preaching at me! It’s all
very well for you to talk—you haven’t as much temper
as a cabbage. And you don’t have people insulting
you because you have a rotten dimple in your chin.”
“ Very well —keep your hair on! But as long as
we’re here, do keep your temper under. We don’t
want to fall foul of these men —they could lick us with
one hand tied up.”
“ Huh! A fine sport you are! I wouldn’t mind
taking on Larrigan myself. Do you mean to say
you’re scared of him? ”
“ I’m not scared, but one must exercise a little
common-sense. I’m no midget, but even you must
know that age and weight count for a lot in a rough-
and-tumble. I want your help, Mont, and you must
give me the kind I need, not what you think I want.”
“ Sorry, Frank! I’ll follow your lead in future.”
“Right! Now, listen—l’ll tell you what I think
we’d better do.”
“ Shouldn’t we have Mike in? We’ve adopted him
as a sort of partner, haven’t we? ”
“All right. Hi, Mike! Come here a minute,
please! ”
The tent-flap parted and the Irishman entered.
“ We were just going to discuss our plan of action,”


Frank told him, “ and thought you ought to be in
on it.”
“ It’s worried I am this minute,” said Mike seriously.
“ How is it that they know me here ? I must have been
here before.”
“ Well, that will clear itself up in time,” said Frank
soothingly, trying to keep all suspicion out of his voice.
“ Someone is bound to refer to your past before long,
and then perhaps it will all come back to you. Now,
we’d better make up our minds what we’re going to do
for the next few days.”
“ You had better get into that hole and start digging
in the morning,” said Mike. “If you’re to be prospec-
tors, you’d better look like them.”
“ And what about you? ”
“ Let you not worry about me. I’ll look about for a
likely spot and see if I can strike it lucky. Perhaps it’s
mascots you’ll be to me after all these years.”
“ But if you’ve lost your memory, how do you know
how to set to work? ” asked Frank.
Mike looked more troubled than ever.
“ I don’t seem to have lost my memory altogether,”
he said slowly. “ I remember digging for gold years
ago, the same as I remember how to make damper.
But I can’t recollect this place, nor my own name —
though it seems to be Mike Donovan.”
“ H’m! Well, we can only take you at your face
value.”
“ Oh, cut it out, Frank! Mike’s all right—anyone
can see that with half an eye. Don’t be so beastly
suspicious! ”
“ Your brother’s right,” interposed Mike. “ You’re
both here on a dangerous job, as I take it, and it’s as
well not to trust anybody. But it’s grateful to you I
am for trusting me this far. Now, if you’ll take my
advice, you’ll turn in and get some sleep so as to be up
with the sun in the morning.”
“But where are you going?” asked Frank as he
turned to leave the tent.


“ I’m going to roll up in my blanket outside. I’m
not used to sleeping in a tent.”
“No?”
Mike paused and stared over his shoulder at Frank.
Neither spoke, and Monty looked anxiously from one
to the other.
“ Well, perhaps you’re right,” said the man at last.
“ I’ll bring me blanket in here.”
He did so, and presently they were all lying rolled up
on the ground. But it was some time before they slept,
for there was a great deal of noise about the camp —
men talking, laughing, and singing; unearthly noises,
supposed to be musical, issuing from the Chinese
quarter; dogs barking and, a long way off, a faint
rhythmic drumming that made the ground vibrate.
“What’s that?” asked Frank after about an hour
of it.
“ That’ll be the blacks signalling,” said Mike, speak-
ing softly so as not to waken Monty.
“ What are they using? ”
“ Long drums made out of hollow logs with skins
stretched over the ends,”
“ They seem to have a sort of Morse code.”
“ They’ve something they can understand, at any
rate.”
“ They must be calling all the tribes together for a
corroboree,” mused Frank, but Mike made no answer,
for he had dropped off to sleep.
For some time Frank lay listening to the distant
drumming and all the other assorted noises, until he
followed the example of his companions.
The sun had scarcely risen when the boys finished
their breakfast and tidied the tent. Already many of
the miners were at work and the cloud of red dust hung
in the air.
“ Into the trench with you, Mont! ” commanded
Frank, and his brother jumped into the hole that had
been dug by Fred Matthews.


“ Here—catch these! ”
Frank threw down a pick and shovel and, taking up
a bucket, followed Monty.
“ What we have to do,” he explained, “ is to fill this
with stone and cart it up to the top, but first we have to
break the stone loose from the sides of the shaft. Then
we’ll examine it all carefully for any show of colour.
If we see anything that looks like gold, we’ll have to
crush the rock and wash it in a pan.”
“ Sounds strenuous,” commented Monty. <c I’ve no
ambition to strike it rich, have you? ”
Frank grinned.
“ You’re a lazy young beggar! You know quite
well you’d just about go off your head if you did find a
nugget. Now, wouldn’t you? ”
“ I suppose so! But nuggets don’t lie about waiting
for someone to pick them up.”
“ Don’t they? You seem to forget that one of the
first finds in Australia was made through someone
picking up a rock to throw at something and discovering
it to be a lump of gold.”
“ Yes, but . . .”
“ Well, this is an alluvial deposit, which means that
gold lies very close to the surface. All the mountains
and things that used to conceal it have been worn down
so much that the gold has fallen from the ground-down
rocks and lies on the surface, because it is too hard to
be powdered by rain and wind as easily as granite is.”
“ Oh, I know all that! But, if it’s lying about so
handy, why are these men digging for it? ”
“ Because they’ve probably picked up all that w'as
lying about —which wasn’t a great deal, according to
what Dad told me —and now they’re digging under
those spots, continuing to break up the granite that
Nature has started on.”
“ But gold doesn’t go in solid w r edges. If it did,
you’d only have to dig under where you’d picked up a
nugget and you’d make a fortune at once. I thought it
went in pockets or reefs.”


“So it does; but a pocket may be worked out quite
quickly and may either be rich or not contain much
gold at all. Also, it may be a sort of welling-up of the
gold in a reef, which you can follow for miles, as in a
real gold mine.”
“ Like the Jumping Jimmy.”
Frank laughed.
“ Maybe,” he said, adding: “ But I don’t think so.”
“ Hullo, kids —how are you getting on? ”
The boys looked up to see the bland face of Stingaree
Kelly beaming at them over the edge of the pit.
“ Fine, thanks! ” said Frank cheerfully.
“ Hard work, eh? ”
“Oh, no! We like it.”
“ Well, there’s no accounting for tastes. Shouldn’t
say myself that it was healthy for youngsters.”
“No ? Well, we’ve got no time to discuss the matter.
Excuse us —we must be getting on.”
Frank grasped and swung the pick, and Monty
shovelled broken rock into the bucket.
“ You didn’t tell me your names last night,” came
the voice from above.
“ Ryan,” said Frank without pausing in his work.
“ Thanks. How interesting! ” And Stingaree
Kelly walked off.
“ Come on, let’s take this lot up above,” said Frank.
He climbed out of the hole and reached down for the
bucket, which Monty handed up. When they were
squatted side by side at the edge of the shaft, Frank
said:
“ I wonder what our friend wanted? ”
“ I’ll bet he had a good look round our things,” said
Monty.
“ Gee! I hadn’t thought of that! ”
Frank sprang to his feet, but Monty hauled him back.
“ Don’t go into the tent now, you ass! He’s watching
us.”
Sure enough, Stingaree Kelly stood a short distance
off, apparently in conversation with another miner.


“ Well, we’ll take the first opportunity of repaying
the visit,” said Frank, “ and don’t forget our new
name.”
The morning passed, and they brought several pails
of mullock to the surface and dumped the contents at
the edge of the shaft.
“ If we don’t do more than this, people will begin to
smell a rat,” said Frank. “ We’ll have to borrow a
pummer and do some crushing.”
“ They don’t look exactly a helpful lot,” observed
Monty, looking around at the miners, none of whom,
with the exception of Kelly, had come near them since
the previous night.
Mike appeared at that moment, and they ate together
in the shade of the tent, discussing what they had done
that morning.
“ It’s my opinion,” said the Irishman, “ that there’s
a reef hereabouts and that it doesn’t lie very deep.”
“ What makes you think that? ” asked Frank.
“ Well, the lie of the land for one thing. Take the
hills, now. So steep this side. That’s the sign of a
fault —the earth cracking and one part slipping down,
like. This is the part that went down, and that part
stayed up. There’s gold in those hills—people
wouldn’t have sunk so deep into them without. It’s
only the shortage of fresh water that keeps them from
being properly worked. So I make out that there’s
gold in the part that slipped, just where the break is,
and ... By the lamb of Saint Agnes, where’s that
boy?”
“ I didn’t see him go. Hi, Mont, where are you? ”
There was no reply, and they began to look about for
him.
“ Perhaps he’s asleep in the tent,” said Frank hope-
fully, but his brother was not there. Mike peered into
the shallow trench, but there was no Monty.
Pushing his hat to the back of his grizzled head,
Mike scratched thoughtfully.
“ I don’t like him going off on his own like that,”


said Frank. “ He’s only a kid —barely fifteen—and I
feel responsible.”
“ He’s gone to borrow something perhaps,” said
Mike helpfully.
“ Yes, that’s it! We were wanting a thing to grind
the mullock—he must have gone to get one. But in
that case, we ought to be able to see him.”
They looked about them again, but still there was
no sign of Monty.
That young gentleman was, as a matter of fact, not
very far away. But if his brother had been able to see
him, he would not have received any consolation, for
Monty was swopping yarns in the most confidential
manner with the crew of the Jumping Jimmy,
The five men were smoking their after-dinner pipes
when the boy appeared around the corner of the wall
against which they sat.
“ Hullo, kid! ” cried Beazley, the foreman.
“ How you getting on? ”
Monty dropped down beside him and leaned against
the iron wall. The others favoured him with amused
grins.
“ 0.K., thanks! ”he said.
“ Found any nuggets yet? ”
“ Buckets of’em! But not to-day.”
“ Don’t suppose you’d know gold if you saw it,”
hazarded Beazley.
Monty considered the matter.
“ I reckon I would,” he replied slowly.
The men laughed.
“ You wouldn’t know duffers from the real thin?.
I’ll bet,” said one.
“ I’ll take you on,” cried the boy. “ Show me a
specimen of each, and we’ll see who’s the mug.”
The man delved into his pocket and brought out
two small pieces of stone which he handed to Beazley,
who passed them over to Monty. The boy took both
pieces and examined them carefully.
They were both rough fragments of grey granite


plentifully streaked with the shining white of quartz and
the duller gleam of mica, with here and there the pale
pink of felspar. Through them both ran a crooked line
of yellow. But, while the one line was delicate as the
veining of a leaf and of a pale shade, the other was more
easily traced and of a deeper colour—the slightly
copperish tinge of iron pyrites, more often known as
“ duffers ” or “ new chum’s gold ’’—New Chums being
the official designation for those inexperienced English-
men who come to the diggings hoping to pick up gold
as easily as gathering berries in their native hedges.
Iron pyrites being much more in evidence than gold
and its gleam being so very inviting, many a man has
safely stored up handfuls of it under the delusion that
he was accumulating the precious metal of his
dreams.
Monty could scarcely be called inexperienced.
Apart from his having seen various specimens that his
father brought home from time to time, he was very
keen on Geology and could recognise most minerals
and types of rock at a glance.
He turned over the two specimens and smiled as he
gave one back to Beazley.
“ You can have that one,” he said; “ I’m keeping
this.”
He suited the action to the word and put the stone
in his pocket.
The men laughed.
“You can have it for a souvenir, sonny!” said
Beazley, “ And next time perhaps you’ll know gold
when you see it.”
“ I say! ” exclaimed Monty in mock dismay, taking
the specimen from his pocket and staring at it. “Do
you mean to tell me this isn’t gold —that it s only
pyrites ? ”
“ Pyrites it is, you blooming New Chum! ” jeered
Beazley.
With an exclamation, Monty threw the specimen on
to the heap near the shaft.


“ Let me have another look at the real thing,” he
begged, and the other stone was handed over again.
“ Did this come out of the Jumping Jimmy? ” he
asked.
“ Sure it did! ” replied Beazley, glancing aside at
his mates.
“ Much more there? ” inquired the boy.
“ Buckets of it.”
“ Then you’ll all be making your fortunes soon,”
continued the innocent voice.
“ Forchins! ” One of the miners knocked out his
pipe viciously against the wall. “No blooming
forchins when you work fer Kelly and Larrigan,” he
grumbled.
“ Shut your mouth, Smith! ” roared Beazley angrily.
“ You get your wages regular, don’t you? ”
“ What I want’s a share of the takings, same as we was
promised,” said the man surlily. “ Where there ain’t no
share, there ain’t no takings, to my way of thinking.”
“ Shut up! Do you want your jaw broken? ”
Beazley loomed over the discontented man, who
slunk away muttering that he “ never meant no ’arm,
swelp me! ”
“ But you just said that there was plenty of gold in
the mine,” came Monty’s voice from the ground, and
the foreman swung round on him.
“So there is. You don’t understand what he’s
talking about. It’s a private matter, and nothing to
do with kids. Come on, mates —time’s up! ”
They all heaved themselves slowly to their feet and
lurched towards the pit, one going over to fetch the
winch horse, which had been feeding out of a box.
Monty followed the others, and stood peering into the
darkness as the miners were lowered by means of the
cage. When the last man had gone and the cage
swung at the end of the rope as the winch turned,
Monty wandered over to Beazley.
“ I’ve never seen a real mine before,” he said admir-
ingly.


“ And you ain’t seen one this time,” said the foreman.
“ This is only the start of one.”
“Is it? It looks big to me.”
“ Say, kid, you’d better clear out of here before the
bosses come back. They’re away on business, but I’d
be sorry to have them catch you. They don’t like
strangers,”
“ Must have suspicious minds,” observed Monty.
“ No—just a knack of minding their own business.
Go on—shove off! ”
“ Wait a minute! I came to borrow something, and
I’m blessed if I haven’t forgotten what it is. My
brother told me to ask. Oh, I know! It’s one of those
things you smash up stones with —like that man’s
using over there.”
“ We’re not allowed to lend things,” said the
foreman.
“ But I’ll bring it back and no one will be any the
wiser. Be a sport! I’ll sneak it back when your boss
is out of the way. Come on —you owe it to me after
taking me in over that pyrites.”
“ If you’re caught, I’ll say you stole it,” warned
Beazley, fetching the implement and handing it over.
“ Now, clear out quick! ”
Monty needed no second bidding, but hurried off,
dragging the heavy pummer. Within a few minutes
he was listening to Frank’s fire of angry questions,
wondering which one he ought to answer first.
“ I’ve been over to the Jumping Jimmy,” he explained
as soon as he could get a word in. “ Made friends with
the crew and borrowed this.”
“You borrowed that from Kelly and Larrigan?
Well, if you aren’t mad ! ”
“ Not at all! They don’t know anything about it—
it’s entirely a private transaction between the foreman
and myself. Come on—let’s get to work. It’ll look
fishy if we stand talking any longer. I’ve got news for
you, but it’ll keep.”
They set to work on the heap of rock, and Frank


showed his brother how to gather up the fine, broken
stuff and wash it in a tin pan as if searching for gold.
“ And go steady with that water,” he cautioned,
cc because we have to go nine miles for the next lot.
And you might really look for specks—there might be a
little in this rock, though not enough to make the claim
workable.”
At that moment Mike came up to them.
“ Glory be! ”he exclaimed. “ It’s never the good
water you’re using for that work! There’s a well over
the way—l’ll fetch you some from there. But you
can’t drink it.”
He seized the bucket and was gone before they could
say anything, returning presently with a cloudy fluid
which slopped over as he walked.
“ Salt as the Dead Sea,” he explained, “ but the dirt
won’t mind that.”
He insisted on taking possession of the pummer and
breaking up the rock for them, leaving to the boys the
easier task of washing the dirt.
“ I’ve found some! ” exclaimed Monty eagerly
after about half-an-hour’s work.
Frank leaned over and peered into the pan. _
“Yes, it’s gold right enough. About a farthing’s
worth, I should say, if that. I told you we’d find some.
Now, what’s your news ? ”
“ Dad w r as right,” said Monty, speaking almost in a
whisper, and stirring the fine golden specks with one
finger. “ The mine is salted.”
“ How did you find that out ? ”
“ They showed me two specimens,” explained Monty.
“ One had gold in it and the other only had duffers.
They wanted to see if I knew the real thing when I saw
it. Of course I didn’t. But here’s the point—the
rock with the pyrites in had more mica than quartz in
it, and the other was nearly all quartz. Now, in the
dump around the Jumping Jimmy there seems to be
mighty little quartz.”
“ Good lad! Let’s hope you’re right.”


And a chap named Smith was complaining because
they hadn’t seen a share-out on the amount of gold
extracted from the mine.”
Frank whistled softly.
“ That looks hopeful. Smith might be useful to us
some day.”
“ That’s what I was thinking. I’m going to cultivate
him.”
“You are ? You keep away from that gang, Monty.”
“ Not me! They’ll be adopting me as their mascot
before long—you watch! They seem to think I’m
about twelve. Well, let ’em! I’ll even talk baby talk
if they want it. Now, if you went nosing around there,
they d suspect something at once. Leave the Tumping
Jimmy to me—l’ll handle it for you.”
“ Holy snakes! What’s that? ”
Mike dropped the tool and stood staring open-
mouthed. The boys leaped up to join him.
In the direction of the Jumping Jimmy there seemed
to be some great excitement.
. What s up?” shouted Frank to their nearest
neighbour.
The man looked across and grinned.
“ Wild Cat and Stingaree! ” he yelled. “At it
again. Private fight. Strangers not admitted.”
“So they don’t get on well together,” commented
frank. “ Well, it’s none of our business at present,
but it may be useful later. Come on, Mont—let’s
look busy.”


CHAPTER VIII
PROOF NEEDED
Monty did his work so well that before many more
days he was admitted without suspicion among the
crew of the Jumping Jimmy. But he always timed his
visits so that they took place during the absence of the
two bosses, and there was an unspoken understanding
on both sides that this should be so.
Where Kelly and Larrigan went on those frequent
occasions on which they left Beazley in charge of the
Jumping Jimmy was a mystery which Monty longed
to solve. A chance bit of eavesdropping gave him
what he imagined might be a clue.
He had gone with Mike to fetch a supply of water
from Nine Mile Spring, leaving Frank in charge of
their camp. They had set out during the afternoon
and, by dint of smart walking, returned to The Iron-
stones shortly before eleven. As they reached the
outskirts of the settlement, Monty’s bootlace became
untied, and he knelt to refasten it. Mike set the
precious bags down and took advantage of the oppor-
tunity to rest.
“ I’m not sorry we’re nearly there,” said Monty.
“ Are you? ”
“ There’s someone coming! ” exclaimed Mike.
“Well, let ’em come. They don’t matter.”
“ Here they are,” whispered Mike, “ and they
talking so loud.”
In spite of himself, Monty became infected with
Mike’s sense of mystery, and crouched under the
shelter of a bush in order to let the strangers go by
without knowing themselves observed.


“ They’ve drove out: everyone they think knows
something about them,” said the voice of the man
amwLdWm" "““ fr ° m Jum P in «
y ’ IB Pa>ing US enoUgh to
“ Well, they ain’t. I tell you, I’m only waitin’ for
the next camel-team to make a getaway. Wot with
workm m a rotten salted mine for a coupla bloomin’
sharks, I’m about fed up.”
“ We’ve got proof it’s a phony mine—we won’t half
make it hot for them. How much does the Govern-
ment pay for information? ”
“I dunno. And I dunno as I’ll bother about
informing I got other plans. Fair gets my goat,
this place does, and I sez to myself ...”
What he said to himself was known only to the
night and his companion, for their voices and footsteps
died away in the distance.
v D > id > e he ? r now? ” whi spered Mike excitedly.
You\ e got the evidence you want. I’m your witness.”
Its great. cried Monty, executing a brief war-
dance m the moonlight. “ Let’s go and tell Frank! ”
1 hey burst into the tent and poured their story out
to frank almost without troubling to lower then-
voices discreetly.
“ Now, what do you think of that? ” cried Monty
triumphantly when all was told. 7
. ot as y° u do >” replied his brother
qiuetly I don t want to dash your spirits, or any-
* « but the yam won’t hold water.”
,° n ,i WWait^ t dash our hopes, did you say? Not
that you d notice! You only smash them up and jump
on them How do you mean the story won’t hold
water r Ihere are two of us to prove it.”
“You’d have to prove it in a court of law and—l
don t mean to be unkind, Mike—but they’d never
accept your evidence. They’d say you had lost your
memory and weren’t a reliable witness.” 7


Mike was thoroughly downcast, as was Monty.
“Oh, hang it!”'exclaimed the latter. Then,
cheering up, he continued: “ Well, anyhow, we know
that they are bringing gold from some other place to
plant in the Jumping Jimmy.”
“ But we can’t do anything about that.”
“ Yes, we can. We might follow them and see them
bring back the loot.”
“ Yes—and follow them down the shaft and watch
them put the lumps of rock into place or shoot the gold
into a hole in the granite —give them a hand, in fact! ”
said Frank sarcastically.
Monty relapsed into silence and sat staring moodily
into the night. Frank laid a hand on his shoulder.
“Cheer up, old man! You’re doing wonderfully,
you know. Getting in with the Jumping Jimmy gang
as you have is a great help.”
But Monty was not listening; he had suddenly
recalled something he had omitted to tell his brother.
“ Beazley spoke about an inspector coming to look
at the mine. I forgot to tell you before. I wonder
if they’ve got wind of Dad’s coming. I wonder if Dad
is coming! ”
He brightened considerably and even frank per-
mitted the lifting of the gloom in which he had been
wrapped ever since their arrival at the camp. _
“ But how on earth could they have got wind of
him?” he pondered. .
« Oh, I don’t know! Might have heard it during
one of their mysterious expeditions, for instance. To-
morrow I’m going to try to worm that information out
of one of them. I’ll get it somehow! ”
Fortune favoured Monty the next day, for Kelly and
Larrigan announced their intention of being away all
night; so after work Monty took his banjo over to the
Jumping Jimmy and gave an impromptu concert,
which eventually included most of the prospectors, not
to mention a crowd of Chinese who squatted on the
fringe of the audience.


Frank and Mike were there as well, and it seemed
as though the hostility towards the trio had melted.
To be precise, Mike had never come under the ban,
but had placed himself under it by refusing to talk to
those who approached him and asked what had brought
him back so soon. He gathered that his recent exit
had been rather hasty, and perhaps helped by some-
one; but as no one attempted to molest him now, he
was unable to reconstruct the past.
“ Does anyone know,” asked Monty after a few
choruses, “ what was the largest island in the world
before Australia was discovered? ”
“New Guinea! ” said a voice promptly.
“ What about Greenland? ” came from the middle of
the crowd.
“ They don’t know if it’s an island or not,” said
someone else.
“ Borneo’s bigger than New Guinea,” said another.
Monty nearly doubled up with laughter.
“You’re a fine bunch!” he told them. “What
about Australia? ”
“ But you said it was before . . . ”
Then someone laughed, and suddenly they all saw
the point.
“ Kelly and Larrigan go away a good deal, don’t
they? ” remarked Frank to Beazley, by whose side he
found himself. “ I suppose they have lots of other
interests? ”
Beazley shot a keen glance at him.
“ Oh, yes —plenty! Been seeing to business else-
where. But they won’t be away so much after to-
morrow. There’s some talk of a licence inspector
coming, so you’d better see that yours is in order,
young fellow-me-lad! ”
“ Naturally, when inspectors come, the owners like
to be on the spot,” observed Frank.
“ Well, it’s usual.”
“ Do they trouble you often? ”
“ Not what you’d call trouble us. We see to that! ”


He laughed, and the sound was not nice, so that
Frank was left in no doubt as to what reception was
accorded over-zealous inspectors.
They smoked in silence for a while, listening to the
singing of the others. Even the Chinese did their best to
take up the tune of “ Tipperary,” though their efforts
were rather painful. Still, as it was strictly subdued,
no one bothered much about it.
Monty’s voice cut the silence that followed the song.
“ I saw a bicycle leaning against Noonan’s hut
to-day,” he said.
“Go on —we’ll buy it! ” said the man referred to.
“ Why was it leaning against my wall? ”
“ Because it was tyred! ”
“Garn! Think you’re smart, don’t you? You
stick to the fiddle, my lad! ”
Under cover of the rollicking “ Shenandoah,” Monty
found a chance of talking to Smith, who sat beside him.
“ We’re getting short of stores,” said the boy. “Do
you happen to know if there will be a team in soon? ”
“ Yes—they’re late—should have been here last week.
They should be here any day now. And I’m clearing
out with them, too —fed up with this bloomin’ ’ole! ”
“ Do you mean you’re leaving your job? ”
“ Yes; but keep it under your hat. I’ll be glad to
get back to civilisation where there ain’t no bloomin’
drums to keep you awake and where a man can get a
drink.”
“ What do you mean by drums? ” asked the boy.
“ The blacks, of course. Signalling. Mean to say
you ain’t heard ’em? ”
Monty shook his head.
“ I guess I sleep too soundly for that. Do you think
the blacks are going to raid the camp, or something? ”
“ Nothing surer, once the supplies come. We’ve had
it ’appen before, and it ain’t nice.”
“ But what can they do against so many white men? ”
“ What can’t they, the murdering devils! I wouldn’t
put anything past them myself.”


And Monty, remembering Blue Beard and his friends,
was inclined to agree, though he did not say so.
At that moment a rich voice started a solo, and
Monty picked up the tune and vamped to it
“ As Pat, an odd joker, and Yankee more sly,”
sang the miner,
‘ Riding together, a gallows passed by;
Said the Yankee to Pat, ‘ If I don’t make too free,
Give that gallows its due, and where would you be?
‘ Why, boyo,’ said Pat, ‘ ’faith, that’s easily known —
I’d be riding to town by myself all alone!
A stranger listening to the gust of laughter that
greeted this effort would have imagined that this was
an ordinary camp-fire gathering such as might be
seen at any Scout Jamboree, and would never have
guessed that in the morning these men would be
searching feverishly for gold, fiercely jealous and sus-
picious of their neighbours, almost savage in their lust
for wealth.
“ John Brown’s body lies a-mouldering in the grave! ”
roared a hundred voices, and the chorus completely
drowned the sound of the banjo. It drowned,
too, the approach of the Ford in which Larrigan
and Kelly went about, and no one was aware
of their premature return until a huge hand came over
Monty’s shoulder and grabbed at the banjo.
“ Stop that rotten noise, can’t you? ”
The silence was instantaneous. Frank and Mike
rose and moved close to Monty’s side, but no one else
moved. The crowd, fickle as such gatherings always
are, was all on the side of might as represented by
the huge form of Wild Cat Larrigan,
“ Let go! ” cried Monty, springing to his feet but
still retaining hold of the banjo. “Let go! Don’t
you dare bust my fiddle! ”
Even by the pale light of the moon, Larrigan could
see the fury in Monty’s eyes. He laughed.


“ All right, little Dimpled Darling. I won’t break
its little rattle. Run home to mummy! ”
“You beast! ”
Before Frank could stop him, Monty had dropped
the banjo and landed Larrigan neatly on the point of
the chin. The big man, who had been bending over
the boy, fell like a log.
“ Come out of this—quick! ” ordered Frank, grab-
bing his brother by the arm.
Ugly noises proceeded from the crowd, and Beazley
and his mates pushed their way towards the centre of
the disturbance.
“ What’s this? ” asked a quiet yet penetrating voice,
and the boys found themselves confronted by Stingaree
Kelly.
“ What you’ll get if you’re not careful! ” shouted
Monty, heedless of Frank’s warnings. “ Take a look
at it.”
They took advantage of the moment in which Stin-
garee bent over his partner to make good their escape,
followed by Mike, who had retrieved the banjo.
Beazley leaped after them, and a small crowd joined
in the pursuit. But the light was tricky and the heavy
men were no match for two nimble boys, who turned
and twisted among the pits that occurred at every few
yards, dodged behind shanties and heaps of mullock,
and finally disappeared apparently into the bowels of
the earth.
Mike was less fortunate, though he suffered nothing
more than a few bruises during his sprint to the tent.
Reaching it, he threw the hampering banjo inside and
turned at bay.
“Be off with ye! ” he shouted. “No harm’s been
done you this night, and Larrigan got no more than
he asked for.”
“ We’ll have those young devils out of there,” cried
Beazley, advancing on Mike.
“By the little pigs of Saint Anthony, that you won’t!
For one thing, they’re not here.”


“ Then where are they? ”
“ Faix! How should I know, and I not with them?
Go find them, and bad scran to ye! ”
“Over here! I saw something move!” yelled a
voice, and the hunt moved off in the direction indicated.
“ Now, where can those young craythers have got
to? ” mused Mike as he searched in the neighbourhood
of the tent. “ Will they have fallen down some shaft
at all? Is it myself should go after them, or would I
do better to stop here and mind their things? ”
Something moved in the distance, and Mike stepped
back into the darkness of the tent and watched it
through the flap.
“ It’ll be the boys coming back,” he decided.
But he could soon see that there was only one figure
moving stealthily in his direction.
“ They’ll have separated,” he told himself dubiously.
But when the creeping figure came close enough to
be distinguished, Mike saw with a shock that it was
certainly neither of the boys, nor was it a miner.
“ Saint Anthony save us! ” he muttered. “ It’s a
thieving black! ”
Mike was in an awkward position. He guessed that
the blackfellow was not alone, but that a tribe which
had watched the camp for several days had taken
advantage of the internal strife to make an attack,
probably in order to carry off the stores. If he gave
the alarm, Mike reasoned, he might bring half the
miners running, which would not only leave the bulk of
their dwindling stores unprotected, but would also cut
off the boys from their headquarters —perhaps even
lead to their discovery. He watched the dark figure
creeping closer and closer, but search as he might, he
could see no sign of any others. All the same, he knew
that they were there, worming their way through the
maze of shafts, slowly closing in on their objective.
Suddenly Mike made up his mind. Calculating
that the boys would not be very far away, he made a
funnel of his hands and yelled:


“Keep back, boys, the blacks are here! Hey!
The blacks are here! It’s a raid! ”
The excitement about Wild Cat Larngan, which
somehow developed into a free fight for all, surged
towards him.
“ What’s that? ” asked a voice.
“The blacks! Look to the stores! I saw one of
them this minute.”
No one doubted him for a moment, and the crowd
broke up instantly, the men running to their shacks to
seize what arms they possessed or to snatch up a pick
or shovel if they owned no gun.
With a wild whoop, about a hundred blacks sprang
up, apparently out of the ground, and made off into
the night. A few shots were fired, but the voice of
Stingaree Kelly could be heard advising the men to
conserve their ammunition. A sharp scream denoted
that a blackfellow was injured, but after that no sound
came from the flats, across which they had vanished.
“You saved us that time, Mike Donovan,” said
Kelly, striding up to the Irishman. “ Well, you owed
it to us. Now, if you’ll just cough up that little bag of
gold, we’ll let you go unmolested.”
“ I don’t know what you’re talking about,” declared
Mike. “ I tell you, I’ve lost me memory. I’ve got no
gold on me.”
“ I don’t suppose you have —you’d hardly be such a
fool. You’ve cached it somewhere. Well, I can
hardly expect you to dig it up before my eyes. But I
warn you —if that bag isn’t in my possession by noon
to-morrow, it’s going to be pretty hot for you.”
With that he turned on his heel and walked off.
Mike stood scratching his head and thinking deeply.
“ So that’s the little bag that young Frank’s carrying
about with him! ”he said to himself. “ I stole it from
the Jumping Jimmy, did I ? I wonder if I used to work
for them? I don’t feel like a thief, but there’s no
telling.”
“ Hullo, Mike! How goes it? ”


He swung round sharply to find Monty at his side.
“ Jehosophat! Where did ye come from? ”
“Shsh!” Frank appeared out of the gloom and
laid a warning hand on his arm. “ Come into the
tent, and don’t show a light.”
They went in and squatted on the ground.
“ We’ve been having the time of our lives,” whis-
pered Monty excitedly.
“ Ah, but what have ye been doing at all? ” queried
Mike.
“ Well,” said Frank, speaking very softly, “ as soon
as we got to a safe place —we’ll show you it some day
—we halted to get our breath. Monty spotted the
blacks advancing on the camp —we were pretty high
up and could see down on to the plain. We didn’t see
the point in showing ourselves just then, as we guessed
that someone else would give the alarm, so we stopped
where we were.
“But as soon as you yelled —it was you, wasn’t it?
I thought so! As soon as you gave the alarm and
everybody got busy looking to their guns and all that,
we felt it was safe to come out of hiding, so we did.”
“ Then where were you, and I looking for you? ”
“Not where you’d be likely to look! ” Monty told
him. “ Nor where anyone else thought to look either.
We were in Kelly’s car.”
“ Save us! Not in the motor-car that Wild Cat and
Stingaree drive? Where did you take it? ”
“We didn’t take it anywhere,” said Frank. “We
simply explored the contents, and mighty interesting
we found them. Bags of stuff from wherever those two
had been all day, all ready to dump into the Jumping
Jimmy and dig out again for the benefit of the inspector.
We brought some with us.”
“So that’s what those two rascals have been doing! ”
exclaimed Mike.
“ Yes,” put in Monty. “ What we heard last night
must have been true. They’ve been getting gold-
bearing quartz from somewhere to plant here. I


expect they’ve got any amount of it —they’ve been
away a good deal ever since we’ve been here.”
Frank shone his torch on the stones which he and his
brother had taken from their pockets, and Mike stared
down at them.
“ If we could get into the Jumping Jimmy,” said
Frank, “ I bet we’d find stacks of this stuff.”
“ I wonder if there’s any chance ...” began
Monty.
Frank’s voice cut in sharply.
“ Get that out of your head, youngster! Your baby
stuff may be going down quite well with Smith and
Beazley, but you’ll never put it over Stingaree and Wild
Cat. If you’re thinking of going down the mine, you
can forget it.”
“ There are more ways of killing a dog than hanging
him,” said Monty mysteriously. “For instance, there
may be something interesting in that iron office affair
which they keep locked so carefully.”
“ If maybe there was a little hole anywhere in the
wall, and it dark,” mused Mike.
Frank switched out the torch and swept up the stones
with his hand.
“ You’d get landed in jail for robbery,” he said.
“ Keep away from the office, both of you.”
Mike laughed.
“ Where’S they be putting us and no jail this side
of Caroline Wells? ” he asked.
“Well, anyhow, I forbid you to even think of such
a thing, Monty. You know it’s the last thing Dad
would allow, don’t you? ”
“ Oh, all right! I promise not to do anything that
may land us in a mess.”
Mike spoke up suddenly.
“ Won’t ye need to prove where this rock comes
from? We know it isn’t out of the Jumping Jimmy
because of what Monty said. But will that be good
enough for the inspector when he comes? ”
“ If he gets suspicious,” said Frank, “ he’ll assay a


certain quantity of this stuff along with some dug out
of the solid rock before his eyes. But if we could get
proof of where these specimens came from, it would
clinch the matter beyond doubt.”
“ Say! Let’s go and see what we can find out! ”
burst in Monty. “We know that they go the other
side of the hills, because that’s the direction the road
leads in. We could cross by a short cut and have a
dekko. Goodness knows what we might find. Mike
would look after things while we were away, wouldn’t
you, Mike?”
“ Sure I would! ”
“ How much water have we? ” asked Frank sud-
denly.
“ Enough for two days.”
“ Then we’ll go for some to-morrow night —only
we’ll go in the opposite direction as soon as we’re clear
of the camp. If we do that, will you go alone for some
the next night, Mike? ”
“ Sure! And if you’re going to be climbing these
hills to-morrow, you’d best be getting some sleep now.
Into bed with you, ye craythers! ”
The boys obeyed gladly enough and were soon asleep.
Only Mike, sitting wakeful, smoking his pipe outside
the tent, knew that the blackfellows’ fires were more
plentiful than usual on the flats, while the muffled
throbbing of their signal drums beat like a pulse through
the night.


CHAPTER IX
THE SECRET MINE
No one came near the boys or Mike Donovan that
morning, and about the middle of the afternoon Frank
and Monty, ostentatiously displaying several water-
bags, made their way out of the camp in the direction
of Nine Mile Spring. Having gained the shelter of
the Bush, they skirted the foot of the hills until they
judged themselves to be well out of sight of the settle-
ment, when they began to climb.
As Mike had remarked, the hills were extremely steep.
They loomed up cliff-like above their heads, and fre-
quently the boys found it difficult to discover a foothold.
“ If we make for that gap,” said Frank as they
rested on a ledge, “ it ought to lead us through to the
other side.”
“ Did Dad say anything about another mining camp
on the south side? ” asked Monty.
“ No; it’s puzzling me rather. I’ve never heard of
there being any gold found there. Perhaps it’s a recent
find that hasn’t got into the papers.”
“ Well, we’ll know soon with any sort of luck. Lets
be getting on —it’ll soon be dark at this rate.”
“Yes, and it won’t be any joke finding our way up
this hill then. Come on! ”
Frank leading, they continued to climb, but the gap
at which they aimed did not seem to come any closer
for some considerable time. At last, however, the
shadow in which they struggled was lit by a strong
ray of light, and they knew it for the setting sun shining
through the gap.
“ Hooray! ” cried Monty. “ We’re getting there! ”


A few minutes later they pulled themselves on to a
ledge and stood up for a last effort.
“ Wonder what we’ll find? ” breathed Monty.
“ The same as what we’ve left behind, I expect,”
panted Frank.
Standing on the ledge, they surveyed the scene they
were about to forsake.
Below them the hillside fell away steeply, with the
mining camp many feet below, giving the impression
of being seen through the wrong end of a telescope.
They could make out numerous shacks and humpies,
and recognised the largest dump with its attendant
cluster of sheds as the Jumping Jimmy. Their own
tent they could recognise only with difficulty.
“ I hope Mike’s getting on all right,” said Monty.
“So do I! ” replied his brother, but his tone plainly
meant something quite different from what Monty had
intended.
“ Mike’s a white man,” proclaimed Monty.
“ He may be while his memory' is lost, but we don’t
know how he’ll turn out when he gets it back —and
that may happen at any moment.”
“ Well, we haven’t anything of value for him to
steal, except my banjo. As a matter of fact, we’re on
the right side, because we have his bag of gold.”
“ He could give us away,” Frank reminded him.
“ Oh, don’t cross your bridges before you come to
them! You really are the limit! Come on —let’s see
what troubles lie on the other side of this gap. You
seem to thrive on them! ”
Reaching up, he drew himself on to level ground,
and Frank followed. Keeping close to the hillside for
fear of being seen from the camp, the brothers crossed
the pass, which proved to be about two hundred yards
wide with rocky, precipitous sides. Before them,
apparently quite close, loomed the Ronald Ranges with
their three sharp peaks. At their feet they were
surprised to find something entirely different from
what lay on the northern side of The Ironstones.


Immediately below them the ground fell away in a
steep granite cliff, which ended in a well-wooded
hillside. From there the hill went down in a succession
of steps to the narrow valley separating these hills from
the Ronalds. Trees and shrubs were plentiful and
there was a certain wild beauty in the scenery.
“It looks as though there were plenty of water
here,” commented Frank. “ It’s such a contrast to
the parched country on the other side. Even those
great trees around Mr. Martin’s Mission looked dried
up compared with these.”
“ The grass in the valley looks pretty good, too,”
remarked Monty. “ But the question is—how do we
get there? ”
“ I don’t know that it’s worth going down. I don’t
see any sign of any workings, do you? ”
Shading their eyes, they searched the slopes and
valley before them without discovering anything at all
like a mine or, indeed, any other sign of human life.
Suddenly there was a tremendous explosion, the
ground shook beneath them and a great cloud of dust
burst into the air, carrying with it what seemed to be
lumps of rock.
“Dynamite!” cried Frank. “They’re blasting
rock! Let’s go! ”
“ It seems to be about half-way down, over to the
right. You go first —if I fall on you, I won’t be as
heavy as you would if I were underneath.”
It took them a considerable time to make their way
down the cliff, but once they reached the wooded
hill, going was easy. Bearing to the right, they came
in about a quarter of an hour on the scene of the
explosion.
There was a tremendous gash in the hillside where
rock had been blasted out from time to time. From
there, a miniature tramway ran for a few yards to a
high dump at the side of which rose up what looked at
first glance like a sawn-off aerial mast —the skeleton
known in mining language as “ poppet-legs,” supporting


at the head a huge iron wheel, from which hung the
rope that let the cage down into the shaft, for the
hillside workings were obviously a new development.
An overhead tramway on wooden supports ran from
half-way up the tower to lose itself in an iron shed
about fifty yards distant.
“ A fully-fledged mine! ” exclaimed Frank.
“ Yes! And by the look of it, it’s been here quite a
while.”
“ But I don’t see the point in keeping it secret.”
“I do!” Monty’s voice held the excitement that
indicated he had some bright idea. “ This is scheduled
as pasture-land, isn’t it? I seem to remember hearing
Dad talk about a man owning some near the Ronalds.”
“Well?”
“ Well, can’t you see the idea? The man this land
belongs to works the mine secretly and keeps the dis-
covery to himself so that there won’t be a gold rush,
which would ruin his pastures completely.”
“ I must say that the reasoning doesn’t appeal to me.
With all this wealth at his doorstep, 1 shouldn’t imagine
that a few acres of pasture would matter to him.
Anyway, he has to dispose of the gold, and he must
explain where he gets it and pay for the mining lease.”
“ But suppose Kelly and Larrigan own this mine
with that chap who sold the shares in Adelaide —what’s
his name? ”
“ Copley. Go on, Sexton Blake! ”
“ Suppose that Kelly, Larrigan and Copley owned
this mine and were working it secretly, raking in the
shareholders’ money for the Jumping Jimmy all the
time —why, it’s money for jam! ”
“ Money for jail , I should say! ”
“ Not if they get away with it. If they’re caught
out on the Jumping Jimmy, or if things begin to get too
hot for them, all they have to do is to slip around here
and blossom out as the owners of a bona fide mine.”
“You worked in that * bona fide ’ well, but other-
wise I think it’s a rotten yarn. Even owning a real


mine wouldn’t save them from jail if they were
caught.”
“ A man like Copley would wriggle out of anything,
I guess, if he could sell shares in a salted mine, as we
know the Jumping Jimmy to be.”
“It won’t work, Monty—you may as well give it up.
And even if it would —do you imagine they’re hoarding
up the gold they get here? ”
“ No. I expect they’re shipping it either north or
into Queensland on a faked licence.”
“ My dear Holmes, you are positively brilliant! ”
mocked Frank, adding in his ordinary tones: “No,
my dear boy, that simply won’t wash. As I’ve told
you before, you read too many detective and Wild
West yarns. Do try to improve your taste, Monty ! ”
“ Well, come along and let’s have a look at this mine
before dark.”
Monty was slightly dashed at his brother’s reception
of his splendid solution of the mystery, and walked
on in silence —a rare thing for him —among the trees
that temporarily hid the mine from view. Suddenly
he stopped dead in his tracks.
“Look!” he cried. Frank followed his pointing
hand and saw, caught up in the branches of a tree, what
was unmistakably part of the wing of a monoplane.
“ Dad’s machine! ” he cried. “He must have
crashed. Let’s hunt about!”
So they hunted, dreading to find what they sought.
Various sections of wreckage came to light, and trees
were smashed where the monoplane had finally fallen,
after struggling like a wounded bird for some distance.
Twisted and crumpled, the machine lay scattered over
the ground, its nose buried deeply in a hole which it
had made. Packages of stores and tins of spirit lay
about, but there were no signs of fire or explosion.
Also, what the boys feared to see was not to be dis-
covered, though they searched almost till dark.
“ He must have got away alive and safe! ” breathed
Monty thankfully.


“ We’re going on to that mine,” announced Frank,
whose jaw was set and determined, “ and they’re
going to tell us what they know about Dad.”
“ But what if . .
“ Oh, never mind anything else! Nothing matters
but finding out if Dad is safe. Come on! ”
Breaking into a run, Frank led the way to the mine,
and soon they came to the edge of the clearing in which
it stood. The gaunt poppet-legs stood out against the
sunset, and several trucks stood at its base. Following
the line of the overhead bridge, they studied the
building whose roof it entered. In there the boys knew
that they would find the giant stampers that crush the
rock to fine powder so that the gold may be washed out
of it. There, too, thought Monty, they would discover
the men who worked this strangely-silent mine.
“ It’s funny there’s no one about,” he said.
“ It’s not funny at all! ” snapped Frank, whose
nerves were strained almost to breaking-point with
anxiety. “It must have been knock-off time when that
explosion took place, and you ought to know that
blasting is always the last job of the day. They don’t
go near the place till the next morning for fear of a
landslide, or in case one of the fuses hasn’t gone off.
They’ll be having their tea somewhere—on the other
side of the sheds, apparently.”
They walked out into the clearing and approached
the mine, and were now able to see what the huge
battery-shed and the trees had hidden till now—a
smaller shed which evidently served as office and assay-
room, since it boasted a brick chimney.
“Cost something to cart those bricks up here!”
commented Frank.
At that moment Monty grabbed his arm.
“Look!” he commanded, and Frank looked and
stood open-mouthed and speechless.
For there, painted in bold black letters along the
white wall of the small shed, was the last name they
expected this mine to have;


THE JUMPING JIMMY.
“ Are you mad, or am I? ” asked Monty when he
recovered the use of his tongue.
“ We both are, as we seem to be seeing the same
thing. Gee! Isn’t that clever!”
“ I don’t see the point.”
“ Well, you ought to —you got half-way to it with
your wild reasoning a little while ago. I take back
half of what I said about you, Mont.”
“ If you’d only explain . . .” said Monty plain-
tively.
“ Don’t talk so loudly —we don’t want to be seen till
we’ve taken our bearings. Having two mines of the
same name is a brilliant idea. They’re probably both
on the same degree of latitude, and there can’t be very
much difference in longitude. If any trouble occurs,
Copley can simply point to an error in one figure in
the specifications—a typographical error, as they say
when they want to get the typist into a row. I’ll bet
they don’t say whether the mine’s to the north or south
of The Ironstones.”
“ Dad’s instructions said the north.”
“ Naturally—they were given him by a shareholder.
It’s even likely that the original documents have been
faked.”
Monty began to see daylight.
“ And then,” he interrupted, “ if Dad found out that
the other mine was a fake, Kelly and Larrigan could
say it was a mistake and that he was looking at the
wrong one.”
“ Yes; but they’d hope to get away with it without
having to disclose their secret.”
“ Bright idea! But don’t you think it seems awfully
quiet here? ”
It was so still as to be uncanny. The silence was
unbroken even by the sound of conversation, which
the hoys should have been able to hear, since they stood
close to the smaller shed.


Frank took a pace forward, and Monty moved
behind him.
“ I don’t like it,” muttered Frank. “ Looks fishy
to me! ”
Monty agreed.
“ It’s too quiet to be natural,” he commented.
They had passed the door of the assay-room, and
did not notice that it opened very quietly when they
had gone on.
“ I wonder if Dad’s anywhere about? ” said Frank.
There was no answer from his usually talkative brother.
“ I wonder where they’ve put him,” he continued.
Still there was no reply. Whipping round, Frank
was amazed to find himself alone.
The uncanny stillness had begun to tell on his nerves,
and it took all his self-control to keep him from shouting.
Suddenly the silence was shattered. From inside the
shed came muffled yells and sounds of a struggle and
of the iron wall being kicked frantically.
“ Coming, Mont! ” shouted Frank, wrenching open
the door and rushing in.
In the half-light he could see his brother struggling
in the grasp of a big man, and flew to the rescue.
“Grab him!” yelled Monty, and Frank wrapped
his arms around the boy’s assailant. But, with a
sudden wrench and a slippery twist, the man freed
himself and rushed into the open air, slamming the
door. A second later there were sounds of a padlock
being hastily fitted and snapped.
“ Who was it? ” asked Frank anxiously.
“Don’t know! He grabbed me while you were
looking the other way —shoved his hand over my
mouth so that I couldn’t yell. I was mad as soon as
I did call out. Of course, that was only his trick to
get you here too. lam a. fool! ”
“ Never mind, old chap—you couldn’t be expected
to realise his game at such a time.”
“Well, we’ve got to get out of here. Let’s have a
look round.”


Moodily they studied the room by the light of their
torches, and the more they saw of it, the less they liked
it. It was about twelve feet square and smelt horribly
of chemicals.
“ Like the Lab. at school,” commented Monty.
Two broad shelves ran along two sides of the room,
and on these were ranged earthen crucibles ’such as
are used to melt bullion and purify gold, together with
large jars of sulphur and treacle and bottles of acids
and other materials that are used during the process
of extracting gold from the baser metals which cling
to it. In one corner was a heap of small bags. Frank
picked one up and examined it.
“ This is exactly like that bag of Mike’s,” he remarked,
taking it out of his pocket. “ They are sample bags
—used to collect samples of gold for assay purposes.”
Monty whistled softly.
“ Then it does look as though . . .’’he said regretfully.
“Yes, it does,” agreed Frank.
“ Well, he must have had some very good reason
for pinching it,” declared Monty in defence of his
favourite.
In spite of their position, Frank nearly laughed.
“ Anyone would have a very good reason for stealing
a bag of gold,” he said, “ Even such a small quantity
as this. Come on, let’s finish our tour.”
The whole of one end of the room was occupied by
a furnace filled with cooling ashes, and a wooden bench
on which the assayer worked. The other end contained
nothing but the door. There was one window, set
high up so that its light fell fully on the bench, but it
was guarded by iron bars.
“ It doesn’t look very hopeful,” remarked Monty;
“ but if you gave me a lift, we might find that the bars
are not fixed very securely.”
“ As a matter of fact,” said Frank, “ I don’t see how
one can fix bars properly to an iron wall—it’s very
thin. But it’s no use trying that way —they’re bound
to be watching for us.”


“ If only we knew who they were it wouldn’t be so
bad ! ” sighed Monty.
Frank was poking about the room, pulling stoppers
out of bottles and peering at the contents, and stirring
the ashes in the furnace as if they might reveal the
solution of the secret. Apparently they did, for he
said softly:
“ Come over here! There is a way out,” he whis-
pered when Monty stood beside him, “ but we’ll have
to wait till after dark. There’s the chimney.”
“ Gee! I hadn’t thought of that! But won’t it be
all smooth inside? ”
“ It’s not likely to be—l don’t imagine the builders
will have made a first-class job of it here in the Never-
Never. Help me to clean out this flue, and we’ll have
a look.”
Noiselessly they cleared out the ashes and soot and
then took it in turns to stare up the long, narrow funnel.
A long way off, it seemed, the darkening sky showed
greyly at the end of a black passage. By the light of
a torch they saw that the bricks projected into the
chimney, each ledge carrying its load of soot.
“ Ugh! We’ll be black as sweeps by the time we
get out! ” exclaimed Monty.
“ That’ll be better than being white as snow in
here,” said his brother. “ Now, we’d better not show
any more light to give away our movements —there
may be small nail-holes in the walls.”
They sat down to wait with what patience they
could muster until it should be quite dark. There was
no sound about the place. Apparently the man who
had captured them was the solitary inhabitant, and
was mounting guard outside the door or had gone to
report his catch.
“ It’s a good job the chimney isn’t very tall,”
whispered Frank.
“Yes; and I noticed that it was pretty close to the
poppet-legs—we should be able to climb down them.
Thank goodness we haven’t long to wait! ”


“ I’m taking one of these bags,” announced Frank,
suiting the action to the word.
“ What’s the idea? ”
“ If they’ve held gold-dust, and they probably have,
and if it assays the same as Mike’s little lot, we’ll know
that he got it from here —or from the other Jumping
Jimmy if they’re salting it with gold from this mine.”
“ But you can’t assay a bag! ”
“ Yes, you can. You burn it, and test the ashes.
But we’d better get going. You go first, and if our
guard comes in I’ll deal with him. Take your boots
off and tie the laces together and sling them over
your shoulder.”
“ But I’ll fill you up with soot,” objected Monty.
“ Well, I won’t start climbing till you’re clear of the
chimney. Here —take this with you in case the space
between the chimney and the poppet-legs is more than
we think.”
He thrust into Monty’s hand an iron hook to which
he had attached a length of fine rope.
“ Most obliging of them to leave such things lying
about,” he said with a grin. “Tie it around your
middle, and see that you don’t show a light, and good
luck!”
A moment later, Monty was in the furnace, wriggling
on his stomach towards the flue, up which he began
to climb, realising for the first time how a fly feels on
a wall. It seemed as though he was in that smelly,
stifling tunnel for hours. The brick ledges were very
narrow, so that he could scarcely find a toehold. But
he did progress, although slowly, groping upwards,
securing a grip with the tips of his fingers, and drawing
his feet up after him. They seemed to weigh tons, his
fingers bled, and he was seized with a longing to sneeze.
He thrust his tongue against the roof of his mouth and
was relieved to find that it stopped the irritation. The
only other dodge he knew was to rub his upper lip, and
that would have been impossible without falling down
the flue.


With aching limbs and bursting lungs he came to
the end of his journey at last, and was overjoyed to
find his head sticking out of the top of the chimney,
with a stream of fresh air fanning it. A moment later
he was sitting on the brick coping, looking about him.
After the obscurity of the chimney he was able to
see clearly. Frank had been right—the skeleton tower
was not so close as it had looked from the ground.
He threw the hook towards it and caught his breath at
the noise it made as it engaged a cross-bar. Holding
the rope, he slipped back inside the chimney, but as
no other sound broke the silence, he ventured out
again.
There was no hook or brick on which to secure the
end of the rope firmly, so that there was nothing for
it but to swing out across space towards the poppet-legs.
Tying the rope about his middle, Monty dropped off
the coping, and within a second was grasping the
woodwork of the tower gratefully. He was appar-
ently unobserved, and sat resting and waiting till
Frank’s head appeared at the top of the chimney.
Throwing the hook across the intervening space, he
made the rope taut, so that Frank was able to make
the journey hand-over-hand, suspended in mid-air.
Neither spoke, but slipped noiselessly down the tower,
going from one diagonal support to the other, and
made for the shelter of the trees.


CHAPTER X
KELLY SHOWS HIS HAND
“ Let’s take a rest,” panted Frank when they had
covered some distance in silence. Suiting the action
to the word, he dropped down on a heap of dead
leaves, and Monty collapsed beside him, grateful for
the rest after the strenuous hours he had passed
through.
“ I wonder what we ought to do,” pondered Frank,
keeping his voice low in case someone should be in
their neighbourhood. “ I feel that we ought to hang
about here and try to find out something about Dad;
but, on the other hand, I don’t want to lose sight of
Larrigan and Kelly just now. There may be some
interesting developments in that direction at any
minute.”
“ So far as Dad’s concerned,” said Monty, “ I don’t
see that we can do much. It’s evident that he isn’t
being held prisoner at the secret mine, because we
were locked in the only suitable building—they’d
never put him in the battery-shed where he could take
samples from the copper plates that the gold sticks to.
Therefore, he either got away safely when the ’plane
crashed, or . . .”
Neither of them cared to complete the sentence.
“ What’s puzzling me,” resumed Frank, “ is—where
do the men live who work on this mine? I couldn’t
see a sign of any dwelling, could you? ”
“ No. But, seeing that the mine is a secret one,
don’t you think the men would live some distance
from it? I mean —a settlement would make rather a
splash on the landscape, wouldn’t it? ”


“But they must live somewhere! There must be
some kind of township in the neighbourhood.”
Monty considered for several minutes before reaching
a solution.
“But of course there is!” he exclaimed. “This
country belongs to a pastoralist, doesn’t it? Well, as
he is obviously also the owner of the secret Jumping
Jimmy, the miners must live at the farm— miners by
day and cowboys by night, so to speak.”
“By Jove, Monty, I believe you’ve got it! If we
find the farm we’ve got the men who know all about
the mine. And perhaps we’ll find Dad as well. Come
on! ”
He sprang to his feet, but Monty did not move.
“ The farm won’t run away,” he said. “ Even
when the watchman tells how he discovered us, they
won’t shut up shop, pull down the mine and all clear
out of the district, will they? ”
“ No, I suppose not. But what are you getting
at ?
“ Only this —that the best thing for us to do is to
return to the other side of the hills and lie low for a
few days until the people here relax the look-out they’re
bound to keep for us. Then we can come back and
reconnoitre properly.”
“ I believe you’re right,” said Frank slowly. “ Yes;
that would be the best thing to do. But I don’t like
leaving without trying to find Dad.”
“ If Dad’s been here over two weeks and nothing
dreadful has happened to him, it’s not going to happen
all of a sudden. If he’s . . .”
Once again he left his remark unfinished, and they
began their climb in silence,
“ I think we’re out of our course,” said Frank after
about ten minutes. “ We’d better bear more to the
right.”
O.K. This certainly seems smoother going than
we had on the way down.”
They changed their course, making what headway


they could in the darkness among the trees. Suddenly
Frank, who walked ahead, gave an exclamation.
“ There’s something here. A shaft, I think. Be
careful! ”
Monty could distinguish what seemed to be a heap
of earth, and they approached it warily lest the ground
should give way beneath their feet. Cautiously Frank
examined the neighbourhood with his torch.
“ It’s a well! ” he exclaimed.
“ And a spring! ” added Monty. “ Listen! ”
He was right, for there was certainly a faint trickle
of water to be heard.
“ Then it must be fresh,” commented Frank. “ All
the wells on the other side depend on water lying in
the layers of rock, freshening after the rains and getting
brackish in times of drought.”
Going down on their knees, they examined the well.
The light showed a deep hole sunk through the granite
into a layer of whitish chalk. Trickling gently from
one side, where rock and chalk met, was a slender
stream of water of about the same volume as that
given by a tap which is only half turned on.
<{ “What a godsend in this place!” breathed Frank,
That explains why the mine has been going for so
long. Lack of good water usually drives most of the
miners out of these parts after a few months.”
. looks as though they draw water out of the well
in the evening and leave the spring to fill it up again
overnight,” observed Monty.
Frank took up a pail that was lying near the edge
of the well and lowered it gently by means of the rope
that was tied to its handle. When it was full, he
pulled it up, and they both drank gratefully, finding
the liquid pure and ice-cold.
“ I wish we had brought the bags after all,” Monty
said. We could have taken some of this back with
™;. I didn’t quite fancy the flavour of the last lot.”
I wondered if you had noticed it. I didn’t say
anything purposely, but it did seem to me to have a


slight flavour of Glauber salts. If Nine Mile Spring
turns brackish, that will be the end of The Ironstones.
And that means that our time is strictly limited.”
“ Then what’s the good of the place at all? ” asked
Monty as, scooping up a handful of the soft earth out
of the hole, he proceeded to use it for soap to remove
some of the soot from his face and hands. “If it’s going
to be impossible to live in The Ironstones for half the
year, where’s the use in trying to get gold out of it? ”
“No use at all —except that gold is valuable and
men will risk anything to get it. After all, they can
quit the place when the water goes bad and return
after the rains, can’t they? ”
“ Then this well explains why the Jumping Jimmy
has kept going all through the past summer—the one
people have shares in, I mean? ”
“ I suppose it does. Copley made out that there
was fresh water on the claim, but this is where it really
is. I don’t suppose that gang goes near the place
unless they get wind of an inspector’s visit or something
of the sort.”
“ Well, let’s be getting on. I feel a bit fresher since
that wash, don’t you?”
“ Yes, we must go—once the moon rises it won’t be
easy to get back unobserved. Give us another drink.”
“ I guess this is where our supplies will come from
in future,” said Monty as he hauled up another pail
of water.
“ You’ve said it, youngster! ”
Erasing their footmarks by sweeping the ground with
some twigs, they continued on their way. Within a
few minutes they located the gap, where they found
the rope and hook of the greatest service in negotiating
the cliff. Clambering, slipping and falling, they
made their way down the slopes of The Ironstones.
“ The water-bags will have to stop where we hid
them,” said Frank. “We can’t go right down on to
the flats now. Alike will pick them up when he goes
for water to-morrow night.”


“ We’ll have to go with him,” said Monty, “ to
show him the way to the new well.”
“ One of us will, at any rate. Here —give me a
hand over this boulder.”
As they neared the camp, the sound of bells came
clearly up to them. First one and then another rang
softly across the flats, each clear-toned, but each on a
different note.
“ Camels,” exclaimed Monty. “ I heard bells like
that at Oodnadatta, didn’t you?”
“ That means that the team has come with the
supplies. I hope Mike thought to get us some more
flour.”
They reached the settlement without attracting any
notice, and gave Mike the surprise of his life when they
entered the tent.
“ Holy snakes! ” he ejaculated. “ Where have ye
been, ye craythers? ”
“Shsh!” warned Frank. “We don’t want to
advertise our return. Have we been missed?”
“ Who do you think would be missing you, unless it
was myself? Missed? No—they’ve all been too
occupied with other things to give a thought to you.”
“We heard the camel-bells. Did the supplies
come? And did you buy some flour —we’re getting
short.”
“ The team is in and I did buy some flour. But I
got something else as well.”
Frank yawned as he pulled off his boots, for he was
very tired.
“ What was it? ” he asked lazily.
“ A nasty shock, that’s what it was.”
“ Why —what happened? ”
“ There’s a white driver in charge of the team —all
the others are Afghans. Well, this man he comes up
to me a minute after they arrived and he says: ‘ Hullo,
Mike Donovan! What are you doing here ? I
thought you’d been chucked out.’ So I says: ‘ls it
myself you’re meaning and I never seeing you before? ’


And he replies: ‘Tell that to your uncle, Mike
Donovan! You’d hardly be forgetting Dave Wilson,
would you ? ’ And just then up comes Wild Cat Larrigan
and says to the driver: ‘ Mike’s lost his memory.’ Just
like that he says it, and they both wink.”
“And didn’t you know this chap Wilson? ” asked
Frank as he rolled into his blanket.
“ Never seen him in me life, so far as I know. I’d
recognise his ugly phiz if I’d ever seen it before, I
should think. I never saw worse.”
“ When you do get your memory back,” observed
Frank, “ things are going to be interesting.”
Mike rolled over and laid a hand on the boy’s arm.
“ I know you don’t trust me and I like a guardian
angel to ye both,” he said rather plaintively; “but
memory or no memory, it’s no harm I’ll be doing you
boys, I take my oath on that.”
But Frank was deaf to this protestation of loyalty,
and so was Monty—the events of the day had exhausted
them utterly, and they slept.
As they breakfasted in the early dawn, Mike said:
“ I don’t like the look of some of the men here, and
that’s a fact. They’re sick, and I’m fearing it’s
something serious.”
“ What do you think it is—measles? ”
“ No, Monty, it’s worse than that. This chap next
to us, now —his legs are swelling and I don’t like the
look of him at all.”
Frank whistled.
“ Beri-beri! ” he exclaimed.
“ That’s what I think,” agreed Mike.
“ The water! It tasted a little of Glauber salts the
last time we had any.”
“ And it’ll taste of Epsoms as well this time,” Mike
said gloomily, glancing at Monty. Frank read his
unspoken fears for the younger boy.
“ That’s all right, Mike! We don’t have to use the
water from Nine Mile Spring. We’ve found a well of
our own.”


Hastily they told of their discovery, concealing all
details about the secret mine—in fact, Mike found their
account of what they had done the previous day
extremely unsatisfactory and was at a loss to fill in the
gaps,
“ We’ll get water from this well to-night,” said
Monty, “ and then we won’t go down with fever.”
“ I’m glad,” said Mike. “ It’s a bad thing, this
Barcoo rot, and the heat won’t improve it.”
The day was particularly hot with more than a
hint of thunder in the air, and as it advanced Frank
realised that Mike was quite accurate in his observa-
tions. Several of the miners looked very ill, and the
man on the neighbouring claim had taken to his bed.
At lunch-time the men tended to gather in little
groups to discuss the situation.
“You know,” remarked Monty, “ I feel that we’re
doing wrong in keeping this well secret. If these men
could get pure water they’d be all right.”
“ It’s an awkward position,” his brother agreed.
“ If we advertise our knowledge, it will be all up with
us, because the well undoubtedly belongs to Kelly,
Larrigan & Co.”
“ Well, then, couldn’t we let some of the sick men
have a supply of fresh water to-night? We needn’t
mention where we got it.”
Mike looked up at the sky.
“ If it rains there’ll be no need,” he said, “ for they’ll
catch water in pans and buckets and whatever will
hold it, and Nine Mile Spring will be fresher. But it’ll
need to rain an awful lot! ”
“ We must wait and see what is best to do,” Frank
decided. “You and Monty can go for water this
afternoon, and if there’s no rain, the only alternative
is to distribute what you bring.”
Mike looked grave.
“Ye know it’s a terrible risk you’re running! It’s
certain that those two will guess where the water came
from, and then ...”


“ Oh, we have our eyes open! You don’t have to
worry about us. Anyhow, what can they do? They
can t kill us for helping a few poor beggars suffering
from Barcoo rot.”
“ You’ll know what they can do,” said Mike, “ and
I think it would be best if you had no knowledge of
this well. Let you say you’ve never heard of it.
It’s myself will be making the discovery.”
“ That’s decent of you, Mike, but we couldn’t have
you doing that. Besides, Monty and I feel that our
time here is nearly up. By to-morrow at the latest
we hope to have proved our case against Kelly and
Larrigan, and then we’ll all clear out —before they have
time to do anything to us.”
“ It’s a couple of babes ye are and I an old fool
with ye! Get on with the work —we can’t be loafingr
like this all the day.”
Mike slipped down into the trench and began using
the pick, the boys remaining on the surface washing
minute specks of gold from the dirt that had already
been crushed.
As they worked they saw the camel-team assemble,
the bells jangling loudly. Each tall beast wore either
a leather collar or a coloured woollen rope about its
neck, to which was attached the bell and a red cord,
which in turn was tied to the tail of the next beast.
The caravan lumbered off, swaying slowly out of sight
in a westerly direction, the enormous pads of the
camels leaving a narrow, winding path that would
not be effaced for years because, oddly enough, nothing
ever seems to grow over the trail of a camel-train.
Hardly had the sound of their going died away than
Frank, seeing a shadow cast upon the ground before
him, looked up to behold the unwelcome vision of
Stingaree Kelly.
“ Much colour? ” he asked.
“ Not much. A few specks, that’s all! ”
“ H’m! I shouldn’t have thought it would have
been worth your while to bother with this claim.”


“It isn’t, either. We’re going to pack up if our
luck doesn’t turn in a couple of days.”
“Is that so ? We’ll be sorry to lose you! Where
will you go when you leave here? ”
“ That’s our business.”
“Is it, now? And perhaps it’s your business why
you’ve jumped this claim.”
“ In any case,” said Frank, “ I don’t see that it’s
any affair of yours.”
“ It only happens to be my claim, that’s all.”
“ Then why haven’t you bothered about it before?
No, Mr. Kelly—l’m afraid that yarn won’t wash.
Try another.”
“ You’ll keep a civil tongue in your head, you young
puppy, or you’ll be sorry for it.”
“ Civility was never my strong point, I’m afraid.
Now, do you mind going away —we’re busy.”
“ I’ll trouble you for a sight of your licence.”
“Oh? And since when have they made you
inspector for this district? As you say the claim is
yours, suppose you show your licence? ”
“ That I won’t do ! Show my licence at the bidding
of a miserable little whipper-snapper like you! I’m
the biggest man on this joint, and I’ll have you know
it. Out with that licence, or it will be the worse for
you.”
“ Oh, run away! Can’t you see we’re busy? ”
“We aim to please! ” said Monty suddenly, and at
that moment, as if by accident, he upset the pan in
which he was washing dirt, so that the mud ran over
Kelly’s boots. Stingaree swore loudly, and Monty
laughed.
“ You’ll laugh the other side of your mouth before
I’m done with you! ” threatened Kelly. “ The
inspector’s here now, if you want to know. I thought
I’d do you a good turn by warning you, and this is
what I get. I’m going to fetch him.”
He strode away, and the boys looked at each
other.


“ Stingo, the world-famous magician, will now
produce the rabbit out of the hat! 55 announced
Monty.
“Yes, it’s funny. I wonder whom he’ll fetch? ”
They were not left many minutes in doubt, for Kelly,
having walked a few yards and tick-tacked to someone
whom they could not see, presently returned with a
companion.
He was a tall, stout man, clad in a khaki suit and
leather leggings. He wore a broad belt which carried
ammunition and a revolver. He was tanned by the
weather and needed a shave.
“ Quite a good imitation of a licence inspector,”
thought Frank, who recognised him at once.
He had last seen him in Adelaide, nattily clad in
palest grey, his equator marked by a fine gold chain,
and he had been popping in the busiest way in and out
of those buildings which contained the offices of People
with Money. Instead of a gun, he had carried an
impressive portfolio; in the place of bullets, he had
beautifully-engraved share certificates. But the result
was the same as it would be now if he were really an
inspector—he had parted the People from their
Money. It was Mr. Copley.
“Here he is!” announced Kelly. “Here’s the
young beggar that has no licence. You’ve seen mine
and you know that I hold one for this claim.”
“ You’ll have to clear out of here,” said Copley in a
loud, swaggering voice. “ I’ve seen all Mr. Kelly’s
licences, and this claim is his. You can consider
yourself under arrest. You’ll be sent down to Caroline
Wells within a day or so —the police are following
me.”
“You never spoke a truer word,” laughed Frank.
“ If they know where you are, they probably are
trailing you.”
Copley flushed to the colour of boiled beetroot.
“ That sort of talk won’t make things easier for you.
Come on—out of this ! ”


“ But I happen to have the licence for this claim,”
said Frank calmly.
“ Show it to me,” blustered Copley, wanking at
Kelly.
“ Not on your life! But I’ll tell you this much
about it—Fred Matthews gave it to me.”
“ Who is Fred Matthews? ”
“ Ask Mr. Kelly —he knows the answer to that
one.”
Kelly looked fit to burst,
“ Never heard of him! ” he said.
“No? Then you will quite soon. Now, buzz off,
the pair of you.”
“ You’re under arrest,” repeated Copley loudly.
“ No, I’m not. I happen to know that whoever
holds the licence to work a certain claim owns that
claim. I’m holding this one down till Matthews
returns.”
“ Then show your licence. If it’s 0.K., you’ve
nothing to worry about.”
“ I’m not showing that bit of paper to any dud
inspector,” said Frank, starting to lose his temper, and
adding most unwisely: “ And you can put that in
your pipe and smoke it, Mr. Copley! ”
The faces of the two conspirators were a study.
Kelly was the first to recover.
“ You’ve made a mistake in the name,” he said.
“ After all, names don’t seem to be your strong point,
do they? ”
Taking Copley by the arm, he walked him off.
“ Now,” mused Frank, “ what did he mean by that?
How much does he know about us? ”
Mike’s head appeared over the edge of the trench.
“ The stingaree is a nasty beast,” he said. “It does
the damage with the end of its tail.”
“ Well, before this one gets its tail into action we’ll
be gone,” laughed Frank. “ You’d better be off
after that water —it’ll take a long time, and you have
to go down on the flats for the bags first.”


“ I don’t like leaving you alone,” said Monty.
“ Oh, never mind about me. I can handle Kelly
and his phony inspector, don’t you worry! Now, hop
it, both of you ! ”
Obediently, they hopped it.


CHAPTER XI
RAIDED BY BLACKS
Frank spoke confidently enough to Mike and Monty,
but he did not feel nearly so happy as he implied.
To begin with, he did not like the look of the camp
at all. Their neighbour was not the only sick man
in it. Beri-beri, or Barcoo rot, usually brought
dysentery with it, and it was this reflection which
clouded the boy’s face whenever it came to him.
He decided that he must get Monty out of the
camp as soon as possible —he could not take the risk
of having his brother struck down with the terrible
disease which, with no medical help available, might
easily prove fatal. But he knew quite well that Monty
would refuse to leave until they had completed their
mission. How to do this in the limited time that
remained he was at a loss to discover.
Working in the trench, he pondered the matter, and
finally hit on the desperate plan of burgling the iron
shed which served the Jumping Jimmy as an office,
although he felt that if there were any incriminating
papers, they would be kept at the twin mine on the
other side of the range. Failing here, he resolved to
cross the hills and try to repeat the process at the
secret mine. It was a mad plan, but madness seemed
to be their only hope—madness and speed. Although
he was naturally a calm, matter-of-fact chap, he found
his imagination playing with all kinds of fantastic
schemes for proving the duplicity of Larrigan and
Kelly—schemes wilder than Monty could ever have
invented.


Just before dark, the man Smith came over to the
claim, and Frank looked up suspiciously.
“ I’m making tracks,” said Smith. “ Going to
catch the camel-train in the morning. They’ll take
me as far as the Telegraph Line, and then I’ll be
0.K.”
“Well, good luck!” said Frank as casually as he
could.
Smith made no move to leave him.
“ I just wanted to say,” he continued, “ that if I
was you I’d get out of here while the going’s good.
It ain’t going to be too healthy by to-morrow. Get
that kid away —he’s a nice youngster.”
“ If you’re referring to the Barcoo rot, we’re not
afraid. We know how to take care of ourselves.”
“It ain’t that so much as . . .” He jerked an
expressive thumb in the direction of the Jumping
Jimmy. “ Kelly’s fightin’ mad and he’s out for your
blood. Come with me if you like—l’ll show you
where the team will camp to-night.”
“ Thanks. It’s decent of you, but we’re seeing this
out. Good luck, Smith, and I hope you strike it rich
soon.”
“Well, you’re a worse young fool than I thought!
If you knew as much as wot I do . . .”
He turned away without further farewell and was
soon out of sight.
Frank chuckled to think how much more he knew
than Smith, and gave a last vicious jab with the pick
at the wall of the trench.
“ That’s all for to-day! ” he exclaimed, leaving the
pick where it had stuck and taking out his pipe.
Standing in the comparative darkness of the shaft,
he filled it, struck a match, and drew luxuriously at
the stem. Throwing the still-flaring match to the
ground, he stooped to loosen the pick, and remained
transfixed. In that second the match went out.
Hurriedly he lit another and examined more closely
what he had seen in the brief glow of the first one.


“ Gee! ” he exclaimed, and leaping out of the trench,
he rushed into the tent. Returning with his torch,
he sent the ray of light searching the wall of rock.
There, where the pick had stuck into the granite, was
an unmistakable gleam of gold.
“ Gee! ” he said again, robbed of further words.
Then he switched out the light and stood in the
gloom, thinking hard. How much gold there might
be in the Matthews claim he had no means of estimat-
ing, but gold there was. It might be a reef, or merely
a pocket —but a pocket of decent size could produce a
small fortune.
Pulling the pick out, he shovelled some loose earth
into the gash and went back to the tent. It did not
take him long to come to two decisions —first, that
this find must be kept from the rest of the miners;
secondly, that Fred Matthews must be found and the
claim handed back to him.
“ He said he’d be back in three months,” mused
Frank, “ but by the time he hit civilisation, he prob-
ablv decided that the game wasn’t worth the candle.
In fact, he’d most likely come to that conclusion when
he burnt his licence, and was only letting off hot air
when we heard him. Perhaps he didn’t fall in with
the other chap till late that night or during the morn-
ing, and was pouring out his soul when they crossed
our trail. But we’ll have to get word to him that
the claim is O.K. The thing is—how to prevent
someone else from finding gold here in the meantime.”
He set about preparing a meal absent-mindedly,
and afterwards sat for a long time, smoking and
revolving plans in his mind. This find complicated
matters dreadfully. He and Monty now had on their
hands not only the unravelling of the mystery con-
nected with Stingaree and Wild Cat, but the responsi-
bility of acquainting Matthews with his luck and
guarding the claim for him.
But that part of the matter was taken out of his
hands in the most providential manner.


So deeply had he been sunk in thought that he
was completely unaware of what Mike had noticed
two nights before—namely, a dark form creeping
through the sparse scrub and among shafts and
humpies. The only outside fact which penetrated his
mind was that the camp seemed quieter than usual
and that most of the men who possessed motor-cars
had taken them to Nine Mile Spring to bring back
water.
“ The supplies came yesterday,” he reasoned, “ so
that they will have been able to buy petrol. Naturally,
no one’s going to carry water nine miles when they
can fetch it by car.”
Later, as the cars did not return, he decided that
many of the miners had followed Smith’s example
and gone “ while the going was good.”
“ Dad told me that the discovery of fresh water
would be the making of this place,” he recollected.
“ Well, we seem to have settled that. It’s a pity these
chaps couldn’t have held out a little longer.”
Looking over the encampment, he discovered that
those camp-fires which were unlit corresponded to the
claims where motors of sorts had been parked —about
seven in all.
“ Apparently they don’t believe in giving their pals
a lift,” he commented, seeing that most of the one-
man claims had fires smouldering near them.
The fires dulled and went out; heavy storm-clouds
crowded the sky, but did not break; Frank began to
grow anxious about Mike and Monty; and, all unseen,
the blacks advanced on their objective.
Frank’s first intimation of their presence was the
looming up of a piece of the general blackness, which
seemed to have become detached from its surroundings
and been endowed with life.
“ Makem noise, makem dead,” said a voice ex-
plicitly, as two great hands grasped the boy, twisting
his arms behind him.
Frank submitted helplessly, and his captor spoke


softly in his own language to an invisible companion.
The white flap of the tent stirred, and Frank knew
that their stores were being raided. A sudden noise
broke out all over the place —shouts mingled with
weird native sounds, and then a volley of shots. The
crew of the Jumping Jimmy were putting up a tardy
defence of their storehouse.
Suddenly a great sheet of lightning flooded the sky,
and Frank saw quite clearly the features of the man
who held him.
“ Pollux! ” he exclaimed in horror. Then darkness
fell, thicker than before. “Pollux, let me go! I’m
Frank Rohan. Don’t you remember me ? If Mr. Martin
knew you were here, it would break his heart.”
“Me no Pollux,” said the blackfellow hastily.
“ Me no see you.”
“ But I saw you only the other day—you brought
us here, and don’t try to pretend that you didn’t.
Don’t let your pal take all our stores —leave enough
for a couple of days. Monty’s only a kid ...”
Another bright flash lit up the scene, so that the
running forms of whites and blacks were plainly visible
—also some that would run no more, having encountered
rifle-fire.
The black who had searched the tent hurried up,
and the other hastily released Frank and melted into
the night.
It needed no more than a hasty glance with the aid
of the torch to convince the boy that the work had
been done very thoroughly—flour, tea, sugar, his last
tin of tobacco, several tins of beef —all had been taken,
apparently tied up in a blanket, since one was missing.
“ Well, that’s torn it! ” commented Frank. “ Weil
have to clear out first thing in the morning and leave
Matthews’ gold to take care of itself. With luck, we
might get to the Mission station before we die of
starvation. I’ve heard that you can go a long time
without food if you have water, and weil have that,
thank Heaven! ”


Suddenly he noticed spurts of flame starting up here
and there. A smell of burning filled the air, and a
faint crackling sounded unpleasantly close at hand.
The tent was on fire, in company with many of the
other canvas dwellings of the camp.
“The beasts! Not content with stealing our food,
they’re trying to burn us out! ”
Frank pulled down the tent and tried to crush out
the flames, but they had too good a hold. Dragging
the flaming canvas aside, he rescued such of their
possessions as remained and threw them into the shaft
out of the reach of any sparks that might blow that
way. He saw that the miners were rushing about
salving what they could and rescuing their sick com-
rades. A third lightning-flash, more vivid than either
of its predecessors, revealed the blacks making off on to
the flats, having cleaned out the camp most effectively.
Total darkness fell again instantly, and then the
storm burst. Rain poured down in solid sheets, and
Frank realised that the hole would soon be full and
even dry clothing would be an impossibility. Wet
clothes, no food, and the intense heat that would be
certain to follow the storm! He did not fancy the
prospect. If only he could cover up the shaft!
In half a second he was running towards the nearest
hut. Its owner, he knew, lay in bed with Barcoo
rot. Shoving his head inside the door, he yelled above
the fury of the storm:
“ Going to borrow a sheet of iron,” and rushed off.
Probably the sick man never heard him on account
of the terrific drumming of rain on the iron roof and
walls of his shanty. Frank seized a large sheet of
corrugated iron that lay on top of a stack of timber
which the miner had hoped to use when his shaft was
deep enough to need support.
Dragging the iron, whose edges seemed to be pos-
sessed of an evil spirit and jabbed and tore at his legs
and hands, Frank reached the claim and pushed the
iron over the mouth of the hole.


“ One more will do it! ” he exclaimed, rushing back
for the piece that had hitherto kept the weather from
the side of the heap of poles. He clattered home, and
found that the two sheets would overlap and success-
fully keep out the rain. Slipping into the shaft, he
pulled the second piece of iron into place, and sat
down in the darkness.
An examination by torchlight showed that the two
remaining blankets had caught most of the water.
Their clothes were fairly dry and, he was thankful to
find, the blacks had not made off with Mike’s bag of
gold, which was hidden in one of the packs. He
made an inventory of the food which remained, and
discovered that they possessed about four handfuls
of tea in a battered tin, some grease in the bottom of
the frying-pan, one tin of corned beef, some salt in a
twist of paper, half a plug of Mike’s pungent tobacco,
and about a pound of flour which was in Monty’s
rucksack.
“ It might be worse,” he reflected, lighting his pipe
and listening to the deafening roar of rain on the
sheets of iron.
“ I hope those two are under cover,” was his thought
one moment, and at the next he was fearful lest they
might have fallen down a disused mine in the intense
darkness.
Except for the steady drumming of the rain, all was
quiet. The fires had been quenched by the down-
pour, and the miners had crowded into the humpies
that remained intact. Suddenly Frank heard foot-
steps and then an exclamation, from which he guessed
that the water-carriers had returned and were looking
for the old homestead.
Pushing aside a sheet of iron, he showed a light.
“ Here we are! ”he cried cheerfully. “ Come into
the dug-out.”
“By all that’s holy! ” cried Mike, starting back.
“ Is it bombarding you they’ve been? ”
“ Not quite as bad as that. But don’t stop out in


the rain—and you’re letting some in too. Come on,
Monty—get a move on.”
They lowered the water-bags into the shaft and
followed as quickly as they could. Both were wet to
the skin, and Frank insisted on their getting out of
their clothes at once.
“ Though how we’re going to dry them is more
than I can say,” he added.
Mike was given clothes from Frank’s pack, since he
possessed only the ones he stood up in.
“ Now tell me all you’ve been doing,” said Frank
when they were reclad to his satisfaction.
“ We found the way all right,” began Monty, “ and
got there easily enough. It was the coming back .. .”
“ Faix, it was awful! ” broke in Mike. “ Slipping
and sliding we were and wet to the skin.”
“ And hungry,” added Monty. “ Got anything to
eat? ”
Frank shook his head.
“ Not a thing ! We’ve been raided.”
“ Gee! Tell us all about it! ”
So, seeing that Monty would continue to ask ques-
tions till he did so, Frank narrated the story of the
raid and the firing of the encampment.
“I can’t understand old Pollux!” said Monty
gloomily, when he had finished. “ I didn’t think he’d
do a thing like that —go back to his tribe and become
completely savage again. I don’t think it could have
been Pollux! ”
“ You believe in everybody, don’t you? I couldn’t
have been mistaken —we were with him constantly for
nearly two weeks, you know.”
“ Yes, but . . . Oh, I’ve got it! ”
Monty started up excitedly, his eyes gleaming.
“ It was Castor, the missing twin! ”
“Why, of course it was!” Frank was honestly
relieved at being able to acquit Pollux of guilt. “ And
that explains why he talked pidgin English.”
“ That’s nothing to go by—so did Blue Beard.”


“Yes! I suppose a lot of the blacks pick it up
through coming in contact with the camps and cattle
stations. Well, go on with your yarn.”
“ There isn’t much to tell,” said Monty. “As I’ve
said, we got there all right. There was no one about,
so we took the water and came back. But there was
one little detail that will interest you —we heard camel-
bells. The train was camped on that side of the
range for the night.”
“ Camels! So that’s the explanation! This team
is on its way to Queensland, I’ll bet.”
“ It’s Queensland they’re going to,” said Mike.
“ That man who knew me said so.”
The boys were silent, and Mike looked from one to the
other for an explanation of their mysterious conversation.
“ I’m sorry, Mike,” Frank said at last. “We
shouldn’t talk in riddles. But it’s awfully late, so
we’d better leave explanations till the morning. Before
we try to get some sleep, there’s one little thing I’d
like you to know. There’s gold in this shaft.”
They were amazed, and fired questions at him until
the whole subject was exhausted. Then Mike, the
old campaigner, rolled up in a corner and went to
sleep. But the boys were too excited to follow his
lead, and sat talking things over, planning their next
moves, until the rain stopped and the darkness lifted.
“ The best thing we can do,” said Monty, “is to
continue to inhabit this dug-out. The usual thing
when you discover gold is to go on digging, isn’t it?
Well, if we don’t do that, the others won’t know we’ve
found any, will they? ”
“ Right again ! ” laughed Frank. “ Anyhow, we
won’t be here much longer —we’ve got to get out
to-morrow at the latest. My word, it’s hot in here.”
Reaching up, he pushed aside a sheet of iron, letting
in a welcome draught of fresh air.
“Just what I was afraid of—it’s going to be a hot
day. That will mean an increase of sickness among
the men.”


“ Well, we can distribute our water —that will be a
bit of help.”
“ Yes, but not to us. Well, we shall just have to
do what seems best at the time. We have a stiff day
before us. Phew! What a pen-and-ink ! The wind’s
blowing off those rubbish-dumps that the blacks left.
That won’t do the invalids any good. Monty, I wish
we could get some sort of medical aid.”
Monty considered the matter seriously.
“ How would it be if we went to the cattle-station
—the one that the secret mine belongs to, I mean —
and put the matter to them? ”
“ That would mean putting it to Copley—l’m con-
vinced that he owns that station,”
“ But even a beast like Copley wouldn’t refuse aid
to a lot of sick men! ”
“Wouldn’t he? I didn’t see any tears running
down his cheeks yesterday at the sight of them. And
Kelly and Larrigan weren’t upset either. No, Mont,
it’s no good! The only thing we can do is make for
Mr. Martin’s Mission as soon as possible—he might
be able to come and help.”
“ He’s probably got some petrol by now, and could
bring everything that’s needed. Let’s get away at
once, Frank! ”
Frank climbed out of the shaft and stood looking
over the camp. No one else was stirring—the boys had
the world to themselves. Early though it was, the air
was heavy with heat and a haze lay over the country.
On the plain, beyond the belt of timber, spirals and
puffs of thin smoke were rising into the calm air.
“ The blacks are signalling,” remarked Monty.
“Yes; summoning the tribes to a grand corroboree,
I expect, to celebrate their victory last night.”
“ And they’re between us and the Mission station.”
“ That won’t matter if we go after the corroboree
has started—no one will take any notice of us.”
“ Then it’s settled that we make a getaway to-
night? ”


“ It’s the only thing to do if we’re to be of any use
to these poor wretches.”
“ And we take Mike with us? ”
“ I suppose so.”
“ Frank, he’s been jolly decent to us—he s a proper
pal. Don’t you think it’s about time you grew a little
more broadminded about him? ”
“ Oh, I dunno! I like him well enough, but 1
can’t help feeling suspicious of that memory of his.
Come on —let’s light a fire and dry his clothes. He
looks funny in mine.” , , , , , ,
“ If it weren’t for us, he wouldn t bother about a
little detail like wet clothing.”
“ And he’d get pneumonia and die, the old tool!
You hop in and get his things and I’ll start the fire.
And we may as well make some tea it s about all
that’s left to us.” . . _ , .
Monty felt his spirits rising. He had taken a dis-
like to the mining camp with its troubles and anxieties.
Mike was awake when he went for the clothes, and
there was a heated argument before the Irishman
would let the boy take them away to be dried, Mike
insisting that it was unnecessary. }
“Go to sleep again,” commanded Monty. there s
nothing to do to-day and nothing to worry about.
We’ll be miles away by this time to-morrow.”
Whistling cheerfully, he climbed out of the shaft
and helped Frank to spread out Mike s garments. A
dog barked and life began to stir in the camp. Men
emerged from their shanties and started to prepare
meals out of what meagre stores remained to them.
Many of them hurried over these snacks and, hastily
packing up their scanty possessions, shook the dust of
the place from their disgusted feet. .
The morning wore on, and the danger which the
storm and raid had postponed approached the boys
all unsuspected —stealthy as a wild cat, poisonous as a
stingaree.


CHAPTER XII
DISASTER
Frank, going over to their neighbour to explain about
the sheets of iron which he had borrowed, found the
man in a very bad way, and gave him one of their
water-bags. An hour later, Kelly and Larrigan
sauntered over to the dug-out beside which the boys
were drying the blankets.
“ Where did you get the water you gave Lewis? ”
demanded Kelly, not troubling to be oily and polite
for once.
“Just got it! 55 replied Monty before Frank could
check his hasty tongue.
“ You didn’t find it at Nine Mile Spring,” said
Larrigan.
“ Perhaps not.”
Larrigan made a threatening step forward and
Kelly’s suave expression fled, leaving a particularly
ugly one in its place.
“ You’d better tell us where you got that water,”
he blustered.
“ Why? ” asked Frank, motioning to Monty to keep
silent.
“ Own up! ” snarled Larrigan.
“ I don’t see what business it is of yours,” retorted
Frank. “We have the water and we’re going to share
it with any sick man who needs it. You can’t want
any—you must have caught enough during last night’s
rain to half-fill those two tanks of yours.”
“ It’s nothing to do with you what water we have,
and what we haven’t,” said Kelly. “ The point is


that there’s only one place where you could have got
that water, and we want to know about it.”
“ Since you appear to know all about it already,
there’s no need for us to tell you.”
“Have you crossed the range?” asked Larrigan
suddenly.
“ Shut up, you fool! ” shouted Kelly, and the big
man grumbled sullenly.
At that moment a man from the Jumping Jimmy
came running with a message from the foreman, and
Kelly and Larrigan, after throwing out a last threat,
returned with him.
“ I don’t like the look of things at all,” confessed
Frank. “We must make our attempt to get those
papers to-day. Mike, if we’re caught and anything
happens to us, you’ll do your best for these poor sick
beggars with regard to w 7 ater, won’t you? ”
“ I will that and I not being caught with ye.”
“ You must keep away from us to-day, that’s all.
We’ll pull this off on our own, or go under on our
own. We don’t w r ant you mixed up in any mess that
we may happen to land into. Besides, it’s a private
row. Now, we had better pack our things and be
ready to slope off at the first opportunity. We’ll
share out the little food there is, as we may have to
separate.”
They laid out the tiny stock that the blacks had left,
and Frank shared it equally between them.
“Now then!” he said when that was done, “I
propose that we arrange to meet at Nine Mile Spring
to-night. Whoever gets there first camps half a mile
to the north of it. I noticed a large hollow tree with
a white trunk —w r e’ll meet there.”
“ I understand,” said Mike, “ but if you’re meaning
that I’m to desert you and you in trouble, you’ll have to
guess again! ”
“ Now, listen, Mike,” reasoned Frank, “ there’s no
sense in the three of us getting into a mess. Monty
and I are after something at the Jumping Jimmy,


and we’re going alone. If we get caught, you hop off
to Mr. Martin and get help,”
Mike was puzzled.
“ How shall I find him and I not knowing him at
all? ” he asked.
“ But you must have heard of Mr. Martin! Every-
body has ! He’s in charge of a Mission station—about
forty miles from here. You must know it! ”
The Irishman shook his head.
“ I may know with my memory coming back to me,
but now I have no knowledge of the place at all.”
“ Well, it can’t be helped! You just keep out of
our trouble, and if you see a way of helping us, I know
you will. Let’s get our packs done up, Monty.”
“ We’d better cache them somewhere,” Monty re-
marked. “We can’t take them with us, and we’ll be
needing them when we’ve finished with the Jumping
Jimmy.”
“ We’ll leave them in the shaft, then. Mike, just
share out some of that water, will you? Here—fill
this bottle for me. Monty can have half a bag. I’ve
given one to Lewis over there, and we’ll leave another
so that you can give it to whoever seems to need it
most. Is your own bag full? ”
Mike assured him that it was and, having left their
possessions in the hole covered over by the sheets of
iron, the boys wandered off in the direction of the
Jumping Jimmy,
“What about the secret mine?” asked Monty as
they went. “ I thought that if we failed here we were
to make for that by .nightfall.”
“Yes, if we keep together. But if we’re separated I
think we’d better meet at Nine Mile Spring—the water
there may be drinkable by to-night, when the rain’s had
time to soak well into the ground. Then we can decide
on future plans. I want to get word to Mr. Martin
about this sickness, but we’ll have to make up our minds
definitely when we’ve got this little job over.”
“ 0.K., Chief! ”


“ Now, look here! This is what we’re going to do.
The office door’s open, so I’ll try and sneak in . .
“ You’ll do nothing of the kind,” interrupted Monty.
“ You aren’t popular here, and I am. Beazley’s
generally about the office, and I’ll pull some of the
kid stuff over on him and try to get in. If he’s alone
I’ll waggle my right hand behind me; if he’s not, I’ll
waggle both hands and we’ll have to postpone the
attempt.”
“ Right you are! And if Beazley’s on his own I’ll
follow you and we’ll deal with him between us.”
Frank pretended to be watching a dry-blower who
was shaking his crazy machine and peering through
the red cloud at the minute fragments that remained
in the tray.
Monty wandered casually over to the iron shed,
where, true to his forecast, Beazley was sitting on a
wooden case entering some figures into a book.
“ Hullo! ” said the boy. “ Haven’t seen you for
donkey’s years! ”
“ Been busy,” retorted the foreman shortly, adding:
“ And you’d better hop it, youngster.”
“ Presently. I just came over to say good-bye.
We’re pushing off to-day.”
“ No luck?”
“ Not a speck ! ”
“ Well, you didn’t deserve it either —a couple of
kids dressing up and pretending to be miners. It
wouldn’t have deceived a blind man. Well, you’re
wise to be clearing out to-day. The bosses don’t like
you at all. If they’d taken you seriously, you’d have
been dealt with days ago,”
“ Taken us seriously? But what do they think we’ve
been up to? ”
“ That’s best known to yourselves, I reckon.”
Monty strolled carelessly into the room, waggling
his right hand in the small of his back. Frank followed
and stood leaning against the door-jamb while his
brother continued his chat with Beazley.


“ Think you’re darned clever, I suppose? ” said an
unpleasant voice in Frank’s ear, and he found himself
confronted by Wild Cat Larrigan, who had apparently
sprung out of the earth.
“ What’s that to do with you? ” asked the boy,
every muscle taut with apprehension.
“ Cut out that silly talk! We mean business. We
knew you wasn’t prospectors the minute we saw
you.”
“ But we are. We’re working a claim.”
“ Yeah! A dud claim with no gold in it, and using
a licence that doesn’t belong to you. Where did you
come from? ”
“ Up North.”
“Yeah? How?”
“ Walked, of course.’
“ Yes; I’ll say so! ”
Sharply, like a steel blade, the voice of Stingaree
Kelly cut in.
“ What about that monoplane? ”
Frank maintained his self-control, but Monty gave
a start that satisfied Kelly.
“I thought so!” he commented. “Take ’em
away, Larrigan—they’re the two we want. And the
other will be here any time now.”
“Do you mean . . .?” began Monty, but things
grew too hectic for anyone to hear him or, indeed,
for him to finish his question.
Larrigan, never entirely under the control of his
cooler partner, lost his rag completely and rushed at
Frank. The boy, expecting this, skipped backwards
and, balancing on both feet, waited his opportunity.
Wild Cat rushed in, swinging wildly and striking out
brutally. But Frank evaded him cleverly, and watched
for a chance to get at him.
Larrigan was a huge fellow with a tremendous
reach, so that the boy’s task was not easy. He was
worried, too, about Monty. Larrigan had been out-
side the shed when he made his attack, so that the


two were gradually working away from it. Frank
could see no sign of Monty, and dared not take more
than hasty glances towards the office. Once he
landed his right on Larrigan’s jaw, but missed the
point by a fraction of an inch. With a furious curse,
Larrigan let fly a blow that would have put Frank to
sleep for hours if he had not side-stepped cleverly.
Larrigan had all the advantages, the chief one being
that he could see where they were going, while Frank
could not. A few yards more, and Frank would be
into a shallow trench, which was Larrigan’s aim.
The boy was too quick to give him an opportunity of
landing any blows—foul means were his only chance.
Inch by inch Frank retreated, then began to do so more
rapidly, thinking to draw Larrigan away from Monty
—wherever the boy might be. Another stride—and
then another. He stumbled, tried to recover, received
a punishing blow, crashed into the trench, and lay still.
Larrigan squatted down and looked at him anxiously.
“ You’ve got him this time,” said Kelly, coming
up. “ Take him away and tie him up. He won’t
trouble us again,”
“ What have you done with the other one? ”
e right —he won’t give any trouble either,
ihe father should be here this afternoon, and when
the bag s full, we 11 be off. Come on—1 5 11 give you a
hand with this young fool.”
They lifted Frank up and carried him away.
Through a nail-hole in the iron wall of the office’
Monty caught a last glimpse of his brother in the grip
of the two scoundrels, and groaned.
Beazley looked up from his work.
“ Feeling sick? ” he asked.
Monty managed a grin.
“ Feeling fine,” he retorted.
Kelly and the foreman had caught him, after a
chase that nearly winded them both, and he now sat
on the floor, bound hand and foot, watching Beazley
tear up and burn papers.


“ We’re in a fine mess! ” thought Monty, then
remembered that when the struggle began Kelly was
about to say about Mr. Rohan.
Instantly the boy’s spirits soared to a height they had
not reached for two weeks. His father must be alive.
He decided to see what information he could get
out of Beazley, and considered the attitude most likely
to produce this result. Reflecting that the foreman
had appeared to be kind on account of his age, Monty
resolved to act younger than he really was and see
what “ kid stuff ” would do.
“ Who is it you’re expecting to-day? ” he asked.
“ None of your business! ” growled Beazley.
“ I only wanted to be chatty ! It’s dashed slow sitting
here all tied up. Thought you might like to talk. _
“ I’m too busy. I’ve got to get all these things
cleared up in half-an-hour.”
“ I could help if you’d undo my hands.”
Beazley looked at him suspiciously, and then back
at the pile of papers.
<{ Well, you won’t be getting a chance to squeal, so
you might as well make yourself useful.”
He went over to the boy and undid the cord that
bound his wrists. ,
“ I’m not likely to squeal,” said Monty. 1 don t
know anything about your business, and anyway I m
completely ignorant about mining,” ,
“ That won’t matter by this afternoon. The heads
have got wdse to you two, and this is the end of your
little game. Look here —I’ve been told to burn every-
thing except bills and receipts. Sort lot out and
don’t let me catch you trying to stuff anything into your
pocket. Not that it would matter much, m a way.
“Why?”
“ Because you’re not going to have a chance to grve
the show away. But it would put me in queer street to
have anything found on you that came out of this pile.
“ Do you mean to say we’re going to be bumped
off, or something? ”


Beazley made no reply, and Monty felt himself going
cold in spite of the oven-like heat of the building.
“ What’s happened to my brother ? ” he asked
suddenly.
“ Dunno ! I wasn’t there.”
“ Well then, tell me—who is it that Kelly and
Larrigan are expecting to-day ? Come on —be a
sport! ”
“ The chap in the other aeroplane,” said Beazley.
Monty’s heart leaped, then an uncomfortable
thought struck him,
“ What other ’plane? ”
“ The one that didn’t crash.”
The boy was more puzzled than ever.
“ I wish you’d say straight out what you mean.”
“ Two ’planes came here about a fortnight ago,”
said the man, “ One crashed on the southern side of
the ranges and the other disappeared. You kids were
in the one that crashed, of course, though where you
got to that first ten days is a mystery. Still, there’s
heaps of old workings you might have laid low in.”
“ And wdiom do you think was in the other ’plane? ”
“ The bloke that we’re expecting to-day.”
“ And what makes you think we were in the machine
that crashed? ”
“ I don’t think about it at all—l’ve no thoughts
on the subject, one way or the other. But they say
you were.”
“ So they think we’ve lost some of our party, do
they? ”
“ Not some —one of them.”
“ Oh, yeah? ” said the boy, affecting a bored yawn.
He finished sorting the papers without finding any-
thing that seemed to be of particular interest, though
he was not sufficiently up in such matters to be any
sort of a judge. He wished it were Frank who was
doing the job. Beazley put the bills and receipts in
his pocket and burnt the rest in a fire he had fit just
outside the door.


“ You’ll have to stop here on your lonesome,” he
said when that was done. “ I’m going to get some
grub—what’s left after last night.”
Monty pulled a face.
“ That’s a rotten idea, going off and leaving a
fellow on his own. And you needn’t have mentioned
food —the blacks cleaned us out pretty well.”
Beazley began to tie up the boy’s wrists again.
“I’m not feeling too much like eating, myself,” he
said. “ This hot weather fair gets a chap down. If
I can smuggle you in a cup of tea, I will, but don’t
count on it.”
“ Thanks. You’re a sport.”
The man got up and walked towards the door.
“ I say! ”
He paused and looked over his shoulder, suddenly
struck by the fact that Monty looked very small and
lonely, sitting on the floor with his back against the
wall, tied up like a parcel.
“Well? What do you want?” Beazley spoke
gruffly because he was ashamed of his rush of tender
feelings,
“ Nothing! I was just wishing I had my banjo ! ”
“What for?”
“ Oh, it’d be something to do.”
“ Huh! ” With this parting grunt the foreman
went out, padlocking the door after him.
But he had gone only a few yards when an idea
seemed to strike him.
“ He’ll be about the same age as my boy,” he
muttered to himself. “ Such a kid to be bumped off!
He can have his banjo till those two come back from
the other side of the range. Game little beggar,
fiddling with that hanging over his head! ”
There was no sign of Mike at the roofed-in claim,
so Beazley took the banjo and returned to the shed.
“ A nice fool I’d look if any of the blokes spotted
me! ” he commented silently. “ Here’s your bloom-
ing banjo! ” he called as he opened the door.


“ Oh, thanks! You are a decent sort. But I can’t
play with my hands tied up.”
“ I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” said Beazley. “ I’ll
let you loose now, but you’ll have to be roped up
again when the bosses come back or I’ll get into
trouble. You can’t do any damage in here, and there’s
no weapon. Now play your silly banjo while you can
—l’ll be back in about an hour.”
“ Thanks.”
Monty stretched luxuriously and, taking the banjo
out of its case, began to play loudly for Beazley’s
benefit. When he judged that the man was out of
hearing, he laid the instrument down and made a
tour of the room.
It was even smaller than the one in which they had
been imprisoned at the secret mine, and far less inter-
esting. It had no windows and was now dark, except
for tiny trickles of light that crept in through nail-
holes in those sheets of iron which had been used for
some other purpose previously. A cheap wooden desk
(empty) and the case on which Beazley had sat consti-
tuted its sole furniture —evidently everything else had
been cleared out that morning.
“ So they’re getting ready to flit,” commented the
boy. “ I suppose they’ve sacked all the crew —unless
they’re going to work at the other Jumping Jimmy.
Gee! I wish I could get out of this! ”
He looked about him miserably, but there was no
means of escape. Suddenly he cheered up and began
to play again.
“ Dad’s safe,” he sang softly. “ Dad’s safe, and
he’ll be here any minute and get us out of this mess.
Or —will he? ”
His troubles swept over him like a wave, and he sat
down on the case to meditate in silence. Was his
father safe? Had not that scrap of conversation im-
plied he was walking into an ambush ? Had they not
meant that Mr, Rohan had been informed of his sons’
whereabouts, and was now hurrying straight into a


trap? Copley, Kelly and Larrigan were utterly un-
scrupulous. Monty had no doubt as to the reception
his father would receive.
And where was Frank? What had they done with
him?
He imagined his brother lying unconscious or
murdered, and understood with sudden clearness
exactly what Beazley had meant —he had not really
believed it at the time.
Monty felt that it was a pity that he and Frank
should have to die so young. But, at any rate, he
reflected, they and their father would go together—
or sell their lives dearly, standing side by side.
It was terrifically hot in the iron shed. He had not
eaten since the previous evening, except for a snack of
damper which they had made in the frying-pan at
sunrise. He felt faint and his head reeled. Coming
over him again was the headache which had been
such torture for several days after their encounter
with Blue Beard.
“ If only they’d come! ” he exclaimed, springing
up and starting to pace the room. “ Anything would
be better than being stuck in here not knowing what’s
happening to Frank and Dad. If only someone would
come! ”
But the settlement was oddly silent. An hour went
by, and there was no sign of Beazley. Three hours
passed; Monty sweltered in his iron oven, and still
no one came. Terror for his father and Frank pos-
sessed the boy—for himself he felt no fear. He was
prepared for whatever might happen —if someone
would only come and let him out into the fresh air.
“ Beazley! ” he shouted, losing his nerve suddenly.
“ Beazley! Let me out of here! ”
But no one heard him. Beazley, stricken in the
first hour of his absence by the dreaded epidemic, lay
moaning in his hut, sweltering as much as Monty was,
and terrified of the almost certain death which awaited
him.


CHAPTER XIII
THE CODE
The agonies of Monty, even the sufferings of Beazley,
were nothing compared with the position of Frank.
Still unconscious, he had been carried some distance
and propped against a tree midway between the white
and Chinese settlements. There was no other tree on
that side of the range—it had been entirely deforested
in the hectic search for gold. This solitary specimen
had been left standing—why, no one knew. It was
scarcely more than a dead, bare trunk, but it had
survived the general clearance, and stood as if marking
the boundary between the claims of the white men and
those of the Chinese —a boundary that had only been
passed twice in the last few days—on the evening of
Monty’s concert and when the camel-train came with
the stores.
When Frank came to himself, he discovered that he
was sitting on the ground, which was particularly hard
and stony. His feet were free, but his hands were tied
behind his back. About his neck was something that
hurt abominably and smelt worse. He realised after
a while that it was a broad leather collar, and from its
smell guessed that it had originally graced the neck of
a camel —and not so long ago either.
The loop to which the bell should have been attached
was at the back of his neck, and through it had been
run a fine steel chain, which was in turn secured over
a branch of the tree and around the trunk.
“In the pillory! ” thought Frank when he regained
full possession of his faculties.
There he sat, in the kind of stocks usually reserved


for law-breakers in the Never-never, and the midday
sun beat down on him.
“ I wonder what’s become of Monty? ” he mused.
“ And Dad. They said Dad was on his way. He’s
been decoyed into this! If only I could warn him!
He mustn’t come! He simply must not come! ”
Hunger, thirst and the heat combined to make him
lose his self-control, so that he found himself muttering
confusedly about Monty and his father and the trap
that had been laid so cunningly.
He strained his eyes for a sign of his father, praying
that he might be able to warn him before it was too
late. But even standing up he could see little. A rise
in the ground hid the camp from view, and the Chinese
diggings were veiled in a cloud of dust. Both were too
far away, he thought, for shouting to be of any use;
but he tried it all the same. For more than an hour
he shouted at intervals, but no one came near him.
As a matter of fact, the noise of the various shakers
used by the dry-blowers drowned the sound in the one
direction, and the Chinese, even if they had heard,
would merely have considered it one of the peculiar
habits of the white men and taken no notice.
Tortured by thoughts of his father and Monty, Frank
strained at the collar until his neck was red and raw,
and rubbed his wrists against the tree in an effort to
chafe through the cord that bound them. But the tree
was old and smooth from much contact with the weather
so that the cord remained unfrayed and Frank still a
prisoner.
Not knowing as much as Monty did, he was uncertain
as to their fate. At the most, he expected that they
would all receive harsh treatment, being liberated
when it suited the purpose of Kelly, Larrigan and
Copley. The idea of their being made away with did
not occur to him—he would not have believed that
anyone would dare do such a thing.
Time passed, and the sun gathered full strength.
The chain was too short to permit of Frank’s changing


his position so as to remain in the thin shadow of the
tree, and after a while the heat beat on his uncovered
head. His throat was parched, his tongue felt swollen,
and his head began to ache.
“ Sunstroke! ”he commented. “ I’ll be as loopy as
poor old Mike in a minute.”
Leaning against the tree, he kicked viciously at a
stone, his energies and despair demanding some kind
of outlet. He hurt his toe and the pain was a relief—it
gave him something definite to think about.
Presently, in order to keep his mind clear, he resorted
to a habit which he had adopted before when in tight
corners —though none of them had even remotely
resembled this one. It was an odd habit, and he had
forgotten how it had been acquired. Mechanically,
in a loud, steady voice, he began reciting what he could
remember of an extract from a text-book, his surround-
ings probably suggesting the subject.
“ Gold,” he informed the vacant air, “ is to be found
in reefs in quartz deposits, in pockets located in quartz,
and alluvially—that is to say, on the surface of the
ground. The alluvial deposits of Australia are not
large; compared with those of California, they are
insignificant. Some of the greatest finds, however,
have been of alluvial nuggets.”
Here he found his voice slipping into a sort of a sing-
song, and he kicked at the stone, seeking to loosen its
hold in the ground, and at the same time following the
rhythm of his voice.
“ The Golden Mile in Kalgoorlie,” he told the tree,
“ was originally an alluvial deposit, though the shafts
extended later many hundreds of feet into the bowels
of the earth. The first discovery in this country was
made by a boy who picked up a stone to throw at a
bird. It proved to be a lump of pure gold.”
Frank was becoming drowsy, and he jerked himself
back to attention.
“ A lump of pure gold,” he repeated, kicking his
stone and working it loose.


But his head hung heavily in spite of his efforts,
and his eyes were closing.
“ I mustn’t sleep! ”he told himself. “ That would
be fatal. Now, where was I? ”
He took up the tale again in the sing-song voice in
which one repeats a lesson. He kicked the stone once
more and it loosened. His attention distracted from
his recitation, he kicked it again, digging at it with the
toe of his boot. It lifted, showing itself to be a flat piece
of rock, and he scraped it towards the tree with his heel.
“ It’ll do to sit on,” he said aloud. “ Better than
this knobbly ground. Looks like a fish! ” he added
as he manoeuvred it into position. “ A petrified
fish! ” he said as he sat down gratefully.
Minutes passed.
“ If Monty’s free,” mused Frank, “ he might be able
to do something about warning Dad. Wish I could
signal somehow.”
At that moment his chain rattled against the tree,
and he realised in a flash that the trunk was hollow.
“ A natural signal-drum! ”he exclaimed, once more
aloud. “ Now, if I sent some Morse, I wonder . . .? ”
He turned the matter over in his mind, his brain
feeling clearer now that it had something to do.
“ I wonder if anyone in this place understands
Morse? I’d better think of something that wouldn’t
convey sense to anyone but Mont.”
Standing up, he began to rap against the tree with
his iron-shod heel. Yes, it was completely hollow and
gave out a good sound. But would it carry far enough ?
Well, it was worth trying. The main thing was to
invent a code.
Ah! He had it! The old school motto —“ Tolle,
lege.” Nobody else in that place would understand it.
But Monty would know at once who was sending it.
He began rapping and was pleased at the resonant
sound the trunk gave out. He kicked out the words
several times, then it struck him that if Monty wanted
to reply he would also find it hard to discover a code.


“ I’ll rap out the first word,” Frank decided, “ and
if Monty picks it up, he’s sure to send the other.
Though I don’t expect he’ll need to—they won’t have
tied him up.”
Filled with the comforting thought that others would
be as kind to his young brother as he was himself,
Frank started signalling again.
One long. Three long. One short, one long, two
short. Again. Then one short. T-O-L-L-E.
One long. Three long. One short, one long, two
short. Repeat. One short. T-O-L-L-E.
Pausing and listening for a reply, Frank kept this
up through the sweltering afternoon. Sometimes his
head swam, and he found himself sinking into uncon-
sciousness, but each time he managed to recover his
wits. Dirt and dried twigs fell down inside the tree
like soot in a chimney as he kicked, first with one heel
and then with the other, refusing to accept the fact
that Monty might not hear him.
Tired out, he sat down on his slab of stone and
rested, but struggled to his feet after a few minutes and
resumed his signalling.
It was about this time that Monty, miserably roasting
in the iron shed, thought to himself sleepily:
“ It’s a funny thing for the blacks to be signalling
at this time of day. This morning’s invitations
couldn’t have been accepted, and they’re sending out
some more.”
He listened for a while, and it gradually dawned upon
him that it was a definite code.
“ Mr. Martin said they were perfectly hopeless, but
it doesn’t seem tike it to me. That fellow’s sending in
code all right—it might easily be Morse, it’s so regular.”
Taking out his diary, he began to distract his mind
from his troubles by writing the signal as if it were the
code with which he was familiar.
“ How funny! ” he laughed, speaking aloud in his


solitude. “ What a coincidence! That nigger’s
actually sending Morse, and he doesn’t know it! ”
The message was repeated, and he wrote it again,
putting the alphabetical equivalents under the signs:
TOL L E
“ ‘ Tolle,’ ” he repeated, then: “Good heavens!
It’s the school motto! Frank’s sending! So he’s still
safe! But it’s only the first word—l wonder why? ”
The reason was not long in striking him, and he set
about inventing a way of replying. His first idea, of
course, was to bang on the wall, but he recollected in
time that this would be heard, and now he was as
anxious to avoid attracting attention as he had so lately
been to secure it.
There remained but one method that might be free
from suspicion—the banjo. It was a toss-up that
Frank would hear it with the usual noises of the camp
about him.
“ But most of the miners have cleared out,” reasoned
Monty, “ so that there won’t be more than two or three
dry-blowers going. I’ll have to chance it. Perhaps
Frank will hear the banjo above the other noises in the
same way as you get so that you don’t notice the hum
of dynamos in an all-mains set. Here goes ! ”
So he began sending. One short, one long, two
short. One short. Two long, one short. One short.
L-E-G-E.
He strained his ears for a reply between each signal.
After a long time it came, followed by a message that
broke off short and was replaced, after about a minute,
by the ominous “ 5.0.5.,” repeated.
Frank was in trouble. Something had just happened.
Monty shouted.
“ Frank, where are you? ” And the walls shouted
back: “Are you?”
Monty yelled again but, so far as the signals were
concerned, there was silence.


The boy hurled himself at the door, battering vainly
upon it. Why didn’t someone come ?
Suddenly he heard the sound of horses and low
voices. He shouted again.
“ All right, my boy, I’m coming! Keep calm! ”
“DAD!”
But the heat, his sufferings and this last overwhelming
joy were too much for Monty. The room spun about
him. He clutched at the packing-case, and it slithered
away across the floor.
Summoning his failing senses, he managed one more
shout:
“ Dad ! Keep away! It’s a trap ! ”
His voice faded suddenly to a whisper. As the pad-
lock gave way to the pressure of an iron bar, Monty
fainted.
Down on the flats, concealed in the belt of timber,
the huge blackfellow who had held Frank prisoner
the previous night sat with his signal-drum between his
knees. All through the morning he had been busy
sending out instructions for the tribes to unite after
dark in a combined attack on the mining camp. The
great chief imagined that more food lay ready for the
taking, and was sure that increased numbers would
secure it. There would be more mouths among whom
to divide it, but then, there must be plenty more in the
way of luxuries on the hillside.
The signaller grew drowsy in the afternoon heat and
sent out his signals mechanically as they came to him
from a hidden source some miles away. Presently he
became aware that he was receiving something entirely
new —an arrangement of beats that he had never heard
before. One long roll and a pause, then three more
long ones, followed after an interval by one short rap,
a long and two more short. His instructions were to
repeat the signals as they came to him. Half-asleep,
he obeyed.
Three or four miles to the north, the signaller of


another tribe picked it up and, without pausing to
reason as the more intelligent Castor had done, trans-
mitted the message. And so it went throbbing through
the hot afternoon, travelling north, east and west, to
the great confusion of those chiefs who ultimately
received it, until Pollux came running into the living-
room of the Mission station and disturbed Mr. Martin
at his writing.
“ Blackfeller send strange signal,” he said.
The missionary looked up and smiled.
“ Well, what is it? Something exciting? ”
“Me not know. Come listen.”
Mr. Martin followed him to the verandah and stood
listening intently.
“ There he come! ” exclaimed Pollux, and the other
held up a hand for silence.
“ Bless my heart! ” he exclaimed. “ How very
odd! How long has this been going on, Pollux? ”
“ One, two, five—big lot times! ”
“ There it is again ! ”
Mr. Martin listened once more, and began to
translate aloud:
“ T-o-l-l-e. Tolle. That’s part of the motto of
St, Augustine’s. Now, who could possibly know that
in this district? ”
A few seconds’ consideration brought the answer.
“ The Rohans! They must be in danger! ”
“ Listen, boss! ” interrupted Pollux, and Mr. Martin
heard the repeated “ 5.0.5.,” and then there was
silence.
“ Him say no more,” remarked Pollux.
“ No, and I’m afraid there’s trouble over at The
Ironstones. Thank Heaven the petrol came this
week! Pollux, go and get my medicine-box and the
things I usually take on journeys. And send Diogenes
to the garage.”
He hurried to the bough-shed in which stood his old
Ford, and Diogenes appeared as he was filling the
petrol-tank.


“ I’m going away,” said Mr. Martin. “ You take
charge of everything here as usual. I shall take Pollux,
Jackie and Bob with me. Send them here, please.
And I shall want food. Here is the key of the store-
room. I shall want as much as we can carry.”
“ All right, boss! ”
Diogenes hastened away, and the clergyman lifted
the bonnet to examine the engine of the car.
In less than half-an-hour he was ready to start, with
Pollux beside him and the other two black “ boys ” in
the back with the supply of food and water and the
medical equipment.
The car jerked its way out of the clearing and
vanished into the Bush. Diogenes, asserting his
authority, called Mary and began issuing orders, to
which she replied cheerfully and of which she took not
the slightest notice.
On rushed the old car, urged to its fullest speed,
the two unfortunates in the back seat bouncing like
indiarubber balls in the utmost discomfort. On it
rushed, as the day came to its close and Frank sat
slumped and delirious against his tree, while Mr.
Rohan worked to restore his younger son to conscious-
ness.
And from the opposite direction came Larrigan and
Kelly, who had experienced at the secret mine one
of those unfortunate spots of bother that occur when
thieves fall out. On they came, rattling over stones,
sending up a cloud of dust, loosening every nut and bolt
in the car as they hastened back to despatch their
victims.


CHAPTER XIV
GOLD !
“ Dad! ” gasped Monty when his father succeeded at
last in bringing him round.
“Yes, my boy, here I am. Did you think you had
lost me? ”
Monty summoned all his cheery optimism to his aid,
“ We —we knew you’d be all right,” he lied, knowing
how Mr. Rohan would worry if he guessed what they
had been through on his account,
“ Where’s Frank? ” asked his father.
“ I don’t know. But we must find him and get out
of here —Kelly and Larrigan will be back any minute,
and I can’t think what’s happened to Beazley.”
“ Never mind about them. You young rascals seem
to have got yourselves into a nice mess. Let’s go and
find Frank. Can you walk? ”
Monty swayed unsteadily for a moment, then pulled
himself together.
“ I’m all right,” he said firmly, though the floor
heaved beneath him. As they went outside he was able
to see clearly for the first time the men who had come
with his father—two of them in dirty, torn dungarees
and the other two in the uniform of the Trooper Police.
“We have to find my other son,” explained Mr.
Rohan. “ Where do you think he is, Monty? ”
“ I haven’t the faintest idea. I only know that he
was signalling just before you came,”
“ Signalling? What do you mean? ”
“ Banging some sort of drum. He was sending
Morse. He —oh, I’ve just remembered ! He finished
with 5.0.5.”


“ How do you know it was he? ”
“ Because he sent the word £ Tolle s—the 5 —the school
motto, you know! 55
“ Then it certainly was Frank—no one else about
here is likely to have been at St. Augustine’s. But how
could he have been sending it? ”
“ I told you—on a drum,”
Mr. Rohan was mystified.
“ Is there any sort of drum here? ”
“ I don’t know, Dad—it’s got me beaten. It
sounded like a native drum —you know, a hollow log
with a skin at each end.”
“ There’s only one drum like that in this ’ere place,”
said one of the dungareed men, and it struck the boy
that his voice was familiar.
“ Yes,” agreed his companion. “ The old tree —the
only bloomin’ tree on the whole rotten outfit. Over
there it is—near the Chinks’ camp,”
“ I know! ” exclaimed Monty, who had been staring
hard at the first speaker. “ You’re Fred Matthews.”
The man gaped in amazement.
“ Well! If it ain’t Bunny the Boy Detective in the
flesh!” he exclaimed sarcastically. “And I come
from Wooloomooloo and like my esrers soft-boiled
don’t I?”
“Oh, cut it out!” cried Monty. “We’ve got no
time for fooling. Let’s find this tree. But I’ve got
news for you all the same.”
“You don’t say! Has the post been while I was
away? ”
“Where’s this tree?” asked Mr. Rohan, as angry
as Monty at this by-play.
Matthews and his companion led the way, one of the
troopers following. The other entered the office, and
Monty noticed that he looked to his gun first.
The arrival of five mounted men, two of them police,
had created a stir in the camp. There had been several
furtive departures during the last quarter of an hour,
and a few miners who had been digging without


licences were hurrying across the flats to the shelter
of the timber. Others stopped work for a while, but
resumed it again when they saw that the new arrivals
were intent on some business not connected with them-
selves. The hours of daylight were too precious to
waste in idle curiosity.
Within a few minutes the little group was standing
where Frank, all huddled up, was talking wildly to
himself. Monty and Mike figured largely in the con-
versation, but Wild Cat and Stingaree had their place
in it too. There was also mention of gold and Barcoo
rot and something about a fish.
“ Is there Barcoo rot in the place? 55 asked Mr. Rohan
anxiously of Monty.
“ Yes. It’s pretty bad, I think.”
“ Then we’ll have to get out of here as quickly as
possible —you boys will, at any rate.”
“ Oh, we’re all right —we have some fresh water.
Gee! I could do with some now —haven’t had a drink
all day.”
“ Where is it? ”
“ Over at the claim. I’ll fetch it.”
He started off eagerly, but was too exhausted to run
more than a few steps.
“ I’ll come with you, sonny,” said Fred Matthews,
taking him by the arm.
Leaving the others to attend to Frank, they set off,
and as they went Monty told Matthews how they had
found his charred licence, jumped his claim and dis-
covered gold in it.
“ Gold! ” cried Fred. “ Did you say gold? Not in
my claim you didn’t find it. There ain’t a speck of
colour in the hole.”
“ Well, you’ll see!” Monty promised. “ But we
used it as a dug-out last night because the blacks raided
us and burned our tent along with other shacks. I
guess Mike’s looking after it all right.”
“ Mike who? ”
“ Mike Donovan —a pal of ours.”


“ Can’t be the Mike Donovan wot I knew —he
wouldn’t be within miles of the Jumping Jimmy, I
reckon.”
“ It’s a common enough name,” observed Monty
carelessly.
But there was no sign of Mike at the claim. Monty
took his own water-bag and Matthews rescued the
bottle from Frank’s rucksack and, after the boy had
indulged in a much-needed drink, they went back to
the tree.
“ He’s in a bad way,” said Mr. Rohan when they
asked after Frank, “ but if we can get him into some
shade, he’ll pull round.”
They had removed the collar, revealing a badly-
grazed throat.
“ That looks ugly,” remarked the trooper. “ Needs
to be bathed and dressed properly.”
“Yes; we’ll see to that presently. Let’s take him
over to that shack —it looks deserted.”
But it was not. Its owner lay within, a victim of the
epidemic.
“ Water! ”he moaned. “ Water! ”
“ Here’s some! ” cried Monty, about to give the man
what remained in his bag. His father caught him by
the arm.
“Don’t go near him!” he commanded. “Keep
away from these men.”
“ But, Dad, he’s suffering and we can easily get some
more water. You know, we’re supposed to help . . .”
“ You’re supposed to obey orders,” said his father
sternly. “ The man won’t hurt for a little while
longer. Let’s attend to your brother first.”
“ Then let Fred Matthews give him what’s in that
bottle,” pleaded Monty, and Matthews entered the
shack.
The next place they came to —a humpy built of
bags—was empty, and they laid Frank on the heap of
sacks that had evidently served the previous occupant
as a bed.


“Gold!” moaned the sunstruck boy. “Nugget!
The big fish. Where is it? ”
Sitting up, he stared wildly about him, but there was
no light of recognition in his eyes. Feverishly he began
searching about, feeling among the sacks, running his
hands over the bare ground.
“ My nugget! ” he cried, falling back weakly.
Without a word, Monty dashed out of the shack,
the long drink having revived him considerably.
“ You follow him,” said Mr. Rohan, and the trooper
did so.
Monty raced back to the tree and, falling on his
knees, began searching for the nugget which he never
doubted his brother had found.
“ ‘ Like a fish ’ ” he repeated, kneeling on the flat
slab to save his knees on the stony ground. But there
was no nugget, fishlike or otherwise.
Disappointed, he rose to his feet.
“ He must have been raving after all,” he said.
“ I guess he was,” agreed the trooper. “ They get
strange notions sometimes when they’ve had a touch of
the sun.”
“ I expect you’re right,” said Monty, turning away
sadly. Then, just as Frank had done, he vented his
disappointment by kicking the slab of stone on which
he had lately sat —it seemed as though the brothers
had a particular grudge against it that day.
But, if so, it was the only grudge they ever did bear
it. For Monty’s kick dislodged a chunk of earth that
clung to its edge, and the boy’s fascinated eyes beheld
a dull yellow gleam that had about it none of the
misleading brightness of iron pyrites.
“Golly!”
He fell on his knees again and picked up the slab
shaped like a fish.
“ Oh, gee! ”
The trooper, stooping down, gave vent to his feelings
more profanely.
“ I’ve heard of them,” he said at last, “ but I’ve


never seen one —only models in the museum. You’re
a blooming millionaire, my lad! ”
Monty hugged the treasure to his chest —a slab of
pure gold about ten inches long, four wide and half an
inch thick. It was very heavy, but Monty was too
exalted to notice that.
“ Let’s show Dad! ” he cried, staggering to his feet
with his precious burden.
The trooper stopped him firmly.
“ I’ve seen a lot of goldfields,” he said, “ and I know
from experience that you can’t keep these finds secret
for more than a few minutes. The best thing for you
to do is to peg out a claim before you tell another soul
about this beauty.”
Monty hesitated. He was absolutely bursting to
break the wonderful news to his father.
“ But there may not be any more,” he said dubiously.
“ All the same, the wisest thing is to make sure of
a decent claim of your own.”
He had taken out a jack-knife and was hacking at the
lowest branch of the dead tree.
Monty laid down the heavy nugget and began to
whittle pieces of wood into temporary pegs.
“ Quick! ”he exclaimed. “ They’re coming! ”
“Who? ”
“ Kelly and Larrigan. I can hear the car.”
“ Then we haven’t time to finish. Here, sonny,
dump the nugget down the tree. It’ll be safe there in
case someone else comes along. Climb up to that hole,
and I’ll hand it up to you. No one will think of looking
there for it. Careful —it’s heavy. 0.K.? Right—let
her go! ”
The lump of gold went clattering down the hollow
trunk and thudded on the ground.
“Safe as the Bank of England!” declared the
trooper.
At that moment the car appeared around the
shoulder of the hill, and Monty and his companion
sprinted for the humpy in which Frank lay.


“ Dad, they’re here —Kelly and Larrigan! ”
“ Go then—l’ll stay with Frank,” said a fresh voice.
“ Mike! Wherever have you been? ”
“ Fetching water for the poor devils and they calling
for it,” said the Irishman.
“ Dad, this is Mike, I’ll explain later. Hurry up—
they’ll bolt if they see the trooper at the office.”
“You stop here with Frank,” commanded Mr.
Rohan as he and the other three sprinted across to the
Jumping Jimmy, doing their best to keep out of sight
of the men in the car.
By this time the miners had realised that something
unusual was afoot and, as it was almost sundown, they
knocked off work and converged upon the big claim,
eager to see the fun.
The fight was on before they expected it, and the
men came running from all directions, afraid of missing
something.
Not seeing anyone else, Kelly and Larrigan threw
themselves upon Mr. Rohan as he reached the door of
the office. Matthews and his mate, anxious to pay off
old scores, joined in. Then the crowd took sides, in
the usual way, and a battle broke out. No one really
knew who was fighting who, but it was a good opportu-
nity for settling old accounts all round. Oaths and the
noise of blows filled the air. Sick men staggered out
of their huts to see what was happening and to curse
their luck because they could not join in. The Chinese
downed tools and raced over to the camp, eager to take
advantage of the general excitement to purloin anything
they fancied.
“ I’m not stopping out of this! ” cried Monty.
“ You’ll not go alone, then! ” shouted Mike, sprint-
ing after him, as eager for the fray as a cat is for fish.
They were not callous in leaving Frank—there was
nothing they could do for him for some time.
“ Dad! ” yelled Monty as Larrigan lifted some heavy
object with a view to bringing it down on Mr. Rohan’s
head.


The shout put the big man off his stroke and the
weapon descended harmlessly.
Eyes gleaming, dimple banished, Monty dived into
the scrum, hitting out wildly, fighting to reach his
father’s side. Stingaree Kelly, fresh from laying out
Fred Matthews, turned his attention to Mike, shouting
like a wild man as he fought. Mike had no idea whom
he was hitting, but in that melee such niceties were not
observed. He only knew in a dim way that Stingaree
Kelly was his especial aim, and gave a whoop of pure
joy when they came face to face. It was the last sound
he uttered for some time, for Kelly, yelling; “ Got you,
you dirty thief! ” crashed his fist into Mike’s face.
“ Beast! ” cried Monty, rushing in with a low tackle
that brought the astonished Stingaree to the ground.
As he struggled to regain his feet, Monty landed a neat
blow on the point of his chin, and “ subsequent pro-
ceedings interested him no more.”
Monty leapt up to go to his father’s aid, but there
was no need for it. Wild Cat Larrigan stood at bay,
looking into the business end of a revolver held in the
steady hand of a trooper. The sight of the weapon
had a magical effect on the rest of the rioters. Within
a minute an unnatural calm reigned in the vicinity of
the Jumping Jimmy.
“ Disperse! ” roared the senior trooper in a sergeant-
major voice, and those who were able to faded away.
There were several who lay where they had fallen,
among them Mike Donovan and Stingaree Kelly.
“ Take this one, officer,” said Mr. Rohan, indicating
the prostrate Kelly.
The policeman put the “ bracelets ” on him while
his companion decorated Wild Cat similarly.
Monty knelt down beside Mike and raised his head
gently.
“ Someone fetch water —quick! ” he ordered.
“ I told you to stay out of this,” said Mr. Rohan
sternly.
Monty grinned up at him.


“ Did you ever know a Rohan to keep out of a fight
as long as he could stand? ” he asked.
“Who is this man, anyway?” asked his father,
making a vain effort to look angry.
“ Mike Donovan. We found him at Nine Mile
Spring, suffering from sunstroke, and he’s been with us
ever since. He’s lost his memory.”
“Not quite all there, you mean? ”
“ I don’t know about that. I should say he was very
much there except for having forgotten the events of a
few weeks.”
Someone brought a pail of muddy water and sluiced
Mike with it. Within a minute he sat up and looked
about him.
“ Where am I ? ” he asked, as he had done the evening
that the boys had found him.
“ Feeling better? ” asked Monty.
Mike stared vacantly and began fumbling about his
clothes and feeling in the pockets.
“ Och! My bag of gold—l’ve lost it! ”
“ No, you haven’t. It’s quite safe. I’ll get it for
you presently, Mike —your memory’s come back! ”
Mike, looking dazed, rose slowly to his feet and
stared around. Suddenly he grabbed at Monty.
“ Quick! ” he cried, propelling the astonished boy
towards the Jumping Jimmy. “In with ye! ” he
ordered, nearly pushing Monty into the cage which
swung from the great winch.
“ Monty, come back! ”
“ It’s all right, Dad ! Mike knows what he’s doing! ”
“ Get out of that cage! ”
But Mike had hitched the winch-horse to its chain
and was trotting it rapidly, so that Monty shot out of
sight as the cage raced to the bottom 01 the shaft.
Mr. Rohan dashed up to Mike.
“ Bring him up again at once! ” he ordered.
“No. I’ve remembered! It’s me lost memory
that’s come back. It’s yourself should see the bottom
of that mine.”


He brought the cage up and called to Fred Matthew’s
mate to take charge of the horse. Together he and
Mr, Rohan entered the cage, the latter quite convinced
that he had to deal with a lunatic.
“ Have you a light? ” asked Mike as they reached
the floor and joined Monty in the darkness. Mr. Rohan
produced his torch and switched it on.
“ This way it is,” said the Irishman, groping a few
yards to the left.
“ He’s gone clean off his head,” whispered Mr.
Rohan. “ I’ll deal with him in a moment.”
Monty laid a hand on his arm.
“ No, Dad, he’s not mad —he’s sane for the first time
in days. He knows what he’s talking about.”
“ Gold in the Jumping Jimmy? You may as well
say there’s life in the moon! ”
They stumbled on over heaps of stone and rock.
“ Show a light here,” ordered Mike, and Mr. Rohan
flashed the torch in the direction of his voice.
Seizing a shovel, Mike worked vigorously for a few
seconds. “It was about here I found it and they not
suspecting,” he said through his teeth.
“ Look here, old fellow, you’d better let us return
to the surface,” said Mr. Rohan. “ You won’t find
any gold in this mine—l’m almost sure that it’s salted.”
“ Salted it is,” said Mike, continuing his labours.
“ And salted it isn’t. It was for stealing the salt they
threw me out of the camp —it’s all come back to me
now. By the little pigs of Saint Anthony, I’ll have me
own back on them two yet! But there’s gold here, and
they never knew it! ”
“Where did the gold come from that’s in the bag? ”
asked Monty.
“ From the Jumping Jimmy.”
“ I told you so! ” said Mr. Rohan in a low voice to
his son, adding aloud to Mike: “ But you said it was
planted here.”
“So it was. This isn’t the Jumping Jimmy.”
“ But . . .”


“ He’s right, Dad. We suspected it, and now I’m
certain. This is not the Jumping Jimmy—it’s only a
sort of ghost mine,”
“ A ghost mine? Have you gone mad too? Here—
we’d better get out of this hole before we all lose our
senses! ”
“ That light, sir! Give me some light! Damn their
eyes ! Why did they have to dump all this stuff on top
of it! Ah ! Begorrah —here it is! Did ye iwer see
better? ”
He threw aside the shovel and stood lost in admira-
tion of what he had disclosed. Bending down and
shining the torch on the rock which Mike had laid bare,
Mr. Rohan whistled softly. Monty leaned over his
shoulder.
“ A reef! ” he exclaimed.
“ Yes, bejabbers, a reef! It’s on the edge of the
fault, like I told ye, and it goes for miles.”


CHAPTER XV
CAPTURES AND RESCUES
“ And now I’ll show ye,” said Mike when he could
control his excitement, “ where the Jumping Jimmy is
salted.”
Shovelling away another heap of broken rock, he
revealed a small tunnel running into the face of the
granite.
“ There’s where I took the samples from,” he said.
“ What samples? ”
“ The gold that the boys is minding for me. They
fired a charge of gold into that hole and I heard them.
I came down here one night, and it dark, and took a
few of the little bits of gold meaning to make for
Caroline Wells and have them assayed.”
“ Why didn’t you? ”
“ They caught me and beat me up. I’d hidden the
samples in a bush and I seeing them coming. I
remember like it was in a dream looking for that bag
of gold. It must have been then that the sun got
me.
“ But you found the gold,” broke in Monty. “ The
bag fell out of your pocket, and that’s how we came to
have it.”
“ I’ll just take a sample of this,” said Mr. Rohan,
proceeding to place some dust from the tunnel in a bag
which he took from his pocket.
“ I was going back,” Mike continued, “to get
specimens from the other mine so as to prove . . .
Jehosophat!” he exclaimed suddenly. “You’ll be
wanting to see that mine, I’m thinking! ”
Grabbing a thin rope that hung inside the cage he


tugged at it frantically as a signal for them to be
hauled to the surface.
“ But you have seen it, Dad,” remarked Monty.
“ I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“ The mine on the other side of the range—the real
Jumping Jimmy. You crashed quite close to it.”
Mr, Rohan smiled.
“ I saw no mine then,” he said. “ I wasn’t capable
of seeing anything. Are you trying to tell me that
there’s another mine of the same name somewhere
else? ”
“ Yes. And—oh! Copley’s there and we’ve got to
get there before word of your arrival reaches him.”
“ You two go first,” said Mike, pushing them into
the cage.
Reaching the surface, Mr. Rohan called the two
troopers to him.
“ Can you lead us to this secret mine, Monty? ” he
asked.
“ Sure! ”
“ This is pretty serious if what you and Frank think
you’ve found out is true. You see, officer, it seems
that the men we’re after have been selling shares in
this claim, which is salted with gold from across the
range; and all the while they’ve been working secretly
a perfectly good mine, which they’ve developed with
money received from the sale of shares in this dud
claim. As you can see, they haven’t spent any money
here. We have to find that other mine. If it’s not
registered—and I’m sure it isn’t—finding’s keeping.”
“ Let’s go! ” cried Monty.
“ There’s a little matter here to be attended to first,
sir,” said one of the troopers, jerking his head in the
direction of the dead tree.
“Yes, Dad! Frank’s made a find—l haven’t had
3. chance of telling you before. A golden fish. It’s
in the tree.”
“ I’ve heard offish existing in mud,” said Mr. Rohan,
“ but this is the first time I’ve heard of them climbing


trees. I think this must be the craziest spot in Aus-
tralia. Will you kindly explain what you’re talking
about ? ”
With the words falling over themselves, Monty
described how he had found the nugget mentioned in
Frank’s ravings, and how he and the trooper had
hidden it inside the hollow tree.
“ And no one knows about this but you and Frank
and the trooper here? ”
“ That’s right! ”
“ Then I think that nugget’s perfectly safe where it
is and we can attend to the pegging-out of the claim
when we come back from the secret mine.”
“ I don’t like risking it,” said Monty dubiously.
“ I can show Mr. Rohan the way,” offered Mike,
who had come up to them. “ I remember it now—l
thought that well was familiar when we went there
together. It’s all come back to me as clear as daylight.”
“ Then let’s be on our way,” said Mr. Rohan.
“You can explain everything to me as we go, Donovan,
and we’ll talk over what you’ve just shown me.”
“ Oh, Dad, I’d like to see the fun! ”
“ Well, you can’t be in two places at once, my lad!
After all, there won’t be much fun—this is rather a
grim business, and I’ll be glad to have you out of it.”
Suddenly there was a noise like a car being started
up, and Monty gave a shout.
“ Beazley! Stop him! ”
Beazley, ill and in terrible pain, had managed to
crawl to the door of his hut in time to witness the end
of the fight, and had later seen his recent employers in
handcuffs. He had grasped the situation at once, and
his first thought was for Copley and the hidden mine.
He must get word to him of the danger. But there was
no one to send. The crew of the Jumping Jimmy had
been paid off and had departed the previous night for
the nearest public-house, which was in Caroline Wells.
Sick, dizzy and in agony, Beazley tried to think the
matter out, realising at length that if anyone was to


warn Copley, it must be himself. Precious time was
lost as he rolled on the floor in a paroxysm of pain, but
as soon as he was able, he made his way to the motor
in which Kelly and Larrigan had come, and which
stood some little distance from the Jumping Jimmy.
Crawling into the seat, he managed to start the engine,
and it was this sound which had alarmed Monty.
Turning the machine quickly, Beazley made off,
and shots aimed at the tyres went wide.
Mr. Rohan, Mike and one of the troopers ran for the
horses and, flinging themselves into the saddle, pelted
off after the car.
It seemed as though the motor were drunk, for it
swayed from side to side over the ill-defined track as
the sick man endeavoured to steer it. But it made
headway and kept a good lead over the horses. It
swept round the curve that marked the angle of the
range, and one wheel skidded on the edge of the
precipice.
After this the road was narrow but less rocky, and
ran downhill. Beazley pressed the accelerator and the
car shot down the incline. Glancing back, he could
see no trace of his pursuers.
“ I’ll blow the horn when I’m within hearing,” he
decided. “ A warning will be all that’s needed, and
Copley can clear out to the farm.”
The riders rounded the curve, but the winding road
was empty of traffic. The trees hid the mad career of
Beazley.
About two miles from the secret mine there was an
awkward angle in the track, followed immediately by
a dip with a gradient of about one in five. Remem-
bering this, Beazley summoned his faffing strength
and grabbed the hand-brake—the pain in his legs and
feet made the use of the foot-brake out of the question.
The bend came in sight, with a granite wall towering
above it and slipping away steeply below, for the track
ran along a narrow shelf above the gully. The car
swerved dangerously and plunged down the slope.


The riders saw it disappear, and thundered over the
straight stretch leading to the bend. Mr. Rohan ahead,
they galloped over the narrow shelf in single file, but
at the head of the slope the horses were pulled up in
a swirl of dust, almost sitting on their haunches in
the struggle to keep their balance.
What had once been a motor-car lay in a mangled
heap half-way over the cliff at the bottom of the
incline. Beazley had been flung clear, and lay against
the trunk of a tree a few yards down the precipice.
The trooper went down and fastened about him a rope
that had been found in the car. He was still breathing.
“ There’s nothing we can do for him here,” observed
the trooper. “ This business of yours won’t take long,
sir, so I suggest that we leave him here in the shade
and pick him up on our way back.”
The other two hauled the unfortunate man on to
the roadway and stooped over him.
“It seems a shame,” said Mr. Rohan, “ but I
suppose there’s nothing else to do.”
“ You won’t be needing me now,” said Mike.
“You can’t miss the mine and it dead at the end of
this road. Let you lift him on to the front of my
saddle and I’ll take him back to the camp.”
They did as he suggested, and Mike turned back
towards the northern side of the range. Reaching his
destination after a slow, wearisome ride, he was
astonished to see signs of intense activity.
But he was less surprised than Monty had been an
hour earlier.
He and the trooper were just hammering in the last
of the pegs to mark the site of the claim at whose centre
stood the dead tree when they saw a motor coming
over the flats at a great speed.
“Goodness!” exclaimed the boy. “Here’s Sir
Malcolm Campbell! ”
“ Looks like it,” grinned the officer, picking up his
gun and slipping cartridges into it. “As well to be
prepared,” he remarked quietly.


Monty was already running back towards the camp,
and the miners, welcoming this fresh diversion, gathered
in a crowd. The trooper ran an expert eye over them.
“ Not very many, but a nasty mob if there’s more
trouble,” was his inward comment.
Fred Matthews and his mate sprang out of the trench
which they had been investigating, proving the truth
of Monty’s wonderful news.
Into this hostile and excited gathering came the car,
and all could see that it held one white man and three
blacks.
“ Gosh! If it ain’t a parson! ” exclaimed Matthews.
Mr. Martin brought the motor to an abrupt standstill
and leapt out.
Monty rushed to greet him.
“ Gee! It’s great to see you! ”
“What’s the matter here?” asked the missionary
hastily.
“ Nothing! Not now, anyway.”
“ But you signalled —one of you lads, I’m certain.
Pollux picked up the message —‘ Tolle ’ and then
* S.O.S.’ No one could have sent that message but
you boys.”
“ Yes,” explained Monty, “ that was Frank. He
has sunstroke. They tied him up to a tree, and ”
—the words came rushing out before he could stop
them —“ he’s found a nugget.”
“So you’ve found gold ! Well done! ”
“ Shsh! You’d better not say it too loudly! ”
But the trooper was too late with his warning.
“ Him find gold! ” exclaimed Pollux, and his
companions repeated the words and beamed at
Monty.
“ Gold! ” said someone on the edge of the crowd,
and the word ran like a flame through the place.
“ The tree! ” shouted a man who had been inter-
ested in Monty and the trooper a few minutes before.
“ A gold rush ! Run ! ”
The trooper shouted and raced for the tree, followed


closely by Monty. They needed all the start they got,
and even then only beat the first man by a few yards.
“ The claim is pegged! ” shouted the trooper,
holding his rifle ready in case of trouble.
Matthews and his mate forced their way through
the crowd and ranged themselves beside the policeman
and the boy.
The crowd halted. There was no chance now of a
pitched battle, such as so often takes place when a
new find is made. Frequently the crowd wins, and the
discoverer of gold goes to prove the truth of the adage
that dead men tell no tales.
But the silence lasted only a few seconds. There
was a rush to acquire claims adjoining this spot, for
who knew what untold wealth might lie in its vicinity ?
As darkness fell, fires were lit and the men worked
feverishly to drive in their pegs and maintain their own
boundaries. There were fights, of course, and the
matter was further complicated by the arrival of a
crowd of Chinese, who also began pegging out claims.
Mr. Martin, following in the wake of the gold-mad
mob, heard moans issuing from a humpy, and in a
few seconds realised that the settlement was in the
grip of beri-beri. From the stricken miner he heard
the story of the raid, and ordered Jackie and Bob to
distribute the supplies which he had brought and to
light fires and heat water with which to make tea
and bathe the sufferers. Followed by Pollux carrying
the medical outfit, he went from one hut to another,
but was faced each time with the same tragedy—
thirst.
“If only we could get some fresh water!” he
exclaimed at length.
“ Me go Nine Mile Spring,” said Pollux helpfully.
“ No; that’s salt, so they tell me.”
“ Him big tanks over by mine,” said the black,
pointing to those at the Jumping Jimmy. Mr. Martin
went over and tested the water, rapping on the rungs
of the tanks to see how much there was.


“ There’s very little here, and it’s not clean,” he
announced after turning on a tap.
But Pollux did not hear. He had roamed into a
hessian humpy, and was astonished to find Frank Rohan
tossing feverishly on the floor.
“ Come quick, master! ” shouted the black. “ Boy
hurt! ”
Mr. Martin realised at once what was the matter
with Frank and, after tasting the water in the canvas
bag, gave him some to drink.
“ Everyone is so full of this gold that they seem to
have forgotten him,” he remarked,
“Forgotten old Frank? How can you say it?”
Monty stood in the doorway. A whole tree-full of
nuggets would not have kept him from his brother
any longer.
“ There’s not much one can do for him till he comes
round,” observed the missionary. “ I’ll go back to
those other poor fellows —though I’m afraid they’ll die
of thirst in spite of me.”
“ There’s no need for that. I can show you where
there’s some fresh water,” said Monty, then his face
clouded. “ But it’s so far away —it would take hours
to get there and back.”
“ Where is it? ”
The boy explained, and Mr. Martin became
thoughtful.
“ If only we had enough men to form a human
chain,” he said, “ then pails could be handed from
one to another and it would be much quicker,”
“ You’d need at least a hundred,” laughed
Monty, adding: “ Well, we’ll have to do the best
we can. It’s no use counting on the miners to help
—they’ve gone mad. I’ll show your two boys the
way to the well, and we’ll hurry as much as we
can.”
But they had reckoned without the ready intelligence
of Pollux, who understood a great deal more English
than he spoke.


“What you want?” he asked, and Mr. Martin
explained.
“ You see, Pollux,” he finished, “ we can’t do any-
thing. We need so many men. You remember how
they passed the pails of water from one to another
when we fought the Bush fire out east? ”
Pollux nodded.
“ No water, him die? ” he asked with a gesture
towards Frank.
“ Perhaps. And all these others besides.”
“ Me fetch water,” said the black man, and vanished.
They saw him running towards the flats, and Monty
shouted:
“ Come back! The spring’s no good ! ” But Pollux
kept on running.
Mr. Martin sighed.
“Just when I needed him most! And I’d told him
that the spring was salt. Well, you will have to help
me, Monty, though I don’t like taking you among all
this sickness. I left my stuff over there. Come along
and we’ll see who else needs help.”
They were on their way from one shanty to another
when Mike rode in with Beazley across his saddle.
Briefly he explained what had happened as Monty
helped to lay the man in the light of a fire, and then
the boy ran for Mr. Martin.
“ Poor old Beazley! ” he exclaimed as he watched
the missionary examine the injured man. “He was
kind to me.”
“ He’ll live if the Barcoo rot isn’t too far advanced,”
announced the parson as he rose from his task.
“By all the saints! If it isn’t Mr. Martin himself! ”
exclaimed Mike, and the other stared at him.
“ Why, it’s Mike Donovan! How’s yourself, Mike ? ”
“ So you do know Mr. Martin, Mike? ”
“Know him? As well as I do myself! It was
him saved my life back in ’26, and never a drop have
I tasted since. Faix! those blue and pink snakes were
the worst I’d ever seen! ”


“ Well, I’m glad you’ve stuck to your resolution.
You know, Monty, Mike Donovan was one of the
finest men I knew before he took to drink. It was
nearly the ruin of him.”
“ That’s years ago,” Mike reminded him. “ It’s a
new man I’ve been since I got the poison out of my
system.”
Suddenly a shout went up : “ The blacks! Another
raid! ”
“No shoot! ” came a voice from the foot of the hill.
“ Mr, Martin—me Pollux! ”
The activity near the new claim had not ceased, and
only a handful of disappointed prospectors watched
the approach of the blacks. They came quite openly
across the flats with no attempt at concealment, and
at their head walked Pollux and a huge naked fellow
about his own size.
“ Fetch water,” explained Pollux with a sweep of
the arm that included his crowd of followers.
“Well, I’m blessed!” exclaimed Monty. “If he
hasn’t mobilised the blacks for us ! Good old Pollux! ”
“ And good old Castor! ” said Mr. Martin, going
up to the companion of Pollux. “ Well met, my
son! ”
Castor grinned, but said nothing. Mr. Martin
cast his eyes over the black forms that blended with
their background.
“ There are so many of them,” he said dubiously.
“ Castor may not be able to control them.”
“We’ll just have to chance that,” said Monty.
“ These poor fellows must have water if they’re to last
the night out. Phew! Isn’t it hot ? ”
So, with Monty and Pollux leading, the chain was
formed, reaching up the hill, over the gap and down
on the other side to the well. With Pollux translating,
Monty learned that the signals that day had been to
summon the tribes to a fresh raid on the camp. Pollux
had seen them gathering as the car rushed across the
plain, and he had returned to find them in formation


ready to set out for the camp. But the leader had
given permission for Castor to choose what men he
required for the water-carrying and had called the
raid off. His name, said Pollux, was The-man-with-
the-great-beard.
“ Him good mans,” remarked the black, as he had
done before, and this time Monty agreed.
So there they were —huge, stalwart natives from the
North, with the bodies of giants and the brains of
children. And as they handled the pails of water
they sang in strong rhythm, and Monty reflected that
the whole affair was as cheery and orderly as a
gathering of Boy Scouts.
When the well was empty and some fifty pails of
water had been passed down into the suffering camp,
Monty explained that it would be several hours before
the slow trickle filled it sufficiently for more water to
be drawn from it. Pollux translated, and Castor’s
team melted into the darkness. But Castor remained
with his brother.


CHAPTER XVI
EXPLANATIONS
The morning was well advanced before Mr. Rohan
and the trooper returned, with Copley behind the
latter’s saddle.
“ How did you get on, Dad ? ” asked Monty eagerly.
“ I’ll tell you when you give us some breakfast ’’
was the reply.
_ Around that fire, with the smell of bacon filling the
air, many obscure matters were cleared up.
Frank was able to join the group, though his head
ached badly and he could scarcely walk. This was
his first meeting with his father, and the excitement
did not improve his condition. However, he insisted
on remaining out of bed, and the boys sat one each
side of their father, plying him with food from Mr.
Martin’s store.
“ I think we’d better start at the beginning,” said
Mr. Rohan. “ What happened to you boys during
the storm? ”
Monty told the story of their adventures, with
occasional interruptions from Frank, and explained
how they had tried to get news of their father while
waiting at the Mission station.
“ I was where no news could reach me,” said Mr.
Rohan, as they begged him to tell his part of the story
now.
“ As you know,” he continued, “ I crashed into the
hillside after crossing the Ronalds safely. I miscalcu-
lated the height of The Ironstones,
“I don’t know how long I lay there, all mixed up
in the wreckage. It was lucky for me that there wasn’t
enough petrol in the tank to start a fire and that the
machine broke up so badly.”


“ Yes, that was luck! ” commented Frank. “ The
tins of spirit were quite a good way from where you
“ How did you get out? ” asked Monty.
“ I was picked up by a bore-sinker who was on his
way to try to locate artesian water somewhere out
west. He took me to his camp and looked after me till
I was able to move,”
“ And didn’t you see the hidden mine? ”
“ Well, I wasn’t capable of seeing anything. But
my friend didn’t know of its existence—of that I’m
certain. This was his first time in this district and his
camp was about five miles from the mine. Evidently
they keep the Sabbath there, and it was not working
the day he found me. You may remember that it
was a Sunday.”
“ Were you knocked about much? ” asked Frank.
“ Pretty well, but I’m very tough, you know !
Now go on with your part of the yarn, Monty.”
The boy took up the tale and related how they had
resolved to return to The Ironstones and how Mr.
Martin had fitted them out and sent Pollux to guide
them.
“You might have been sending them to their
deaths! ” said Mr. Rohan angrily.
“ Have you ever tried to prevent those two from
doing what they’ve set their hearts on? ” asked the
missionary, “It was anxiety for your safety that
brought them back here, Mr. Rohan.”
When Monty came to the story of the encounter
with the two riders, Matthews interrupted.
“ That guy Kelly was always jumping people’s claims.
He and his mate took ours while we w T as away getting
water. They said they thought we’d gone for good.
I reckon they suspected that we knew something about
their phony mine—not half we didn’t! ”
“We let them keep ours,” said his mate. “ They
were welcome to the gold in it as far as we knew —we
hadn’t found any.”
It s a good thing for you that Kelly and Larrigan


didn’t do any digging,” remarked Frank. “It took
some pretty hard work on our part to make a find.”
Matthews grinned.
“ You kids ’ll have to go shares with us now, he said.
“No fear! We’re millionaires on our own, aren’t
we, Mont? ”
“ Sure! And we hope your claim pans out halt as
well as ours. But how did you happen to meet up
with Dad? ”
“ Well, you see,” said Mr. Rohan, “ I’d borrowed
a horse from my rescuer and w r as making for The
Ironstones when I ran into these two and the troopers,
and we decided to join forces.”
“Yes,” said Matthews. “We was going to lay
information against the Jumping Jimmy gang when
we got to Caroline Wells, but we wasn’t half-way when
we met the troopers, and after we’d told our yarn
they said they’d come back with us.”
“ But you’d destroyed your licence —you had no
proof that the claim was yours,” said Frank.
“ I hadn’t torn mine up,” said Fred’s mate. “We
still had that to go on. As a matter of fact, Fred made
a mistake over that licence —thought he was burning
letters from some girl, didn’t you, Fred? ”
Matthews looked sheepish and grinned.
Mike felt that his turn had come and now started
to tell his side of the story to Mr. Rohan. _ M
“ Before you’d ever heard of the Jumping Jimmy,
he said, “ I was prospecting in these ranges. I got a
job with Larrigan and Kelly—said I hadn’t had any
luck and was starving. It always seemed to me there
was something funny about that mine. It’s the one
the other side of the hills that I’m meaning. Then I
tumbled to their sending the gold away by camel-
team.”
“ But surely they didn’t trust it to the drivers?
“ Not they. Two men went with it and they armed
to the teeth.” #
“ And I suppose they paid the driver his share.
“ They must have done and he not giving them


away. Well, I followed the tracks of the car one
night, and it moonlight. I wanted to know where
Kelly and Larrigan went to on them little joy-rides.
They were putting the charge of gold into this mine
here when I arrived, so when they’d gone I went down
and put specimens into my little bag. They caught me
at daylight, and I not spry enough in getting away.”
“Was it your intention to have the two sets of
specimens compared? ” asked Mr. Rohan.
“ Yes; and then they’d have been proved to be the
same gold.”
“ But you hadn’t any gold out of this claim, had
you? I mean the gold that really did come out of
it?”
“ No; but that was at headquarters.”
“What do you mean?” asked Monty. “Aren’t
you a prospector at all? ”
Mike laughed.
“ The Mines Department has had its eye on Larri-
gan and Kelly this three months past and they sent
me to have a look round for them.”
“ So that's why you lost your memory! ” exclaimed
Frank.
Mike looked at him sorrowfully.
“ It’s after losing my memory I am,” he said, “ I
told ye no lies, me boy! The crack that Larrigan’s
after giving me brought me memory back again—so
the doctor says! ” he added, with a gesture towards
Mr. Martin, who nodded confirmation.
“ And now, if you’ll give me that little bag you’ve
been minding for me . . .”
The boy handed it over, and the Irishman and Mr.
R.ohan became involved in some highly technical
discussion.
“ I want you to add the weight of your evidence to
mine when I report to the shareholders of the Jumping
Jimmy,” said Mr. Rohan presently.
“Yes,” put in Frank, “and that sample bag I
pinched from the office at the secret mine will prove
the truth of all Mike’s statements without a doubt.”


“ I want to get you boys out of this as quickly as
possible,” said their father some hours later. “ Also,
we have to take our prisoners down to Caroline Wells,
though I don’t know how we’re going to do it.”
“ You can take my car,” said Mr. Martin. “ I’ll
stop here till the epidemic is over, and by then you
will have sent it back.”
“ We’ll do better than that! ” cried Monty. “ We’ll
send you back a hospital aeroplane and anything else
you need.”
“ You’d want a fleet of ’planes for that,” laughed
the missionary.
“ Then we’ll send a fleet. You forget that Frank and I
are rich now. Dad says the golden fish is worth a couple
of thousand at least, and there’s more in the ground.”
“ That’s so,” agreed Mr. Rohan. “ I’m certain the
boys have struck it rich. Aaid it’s dead in line with
the reef that Donovan found, so that they should strike
that when a shaft is sunk.”
“What are you going to do with your wealth? ’
asked the clergyman. _ . .
“ I’m going to take up mining engineering, said
Frank promptly. “ I’ll be back here in a few years
as manager. Nothing like taking care of your ow r n
affairs is there ?
“ That’s a sensible decision,” remarked his father.
“ And have you made any resolutions, Monty? ”
“ Oh, Mont will take to writing popular songs and
leading a gay life, I bet! ” laughed Frank.
“ I’ll do nothing of the sort! ” said the younger
boy, and the others noticed that his eyes were grave and
his firm jaw thrust out —for those terrible hours shut up
in the office had had a very steadying effect on Monty.
“ As soon as I’ve passed matric.,” he said, “ I’m
going to take up medicine. It’s Edinburgh for me in
a couple of years, and after that I’ll be back here too,
Mr. Martin. But I won’t be at the mine. I’ll leave
that entirely to Frank.”
“ And what will you be doing, Monty? ” asked his
brother. “ Setting up a practice among the miners?


There won’t be much for you to do—the discovery of
fresh water has banished Barcoo rot from now on.”
“ No; I wasn’t thinking of the miners, I was
thinking of what Mr. Martin said the other day about
the people scattered over the Never-Never who are
hundreds of miles from any hospital or doctor. I was
thinking that with your help, Mr. Martin, we might
start a fleet of hospital ’planes and get over that
difficulty for them.”
“ You’re a fine chap, Monty! ” exclaimed the
missionary. “ I’ll be waiting for you! ”
It was finally decided that Mr. Rohan and the
troopers should take their captives to Caroline Wells
in Mr. Martin’s car and that Monty and Frank should
remain at the diggings for a few days, partly in order
to protect their rights to the claim, and partly in order
to enable Frank to rest before beginning the journey
back to Adelaide.
The boys occupied themselves in examining their
claim more closely and in starting to have a shaft
sunk. Monty spent quite a lot of time in helping Mr,
Martin, as Pollux was engaged in directing the blacks
whom he had once more mobilised and persuaded to
destroy the dumps that had helped to spread disease
through the mining camp.
Three days after their father’s departure, the boys
sighted a large monoplane coming from the south, and
knew that their first visit to The Ironstones was over.
“ Your car will be here to-morrow, Mr. Martin,”
said Mr. Rohan, as he climbed out of the machine.
He was followed by a tall, thin man whom he introduced
to the boys.
“ This is Mr. Green. He’s going to start work on
your claim, and I’m coming back to be with him as
soon as I’ve settled things in Adelaide. I registered
the mine at Caroline Wells, so that everything is
O.K. now. Have you decided what to call it? ”
“ Why, that’s obvious! ” exclaimed Frank. “ There
is only one name for it—The Golden Fish.”
“ We have someone else who wants to work for us,”


put in Monty. “ It’s Beazley. Give him a chance,
Dad —he’s a decent sort.”
“ I’ll consider it when he’s better,” said Mr, Rohan.
“ He will probably be accused of aiding and abetting
the other three, so I can’t make any promise regard-
ing him. It is possible that he only acted out of a
mistaken sense of loyalty. But you must come now,
boys—we have to be getting back.”
The whole settlement gathered about the ’plane to
see them off, and those of the invalids who were able
to move staggered to the doors of their shacks and
shouted farewells.
Mr. Martin stood surrounded by his dusky staff, to
which had been added a new member —Castor,
grinning broadly in a suit of blue dungarees.
“ It’s meself will be going with you,” announced
Mike suddenly. “ It’ll be saving me the walk to
Caroline Wells.”
“ We’re not stopping to put down passengers,” said
Mr. Rohan, “ and you’d find it a decent drop if you
wanted to land. You’d better come with us to
Adelaide and we’ll put in our reports together.”
“ We’re not supposed to carry more than three in
these ’planes,” said Frank, “ but we’ll find room for
you somehow.”
“ Faix! it’s a stowaway I’ll be! ” laughed Mike as
he found a place for himself in the cabin.
The ’plane taxied over the ground that the blacks
had cleared, and took off, its passengers waving to
those below.
“ Remember, Monty, I’ll be waiting! ” shouted
Mr. Martin.
The roar of the engines drowned his words, but
Monty guessed what they were, and nodded vigorously.
Then, settling into his seat, he started to whistle, and
the old confident grin returned to his mouth and the
impudent gleam to his eyes. The future looked very
good indeed to Montague Anthony Rohan.
The end of the story did not come for several months,


when Monty came home from school for the week-end
to hear the result of the joint reports of Mike and Mr.
Rohan. They all gathered on the verandah in the
cool of Saturday evening and Mr. Rohan explained
how everything had been settled.
“ The secret mine—the real Jumping Jimmy—
belongs to the syndicate that employed me,” he told
them. “ Mike has proved his claim to the other one.”
“ I’ll be calling it ‘ Donovan’s Find,’ ” said Mike,
“ and half of what it yields will go to Mr. Martin’s
Mission. But for him I wouldn’t be here this minute
with wealth lying before me, drinking lemon-squash
through a straw.”
Frank laughed.
“ Good old Mike! ” he cried. “ I always knew
you’d turn up trumps! ”
“ Sez you! ” was Monty’s sarcastic comment.
“ Frank was right to doubt me,” said Mike, cc and
he not knowing who I was at all.”
“ And you not knowing either,” added Frank.
“What happened to Larrigan and Kelly?” asked
Monty.
“ Well, Larrigan turned King’s Evidence, and the
rest was easy. It appears they had been working the
secret mine for about five years. It’s on Copley’s
land, as you thought, but he’s forfeited it through
fraud. Anyhow, even the land won’t be much use
to him by the time he’s served his sentence. He got
fifteen years, and he’s not a young man. The other
two won’t trouble the general public for some consider-
able time either.”
“ And what about Matthews’ claim? ” asked Frank.
“ I hear that it’s panning out very well. They won’t
make a fortune over it, but they’ll certainly get a very
good living. You know about your own mine, of course.
The Golden Fish will lay golden eggs for a good many
years to come. How’s the engineering, Frank? ”
“ Fine! Just the work I always meant to take up,
you know.”
“ And is it still to be Edinburgh, Monty? ”


“You bet! I’m pretty certain of matriculating at
the end of this year, and then the fun begins! ”
He rose to his feet. He found it impossible to sit
still any longer. This conversation was very inter-
esting, of course, and it was wonderful to hear how
rich he and Frank were going to be; but at the back
of the house there was something from which he could
not remain away for another minute.
“ Dad tells me you’re both starting back to The
Ironstones on Monday,” he said to Mike. “ Well, in
case I forget to tell you —when you see Mr. Martin,
I’d like you to give him a message from me.”
“ Sure! It’ll be a pleasure! ”
“ Thanks ! Just say ‘ Monty’s coming! ’ He’ll
understand.”
He strolled away, hands in pockets, breaking into
a run as soon as he was out of sight of the three on
the verandah.
Hurrying to a shed that had been newly built, he
threw back the sliding doors to reveal, in all the glory
of new paint and aluminium, the special Vagrant
Bird which represented his first purchase out of his
share of the Golden Fish nugget.
It had a fuselage of steel, was furnished with all the
latest equipment, and painted in green and white
and silver. Monty ran it out of the hangar and
unfolded the wings.
“ Isn’t she the little beauty! ”he exclaimed, walking
around her proudly.
He climbed into the pilot’s seat, his enthusiasm
dimmed for the moment by the recollection of the fact
that some time must still elapse before he would be
permitted to make solo flights. Lastly, he examined
the beautiful 120 h.p. engine and lost himself in dreams
of joyous days to come —hours spent in the air with
the earth slipping away beneath him, the machine
answering perfectly to his control, and all the heavens
for his playground.
“ Hurrah for gold! ” shouted Monty Rohan.
Printed in Great Britain by Richard Clay & Sons, Limited.
Bungay, Suffolk.


'Books for
BOYS & GIRLS
From Six to Sixteen
Popular Writers
Illustrated by First-Class Artists
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge
THE SHELDON PRESS
LONDON ; NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C. 2
AND OF ALL BOOKSELLERS




BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
FROM SIX TO SIXTEEN
Adventure House. By Mary Shrewsbury. (Adventures at
the seaside of two Scouts and their sisters.)
Audrey in Camp. By F. O. H. Nash.
Bottle of Sweets, The. By Mabel L. Tyrrell,
Colin and Joan. By Amy Cripps Vernon.
Dick’s Hero. By F. O. H. Nash.
Faithful Teddy. Cheery tales for Little People. By Constance
He ward.
Granny’s Fairyland. By Amy le Feuvre.
How Audrey became a Guide. By F. O. H. Nash. (Just the
book for Brownies.)
In Mid-Air. By G. Manville Fenn. (Describes an escape
from Paris by balloon in 1870.)
Ivory Picture, The. By Winifred Pares.
Joy, the Happiest Child in England. By F. C. Beames.
Kitty’s Tea-Party, and other Stories. By Constance Heward .
Knight in Petticoats, A. By D. M. Percy Smith.
Mick, an Ugly Dog. By Emily Underdown.
Misadventures of an I.M.P. By Edith E. Cowper.
Mollie and the Months. By Lilian Dalton.
Mystery of the Manor, The. By Ethel Talbot.
Oggie and the Sea-Fairies. By Alice Sophia Jackson.
Plague Ship, The. By G. A. Henty.
Purring When You’re Pleased, and other Stories. Retold from
Mrs. Gatty’s “ Parables of Nature.”
Red Caps at School. By Ethel Talbot.
Rolf’s First Earnings, and other Stories. By Constance
Heward. (Stories for little children.)


Is. — continued.
Stolen Feathers. By Dora Percy Smith.
Sunshiny Stories. By Constance Reward. (For little ones.)
Told by the Twins. By F. L. Farmer.
Ups and Downs ; or, The Life of a Kite. By Ascott R. Hope.
Vicarage Twins, The. By D. M. Percy Smith.
While Mother was Away. By Ethel Talbot.
PICTURES AND STORIES FOR YOUNG CHILDREN.
Old World Wonder Stories. Edited by M. V . O’Shea.
Tales of Animal-Land.
Tales of Far Away.
Tales of Long Ago.
Tales of Mother Goose, The. As First Collected by Charles
Perrault.
Tales of the Countryside.
Teddy and the Fairy, and other Stories.
The Land of Faraway, and other Stories.
Is. 3d.
Audrey at School. By F. O. H. Nash.
Bell in the Forest, The. By Beatrice Radford.
Boy’s Honour, A. By Maud Christie.
Family Next Door, The. By Ethel Talbot.
In the Reign of the Red Cap. By Dorothea Moore. (A tale
of the French Revolution.)
Jack’s Baby. By Amy Grey.
Lenny from London. By Lilla Waithman.
Matt Desmond’s Bit. By John Comfort.
Misfortunes of Tony, The. By M. C. Barnard. (A humorous
story of small boy life.)
Moon Lady, The. By A. Eva Richardson. (A charming story
for children.)


Is. 3d.— continued.
On His Own. By John Comfort. (The adventures of an
English boy in Canada “ on his own.”)
Peggie Pemberton, Brownie. By H. B. Davidson.
Perilous Album, The. By D. M. Percy Smith. (A jolly story
of a boys’ preparatory school.)
Pirates and Perils. By " Stormrail.”
Raiders of the Pool, The, and other Yarns. By Alfred Judd.
Red Rabbit. By Anne Mort. (For young children.)
School over the Way, The. By Wallace Grey.
Seven Robins. By Tess Peppard,
Stranger in the Train, The, and other School Stories. By Ethel
Talbot.
Terry and the Ancestors. By Mary Baldwin.
Through the Nursery Gate. By Winifred Pares, (For little
children.)
Tommy’s Little Grains of Sand, and other Stories. By
Constance He ward.
Tweedledum and Tweedledee. A story for children. By M.
Rodino.
Whither ? The Story of a Flight. By Dorothea Towns-
hend. (A tale of the Huguenots.)
Wrens to the Rescue. By Alfred Judd, (Detective and
other stories.)
Is. 6d.
Audrey the Sea Ranger. By F. O. H. Nash.
Boy from Nowhere, The. By Nancy M. Hayes,
Brave Dame Mary; or, The Siege of Corfe Castle.
Brave Girl, A. A story of the Indian Mutiny. By A. F.
Jackson.
Broken Voyage, A. By John A. Higginson.
Bush Boys, The. By T. C. Bridges.
Child of Surprises. By Mabel Escombe.
Clue of the Shakespeare Head, The. The second case of Bruce
Brendon, amateur detective. By J. Roland Evans.
Copper Urn, The. By Amy Grey. (A story of hidden treasure.)
Creaking Bough, The. By WTnifred Pares.


Is. 6d. — continued.
Cromer Street Party, The. By Norman P. Greig. (A story
of child-life in a slum, drawn with sympathy, insight, and
humour.)
Dick’s Debt. By Amy Grey. (How a boy did his bit in war-
time.)
Don’s Doings. A story of life in Western Canada. By John
Comfort.
Everyday Angel, An. A Story for Girls. By Winifred Pares,
Fellow Fags. By E. Talbot. (A lively story of a small boy’s
experience at a public school.)
Henri Duquesne. A Sussex Romance. By E. E. Crake,
M.A., F.R.H.S.
Heroes of the Chitral Siege. By Alice F. Jackson.
How Audrey became a Guide and Audrey in Camp. By F. O. H.
Nash.
Hunted and the Hunter. By E. E. Cowper. (A vivid story
of the joys and perils of campers’ life in North-West Canada.)
Kitty goes to Camp. The Story of an Ordinary Guide. By
Penelope Gaunt.
Lodge in the Wood, The. By E. E. Cowper. (A charming
story of everyday children’s experiences.)
Lorna’s First Term. By Joan Herbert. (A delightful
vignette of life at one of the best-known girls’ schools.)
My Lady Venturesome. A story of 1685, By Dorothea
Moore. (A story of the Monmouth invasion.)
Nobby. A Son of the Empire. By John Comfort.
Peggy’s School Pack. By H. B. Davidson. (A sequel to
“Peggy Pemberton, Brownie.” Peggy is now at school.)
Poor Man’s Pepper. By Winifred Pares.
Purple Rose, The. A story of Italy in the Fifteenth Century.
By Anne Forester.
Queen Caroline. By A. S. Jackson.
Red Rabbit’s Family. ByANNEMoRT. (A story of animal life.)
Road through the Bog, The. By C. M. MacSorley. (A story
of Irish life.)
Rosie the Peddler. By F. O. H. Nash. (The story of a girl
who was kidnapped and lived an open-air life.)
Secret of Forest Hall, The. By Norman P. Greig. (A story of
delightful children.)


Is. 6d.— continued.
Seven Giants, The, By J. Roland Evans.
Star Maiden. A Tale of Southern India. By Eleanor Pegg.
Tales of Pendlecliffe School. By Sid G. Hedges.
Thorn Fortress, The. A Tale of the Thirty Years’ War, By
M. Bramston.
Toby’s Luck. By John Comfort. (Gold-mining in Western
Australia.)
Treasure of Spanish Villa, The. By F. Bayford Harrison.
Trehurst Mystery, The. By Norman P. Greig.
When Duty Called. A yarn of shipwreck and adventure on
the coast of Portugal, By John A. Higginson.
With Bligh of the “ Bounty or, From Tofoa to Timor. By M.
Nackington.
Wolf Cub Days. By Margaret G. Rhodes. (Stories from
life.)
Yarns by the Fireside. By Alfred Judd. (Racy boys’ stories.)
2s.
Adventurers Two. A Story of the Vendean Rising. By
Dorothea Moore.
Adventures of Marshall Vavasour, Midshipman. By S. W
Sadler, R.N.
Adventures of Nancy in Sweden, The. By Pauline Toller.
Barbara’s Heroes. By H. Louisa Bedford.
Bearer of Despatches, A. A Story of the Siege of Lynn, 1643
By Emil Loch.
Castle Cornet. A story of the Channel Islands. By L. Haw-
trey. (A fine historical story.)
Cave-Men of Dulvercoombe, The. By Frederick Brough.
Cave of Hanuman, The. By Mrs. Hobart-Hampden. (The
adventures of four children in the jungles of India.)
Children of the Cliff, The ; or, The Smuggler’s Hole. By A. V.
Dutton.
Chronicles of Durnford, The. A Public School Story. By
John Cartwright.
Crow’s Nest, The. By E. E. Cowper. (A story for girls.)
Dame Joan of Pevensey. A Sussex Tale. By E. E. Crake.
Deputy Boss, The. A Tale of British Honduras. By Bessie
March ant.


2s. — continued.
Fortunes of Junia, The. A Story for Girls. By M. Bramston.
Frontier Fort, The. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Gilpins and their Fortunes, The. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Girl Chums of Norland Road, The. By Edith Miles. (A story
of school life.)
Guinevere. By C. Ainsley Gillespy. (A story for elder girls.)
Hen and Chickens. A Story of Girl Life in the Great War.
By Winifred Pares.
Jack the Englishman. A Story of Tasmania. By H. Louisa
Bedford.
Jackanapes, and other Tales. By Juliana Horatia Ewing.
Jock and the J oyous Kingdom. By Arthur Willink.
Kevin and the Cats. By K. F. Purdon. (Will delight all
lovers of animals.)
Lamb House Plot, The. By D. M. Percy Smith. (A story of
a boys’ preparatory school.)
Land of the Firestone, The. A thrilling Story of Adventure in
the deep Forests of America and upon the High Seas. By
Alfred Judd.
Little Duke, The. By Charlotte Yonge.
Little Pair of Pilgrims, A. By Margaret J. M. 801 l and.
Little Peterkin and his Brother. By E. M. Green.
Lob Lie-by-the-Fire, and other Tales. By Juliana Horatia
Ewing.
Lost Cave and those Kennards, The. By Nancy M. Hayes,
(A story of a smuggler’s cave and lost treasure.)
Mate of the “ Lily.” ByW.H.G. Kingston.
Meg and the Guides. A country story. By H. B. Davidson.
Midbourne School. By Edith Miles.
Mystery of the Sinclairs, The. By F. Bennett. (The story
of a dream about the days of King Charles.)
Nest of Malignants, A. A Story of the Civil War. By Doro-
thea Moore.
Nora. An Irish Story. By C. M. MacSorley.
Peggy and Pat. A tale of the Australian bush. By M.
Bradford Whiting.
Queen Mab. By Mrs. Arthur G. K. Woodgate. (The
amusing adventures of four children.)
Richenda and the Mystery Girl. By F. O. H. Nash. (A story of
school life. Natural happenings in the life of nice jolly girls.)


2s. — continued.
Runaway Caravan, The. By Nancy M. Hayes. (Stirring
adventures with a snow-bound caravan.)
Saint George of KingCharles’Days, A. ByDorotheaTownshend.
Second Innings. By J. S. N. Sewell. (A boys’ school
story.)
Secret of Marsh Haven, The. A Story of School Adventure.
By Alfred Judd.
Secret Jungle, The. By R. J. MacGregor. (A story of
India.)
Silver Idol, The. By Jack Carew. (Adventures at Sea.)
Sonny. By Mary Roding.
Sunshine Bill. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Three in a Bungalow'. For Girls. By M. F. Hutchinson.
Tom with a Temper. E. M. Channon. (For younger folks.)
Tracked on the Trail. By Nancy M. Hayes. (A charming
story of three children.)
Tracking of Toby, The. The tale of a holiday chase. By
Alfred Judd.
Treasure of the Red Peak, The. A tale of the Cordillera. By
Frederick Brough. (An expedition in search of treasure.)
True to the King. A story of the New Forest in 1647. By
Mrs. Frank Cowper.
Two from Town. By Theodora Mills. (A charming story
for children.)
Two Shipmates, The. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Uncle Michael’s Story. A Tale of the River Amazon. By
Gertrude Hollis. (A boy’s adventures in unknown Brazil.)
Vita. The Story of a Charming Little Girl. By Amy Grey.
Westcote Towers. A story of life at a preparatory school.
By Marjorie C. Barnard.
When Bab was Young. By L. E. Tiddeman.
2s, 6d.
Ardice Fortune, The. A story of Girl Guides. By H. B.
Davidson. (A story of modem school life.)
Athabasca Bill. A Tale of the Far West. By Bessie Marchant.
Baymen of Belize, The. And how they wrested British
Honduras from the Spaniards. Edited by E. W. Williams.


2s. 6d. — continued.
Black and White. By J. S. N. Sewell. (A school story.)
Bobby Wild Goose. A chronicle of Old Gloucester. By Lilian
Dalton.
Castle Tea-Garden, The. A story of Girl Guides. By H. B.
Davidson.
Colin of the Seven Seas. By Captain K. Maclure. (A
thrilling chronicle of modern life at sea.)
Countess at School, A. By E. M. Channon.
Darling of Sandy Point. By Bessie Marchant. (A story of
adventure around the Straits of Magellan.)
Dragon’s Eye, The. A tale of the Eastern Seas. By Frederick
Brough. (A splendid story of amazing adventures.)
Enemy in the Midst, The. By Captain K. Maclure. (A
story of a German spy in the Great War.)
Finding her Family. A story for girls. By Elsie J. Oxenham.
Fortunes of Eglantine, The. By Mary Bradford Whiting.
“ From Greenland’s Icy Mountains.” A tale of the Polar
Seas. By Gordon Stables, M.D., R.N.
Galleon Treasure. By A. B. Sherlock. (Adventures to
recover gold from a sunken galleon.)
Harter’s Ranch. By F. B. Forester. (A story of adventure.)
House at Brambling Minster, The. By Bessie Marchant. (An
amusing story of a haunted house.)
Hugh the Messenger. A Tale of the Siege of Calais. By G.
Hollis.
Island for Two, An. A school story. By. L. F. Ramsey.
Kidnapped Prince, A. By Herbert Hayens. (Exciting adven-
tures of boys in the South Seas.)
King’s Double, The. By Edith E. Cowper. (A vivid episode
in the Civil War, 1651.)
King’s Legacy, The. A story of the French Revolution. By
Kate Whitehead.
King’s Namesake, The. A tale of Carisbrooke Castle. By
C. M. Phillimore.
Kitty. By Adela F. Mount (Mrs. Bricknell Perry.)
Lances of Lynwood, The, By Charlotte M. Yonge.
Liberators, The. By Captain K. Maclure. (A capital story
full of stirring adventure.)
Little Prince Tota. A tale of the Himalayas. By Mrs.
Hobart-Hampden.


2s. 6d. — continued.
Luck of the Lauries, The. A girls’ school story. By K. M.
Macleod.
Makeshift Patrol, The. By H. B. Davidson. (A story of
Girl Guides.)
Making of Mona, The. By Mabel Quiller-Couch.
Marquis’ Heir, The. A Tale of the Early Years of the French
Revolution. By A. H. Biggs.
Mysterious City, The. A Story of the Congo. By Bessie
Marchant.
Mystery Scout, The. By A. Le Breton Martin. (Scouts
rescue a comrade who has been kidnapped.)
Mystery of Castle Veor, The; or, The Spies in Our Midst. By
E. E. Cowper.
Pat of Whitehouse. A Story of Girl Guides. By H. B.
Davidson. (A thrilling story of girls’ school life.)
Philip Okeover’s Pagehood. A Story of the Peasants’ Rising.
By Gertrude Hollis.
Queen of the Extinct Volcano, The. By C. Dudley Dampen.
(A story of adventure.)
Riddle of the Screen, The. By C. W. C. Drury. (Exciting
adventures in connection with an old fortress.)
Rivals of the “ Rampant.” By Stanton Hope. (The rivalry
of two boys who join the Navy. The one who is most
successful is to receive a legacy: very exciting.)
Rolf the Rebel. By Bessie Marchant. (Exciting adventures
and hairbreadth escapes in Cuba.)
Sea Raiders. The, By A. B. Sherlock. (A capital yarn of
exploits in the Australian Navy.)
Sea Rangers of the Rodney. By H. B. Davidson. (A girls’
story with a strong “ Guiding ” interest.)
Sea Scouts Afloat. A story of the Great War. By Frederick
Harrison.
Secret Temple, The, and Other Tales. By various writers.
(Thrilling adventures in all parts of the world.)
Sons of Want. A story of the Hungry Forties. By Lilian
Dalton. (A vivid and fascinating story of the Chartist
period.)
Spurs and Bride; How they were Won. A Tale of Magna
Charta. By Gertrude Hollis.
Story of Dorothy, The. By L. E. Tiddeman.


2s. 6d.— continued.
Stranding of the “ White Rose,” The. By C. Dudley Dampen.
Track of Danger, The. Major Brand, his son Dick, and stalwart
O’Flannel in New Adventures all round the Globe. By
Alfred Judd.
Tudor Necklace, The. By Mrs. R. T. Nicholson. (An
historical tale.)
Under One Standard. A Story of the Maori War. By H.
Louisa Bedford.
Under the Blue Flag. A story of Monmouth’s Rebellion. By
M. E. Palgrave.
Western Scout, The. By Bessie March ant. (The adven-
tures of a Boy Scout.)
With Mahdi and Khalifa. By Alice F. Jackson. (A tale of
the Soudan.)
3s.
Audrey Books, The. " How Audrey became a Guide,
“ Audrey in Camp,” “ Audrey at School.” and “ Audrey the
Sea Ranger,” in one volume. (An Audrey Omnibus.)
Barbara Pelham. The story of an unselfish life. By M. E.
Shipley.
Beggar Princess, The. By Mabel L. Tyrrell. (A story for
older girls.)
Black Dog’s Rider, The. By Edith E. Cowper. (A high-
spirited girl turns highway robber.)
Brave Endeavour, A; or, The Proving of Ysolt. By E. L.
Haverfield. (A Canadian girl’s thrilling adventures.)
Brave Little Cousin, A. By Bessie March ant.
Camp across the Road, The. By H. B. Davidson. (A simply
told and charming story of Guides.)
Captain of the Waterguard, The. By E. E. Cowper.
Carved Cartoon, The. A Picture of the Past. By Austin
Clare.
De Montfort’s Squire. A Story of the Battle of Lewes. By
Frederick Harrison.


3s. — continued.
Diana’s Decision. A Story for Girls. By A. Wilson Fox.
Disappearance of David Pendarve, The. By Edith E. Cowper.
Eardley House. A School Story. By Sibyl B. Owsley.
Gold Hunters, The. A Story of the Californian Goldfields.
By W. J. Marx.
Guides Make Good, The. By H. B. Davidson.
Hidden Chalice, The. By lerne L. Plunket. (A tale of the
dissolution of the monasteries.)
Invaders of Fairford, The. A Story of Cromwellian Times.
By E. E. Cowper.
Leo Lousada, Gentleman Adventurer. By Edith E. Cowper.
(Strange adventures among the Channel Islands in 1820.)
Ned Garth. A Tale of the Slave Trade. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Odin’s Treasury. By W. Victor Cook. (A thrilling story of
hidden treasure in Iceland.)
Redwood Ranch. By Bessie Marchant. (Adventures of a
boy lost in a Californian forest.)
School they Handed On, The. By Sibyl B. Owsley. (A girls’
school story.)
Who are the Cromlyns ? By E. L. Haverfield. (A capital
story about young people.)
3s. 6d.
Admiral’s Chart, The. By C. W. C. Drury. (A fierce old sea-
dog conceals ill-gotten treasure. The clue, concealed in a
chart, falls into the hands of treasure-seekers: the result is
described in this stirring yam.)
Another Pair of Shoes. By Jessie Leckie Herbertson. (A
school story.)
Book of the Fairies, The. Stories retold by C. M. Duncan-
Jones.
Dick Trawle, Second Mate. By W. C. Metcalfe. (Adven-
tures in Polar Seas.)
Earncliffe of Errington. By F. B. Forester. (Stirring
adventures of a boy at the time of the Peninsular War.)


3s. 6d. — continued.
First Princess Margaret, The. By E. K. Seth-Smith. (The
famous story of St. Margaret of Scotland attractively told
in fiction form.)
General and his Daughter, The. By Frances Armstrong.
Girl Guide Omnibus, A. By H. B. Davidson. ("Pat of
Whitehouse,” “ The Camp Across the Road,” and “ The
Guides Make Good,” in one volume.)
King of the Air, The. By E. Keble Chatterton. (A story
of thrilling adventure.)
Mary’s Meadow, and other Tales of Fields and Flowers. By
Mrs. Ewing. With coloured Illustrations.
Mystery of the Gap, The. By C. W. C. Drurv. (A thrilling
story of real distinction.)
Old-fashioned Fairy Tales. By Mrs. Ewing. With eight
coloured Illustrations by W. Graham Robertson.
Ordeal of Susannah Vantham, The. By Emily Pearson
Finnemore. (For elder girls.)
Pendlecliffe Swimmers, The. By Sid G. Hedges. (A splendid
story which will arouse enthusiasm for the finest sport in the
world!)
Rupert Dudleigh. A Story of Old Brighton. By Frederick
Harrison.
Silent Zone, The. By C. W. C. Drury. (An exciting story
of a Destroyer sent to solve a wireless mystery.)
Skirl o’ the Pipes. A Modern Fairy Tale. By F. C. Brodiz.
Tales of Ancient Rome. By J. E. Wethereix.
Tales of Empire. By J. E. Ray.
Three Roman Pennies. By M. M. B. Higham, M.A. (An
unusual and fascinating tale of how three children go back
into the past.)
Too Near the Throne. An Historical Romance. By Alice
Wilson Fox.
Tookey and Alice Mary Tales, The. By Robert de Montjoie
Rudolf. (For young children.)
With Dog and Canoe. By Dillon Wallace. (Robust,
healthy, out-of-door adventures.)
Yellow Beetle, The. By A. B. Sherlock. (A breathless story
in which fast ships, racing cars, and aircraft are used.)


4s. 6d.
Adventures of Jack-a-Lantern, The. By S. Walkey. (The
adventures of an English boy in revolutionary France.)
Land of the Ever-Young, The. By Rosamond Langbridge.
With four coloured and four black-and-white Illustrations
by F. D. Bedford. An exquisite phantasy which Mr. F. D.
Bedford, who illustrated “Peter and Wendy,” has sym-
pathetically interpreted.
A. E. says: “We think this book can be put on the shelf
with ‘The Water Babies,’ etc. ... It will be remembered
as among the very best books for children ever written.”
Sons of the Violet-Crowned. A Tale of Ancient Athens. By
Arthur S. Way, D.Litt.
ss.
Adventures of the Cid, The. By Mervyn Young. (A story
of Spain, telling in a vivid manner how the Cid reconquered
the land from the Moors.)
The Voyage to Vineland. By Wray Hunt. (A story of great
interest founded on the tradition that Rolf Hrafn, a Norseman,
discovered in the far west a land he named Vineland,
thought to be either America or one of the West India
Islands.)
1-5-34






A 82.3. 2
(tjfyjf) ,




r. tzstzlr- 7 V~^nss^l-*C^s^rrr3r“; --rTTPy rSsifr—•- ra-;-rt---'-rr - - xr.^
