

REPORT OP THE COMMITTEE ON PRACTICAL
TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
No.
6/1931
HONG KONG.
We the members of the Committee appointed by His Excellency the Governor
under notification No. 615, as published in the Hong Kong Government Gazette of
the 3rd October, 1930, have the honour to submit our report.
I. Introduction.
2. The terms of our reference were "To report on the possibility of increasing!
facilities for practical technical education and the feasibility of establishing a Trade,
School”. The Committee has met four times. To save members’ time, various
enquiries have been carried out by the Chairman who has visited the Taikoo and
Hong Kong Whampoa Dock Companies' yards and secured the views of the directors,
managers and others of these concerns. The Chairman has had interviews with
Mr. A. C. MacKichan of the firm of Messrs. Leigh & Orange, Hong Kong, and with
representative Chinese building contractors. The Chairman has also visited the St.
Louis Industrial School, West Point, and conferred with the Rev. Father Kerec of
the Salesian Institute, the School’s acting Superior. Memoranda of these visits and
interviews are attached to this report. A Memorandum of the Chairmans visit to
the Taikoo Dockyard was sent by Mr. T. H. R. Shaw to Messrs. John Swire & Sons
Ltd., London, who showed it to Mr. K. E. Greig, Manager of the Taikoo D.ock, who
was at the time in London. Messrs. John Swire & Sons Ltd., were good enough to
send fo Mr. Shaw a statement of their views, as also of those of Mr. Greig. Mr.
Shaw placed these views before the Committee and the Committee has thus had the
advantage of having them before it.
II. Existing Facilities for Technical Education
in Hong Kong.
3. The University maintains and conducts an engineering faculty and this
faculty has received a generous endowment from Messrs. John Swire & Sons Ltd.
and their allied interests. The engineering course covers 4 years. Admission to
this course is through the University’s matriculation examination or any other
examination recognised as equivalent thereto. To qualify for matriculation in the
Faculties of Engineering and Arts, a candidate must at one and the same examina-
tion satisfy the examiners in English and mathematics, and in three other sections.
The three other sections must be taken from a list which contains, (1) Chinese
Language and Literature, (2) either (a) Latin (including set books), or (b) “a classical
oriental language other than Chinese", (3) geography, (4) any modern language other
than English or a Chinese dialect, (6) Mandarin, (6) history, (7) physics, (8) chem-
istry, (9) ‘‘optional” mathematics, (10) drawing and (11) botany. The regulations
of the University make it necessary for every Chinese candidate for matriculation,
who has not obtained exemption from the Senate, to satisfy the examiners in
“Chinese Language and Literature”. The subject “Chinese Language and Litera-
ture” comprises (1) essay in Chinese on a given subject, (2) translation of Classical
Chinese into English of passages taken from the “four books”, and of modern
literary Chinese, (3) translation of English into Classical Chinese and modern literary
Chinese, (4) questions on Chinese grammar, Chinese history, and Chinese geography
To pass in Chinese language and literature, a candidate has to reach a sufficient
standard in each of the four sections set out above. In the course of the last, few
months the syllabus has been simplified both as regards what is attempted in Govern-
ment English Schools and what the University will require for its matriculation test.
The simplified syllabus has not yet come into force.
Terras of
Reference
& Procedure.
The Univers-
ity's Faculty
of Engineer-
ing.


■ 4. The University has a workshop which was constructed in 1925 out of a con-
tribution of a lakh of dollars from Sir Robert Ho Tung. The curriculum of the
Faculty of Engineering which is the same for all students, except that those who
have by then definitely decided to be civil engineers start surveying (lectures and
field work) in their third year, comprises during the first three year period, in
addition to the practical workshop course taken during the first and second year,
(1) mathematics (pure and applied), (2) physics (lectures, class exercises, labora-
tory work), (3) chemistry (lectures, and laboratory work), (4) engineering drawing,
(5) machines (lectures), (6) structures (lectures), (7) electrical technology (lectures),
(8) hydraulics (lectures), (9) prime movers (lectures and laboratory work), (10)
materials (lectures), (11) laboratory work in applied mechanics, (12) electrical
laboratory work, (13) drawing office work.
5. The fourth year civil engineering course consists of lectures and held Work
in surveying, lectures in astronomy and advanced structures and. lectures and labora-
tory work in hydraulics. Ten hours a week are assigned to the Drawing Office and
three to work in the “Concrete Laboratory or visits to works’ 7 . The fourth year
course in mechanical engineering includes lectures on (1) machine design and work -
shop practice, (2) electrical engineering, (3) advanced prime movers. It gives six
hours a week to the Drawing Office, eight hours a week to work in the Electrical
Engineering Laboratories, six hours a week to work in the Prime Movers Labora-
tories,' and four hours a week to the Workshop. The fourth year electrical
engineering course provides lectures on (1) electrical engineering and design, (2)
electrical generation, transmission and distribution, and (3) advanced prime movers,
liie curriculum allows for ten hours a week in the Drawing Office, and eight and
six hours a week respectively to the Engineering and Prime Movers Laboratories.
6. A freshman may enter the workshop before he starts on the engineering
curriculum. This arrangement is advocated in the University Calendar for those
students ’intending to join the Engineering Faculty who come to the University in
September instead of in January, when the University year begins. This arrange-
ment enables a student, before he starts on his course proper, to devote about three
months to the Workshop.
7. The workshop course, as shown in the University Calendar for 1931, pro-
vides, during its first year, for thirty exercises calculated to bring into use the various
tools required in filing up plate gauges to given limits + .001"
ing to given limits + .001"
shaping machine + .001" - .005", milling to given limits + 1001" - .005"7
planing to given limits + .001"
drilling, using surface plate and scribing block, forging and making small tools,
hardening and tempering, brazing, soldering and case-hardening. The second year
course includes 30 exercises which bring into use the various tools required in
forging and making small tools, hardening and tempering, making plate gauges —
limit + .001" - .002", plain turning—limit + .001" - .002", grinding limit
gauge —limit + .0005", left and right hand screw cutting in the lathe, gear cutting,
milling machine, helical milling, plaining and hand scraping to surface plate.
8. All students in the Engineering Faculty are required to take the fuh work-
shop course during their first and second years. Students are also recommended, to
take advantage of the facilities offered for additional workshop instruction during
the summer vacation. We notice that the extent to which a student has profited by
their workshop course is not ascertained by any examination test; indeed, though the
course is compulsory, no evidence other than that of the student having been signed
on the workshop register, presumably by the Instructor in Workshop Practice, as
having been in the workshop for a certain number of hours is apparently required
The extra fee for the workshop course is f25 a term.
9. All students admitted to the engineering curriculum, except those who have
been specifically exempted by the Board of the Engineering Faculty, are required to
in English. This is in addition to the English test passed at the
Matriculation Examination. For those not exempted from this special test four hours
Engl Ah teaching a week are provided as part of their first year course.


10. The University’s degree of B.Sc. in Civil, Mechanical or Electrical En-
gineering is awarded on four examinations, viz :
(a) Intermediate Examination in Engineering Part 1.
(b) Intermediate Examination in Engineering Part 2.
(c ) Final Examination in Engineering Part 1.
(and) Final Examination in Engineering Part 2.
A student is not allowed to appear at the Final Examination in Engineering Part 2
until he has passed the prescribed examination in English or has been specifically
exempted therefrom.
11. The Faculty of Engineering is the only faculty in the University which awards
degrees with honours. The standard in the case of these honour degrees is assessed
by special examiners from among the external examiners in engineering of the Univer-
sity of London. Bachelors of Science in Engineering may be admitted to the degree
of a Master of Science in Engineering not earlier than two years after graduation.
The requirements for the master’s degree are the presentation of a suitable thesis and
the passing of a written examination. If the examiners so desire, viva voce and
practical examinations may also be held. The University Calendar for 1931 shows
one master of science in engineering—an engineer graduate who is now employed in
the Port Development Branch of the Public Works Department.
12. The permanent and whole time stall' of the Engineering Faculty consists of
the Taikoo Professor of Engineering, who is Professor of Mechanical Engineering and
Director of the Engineering Workshops, the Professor of Civil Engineering, the Pro-
fessor of Electrical Engineering, a lecturer in civil and mechanical engineering, and
a lecturer in mechanical engineering, a demonstrator in electrical engineering, an
instructor in workshop practice, a demonstrator in mechanical engineering and a de-
monstrator in civil engineering. The Professor of Mathematics works both in the
Faculties of Engineering and Arts, and is a member of the board of each of those
faculties. The Professors and Lecturers of Chemistry and Physics, as also the de-
monstrators of these two subjects, work in each of the three faculties, viz. the
Faculty of Medicine, the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty of Arts, and the
Professors are members of the boards of each of these faculties. Special lectures
are given annually by selected members of the Public Works Department of the
Government of Hong Kong and a member of the staff of the Taikoo Dockyard and
Engineering Company is now giving a special course in machine design and workshop
practice.
13. The 9 Eiikoo Dockyard and Engineering Company have for some years allowed
students of the University’s Engineering Faculty to come and work in their shops
during the summer vacation. Last year this Company arranged for a member of
their staff to be in general charge of these students while they were in the Taikoo
workshops with a view to helping them to get the greatest possible advantage out of
their stay in the w r orks.
14. The member of the Taikoo Dockyard and Engineering Company’s Staff who
has been placed in charge of the University students during their temporary employ-
ment in the Taikoo Dockyard is also giving the special course of instruction in
machine design and workshop practice which is now r a part of the fourth year
mechanical engineering course. We have before us a report by this gentleman
which is w 7 orth quoting. The whole course is to consist of thirty lectures and when
the report was recorded the course had been in progress for about four months.
“The object of the lectures is to give some information on the intelligent
construction and operation of machinery for land and marine use, with notes
on management and workshop practice. Theory, therefore-, to a great extent is
being deleted, but numerous sketches of a practical nature are being, added. A
certain amount of difficulty is being encountered through lack of means of de-
monstration, but one hour on boiler construction has been put in at Taikoo
Dockyard.


Facilities
offered by
the China
Light &
Power
Company,
The lectures given to date include the following : —
(i) The disposition of various workshops with reference to the Marine En-
gineering Industry.
(ii) The lay-out of machinery in workshops with practical information on
the intelligent operation of each department.
(iii) Welding, brazing, soldering, with notes on chilled and malleable castings.
(iv) Contracts and estimating.
(v) Description of firetube boilers with notes on difficulties encountered in
construction.
(vi) Practical information on intelligent boiler management.
(vii) Boiler mountings with some notes on strength of plates.
(viii) Observation at Taikoo Dockyard.
(ix) Water tube boilers, land and marine use. Yarrow and Babcock and
Wilcox types. Description and practical information on construction and
management.
The students are showing considerable interest in the subjects under review and
definite progress is being made Attendance is good. '’
15. The Taikoo Professor of Engineering reported in March that three students
are now taking the fourth year mechanical engineering course. He reported that
next year there would be four students taking this course, adding
‘‘As the students-do not specialise until the 3rd year it is impossible to give
numbers for 1933 onwards; as, however, the entries have been much larger
during the last two years, and as there is now more prospect of employment for
mechanical engineers in China, we anticipate a considerable increase in these
numbers.’ 7
The present enrolment of the Engineering Faculty is as follows : —
4th Year
1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year Civil Mech. Elec.
39 23 15 3 3 3 None
The University degree of Bachelor of Science in Engineering has been awarded
to 151 graduates, 'viz., Civil Engineering graduates 84; Electrical Engineering,
graduates 39; Mechanical Engineering graduates 27. There was also one War
graduate. Records of the careers of these graduates have unfortunately not been
kept by the Faculty. We are of opinion that careful records of the careers of its
graduates should be kept by the Faculty of Engineering.
16. In January, 1929, through the good office of the Hon. Mr. J. P. Braga,
the General Manager of the China Light & Power Co. (1918) Ltd., agreed to- extend
such facilities as the Company was able to offer to graduates and undergraduates
of the University who might wish to acquire practical training as apprentices in the
Company’s Power Stations, sub-stations and workshops. The General Managers sug-
gested that the facilities then offered would afford an excellent opportunity to under-
graduates to obtain practical experience in electrical engineering during the Univer-
sity’s vacations. The General Managers explained that the Company was not equipped
with workshops for manufacturing or repair purposes to an extent which . would
enable a student of electrical engineering to gain that practical knowledge which can
only be obtained in works where plant is under construction or repair where the
student through actual usage of machine tools etc., and experience at the work and
test benches, gains that experience so necessary at a later date”. The General
Managers mentioned this limitation in order that subsequent disappointment might
be avoided. In conclusion the General Managers reported that, though it was then
only possible to offer apprenticeships in the Company at nominal the
Directors would be pleased to consider as occasion arose, the engagement of sue i
persons as it is found possible to absorb into the Company’s requirements of qualified
electrical engineers.”


17. For a number of years the Education Department has organised evening;
classes. These classes were originally known as “Evening Classes”. Later, and as
the present Director thinks, unfortunately, the organisation received the somewhat
misleading title of “Technical Institute”. The Institute has no building nor any
whole-time staff; it is not in fact an institute in the generally accepted sense of this
term but an organisation. The organisation is directed by one of the Inspectors of
English Schools from the Office of the Director of Education. Its classes are held
mainly at Queen’s College but also in the University (i.e. classes in Electrical
Engineering), King's College, the Belilios Public School and the Central British School,
Kowloon. The Technical Institute charges fees at the rate of $10 a - term for
every subject. There are two terms in a year. Government servants taking certain
subjects which have a direct bearing on their work may on the recommendation of
their Departmental Heads have the fees returned, if they succeed in passing the
examination held at the end of the session. These fees are paid into the
Treasury and the Institute has to depend for its working expenses on the provision
made for it in the annual Colonial vote for education. Thus the means available for
the Institute’s activities vary from year to year. The Director of Education reports
'that funds available for the current year are earmarked down to the last dollar, and
that one of the classes (that in sanitation) has only been rendered possible by a
supplementary provision. As we shall show later, the Taikoo Dockyard had last
year to undertake the financial responsibility for a technical class for the apprentices
of the Taikoo Docks which the Institute had undertaken to organize and maintain.
18. At the present time the Technical Institute has the following classes : —
building construction, field surveying, physics, chemistry, sanitation, shorthand,
bookkeeping, French, English literature and commercial English, hygiene and physical
instruction. The Technical Institute also arranges a course for teachers, both
English and vernacular.
19. With reference to this time-table the Director of Education remarks there
is very little in it that can be called technical and that it is all “essentially evening”.
He adds that in the electrical engineering class the students are cosmopolitan, mostly
Chinese or Portuguese, and employed in the day time in electric workshops and
stores and that there are generally some British soldiers attending these classes The
Director explains that those who attend the building construction class are day-time
employees of architects and contractors.
20. There are at the moment 299 persons attending the various courses which
the Institute is now holding. The number of teachers, English and Vernacular, who
are attending the classes specially organized by the Institute for teachers are not
included in this total.
21. Mr. Brawn who combines with the duties of Inspector of English Schools
the directorship of the Technical Institute, reports that an elementary nautical class
for the instruction of coxswains in the rules of the road at sea used to be conducted
but that it was closed last December as it was no longer required; he adds that
classes were once organised in steam, machine drawing, applied mechanics, architec-
tural design, practical mathematics, logic and political economy, but that the demand
for instruction in these classes was so small and fitful that the expense involved in
organising and. maintaining them could not be justified. The Director of the Tech-
nical Institute is prepared, provided expert tuition can be obtained and funds are
available, to organise a class for any technical subject. But a minimum attendance
of 10 students must be guaranteed and maintained.
22. Both the Taikoo Dockyard and Engineering Company and the Hong Kong
& Whampoa Dock Company have organised a regular system for the training of
apprentices at the Taikoo and Kowloon Docks respectively. Lower Primary Schools
are maintained, one, the Quarry Bay School, close to the Taikoo Docks ' and the
other near the Hong Kong & Whampoa Dock Cods premises in Kowloon. The sons
of the workers of these two companies go largely to these schools for their elemen-
tary vernacular education. No English is taught in these schools and the boys
generally leave them at about the age of 12. The Managing Director of the Hong
The
Technical
Institute.
Amui£(e _
ments at tJie
for tS rds
edueat L n of
api>ientices *


Kong & Whampoa Dock Cos., reports that some of the boys go on with free scholar-
ships to the Yaimiati District School and that many of the boys who have been pupils
of the Lower Primary School near Kowloon Docks find their way into the Company’s
works as soon as they are able to enter tl em. The question, what becomes of the
boys who get their elementary vernacular education at the Quarry Bay-School (thev
are almost entirely the sons of the Taikoo Dockyard & Engineering Co.’s workers)
and the allied question whence come the apprentices of the Taikoo Docks have been
carefully investigated. The facts appear to be (1) that a considerable number of
the boys who have been pupils in the Company’s Quarry Bay School are not findm
their way into the apprentice system of the Taikoo Dockyard, and (2) that the boys
who actually become apprentices in the Taikoo Dockyard come from a variety of
schools (mostly private schools) and that one apprentice has recently been admitted
from King’s College. The fact that many of the boys who have been pupils of the
Company’s Quarry Bay School are not finding their way into the Taikoo Dockyard
Apprentice System is due to the time which must elapse between their leaving
school and the age at which a boy is physically capable to work as an apprentice.
That age is not less than 16.
23. In addition to these lower primary schools which, as they give a general
and not a technical education, are not strictly within the Committee’s purview there is
conducted in connection with the Hong Kong & Whampoa Dock Co.’s Yard in
Kowloon a night school called the Hop Ying English Evening Free School. All pupils
at this school are employees of the Hong Kong & Whampoa Dock Cos. Attendance
at this school is not obligatory on the apprentices of the Company, nor is it in fact
an institution which the Company either started or is maintaining. The school
represents a voluntary effort on the part of the Company’s workers and it receives a
recurring grant from the Company. There is room in the school for 136 pupils and
it is always full. The curriculum of the school includes English (with special refer-
ence to the English names for tools and parts of machinery) also drawing and some
simple mathematics. The apprentices get away from the works at 5 p.m The
school opens at 7 p.m. and closes at 9 p.m. The Headmaster assured our Chairman
that it was not the case that the boys are too tired to study intelligently. The school
does not meet during the hottest part of the summer.
24. The Taikoo Dockyard started a technical class for apprentices in 1925 but
this class was not continued after the general strike in the Colony which took place
in that year. This class was reopened in October 1930. When the reopening of
this class was being mooted, the firm arranged with the Director of the Technical
Institute that the firm would provide the necessary accommodation, furniture,
equipment, light, etc., but that the Education Department should pay the teachers',
the firm agreeing, to start with, to pay the fees of the apprentices -attending the
class. The Acting Manager of the Taikoo Docks was, however, subsequently told
the Education Department that no funds were available. Rather than let the op-
portunity lapse the firm has for the time being undertaken the remuneration of tbe
teachers and interpreters who work this class. This class is attended by 50 appren-
tices. Its curriculum includes arithmetic, mensuration, solid geometry and modH
drawing. The teaching of these subjects which is in the hands of the members of the
Dockyard Staff, is closely connected with the work which the apprentices are
actually doing in the shops. The members of the Dockyard Staff are paid for this
work at the rate adopted by the Technical Institute.
25. There is also an English class conducted at the Taikoo Docks for the
apprentices of the Company. This class was started early last year. The class is
conducted by one of the Assistant Masters of King’s College, assisted by an inter-
preter. Our Chairman visited this class on 3rd December, 1930, and found some
80 apprentices being instructed in it. Our Chairman was favourably impressed by
the work of the class but found that some of the apprentices were unable to read
the Chinese translations of the simple English sentences set out in the Anglo-Chinese
reader which was in use. It transpired that some of the boys start on them
apprenticeships practically, if not wholly illiterate. Possibly some of the boys who
appear to be illiterate would be found to have spent some time in a Chinese verna-
cular school, but whatever capacity to- read and write they may have secured there-
they have apparently lost in the interval between leaving school and starting as-
-apprentices. This class which meets twice a week from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. is organised


by the Technical Institute, the teachers being paid out of the funds assigned by the
Government to the Institute in the annual Colonial vote for education.
26. The Salesian Institute which maintains this school is an Italian Order which
has made it its work to relieve and raise the poor. This the Order attempts to do
by means of schools which not only give the boys a general elementary education
but also teach them various trades. The St. Louis Industrial School has on its
rolls 72 small boys who attend as day scholars. These small boys are simply under-
going an ordinary vernacular education. The school is partly, but by no means
wholly, an institute to which waifs and strays are sent. These waifs and strays are
taken in at various ages and they are generally older than the other boys. They
are thus organised as a special class for the purposes of general education. The
school has four trade departments, v.iz. , a department of shoemaking, which is
training 24 boys, a department of tailoring, which is training 18 boys, a department
of carpentry, which is training 16 boys and a department of printing which is train-
ing 8 boys. All the boys in these trade departments live in the school which has
incidentally trained and organised from its pupils a quite effective brass band. The
Salesian Institute conducts large and important trade schools in Italy and Germany.
Each trade department is in charge of a lay brother who has been trained in one
of the Institute’s schools in Europe. Each trade department is also run on a com-
mercial basis. The training given in trade departments is excellent and the school
authorities have no difficulty whatever in placing their trained pupils remunerative
employment.
27. With reference to the frequently repeated criticism that the Chinese Guild
system makes a technical training difficult, if not impossble, it is interesting to note
that a boy trained in this school as a carpenter is admitted by the Carpenters’
Guild direct on to building work as a wage-earner. The articles produced by these
trade departments are distinctly good. Father Kerec assured the Chairman that his
Carpentry Department carried out orders for the Furnishing Department of Messrs.
Lane, Crawford, Ltd., and that the Manager of that Department was anxious
to take his trained boys and to give, them regular employment in his furniture shop
at good wages. We understand that a Chinese Society for the encouragement of
industrial education is now negotiating with the Salesian Order through the Secretariat
for Chinese Affairs with a view to getting the Order to work a school for the Com-
mittee at Aberdeen. The suggestion is that the Government might hand over the
old paper factory for the purpose. This school at Aberdeen will apparently be
rather definitely designed for the charitable purposes which the Society has in view.
But the Salesian Institute does not propose, even if it takes on this Aberdeen venture,
to give up its school at West Point. On the contrary the Institute has decided D
rebuild and extend its school at West Point.
111. Higher Technical Education in Hong Kong.
28. We were considerably assisted in our inquiry by the Report of the
Technical Education Committee which was appointed in 1925 by His Excellency the
Governor and High Commissioner to consider the feasibility of industrial and tech-
nical education in Singapore and the type of classes and institutions required. The
Committee considered the problem under four heads —
(a) Higher Technical Education —leading to the attainment of a college
degree and the producing of fully qualified engineers, surveyors and
architects;
(b) Intermediate Technical Education of the standard desirable in English
clerks of works, assistant surveyors, building and road overseers,
ships’ engineers, architectural and other draftsmen;
(c) The Education given in trade (or artizan) schools to youths training
to become mechanics and so on.
(and) Industrial Education—where children are taught simple trades such as
carpentry besides ordinary subjects.
The St.
Louis
Industrial
School,
West Point.
The
Singapore
Technical
Education
Committee,
1925.


The problem
of higher
technical
education
in Malaya.
The Hong
Kong Uni-
versity’s
Engineering
Faculty.
29. The problem of higher education as it presented itself to the Singapore
Committee resolved itself piacticallv into the question, whether a technical branch
of the .Raffles College would be successful. In answering this question in the nega-
tive, the Committee quoted the Director of Public Works for the Federated Malav
States as having said : —
£ ‘I:or a higher collegiate or University training in engineering I consider
that theie is no demand. Locally trained Asiatics are unfitted to have ad-
ministrative charge in a department with employees of several different races.
The case of Hong Kong is different. China offers a vast field for Chinese
engineers.. Chinese (i.e. the Chinese in Malaya) would prefer to learn engineer-
ing in Hong Kong and it would be better for them.”
30. The Singapore Committee reported that they had reason to believe that
Hong Kong graduates in engineering found it difficult to get suitable employment. It
was noted that during the previous seven years (1.918-1924) one hundred and seven
students were awarded the Hong Kong University degree of IS.Sc. m engineering,
viz, ; an average of fifteen a year; but the Singapore Committee regarded it as certain
that many of those graduates came from outside the Colony of Hong Kong. After
citing the failure of 'the Government Technical College which was established in
Colombo in 1893 to teach civil, mechanical and electrical engineering, but was
converted in 1910 into a technical school for subordinates in Government depart-
ments, and remarking that a technical college can not be an economic proposition
unless in each of the classes in a four years’ course there are approximately 30
students, the members unanimously declared themselves as not sanguine that a
technical branch of the Raffles College would be successful—
(i) until the struggle for existence grew more acute and the openings in
agriculture and commerce for an increasing population fewer;
(ii) until applied mathematics, drawing, manual instruction and elementary
science, were regarded not as extras but as basic subjects in all thtk
schools from which the students would be drawn;
(iii) until the Asiatic parents was prepared to exercise the self-sacrifice
economy and patience which most Europeans have to exercise if they
desire their children to devote several unpaid years to the study of a
profession.
31. The Committee summarized the position as follows : —
“Any effort to open a technical branch at Raffles College will require for
its success a liberal system of scholarships without which the children of all but
wealthy parents will be unwilling to risk a long course of training dependent
for its issue on the test of examinations. This is recognised by the Associated
Chinese Chambers of Commerce of British Malaya which, in pressing for such a
branch, hope that ‘Government will see its way to award scholarships to bright
boys from the English schools, preferably to those of poor parentage’.”
“The provision of such scholarships for a favoured few forming as we have
seen an infinitesimal portion of the population is, however, here as in England
as much a matter of private endownment as for the expenditure of public
money.”
32. As was realized by the Singapore Committee some of the difficulties which
that Committee found standing in the way of Higher Technical Education in British
Malaya do not exist in this Colony, but it cannot be denied that the Engineering
Faculty of the University has not altogether realized the. high hopes (possibly they
were unreasonable hopes) with which it was started. The Viceroy of Canton (His
Excellency Chan -Ten Chung) sent in 1909 a despatch to the chief officials of the
various Government bureaux under his jurisdiction requesting them to meet and
discuss means to raise subscriptions in aid of the Hong Kong University Endowment
Fund. In the despatch the Viceroy said that “the teaching of applied science includ-
ing civil, mechanical and electrical engineering and surveying meets the most urgent
needs of our country.” In the same year Messrs. John Swire & Sons Ltd. and their
allied interests contributed £40,000. In so doing Mr. J. II. Scott writing on behalf
of his firm to Sir Frederick Lugard said : —


“There can be no doubt about the merits of your scheme which strongly
appeals to my partners and myself and lo which we contribute £'lo,ooo believing
that a University in Hong Kong will be to the advantage of our Colony and the
Empire.”
Voicing as they did in November 1929, their disappointment, Messrs. -John Swire
& Sons Ltd., in a letter addressed to His Excellency the Governor explained that
their hope was that not only would the Engineering Faculty provide British firms in
China with practical engineers who would help to create a greater feeling of unity
between Chinese and British but also
“which is much more important than private advantage, that it would help to
meet the great- Chinese demand for qualified practical engineers in all kinds of
enterprises all over the country by means of Chinese trained up in British ideas
and standards of machinery and steel ware. ’ ’
The expectation was in fact that just as the Hong Kong University was to be an
instrument for making the King’s English predominant in the Far East, so the
University’s Faculty of Engineering was to contribute towards the expansion of
British Commerce. Sir Frederick Lugard argued, with Messrs. John Swire & Sons
Ltd., that a man trained in the engineering formulae of other western nations would
not understand British catalogues and engineering particulars, and would draw up
his specifications in accordance with the gauges and standards with which he was
familiar.
33. The l niversity was opened in 1912 and the Court of the University at one
of its earliest meetings resolved that one of the main objects of the University was
to afford a higher education in applied science. In 1914 came the great war and ever
since the end of the war China has been in a state of almost continuous civil war and
anarchy. The engineer has therefore not yet had his chance in China. But, these
difficulties apart, there stood from the beginning in the way of the Engineering
Faculty anomalies which were not perhaps at first fully appreciated. The engineering
courses of the University of London were adopted as models, but the very small part
which engineering graduates who had been whole-time students of engineering in the
Universities of Britain were then playing in British engineering enterprises had not
apparently been investigated, nor does any consideration seem to have been paid to
the process by 'winch those British engineers who had never been through a university
course-mind they were then and still are the great majority —had secured their
theoretical and practical training. The process was and is apprenticeship supplement-
ed by evening classes. A survey of the provision made for Technical and Further
Education in England and Wales which was published in 1924, pointed out that
institutions in London, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Birmingham, Sheffield, New-
castle, Bristol and Nottingham which are all now I niversities or University Colleges,
were, when the Royal Commission on Technical Education was making its inquiries in
1882 and 1883, merely technical schools whose activities were mainly confined to
evening classes.
34. Education in China had been for centuries a literary one and there still
yawned a great gulf between the educated man and the man who worked with his
hands. 1 here had grown up in the Colony a certain number of organized engineering
industries the Kowloon and Taikoo Docks for example. But the foremen of these
concerns were all Britishers (as they still are) and there had been no attempt to
produce locally any labour, other than that which may be called purely mechanical,
though some of the leading Chinese had become by experience experts at their work
and capable of directing the ordinary foreman.
35. A technical Institute was in existence but the instruction which that Institute
provided had not touched the artizan class, as indeed it is scarcely touching it today.
It was established and is maintained for another purpose. Some of the Government
schools in Hong Kong had begun to provide some instruction in chemistry and physics
and drawing; and possibly some applied mechanics were included in the curriculum
of these schools. But the education given even in the most highly developed schools
in the Colony was (and is) very largely a training in language. This was and is
inevitable, for English to the Chinese is a foreign language and a very difficult one
and it would have been a fatal mistake to have excluded the study of Chinese from


The
University
Employment
Committee.
The repre-
sentations of
Messrs. John
Swire &
Sons Ltd.
the school curriculum. We are not depreciating' the vital importance of linguistic
training, nor criticising the school curriculum. We have already set out (see
paragraph 4 above) the syllabus in Chinese Language and Literature in which it has
been always obligatory on every Chinese student, as a condition of entering the
University, to qualify. Whether this syllabus represents the. minimum knowledge of
his language and literature which every educated Chinese, whatever he is going to do
in life should possess, is a question which it is beyond our scope to investigate, but
it does occur to us that a Chinese boy who wanted to be an engineer can not with the
demands of the University matriculation ever before him, have had very much time
during his school course for such subjects as applied mathematics, drawing and
manual instruction. And the handicap thus involved was and is the more serious,
because, as has so often been said before, there ate almost entirely lacking in the
Chinese boy of the social and economic status from which the University recruits its
students that passion for things mechanical which is so marked a characteristic of
some European and American boys. If a stray Chinese boy had had this taste, he
would not easily have found opportunities for developing it. It is quite a common
thing to come across a Britisher of the middle or upper economic strata of society
whose work is in no way mechanical but who lias fitted up a small workshop in his
home. Such a thing is practically unknown among the Chinese- —apart from wireless
enthusiasts.
36. In 1827 the University Employment Committee was confronted with the
decline in. the number of students in the Engineering Faculty generally and with the
fact that the special fourth year courses in mechanical and electrical engineering
were not attracting students. The Managing Director of the Hong Kong & Whampoa
Dock Co. Ltd,, suggested on this occasion that the University’s Engineering Faculty
was starting at the wrong end; that instead of taking Chinese of the middle and upper
classes and trying to turn them into practical mechanical engineers, the Faculty should
aim at attracting selected apprentices with a view to giving them an education
calculated to*make them capable of being efficient engineers to whom more respon-
sible executive work could be entrusted. This view was accepted by the Employment
Committee and the Senate of the University was then approached with a view to seeing
whether the Matriculation Examination could be simplified for these selected ap-
prentices. The Senate agreed to modify the Matriculation Examination to this extent
—namely that, an apprentice who had qualified in English and mathematics could take
the other subjects necessary for a matriculation certificate during his University
course, but the Senate found itself unable to modify, in favour of the apprentice, the
obligation to qualify in Chinese- Language and Literature, except in so far as that
subject might be taken by the apprentice during the engineering course —which is in
fact a concession generally allowed to all students entering the Engineering Faculty-.
No apprentice was forthcoming and, the matter having in the following year come
before the Employment Committee again, that Committee decided to ask the Vice
Chancellor to approach Government with the request that they would establish and
maintain, somewhere in the neighbourhood of the Dockyards, a technical school which
would organize and conduct off-shift classes for apprentices. Nothing has come of
this proposal so far as Government are concerned. As has been explained above the
off-shift instruction of apprentices in dockyards is limited to the English and technical
classes which are now working at the Taikoo Yard and to the Hop Ying English
Evening Free School at the Kowloon Docks.
37, The position remains practically unchanged but more protests are in the
field. We have already referred (para. 22 above) to the letter which Messrs. John
Swire & Sons Ltd., addressed to His Excellency the Governor in 1920. Their point is
that the University trained engineer is of little use until he has- gone through the
shops in addition to the University course; that the present system of technical
education in Hong Kong which is practically confined to the University requires too
high a standard of general education and is too limited in its scope, that by starting
from the top it is ineffective, so far as practical training is concerned,, and that the
system requires to be reorganized. The line of reorganization suggested is the estab-
lishment and maintenance by Government of a technical school near one of the big
docks where technical engineering education could be given to selected apprentices
after work hours. These evening classes were definitely to lead the most promising
apprentices into the Engineering Faculty, while to those who did not come up to that
standard there would be good and useful careers available. The firm expressed the


view that those boys “who passed a certain standard (i.e. at the technical school)
would then be really fit to enter for a university degree course at the Hong Kong
University from which they would emerge, qualified, educated, practical engineers.
Even those who did not qualify for a university course would be practical educated
men who would be of use to, and readily find a job with, Chinese undertakings or
foreign firms, and be the article which we have all been in vain trying to produce
by starting from the top.”
38. The Vice Chancellor was away on leave when this letter from Messrs. John
Swire & Sons Ltd. was received and dealt with. After his return the Vice Chancellor
reviewed the position in a letter dated the 16th June, 1960, which he addressed to
Messrs. Butterfield & Swire, Hong Kong. This letter has been placed before us and
we quote as relevant to the problem before us the following passages from it
“I was, and still am, a zealous advocate of the recruitment of boys of the
artizan class to the Engineering Faculty of the University, if that be possible.
But even with the modified Matriculation Examination which the Senate is pre-
pared to accept in the case of such students, l am exceedingly doubtful whether
any but the most exceptionally gifted apprentice would ever get to the Univer-
sity via his apprenticeship and the evening classes of a school for apprentices,
however efficient that school might be Your Principals want
practical men and they are not I imagine, only thinking of graduates. We
must, I think, concede that it is only the rare apprentice who
would rise to graduate rank,' but even so, an apprentice not capable of be-
coming a graduate, might if he had a better general education and a working
knowledge of English make a capable foreman or something of that kind. That
is where your technical school for apprentices should come in. But technical
schools can not be conducted by the University I feel strongly
that the aim of your Principals will not be fully achieved, unless the educa-
tional needs of the artizans are considered and met I have dealt
at some length with the problem of producing in Hong Kong effective and
practical engineers of various grades, not only because it is in my
opinion vital to do something to orientate educational influence (and
the rush in Hong Kong into schools is now a flood) away from the
clerical into the mechanical, but also because it is just this aspect of the
general educational problem of Hong Kong winch the administrative machinery
of the Colony is so ill-adapted to tackle. The educational system of the Colony
has grown up round a few Government Schools for general education...
The University of Hong Kong did not grow out of the school system; it was
rather superimposed on it.”
39. The Vice Chancellor endorsed the view of Messrs. John Swire & Sons
Ltd. that a university course in mechanical engineering was not calculated to
produce the 1 equued article, unless that course was supplemented by a course of
practical training in a commercial workshop but lie saw that the solution of this
difficulty advocated by Messrs. John Swire & Sons Ltd. would involve the closirm of
the University’s mechanical engineering course altogether; that if the Engineering
Faculty was to be recruited, so far at least as mechanical engineering was °concerm
ed, from apprentices alone, students would not be forthcoming, unless the whole
standard and purpose of the Faculty ’as part of a British University were reduced
in status —a remedy which he regarded as impossible. Turning to the question of
the practical training of such boys who come from the ordinary schools of the
Colony to the Faculty of Engineering with a view to qualifying as mechanical en-
gineers the view recorded was :—
(C It seems to be beyond question that such training as the University can
give, even though that training includes workshop training as obligatory cannot
be legalded. as a piocess which can be expected to produce qualified
piactical engineeis. To do this, the University course must be supplemented
by a definite system of apprenticeship covering a reasonable period in well-
equipped and efficiently controlled works under effective supervision. No
university course in the world can be regarded as an adequate substitute for
this period of apprenticeship. I think that the Engineering Faculty should do
everything in its power to render the practical work which'the student is com-
pelled to do in the University workshop, as thoroughly effective as possible and
The Vice
Chancellor’s
review.


The difficul-
ties iti the
way of post-
graduate
apprentice-
ship.
The essence
of a Univer-
sity course.
that the Faculty should encourage its students to take advantage of the facili-
ties which the Taikoo works are offering to engineering students of the Univer-
sity, to put in a certain amount of time during the summer vacations, as
learners therein
The point which I wish to make is that, if qualified practical engineers of the
highest grade are to be produced in Hong Kong, this can only be done by the
engineering firms of the Colony co-operating with the University and agree-
ing to admit such engineering graduates as may have elected to become
mechanical engineers, as apprentices to their workshops for, say, two years and
to pay them during that period a living wage of say $150 a month.”
40. in criticism of the above observations. Messrs. Butterfield & Swire, Hong
Kong, submitted that the practical training required might be concurrent with the
University training instead of post-graduate and that in any case the vacations should
be availed of for this training. The Vice Chancellor was also reminded that it must
not be forgotten that the average Chinese student is anxious to get on an earning
basis as soon as he can.
41. We regard this last criticism as important but it has occurred to us that
it would apply equally to the case of an apprentice who as a result of what he had
learnt practically in the shops supplemented by the theoretical knowledge he had
acquired in evening classes was qualified by his general educational status to enter
the Engineering Faculty of the University with a-view to taking a degree —an object
which could not be attained in less than t years. We regard this point as important
because a youth who has been through the apprentice system is not likely to be able
to afford to go to the University, unless he Lie provided with a scholarship sufficiently
generous to cover the whole cost involved in being a student in a residential
university, such as the Hong Kong University is. An allowance of $150 a month
may be regarded as a living wage for a University graduate while he is going through
a post-graduate apprenticeship. But such an allowance would not do much more
than cover the ex-apprentice's expenses as a student in the Engineering Faculty.
Reverting, however, to the criticism of Messrs. Butterfield & Swire we are con-
strained to admit that reflection certainly casts doubts on the appositeness of the
English parallel which has been cited. A young Englishman who after taking the
mechanical sciences Tripos at Cambridge goes as an apprentice into works for 2
or 3 years certainly has prospects beyond the dreams of the most ambitious Hong
Kong University graduate.
42. At this point we feel- it necessary to insist that a University course,
whether it be a course in mechanical engineering or a course in philosophy, must
connote not only a certain standard of attainment but also a certain view-point and
range of vision. Whether there is any real demand in Hong Kong for special
University courses in mechanical and electrical engineering is a question which may
even now be legitimately and reasonably asked. But nothing but harm and pre-
judice to the University’s status on the one hand and contusion of functions mid
standards in the Colony's educational system on the other can, in our opinion,
result from any attempt to reduce the University's teaching of engineering to the
level of such a course of training as could properly be handled in a technical school,
yyq, would however venture to emphasise the* importance on the part of the Board
of the University’s Faculty of Engineering of keeping in constant and vital touch
with the engineering industry and especia’ly with those engineering firms which
operate in Hong Kong and China. Mutual understanding and co-operation between
the Faculty of Engineering and the engineering firms of the Colony is an essential
condition of higher technical education in Hong Kong. While the University
Engineering Staff would we hold, be justified in refusing, even in the face of alleged
local needs, to lower their standards and to circumscribe unduly their curriculum,
they must realise that the Engineering Faculty cannot thrive suspended in mid air
without a solid basis of technical training out of which the higher standards of
University education can evolve. No University Engineering Faculty can flourish
anywhere, and certainly not in a Colony like Hong Kong, unless the sympathetic
interest of the Faculty’s teachers and the guidance of their knowledge and experience
are felt at every point in the local technical education scheme. On one side, the
Directors of the local engineering firms should be looking to the University’s


engineering teachers for their scientific help; on the other side the University’s
teachers should ever be appraising their theories of engineering training by testing
them against those practical conditions to which their experience as employers of
labour have forced the Directors.
43. Regarding as we do the co-ordination between the University and the
other agencies in the technical education field as essential we have given careful
consideration to the part which the Faculty of Engineering should play in the general
scheme for technical education which we are attempting to envisage. The Professor
of Electrical Engineering, who is also the Dean of the Faculty of Engineering, has
written us an interesting letter which deals with this aspect of our problem.
44. The Professor preludes his remarks by stating that though there is no'
difficulty with the civil engineering graduates of the University who can secure 1
salaries on graduation sufficient to attract students to the Faculty, “no university in l
the world can turn out mechanical or electrical graduates who are of immediate
use to their employers”. He goes on to explain that this is why there has been
evolved in Britain for these graduates an apprenticeship course of 2or 3 years
duration which is generally recognized as an essential supplement to their university
course. He then makes the point that, whereas in highly industrialized countries
there is a demand for specialists in branches of electrical and mechanical work, in a
country such as China is likely to be for some time the most useful man will be the
man with wide general knowledge both of electrical and of mechanical work. He
explains that to meet this demand the Hong Kong University course requires that the
electrical students should take two electrical and one mechanical subject and that the
mechanical students should take two mechanical subjects and one electrical; that the
electrical and mechanical courses of the Engineering Faculty are therefore inter-
dependent.
45. The Professor does not think that any of the local engineering workshops
can provide an apprenticeship course for the University graduate which is in any
way comparable to the apprenticeship courses in England —courses which are at-
tended by graduates from all over the Empire and from South America. He thinks
therefore that every effort should be made to send the University Engineering
Graduates to apprenticeships with engineering firms in England and Scotland. He
adds that, as apprentices, they could earn a living wage during their courses and
that the fares to England and back are the only things to be considered. He sug-
gests that free or reduced passages might be provided by shipping firms and that the
University might provide scholarships. As the number of students is likely to be
small for some years this need not, in his opinion, be regarded as a very serious
consideration.
46. Turning to the question whether the Engineering Faculty, so far at least
as its mechanical and electrical courses are concerned, could be recruited from the
ranks of apprentices of exceptional promise, the Professor remarks that the case of
the trade apprentices in Hong Kong as at present employed in local engineering
works has been examined in great detail and that it seems to him to have been
demonstrated beyond dispute that the standard of education, of the apprentice is so
low that it is impossible to impart engineering knowledge to him during his appren-
ticeship. In other words he regards the gap between the apprentice and the
University as too wide to bridge. The Professor’s letter is attached to this Report
as Appendix A.
47. The Manager of the Taikoo Dockyard has recorded the view that engineer-
ing training in a university is desirable for those engineers only who are to fill the
highest posts and then only if such training is kept in its proper perspective.
For an industry such as that carried on in the Taikoo Dockyard which consists
largely of ship-repairing the Manager regards a University training in -engineering
as undesirable, except for a limited number —and they would have to possess a
standard of general education to which the apprentice can in the majority of case?
not attain.
48. We admit the gap which now separates the apprentice from the Univer-
sity, but we do not regard it as essentially and permanently One 1 which no bridge
can ever span. We agree that it would be unreasonable to expect that any system
The views
of the
Professor
of Electrical
Engineering,
The views
of the
Manager of
the Taikoo
Dock,
The Com-
delusion,


The Univer
sity must
formulate
a policy.
for the better education of apprentices which could reasonably be advocated for
the Colony as it now is could ever bring even the more promising apprentices up to
a standard at which they could, without neglecting their work, either pass the Uni-
versity matriculation or even after having done so, go profitably through an
engineering course leading to a University degree. We are even inclined to doubt
whether if this were a practical goal, it' would at the present juncture be a desir-
able one. But we think it possible that if such a technical school system as we
are envisaging progresses, a higher type of apprentice may emerge who could in
time be profitably sent to the University. Meanwhile we would not wish to see the
University’s efforts to teach mechanical and electrical engineering of the highest
standard either curtailed or prejudiced. We look to a future in which the most
promising apprentices will pass on naturally to the University and with good technical
ground, work their numbers should increase in time. For the present we look to
the Engineering Faculty to show to the Colony and to China what the University-
training of engineers involves and stands for and to co-operate in the more practical
stages of technical training in the absence of which the Faculty cannot hope to
satisfy the high hopes with which it was created.
49. ft is not our business to suggest how the University should adapt the
working of its Faculty of Engineering to the demands with which it now
stands confronted. But the careful study which we have given to the history
of the Faculty of Engineering and to the controversy as to the practical value of its
graduates, which will we hope now be closed, reveals at least one point on which
both the Faculty and its critics are agreed —We refer to the universally accepted
necessity for the practical training of mechanical and electrical engineers.
50. The present Dean of the Faculty of Enginering regards the proper .function
of the University in this respect to be the education of those who will, or could be
sent to complete their training as apprentices in Britain. We admit unreservedly
ihat the regular drafting into British works of engineering graduates from Hong
Kong would be in every way a most desirable arrangement. But this arrangement
is conditional on return fares at least being made available. Has the University
any reasonable prospect of raising the necessary funds? Moreover, the majority of
Chinese parents cannot afford, to send their sons so far away and for so long an nn-
remunerative period.
51. The Dean suggests that the number of graduates who could be sent abroad
is likely to continue to be small. This will of course be the case so long as the
number of students taking either the mechanical or the electrical course stands
annually at 2 or 3, as it does at present. We should, however, suggest that to
conduct a mechanical and an electrical engineering course for 2 or 3 students can
scarcely be regarded as an economical proposition.
52. We have quoted the Singapore Technical Education Committee as having
stated (see para. 30 above) that a technical college cannot be regarded as an
economic proposition unless in each of tie classes in a four years’ course there are
approximately MJO students. We do not regard this statement as an unreasonable
one and we can not help noticing that all the students in the final year of the
Engineering course of the Hong Kong University do not at the moment exceed 1(1
and that 13 of these are taking civil engineering. We are bound to look forward to
a time when the mechanical and electrical engineer will have better prospects before
them than he apparently has at present.
53. Be this all as it may, it does occur to us that the force of circumstances,
to say nothing of its own admission, points to the urgency of the formulation by the
University of a policy in the matter of its mechanical and electrical engineering
courses.
54. The impossibility, for the time being at any rate, of an apprentice who
has had experience in a workshop being admitted to the Engineering Faculty being
granted, the University can only look for recruits to that Faculty to the ordinary
school-boys who have succeeded in passing the Matriculation Examination. To
students such as these the University offers a special course either in mechanical or
in electrical engineering, but in admitting a student to such a course the University


is, unless it can arrange for the student to pass on to an apprenticeship in Britain,
undertaking to give him a training at the end of which he will, on its own admission,
be of no immediate use to an employer. The possible employer, moreover, will
not be apparently either willing or in a position to take on such a graduate as an
apprentice.
55. This is, we venture to think, an impossible position for the University to
be placed in. It is not for us to suggest what the University should do. The
difficulty affects our inquiry directly, in so far as it makes us apprehensive that,
unless a solution be found, the mechanical and electrical courses of the University
may have died long before there could be any hope of an apprentice from the
technical school, which we are going to propose, making use of them. We should
deplore this curtailment of the Colony’s general facilities for higher technical educa-
tion, but facts must be faced, and economic considerations can not be ignored.
56. There are, as it seems to us, only two possible ways out of this difficulty.
Either the University must provide scholarships so that the local engineering firms
may take on as apprentices, without expense, those mechanical and electrical
engineering graduates who can not be sent to works in Britain, or the University
must try and arrange with the local engineering firms some sort of “sandwich”
system, by which those students might be admitted to the local engineering works
for definite portions of the year. If the first alternative be adopted., the actual
payment of the allowances should be in the hands of the firms. The latter alterna-
tive could possibly be worked, without much interference with the present teaching
terms, so as to admit of six months in the University and six. months in the works.
Even if the “sandwich” system alternative be not regarded as so satisfactory as
the other, it should not, we think, be rejected, without consideration. There are
colleges in America in connection with which the “sandwich” system is believed to
be working satisfactorily. And local needs and conditions cannot be ignored.
57. It has been suggested by local employers of engineering labour that the
University’s course in mechanical engineering might with advantage be made more
practical. The Professor of Electrical Engineering from the stand-point of one who
is advocating the drafting of graduates to British works is opposed to this suggestion.
He thinks that the substitution of instruction in machine design and workshop to
which we have referred in paragraph 14 above for mechanical design was a step in
the wrong direction. He argues that the Hong Kong University engineering courses
should be kept as far as possible on the same lines as those which are taught in
British universities and suggests that workshop practice would, be better taught in
a workshop. From the point of view of those who are going to apprenticeships
in British works there is something in what the Professor says, but if students are
going to be admitted to the mechanical and electrical engineering courses who have
no prospect of going on to British works, the problem must it seems to us be viewed
from a different aspect, especially if such students can not look forward. to post-
graduate apprenticeships in local works. We submit that it might be possible
slightly to differentiate the course as between a student who had a good prospect
of passing on to an apprenticeship abroad and one for whom such an arrangement
would appear to be difficult or impossible. We realize Ithaf such differentiation
as also the fixing up of the “sandwich” system for such students as'were intending
to take either the mechanical engineering or the electrical engineering course,
would involve the making of plans for a student early in his engineering course,
whereas under existing conditions the usual practice is for a student to postpone
until after he has completed successfully three years of the engineering curriculum,
making up his mind whether he will take the civil, mechanical or electrical
course. We do not, however, regard, these difficulties as insuperable. We feel
that a serious student of engineering should know his mind from the start and
that this habit of drifting should be discouraged.
58. We venture to make another suggestion. A workshop course is, as we
have pointed out, compulsory for students of the Engineering Faculty who are in
their first and second years but the work done by the students in the workshop
is not subjected to any examination or other form of test. We think that the
practical skill of the student in this respect should be tested by the Professor of
Mechanical Engineering acting in collaboration with an external examiner who
Post-
graduate
apprentice-
ship in the
sandwich
system.


The
Technology
of Building
Material.
University
help
required.
What the
University
has done.
might be a member of. one of the Engineering or Dockyard Staffs. A student
who, as a result of this test, failed to show that he had any capacity as a worker
with his hands, even if he were not altogether precluded from going any further
with his engineering course, might at least be prevented from trying to qualify
as a mechanical or electrical engineer. Such a student is not likely to shape well
as an apprentice anywhere.
IY. Technology.
59. Colonel M. H. Logan, d.s.o., of Messrs. Palmer, Turner & Company to
whose indictment of the labour conditions under which the building industry of the
Colony is carried on we revert later, states that in connexion with brickmaking and
ceramics there is in Hong Kong obvious need for research. He asserts that at
present there is tremendous wastage in connexion with locally made bricks and that
there is the ever present problem of the locally made tile; that the corrosion of
iron-piping and lead-covered, electric cables due to salts in the water and in the
building material generally is the source of heavy expense to the Colony every
year and is a serious factor in the life of buildings. Colonel Logan contends that
the seasoning of woodwork is a matter which deserves attention and that experiments
as to the correct amount of moisture content for the climatic conditions prevalent
in Hong Kong are badly needed. He adds that much successful work has been
done on these lines in Shanghai; and that whereas kiln-drying in Shanghai is the
rule, such a thing as a wood-drying kiln is in Hong Kong non-existent. Colonel
Logan claims that the economic use of scaffolding and centering for re-inforced
concrete work needs study and he holds that a very much greater efficiency in time,
labour and material generally could be effected. He concludes by protesting that the
building trade, though probably the largest individual trade in the Colony, is badly
organized, that waste is prevalent and that the trade has never received the attention
given to it in Other countries in proportion to its importance.
60. Colonel L ogan thinks that research into' brick and tile construction and the
various problems presented by sand, lime and concrete would seem to be the sort
of work which the University should undertake, but that a practical man who had
some scientific insight into the ceramics industry might be recruited for the staff of
any technical school that might be established. Such a man would be useful in dealing
with practical problems; he should work in close contact with the University’s en-
gineering and scientific laboratories.
61. Mr. MacKichan was of opinion that if a ceramics instructor were recruited
for a technical school, he should be attached to the University for the purposes _ of
research work. He also suggested that additional instruction in building materials
might form a useful complement to the curriculum through which students of the En-
gineering Faculty now pass, and that the ceramics instructor of the Technical School
might give this instruction at the University.
62. The Taikoo Professor of'Engineering to whom these representations were
sent has pointed out that both the Professor of Civil Engineering and the Professor of
Mechanical Engineering have conducted a considerable amount of research work in
the University on building materials and this in spite of their having had no encourage-
ment either from the University or from private firms; that facilities for standard tests
in all materials have been offered, and that warnings have frequently been issued _ to
local buyers that poor materials are used, because standard tests are not always insist-
ed upon. The Taikoo Professor refers to the fact that some years ago in 1918 he
thinks — practically all the Far Eastern timbers were tested and the results published.
He explains that the Board of the Faculty of Engineering would be glad to continue
these researches provided that (i) the expenses were guaranteed and (ii) that the work
would be done under the supervision either of the Professor of Mechanical Engineer-
ing or of the Professor of Civil Engineering; that no outsider could be allowed to use
the University’s Materials Laboratory but'that a special demonstrator appointed in
connexion with this research- work would he of great use.


-63. We deal in the next two sections of our Report with the question of the 1
raising of the standard of building trade labour. We have not found it possible to re-
commend that an instructor in ceramics should be among those whose recruitment
to the suggested Technical School’s Staff is recommended at the outset. The Univer-
sity’s Engineering Faculty has a materials testing laboratory and we notice that in the
terms of paragraph 11 of Statute 3of the University Ordinance any professoi or
lecturer may, with the approval of the Council, engage in professional practice in a
consultative capacity. We think that the professors and lecturers of the University
should be encouraged to help local commerce and industry by placing at their disposal
their scientific knowledge and their capacity to deal with technological problems. We
venture to think that this is the case in which closer co-operation between the
University Staff and local firms is called for.
Y. Intermediate Education.
64. We have already quoted the Singapore Technical Education Committee of.
1925 as defining intermediate technical education as being “the standard desirable in '
English clerks of works, assistant surveyors and road overseers, ships’ engineers,
architectural and other draftsmen.” Commenting on the demand for this education in
Malaya, the Singapore Committee was struck with the unanimity with which those
employers who gave evidence before it advocated the use of evening classes to
impart the theoretical side of the intermediate type of technical education. Courses in
applied mathematics, physics, magnetism and electricity, mechanical and survey
drawing, building construction and mechanics were all recommended. The Committee
was equally struck with the failure of employees to avail themselves of such evening
classes as had been started in Singapore. The Commitee had been at some pains to
analyse the reasons for the failure of the evening classes which had been started and
its conclusions were recorded as follows : —
(a) “The English of an apprentice is not up to the standard of English of a
good clerk.” This statement made by one of the witnesses corroborated
• the Committee’s view that the problem of existence in Malaya had not
driven many youths to. choose technical careers. The class of youth who
chooses a technical career generally lacks sufficient knowledge of English
to benefit by evening classes; he lacks sufficient English to get employ-
ment as a clerk;
I
(b) the fact that drawing and science had been until .recently regarded as
“extras” in the schools and that there had been a lack of effective
manual training;
(c) attempts to win the co-operation of employers had up till then failed.
65. The Committee was, however, convinced that, despite the disappointing
results, evening classes should be developed and the demand for them fostered. One
of the four resolutions put forward in the Committee’s Report was : —
‘ 'That the demand for Intermediate Technical Education should be met by
evening classes in pure and applied mathematics, physics, magnetism, and survey
drawing, building construction and mechanics ”
66. In Hong Kong, so far at least as the Engineering and Shipbuilding Industry
is concerned, there is no reluctance on the part of the employees to avail themselves of
evening classes. The employers in this industry are, as we have shown, more than
willing to co-operate in any scheme of organized off-shift instruction. They have
indeed been pressing the need for this instruction in the organization of which they
have taken the initiative and the statements made before us in evidence show a willing-
ness on their part so to adjust and where necessary even to reduce working hours as to
facilitate the attendance of their employee's at evening classes. We have, however,
quoted the findings of the Singapore Committee, because they bring out two con-
siderations which we regard as of vital importance The first is that instruction' of
this grade in off-shift classes is impossible, unless the workers have some standard of
general education and intelligence, some facility of oral and written communication
irt their own language and a working knowledge of English. The second consideration
is the lure of the clerical career It is impossible to make an intelligent and arnbit-
Closer
co-operation
between the
University’s
Staff and
Local firms
is indicated.
Evening
Classes in
Singapore.
The pros-
pects of
Evening
Classes, in
Hong Kong
and the
general
conditions
essential
to their
success.


The Hong
Kong
Dockyard
Apprentices.
Groups A
and B.
IOUS mechanic out of a boy who only joined the ranks of industrial workers, because
he has failed to become a clerk.
We have alread y ref erred to the apprentice systems now working with the
on S h.ong & Whampoa Dock Company and the Taikoo Dockyard & Engineering Com-
pany. On the 1st June, 1931, there were 434 apprentices on the payrolls of the two
hrms. These apprentices were distributed as follows: —Taikoo Dockyard: Brass-
finishers 20, Coppersmiths 12, Plumbers 18, Fitters 58, Turners 24, Electricians 9.
Patternmakers 3, Joiners 22, Carpenters 12 = Total 178! The Hong Konq & Whampoa
Dock ; Brassfimshers 6, Turners 51, Fitters 147, Electricians 24, Coppersmiths 26
Patternmakers 2 = Total 2o6. We have explained that many of these apprentices enter
upon their indentures practically illiterate and though we recognize their enthusiasm
for education and improvement, we realize how little an evening class can do for
a boy of 16 or more who after his day’s work brings to such a class a mind almost
entirely uneducated and hands and eyes almost wholly untrained. The Manager of the
Ta ] koo Docks reports that owing to their lack of elementary education and ignorance
of English some of his apprentices who are attending the Technical Class held at the
Taikoo Docks are wanting in enthusiasm in tackling technical subjects, whereas they
are all keen to learn English. We think that something should be done for all appren-
tices ; but though the raising of the general intelligence of all engineering workers is
part of our aim, it is not the whole of it. We want to produce leading hands, junior
foremen who can develop into foremen and draftsmen and we want in this way to
create a class from which there may occasionally emerge a specially brilliant youth who
can be sent on to the University.
68. It appears from the statement made to us by the Manager of the Taikoo
Docks that the boys whom his firm takes on annually as apprentices have mostly been
to a lower primary school —many of them have doubtless attended the Quarry Bay
Lower Primary School —and have filled the interval between their leaving school
and their joining the works as apprentices, by doing odd jobs for their parents or m
some form of casual labour. These boys are frequently illiterate or practically so
when they become apprentices. Many of them do not know the most common
Chinese characters. Of English they are nearly always quite ignorant nor have their
calculating capacity or their ability to draw (this ability is probably latent in many of
them) been developed. But there are also found among the annual recruits who start
on the Taikoo apprentice system a few boys who are mostly sons of the firm’s best
Chinese employees. These boys have probably had some school education above the
lower primary stage and many of them have acquired some knowledge of English.
69. We have been told that one apprentice came recently to the Taikoo Docks
from King’s College and the Managing Director of the Plong Kong & Whampoa Dock
Co., has. we understand, received occasionally into his apprentice system boys from
Queen’k College and King’s College. But tire demand for admission into the Govern-
ment Anglo-Chinese Schools far exceeds the vacancies available. There seems to be no
doubt but that those boys destined to be apprentices in engineering works, whose
parents can afford to keep them in school beyond the lower primary stage generally
drift into private proprietary schools —schools whose lure is that they teach.English but
which rarely employ teachers capable of teaching that language effectively. The
best boys when they become apprentices, have probably acquired a smattering of
English and Chinese and a little arithmetic but have no solid grounding. In fact,
though in the annual batch of the apprentices it is generally not difficult to pick out a
few who show signs of having had some education and who can therefore be regard-
ed as capable of further instruction, even so not only are those few far below the
standard of general intelligence and education which would be demanded of apprentices
in England, but they are also lacking in the rudiments of those subjects, such as
elementary mathematics, drawing and the first principles of mechanics which are
essential to the intelligent practice of their craft. His defect is a serious handicap
to their advancement more especially as they have never had their hands and eyes
trained by manual instruction. We are convinced that the first and most vital step in
the process of producing locally a more responsible and effective type of engineering
mechanic is to Secure for him a more appropriate and more generally effective system
of pre-apprenticeship or school education


70. The first suggestion put forward in this connexion was that the Government
should be asked to provide scholarships to enable the sons of artizans and mechanics to '
go for their general education to such schools as Queen’s College or King’s College,.
there to prepare to become apprentices. The second was that the Committee should
impress upon the Education Authorities the necessity of providing better facilities for
Chinese children of the artizan class to learn “English and kindred matter” after they
have learned their own language but during a school life of from 6 to say 15 years.
These better facilities were to take the form of a special school which might be near
one of the Dockyards but not necessarily so. The second suggestion was supplemented
by the view that : —
“Some fair standard of education and brain-training is essential in the case
of all young people, including Chinese, and such education in the case of the latter
should cover some training in the English language before there is the slightest
use of trying to heap on to the youth any technical education at all.”
71. The first suggestion brings us up against a difficulty that we believe to be a
very real one. We have referred to it already and have quoted the Singapore Technical
Education Committee on it. The difficulty is the lure of the clerical or white collar
occupations. The reality of this difficulty has been impressed upon us by the Director
of Education, by the Acting Manager of the Taikoo Dockyard, by Mir. MacKichan and
by the Building Contractors who told our Chairman that the sons of the more success-
ful workers in the building industry now go to some small extent to private schools and
that, having picked up therein a little English and imbibed a general distaste for labour,
they generally manage to become store-clerks, shop-assistants or domestic servants.
Anyway they are lost to the industry.
72. The second suggestion does not appear to us to meet in any way the needs
of the case. Simply to ask Government to provide better educational facilities for
Chinese children of the artizan class is merely to shift on to someone else’s shoulders
the solution of a vital aspect of the problem which we have been called upon to investi-
gate. A special Government school providing a general literary education with special
emphasis on English —a school which is to be in no sense technical nor under the
control of anyone whose business it is to look after those who are likely to become the
future workers of the engineering industry —would be in effect merely an additional
English school which Government would certainly be loth to establish and maintain.
If Government did establish such a school, either in the neighbourhood of one of the
Dockyards or elsewhere, it is difficult to see how such a school could be reserved for
possible future apprentices, for even if preference were given to sons of employees of
engineering firms (and part of the suggestion was that such boys should be educated
free) there would be no guarantee that boys educated under these conditions would join
the engineering industry at all. If experience be any guide, this would probably be
the last thing they would wish to do. A special general school established and main-
tained. by Government in response to a demand for better educational facilities for
the children of the Chinese artizan class would reproduce the white collar danger in an
acute form.
73. The problem is to bridge over the gap between the vernacular primary
school and the apprenticeship and to bridge it in such a way as to avoid the distraction
of more popular forms of employment which are much easier of access. The problem
is by no means confined to Hong Kong or even to the East. It has existed :
and it still exists in England. Colonel R. K. Morcom, O.B.E., of the recent Economic
Mission, to the Far East, who in addition to being a Director of Messrs., Beiliss &
Morcom Ltd., and Chairman of the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers As-
sociation was also for years a member of the Education Committee of the Birming-
ham City Council, told our Chairman that the problem of keeping boys who should
eventually become apprentices in engineering works from drifting into other forms of
livelihood and especially from getting submerged in various forms of casual labour
was one of vital importance. The tackling 'of the problem, is, in England, the func-
tion of the Junior Technical School. The following is an extract from a Survev of
Technical A Further Education in England and Wales which was published bv' the
Board of Education, Whitehall in 1926 (Educational Pamphlet No. 49) : —
“Boys of 13 or 14 with a taste for engineering and with the requisite
ability can obtain, in almost any large centre of population, a pre-apprenticeship
The im-
provement of
P re-Apprenti-
ceship
Education.
The white
The bridge
6
primary
ticeship.


The Junior
Technical
Schools of
London.
A Govern
ment
Technical
School in
Hong Kong.
training m a junior technical school preparing for constructive trades
bud, a school provides during a period of two to three years, a sub-
stantial time for the _ study of 1 nglish subjects together 'with mathe-
matics, science, mechanical drawing and manual instruction in wood and irfetal
nus ftrammg while specially mutable for a boy who wishes to become a skilled
aitizan, is so frequently followed up by further technical study, mainly in
evening classes that boys from these schools, ultimately find their wav into a
iiumlKM' of miscellaneous posts in the industry, many of them of a higher ffrade
than that of a skilled mechanic.
r e agice that it would be futile to heap technical education on an immature
Chinese boy but we do not agree that general education can not be directed toward
constructive trades. We hold strongly that a school in which this attempt is made is
better calculated to produce the apprentice that the engineering and shipbuilding
industry of Hong Kong requires rather than a school whose curriculum is dominated
oy the University Local Examinations which would seem to be the only alternative.
the Junior Technical Schools of London have been recently described thus
“They (ie. the Junior Technical Schools) take in boys from the age of 13
and give them concurrently both a general and a specialized education. The
essential feature of the system is the recognition of the fact that much real
knowledge is to be acquired only through the finger tips, that manual skill is no
less worthy than book -learning and that skill of hand is in reality skill of brain,
and that a training which has direct vocational value is not necessarily deficient
m cultural merit.”
- 7 fj- .We have consulted Mr. G. E. S. TTpsdell, now a Government School-master
m the Lins liadoorie School, but a qualified electrical engineer and a Companion of
the Institute of Engineers. Mr. Upsdell writes to the Chairman :—
from your letter I gather that it is the wish of your Committee to start a
school which will eventually turn out Chinese capable of filling the positions of
junior loremen and draftsmen in foreign establishments, a school similar to
institutions in the United Kingdom where practical and theoretical training in
engineering and architecture is given and from my own experience, having
received my elementary training in such an institute, I feel that this is the line
on which it would be advisable to develop.”
76. We are unanimous in urging the necessity for the establishment and main-
tenance by Government of a Junior Technical School, This school should feed the
apprentice system of the Colony with adequately educated and promising youths.
But the matter can not be left at that. The next stage is the stage of evening or off-
shift classes. How are these classes to be organized, controlled and maintained? Our
answer is that Government should establish and maintain an institution which should
have a dual function, that is to say that it should combine a Junior Technical School
with an organization for the further and technical education of workers. This combina-
tion of functions in one technical institution is very common in England. We suggest
that the institution for the establishment of which we are now pressing, should" be
called the Government Technical School and that it should consist of two departments
--The Junior Technical School Department and the Department of Further and
1 e elm i ca l E due at i on.
77. We are also convinced that it is necessary to appoint a well qualified and
experienced principal of this technical school. We want new machinery, and the first
essential piece of machinery is, we think, the Technical School. This’involves some
one to direct it. The present school system of Hong Kong is one-sided. The Director
of Education has no one to advise him with reference to the special needs of the
industries and their workers. There is no one to whom the industries and their
workers .can turn for help m this vital matter. The Technical Institute has no building
and no permanent staff; it is directed by one of the two Inspectors of English schools
and its activities which could not in our opinion possibly be extended to cover the
whole field of apprentices and other industrial workers, are limited by the varying
grants which are voted for it in the annual education estimates. In the course of our
inquiries we have been struck by the amount which has been written in the course of
the last, few years about technical education in Hong. Kong. That the practical effect


of all his writing has been nil is due, we think, mainly to the fact that technical
education below the University grade has been nobody’s business.
78. The Technical School for which we now ask should be a constituent part of
the Education Department and the Director of Education should be responsible to
Government for it The Principal of the Technical School would be not only respon-
sible to the Director of Education for the institution but also his general advisor in
all matters connected with the education of industrial workers —potential workers as
well as those actually engaged in some industry. The Principal will be responsible
both for the Junior Technical School which will work for the normal school hours and
for the classes for the further and technical training of apprentices, etc., which will
be held in the evenings and other times during which the workers are free. If the
Principal is to' do his work properly he will have to keep in close and constant touch
not only with the heads of engineering firms but also with those who are actually in
charge of workshops such as the Managers of the Taikoo and Kowloon Docks and the
heads of the leading architectural and constructional firms in the. Colony. We regard
it as essential that the Technical School should * be a Government School and an
integral part of the Education Department. We are opposed to any sort of duality
either of responsibility or of control, but we think that an advisory committee of
industrialists would probably be useful to the Director of Education and the Principal
of the Technical School, especially in arranging accommodation for evening classes.
79. For the Constitution of the Advisory Committee we suggest (1) the Director
of Education as Chairman; (2) a representative of the Hong Kong & Whampoa Dock
Co; (3) a representative of the Taikoo Dockyard & Engineering Co'; (•!) a representa-
tive architect; (5) a representative of the Chinese contractors; and (6) a representa-
tive of the Engineers (Chinese) Institute, as members, with the Principal of the
Technical School as Secretary and Member. All the members would be appointed by
Government for a term of three years, a member being eligible for reappointment.
We are informed that the Board of Education has the right of approaching Govern-
ment on matters of detail and policy and that this right has reference to the whole
field within the jurisdiction of the Director of Education. We think that the Advisory
Committee of the Technical School should be represented on the Board of Education
and we recommend that two technical representatives from the Committee should be
appointed to the Board.
80. We think that the Technical School should be, to start with, quite distinct
from the Technical Institute, the activities of which should not be, at the outset at
any rate, curtailed in any way as a result of the Technical School being established.
Later on, if the Technical School makes good, the transfer to it of the more technical
instruction which the Technical Institute is then handling should be considered. Such
a transfer would seem to be theoretically a move in the right direction, but we feel
strongly that there should be no attempt to eifect this transfer until the Technical
School has got a good footing. We are bound to suggest that the Technical School
should be started on an experimental and temporary basis and this suggestion, if it
be adopted, would make any interference with existing activities in the matter of
further education impracticable. But apart from this consideration we think that it
would be unwise to impose on the Principal of the Technical School on his first arrival,
the responsibility for carrying on any existing activities in the matter of further
education. Let him concentrate at first on his own particular problem the education
of potential and actual industrial workers—and find his feet in that capacity.
81. We would suggest that His Excellency the Governor might consider the
desirability of nominating the Principal of the Technical School to be a member of
the Court of the University. If this could be done the Council of the University might
perhaps be prepared to consider the appointment of the Principal to be a member of
the University Employment Committee, and possibly a member of the University
Senate. The Principal would of course be quite apart from the University’s teaching
organization (though he might quite well be asked to give occasional lectures in the
Engineering Faculty), in the same way as the Director of Education is, but he would
probably be able to give valuable advice in connexion with the University’s engineer-
ing course, especially on the practical side. The Principal should be allowed reason-
able access to the engineering works in which the ex-pupils of the Junior Technical
School and the students of the Department for the further and technical education of
An
Advisory
Committee.
The Technical
School to be
distinct
from the
Technical
Institute.
The-
Principal’
and the
University.


The Quali-
fications
required
in the
Principal
of the
Technical
School.
Proposals
Recapitu-
lated.
workers will be employed. In this capacity the Principal might be of considerable
assistance to the University in connexion with such students as might be working,
either during their course or after it, in local engineering works. We suggest it
would be advisable to co-opt the Principal of the Technical School to be a
member of the Board of the Faculty of Engineering.
82. I he Technical School will have to be created. A great deal will depend on
its first Principal. He must be a man who has been through the works himself. He
should also have taught and be an enthusiast for teaching. He will have to be an
organiser and one who will secure the confidence of those who are actually working
in, and supervising and directing, the various industries. Physical and mental energy
will be essentia], seeing that he will have to realize that the evening classes will require
his attention just as much as the Junior Technical School. As to his professional
qualifications one suggestion given ns as an indication of what might be looked for
was a successful apprenticeship which had led up to special study in a University or
elsewhere, as a Whitworth scholar. Another suggestion was that he should be of the
foreman type. We believe that the right man is to be found in Britain by those who
know where to look for him. We believe that the best wav to recruit the Principal
would be to ask the Secretary of State for the Colonies to consult the Board of Educa-
tion, Whitehall. The Board is in touch through its Inspectors of Technical and Con-
tinuation Schools, with all the technical education work which is being done by all the
Local Education Authorities in England and Wales. The Secretary of State might also
be asked to consult at- the same time the Secretary to the Committee of Council on
Education in Scotland. Either of these two authorities would know the type of man
required and would probably be able to find a suitable candidate. It has been suggest-
ed to us that it is advisable that the Principal should have had some experience of the
Chinese mentality. We agree that this would be desirable, but we do not know of any
such person who is thus qualified and would be likely to accept the post. W r e should
also feel a little diffident about appointing a local man who would probably start on
the work oppressed by a sense of the difficulty of this task. What is required is in
our opinion some one not too old but fresh and vigorous—some one with confidence
in himself and a belief in his mission. The organization of technical education is
rather a specially delicate matter anywhere, but in England and Scotland the difficul-
ties have been overcome. Administrative experience under a local education authority
in England or Scotland would be a valuable quality in the Principal. At the time of
his recruitment the Principal should not be more than 35 years of age.
83. The question of the salary for the Principal of the Technical School is not
an easy one. The City of Manchester was recently advertising for a principal of its
school for Building Trade Apprentices. The salary offered was £525 a year. The
Motor Mechanic Instructor at the Kuala Lumpur Trade School receives an incremental
salary of Straits $350 to $600. This is equivalent to £490 to £840 a year. The
Agricultural Instructor at the Sultan Idris College is paid Straits $400 to $S00 a
month or from £560 to £1,120 a year. The salary of the Principal of the Technical
Schools in Ceylon who is a B.Sc, and a Member of the Institute of Electrical En-
gineers is £900. The three officers last named are on the permanent pensionable
establishments of their respective Governments. The maximum salary of a school-
master in the Hong Kong Government Education Department is nominally £950 a
year. As the whole scheme is experimental we think that the Principal should be
recruited on a five years’ agreement and that under the terms of his first agreement lie
should receive a non-incremental salary of £850 a year.
84. Our idea is then that there should be established and maintained by Govern-
ment, for five years in the first instance a Technical School which should have two
departments —a Junior Technical School and a Department for the Further and
Technical Education of Workers. The function of the Junior Technical School will be
to educate boys from 12 to 14 to 16 to 18 who are going to be apprenticed to some
constructive trade. We suggest that the curriculum of the Junior Technical School
should cover 4 years and that the number of pupils in each year should be limited to
start with to 30. The total capacity of the school would therefore at first be 120.
The instruction given in the school would have to be, to begin with at any rate, more
general and less technical tiffin the curriculum of a Junior Technical School in Eng-
land. This is partly because the pupils who come to it will be far less educated than
the English pupils and also because the Junior Technical School while it will have to


■continue to teach its pupils Chinese will also have to initiate them into English So
far at least as boys who are going to be apprentices in the Engineering and Ship-
building Industry is concerned the curriculum will not be difficult to suggest. As
regards the Department of Further and Technical Education for Workers, the arrange-
ment for the teaching of apprentices in the dockyards which will be part of the work
of this department of the Technical'School will not be difficult to formulate in outline.
But we do not propose that the Technical School should be confined to the Engineer-
ing and Shipbuilding Industry. We therefore postpone the elaboration of the
School’s work until we have discussed another Industry which has been brought
prominently to our notice. We re’fer to the Building Industry, the needs of which we
now proceed to investigate.
85. The Building Trade is probably the largest individual trade in the Colony.
We believe that at the moment there is something like $2,000,000 worth of building
going on. Colonel M. IT. Logan, D.S.O. of Messrs. Palmer Turner & Co., whom we
have already quoted, has put in a strong indictment of the standard of building work
in this Colony which he contrasts most unfavourably with that which obtains in
Shanghai. “I wish” he wrote to our Chairman from Shanghai, “That yon could in-
fluence the Government and the general body of business men (in Hong Kong) to
send a commission up here to see how industry and building methods have progress-
ed.” Colonel Logan further contends that the work of the contractors is bad largely
because the general level of labourers’ and coolies work is low and because the
experienced foreman does not exist. In Colonel Logan s opinion there should be m
Hong Kong a technical school which should aim at turning out, for the building trade,
intelligent and trained men who could rise to the position of foremen. We have
already referred to the Building Construction Class which is being conducted by the
Technical Institute. Those who attend this Class are, we were told, in the main the
daytime employees of architects and contractors.
8S. It has been ascertained from Mr. MacKichan of Messrs. Leigh & Orange,
that those who are destined to become workers in the building industry as carpenters,
blacksmiths, fitters, founders, plumbers, cementers, etc., usually go to a vernacular
primary school and then after an interval they become apprentices for three years
after which, without satisfying any test, they can join the various guilds and work at
their trades. Mr. MacKichan thinks that it is necessary that something should be
done to improve the general standard of capacity and intelligence of the workers and
he admits that the standard of work is deteriorating. He is, however, very anxious
that the attempt now contemplated to make the workers in the building industry more
effective by means of instruction should not tend to distract boys from their hereditary
avocations into' clerical and other “white collar’' lines of employment. He was at
first more inclined to limit any attempt to improve the capacity of the young workers
by education to attendance at evening classes during apprenticeship. When asked
what he contemplated teaching carpenters in evening classes he suggested : —
(а) the reason for, and the use of, tools-;
(б) joints and finishing;
(c) the uses of the various kinds of timber and how to prevent the deteriora-
tion of timber.
As regards blacksmiths, fitters, founders and plumbers, Mr. MacKichan thought
their curriculum in evening classes should be much the same as that designed for
engineering apprentices. Mr. MacKichan regards it as very necessary, that the
carpenter apprentices, and indeed all apprentices, should learn some English, also
how to calculate, with specific reference to figuring out dimensions, quantities etc.
Confronted by the problem, how the apprentices of the building trade were, in their
present educational condition, to study in evening classes the principles of their
various crafts and at the same time acquire some facility in English expression (it
must be assumed that when the apprentice starts his apprenticeship he will know no
English and indeed be practically illiterate and it must be remembered that his ap-
prenticeship covers a course of 3 years only), Mr. MacKichan admitted the need of
some special school which the building apprentice that is-to-be could attend for two
or three years before entering his apprenticeship and in which he could study some
simple English and arithmetic. Mr. MacKichan thought that the establishment of such
The
Building
Industry.
Colonel
Logan’s
Indictment.
Mr.
MacKichan’s
statement.


P re-Appren-
ticeship &
Evening
Courses for
the Building
Trade in
English
T echnical
Schools.
a school would be of great advantage to the industry, provided always that the effect
of the school were not to divert boys from the industry.
87. Our Chairman subsequently arranged to meet the heads of some of the
leading Chinese, contractors firms and to talk over the matter with them. At the
first of these interviews it was explained to the contractors that there were employed
in the Colony a larger number of workers in various industries of which the building
industry was probably the largest. What the Committee wanted to find out was how
far by means of instruction given in schools and evening classes the general standard
of intelligence and capacity of the workers could be improved. The first question
put to them was whether if a school were established those boys who were going to
work in the industry in its various branches would avail themselves of it?
88. The Contractors explained, to start with, that the great majority of the
workers in the building industry come from the country and that they begin by
passing through a three years apprenticeship; that the apprenticeship ends in no
definite test but that after this period the apprentices become generally recognized
as day workers. So far as a pre-apprenticeship school is concerned the contractors
felt that it would be defficult for boys who are going to become workers in the
building industry to join such a school. To do so it would be necessary for them
to come from their villages to Hong Kong and there would be in that event nowhere
for them to live nor would they' be able to pay the fees, were such levied. The
Contractors admitted that most of the workers had had no education whatever. A
few of them had spent short periods in vernacular private schools. The Con-
tractors also explained that boys were taken on as apprentices at varying ages
some, though they were in the minority, as early as 13, others at the ages of 14,
15, 16, 17 and 18.
89. When our Chairman put it to the Contractors that while it was not, of
course, considered possible that all or even a considerable proportion of the building
industry would, to start with at any rate, go to a special school for apprentices
before they started work or even attend evening classes while serving as appren-
tices, it was thought to be not impossible that those advantages might be regarded
as within the reach of a few and that these few having had the advantages of educa-
tion might be presumed to be more intelligent and likely to qualify as foremen, they
still seemed sceptical. When however our Chairman put it to the Contractors,
whether, if evening classes in which English and Chinese and such subjects as simple
calculations were taught could be organized they would be welcome, they immediately
replied that such classes would be a great boon, as they were already spending
money on having their apprentices taught by private teachers.
90. About a month later, our Chairman had a second meeting with the same
contractors. At this meeting the Contractors having in the interim consulted the
guilds, welcomed the suggestion which the Chairman had previously outlined. They
said that there were already some hoys who had left primary vernacular schools
and were awaiting their apprenticeships and who were undergoing some form of
instruction mainly, if not wholly, in private proprietary schools, in English. The
Contractors were therefore in favour of a school which could take boys wlm were
awaiting their apprenticeships in the building industry and give them appropriate in-
struction. They thought that English was very important, as also were simple
arithmetical calculations directed towards the work they would do as workers in the
building industry. They seemed to think it would not be necessary for the boys to
continue their Chinese in such a school but they hoped that the future apprentices
of the building industry would learn in it the rudiments of their craft, e.g. carpentry,
bricklaying, plumbing, etc. The Contractors welcomed the idea of evening classes
for actual apprentices. They seemed to have realized the urgent need for more
intelligent and more capable workers.
91. Pre-apprenticeship training for the building industry is rather a special
feature of the Junior Technical Schools in and near London. The general character
of a building trade Junior Technical School in England may he inferred from the
following curriculum :*—•


Year 1
English subjects 5 hours
Mathematics & geometry .5 ~
Science 4 ~
Technical drawing 2 ~
Art 8 ~
Drill 1 ~
Building construction 3 ~
Workshop (carpentry plumbing and painting) 7 ~
Year 2
All as before except the Ist two items. These are for
carpenters, building construction 3 hours
workshop 7 ~
for others, workshop 10 ~
92. Part -time day classes for apprenticed carpenters and other craftsmen are
provided in a few large towns in England and it was reported in 1926 that the system
might be expected to grow. The school training of most builders and craftsmen was
then carried on mainly in evening classes. In the Survey of Technical and Further
Education in England and Wales from which we have already quoted, it is pointed
out that what the building craftsmen needs is instruction in the theory of his craft,
some additional workshop practice and some exercise in drawing, geometry and cal-
culations. The Survey explains that “Builders” (e.g, office employees, builders’
sons or craftsmen aspiring-to become foremen, clerks of works, managers or master
builders) are primarily interested in building construction and drawing and later in
quantity, estimating and accountancy. But the Survey adds that these “builders” are
usually slow to realize the importance of mathematics and science as a foundation
for advanced study of structural work.
98, The character of w T ell organized instruction in evening classes in England
may be inferred from the following examples : —-
Course for Builders
Year 1
Construction & drawing
Building mathematics
Geometry, building science
(Each one evening)
Years 2 Sf 3
Construction & drawing
(2 evenings)
Science (1 evening)
Course for Carpenters
Year 1
Trade knowledge
Drawing, workshop
(Each one evening)
Year 2
As in first year
In setting out these specimen courses the Board of Education Whitehall, advised
that the course for builders might in the best organized schools be extended to a
fourth or even a fifth year “in order that further aspects of the building industry
might be studied with specialization according to individual needs/’
94. Mr. MacKichan had unfortunately left the Colony before our Report was
formulated. The idea of the Junior Technical School and what it might do for the
building trade was, however, discussed at a meeting which he attended. He sub-
sequently pointed out in a letter addressed to our Chairman that it must not be
forgotten that most recruits for the building trade in Hong Kong are illiterate, the
nest having had very little education and that in vernacular primary schools! To
try and place such boys in a Junior Technical School and to teach them there science
and allied subjects, would, in Mr. MacKichan’s opinion, be difficult, and the results
Mr.
MacKichan's
fear.


The
Technical
School
is for
Supervisors
$ Foremen
not for
Journeyman
Bricklayers,
Mr, Holmes’
systems,
Suggested
Curricula.
might defeat the aim of the Committee. Mr. MaeKiehan went on to explain that
what was required in the Colony, so far as the building trade was concerned, was
better artizans and that if an attempt was made to teach potential workers in the
building industry science, then they would be educated to a plane above manual
labour. This would defeat the purpose of the suggested Technical School. Mr.
MaeKiehan can not visualize a King’s College or similar boy laying bricks, but he can
visualize the same boy going through an apprenticeship as a mechanical engineer.
He feared that it was impossible to put the two trades on a par. Mr. MaeKiehan con-
sidered that the average youth who entered the building trade was definitely inferior
in ability and knowledge to the engineer apprentice whom the Taikoo and Kowloon
Docks are trying to encourage. The average youth entering the building industry is
poor and has got to earn his living practically from the start. He has little or no
learning to begin with and if he is to be retained in the trade he must not be
educated above it. What is wanted in fact is craftsmen and any teaching given must
be, as far as the building trade is concerned, principally craftsmanship.
95. We considered very carefully Mr. MaeKiehan’s representations but the
purpose of the proposed technical school is not to train bricklayers or other journey-
man workers but supervisors, such as foremen, clerks of works, managers or master
builders. It is the complete absence of the supervisor class which is today hampering
and prejudicing the building trade of the Colony. The purpose of the Technical
School is to provide a curriculum suitable not only for shipbuilding and engineering
but also for the constructive trades generally. The wider the purpose of the school,
the better. We therefore feel strongly that it would be a mistake to exclude the
building trade from the purview of the proposed school. There are obviously openings
for supervisors and we should imagine that, if the training which would enable this
class to be developed were forthcoming, contractors’ sons and others would come for-
ward to' profit by it. We must again emphasize the fact that unless the workers in any
particular industry have had some adequate pre-apprenticeship education they can not
be touched by evening classes. The curriculum of an English Junior Technical School
giving pre-apprenticeship training in the building industry was merely quoted by way
of illustration. As in the case of boys preparing for apprenticeship to the engineering
■and shipbuilding industry, the course of instruction appropriate to potential fore-
men of the building industry would have to contain far more general education and far
less technical training than could be attempted in an English Junior Technical School.
We have decided to advise therefore that the Technical School which we are advocat-
ing should be so designed as to include suitable pre-apprenticeship training for the
building industry in the Junior Technical School and for appropriate organized even-
ing classes for builders, carpenters, etc., in the Department for the Further and
Technical Education of Workers.
96. We deal with the needs of the rank and hie of the industry in the next
section of our Report. We have consulted Mr. Thomas Holmes of the firm of Messrs.
Palmer Turner & Co. Mr. Holmes is a practical builder who has himself been con-
nected with technical schools in England both as a student and a teacher. He is now
employed in this Colony on a big building construction work. He is strongly in favour
of practical evening classes being organized for the actual workers in the industry and
he has submitted for our information a syllabus which is attached to this Report as
Appendix B.
97. We now return to the Technical School. Mr. Upsdell advises that the cur-
riculum of the Junior Technical School should consist of :
English : —Reading, writing, short sentences, oral instruction aimed at mak-
ing the pupils capable of making themselves understood, technical
terms, words and phrases necessary to meet the needs of the particular
trade aimed at. Care should be taken to prevent this teaching from
becoming c Titerary.”
Arithmetic :—As far as multiplication and division of fractions.
Drawing: —The use of ordinary instruments, e.g. squares and compasses,
etc.
Mensuration : —The use of measures the ability to calculate areas etc.


98. The Taikoo Professor of Engineering suggests that the subjects to be taught
in the Junior Technical School should be (i) English, (ii) elementary mathematics,
(hi) carpentry, and (iv) drawing and elementary mechanics —in the upper classes. He
thinks that it should be possible for the upper classes to get some of their instruction
in the University’s metal workshops.
99. The Managing Director of the Hong Kong & Whampoa Dock Cos., has sub-
mitted the following syllabus for the Junior Technical School: —
Ist Year
English / Readin S
| Writing
-r. . f Freehand
Drawing | Geometrioal
Arithmetic
Elementary Physics
Manual Instruction (Wood Working)
2nd Year
-p, ... f Reading
English (Writing
Drawing, Elementary Practical Plane & Solid Geometry
Elementary Mathematics, Arithmetic, Algebra
Manual Instruction (Wood Working)
3rd Year
r , (Beading
English jwritin!
Drawing, Elementary Machine drawing and Plane Geometry
Natural Philosophy viz., Elementary Dynamics, Physics and Chemistry
Mathematics, Elementary Trigonometry and Algebra
Manual Instruction (Wood Working)
4th Year
-n v , fßeading
English { Writin |
Drawing, Machine Drawing & Plane Geometry
Natural Philosophy viz., Dynamics, Physics & Chemistry
Mathematics viz., Trigonometry, Algebra, Elementary Calculus
Manual Instruction (Wood Working)
100. We have also received the following suggestions from the Taikoo Dockyard
& Engineering Company :
Suggested curriculum for the Junior Technical School.
English.- —Technical terms, which should be taught by_ compiling an Anglo-
Chinese dictionary of materials used in shipbuilding Jand engineering together with
sketches —where possible —illustrating item.
Figuring. —Numerals and tables of length, area, etc.
Arithmetic. —Addition, subtraction etc.
Geometry. —Plain geometrical figures and use of rulers, dividers, protractors,
compasses etc,
Chinese. —This should also be continued, but the syllabus should be drawn up by
the Education Department.


Drawing. Use of tee and set squares, use of scales, simple geometrical figures,
use of protractors, dividing a line and angle into equal and unequal parts.
Suggested Curricula for the Instruction of Apprentices .
I
Works Classes.
Session. Ist October to Chinese New Year. Chinese New Year to mid-June.
Houis of Attendance. 6pm. to 8 p.m.- —two nights per week.
Years of Study. —3 years.
Students.—Selected apprentices from Works. Each year an entry of 50.
Subjects.
English — Conversational.^— Short sentences embodying technical terms.
Rending . —Again devoted to technical work which will enable the students to
read plans, orders, etc.
Writing .—Short sentences that would enable students to write stores, orders, etc.
. Arithmetic.— Numerals and. fractions to be taught first, then followed by
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and simple fractions.
Mensuration.—Tables of length, area, etc., areas of squares, rectangles, triangles,
circles, etc.
Technical. —Materials and tools used in shipbuilding and engineering. Parts of a
ship and engine with pencilled sketches and explanations of their services.
Pi vetting, caulking, plating, frame-Setting, etc., machines in shops, casting,
pattern-making materials used for various components of engines machines used in
shops.
Drawing. —Use of the tee and set squares, use of scales, simple geometrical
figures.. Use of protractors, dividing a line and angle into equal and unequal parts.
Projection in three planes. Parts of ships such as angles and general sections, rivets,
bolts, etc., and parts of engines such as crank shaft connection rods, etc.
Elementary electricity
Elementary steam
II
This syllabus is based on the assumptionn that the apprentices who take it will
come from the Junior Technical School.
Years of Study. —3 years.
Attendance. —Two nights per week. .
English .—More advanced classes, with a view to students acquiring a more
general knowledge of reading writing and conversation, keeping strictly to trade terms
and expressions.
Arithmetic. —0.0 M. L.O.M. square roots.


Mensuration. —Areas of other geometrical figures and also areas by Simpson’s
rules. Volumes of solids etc. and application of Simpson’s rules to volumes.
Technical —(i) Shipbuilding —V arious structures throughout ship, Heck, fittings
such as bollards, fairleads etc., together with arrangements and purposes. Capstan,
anchor, and windlass gear. Arrangements of cabin furniture. Laying of wood decks,
ceiling, sparring etc. Mould loft work. Erecting and fairing —boat arrangements
derrick arrangements etc. Deck machinery, pumping and piping.
(ii) Engineering. —General boiler construction, action of steam in cylinders, con-
denser pumps. Details of cylinders, piston etc. Steering gears. Windlass, capstan
and winches. Steam piping arrangements, sea cocks, stern tubes etc. Elementary
heat.
Elementary electricity.
Elementary steam.
It is suggested that for the first two years all apprentices attending evening
classes might work according to the same curriculum, and that in the third year it
would be necessary to divide the classes for technical training only.
101. We have set out these curricula to indicate that the engineering firms and
others have given the matter considerable thought. With these suggestions before 1
him the Principal of the Technical School should have no difficulty in working out a
suitable course for the Junior Technical School and for the Evening Classes. All
the curricula set out above have reference to the shipbuilding and engineering
industry, but Mr. Holmes’ suggested svllabus gives valuable material for the designing
of courses for building apprentices. The question how far, if at all, it will be possible
to differentiate the Junior Technical School course for future workers in the building
industry is one which will have to be solved in the light of experience. Some of the
suggested curricula omit Chinese from the syllabus of the Junior Technical School.
This would be in our opinion a mistake. We think that Chinese should certainly be
taught in the Junior Technical School and that emphasis should be laid on the capacity
to translate from English into Chinese and vice versa simple sentences likelv to be
useful to the coming apprentice in this future work. We think that the suggested
compilation of an Anglo-Chinese dictionary of materials used in shipbuilding and
engineering is an excellent one. We hold it to be important that manual instruction
(woodwork) should be a compulsory part of the Junior Technical School course.
102, We recommend that a Earopean Woodwork Instructor for the Junior
Technical School should be engaged locally and the Director of Education suggests
that this instructor might visit the Central British School and King’s College where
this work is now handled by part-time men at so much an hour. We think that a suit-
able salary would be S4OO a month with a liberal travelling allowance. We think
that teaching of English, mathematics, geometry, science and Chinese required in
the Junior Technical School, could be handled, to begin with, by two University-
trained graduate teachers. We understand that these teachers are now on a salary
scale which ranges from SI,BOO a year to $6,000 a year by eight annual increments
of $l5O and 15 of S2OO. Such teachers must be appointed in their appropriate scale
and we are estimating the cost of each at SI,BOO a year. Building construction
could possibly be taught, to start with, by a part-time teacher at $7 an hour—the
rate now paid by the Technical Institute. The non-technica! subjects taught in the
evening classes should be handled by the whole-time teachers of the Junior Technical
School. It will not be difficult to find capable teachers of the technical subjects.
All the teachers of the evening classes would presumably be paid at the rate of $7 an
hour. It is suggested that the evening classes should meet for two four-hour periods
each week for two sessions which are to extend from the Ist October to' Chinese New
Tear; and from Chinese New" Year to mid-June. The evening classes will be there-
fore held for roughly seven months each year, or about 40 weeks. Assuming that
the evening classes at the Taikoo and Kowloon Docks will be duplicated so as to
provide for the separate instruction of Group A and Group B apprentices, and that
Building Apprentices will have two hours of separate instruction a week, we arrive
The
°*
and of
instruction
essential
The
g£)i'and
its


at the following estimate —(112 x 40) + (28 x 40) = $5,600 as the annual cost
of the Instructors for the evening classes.
103. We now give a very rough estimate of the annual initial cost of the
Technical School —
Principal £850 x 16.66 $14,161
Woodwork Instructor 4,800
Add travelling allowance @ $50 a month for 7 months 250
Graduate teachers in the Junior Technical School 3,600
Building construction Teacher; 3 hours a week for 40 weeks
@ $7 an hour 840
Evening Class Instructors 5,600
$29,251
104. The Director of Education informs us that it is just possible that a school
building will be available in the Eastern District and that this might serve the
purposes of the Junior Technical School and for some of the evening classes. For
such evening classes as could be most conveniently held at the Taikoo and Kowloon
Docks accommodation would we understand be provided by the companies concerned.
The Technical Institute classes are already held in the University, and we have
already referred to the Taikoo Professor’s suggestion that the Technical School
might possibty make use of the University’s metal workshops. The University would
probably be willing to lend the use of its lecture rooms and its laboratories (under
safeguards) and we have received from the Professor of Electrical Engineering a
suggestion which involves making the University’s lecture-rooms, drafting-rooms,
laboratories etc., annually available for the further and technical education of appren-
tices. Government school buildings might also be made available, though the
priority of the claim of the Technical Institute to the use of these buildings would
have to be recognized. We should not at any rate recommend the erection of any
new building, until the Technical School has justified itself and the Principal is here
to advise on the lines of the new building. The only possible expenditure which
might have to be incurred before the scheme could be started might be the renting of
a house for the Junior Technical School. If we assume that $200 a month might be
required for this purpose and add a sum of $1,549 for furniture and equipment
and other unforeseen expenses the estimate of initial expenditure must be raised
to $31,000. We do not in fact anticipate that the cost of the Technical
School during the first five years of its existence would exceed $35,000 a year, which
at the present rate of exchange is less than £1,750.
105. We feel that the scheme might be initiated on the basis of the following
programme. : —
(a) Bring out the Principal to a building adapted for the purposes of the
Junior Technical School and for evening classes organized either in this
building or elsewhere.
(b) If the undertaking is successful both as regards the Junior Technical
School and the Department for the Further and Technical Education of
Apprentices, then retain the Principal and put up the necessary building.
(c) If the undertaking is successful as regards the Department for the
Further and Technical Education of Apprentices but fails as regards the
Junior Technical School, then dispense with the Principal; close the
Junior Technical School, and increase the funds at the disposal of the
Director of Education so as to enable him to extend the present Technical
Institute Evening Classes by the inclusion in that organization of the
work in which the Department for the Further and Technical Education
of Apprentices has succeeded.
(d) If the Junior Technical School is successful but the Department for the
Further and Technical Education of Apprentices is a failure, the
Principal could, if necessary, be sent home and the Junior Technical
school continued under a less expensive headmaster appointed from the
Education Department.


(e) If the undertaking is unsuccessful in both departments the Principal can
be sent home.
106. We think that fees should be charged both in the Junior Technical School
and in the Evening Classes. As regards the latter the fee rates might be the same as
those charged by the Technical Institute viz., $10 a term per subject, for an annual
session of two terms. Thus an apprentice who is taking two subjects would pay $40
a year. The fees charged at the Junior Technical School should be at the rate of $60
a year —which is the fee now r charged in the lower classes of Queen's College. Ad-
mission to the Junior Technical School should be by competitive examination. We
do not think that there should be any free students at the Junior Technical School,
but we should like to see some scholarships to be competed for either at the entrance
or at the annual examinations. The engineering firms agree to give the pupils who
pass successfully out of the Junior Technical School first claim to enter their appren-
ticeship systems. But the engagement of apprentices by any particular firm will be
of course at the sole discretion of the firm. It would be desirable that there should
be a few scholarships awarded at the final examination of the Junior Technical School
—scholarships tenable by apprentices only, who were going through the evening
classes curriculum. We consider that if Government establishes and maintains the
Technical School it is only reasonable that they should look to the public for scholar-
ships. We have suggested that admission to the Junior Technical School should be
by competitive examination. Care will also have to be taken to see that none but
those whose parents' intention is bond fide that they should pass on to be apprentices
should be admitted. Probably a statement to this effect from the parent or guardian
should be required.
107. It should be noted that the stalling arrangements suggested both for the
Junior Technical School and for the evening classes should make it possible for all the
instruction save the technical instruction given by members of the Dockyard staffs
and others to be through the medium of Chinese. This arrangement will make it
practical for the English teaching to be devoted towards the workers’ practical needs.
VI. Trade Schools.
108. The third category under which the Singapore Technical Education Com-
mittee of 1925 considered its reference was “the education given in trade (or artizan)
schools to youths training to become mechanics and so on.” In so far as our suggest-
ed Junior Technical School is to give pre-apprenticeship education to those v r ho are
going to become mechanics, it falls under this category. But it differs from the
trade school, as we understand it, in this important respect, that, whereas a trade
school such as the Kuala Lumpur school for the training of motor mechanics aims
at training the ordinary workers in the motor driving and repairing industry, or in
other words, chauffeurs and the ordinary garage workers, the Junior Technical School
which we suggest aims at producing mechanics or workers who are likely to develop
into supervisors, foremen etc. The distinction turns to a certain extent on the nature
of the industries towards which the educational effort is directed. The shipbuilding
and engineering industry of Hong Kong is an organized industry which needs to be
able to recruit locally ordinary workers and men of the potential foremen or supervisor
class. The Junior Technical School represents the first stage in the attempt to
produce the latter type. Admission to this school will be by open competition, but it
will not, to start with at any rate, touch the. rank and file of the dockyard workers.
It might therefore be suggested that such a trade or artizan school should be estab-
lished and maintained for the dockyard workers. We are not in favour of any such
step being taken at the present juncture. The ordinary trade apprentices w'ho are taken
on at the Dockyards will be eligible for admission to appropriate evening classes and
for the organization and conduct of these classes the experience of the Principal of
the Technical School will be available. These artizans will learn the practice of their
several crafts in the workshops of the shipyards. The evening classes will give them
a chance of becoming more intelligent craftsmen and wall give the exceptional boy a
chance of rising. A beginning has to be made and we are convinced that our suggest-
ed Technical School is the most practical way of making an effective start. To
attempt to plan under existing conditions a scheme of trade schools directed towards
the provision of a general training of artizans and mechanics for the local engineer-
Fees.
Medium of
instruction-
I low far
can the
Junior
Technical
School be
regarded as'
a Trade
School?


The train-
ing of
workers
for the
building
industry.
The
Saleslan
institute.
ing and shipbuilding Industry would be to confuse issues and to attempt in schools
a practical training which is much more effectively handled in works. In deciding
as it did in 1925 that the establishment of trade schools was premature, the Singapore
Committee added, as one of its reasons, that artizans were being trained by the
Harbour Board and by local firms.
109. The Manager of the Taikoo Dockyard would divide apprentices into two
groups. Those who have not gone beyond the lower primary stage of vernacular
education and are ignorant of English he would constitute into a class of “purely
trade apprentices” and he would set them to work at once on the special trades to
which they have been severally and respectively apprenticed. He would admit a
certain number of these apprentices to the evening classes for the teaching of Eng-
lish, the selection being in the hands of the Manager or his nominee. To' those who
made good in the English classes he would make facilities for learning simple
technical subjects available. Apprentices falling under this general category he
would call Group A apprentices. From the better educated apprentices who would be
for the most part ex-pupils of the Junior Technical School, the Manager would
select, when they first came, a certain number —from about 12 to 20 annually. The
criterion of selection would be a certain capacity of oral and written expression in
Chinese and English. These selected apprentices the Manager would call Group B
apprentices. He suggests further that Group B apprentices should have the same
conditions of employment as Group A apprentices but that, on a given number of
afternoons, or probably at certain stages for whole days, they would be excused
attendance in the workshops for the purpose of attending classes in more advanced
English and engineering subjects. Such training would be continued during the
whole five year period of apprenticeship at the discretion of the Manager. It has been
suggested that it would be only during the last two years of apprenticeship that day
classes might be found preferable to evening classes and that it would be during these
two years that there might emerge a specially brilliant pupil (brilliant not only in class
but in the workshops) and that for such a student a special scholarship which would
enable him to go on,to the University might be provided. The Manager stresses the
necessity of good general education in the pre-apprenticeship stage.
110. The Building Industry of Hong Kong is, however, largely unorganized and
the training of the ordinary workers in this trade such as bricklayers, plasterers, pain-
ters, stone-masons, blacksmiths and plumbers, is given by a “look-see’ method which
is certainly not effective. Mr. MacKichau has emphasised the point that the training
Which the building trade workers require is a training in craftsmanship and we have
insisted that in so Tar as the proposed Technical School is designed to meet the needs of
the workers in the building industry, it will be for the purpose of training supervisors
and foremen. We have little doubt that when the Technical School is working the
Principal may find himself in the position to arrange something in the way of evening
class instruction for those who are actually engaged in building work. The experience
of Mr. Holmes who is now working on the new Hong Kong Jockey Club Stables is
interesting. Finding himself as clerk of works in charge of this building faced with
the problem of a large number of illiterate workmen who had merely learnt their
work by watching others, he has found it possible to pick out the more intelligent,
to teach them and to get them to teach others. But this does not really touch the
problem of the building trade worker in Hong Kong. A Trade School for the
training of these workers would seem to be indicated, but we are doubtful whether
the time has come to establish such a school. It would be expensive and it might
fail to attract. We have been told that most of the workers come, in the first
instance, as boys from their villages and are at once taken on as apprentices.
HI, We have already referred to the St. Louis Industrial School at West
Point. We understand that the training of workers for the Building Industry is a
feature of the Salesian Institute’s establishment at Turin. It has occurred to us that
if the authorities of this School were approached by Government and offered finan-
cial assistance, they might cooperate most effectively with the Education Department
in the training not only of workers for the building industry but also of artizans for
other trades, such as general carpentry and furniture manufacture. We have already
referred to the excellent work which this school is doing in training tailors, shoe-


makers, carpenters, book-binders and printers. We feel strongly that the Salesian
Institute is an agency in the field of technical and industrial education in Hong Kong
which is deserving of all possible encouragement.
VII. Industrial Education.
112. Under this head the Singapore Education Committee of 1925 emphasizes
the aversion of the boys of Singapore to manual crafts. The Committee went on to
refer to the fact that, in the lower forms of all local schools in Malaya, Government,
aided or unaided, English or vernacular, modern methods of developing the “think-
ing hand” were being pursued and that drawing, modelling in paper and plasticine,
in raffia and rattan were being practiced and that in the best schools the practice of
these forms of manual training was correlated with the teaching of languages, arith-
metic, and geography, which meant that manual subjects were forming a legitimate
part of general mental training. The Committee added : —
“This is as far as instruction in manual craft can go for children below the
age of 12. But it is clear that manual instruction should not cease with the
elementary school but that instruction in carpentry and .simple iron work garden-
ing and so on .should be provided for boys above the age of 12 both in verna-
cular and English schools."
113. The Committee recommended that in all English Schools in Malaya, both
Government and aided, facilities should be provided in gardening and carpentry and
simple iron work and that Chinese Schools should receive a special grant in aid of
any classes that they might start in those or allied subjects for boys above the age
of 12. The Committee insisted that to introduce manual work effectively and to
make it an integral part of the curriculum it would not suffice to employ local car-
penters or to leave the supervision of the manual work teaching in the hands of head-
masters, unacquainted with the modern methods of the subject. The Committee
therefore advocated the appointment of a chief instructor for manual work- —a
graduate possessing the City and Guilds certificate in Manual Training. The Committee
felt that such an appointment would prove to be the foundation stone of all technical
training in Malaya.
114. We have not attempted to investigate this aspect of the technical educa-
tion problem of Hong Kong. We believe it to be a vital one and we commend
these remarks to the consideration of the Education Department of this Colony.
We have refrained mainly on grounds of economy from suggesting that a graduate
possessing the City and Guilds certificate in Manual Training should be recruited for
the Staff of our proposed Technical School. We hope that the Principal of the
School will be able to direct this work himself. Should the Government of Hong
Kong feel that a Manual Instructor of the high qualifications demanded by the
Singapore Committee should be recruited for this Colony without delay and that
the establishment of the proposed Technical School would be a suitable occasion
for making such an appointment, we should be very glad to hear that our proposals
had been modified in this direction.
VIII. Conclusion.
115. Our conclusions are
(1) That the significance of the University’s Faculty of Engineering as the
only existing local agency for higher technical education and the limita-
tions therein involved should be realized and that the distinction between the
function which that Faculty as a component part of a British University can
properly perform and such work as can be rightly handled by a technical
school recognized; but that the close co-operation of the University’s Engineer-
ing Staff and the local industries and the interest of that Staff in technical
education of all grade's, and particularly of the intermediate grade, are essential
to the well-being not only of the Engineering Faculty but also of the whole
system of technical education of the Colony—the creation of a general system
of technical education for the whole Colony being long overdue;
The valim
of manual
work m
schools.
A qualified
chief instruc-
tor in
manual work
as the
foundation
stone of
technical
education.


(2) That closer co-operation is needed between the University’s scientific
staff and local commercial firms and industrial undertakings so that the tech-
nological service which the University could and should render to local trade
may be more generally known and more readily made use of; that the Univer-
sity Council should aim at making this technological service as effective as
possible.
(3) That in the matter of the education of mechanical and electrical
engineers the University should formulate announce and adhere to a definite
policy, having in view the admittedly necessary training of these graduates in
commercial workshops; that while the University would be wise to arrange
facilities, whenever possible, for sending such graduates to be apprentices in
British works, it is desirable that some definite scheme should be worked out
in consultation with local engineering firms for the practical training in Hong
Kong, either in accordance with the “sandwich” system or by a scheme of
post-graduate apprenticeship, for those mechanical and electrical engineering
graduates for whom facilities for being sent to apprenticeships in British works
can not be made available.
(4) That the greatest technical education need of the moment is the train-
ing of mechanics and other workers in constructive trades on such practical and
theoretical lines that a class of locally produced supervisors and foremen may
be evolved, this class being needed not only for local undertakings but also for
constructive work in China and elsewhere; that the way to produce such prac-
tical and responsible workers is by a suitable system of pre-apprenticeship
education followed by an apprenticeship in which the practical training in the
works will be supplemented by technical and other education in evening classes.
(5) That the Salesian Institute should be encouraged and assisted financially
to extend its facilities for the training of artizans for the building trade and
other craftsmen.
(6) That the Education Department of the Colony should consider the
feasibility of making manual instruction and other forms of hand and eye
training more effective in the general schools of the Colony of all grades.
116. Our immediate recommendation is the establishment of a Technical School
on the lines advocated in this Report. We regard this as a development which is
very urgently needed. In the interval which is bound to elapse before the Tech-
nical School can start work we would urge that a sum of at least $4,000 be placed
.annually at the disposal of the Director of Education to enable _ the Technical
Institute to organize and maintain evening classes for the apprentices at or near
the Kowloon and Taikoo Docks.
117. We regret that two of our members, Professor C. A. Middleton Smith
and Mr. A. S. MacKichan should have left the Colony before our Report was
formulated. To send the Report to these gentlemen would involve indefinite delay
nor would it be practicable to attempt to arrive at an agreed report, in consultation
with persons who are so far away. We therefore submit the report under the
signatures of the six members (including the Chairman) who are now in Hong Kong.
Though neither Professor C. A. Middleton Smith nor Mr. MacKichan can be regarded
as in any way responsible for what the Report- contains we have secured the agree-
ment of each to our main recommendation —namely the establishment of a Technical
School.
118. We desire to thank the General Committee of the Hong Kong General
Chamber of Commerce for so kindly placing at our disposal a room in which we
could meet and for lending us the services of the Chamber’s Secretarial Staff.
We thank Mr. M. F. Key, Mr. E. R. Pri ce, and Miss Woolley for the help that
they have rendered.


119. We have not consulted the authorities of the Royal Naval Dockyard,
liong Kong. But we have reason to believe that they would be interested in this
survey and that they might wish to co-operate in the realization of some of our
recommendations, especially in the matter of training foremen mechanics. We
suggest that Government should send a copy of this report to the Commodore.
W. W. Hornell,
R. M. Dyer,
S. W. Tso,
G. P. de Martin,
T. FT. R. Shaw,
T. N. Chau,
E. R. Price (Secretary).
Hong Kong, llti. June, 1931.


Appendix A.
A Letter from the Professor of Electrical Engineering to the
Vice-Chancellor, Hong Kong University.
Sir William Hornell, c.i.e , m.a.,
Vice Chancellor,
Hong Kong University.
25th March, 1931.
Sir,
I have the honour to submit for your consideration the following suggestions
in the hope that they will help to clarify a situation which is at present obscured
by a voluminous, correspondence extending over several years which has wandered
into countless side-tracks. The confusion is due, in my opinion, largely if not
wholly to the fact that the main issues have never been clearly stated and in
consequence irrelevant matter has been introduced by people who have only con-
sidered one aspect of the problem. I therefore venture to put forward the follow-
ing outline of my views on the whole subject. This must necessarily be general to
keep it within readable limits and it is useless to go into detail until we have
secured agreement on the principles which are in my opinion fundamental.
Fortunately there is no difficulty with our civil engineering graduates. They
can secure salaries on graduation sufficient to attract students to the Faculty and it
has always been the most popular course.
On the other hand no university in the world can turn out mechanical or
electrical graduates who are of immediate use to employers and there has been
evolved for these graduates an apprenticeship course of two or three years duration *
which is generally recognized as an essential supplement to their university course.
In Europe and America in particular and in highly industrialised countries in
general there is a demand for specialists in branches of electrical and mechanical
work but in a country such as China for some time to come the most useful men
will be the men with a wide general knowledge of both electrical and mechanical
w T ork. To meet this demand our electrical students take two electrical and one
mechanical subject and our mechanical students take two mechanical subjects and
one electrical. Our electrical and mechanical courses are therefore interdependent
and if the mechanical course is modified there must still lie provided for electrical
students a course in prime movers of degree standard.
Ido not think that any of the local engineering works can provide an ap-
prenticeship course for our graduates in any way comparable to the apprenticeship
courses in England and this is confirmed by the fact that the apprenticeship courses
in England are attended by graduates from all over the Empire and from South
America. I think therefore that every effort should be made to send our graduates
to England. They can obtain a living wage during the course and there remains
only the return fare to be considered which in most cases must be provided by the
generosity of shipping firms or by the University as a kind of scholarship. Since
the numbers of students is likely to be small for some years this is not really a
serious consideration.
During the apprenticeship course all apprentices are encouraged to attend tech-
nical classes and can therefore extend and consolidate their theoretical work which
could not be done locally and they can obtain either the A.M.I.E.E. or the
A.M.I.M.E. qualification at the conclusion of their course.
It is I think generally admitted that it would be the exception rather than the
rule for our graduates to obtain permanent employment in Hong Kong, and, if our
graduates are to take apprenticeship courses in England, their university work
should as far as possible be on the same line as those adopted by English univer-
sites. I think therefore that the change made last year in the final year of the
mechanical course was definitely a step in the wrong direction and that the subject


of mechanical design should be replaced and the new course or workshop practice
discontinued at the end of this year. Surely the place to learn workshop practice
is in the works where it can be assimilated more rapidly and effectively than m a
University course of lectures?
I submit therefore, with the utmost respect, that our degree course is not
really the concern of the engineers of the colony. It is a matter for the University
alone and must stand substantially as at present constituted.
We have already examined in great detail the case of the trade apprentice at
present employed by the local engineering works and I think it has been demon-
strated beyond dispute that his standard of education on entering his identures is
so low that it is impossible to impart engineering instruction to him during the
term of his apprenticeship.
The Senate of the University grudgingly conceded a modified matriculation
standard which it was hoped that this apprentice might reach but at present there
seems no prospect that this scheme will ever mature and the cost of the apprentice
course at the University remains to be provided.
The gap between the present trade apprentice and the University would appear
to be too great to bridge and unless we are to abandon the problem altogethei sonic
intermediate solution must be found. I hope that the following suggestion which
is an entirely new contribution may serve as a basis for discussion and result in
a solution of this extremely difficult problem.
The problem has of course been solved elsewhere by technical institutes but
there is no such institution in Hong Kong and the expenditure involved in its pro-,
vision could not be contemplated at the present juncture. Nor would it be possible
to forecast with any accuracy the support which such an institution would receive
if provided. My suggestion therefore is necessarily limited to the problem of using
existing means to the best advantage and it postulates the existence in Hong Kong
of a class who could reach say the junior standard before starting an apprentice-
ship course in the local works.
If it can be assumed that such a class exists from whom apprentices satisfac-
tory to local works can be selected I see no insuperable difficulty in their training.
The University is closed for four months in the summer and has all the facilities m
the way of class rooms, drafting rooms, laboratories etc., necessaiy foi tiainmg to
any theoretical standard required and these could be used without in any wa\
interfering with the University work proper,
I suggest therefore as a basis for discussion that we try to find candidates of
this kind and offer them an apprentice course consisting of eight months of the year
in local works and four months at the University. If this is acceptable to Mr. Shaw
and other managers of local engineering concerns a syllabus for the theoretical
instruction can be evolved by the Education Department, the engineers of the works
and the University working together and the scheme could be working by the end
of the year.
The University could not undertake to provide the teaching staff but 1 suggest
that Prof. Forster be consulted as tO' how far his final year students could help in
this work and it is impossible to determine the staff that would be required until
the numbers were known and the syllabus approximately decided.
I should be only too willing to co-operate to the fullest extent in the working
out of this scheme if it is acceptable to the works and the Education Department.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(sgd.)
M. H. ROFFEY.


Appendix B.
Technical Courses for Workers in the Building Industry.
c/o Palmer & Turner,
Alexandra Buildings.
19th May, 1931.
Sir William ITornell.
|
Dear Sir,
I received your letter of the 16th to-day, and submit for your information a
■syllabus built up from :
The City and Guilds, London
Sheffield Technical School
Holt Technical School, Liverpool.
oil the above are practical courses, and the practical work is preceded by a lecture,
usually 30 minutes, with profuse sketches in chalk on a large blackboard. Tools
are explained formally with demonstrations by practical men.
I have detailed the various courses and suggest that an easy test of arithmetic
and writing (not necessarily spelling) is made before a candidate is accepted. Only
workers with the tools are taken in the trade schools in England and in Ceylon.
I trust the enclosed will meet your desires, and that we in the industry will
receive benefit from your efforts.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.)
T. HOLMES.
SUGGESTED SYLLABUS
(A) Arithmetic. Definitions, Notation and Numeration, Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, Division, Cancellation, Fractions, Decimals, Ratio, Pro-
portion, Percentage.
The mathematics used in architecture and in the building trades largely
consist of the use of formulae of different kinds. In this course the con-
struction and use of the formulae are fully explained, and the methods of
their application are clearly demonstrated.
Elementary Principles —Use of letters; Application of principles.
Equations —Transformation and Transposition; Combined Operations.
(B) Geometry & Mensuration. This course gives complete instruction in the form
and application of all place figures, and the mensuration of plane surface
and solids, with their special application to architectural estimating.
Principles of Geometry. Preliminary Definitions : Lines, Angles, and
Arcs : Angles and Perpendiculars: Measurement of Arcs and Angles:
Parallels. Place Figures : The Triangle : Principle of the Right Triangle :
Similar Polygons and Triangles : Geometrical Principles of' the Circle :
Inscribed and Circumscribed Polygons.


Mensuration of Surfaces and Solids. Preliminary Explanations:
Heading Drawings : Conversion Tables. Plane Surfaces : Quadrilaterals :
Triangles, The Circle : Sectors and Segments of Circles : The Ellipse:
Area of any Place Figure : Regular Polygon Solids : Definitions : The
Prism and Cylinder : The Pyramid and Cone : The Wedge : The Prismoid :
The Sphere, Symmetrical and Similar Figures.
(C) Preliminary Building Operations. This course deals with such important
matters as excavating, shoring, scaffolding and the transport of materials.
Excavating . Datum Lines : Staking out Excavations : Character of
Soil; Virgin and Artificial Ground: Bearing Value of Foundation Soils:
Depth and Aiea of Excavations : Removal of Material: Measurement of
Excavation.
Shoring , Needling, Underpinning and Bracing Buildings.
Scaffolding. Classification: Pole Scaffolding: Frame Scaffolding,
Needle Scaffolding : Trestic Scaffolding: Bracket Scaffolding, Suspended
Scaffolding, Staging, Gantries. Scaffolding Details and Accessories, Means
of communication: Connections: Equipment. Hoardings and Fans:
Regulations and Recommendations.
Transport of Material. Builders' Hoisting Plant: Simple Lifting
Tackle; Cranes, Hoists or Lifts.
(D) Foundations and Footings. This course deals very carefully and fully with
the design and construction of foundations and footings. The materials of
which foundations can be constructed are clearly enumerated and defined.
The use and methods of driving piles and caissons are also dealt with, as
are foundation walls, and the protection of basement walls.
Footings. Definitions : Design and Construction.
Foundations. Materials: Timber, Concrete; Steel and Iron: Stone
and Brick. Piles and Caissons: Classification of Piles: Bearing Piles:
Metal Piles; Sand Piles: Driving Piles: Remforced-Concrete Bearing
Piles : Concrete Piles : Calculations for Piles Foundation's : Terms used in
Pile Driving: Protection Piles: Cribs or Caissons. Foundation Walls;
Stone-Rubble Thickness of Walls : Thickness of Foundation Walls : Founda-
tion Walls partly on Rock; Openings in Basement and Cellar Walls; Brick
Foundation Walls; Foundations on Sloping Ground; Concrete Foundation
Walls: Distributed Foundations; Planking: Rafts: Grillage Foundations
Reinforced-Concrete Foundations; Calculating Requisite Area of Founda-
tions. Protection of Basement Walls; Dampness in Cellar Walls. Damp-
proof Courses : Damp-Proofing Cellar Walls : Subsoil Drains : Areas for
Keeping Cellars Dry.
{E) Areas, Vaults, and Retailing Walls. Examples of the different kinds of
areas, vaults, and retaining walls in use are given in this course. Their
design to resist thrusts, their use in giving a means of obtaining light to
basements in town buildings, and other points are fully covered.
Areas.
Vaults.
Retaining Walls.
Paving and Pavements.
(/*) Limes, Cements and Mortars. This course was written in close co-operation
with the chemists and works managers of one of the largest cement-making
plants in the country. The materials, their classification, varieties and
general properties, methods of mixing, and burning etc., are dealt with in
a careful and comprehensive manner.
Limes. Introduction : Limestone and the Burning of Lime : Classifica-
tion of Limes : Varieties of Limes.


Cements. Classifications and General Properties : Varieties of Natural
Cements : Analysis of Natural Cements : Varieties of Artificial Cements :
English Portland Cement: Miscellaneous Cements: Testing Cement:
Methods of Testing.
Mortars. Lime and Cement Mortars : Ingredients : Lime Mortars :
Cement Mortar : Strength of Mortar : Mortar Colours and Stains : Water-
proofing Mortar : Grouting.
(G) Concrete Construction. This course explains the methods of mixing concrete
and the many uses of reinforced concrete in building construction.
Composition and Use of Concrete. Introduction : Mixing and Laying
Concrete.
Plain Concrete Construction. Concrete in Situ : Wall Construction :
Other Uses of Concrete : Moulded Concrete : Concrete Blocks.
Reinforced.~Concrete Construction. Introduction : Materials and Work-
manship : Characteristics of Construction : Columns : Beams : Slabs and
Wall Panels : Systems of Construction : Special Forms of Reinforcement:
Method of Construction : Construction of Falsework : Course of Construc-
tion : Surface Finish of the Concrete.
(H) Fire-Resisting Construction. In this course the various methods of fire-
resisting construction are explained to the student. The use of concrete*
either plain or reinforced, in this kind of construction is treated with
completeness.
Planning and Arrangement. Need of Fire-Resisting Construction:
General Design: Methods of Extinguishing Fires : Typical Fire-Resisting
Building.
Materials. Character of Materials Used : Fire-Resisting Materials.
Construction. Protection of Columns and Stanchions : Protection by
Concrete : Protection by Terra-Cotta : Protection by Brickwork : Compari-
son of the methods of Protection : Imperforate Floors : Next Stanchions :
Construction of Floors and Ceilings : Early Methods : Steel and concrete
Floor: Expanded-Metal and concrete Floors Without Centering: Terra-
Cotta Floors : Special Forms of Terra Cotta Floors : Steel-Plate Floors :
selection of a Fire-Resisting Floor : Plugging of Wooden Floors : Fire-
Resisting Partitions : Concrete Partitions : Expanded-Metal-and-Plastor Par-
titions : Terra-Cotta Partitions : Door Frames and Finishings : Light Parti-
tions : Construction of Fire-Resisting Roofs: Flat Roofs, Mansard and
Other Pitched Roofs; Ceiling Construction: Protection of Openings:
Methods of Protection : Fire-Resisting Doors.
(7) Brickwork —A most comprehensive treatise on brickwork and bricklaying. The
varieties of earths or clays, the process of manufacture; the varieties, sizes
and weights of bricks, are fully described. The tools used in bricklaying
and the various methods of performing the work receive treatment.
Bricks and Brickmaking . Manufacture of Bricks : Brick Earths or
Clays : Processes of Manufacturing Bricks : Brick Burning : Glazed Bricks :
Varieties of Bricks : Sizes and Weights of Bricks : Strength of Bricks and
Brickwork.
Bricklaying. Solid Walls: Tools Used by Bricklayers : Joints in
Brickwork: Bond in Brickwork : Kinds of Bond: Hollow Walls: Joining
New Walls to Old Walls : Jointing Brickwork : Brick Arches : Terms Used
in Connection with Arches: Classification of Arches : Brick Vaults:
Methods of Supporting Floor Joists: Corbelling for Floor Joists: Hangers
for Floorbeams in Brick Walls.


Walls , Piers and Chimney Breasts. Thickness of Brick Walls : Walls
Domestic Buildings : Walls for Public Building : Types of Brick Walls :
Terra-Cotta luinng Openings in Walls: Brick Piers: Brick Noggin g :
Bedding Wood m Brickwork : Chimneys and Fireplaces: Settlement in
Brickwork.
Ornamental Brickwork. Designs in Brickwork: Methods of Orna-
mentation: Constructive and Decorative Features: Brick Columns:
Pilasters, and Rustication : String-Courses : Cornices Cleaning and Protect-
ing Brickwork : Efflorescence : Waterproofing Brickwork.
(J) Building Stones. This course consists of lectures on the qualities of the prin-
cipal kinds of building stones, and on the tests used to assist in deter-
mining these qualities. Stone cutting and finishing are fully explained and
illustrated.
Varieties of Stones. Introduction : Geological Classification : Physical
Classification : Chemical Classification : Practical Classification.
Varieties of Stone. Granite : Limestone : Principal Limestone Quarries
in England. Marble Sandstone : Slate. Properties of Building Stones:
Average Weight of Stones : Average Crushing Strength of Stones : Condi-
tion Affecting the Durability of Stone.
(K) Masonry. The art of shaping and arranging stones or bricks to form the walls
and other parts of a structure is one of the most important Branches of
ilie building trades. The necessary instruction is given in this course.
Stone-Cutting dnd Finishing. Stone-cutting Tools: Stone Cutting:
Finish of Stonework : Carved Work.
Finishings and Walling. Definition: Technical Terms: Stone Dress-
ings : Lintels : Sills : Strings and Cornices : Coping : Columns and Entabla-
tures : Tracery : Labour: Stone Walls: Constsuction of Walls: Rubble
Walls Block in Course : Ashlar.
Arches and Arch Construction. Introduction: Kinds of Arches : Con-
struction of Arches : Application of Arches to Design.
Step and Staircase Construction.
Masonry Fixing. Special Joints: Joints and Connections : Defective
Methods of Fixing: Care and Preservation of Stonework.
(L) Carpentry. 1 under and its uses : Conversion of Timber : Seasoning Timber :
Decay and Preservation of Timber : Softwoods : Hardwoods : Selection of
limber : Province of Carpentry : Carpenters' Tools : Joints and Fastenings :
floors : Studded Partitions : Sills : Posts and Studs : Frame Buildings : Types
of Roofs and Root Framing : Trussed Roofs : Roofs of Special Form : Details
of Roof Construction: Balloon Frame Construction: Roof Finishings:
Plaster Grounds : Weather Boarding: Verandas: Centres for Arches and
Domes : Bridge ways : Lattice Bracing : Half-Timber Work : The Steel
Square: Application of the Square: Setting out Various Parts of a
Structure.
(M) Looping. Origin of Roofing —Roof Pitches: Coverings for Pitched Roofs:
Covering for Flat Roofs : Composition Sheetings : Roof Finishings : Flash
ings : Putters.
(A) Joinery and Stair Building.
Joinery. Joints: Classification of Joints : Splayed Work : Curved
Mitres : Raking Mouldings : Bending Wood : Veneering : Doors : Hedged and
Framed Doors : Panelled Doors : Methods of Hanging Doors : Hinges and
I heir Application : Window Design and Construction : Double-Hung Sash
Windows: Casement Windows: Windows in Curved Walls: Design of
Windows : Skylights : Shutters Interior Finishings : Interior Fittings.


Stair Building. Construction of Staircases : Classification of staircases :
Setting out Stairs : Construction of Strings : Construction of Steps : Con-
struction of Hand Rails and Balustrades ; General Staircase Design : Geo-
metrical Staircases : Special forms of Staircases : Panelling.
(O) Ikonmongery . Staple Ironmongery : Nails and Spikes : Screws : Bolts : Sash
Weights: Materials and Finishes: Hinges: Door Springs. Checks and
Stops : Sliding Door Hangers and Track : Gate Hinges and Stops : Locks :
Latches : Door Bolts: Lock Fittings: Door Furniture : Bell Fittings: Sash
Window Fittings : Miscellaneous ironmongery.
(P) Plastering. Fse of Plastering: Materials Used by Plasterers: Laths: !Master-
ing Materials : Plaster Slabs and Partitions : Tools : Applying the Plaster :
Plane Surfaces : Mouldings : External Blaster Work : Inspection of Work.
(Q) Glass and Glazing. Plain Glass : Obscured Glass : Ornamental Glass : Wired
and Prism Glass : Fixing with Putty : Glazing Wood and Iron Frames :
Fixing Without Putty : Ordinary Methods : Leaded Glazing : Proprietary
Systems of Glazing.
(R) Painting and Decorating. Materials Used in House Painting: Colours: Com-
position of Paints: Pigments: Vehicles Varnishes: btams : Composition
and Classification of Various Wood Stains: Pools used by Painters:
Painting: Decoration: Tools used in Graining: Graining: Marbling:
Stencilling : Distempering : Gilding : Paper Hanging.
(S) Plumbing and Materials. Sheet Metals: Pipes: Pipe liftings: Drain Pipe
Fittings: Cocks: Valves: Sundries.
(T) House Drainage. Design of a Drainage System: Different Methods: Require-
ments m a Drainage System : typical Drainage flans . Diamage Details.
Vertical Pipes and Branches : External Traps, Drains and Manholes :
Stables Drainage: Testing a Drainage System: Sewage Disposal: Disposal
into Cesspools : Disposal by Bacortial Methods.
(//) Sanitary Fittings. Modem Sanitary Equipment: Sinks : Laundry Tubs:
Lavatories : Drinking Fountains : Baths : Special Forms of Baths : Bathroom
Arrangements : 1 rmals: Water-1 Insets : Clop lloppeis.
(i j Water Supply to Buildings. Cold-Water Supply: Sources of Water Supplv
and Storage Wells: Service to Buildings: Hot-Water Supply: Water
Heaters: Fire Heated Boilers: Steam-Heated Watery Heaters, or Calon-
fiers : Hot-Water Storage and Distribution : Cylinder System : l ank
System: Water Hammer: Air Locks: Example of Complete Hot-and-Cold
Water Supply . Regulations of Lie Metropolitan Water Board for London.
(IF) Gas-Fitting. Manufacture and Use of Gas : Physical and Chemical Properties
of Gas : Gas Measurement: Gas-Fitting : Gas Lighting : Principles of Illu-
mination : Gas-Lighting Burners : Gas Heating: Burner Construction
House-Warming Gas Heaters; Miscellaneous Gas Heating Appliances:
Water Heaters.
(X) Protection op Work. Lecture.
(7) Definitions. Lecture.
