

Natural Science Association of Northern
Tasmania.
IfEOLOGICiL ||OTES
IN AND AROUND LAUNCESTON.
A. MONTGOMERY, M.A.
LAUNCESTON :
PRINTED AT THE “EXAMINER” AND “TASMANIAN” OFFICE.
MDCCCXCII.


punot


jSdENCE OF
jIORTHERN yASMANIA.
GEOLOGICAL NOTES IN AND AROUND
LAUNCESTON.
BY A. MONTGOMERY, M.A.*
The most striking feature of the scenery round our good town of
Launceston is, I think all will agree, the picturesque ravine which
we know as the Cataract Gorge. So impressive is it that even casual
visitors, least curious of mankind with regard to the reason of being
of natural phenomena, are aroused to wonderment, and may be con-
stantly heard speculating as to how the South Esk should have come
to find its way through the solid hills instead of following the low
country traversed by the railway line. What could have formed
such a vast chasm in the hard rock, and allowed the water this way
of escape P Were the hills violently rent asunder by earthquake or
volcanic forces in some grand convulsion of nature ? or must we look
for some other cause P The first explanation is a favourite one with
untrained observers, but a geologist, familiar with the immense
erosive work done by even small streams working through long periods
of time, and loth to appeal to great convulsions to explain effects
which can in any more ordinary way be accounted for, sees in the
Gorge only the natural result of long continued cutting down of the
rooky bed by the never-ceasing energy of the restless waters. Fur-
thermore, as one of the most potent causes of a river continuing to
cut its bed deeper and deeper is a slow elevation of the land, by
means of which the grade of the channel is prevented from being
worn flat enough for scour to cease, a suspicion arises in his mind that
such a long continued erosion as must have been required to carve
* Read at Launceston August 1 9th, 1892.


the Cataract Gorge through miles of dense and solid greenstone, may
have been a consequence of such a movement of elevation. When
we come to study the surrounding country further, it is soon manifest
that there is much reason to believe that the land has indeed been
rising, and moreover our examination reveals that this rise was pre-
ceded by a long period of subsidence.
I have begun by instancing this problem of how the Gorge came to
be formed as an example of many others common in our neighbour-
hood, the solution of which is only to be found by reference to the
geological history of the district. It may also serve in some measure
to remind us of the vast space of time covered by the geological records
with which we shall have to deal, when we reflect that this ravine has
been cut by the river in comparatively recent times, dating back
certainly not farther than the beginning of the latter half of the
tertiary period.
The main facts relating to the geology of the country round
Launceston have long been known, and are well set forth in detail
in Mr. E. M. Johnston’s remarkable work, “The Geology of Tas-
mania j” but as many present have probably not given the matter much
attention, those who are familiar with the subject are requested to
bear with me while I recapitulate the principal points before directing
your attention to a few of the numerous problems that still remain to
be solved, and to some of the many directions in which this asso-
ciation could do good service to science.
In our immediate vicinity we come in contact with two principal
formations, the diabase greenstones of igneous origin forming the
Cataract Hill and most of the high land round the town, and the sedi-
mentary beds of clay, sand, gravel, etc., which form the Windmill
Hill and Sandhill, and which extend up the basin of the South Esk
for a long distance. The greenstones are probably of mesozoic age,
being generally at any rate younger than the upper coal measures of
this colony, which they have bioken through and often greatly
altered in many localities, and older than the sedimentary beds just
mentioned, which are lacustrine and fluviatile deposits ranging from
the early tertiary times—miocene or possibly even eocene.
Mr. Johnston has classified the tertiary deposits of Tasmania into
two divisions—Palaeogene or earlier tertiary, and Neogene or later
tertiary. This division is designed to avoid the use of the terms
eocene, miocene, and pliocene—generally used for the periods of
tertiary time in other countries, whose geology has been more
thoroughly worked out—until such time as sufficient evidence shall
have accumulated to enable us to refer our formations to one or other
of these recognised divisions of time with some certainty. As yet it is
impossible to do so with any accuracy.


Both palaeogene and neogene formations are well represented round
Launceston. The former includes the sediments laid down previous
to the pouring forth of the basalts, which we see so well on the Main
Line Bailway between St. Leonards and Evandale junction ; while
the deposits formed after the period of volcanic activity had come to
an end are regarded as neogene and recent. The basaltic outflows
appear to have been ejected about the same period as the very similar
older tertiary basalts of Victoria, which correspond with ours both
in mineral characters, and in their mode of occurrence. In this
colony they cover very considerable areas in several detached patches*
being found between Waratah and Burnie, over a large portion of
the Mersey, Don, and Leven basins, round Breadalbane, along the
valley of the Piper river, round Scottsdale, about Kingarooma, Branx-
holm, Brothers’ Home, and Moorina, round Campbell Town and
Avoca, in parts of the Derwent Valley near Macquarie Plains and
Hamilton, and even high up on parts of the great central plateau of
the Lakes district. In nearly every instance they are found to cover
sedimentary beds of lacustrine character and of palaeogene age.
At the Brothers’ Home they lie upon valuable tin-bearing drifts, and
at Lefroy and Back Creek it is hoped that payable deposits of allu-
vial gold will be found beneath them similar to those in like position
below the basalts of Victoria and California.
The Windmill Hill beds are among the best examples we have of
the palaeogene series. In the cuttings in George street, York street.
High street, Charles street, and elsewhere, we see exposed beds of
clayey, sandy, and tufaceous nature, rather irregularly deposited, and
very full of hard brown ferruginous layers and cakes which often show
a concretionary structure. In these beds, particularly in some of the
ironstone layers, are preserved numerous fossil leaves and fragments
of stems. The same sort of beds are seen again at Stephenson’s Bend,
where they are well exposed at low water, and again lower down the
Tamar at Dilston, Windermere, and Muddy Creek. A bed of clay
exposed at low water off Muddy Creek is particularly rich in fine
prints of leaves. At Dilston lignite was found in considerable quan-
tity during the coal prospecting operations carried out there not long
since by Messrs. Henry Law and Co. Lignite is also said to have been
dredged from the bottom of the Tamar at the junction of the North
and South Esks, the seam therefore underlying the Windmill Hill
beds. Southward from Launceston the formation extends a long
way, occupying what is termed the Launceston tertiary basin, and
spreading over an area of about 600 square miles, it runs back to
Campbell Town, and up the South Esk to past Avoca. Near St.
Leonards and close to Evandale Junction it has been proved to con-
tain considerable beds of lignite, a noticeable feature in which is the
constant presence of unaltered globules of resin. No marine fossils


have yet been found in this formation, the only shells got being of the
genera Unio and Anodonta, both of which are freshwater forms. This
fact, and the constant occurrence of leaves and wood, together with
the tufaceous character of the sediments, enable us to feel positive
that the Launceston tertiary basin was once a freshwater lake, which
has been gradually filled up. This filling has taken place to a great
depth, as has been proved by borings made in search of coal near
Longford and elsewhere in the formation, as well as by natural
sections such as we have in Glendhu and the valley of the North Esk.
At Belmont, near Longford, two bores with a diamond drill made a
few years ago went to depths of 690 and 894 feet without reaching
the bottom of the tertiary strata, and at Carr Villa another bore pene-
trated them 570 feet before striking the underlying diabase green-
stone. The natural section up Glendhu from the Tamar to the Eising
Sun Inn shows a thickness of quite 350 feet of these palaeogene
deposits.
The vegetation prevalent at this period was very different from
that now existing, for the leaves most commonly preserved belong
to such families as the maple (acer), laurel ( laurus ), willow ( salix ), oak
(quercus ), plane (platanus), birch ( betula ), alder (alnus), myrtle
(myrica ), elm (ulmus >, and beech (fagus), while eucalyptus, casuarina,
lomatia, hanksia, and other now common genera are only sparingly
represented. On the whole, as Mr. E. M. Johnston remarks, the flora
showed “ apparently a closer relation to the existing vegetation of
Europe than to the existing plant life of Australia.”
During the formation of these enormous depths of lacustrine deposits
a slow subsidence of the land must have been going on. The character
of the sediments shows plainly that they were laid down not in deep
water but in shallow, the rapid alternation of sands and clays, the
beds of lignite, and the great commonness of false bedding being
conclusive on this point. Had there existed a vast deep lake which
became gradually filled we should find in the deeper parts of the basin
very fine sediments regularly and evenly deposited, but even the
deepest borings show the same rapid alternation of sands and clays
which we see in the cuttings on the Windmill Hill and elsewhere.
Another proof of subsidence is afforded by the depth of the bore at
Belmont, 894 feet, without reaching bottom. The surface is certainly
not more than 700 feet above sea level there, and consequently the
bottom of the basin must be quite 200 feet below the sea. Leaving
out of account a possible but unsupported explanation that the basin
had been gouged out by glacial action, we must regard this old valley
as having been first of all eroded by the action of running water,
which implies that the land was then at least 200 feet above its present
level. This conclusion is corroborated by what is known as the “ deep
lead” at Beaconsfield, an old river channel, the bottom of which has


been proved by borings to be some 270 feet below present sea level.
Lignite and black clays containing leaves and fruit found in the
upper parts of this old lead show it to be contemporaneous with the
palaeogene deposits of the Launceston basin further inland. It is
probable that the deep leads under the basalt at Lefroy also run well
below sea level. In the Eingarooma valley there is evidence that
prior to the filling with stanniferous drifts of the old channel of the
Eingarooma at the Brothers’ Home, it had been eroded to a depth at
least 90 feet below the bottom of the present stream, and there is
reason to believe that the outlet of the old Eingarooma is now far
below tide marks. At the beginning of the palaeogene period, there-
fore, we may say that the northern part of Tasmania stood higher
above sea level than it now does, and that a period of subsidence set
in which resulted in the formation of a shallow lake in the area now
covered with tertiary sediments. The continuation of subsidence
and filling up of the lake with detritus going on simultaneously has
resulted in the enormous accumulations of lacustrine debris that we
now find. While the country south cf Launceston was thus sinking,
the north-eastern portion of Tasmania was also subsiding, and enor-
mous accumulations of gravel and drift were piled up, the remains of
which we see near Scottsdale, and at the foot of the Billycock Tier,
The period of subsidence seems to have terminated in a time of
widespread volcanic activity. Showers of ashes and flows of basalt
were poured forth and covered the tertiary sediments, protecting
them from the erosion that soon followed. The volcanic activity
probably lasted for some very considerable time, as several successive
lava flows may often be found with beds of sand and clay between
them, as, for instance, at Lefroy, where diamond drill borings now in
progress have passed through four flows of basalt, one above the
other. On the east side of the North Esk at Corra Linn a section is
exposed showing volcanic agglomerates and tuffs containing fossil
trunks of trees, some coniferous, some a banksia, and others not
yet determined, and at the “ fossil cutting ” near Breadalbane the
scoriae and ashes must have overwhelmed a standing forest of
coniferous trees. The basaltic ground is now the best agricultural
land in the colony, the rock decomposing readily to a rich brown
soil.
I have not yet met with evidences of much subsidence having gone
on after the volcanic period, though gravels are sometimes found
resting on the basalts. A movement of elevation seems rather to
have set in, for valleys have been cut deep into the mass of old
deposits laid down in the ancient tertiary lake, until we now find
remains of these standing out, as such hi Is as the Windmill Hill and
Sandhill. It was probably at the beginning of this period of elevation
that the waters of the South Esk were directed by the then shape of


the land on to the greenstone country, at that time perhaps covered
with tertiary deposits, and began to cut the channel from which it has
never since been able to escape, but has had perforce to scour lower
and lower as the elevation proceeded. Ihe rocky gorge at Whirlpool
Eeach would also be carved out in the same way at the same time.
During elevation of the land, as the river channels are cut deeper
and deeper, terraces of gravel are often left behind along the sides of
the valleys, marking former levels of the river beds. We see good
examples of such along the North Esk valley, in the big gravel bank
at the St. Leonards railway station, and extending from there to
Newstead; in the corresponding terrace on the opposite side of the
river above Waverley, and in the gravel hill at Newnham. In the
latter place we see the neogene terrace gravels resting upon the
denuded palaeogene beds exposed at Stephenson's Bend. The gravel
deposits are again well seen in the cutting of the Scottsdale railway
where it rises from the plain to ascend to Mowbray. In the fine sec-
tion exposed here we may see gravels of two ages, an older, but still
neogene, gravel in regular strata being cut off by a newer one which
has been laid down against the scarped face of the former.
The terrace drifts are unfortunately remarkably poor in fossil re-
mains. They contain abundance of fossilised wood, but it is derived
either from the older coal measures or from the palaeogene beds, and
therefore affords no clue as to the vegetation of the neogene period.
It is only, therefore, by their position that we can judge as to the age
of these gravels. They merge into pleistocene and recent deposits
without any line of demarcation being possible to be laid down.
Bearing in mind this general sketch of the history of the neighbour-
hood, we may now come to the more practical business of considering
what can be done to supply missing details, to verify doubtful ques-
tions, and to add new chapters to the record. Much has been done,
and the outline has been well drawn, but when we look at the vastly
greater amount that remains to do we may well shrink from the task.
Questions in stratigraphy, topography, palaeontology, petrology, and
mineralogy arise in multitudes, all requiring earnest work for their
solution. The great problem of the origin or evolution of the rich
tertiary flora and of the manner of its change to the present so
different one stands prominently out from all others. It involves
the connection of this island with the mainland of Australia, the con-
sideration of periodical climatal changes, and of those possibly pro-
duced by change of elevation of the land and by the diversion of
ocean currents; and, in short, all the varied factors in the struggle
for existence in which plants take part equally with animals. To
understand it we shall have to invoke all the aid obtainable, both


from biology and stratigraphy. The following extract from Baron
von Ettingshausen’s i eport on the Tertiary Flora of Australia, brings
the question before us. He says—
“ I find the tertiary flora of Australia is far more nearly allied to
the tertiary floras of other continents than to the living flora of Aus-
tralia. It seems therefore that the numerous forms which charac-
terise the latter have been developed out of pliocene or post-tertiary
forms of plants till now unknown to us. The recent flora of Australia
contains also genera which characterise other floras, but not the
Australian. It was till now enigmatical how they came to form part
of this recent flora, as the species are endemic and have not wandered;
for instance, the species of the European and North American genus
fagus, of the Asiatic genera tabernaeniontana and elaeocarpus, etc. As
some of them now have been discovered in the Australian tertiary
for instance the above-named, there is no doubt they passed over into
the living flora from the tertiary. The proofs of this may be easily
introduced into palaeo-botanical science by means of future discoveries
and investigations ; for in every case the more species from large and
well preserved series, the more readily shall we be enabled to show
the origin of our living[floras.”
Here, then, is an opening for valuable research. In the neogene
and recent deposits common in our neighbourhood there must be
some mud and clay beds where leaves and fruits of the plants of the
transition between the tertiary and the recent flora may be found.
Though as yet they have been poor in vegetable remains, we must
remember that there have been but few searchers, and it is still far
too early to give up hope of finding the missing links. Sufficient
investigation too has not yet been devoted to the rich leaf beds of the
palaeogene period to allow us to regard them as thoroughly explored,
and there can be no doubt that study of these would result in the dis-
covery of very numerous yet unknown species, and greatly extend
our knowledge.
The evidences of motions of elevation and subsidence in Northern
Tasmania are of much interest when we consider the question of the
time of separation of Tasmania from the Australian continent. The
biological evidence is clear as to there having been a land connection
between south Victoria and Tasmania in tertiary times, but there is
no certainty as to in what part of the tertiary period the separation
took place. If it can be shown that there was a general subsidence
during the palaeogene period and subsequent elevation during the
neogene extending onwards very much to the present day, it is not
so easy to reconstruct the old land bridge or isthmus as it would
be if there had only been a motion of subsidence to deal with.
Had this been all we might readily regard the Straits Islands as the
tops of a submerged connecting range. This is probably true, in


the main, but if, as is likely, there was land connection between the
mainland and Tasmania, even at the close of the palaeogene period,
and the country has been rising since, we should expect to find the
bridge larger now than then, instead of being broken through by
miles of sea. Possibly towards the end of the period of subsidence
gaps were formed in the bridge, which have been kept open and
widened by the action of the waves during and in spite of the
subsequent elevation. Soundings among the islands would help us
very much in coming to a correct conclusion as to this hypothesis.
A question of less general interest, but still worthy of attention
from inhabitants of Launceston, arises out of the proved fact of the
bottom of the old tertiary basin being at least 200 feet below present
sea level at a distance of, say, 50 miles from the coast: is there any
corresponding deep tertiary valley leading out from this to the sea ?
The Tamar valley cannot be the old outlet, for it is rock-bound at
the Whirlpool Reach and far too shallow. On the western side of
the Tamar the high hills prevent any outlet, and consequently we
have to look for it on the eastern side. The tertiary deposits at
Dilston, Muddy Creek, and Windermere, show that the old valley
followed the course of the present one so far. lam not familiar
enough with the country to speak with any certainty as to its course
after passing Windermere ; but bearing in mind the great stretches
of low-lying land covered with alluvial gravels in the vicinity of
Mount Direction seen along the Lefroy road, it seems possible that
the old valley bore away to the eastward and perhaps even reached
the present valley of the Piper river. The large amount of basaltic
country in this renders it probable that there is an older buried
valley, the basalt flows being so frequently found over older alluvial
deposits, as is naturally the case on account of their having been
poured out in a liquid condition, in which they followed the low
ground.
Another somewhat similar problem presents itself quite close at
hand. Going along the railway from Launceston to Evandale, we
pass over tertiary deposits all the way : was this then the course of
the old tertiary valley of the Esk, or did it perhaps come in through
Glendhu ? The top of the Sandhill at Normanstone is of tertiary
formation, and this extends out behind Mount Pleasant, and I do
not know how much farther. It would be interesting to trace this
line to an end, and ascertain if it runs out among solid rocky hills
or connects right through to the main mass of tertiary deposits.
The Windmill Hill, it should be observed, is not a mere ridge of
tertiary drifts left standing between the eroded valleys of Glendhu
and the North Esk, for from Newstead to the Punchbowl and Young
Town we may trace a ridge of greenstone coming up nearly to the


top of the dividing spur, thus showing that the two valleys correspond
with two that have been separated from the beginning by a hill of
hard rock. I have been told that the greenstone backbone of the
ridge crops out on the Elphin road somewhere, but have never been
able to find the spot.
The differences in soil, vegetation, and insect life resulting from
the variety in the underlying strata, make these questions of interest,
not only to the geologist, but also to the botanist and entomologist.
The barren white gravel and sand country on the top of the Sandhill
is readily distinguishable from the fertile —or at any rate grass-
bearing—greenstone land, by its peculiar vegetation, especially by
the heaths and bracken which flourish on it, and the two formations
may be very quickly traced by their characteristic plants alone.
If our tastes lie in the direction of mineralogy and petrography
rather than stratigraphical and biological geology, there is still a
very wide field open for investigation. Extremely little has yet been
done in the study of the volcanic rocks of this colony. Even the
widespread diabase greenstone has hardly been at all studied
petrologically. and of itself affords work to keep a man busy for
years. Though very uniform in its general appearance, there are
still many varieties distinguishable, the rock ranging from coarse-
grained to aphanitic and being now massive and with few joints, and
again shingly and split by numerous planes into prismoidal columns.
It has been always a moot question whether these immense greenstone
masses were poured out on the surface of the land as lava flows, or
were submarine, or were of the nature of large dykes. Study with
the microscope would probably throw light on many points now in
darkness. Some of the decomposition products of the greenstone,
too, are worthy of notice and show considerable variety in the
constitution of the parent rock. The clays vary very considerably.
Zeolites sometimes occur, arragonite also, and very often there is
much limonite and magnetite. In one clay I have found cimolite, a
tough light mineral rather like meerschaum but allied to kaolin.
Common and uninteresting as the “ blue road metal ” is, it might
therefore become an absorbing and fascinating study to anyone who
would choose to make it a speciality.
The tertiary basalts also require petrological study, and have
sufficient variety to give years of employment to anyone ambitious
of writing a monograph upon them. With the exception of a general
examination of a few typical specimens by Professor Ulrich, the field
is practically untouched.
The attention of petrologists might also be directed to the rolled
pebbles in the neogene gravel terraces. Some of the varieties of
granite, for example, found among these are very interesting.


What I have mentioned do net by any means exhaust the
opportunities of geological research within an easy distance of
Launceston. We have only to go out to Perth to be within a short
walk of the patch of the upper coal measures in which the Norwich
Colliery is located, and where we may see the cos measures, the
greenstones, and the tertiary beds in close juxtaposition. The
interesting problem of the relation of the greenstone to the coal
measures is well exemplified here. Again, near Native Point the
marine mudstones of carboniferous age will well reward the collector
of fossils. If we wish to get among still older rocks the favourite
excursion to the Denison Gorge gives us a good opportunity of
studying them between Golconda and Lilydale. Between Lilydale
and Karoola there are again coal measures, and though I have
only paid one very short visit to the locality I have seen enough to
be sure that it would well repay extended examination. Numerous
other places might be added to the list, but I think I have said
enough to show that the country round Launceston is very far from
devoid of interest to lovers of the geological branch of natural
science, while possibly some of our botanical members who have not
devoted much attention to the fossil flora may be led to enter into a
field which promises to reveal the progenitors of the existing types,
and so invest their study with new interest. Excursions of the
association during the summer months would in my opinion be
productive of much benefit, affording a stimulus to members to
collect specimens and compare notes, while adding the pleasures of
congenial companionship to those of studying nature for her own
sake.
Launceston Emminer Office,
