

s*£/•
Cfr v
1(L1
/~T I
GO
40




The Effects of Settlement and Pastoral
Occupation in Australia upon the
Indigenous Vegetation.
Samuel Dixon.
[Read October 4, 1892.]
I propose to consider in this paper the general effect of settle-
ment in Australia upon the native vegetation, not only by the
direct results of cultivation in destroying it, but also those pro-
duced indirectly by the introduction of foreign plants; and
finally the effect of grazing upon the indigenous fodder-plants.
To generalise on these subjects over such an extensive area as
Australia may seem to be presumptuous in view of its widely-
different soils and climatic conditions, and though I am fully
aware that no one can be in a position to compare all the typical
districts, yet I venture to record the results of my own observa-
tions in both the settled and unsettled districts of extra-tropical
Australia, having paid particular attention as a practical grazier
during the last thirty years to the native growths.
Settlement in Australia has been largely influenced by legisla-
ture. The pioneer has usually been the cattle-breeder who, fol-
lowing the surface-waters, has penetrated under enormous diffi-
culties to the distant interior ; next came the wool-grower, who
stocked the back country (i.e ., back from the rivers), sunk wells
and tanks, and enclosed large tracts with wire-fences; in the
districts with regular rainfalls the cultivators of the soil succeeded,
who now usually combines grazing on a small scale.
In New South Wales and Victoria the principle of “ Free
Selection before Survey ” allowed the farmer to select the richest
and most fertile spots, which became centres for the dissemination
of foreign plants commonly of little value, in fact, weeds, the
rankness of growth of which frequently overcame the indigenous
vegetation, especially the herbaceous. On the exhaustion of the
soil by cultivation and grazing with cattle in succession, the
übiquitous red gums (Eucalyptus rostrata) re-occupied the land,
and was accompanied in a small degree by various species of
Acacias (e.g., A. decurrens, A. pycnantha , <tc.), and under their pro-
tecting shade there reappeared the perennial grasses, such as species
of Stipa , Danthonia , Panicum, &c. In other districts the worn-
out farms, being grazed with sheep, are now grassy pasture lands
and with the exception of the native grasses comparatively few
species of the indigenous flora remain.


In North-Western Victoria and South Australia, where very
extensive tracts have been cultivated in the “ mallee scrubs,” it
might have been expected that the original mallee ( Eucalyptus
oleosa and E. gracilis) would have reappeared, but so far this is
not the case, as wherever that mode of cultivation known as
“ mullenizing” has been sufficiently prolonged to ensure the death
of the primitive growth by uprooting the underground stem—
popularly known as the “mallee root”—regeneration is almost
wholly unknown, and if thoroughly stocked with sheep, it never
does take place, owing to the infrequent germination of the seeds
and the extreme slowness of growth of the seedlings.
Sufficient time has not yet elapsed since settlement took place
to formulate the conditions under which the original vegetation
can be expected to reclothe the surface exhausted by farming,
but in the cooler and moister regions we find, as stated above,
that Eucalyptus rostrata does rapidly resume its sway over the
cultivated tracts where it originally prevailed; but in the warmer
and drier zones we are without any extensive examples of the
native vegetation reasserting its dominion. These former areas
present the best examples of the overwhelming growth of intro-
duced weeds—the stinkwort (Inula graveolens) in summer, and
the Cape weed (Cryptostemma calendulacea) and sundry thistles,
Ac., in spring. In the tropical region, however, where abandoned
sugar-cane fields are now covered with Lantana, we may expect
the original dense growth to reappear by degrees.
Necessarily as cultivation proceeds a larger area becomes
despoiled of all the native plants, the forests are cleared, and
repeated ploughings complete the extermination. Here, intro-
duced plants find a suitable habitat for propagation, and each
isolated farm becomes a centre of dissemination of the various
weeds, which injuriously affect the grain-crops in the northern
hemisphere ; a list of these troublesome plants would be very
extensive, and it is steadily increasing, and although some few
annuals of indigenous growth reproduce in these cultivated
spots, yet none of them do so to any injurious extent, none can
therefore be considered “ weeds.”
It would be very difficult to indicate any Australian plant
which has increased in numbers while the land is regularly culti-
vated for a lengthened period; intermittent cultivation does,
however, tend to the individual-increase of certain vigorous
species, thus on limestone soils we find Zygophyllum, Erodium,
Erysimum , &c., similarly where cultivation has been attempted in,
or at the boundary of, the saltbush-country, which has prepared the
soil for the retention of the seeds, and if stock be kept off for
two or three years, the more tenacious plants, such as Kochia ,
A triplex, &c., reappear.


In the moister regions, cultivation generally annihilates every-
thing indigenous, and after its cessation annuals very slowly
reappear. Each locality has of course its peculiar species, but
the common Purslane (Portulaca oleracea), so widely spread
through Asia and Australia, and known by the aborigines as
“ Parakylia,” is almost universal in rich soils.
Many garden plants are spreading rapidly, and becoming
weeds, so that it is now quite common to find some of them in
secluded localities to which they have spread from a selector’s
garden ; the showy Vinca rosea, so abundant on the Queensland
coast is a good example, but I do not know of any introduced
forest-tree which has reproduced itself largely, except under
cultivation, although Finns halepensis might have been expected
to do so.
It is safe to conclude that on the whole cultivation means
absolute destruction to the Australian flora, whether of the
tropical, subtropical, or temperate climates; and because the
richest soils are naturally those most suitable for cultivation,
the species endemic in those localities are most likely to become
extinct. The Illawarra district of New South Wales affords a
striking example of the alteration which may take place within
a very limited period ; in few spots can the botanist now discover
the specimens of the peculiar and lovely flora for which it was
celebrated, when first settled, and this almost the loveliest dis-
trict of Australia has now become commonplace and compara-
tively uninteresting to the botanist.
The farmer, the squatter, the miner, and the swagman all
cause extensive conflagrations, and by their oft-recurrence the
arborescent growths are reduced to mere scrubs, and the more
tender plants, such as orchids and other flowering plants, are
utterly destroyed with a recklessness which can only be fittingly
described as insane. In aboriginal times fires were much less
frequent, and in the forest regions were rarely intentional.
Although in the plains-country, between the coastal forest-belts
and the desiccated interior, fires were systematically employed
in hunting wallabies and kangaroos, yet as these plains were
usually grassy little harm resulted ; in fact, these fires at long
intervals assisted the germination of the hard seeds of the
Acacias, &c., and were so far beneficial. Now, however, fre-
quent fires and the subsequent grazing by sheep, which eat off
the tender shoots of almost every shrub and the hearts out of
the Xanthorreas, and nibble the shoots of other arenaceous-
loving plants, prevent anything but the hardiest surviving ;
from this cause alone many rare plants, most of which are of
sporadic occurrence, and would seem to be survivals of a still
more ancient flora, are being surely destroyed, although under


other circumstances none of our floras are so likely to remain in
their primitive condition as those where the siliceous nature of
the soil naturally produces plants which from their innutritions
quality fail to support any sort of stock, nor do introduced plants
as a rule find this class of soil congenial. It is to be expected
therefore that the Banksias, Ilakeas, Melaleucas, and other
plants eminently characteristic of Australia and peculiar to its
sandy poor soils will remain comparatively unaffected in those
parts of the continent which are not adapted to carry stock,
are unsuited for cultivation, and remain comparatively free from
bush fires.
On these grounds the unique and singularly lovely flora of
Western Australia, especially of its “ sand plains,'’ and the moist
district immediately contiguous to King George Sound, may
possibly remain for centuries to come. Indeed to this peculiar
flora occasional fires are to some extent beneficial, as not only
are the long buried seeds germinated, but many species produce
in the succeeding year their most luxuriant blooms. Of this, the
locally named Cabbage-or Flame-tree, Nuytsia Jioribunda, is the
most conspicuous instance, whose strikingly-brilliant orange-
coloured bunches of bloom are only to be seen in their full gor-
geousness at this time.
The Xanthorreas too invariably flower after a thorough scorch-
ing and thereby afford to bushmen sound data for reckoning the
period which elapsed since the last tire.
Indeed, of West Australia it may be said that no other part
of the continent is so likely to have some of its indigenous flora
preserved intact ; because not only from the poorness of the soil
and the fire-resisting quality of so many of its endemic plants, but
also from the presence of several poisonous and deleterious plants
which will not allow of overstocking, which is proving so pre-
judicial to the Eastern-Australian floras. With the exceptions
referred to of West Australia and other analogous soils with cor-
responding floras, the constant recurrence of extensive conflagra-
tions are in the highest degree prejudicial, and particularly to the
forest-regions, and must ultimately destroy the noble growths of
those giant forms which add so much to the value and beauty of
our forests. In ordinary seasons sufficient moisture exists to pie-
vent extensive destruction, but at intervals extremely dry seasons
are experienced, and the undergrowths become highly inflam-
mable; and then miles of country are completely devastated; and
although only old or partially-decayed trees are consumed, the
scorching of the upper branches of vigorous trees causes these to
die away, and, ultimately rotting, the whole trunk becomes in-
volved in decay, so that the next fire makes a prey of every tree
so affected; the inevitable result being that wherever fires con-


stantly recur, trees valuable for timber cannot be produced, and
finally the forest-regions are reduced to mere expanses of unsightly
and useless scrubby growths.
The unwise system of permitting “ free selection” within the
boundaries of natural forests has produced such enormous
destruction of timber that it becomes impossible to even roughly
estimate the amount of loss from this cause alone, not only from
the fires which the selectors have originated wilfully or carelessly,
but from the injury done by stripping the very best timber-trees
for the sake of the sheet of bark so obtained, and, in spite of the
regulations intended to stop this senseless havoc, the practice is
still common to ruin a tree worth possibly four or five pounds
steiling for the sake of a sheet of bark worth possibly sixpence or
a shilling.
The outlook for, succeeding generations is indeed dismal should
the destruction of the forests continue as in the past; our water-
sheds will become bare, bald hills and mountains, from which
torrential floods will devastate the alluvial plains, and though the
grazing area will be much extended, it will be at the expense of
those forest-regions which so greatly affect and modify the
extremes of climate for which Australia is remarkable.
We can look to other countries to learn the extent of injury
which the destruction of the indigenous flora may entail. Of
this Spain affords a good example. Since the Roman period her
extensive forests of oak, chesnut, and pine have almost entirely
disappeared, and the extremes of climate being thus intensified,
that country has lost much of her fertility, and consequently is
less able to support a large population.
To counteract the disastrous result of the wholesale destruc-
tion of that portion of the Australian flora which now clothes
the forest-regions with the very best and most valuable hard
woods, an enlightened public sentiment needs to be cultivated,
and though a beginning has been made, much remains to be done ;
and it cannot be too much insisted on that the preservation of
the Eucalyptus in its numerous species is of the very greatest
and most vital importance to the best interests of Australia. It
is of truly national consequence, for not one single instance of an
exotic timber-producing tree can be quoted which so completely
fulfils the conditions demanded by the soil and climate of Aus-
tralia as the various Eucalypts now do, namely, great resistance
to extremes of heat and cold, rapid reproduction, and a wonder-
ful power of recovery from the effects of fire.
That the public sentiment in favour of the preservation of the
indigenous flora is awakening is evidenced by the readiness of
large and small land-owners to plant round their homesteads
various shelter-trees, which some of the Colonial Governments
encourage by the gratuitous distribution of young seedlings.


Ring-barking, especially in New South Wales, where it has
been often carried out very injudiciously, has produced deplorable
results. Owing to the policy of “ selection before survey,” it is
not infrequent to see magnificent timber ring-barked so as to
comply with the “ improvement ” clause, so that it is possible to
see trees worth £5 to £lO a-piece which have thus been ring-
barked—destroyed under the pretence to “ improve ” the “ selec-
tion.” Even on pastoral properties the practice of ring-barking
has not been an unmixed benefit, for although the crop of grass
is often increased, the more tender herbaceous and shrubby
plants die out, partly from the loss of shade, which permits the
full effect of frost to be felt, and further injury results from the
earlier drying-up of the grasses thus exposed to the full heat of
the sun.
In the South-Eastern portion of South Australia a similar
result to that caused by ring barking has been produced by de-
pasturing stock. Large tracts of dead gum-trees are there to be
seen, and it appears to me as if the trampling down of the soil
by cattle has so altered the conditions of growth, that the trees,
losing their vigour, have fallen a prey to insect-pests, which,
yearly increasing, have finally killed them.
The only instance in which settlement in Australia has had
the effect of increasing the indigenous vegetation on a large scale
occurs in the Cobar district, where the Cypress-pine (Callitris
verrucosa) has increased to such an extent that much less stock
can now be carried there. This has arisen apparently from the
grass being eaten off by stock, so that bush-fires no longer travel
over large areas, and the young plants, which are easily destroyed
by fire, growing closely together and seeding abundantly, take
complete possession of the soil, to the exclusion of other plants.
This is the only instance within my knowledge of any native
plant largely extending its area after settlement has taken place.
On the borders and beyond the limits of successful cultivation
alien plants do not flourish every season, but some individuals
produce seed which, on the occurrence of a wetter season than
usual, grow and reproduce with great rapidity wherever the sur-
face of the ground has been broken. This may be observed
along our Great Northern railway within the dry interior, where
the common weeds of the farming districts have sprung-up and
propagated, though it is not yet apparent if these strangers will
maintain themselves in so arid a climate, or successfully compete
with the indigenous flora —most probably not !
In the regions where cultivation is profitable, the introduced
plants prove formidable rivals to the native ones in the struggle
for existence, and attain a luxuriance of growth quite unknown
in their original habitats ; nor do they confine themselves to cul-


tivated areas alone, since carried about in the hair of horses, in
the wool of sheep, or exuded in the dung of cattle, many of them
are now to be found in exclusive possession of the best soils.
With some, as the thistles, the invasion is transitory, as after
exhaustion of the soils of the special constituent required by
them, the growth becomes weaker, and the plants finally dis-
appear.
The extension of railways throughout Australia has also
greatly assisted in a wide and rapid distribution of imported
plants, not only from the seeds present in the hay on which the
horses used in the construction of the various lines, but also in
the facilities offered for the transportation of fodder grown in
coastal regions, into the most distant pastoral districts, and as
the soil throughout the interior regions of Australia is commonly
of very excellent quality, climatic conditions seem the only bar
to their indefinite increase.
It is, however, in the regions of cultivated lands and their
immediate vicinity that the most striking examples of the effects
of these introductions are to be noted. Two or three plants in
particular may be instanced which under certain conditions take
complete possession of the soil, to the utter exclusion of any
other j the most universally spread and the best known is the
corkscrew- or clover-burr {Medicago denticulata). Coming up
annually with the first fall of rain, it spreads in dense, close
masses with prostrate stems, and entirely chokes the growth of
any other annual; when the heat of summer is felt it quickly
dries up and its abundant seed-vessels then freely cover the
ground. No introduced plant has produced greater loss to the
woolgrowers than this, for although a fairly good fodder, the
seed-pods, coiled up into two or three whorls, readily become
affixed by their serrated edges to the wool on the bellies and
legs of sheep. To the flock-master the presence of these trouble-
some seeds means a loss of one penny per lb. on all those parts of
the fleece which contain them, so that the total yearly loss
amounts to hundreds of thousands of pounds. The best soils
with the best climate producing it in the greatest abundance; so
that our native clovers, especially the delightfully-scented and
invaluable Trigonella suavissima, have no chance to survive
against so vigorous an enemy.
Another plant, the Bathurst Burr, Xanthium spinosum, a
South American introduction, is also yearly the cause of great
loss to the wool-grower, and though it is only a summer-growing
plant, and ripening its troublesome burrs in autumn, yet is useless
as a stock food, and to some extent also interferes in certain
situations with the reproduction of native plants.
A third example is the South African Cryptostemvna calen-


dulacea , or Cape-weed, which, like the clover-burr, fairly smothers-
out of existence native annuals and perennial grasses; its
abundantly produced seeds germinate with the first fall of rain,
and the plant grows very rapidly and vigourously. An indi-
vidual of this procumbent species will often cover a space of
30 inches in diameter, but commonly such exuberant growth is
on ground where the surface has been broken by cultivation or
otherwise.
Other examples of introduced plants, which take complete
possession of the soil, often covering acres, especially where it is
very rich, are afforded by various species of the thistle-tribe, and
several other European composites have also become very
common. Amongst the numerous shrubby plants which threaten
to displace the Australian indigenes, none are more noteworthy
than the sweet-briar (Rosa rubiginosa), and the dog-rose
( R. canina), which on neglected properties take complete posses-
sion, and are difficult to eradicate. In the coldest and moistest
parts of Australia the Bramble (Rubus fruticosus) is already
forming tangled brakes as impenetrable as the masses of furze or
whin (Ulex europceus) to be found under the same conditions.
A full list of introduced plants would include a large proportion
of small or of no economic value.
The destructive effects of settlement upon the indigenous flora
of Australia is nowhere more apparent than in the purely pas-
toral districts where the rainfall is decidedly scanty. Through-
out the immense region known as Riverina, and to the extreme
western and northern runs of South Australia, the injury to the
original vegetation by overstocking has assumed so great a mag-
nitude as to entail a national loss. Continuous overstocking has
destroyed the bushy vegetation and the perennial grasses. The
numerous species of Atriplex, Kochia, Rhagodia, and other Salso-
laceous plants, Mesembrianthemum , and a long list of other small
shrubs, together with the smaller tree-growths of various Acacias,
Myoporum , &c., which formerly provided abundant sustenance
for sheep and cattle during ordinary droughts, have now disap-
peared, and only inedible shrubs, mostly of the Proteaceus order,
remain. The effects of this destruction had begun to be felt at
each period of drought more and more, and now the rabbit-plague
comes to finish the devastation begun by injudicious stocking, so
that throughout the territories above mentioned hundreds of square
miles are to be found which (except during favourable seasons
when the rainfall is sufficient for the growth of annual grasses
and herbs) have ceased to carry stock. Indeed, for miles back
from the river frontages, and in the neighbourhood of wells and
dams, an unproductive surface, trodden down until almost im-
pervious to water, now extends. Hence, from the diminished


yields of wool and the tremendous losses of stock, which each
drought now entails, extensive squatting properties fall into the
hands of financial institutions, who find that “ runs ” which
formerly produced thousands of pounds per annum now require
an income to be spent upon them, as it is only in very wet
seasons that a surplus over the expenditure may be expected.
On the Lower Murray River, in the mallee country, many such
■dire experience could be related, and it does not appear probable
that these extensive tracts can become again covered with their
original flora so rich and varied in drought-resisting plants, a
flora which is unequalled in the world for the abundance and
\ ariety of the very best fodder-plants. If it were possible to
•exclude herbivorous animals from these desolated areas we might
hope that in the course of years, the seeds now buried might
vegetate and gradually re-clothe the country ; but unfortunately,
though every few months of drought destroys millions of rabbits,
there always remain enough to re-stock the country, and so rapidly
do they reproduce that very few months are sufficient to cover
the country in incredible numbers. It may possibly happen that
in the course of years, as the shrubs from which they derive
moisture during the hot months become gradually extinct, they
may perchance become extinct also; but it is appalling to think
of what must first happen when we find such trees as Sandalwood
(Myoporurn platycarpum), Mulga (Acacia aneura), Myal
(A. cyclops., &c.), Leopard-wood (Flindersia maculata), Dog-wood
(Eremophila longifolia), and many others, all carefully ring-
barked by these destructive rodents.
Only the two extremes of country are safe from these pests,
namely, the very moist, where they become attacked by entozoa ;
and the very dry, say, inside the five-inch rainfall belt, where the
rainfall in some years is only two inches, or less.
It is no exaggeration to say that the devastations to the Aus-
tralian flora by this rabbit-plague are more than all the other
causes put together, and the pecuniary loss to Australia has
already amounted to many millions of pounds sterling.
In Western Australia the destructive effects of settlement are
not so conspicuous; two factors of much importance preventing
systematic overstocking exist, and the rabbit-plague has not yet
reached there. From the siliceous nature of much of South-
Western Australia, there are very large tracts, the prevailing
flora of which is so extremely innutritions that neither cattle nor
sheep can be profitably kept; and though after fires in the sum-
mer the winter rains produce an abundance of tender shoots,
stock can only be grazed for short periods. These “ sand-plains ”
are, of course, altogether unfit for the cultivation of any food-
producing plants, whilst in other districts the prevalence of plants


poisonous to all ruminants prevents any attempt at systematic
overstocking
Originally the gorge of the Lower Murray was well-covered
with herbaceous plants and grasses, which were confined to the
actual banks of the river and to the lagoons, some of which are
two to three miles long, and one to half a mile across. Here the
“ lignum ” (Muehlenheckin Cunninghami), attained its largest
o-rowth, 15 to 20 feet high, and so thickly matted together as to
be impenetrable ; but at the present time, many miles of this
valley have been denuded of lignum, reeds, bulrushes, and grasses,
and the prevailing aspect is an uninteresting expanse of dry mud
and sand, only diversified by a few Eucalypts. The destruction
of the swamp-vegetation throughout Riverina has considerably
lessened the amount of stock which formerly grazed upon it
during the long hot summers and during droughts.
No class of country suffers so extremely from excessive stocking
as the sand-hill country, and especially the sand-dunes which
fringe much of the coast-line of Southern Australia. As natural
growth is exterminated, the sand, no longer protected by the
herbs and shrubs shading its surface, and binding it together with
their very long and widely-spreading roots, is driven by the pre-
vailing winds over the surrounding country, to the destruction of
all lowly vegetation; even forest-trees are overwhelmed in the
advancing sand-waves. This phenomenon is not confined to the
coast-line, but instances, usually on a limited scale, may be found
in the interior.
The destructive effect by stock trampling down and consolidat-
ing the clay-surfaces around watering-places has already been
adverted to; but whilst the whole vegetation in purely pastoral
districts is affected more or less by this trampling, yet the effect
upon the growth of certain species of grasses is of a more particu-
lar kind. ' Those whose seeds are provided with long awns, such
as Andropogon, Aristida, Stipa, &c., are able to penetrate the soil
and await the rains to germinate them, while the more valuable
and nutritious ones —as, for instance, Panicum , Sorghum, Sporo-
holus, &c.—being without those special arrangements, are liable
to disappear, not alone from the difficulty of obtaining _ suitable
lodgment in the ground, but also from all stock preferring their
more succulent stems to the hard siliceous culms of their rivals.
From these causes, overstocking, rabbits, and introduced
plants, it appears probable that in the near future the features
peculiar to the Australian landscape from its endemic floras will
be greatly modified. As, for instance, the aspect of our Pacific-
slope has been in certain spots much altered by the spread of the
cactus, and our water-courses are choked up in various parts of
the colonies by the spread of the common water-cress ( Nasturtium
officinale).


The results of overstocking hitherto referred to have been
mainly due to sheep. Cattle, although very destructive to some
of the shrubby trees, such as Emu-bush or Bitter-bush (Hetero-
dendron oleacfolia ), Quondong {Sant alum persicarium), Mulga
{Acacia aneura), of all of which they are extremely fond, breaking
down the branches to reach the young growth, are otherwise not
nearly so destructive as sheep ; and where not grazed in excessive
numbers, the native grasses have greatly increased in quantity,
but the influence of big cattle in consolidating the surface soil
and making it more retentive affect the native vegetation rather
beneficially, and the long paths made in crossing the country
often develop into small watercourses, and the vegetation of the
lower-lying ground of the drier part is thereby improved.
It is not to be supposed that in pointing out the dire results of
overstocking, especially with sheep, that moderate and judicious
grazing has the same effect. Of course, the exigencies of bad
seasons, with little or no rain, may compel overstocking; but, if
not persisted in, the injury done is not permanent, and a few wet
years recuperate the pastures.
In newly-stocked country, where the rainfall is light and pre-
carious, the indigenous perennial grasses exist as tufts wide-apart;
hence, while the stock is few in numbers and not kept con-
tinuously in the same spot, these perennial grasses greatly in-
creased and covered the ground fairly well, but as the stock
multiplies the perennial grasses and the shrubs became fewer, or
died out, and their place is occupied by annual grasses and herbs.
By preference the stock eat the sweetest and best, and the result
of much overstocking for lengthy periods is that inferior grasses
prevail, as evidenced by the poverty and poor condition of the
animals, despite the abundance of feed. An intelligent system of
grazing will allow the best grasses to reproduce themselves, and
thus secure an increase of the yield of wool and lambs.
Many of the mnutritious grasses are importations, and one of
the worst is an Indian grass ( Hcemarthria , sp.), which has spread
very widely on the better soils, and is very abundant in the dis-
tricts near to _ Sydney, where originally the kangaroo grass
v Antkistenn ciliata) was common. Of native innutritions grasses
species of Andropogon and Aristidn furnish typical examples.
Generally the results of settlement appear on the whole ex-
tiemely injurious to that portion of our vegetation which com-
prises the best fodder-producing plants, and that the very exis-
tence of the indigenous forests is threatened by the constantly-
recurring conflagrations, and it may perhaps be permitted to
suggest remedies of a practical nature to mitigate these deplor-
u.) e effects. In all natural forest-country very extensive forest-
reserves ought to be set apart in such a manner as to be beyond


the possibility of resumption by the political heads of the Crown
Lands Department of each colony, whose fiscal necessities have
frequently caused the public estate to be alienated for the benefit
of private individuals. Each reserve would require one forester
at least, who should be permanently resident thereon. The
boundaries of each forest should .be as far as possible natural
ones. It is true most of the colonies have now a forest depart-
ment, but some of the reservations are unsuitable, and those
suitable are often too limited in extent; whilst the resumption of
the reservation is too easily obtained.
In respect to the preservation of our exceptionally rich and
abundant fodder-plants on areas where the rabbit plague is kept
within reasonable limits, graziers will find it entirely to their
own interests to encourage the most valuable growth by the
adoption of a system of alternate grazing of sheep and cattle on
the different divisions of their holdings. Seasons of heavy and
continuous rains invariably cause the long-buried seeds to spring
in wonderful abundance, and these only require sufficient time
to reach a development which will withstand a moderate amount
of grazing.
It cannot be too often repeated that the fat-producing quality
of our native vegetation, which covered originally all the in-
terior at present stocked, is quite unequalled in the world for its
abundance and hardiness to withstand an ordinary drought and
it is notorious that stock fed on it will travel hundreds of miles
to market without serious deterioration. Unless some such plan
is widely acted on it is safe to forecast the extinction of that
portion of our vegetation whose great value and importance is due
to its economic value as a food for stock, and capable of increas-
ing and multiplying under such conditions of heat or cold,
drought or flood, as no other vegetation can possibly do.
The longer this extinction progresses the greater and greater
will be the losses entailed by periods of drought, and it has been
already demonstrated on an extensive scale that this destruction
renders valueless very large tracts of country; and that in other
parts, where the rainfall is greater and more regular, the edible
shrubs and perennial grasses are liable to be supplanted by
annuals and worthless perennial grasses. Hence the preservation
of our indigenous flora, whilst looked upon as a fad by the
ignorant and unthinking, is really in its cumulative effects one of
great national importance—an importance difficult to exaggerate
as affecting our food-supplies and the greatest of our sources of
exported wealth.


r
*
■
*
s
V
.
,
!■ > :


