

Box 3
STATE-AID
RELIGION
CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO THE
RAPID INCREASE OF
INFIDELITY.
WILLIAM IACEEDIE, ESQ.
MELBOURNE;
JAMES CAPLE, 33 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1856.


PREFACE.
The clear and convincing arguments of the Dean of Mel-
bourne, the eloquent though inconclusive reasoning of the
Rev. Dr. Cairns, with the abilities of Mr. TBeckett, and the
ciideal acumen of a Scotch Catholic, have all been bestowed
upon the vexed Question of State Aid. It might be sup-
posed, therefore, that the subject was now exhausted, but it
is one of infinite importance, and cannot be too closely
examined. Some of its aspects which have occurred to
my own mind, and are not touched upon by previous
writers, I now lay before my readers.
W. M.
Melbourne,
12 th September, 1856.


STATE AID TO EELIGION.
The question has been lately put forward, “ Where do we
find State Aid authorized in the New Testament?’’ Where,
I would ask in reply, do we find Hospitals, or Benevolent
Asylums, or Seamen’s Homes, authorised in the New Testa-
ment ? Nowhere that lam aware of; but we find principles
laid down there which lead, as a natural consequence, to their
erection. Just so with State Aid. We do not find it recom-
mended to us in these identical words, but there are passages
in the New Testament which cannot fairly be construed°to
mean any thing else.
In 1 Cor. ix. 13, St. Paul tells the Corinthians: “Do ye
not know that they which minister about heavenly things, live
of the things of the temple, and they which wait at the altar,
are partakers with the altar;” ver. 14—“ even so hath the Lord
ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the
gospel.”
The priests and Levites here referred to, were excluded from
the inheritance and employments by which the other Israelites
maintained themselves, and were supported by tithes, first
fruits, oblations and sacrifices, as prescribed by Moses, and by
“free-will offerings,” which, as the name implies, depended
upon the inclination of the giver. The tithes, &c., were fixed
burdens or charges upon the people, they formed the largest
portion, apparently, of the priests’ sustenance, and they cor-
respond to what we term “ State Aid,” just as the “ free-
will offerings ” do to our voluntary contributions. He who
directed Moses, knew well that to leave his priests dependent
upon “ free-will offerings ” only would expose them to certain
destitution. “ These things were written for our edification.”
In all that Dr. Cairns says of the duty of the State to
recognize truth, and to support it where support is needed, I
most heartily concur. But how it is that, after enunciating
such truths as the following, he comes to the conclusion he
does, appears to me extraordinary :
“The duty of the magistrate to the Church still remains to
be considered, and it can never be admitted that he owes the
cause of religion no countenance or aid, because the body of
the faithful is charged with certain responsibilities . . . .
I ask, is the magistrate entitled to keep coldly aloof from the
necessities of myriads, and see them sink into an abyss of
shame, without an effort to avert the frightful danger, or to
shield them from ruin ? Is the State guiltless which con-
templates the abandonment to a life of sin, with all its probable


aggravations of any number of its own subjects, and sternly to
withhold the means it possesses for their moral and their
spiritual good ? So startling and monstrous is such an appli-
cation of the voluntary principle, that we could as soon consent
to a denial of Clod as the Righteous Governor of the world, as
face the cold-blooded cruelty and impious selfishness which it
clearly implies And whatever the Church may do
or may not do, the State that deliberately allows any portion v
of its people to lapse into a state of heathenism, is abdicating
the highest of its functions, and converting the ordinance of
Clod, designed for gooR into an apology for the most ruthless
neglect. .... We hold, decidedly, that if the State can
send a minister of Christ to a people who must otherwise be
left spiritually destitute, then it is bound, and imperatively
bound, to prevent this calamity It is the settled
conviction, not of a few speculative minds, hut of many of the
most thoughtful and sagacious of our godly men, that without
extraneous help, it will be impossible to make the means of
grace commensurate with the wants of the community, or even
to retain them in some important localities, where they are
now provided. The great majority of ministers of the gospel
are of this opinion.”
Yet in the face of all this he recommends that rather than
continue the present system as it stands, the State should
withdraw its aid entirely !
He tells us (at p. 16) that “ injustice would he impossible
under the regime of a truly Christian administration.” Our
blessed Lord has told us that the summary of the whole law,
as regards our neighbour, is, “ Do unto others as ye would be
done by,” and injustice is simply the transgression of this
golden law.
We know what our own feelings would be were we living in
a constitutional Roman Catholic state, and obliged to contribute
to the support of the dominant religion, if we saw that religion
supported by the taxes paid by ourselves, and no aid whatever
extended to our own church. We certainly would call that
injustice, and give it its right name. Yet those who, like Dr.
Cairns, would restrict State Aid here to the Truth, would, it
appears to me, fall into the very same error.
"Would you then, it may be said, support truth and error
alike, and consider everything bearing the name of religion
as equally deserving of the State’s countenance and aid?
Most certainly not. I agree with Dr. Cairns that the truth
alone should be recognized and supported by the State, and
that it is the duty of a State, just as it is of an individual, to
decide on what is truth.
In a Government like ours, where men of any creed, or of
no creed, are eligible to office and to seats in Parliament, it is
clearly impossible to have an unanimous decision upon this
subject, but a majority might be found, to redeem our character


as a Christian nation, and testify to the truth, as taught by
Christ and His apostles.
Such a majority might decide that all those Churches which
receive scriptures as the inspired word of God, and say, with
the 6th Article of the Church of England, “that whatsoever is not
lead therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any man that it should be believed as an article of faith, or
be thought requisite and necessary to salvationand all those
which acknowledge Jesus Christ to he their God and Saviour,
should he recognized by the State as being orthodox Christi-
anity as the State religion, in fact. This would include
Church of England, Church of Scotland, Free Church, Wesley-
ans, Tnaependents, Baptists, Moravians, and Quakers; and it
would exclude Roman Catholics, Unitarians, Jews, and
Mormons.
Thus would the State be fulfilling the first table of the Law,
its duty to God; but how for the second, its duty to its
neighbour ?
It is evident that, if only the orthodox bodies are paid, and
nothing is given to other denominations, the latter will have
good reason to accuse us of that very “ injustice ” which we
nave been already denouncing. They may say with perfect
truth, “ You are taking our money to support what we believe
to be error.”
What then is to he done ? The State is hound to support
the teachers of truth, and the only feasible way of doing so, in
this country, is out of the taxes—those taxes to which all
have contributed, whatever their religion. There is hut one
' course left that I can see, and that is the one our Govern-
ment has adopted. To prevent the charge of injustice,
they give to the teachers of error their respective shares
of sum taken out of the taxes. They return to
them, in fact, what had been taken from them. This need
not imply recognition of them as teachers of truth. The
money is given to them simply as an act of justice, and to
prevent the States’ “ good being evil spoken of.” The re-
sponsibility of applying this money rests with themselves ; the
State has nothing to do with it, so long as it does not involve
any breach of the peace, or of the laws of the country. They
may spend it on their priests, or on schools, or on hospitals ;
The State could not keep it back from them, without commit-
ting an act of injustice, and cannot, therefore, be held responsible
for the way m which they choose to sp- nd it. The case is
precisely similar to that of a farmer, who knows that weeds
will spring up with his wheat, and that all the ploughin o- and
harrowing, and manuring, will benefit them quite as° much as
the wheat. Does he, on that account, abandon his intention
oi sowing his seed, lest weeds should spring up with it, or
does he look upon himself as responsible for the weeds, inas-


much as they profit by the care he bestows upon the wheat ?
Certainly not.
Some assert that, as the Protestants are in a decided
majority, they might appropriate the assistance entirely to
themselves, and exclude all others. And they refer to the case
of the Quakers, who, we know, are opposed, on principle, to
standing armies and navies, and might insist, therefore, ac-
cording to the rule just laid down, that their proportion of
what goes to sustain these branches of the service, should be
restored to them. There is this difference, however, between
the two cases, that fleets and armies are for the general pro-
tection ; that they benefit the Quaker in the safety of his
person and security of his property, and therefore, it is quite
right he should pay for them—his own private feelings not-
withstanding. Besides, this is not an invasion of the rights
of conscience, as when a Protestant is called upon to support
Roman Catholic worship, or vice versa.
If the question is asked, should the Chinese participate also
in the distribution of the money ? I would reply, that we
have yet to learn that they have any “ rights of conscience ”
in this matter to invade, and if they have none, the argument
we have used for the admission of Roman Catholics and others,
when applied to these pagans, falls to the ground. Besides,
if their case were considered one of hardship, the simplest
mode of reparation would be to make some reduction in the
heavy poll-tax now imposed upon them.
Even supposing there was no selection made, and that truth
and error were placed exactly on the same footing, the State
withholding any expression of opinion as to which was truth or
which was error, I contend that this would be infinitely better
than endowing neither. For though the State thus supports
error, the good that it does in supporting truth also, infinitely
counterbalances the harm done by its support of the other.
The State upholds the truth, and holds it forth to the people,
and leaves it for them to judge between its claims and those of
error. Surely this would be better than ignoring both, and
allowing the people to sink into what, alas ! all experience tells
us it surely proves—the sleep of death.
Should, at any time hereafter, the Roman Catholics obtain a
majority in our councils, they will then have a perfect right to
assume the creed of Pius IY., as embodying the truth, and
declare this to be a Roman Catholic State; and we Protestants,
who will then be in a minority, will receive, it is to be hoped,
our share of the money, as we now cheerfully extend theirs to
them.
Hitherto we have been speaking of the duties of the State,
let us now examine the objections made by many good men
among us to receive the money. “ Touch not the unclean
thing,” they say, “it is unholy—ye are joined with idolaters
and infidels.”


Granting, for tie sake of argument, that the State is guilty
of thus countenancing truth and error alike, I deny that the
orthodox believers are justified in declining the money.*
The holy prophet, Ezra, lived in the court of a heathen
monarch, and received from him, as he tells us himself (see
chap i. 2,4, and chap. vi. 8), the most powerful assistance to
rebuild the Temple and revive the Jewish worship. Nehemiah,
too, received similar assistance from King Artaxerxes, and
evidently, as in Ezra’s case, it was accepted with gratitude.
Are -we to be “ wiser than what is written ?” Are we to set
up our “ free-will offering,” alone, or “ voluntary system,” as
perfection, in opposition to the combination of “ State aid”
and “ free-will offerings,” prescribed by Moses, and held up for
our imitation by St. Paul? and are we to have our scruples, in
cases where Ezra and Hehemiah would have had none?
The example afforded by these holy men is still more
striking, when we consider that the government under which
they lived was an absolute one—the king everything, the
people nothing. Had Darius thought proper, he might have
refused all aid to the heathen deities, and confined his favors
to the God of Israel. The money was at his own absolute
disposal. Under a constitutional government, again, like our
own, with the democratic element so strong, the case is totally
different. The State here is merely the trustee, as it were, for
the people. As Ezra, therefore, had no scruple in accepting aid
from one who, if he chose, could have confined his favors
to truth, much less would he object, were he here, to accept
assistance from those who have not t he power to discriminate,
and who, in their donations, must be swayed by majorities,
and not by their own individual inclinations.
What then is wanted, is not to sweep away the grant, as
Dr. Cairns proposes, but to increase it yearly, as our population
increases, and .put it on a different footing. Let the Jews
participate, and let them, the Unitarians, and the Eoman
Catholics, appoint Commissioners to receive the money from
Government, and superintend its distribution, instead of the
money being paid, as it is now, into the hands of the clergy.
And let our Parliament, as soon as it assembles, declare
that, whilst the rights of conscience shall in every case be
respected, and justice extended to all denominations, the State
recognizes those only as teachers of the truth, who receive the
Holy Scriptures as inspired of God, and our sole authority in
matters of faith, and who believe in the Divinity of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ,
Far from looking forward, as Mr. A’Beckett does, to the dis-
continuance of State Aid, as one of the advantages which the
* I had written these pages before I read the very able pamphlet of
the Dean of Melbourne, and I find that both in this reference to Ezra,
and in much of what I have said of the support of the priests under the
Mosaic economy, I have been anticipated by his observations.


future has in store for us, I feel persuaded that the need of it
will become every year more apparent.
Does America give us any reason to expect that it shall he
otherwise? Is it not the opinion of all thinking and dis-
passionate men there, that the withdrawal of State support has
inflicted, and is inflicting, a most serious blow upon the cause
of religion ?
Where the Voluntary system answers at all there, is in the
great cities.
The Episcopalians, though one of the smallest, are perhaps,
in proportion to their numbers, the richest religious body in
the Union ; and Pennsylvania is an old and flourishing State.
Yet the average income of the Episcopal clergy in that country
is only £5O per annum; a common laborer’s wages being a
dollar a day!
In England, the stronghold of Voluntaryism is in the cities
also. To read the speeches of those agitators who met the
other day at the “Eeligious Liberation” conference in Lon-
who would suppose that the state of matters is such
as the following letter discloses. The writer is an aged pastor
in Dorsetshire:—
“ laking the whole of this district of the country, we have
an area of only nine miles from east to west, by six from north
to south; and in this limited space, we have not less than
eight so-called Independent churches, most of them in a
starving condition—three which could not exist as such without
extensive aid from the Home Missions Society, and hardly one
of which, perhaps, is in a desirable condition. The town in
which I minister contains an ancient Congregational Society,
which had, for many years before I came to it, been in a low
and languishing condition. Subsequently, it revived •••••.
Now, in consequence of mortality, the failure of trade, numerous
bankruptcies, and emigration, there is a sad falling-off—the
chapel not half occupied, the school almost defunct, the
salary a mere pittance. Eural resources are
almost entirely cut off. For myself, were I twenty years
younger, I should not think of continuing in this sphere,
when I recollect that, as Mr. Ferguson says, there are large
towns, as well as whole counties in England, in which
Congregational dissent is inoperative, nnfelt, and almost ready
die '. ,-^ h ay i n g arrived at a rather advanced period of life,
the intrigues, and risks, and responsibilities of a
new situation, -and being, providentially, not dependent on
the support of my people, I have hitherto felt it a duty to
remain at my post, to prevent worse consequences. But when-
ever I may retire, or be removed, there will come a crisis. I
, * S ® e Nonconformist of Bth May. I have copied this interesting
ietter from one of the valuable communications furnished by D. D to
the Argus. J


might mention another church, in a village of some 400 inha-
bitants, kept alive mainly hy an ancient endowment.' • • • ”
Dr. Campbell, the Editor of the Christian Witness, in which
paper this letter appears, thus comments upon it, “ This very
interesting letter tells a sad tale, and there is reason to believe
that not a few very worthy men could tell a similar one. The
writer is a man of thoroughly independent character, a close
observer, and a credible witness.
“For these things a remedy is needed, and that remedy must
he found; else the mischiefs which proceed from the evil will go
on accumulating
Who has not heard of the Free Church movement in Scot-
land, in 1843 ? In church history there has been nothing like
it, and the power of voluntaryism never shone forth as it did
then. The men who headed the movement were, on principle
favorable to the union of Church and State ; but rather than
submit to what they believed to be the unlawful interference
of the secular power with things sacred, they left their churches
and manses, and threw themselves upon the “ free-will offer-
ings of their people. Sums of money lyere raised year after
year which astonished the world. But, alas for the voluntary
system ! The good men and women who poured their trea-
sures into the lap of the Free Church are, many of them
gathered to their fathers, and the fiery zeal that inaugurated
the movement exists no longer. Dr. Guthrie, of Edinburgh
one of the best and wisest men in their body, thus addressed
a large meeting, in Glasgow, last November
Look across the Atlantic to America, and you find that there
they aie complaining that all the energy, talent, and power of the
rising youth of that country are going to other professions and
mercantile business, instead of the church. Look across the
Irish Sea, and you will find the same thing in Ulster. Look
to your own city of Glasgow, in which, I am told, there is a
singularly small number of students coming out for the
ministry of the Free Church. This is to me a most melancholy
tact. But Ido not wonder at it; lam at liberty to devote
myself to poverty if I choose ; but I don’t know that I am at
liberty to devote my family to the poverty ministers must lay
their account with. I do not want wealth in the Church ; I
do not want the attractiveness of wealth set up ; but I want
the repulsiveness of poverty removed. People talk of ministers
being spiritual men, but I wish to know if they think that I
can keep up a body of six feet two and a half inches on air.
It is very easy to tal k of ministers being men of spirituality,
—I wish we were more so than we are,—but I would prav such
talkers to remember that we are men of like passions with
themselves, _ and like infirmities too. My doctrine is, Lord,
lead us not into temptation; and, I want every Christian parent
to be delivered from the temptation, to which I know some
have yielded, of turning away the aspirations of their children


from the ministry, and directing them to more lucrative
occupation. And I want our young men of talent to be
delivered from the temptation of seeing their brethren made
comfortable in other professions while they are ground down
with difficulties. And I don’t want our ministers to be doing
what I know some of them are doing, maintaining themselves
on their private means—on what does not belong to them, but
to their children. I tell you that I have heard it said in my
own ears, in my own house, by two most respectable ministers
of our Free Church, that the very last profession on earth to
which they would rear a son was that of a Free Church
minister. That is a sad and melancholy state of matters,
which will bo most injurious to our Free Church.
“ Some people think that all other professions may be respect-
able, but that it is quite reasonable that a minister should' be
a poor man. Some think that a minister is all the better for
being kept poor. There was a friend of mine who w r as assistant
to his father, a seceding minister, and got £BO a-year, while
the father got £IOO. After his father’s death, the question
was asked whether the minister should be kept at his old
allowance of £BO, or get the £IOO, like the father. Whereupon
an honest man stands up in the congregation, and said ‘ Mode-
rawtur, Aw’m clear for keeping the lad to the aughty, and my
reason is just this, that the Church never had ministers since
she was a Church like them she had when they went aboot in
sheep-skins, and lived in holes and caves of the earth.’
I meet that old, narrow-minded, worthy man, by the high
authority of Matthew Henry, and I am disposed to leave the
whole question in his hands. He said, and I believe the
experience of the world will prove it, that ‘ a scandalous
maintenance made a scandalous ministry.’ Poverty and piety
are not identical things. I have high ideas of the office of the
ministry. With Paul, I would so magnify my office that I
would like to see the finest genius and the noblest talent in
the country devoted to that noblest office. Of course I deside-
rate piety,—that is the first thing ; but I am not one of those
who think that God generally works by the weakest instrument,
though he may do so to show his power. I set the pulpit in
the highest position which any man can occupy on earth; and
I desire, piety being granted, to see the first genius and the
noblest talent of our country consecrated to the service of my
blessed Master. I do not speak for myself and existing
brethren. We will very soon be mouldering in the dust. But
I am exceedingly anxious for the fate of our Free Church, that
the vexations and annoyances of debt and, difficulty be taken
out of the way of the rising ministry; and God grant such
liberality to you and others that our youth may see no
obstruction in the poverty of the ministry in coming to lay
their noble talents at the feet of Jesus.”
Yet, in the face of all this, we are told that we may safely


cast off State support, and trust to Yoluntaryism, in Victoria
In this land of incessant changes, where selfishness is universal,
and the one engrossing, all-absorbing pursuit is money, we are
to see a system prosper that is failing in Scotland, and fast
losing favor in America!
I may here remark, before I quit this part of my subject,
that the position of the Church of England and the Church of
Scotland in this province is totally different from what it is in
the mother country. There, the position they occupy is
such that the tie which connects Church and State might be
severed to-morrow, and both Churches would continue to
enjoy their incomes almost exactly as they do at present.
With the exception of Church-rates, the whole emoluments
of both Churches arise from those endowments of our pious
forefathers, which the State has no more to do wi+h than it
has with any private gentleman’s income.
I contend, as I said before, that the grant made in support
of religion should be increased as our population increases, and
largely increased ; but if, instead of that, our rulers should be
so infatuated as to abolish it altogether, “ Angels will weep,
and devils will rejoice.”
All students of prophecy, all who are watching the current
of events, believe that a tremendous conflict is at hand between
the powers of light and darkness.
The last census of England showed the enormous numbers
that attend no place of worship; and it is well known that the
infernal doctrines of Secularism, or more properly, Atheism,
are fast making progress among otir working men.
I have now before me a hook, entitled “ Christianity and
Secularism : Eeport of a Public Discussion between the Eev.
Brewin Grant, 8.A., Editor of the Bible and the People, and
George Jacob Holyoake, Esq., Editor of the Pieasoner. Held
in the Eoyal British Institution, Cowper-street, London, on
Six successive Thursday evenings, commencing 20th January,
and ending 24th February, 1853 ; on the question : ‘ What
advantages would accrue to mankind generally, and the
working classes in particular, by the removal of Christianity,
and the substitution of Secularism in its place.”
What a state of things is this! That Atheism should
actually lift its unblushing front in the capital of the world,
and challenge discussion, and that a minister of Christ should
have to descend into the arena with men who turn the Scrip-
tures into ridicule, cast their most filthy blasphemy upon our
Blessed Eedeemer, and who deny even the very existence of
a God!
Still more startling is it to find one apparently filling the
sacred office of a Christian minister (!) acting as the Atheist’s
chairman and personal friend !
Whilst Mr. Samuel Morley appeared as the Christian
champion’s chairman, a Eeverend Ebenezer Syme came forward


in that capacity for Mr. Holyoake ; and it was in these words
he introduced him to the meeting: “ You see then, ladies and
gentlemen, what the subject of discussion is to be. It is very
clearly and plainly laid down. Clearly, we are going to have
a pitched battle. Both the speakers are able men, and both, I
believe, are equally sincere. . , , It is quite superfluous
for me to say anything to recommend Mr. Holyoake. I have
known him for two years, and have had every reason to esteem
him highly, both in public and in private. 8 . . . I never
stood beside any man in public with more pleasure than I stand
beside Mr. Holyoake to-night. If lam not mistaken, Mr.
Holyoake will take this opportunity of bringing before you
something like positive truth.” Who or what this Mr. Syme
is, who thus endorses the character and opinions of this noto-
rious blasphemer, does not appear, farther than that he is
sometimes styled the Reverend, sometimes simply, Mr. Syme.
But of Holyoake himself we know enough, from his own
writings and speeches, to satisfy us that, for cool, unmitigated
blasphemy he probably never had his equal. He speaks of
“ belief in a God as an atlas of error, bearing on its broad
shoulders a world of immoralities.” Of prayer he says, “We
have no faith whatever in prayer ; we do not in any way
believe in its efficacy ; and we say, if you tell us Providence
interferes in human affairs, ‘ you only discourage human exer-
tion, and you tell us that whiuh does not prove to be true in
the end.’ . , . Science is the Providence of life. . .
Do you ask what benefits flow from our doctrine ? Why,'for
man 7 years to come, the place of the Religious Tract Society
might be supplied by a Scientific Tract Society; and it would
be well wiih us were our chapels and churches also converted
into temples of science. . . . Prayers quite as holy might
ascend from the laboratory as ever ascended from the vestry.”
“Do you ask, ‘ What advantage there is in this doctrine ? ’
I answer, All the advantage of being undeceived. . . . But
it is said we are without God in the world. Remember, if it
be so that is not our fault. . . , The New Testament
was always a sad book to me. In my youth it filled me with
gh.omy apprehensions, its dark shadow was over the path
of my boyhood. . . . When I came to re-examine the
Isew Testament, I found it to contain a revelation of two
Christs: Christ the gentle, submitting, loving, suffering,
serving; Christ the austere, imperious, dark, frowning,
terrible, punishing. And I could not trust him who said,
‘ Suffer little children to come unto me,’ when I thought of
him who said, ‘ The believer shall be saved, but the unbeliever
shall be damned.’ . . . When I was imprisoned in Glou-
cester gaol an honest answer to a Christian preacher, two
Christian magistrates denounced me as a ‘fool.’ As I com-
plained of this to the Judge, Mr. Jones came one day to me
and read, from the writings of the Psalmist, these words, ‘ The


fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.’ ‘ You see,’ added
Mr. Jones, ‘that David calls you a fool.’ I answered, ‘I no
more like rudeness in the mouth of David, than I do in the
mouth of a magistrate.’ ”
As editor of the Reasoner, he admits such passages as these:
—“ We think the treasure in heaven worse than the treasure
upon earth. We think it an immorality to turn people’s
attention from earth to indefinable treasures above. Of course
it is very good measure for the priest, who is assumed to keep
the treasury of heaven.”
The atrocious insinuations against our Blessed Lord which
the pages of this Reasoner contain, are utterly unfit for
publication.
Compared to some that might have been given, these
extracts are unobjectionable. Everything that Christian men,
whether Roman Catholic or Protestant, hold in reverence, these
wretches openly question, and turn into contempt. Their
accursed tenets, carried out to their consequences, would turn
this earth into a hell; and when such frightful doctrines are
broached in England, we may be certain we shall have them
here also. Doubtless there are many in this colony now, who
hold them, who strive to communicate them to others, and
who are among those who speak of State Aid as “promoting
cant and uncharitable feelings.”
One of the deepest thinkers of the age, Isaac Taylor, thus
expresses himself and they are words which should be
weighed deeply by every man who reads them, and who has
the good of his country at heart:
“ The covert scepticism of the eighteenth century has become
open atheism in the nineteenth. The spread of unbelief, after
so signal a restoration of belief as we have seen in our day
may appear highly improbable. But, in truth, if the problem
be looked at attentively, we shall be compelled to grant that
the future increase of infidelity to any imaginable extent, is not
a whit more difficult to suppose, than its existence at all is
hard to account for, in an age like our own, when as matter of
argument it has been driven from all its positions, and when,
after the severest possible contest, Christianity had remained
in possession of the whole of its evidence, and has received the
benefit of having that evidence purged from dross, and freed
from suspicion On hypothetical grounds, it might well have
been supposed that the controversies of the last forty years, and
the uniform triumphs of Christianity in every contest, must
by this time have rendered infidelity the object of contempt
among all well-informed men; and if reason held sway in the
world, nothing else could have taken place. But it is other-
wise ; and if so, then the spread of that which, under such
circumstances, dares to show its head at all, must not be
deemed, after having been fifty times refuted, improbable ; for
if infidelity can live, it can grow.


. £ ‘ tr ue, indeed, that for some time past, unbelief has kept
its ground in this country by its sinuosity, by its affected
modesty, and by its evasion of open warfare. (This was
written the year before Holyoake’s discussion). Meanwhile it
industriously pursues speculations which, though in their
apparent tendency they have no bearing upon the question of
Christianity, are yet always brought to a conclusion which
silently implies its nullity. . . . This, at least, may most
confidently be prognosticated, that the atheism which is now
bland, submissive, respectful, crafty, will become a creature
altogether of another temper, should it ever reach the point of
supremacy, and enjoy a visible triumph. . . . Nor would
the spread of atheism be slow, if a decided advantage were once
obtained over religion, nor would its deportment then be
moderate.
/ -The whole history of man makes it certain that sensuality,
frivolity, and cupidity, the close companions always of atheism,
connect themselves with ferocity, as surely as superstition and
lanaticisrn do so. . . . Shall we imagine that none but
the priest is likely to become persecutor, and that the atheist
has no fang? That were a vain conceit. The priest has,
indeed, often raged upon this or that rival sect, and sought to
exterminate his foe ; but the atheist holds all mankind in
contempt, and would be ready with a jest to blot out life from
the world.”
Were this a land wherein the great bulk of the people were
under religious feeling; if the age we live in were one of strong
religious convictions, then one could excuse Christian men
trying to do away with State Aid. But when we know that
the reverse of all this is the case, that the great majority of us
are solely occupied with the concerns of the present life, and
heedless about the life eternal; when we think of the flood of
infidelity that is fast setting in upon the Christian world, and
remember that voluntaryism, wherever it has been tried, in
circumstances similar to our own, has proved a failure, the
efforts now being made to abolish State support, seem little
short of madness.
Quern Deus vult perdere prius dementat!
Printed by W. H. Williams, 94 Bourke Street East, Melbourne.




