

A YOUTH SERVICE FOR
AUSTRALIA
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.
by
KATHLEEN M. GORDON, B.A.
National Fitness Officer.
PAPER PRESENTED
at
EIGHTH SESSION OF THE COMMONWEALTH
NATIONAL FITNESS COUNCIL
held at
MELBOURNE, OCTOBER 25TH-26TH, 1945.
1714.
By Authority:
L.F.JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australin.)




A YOUTH SERVICE FOR
AUSTRALIA
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.
by
KATHLEEN M. GORDON, B.A.
National Fitness Officer.
PAPER PRESENTED
at
EIGHTH SESSION OF THE COMMONWEALTH
NATIONAL FITNESS COUNCIL
held at
MELBOURNE, OCTOBER 25th-26th, 1945.
1 714.
By Authority:
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)




"A YOUTH SERVICE FOR AUSTRALIA."
(By Miss K. M. Gordon, B.A., Commonwealth National
Fitness Officer.)
Tlie following paper is a brief examination of tlie role of the
National Fitness Movement in regard to youth service, with suggestions
for future development.
[Note. —When this paper was presented to the Commonwealth Council, an
outline was also given of the Service of Youth schemes in Britain, Scotland and
Wales. This was done so that the delegates would have a basis of comparison
when the meeting was considering the relation which a youth service might
have to an Australian education policy, if such were formulated on a national
basis in the future.
The material in the outline was compiled from already published pamphlets
on the subject of youth service, in order to place it before the meeting in a
convenient form. It was not considered necessary to include it in the final
report, though copies are available on application.
The pamphlets from which the material was extracted are—-
“The Youth Service after the War.” (H.M. Stationery Office.)
“The Youth Service Scheme in Scotland.” (H.M. Stationery Office.)
“ Post-war Youth Service in Wales.” (H.M. Stationery Office.) ]
Until tlie launching of the National Fitness Movement in 1939,
there had been no Government responsibility for youth service. This
does not imply that no youth work had been done in Australia. The
major youth organizations like the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides Associ-
ations, the Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s
Christian Association, and the youth departments of the churches
had been working in this field for many years and had given sterling
voluntary service to post-school youth. In addition to these large youth
organizations with interstate and overseas connexions, there were small
independent clubs and voluntary youth agencies in every State, while
in more recent years many of the trade unions and industrial and
political groups have developed junior organizations to serve youth
within their own particular organizations. Lastly, during the war
years, several pre-service youth organizations, the largest of which is the
Air Training Corps, have entered the youth field.
Some of the' major youth organizations have been in a financial
position to develop adequate facilities, and employ professionally
trained staff for their youth work, but the greater majority are
dependent entirely on voluntary effort, while all of them financially
are dependent on funds raised from their own members or from the
public.
The Educational Basis of Youth Work.
All worthwhile youth work must admit education as its fundamental
aim. Even though the work of youth organizations is occupied chiefly
with the leisure-time activities of post-school youth, these activities,
though primarily recreational in character, must be such that they
develop the potentialities of youth for worthy citizenship and richer
living.
1714.— 2


Education demands facilities, accommodation, equipment, libraries
and trained personnel. These things are just as necessary for leisure-
time education as they are for organized education inside the schools.
The work of the voluntary youth organizations, excellent as it
lias been over all these years, has been continually hampered by—
(1) Lack of funds.
(2) Lack of accommodation.
(3) Lack of equipment.
(4) Lack of trained leaders due to the lack of funds to pay for
full-time service.
Added to this, there has been widespread ignorance in the population,
and a lack of appreciation of the true significance of leisure-time
education. The old idea that “schooling” is finished at fourteen
persists, and there are still many who consider as an unnecessary luxury
any further education for the working boy or girl unless such education
is purely vocational.
Thus there has not been developed, in the average Australian youth
on leaving school, a desire or an obligation to join a youth organization
for the purpose of further education. Only if his interest has been
particularly stimulated will he think of joining; and unless the
activities are personally satisfying, he will soon drop out. Australian
figures giving the 14-18-year-old membership of voluntary youth
organizations are unfortunately not yet available, but it is very unlikely
that membership would reach more than 30 per cent, of the total
adolescent population.
In Victoria, the only State in which any detailed survey has been
made, the approximate senior membership (over fifteen years) in
youth organizations affiliated with the National Fitness Council is
36,883. The Victorian adolescent population (between 14-18 years)
in 1940 was 131,230. Thus, even in Victoria, where voluntary youth
organizations are generally strong and well organized, an estimate of
30 per cent, membership is a generous one.
It would appear that if leisure-time education is accepted as
important to future citizenship, the provision of facilities for only
20-30 per cent, of the adolescent population is quite inadequate.
The problem which, therefore, presents itself is how to provide
some form of leisure-time education for youth, or some form of youth
service, which will attract the majority of post-school adolescent youth
to continued membership of a youth organization*
Types of Youth Service Organization.
Three solutions of the problem might be considered—
I. A compulsory State-organized youth movement to which all
youth must belong.
11. A youth service, carried on, by voluntary agencies independent
of government control or statutory authority.


111. A youth service as a special branch of education sponsored
by education authorities, but carried on with the co-
operation of the voluntary youth organizations.
I. A Compulsory State-organized Youth Movement. —It is almost
certain that public opinion would rule against a compulsory State-
organized youth movement, on the score of it being a potential source
of danger and a threat to individual freedom. This has been amply
demonstrated already in many countries.
On the other hand, there are many who think that some form of
compulsory training, particularly for boys, in the interests of future
defence, should be maintained. This might mean a revival of the
old junior cadet system. The pre-Servioe organizations have played
an important role in youth training during the war years, and it is
felt that they would still have a contribution to make in peace-time,
providing their programmes were designed to include a wide range
of activities and were not confined solely to the military drill of the
old junior cadet corps.
The introduction of any compulsory State-controlled system would
undoubtedly affect the work and the strength of the voluntary youth
organizations. In Germany, it led to the banning of other youth
organizations altogether. This would be completely unacceptable in this
country, even though its very thoroughness in bringing in every boy
and girl for training might be an argument in its favour.
•IT. A Youth Service Administered by the Voluntary Youth
Organizations. —This virtually was the situation in the pre-war years,
and has much to recommend it, in that it allows freedom of choice
as to membership and to types of organizations.
However, experience has proved that the voluntary youth organiza-
tions cannot of themselves provide for the total adolescent post-school
population of the country, and a very large majority of boys and
girls never join any organization if left to act for themselves.
ISTor is it likely that Governments would make grants sufficiently
large to do the job adequately unless there were a degree of statutory
control of such expenditure.
TIT. A Youth Service as a Special Branch of Education Sponsored
by Education Authorities and carried on in Co-operation with the
Voluntary Youth Organizations. —This would appear to be the most
satisfactory solution providing a middle course between the tw T o extremes
of regimentation and compulsion on the one hand, and on the other
hand, of a freedom which would allow of no effective check.
This is the solution which has been arrived at in Britain and is
proving highly satisfactory. Its advantages are obvious—
(l) As part of the education system, the importance of education
for leisure is recognized, while the machinery of education
administration provides a check and a follow'-on from the
period of organized education.


(2) The experience of youth work possessed by the voluntary
youth organizations is available to education authority
for the use of all.
(3) Finance for the necessary extension of facilities is more
readily available through statutory authority.
(I) The pooling of experience, of resources and of trained
personnel in a co-ordinated plan means economy of effort.
(5) A measure of personal freedom and self-determination can
still be allowed to the individual boy and girl, while
the many youth organizations can still work freely in
the field.
A Survey of Developments in Australia Since 1939.
At the time of the inauguration of the National Fitness Movement
in 1939, no thought was'entertained of developing a youth service in
the widest sense of the term as part of this movement.
Certain directions were given with regard to the promotion of
physical fitness for post-school youth, and tentative suggestions were
made in some quarters as to the desirability of establishing an Aus-
tralian youth movement of the regimented type.
Fortunately, the latter suggestion was not followed up, though the
general principle of developing common national ideals among youth
was accepted, and the aims of National Fitness widened to include
mental and moral, as well as physical Fitness.
Instead, there gradually developed through the State National
Fitness Councils increasing contact with the voluntary youth organiza-
tions. The Councils were in a position to act as co-ordinating bodies,
bringing together representatives of all the major youth organizations
in each State.
This co-ordination was accomplished by the setting up of Committees
or associations as sub-committees or co-operating agencies of the State
National Fitness Councils.
In Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania .the Committees,
from the beginning, consisted of representatives of the major youth
organizations in those States. In Western Australia, Queensland and
South Australia representation was at first on a narrower basis,
but all three States now have fully representative Committees.
None of the Australian Youth Committees have the breadth of
representation of the British Youth Committees which include
representatives from education authority, health, industry, local govern-
ment, juvenile employment, religious and philanthropic bodies, as
well as the youth organizations in the area.


Functions and Aims of Associated Youth Committees.
The functions and aims of these committees may be defined by
quoting from the constitution of the Victorian Associated Youth
Committee, which has set a pattern for the majority of the other
States—
“ 1. To correlate the work of Organizations that are now or may be later
working for the welfare of youth by—
(а) providing opportunities for discussions of policies and programmes;
(б) securing co-operation between voluntary organizations and govern-
mental agencies in the development of youth welfare work.
2. To assist and supplement the efforts of such organizations where desirable
and possible in such matters as —
( а ) enlisting public interest in, and recognition of the needs of youth;
(б) recruiting and training leaders;
(o') securing adequate buildings, equipment and grounds for such
activities;
(d) advising about courses of training and standards for voluntary
leaders;
(e) increasing facilities for medical and dental treatment;
(/) organizing projects of community and material service.
3. To co-operate with appropriate organizations in promoting the physical,
mental, spiritual and social welfare of youth by such means as the committee
may decide upon.”
The committees or associations sponsored by National Fitness
Councils to co-ordinate youth work in the Australian States are as
follows: —
Victoria—Associated Youth Committee, set up in 1941,
New South Wales—National Youth Association set up in 1943.
South Australia —
(a) South Australian Association of Boys Clubs;
(h) Girls Clubs Committees; both set up in 1940.
Queensland—Associated Youth Committee, originally Youth
Welfare Committee set up in 1941.
„ Western Australia—Associated Youth Committee, originally
Youth Welfare Committee set up in 1941.
Tasmania—Associated Youth Committee, set up in 1944.
All committees, except those in South Australia,* consist of repre-
sentatives of the central bodies of the major youth organizations.
Victoria which has the largest number of affiliated organizations, has
now introduced associate membership for certain other types of youth
organizations.
Rules Governing Membership of Associated
Committees.
To quote again from the Victorian constitution, membership is
generally restricted to —
“1. Youth organizations, the majority of whose members are under the
age of twenty-five years, and are engaged in promoting the general welfare
of youth.
“2. Youth organizations engaged in any particular aspect of youth welfare,
e.g., those who are mainly political, cultural or sporting in their activities,,
providing the committee is satisfied that adequate measures are being taken
to secure the all-round development of their members.”.
* An Associated Youth Committee has now been set up in South Australia


State.
Number of Youth Organizations Affiliated to Associated
Youth Committee or their Equivalent in each State.
Victoria ..
37—30 affiliated, 7 associate member organizations
New South Wales
32
Western Australia
25
Queensland ..
20
*South Australia (South Aus-'|
8 affiliated youth organizations
tralian Association of Boys’ }■
52 individual clubs
Clubs only)
19 country centre clubs
Tasmania
21
To qualify for affiliate membership of the Victorian Committee,
an organization must have at least 500 members as shown in its most
recent annual report. This figure would probably be too high in the
smaller States. This entitles the organization to two representatives
on the Associated Youth Committee of the State Council. One of the
representatives must be an executive member of the affiliating organiza-
tion. This ensures direct contact with the central authority of each
youth organization. It is also suggested that, where possible, one of
the representatives be under twenty years of age.
Affiliation to Associated Youth Committees.
An examination of the lists of affiliated organizations in each State
shows a uniformity of affiliation as far as the major youth organiza-
tions are concerned. In practically all States, youth organizations
like the Boy Scouts Association, Girl Guides Association, Young Men’s
Christian Association, Young Women’s Christian Association, and
the youth organizations of the Churches, are represented.
The following list shows the total number of affiliations in each
State:—
Affiliation in each State to Associated Youth
Committee of State National Fitness Councils.
Victoria.
Affiliate members —-
Amalgamated Engineering Union (Youth Section).
Australian Air League.
Baptist Youth Department.
Boy Scouts Association.
Central Council for Railway Youth.
Churches of Christ Young People’s Department.
Church of England Girl’s Friendly Society.
Church of England Boys Society.
Congregational Youth Movement.
Eureka Youth League.
Girl Guides Association.
Legacy Club.


Melbourne Boys Clubs Association.
Melbourne City Newsboys Society.
Melbourne Jewish Youth Council.
Methodist Girls Fellowship.
Methodist Young Men’s Movement.
National Catholic Girls Movement.
Playgrounds Association of Victoria.
Presbyterian Girls Fellowship.
Presbyterian Young Men’s Fellowship.
Salvation Army Young People’s Legion.
Try Boys Society.
University of Melbourne Students Representative Council.
Victorian Association of Boys Clubs.
Victorian Society for Crippled Children.
Young Christian Workers;
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Young Women’s Christian Association.
Youth Hostel Association.
Associate members —
Architectural Students Society of the Royal Victorian Institute
of Architects.
The Boys Brigade.
Children’s Courts.
Good Companions Christian Social order Group.
Rotary Club Welfare of Youth Committee.
Unitarian Young People’s Society.
Victorian Basketball Association.
New South Wales.
(National Youth Association.)
Air Training Corps.
Amalgamated Engineering Union (Junior Section).
Australian Air League.
Australian Women’s Flying Club.
Boys Brigade.
Boy Scouts Association.
Catholic Youth Movement.
Church of England Boys Society.
Church of England Fellowship.
Congregational Youth Council.
Comrades of St. George.
Eureka Youth League.
Girls Friendly Society.
Girl Guides Association.
Legacy Clubs.
Methodist Girls Comrades.
Methodist Order of Knights.


Methodist Crusaders.
Navy League.
Presbyterian Fellowship Union.
Order of the Covenant.
St. John Ambulance.
Students Representative Council.
Sydney Technical College Union.
Salvation Army.
The Grail.
University Settlement.
Women’s Australian National Service.
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Young Women’s Christian Association.
Queensland.
Boy Scouts Association.
Breakfast Creek Boys Club.
Church of Christ.
Congregational Church.
Eureka Youth League.
Girls Friendly Society.
Girl Guides Association.
Ithaca Community Centre.
Methodist Young People’s Department.
Presbyterian Church.
Salvation Army Young People’s Department.
Toowoomba Recreational Club.
Young Christian Workers.
Young Women’s Christian Association.
South Australia.*
(South Australian Association of Boys’ Clubs.)
Affiliated Organizations —
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Boy Scouts Association.
Legacy Club.
Our Boys Institute.
Apex Club.
Boys Brigade.
Adelaide College of Music.
Toe. H.
Affiliated Clubs —
Baptist Church—five clubs.
Methodist Church—fourteen clubs.
Church of Christ—four clubs.
Presbyterian—one club.
Lutheran—two clubs.
* Since tl . u ' s P a P? r l vas presented, an Associated Youth Committee has been set up in Smith Australia
The affiliated organizations are listed in Addendum A at the end of the paper. Australia.


Church of England—four clubs.
Congregational—one club.
Young Men’s Christian Association, Walkerville.
Young Men’s Christian Association, Glenelg.
All Boys Club, Woodville Park.
Salisbury Boys Club.
British Tube Mills.
Enfield Youth Club.
Boys Guild.
Grange Boys Club.
Glenelg Four Square Club.
Edwardstown Community Centre.
Unley Boys Club.
Blackwood Boys Club.
Pathfinders Club.
Seacliff Youth Club.
Pt. Noarlunga Boys Club.
Coo-ee Club.
College Park Club.
Norwood Youth Club.
Ashton Club.
Athelstone Club.
Lobethal Club.
Country Centres —
Gladstone. Whyalla.
Glossop. Nuriootpa.
Mt. Gambier. Cowell.
Ber ri. Pt. Lincoln.
N aracoorte. Barmera.
Murray Bridge. Orroroo.
Keith. . Pt. Pirie, Young Men’s Christ-
Y aikerie. ian Association.
Denmark. Peterborough, Young Men’s
Loxton. Christian Association.
Mt. Barker.
Tasmania.
Baptist Union Young People’s Department.
Bellerive National Fitness Committee.
Boy Scouts Association.
Catholic Youth Movement.
Church of England Men’s Society.
Church of Christ.
Congregational Union.
Council of Parents Association.
Crippled Children’s Association.
Eureka Youth League.
Girl Guides Association.


Hobart Youth Club Movement.
Junior Red Cross Society.
Legacy Club.
Launceston Youth Movement.
United Nations Association.
Burnie Community Youth Centre.
Devonport Boys Club.
Salvation Army.
St. James’ Youth Club.
Tasmanian Women Graduates Association.
Tasmanian University Union.
United Methodist Youth Movement.
Women’s Air Training Corps.
Workers Educational Association Youth Group.
Young* Men’s Christian Association.
Western Australia.
Air Training Corps.
Baptist Young People’s Department.
Boy Scouts Association.
’Catholic Girls Movement.
Churches of Christ Young People’s Department.
•Cottesloe Boys Club.
Federation of Police Boys Clubs.
Eureka Youth League.
■Girls Friendly Society.
Girl Guides Association.
Girls Recreational Club.
Independent Order of Rechabites (Juvenile Section).
Legacy Club.
Maccabean Youth Club.
Methodist Young People’s Department,
Presbyterian Girls Fellowship.
Presbyterian Young Men’s Fellowship.
Salvation Army.
. Seventh Day Adventists.
Western Australian Naturalists Club.
Women’s Air Training Corps.
Women’s Australian National Services.
Young Australia League.
Young Men’s Christian Association.
Young Women’s Christian Association.
Victoria is the only State to date in which any comprehensive
survey of youth work has been made. Early in 1945 a questionnaire
was issued by the Associated Youth Committee to its affiliated and
associate member organizations, and the results are given in the table
below. (Table by courtesy of the Victorian National Fitness Council.)


Name of Organization.
Number of Branches.
Estimated Membership.
Metro-
politan.
Country.
Total.
Junior.
Inter-
mediate.
Senior.
Total.
Church Clubs.
Baptist Youth Department (Christian Endeavour, Young People’s
Clubs, Young Men’s Union, Senior Girls’ Missionary Union)
Churches of Christ Young Prople’s Department (Girls’ Good
Companions, Girls’ Fellowship, Boys’ Explorers, Bible Classes,
Christian Endeavour)
Church of England Youth Department —
(i) Boys’ Society ..
(ii) Girls’ Friendly Society ..
Congregational Youth Movement .. .. .. ’ ’
Jewish Youth Council (ten affiliated organizations)
Methodist Youth Department (Girls’ Fellowship, Girls’ Comradeship,
Young Men’s Movement, Order of Knights)
Presbyterian Youth Department (Girls’ Fellowship, Young Men’s
Fellowship
Roman Catholic Youth Groups (National Catholic Girls’ Movement,
Young Christian Workers)
Salvation Army Young People’s Legion
26
58
(i) 80
(ii) 125
33
(
9
162
276
93
116
56
71
(i) 51
(ii) 85
15
Incomplete)
120
261
28
51
82
129
(i) 131
(ii) 210
48
9
282
537
121
167
1,500
3,000
c
250
u
90
(-
500
0
u
368
1,500
1,000
Approximate
(i) 1,420
(Incon
350
Approximate
110
Approximate
1,566
Approximate
Approximate
1,499
2,900
, 2,050
5)
(i) 1,350
plete)
500
300
')
2,500
0
6,980
4,600
)
1,389
5,900
6,050
(i) 2,770
(ii) 4,380
1,100
500
4,570
6,980
4,600
3,260
BRIEF STATEMENT COVERING SCOPE OF YOUTH WORK IN VICTORIA, SETTING OUT A SUMMARY OF THE GROUPS
AND THEIR ESTIMATED MEMBERSHIP.


Name of Organization.
Number of Branches.
Estimated Membership.
Metro-
politan.
Country.
Total.
Junior.
Inter-
mediate.
Senior.
Total.
Open Clubs.
Amalgamated Engineering Union Youth Committee
Australian Air League
Boy Scouts’ Association
Boys’ Brigade .. .. .. • • • •
Eureka Youth League
Girl Guide Association
Melbourne City Newsboys Society .. .. ■ •.
*Plavgrounds Association of Victoria
Try Boys’ Society
University Students’ Representative Council ..
Victorian Association of Boyis’ Clubs (Eitzroy, Exhibition,
Opportunity Clubs, Footscray and Yarraville)
*Victorian Society for Crippled Children
Young Men’s Christian Association .. ..
*Young Women’s Christian Association .. ..
Youth Hostels Association .. .. .. ..
Totals —
Church Clubs
Open Clubs
Grand Total
1
16
206
6
13
174
(Plus Lo
1
7
1
1
11
1
2
1
1
4
148
3
186
cal Associat
1
3
2
20
354
6
16
451
ons, 91)
1
7
2
1
11
1
5
1
All youths
7,500
24
1,897
50
Registered
on
100
400
600
in metal tra<
850
9,000
96
4,768
300
attendance
iy
30
549
814
les eligible
150
500
1,400
1,260
74
20
3,300
650
686
414
1,000
(approx.)
17,000
(approx.)
120
1,400
7,925
424
2,000
150
3,300
1,609
2,017
2,100
2,000
414
978
441
and
91
738
346
1,716
878
5,708
10,571
• 7,445
16,407
22,569
8,444
40,110
(approx.)
41,459
(approx.)
1,419
and
91
1,084
2,594
*16,279
*23,852
*31,013
81,569
(approx.)
Brief Statement Covering Score of Youth Work in Victoria, Setting Out a Summary of the Groups and tiieir Estimated
Membership — continued.
©
t
S
§
.2
'B
s
E. c
c
©
©
M
5
©
pC
P
©
£
'sc
§
§
.2
!E
s
.2*
t-
-2
S
©
s
©
©
c
J 6
C
©
©
P,
s
o
c
h-t
*


Name of Organization.
Total
Number of
Branches.
Total
Membership.
Central Council for Railway Youth
Junior Legacy Club .. .. .. .. , ..
Melbourne Boys’ Clubs Association .. •
Victorian Basketball Association
Good Companions Christian Social Order Group
Architectural Students’ Society of the Royal Victorian
Institute of Architects
Children’s Courts
Totals—-
Church Clubs
Open Clubs
Open Clubs estimated figures as above
1
7
3
36
1
No figur
Not in
80
3,000
500
200
100
es given
eluded
48
3,880
1,717
878
48
50,891
41,459
3,880
2,643
96,230
Some member organizations did not return questionnaires. The
following figures are based on information previously supplied:—
Note. —lt should be observed that these figures cover junior as well as senior
members of youth organizations. The total number of senior members as given
is 36,883, which is approximately 27 per cent, of the total adolescent population
between the ages of 14 and 18 years (1940 figures).
This percentage would probably be borne out in all States under a
similar survey. Moreover, it should be realized that of this group, a
majority are probably still at school receiving some measure of educa-
tion for leisure.
It is evident, therefore, that however good the work of the voluntary
youth organizations and National Fitness Councils has been over the
past years, there is still a great deal to be done if the needs of adolescent
youth are to be fully satisfied. One is tempted to ask whether we are
not progressing too slowly, considering the urgency of the task.
The Need for a Plan for Youth.
The question might also be asked as to whether the voluntary youth
organizations in co-operation with the National Fitness Councils can
of themselves accomplish this immense task of supplying recreation and
leisure-time education for all Australian youth. Is it possible to bring
the bulk of youth into membership of the existing youth organizations
with the existing machinery?
Without considering any suggestion of regimentation or compulsion,
it would seem that some strengthening of the existing machinery is
necessary. This could be brought about by—
(1) Closer contact with eduction authority to secure—
(a) co-ordination between education programmes in
. the schools and programmes for leisure-time
education outside;
(b) the creation of interest in worthwhile leisure-time
activities and the activities generally of youth
organizations before boys and girls leave school,
so that they will continue membership;


(c) co-operation in the use of school buildings where
desirable;
(d) co-operation with school staffs, particularly in
country centres.
(2) Increased contact with local governments in regard to—
(a) development of recreation facilities, playing fields,
swimming pools, &c.;
( b ) use of suitable buildings as youth centres;
(c) local financing assistance in the development of
youth centres and other facilities.
(3) Increased contact with industrial and social welfare.
agencies, governmental as well as private.—Approximately
two-thirds of the adolescent population between the ages
of fourteen and eighteen years have left school. Practi-
cally all of them are at work of some kind, the greater
majority absorbed into industry end commerce in the
large cities. It is in this group that the biggest lag occurs,
and where the need is- greatest. Therefore any
co-ordinated plan for youth should be developed in
co-operation with industrial and social welfare agencies
operating in this field.
General Aims.
The aims of the various youth agencies, whether governmental,
statutory or private, should he —
(1) To direct their recreational youth work in such a way that
it will be an educational force in securing the physical,
mental and social welfare of youth;
(2) To secure adequate facilities for youth activities —buildings,
equipment and playing fields;
(3) To attract and train suitable leaders for youth work.
Government Responsibility for Youth Work.
The present extent of government responsibility in Australia for the
development of youth work can be shown in the following diagram: —
Commonwealth National .Fitness Council (statutory authority
administered by the Commonwealth Minister for Health),
State National Fitness Councils (voluntary Councils administered
by State Ministers for Education, except in Victoria—Minister
for Health).
Associated Youth Committees. Local National Fitness Committees
(with Local Government represen-
Affiliated Youth Organizations Nation). ,
and Youth Clubs.
Youth Clubs. Youth Centres. Youth Centres.


In spite of the fact that work for post-school adolescent youth should
be primarily the concern of education, at no point is government
education machinery directly responsible for its promotion, even in
co-operation with the voluntary youth organizations, as it is in the
British Service of Youth Plan.
It is very desirable that cooperation, with the voluntary youth
organizations should he preserved.. At the same time there are decided
advantages to be gained by close collaboration with education authority
at all stages.
It is possible that this collaboration will develop more strongly even
under the present voluntary organization controlled by State Councils.
In two States, Yew South Wales and Western Australia, thd
Director of Physical Education in the Education Department is also the
executive officer for the National Fitness Council, while in the other
States, there are representatives of education authority as members
of the State Councils and their executive committees.
A complete plan for youth as an integrated part of a total education
plan, cannot be initiated except by either Commonwealth or State
education authority, even though the voluntary National Fitness
Councils and their Associated Youth Committees have shown the way.
The leisure-time education of adolescent youth must be part of
government education policy, using the machinery of the State National
Fitness Councils and the voluntary youth organizations in collaboration
with existing State education administration.
The Future of the Pre-Service Youth Organizations.
The pre-Serviee training organizations which have developed
extensively during the war years, have attracted many boys and girls to
their ranks. The chief of these organizations are —
(1) Air Training Corps.
(2) Women’s Air Training Corps.
(3) Australian Air League.
(4) Women’s Australian National Service (W.A.N.S.).
(5) Navy League.
All of these organizations have served as recruiting grounds for the
different services; especially in the case of the Air Training Corps,
which has had official recognition and financial assistance from the
Royal Australian Air Force.
Iffie Air Training Corps as a preparatory training organization for
air erews has been re-organized, and it is now planned to provide
preparatory training in some branches of civil flying.
Pre-Service training did not develop as extensively in Australia as
it did in Britain during the war years. Nevertheless, it is possible that
the other pre-iService organizations may continue to recruit members


who are attached to a uniformed youth organization, particularly if
military service in some form as a defence measure is maintained in the
post-war period.
Youth Centres.
An interesting development in the evolution of youth service, is that
of the youth centre, as distinct from the traditional youth club.
The youth club usually indicates a smaller and more intimate group
of boys or girls or both, with individual membership and a programme
of activities in which the majority of members take part.
A youth centre is usually a much larger organization in which many
groups may function, each as a separate unit. Because of this, a youth
centre can satisfy the needs of a more varied youth population in a
community, whereas a club may only satisfy one group.
A club, providing it is not too large, can be run by voluntary
leaders, but once it assumes the size of a youth centre, with many varied
activities and groups, trained full-time supervision is absolutely
necessary.
Local National Fitness Committees and Youth Centres.
A youth centre may be successfully run by one particular youth
organization. Examples of this type may be cited in the centres run by
the Young Men’s Christian Association and the Young Women’s
Christian Association not only in the capital cities, but in larger country
towns.
In many country centres where local National Eitness committees
operate in co-operation with local government authority, the develop-
ment of a youth centre has often been the main objective of the local
committee.
In developing such a centre, it should be the aim of the local
Yational Eitness committee to establish a centre which will provide
facilities for all youth in a community, whether they already belong to
existing youth organizations or not.
The facilities of a centre should be such that they provide for—
(a) Individual members.
(b) Groups organized within the centre’s activities, e.g., debating
clubs, games’ clubs, &c.
(c) Individual youth organizations in the community who can-
not provide adequate facilities for themselves, e.g., Scout
troops needing a properly equipped gymnasium or
swimming pool, church clubs wanting accommodation to
show instructional films, youth groups wanting the use
of a good library.
To show what can be done by a central co-ordinating agency such as
a local National Eitness committee to stimulate and extend the work of
the existing youth organizations in a small community, it is interesting


to quote a letter received by tlie Victorian National Fitness Council
from the honorary secretary of the Warracknabeal (Victoria) National
Fitness Committee —
‘■'When National Fitness activities started here just over a year ago, there
were in existence two Church organizations for young people, with a gross
enrolment of about 30 members. It is very pleasing to be able to report that
those two organizations are still in existence, are affiliated with the National
Fitness General Committee, and have a greatly increased attendance, both
gross and nett. Further, there are now in active existence here no less than a
total of eleven Church organizations for young people, all affiliated with this
committee, with a nett weekly attendance of at least 200. Ihe Anglican,
Presbyterian, Methodist and Church of- Christ denominations are represented
in this expansion of activities for youth. I am in frequent touch with the
clergymen concerned, and I find that their attitude is one of satisfaction that
the clubs are active, that the members are receiving beneficial training. of
personal physical and communal bias, and that other Church activities are being-
assisted.
The avowed policy of National Fitness Councils as co-ordinating agencies
cannot be too strongly stressed, particularly in regard to established youth
organizations.
This applies particularly in country centres, where generally no one youth
organization is strong enough or has enough resources to develop a full range of
activities and provide the necessary facilities.
If local committees whose functions have already been directed by the 1942
Schedule towards the promotion of national fitness for the 14-18 years old group,
can act as real co-ordinating agencies for all youth in the community while
allowing individual groups to preserve their identity, they will be fulfilling
their highest purpose in the service of youth ”.
Conclusion.
Throughout this paper emphasis has been laid upon the provision
of recreational and leisure-time education for the post-school 14-18 year-
old group, as being the primary function of the National Fitness
Movement in the youth field.
Increasing collaboration with established education authorities and
the co-operation and support of the many youth organizations, with
their varied programmes of activities, are a guarantee against any
regimentation of youth.
A youth service on the British pattern is not strictly speaking a
youth movement. It is an educational service whose task should be
completed when a boy or girl reaches the age of IS or 20. By- that
time, attitudes towards living, and the development of individual
potentialities should have been determined.
In planning a youth service it is very necessary that this purpose be
kept very clearly in sight. At the present time, there are youth
movements growing up in many countries abroad, which have had their
origin in the resistance groups during the war. Their interests reach
beyond the ordinary educational activities of the schools into the
political and international fields. Properly directed, they have an
important part to play in the- international relationships of youth.
But since their membership is generally drawn from youth beyond
the age of 18, they are less concerned with the basic educational
aspects of youth work as part of the educational system.


Our immediate Australian problem is to provide a leisure-time
education service for the great mass of post-school 14-18 year olds.
Whether we develop a youth movement beyond this point is a matter
for the future. But whatever happens, we must preserve for the
individual boy and girl a freedom of choice and action. The important
thing to remember is that the wisdom or otherwise of that choice will
he determined by the quality of the education which youth has received
during the 14-18 year old period, the period when a Service of Youth
can make its most effective contribution.
ADDENDUM. (See page 10 footnote.)
List of Youth Organizations Affiliated with the Associated
Youth Committee of South Australia.
Boy Scouts Association.
Catholic Young Men’s Association.
Churches of Christ Youth Department.
Congregational Youth Council.
Girl Guide Association.
Junior Catholic Women’s League.
Methodist Young People’s Department.
Salvation Army.
South Australian Association of Boys’ Clubs.
South Australian Christian Endeavour Union.
Y.M.C.A.
Y.W.C.A.
By Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.




