

(Jfomoxiam
1866 - mi
‘‘ Fo rtis et Fidel is. ’ ’




IN MEMORIAM
Commemorating the Fifty-Fifth Anniversary
(On 7th May, 1921)
of the decease of the late
EDWARD CHARLES CLOSE, ESQ.,
FOUNDER OF
THE CHURCH OF St. JAMES,
MORPETH, N. S. WALES.
Edward Charles Close was a man whom the Bishop
and the Church could ill have spared—a kindly, conscientious,
high principled Christian gentleman, ever forward in good and
useful works.
Boodle’s “ Life of Tyrrell.”
In “ Morpeth Parish Notes” for March and April, 1921,
allusion is made to an interesting proposal of the Lord Bishop
of Newcastle at the first meeting of pewholders (in April, 1849)
for the election of churchwardens, viz : “ That the first entry
in the books of the parish be a resolution of this meeting con-
veying to E. C. Close, Esq., the grateful thanks of the inhabi-
tants of Morpeth for his generosity and piety, in erecting at
his sole expense the Church of St. James in this parish.”


SERMON
Preached by
VEN’BLK ARCHDEACON THOS. R. REGG,
(Archdeacon of Northumberland, N.S. W.)
On 7th May, 1916,
Being the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Founder’s Death.
Repfoddced By Kind Permission
PROVERBS X., v. 7.
“ THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED ”
“He lias come into a legacy. Lucky fellow!” we are
inclined to say. “How much is it, or what is it worth?”
And yet it may be worth nothing, for there are legacies and
legacies. There are legacies which may mean to those who
come in for them all the difference between want and
sufficiency, between grinding poverty and circumstances of
comfort which men rejoice to inherit, or there are legacies
which the legatees would give much if they had not fallen
to their lot—a legacy of debt contracted by a parent which
honour tells the son should be paid off; a legacy of disease
inherited by the child from the parent; a legacy of a craving
after things ievil. “I dare not touch wine or spirits,” said
a minister of religion to me once. ‘‘ My family history! ”
The craving was there, and he dare not do anything to
gratify it; and so he wisely abstained.
What is the effect of the questions put to us by an insur-
ance society but to enable them to protect the interests of
the society against the adverse influences that some such
legacies may exercise!
But the text speaks of a legacy that all can bequeath,
all can inherit with advantage, that enriches all who
inherit it—the legacy of a blessed memory.
“The names and memories of great men are the dowry
of a nation.”


And so, writing as an Oriental, amongst whom justice
is most difficult to obtain, the writer of the Book of Proverbs
says, “The memory of the just is blessed.” It is quite in
keeping with this that the writer of Psalm cxii. 6 says, “The
just shall be had in everlasting remembrance.”
I doubt not that one factor that has moved our Indian
fellow-subjects to come to our help with men and money
in a most generous fashion is the knowledge that the British
Raj—the British rule—stands for that which, as Orientals,
they find most difficult to get among themselves, viz.,
justice; and thus, writing as an Oriental and with intense
appreciation of this most rare virtue among themselves, the
sacred writer says, “The memory of the just is blessed.”
‘ ‘ Thine equal justice, mercy, grace.
Hath made a distant alien race
A part of Thee.”
It is the privilege of the church-people of Morpeth to
have had living in its midst as fellow church-people those
who have left to them the legacy of a blessed memory.
There have been our bishops—-our first pioneer bishop,
Bishop Tyrrell, called from a country parish at Home to
form and guide and administer a diocese extending from
Rockhampton in the North to the Hawkesbury in the South.
The very size of yonder stables is an indication of what it
meant in travel. There was the scholarly and humble man
of God, Bishop Pearson. Then the lovable, fatherly, self-
denying Bishop Stanton, whom to know and to be intimate
with was an education
All these have left to us a legacy of blessed memory
of which God grant we may prove worthy. “The memory
of the just is blessed.”
And to-day there is another of whom 1 would speak;
one whose name is inscribed on yonder beautiful window—
the founder of the original of this church, and who died, as
the date attached reminds us. just 50 years ago to-day
(May 7th). Edward Charles Close was born in India in 1790.
He was educated with a view to the ministry of the Church;
but. like the present time, it was a time when men’s pa-
triotism was being stirred, and when some of the best of
England’s sons were rallying + o the colours. And so he
joined the army under the great Duke of Wellington, and
served in the Peninsular War, taking part in no less than
seven engagments. It was in one of these that he made the


vow which resulted in the erection of the Church which
was the original of that in which we now worship, and of
which the tower remains. (Much of the original church was,
unhappily, destroyed by fire. “Q.”)
For the benefit of those who do not know the story, the in-
cident which gave rise to the vow was as follows: —The soldier
carrying the colours was struck down. Four men at once
rushed forward to save them from falling into the hands of
the enemy, one of the four being Captain Close. No sooner
had they secured them than a shell fell where they were.
They at once flung themselves flat on the ground, the shell
hurst and killed three out of the four. The one who sur-
vived was Captain Close, and his heart was so filled with
gratitude for his life being spared that he vowed that he
would, at the first opportunity, build a church to God’s
honour and glory.
He came to the Colony in 1817, and four years afterwards,
at the time of his marriage, had a grant of land, which he
selected in this neighbourhood.
What are now lovely flats were then dense bush, covered
with scrub and ancient trees, whose arched branches almost
concealed the river, and whose leafy boughs were so imper-
vious to light that to walk beneath them, even in broad day-
light, was like walking in the dimness of twilight. This dense
forest and bush land he set to work to clear, hampered by
all the drawbacks attendant on the lawless condition of the
then ignorant and criminal population.
The results we now see in fertile meads and peaceful
habitations. For 45 years he thus laboured, frequently
sharing in the manual toil that it involved. For years he ac-
ted as police magistrate, receiving no emolument as such, and
that, too, at a time when it was dangerous to oppose ruffian-
ism, and scarcely safe for anyone with a pretence to honesty
or gentlemanly conduct to move without weapons or far from
succour.
He was a member of the first Legislative Council, and
also the first President of the Maitland Hospital-
We do well, surely, in view of to-dav’s anniversarv, to
think of our benefactor in connection whh the words of the
text: “The memory of the just is blessed.”


But Captain Close was what he Avas, in the various cap-
acities, I have mentioned, because he was a Christian. He
was just that type of godly layman which it is the glory of
our Church to produce. And, therefore, we are not sur-
prised to know that, in the absence of a clergyman, he would
conduct Divine Service, carry on a Sunday School, Gnd
\isit the sick.
And here is one capacity in Avhich we may imitate him,
We cannot all be soldiers, or magistrates, or landowners, but
aa'c can all be Christians. To the same Saviour we can go
for forgiveness for the past, and help for the future, as he
Avent. The same Word of God as he had, the same Sacra-
ments as he had, avc have, the same heavenly promises that
cheered and inspired him, are ours too.
Those Avho concern themselves AA'ith the welfare of men’s
souls are generally those who concern themselves with the
Avelfare of men’s bodies. Supporters of churches are gen-
erally supporters of hospitals. The founder of St- Bartholo-
mew’s Church, Smithfield, London (Rahere) was the founder
of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital.
The stained glass window in St. James’ Church tells that
Captain Close was the founder of our church ; his full-length
portrait in the committee room of the Maitland Hospital tells
that he was one of the founders of the Maitland Hospital.
Of the Eastern WindoAv—embodying five principal lights,
surmounted by several smaller ones and a rose-window—cree-
led to the Founder’s memory in, St. James’ Church, the Arch-
deacon of Northumberland writes:—“ln the beautiful win-
dow, the central subject is the Crucifixion. There are also
represented, the Lord’s Supper, His Burial, Resurrection, and
Ascension, the Call and Martyrdom of St. James . , . and
two scenes appropriately connected with soldiers; one illus-
trating Luke VIT : v. I—s, and the other illustrating Acts X.
v. 1-4.” The Inscription reads—
‘ In memory of Ft C. Close, Esq., Founder of this Church, who fell asleep
in Christ, May 7th, 1866.’


ADDENDA
By “Q.”
EDWARD CHARLES CLOSE had served in the Pen-
insular War as a Lieutenant and Adjutant of H.M-, 48th
Regiment of Foot (Northamptonshire Regt., known as “The
Heroes of Talavera.”) He appears to have been sometimes
accorded the courtesy rank of Captain.
He sold out his military commission and commenced op-
erations one hundred years ago—in the year 1821 —for land
settlement at the Green Hills of the Hunter River.
In Judge Burton’s “Religion (and Education in New
South Wales, 1840,’’ it is stated that -“At Morpeth, by al-
most a rare instance of private resources devoted to the pro-
motion of a public benefit, E. C. Close, Esq., member of the
Legislative Council has proceeded quietly but steadily in
the erection of a Church upon his estate. It is a handsome
find capacious brick building, cased with stone, and is de-
signed to have a tower of corresponding dimensions, which
from the commanding site on which it stands, will form a
fine object over a large extent of country . . . This town-
ship being at the head of the navigation of the Hunter, a
considerable population is very rapidly collecting, to whose
best interests the donation which Mr. Close is making of a
church, with a schoolhouse already erected, will contribute, it
may be hoped, in a most essential degree . ,
Boodle’s “Life of Rt. Revd. William Tyrrell, D.D.,”
makes mention of the purchase from Mr. Close, in 1848, of
his house at Morpeth, to be the Diocesan residence of the late
Dr. Tyrrell—first Bishop of the then huge Bishopric of New-
castle. Of this house (thenceforward known as Bishops-
court) Canon Boodle records “In Zanzibar a church conse-
crates ground which was onc e the slave-market. Bishop Tyr-
rell acquired a house for the See already consecrated by the
good Christian example which had been some time shining
Ihere ‘like a light in a dark place.’ ”
The present “Morpeth House” was built and occupied
by Mr. Close and family after the said sale of “Bishops-
court.”


“The land .... was sown .
I myself laboured . . .
No little
child was ever ill-
treated, nor widow oppressed by me . .
. In my judgments
Rusden’s “History of Australia,” contains a reference
to “the gallant and highly-esteemed E. C. Close,” extolling
him as being “one of the worthiest men in the land.”
Bishop Tyrrell, in his strikingly impressive obituary notice
in the “Church Chronicle” of 21st May, 1866, described him
as “a personification of kindly manliness” who was “as a
landlord, liberal and unselfish,” “as a friend, trusty and
true,” “in private life beyond reproach.” and “weighty per-
force of his known human worth ”
Bishop John D. Langley (lately of the Diocese of Ben-
digo, Vic), in eulogy upon Mr. Close in the “S. M. Herald,”
6th May, 1916, alluded to the prominent place he held among
“the splendid men by whom the foundations of our Common-
wealth were laid.”
In a charming little book entitled “The Golden South,”
(by ‘Lyth’) the authoress, an English lady, describes her
varied Australian experiences in the middle of the 19th cen-
tury. She had lived some time at Morpeth House, as gover-
ness to Mr. Close’s granddaughters, and, in a chapter de-
voted to Morpeth House and its occupants, she writes of him,
“Mr. Edward Close, senior, was without exception the most
Christian-like man I ever knew.”
A touching tribute, in the form of some simple verses in
rhyme, dedicated to his memory by a local inhabitant (late Mr.
J. G. White?) soon after his decease in 1866, amply testifies
to the feeling of Morpeth residents, and the genuine respect
and affection he inspired. These lines begin;—■
“Under a stone not far away,
Lies the friend of the poor of a past-gone day.”
Edward Charles Close might truly have exclaimed in the
words of Ameni, an ancient Memphian provincial governor:
I did not favour the great at the expense of the poor.”
Dutiful and loyal to God, King, and Country, his family
motto—“Fortis et Pidelis” —harmonised fittingly with his
laudable life and character. “Brave and Faithful” in things


spiritual, as temporal, his just conception of Christian Duty
and elevated standard of ethics, honour, and morality, make a
powerful appeal.
“A good man out of the good treasure of the heart
bringeth forth good things.” Matt. XII. - v.-35.
He died in his seventy-seventh year, and was laid to rest
in the family vault in the Moipeth cemetery, where his wife
had been buried a decade earlier.
“ THE MEMORY QP THE JUST IS BLESSED.”
Empire Day,
24th May, 1921.




F. J. RIDLEY
Printer, Petersham,
