

ADDRESSES
PRESENTED TO THE
REV. MACINTOSH MACKAY, LL.D.,
ON HIS REMOVAL FROM
ST. GEORGE’S CHURCH, SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
do* sr
Printed at the request of Friends.
EDINBURGH : PRINTED BY JOHN GREIG & SON.
1862.




To the Rev. MACINTOSH MACKAY, LL.D.
Reverend and Dear Sir,
We, the underfigned inhabitants
of Sydney and the colony of New South Wales, cannot allow
you to depart from this city, which, for feveral years pail, you
have adorned by your prefence and bleffed with your labours,
without expreffing our high eilimate of your perfonal and
miniilerial character, our deep fenfe of the lofs which the city
and colony will fuflain by your departure, and our earned, and
affedlionate wifhes for your future welfare and profperity. We
fully appreciate the honour conferred on Auilralia, in a man
occupying your pofition in Scotland and your gifts and acquire-
ments, cailing in your lot for a feafon with the infant Church
in these Colonies ; and we defire to record our conviction of
the eminent fervice which you have rendered during your day
among us, not only to the caufe of Presbyterianifm, but to that
of our common Chridianity. While the intereds of your own
congregation, and of the religious denomination with which it
is connected, have had your peculiar care, you have alfo ihewn
yourfelf a lover of all good men; our varied religious and
benevolent inditutions have found in you a deady friend and
promoter; and you have endeared yourfelf to all claffes of the
community by your deady and confident courfe of aCtion,
your dignified and courteous demeanour, and your readinefs
to do good to all as you had opportunity.
We would fpecially exprefs our fenfe of obligation to you
for all your felf-denying, earned, and perfevering endeavours
to promote a fpirit of brotherly love and concord among the
feveral claffes of Presbyterians in this colony, to remove
unworthy jealoufies and alienation, and to bring about a union


of the various feClions of the Presbyterian Church, at prefent
in fuch an unnatural Hate of feparation. And although you
have not been permitted, before leaving our thores, to fee
your labours in this refpeCt crowned with the defired fuccefs ;
yet we trufl and believe that you have fown feed which (hall,
in God’s good time, ripen into a glorious harvefl; and we
cherilh the pleafmg hope that there will yet reach you, when
far away, what will be as cold water to a thirfly foul—the good
news of brethren no longer falling out by the way, but of a
divided Church made one.
And now, Reverend and Dear Sir, fuffer us, when we are
about to part from you, to affure you of the deep and affection-
ate interell with which we (hall watch your future courfe. May
He who commands the winds and the waves, give to you and
your beloved partner and filler a profperous voyage to your
native land. May the great Head of the Church allot to you a
fuitable fphere of future ufefulnefs ! May every comfort and
bleffing attend you beneath the Divine fmile ! May that fmile
brighten to you the falling lhadows of evening ! At evening
time may it be light with you ; and, far beyond the clouds and
darknefs of this world, may the Lord God be your everlafling
reft, and your God your glory.
As fome fmall proof of our fincerity in the fentiments Jufl ex-
preffed, we beg your acceptance of the fum (£300) flated in the
accompanying lift which the treafurer will hand to you, for
the purpofe of defraying the paifage of yourfelf and your
family to Europe. It is gratifying to us to be able to add,
that the lift comprifes the names of individuals belonging to
almoil every religious denomination in the Colony.
We remain,
Rev. and Dear Sir,
Yours very refpeftfully and faithfully,
(Here follow the Signatures.)
Sydney, New South Wales,
21 st October 1861.


To the Rev. Dr MACKAY, Paftor of the Congregation of
St George's Church, Sydney.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
We, the Congregation of St George’s Church,
desire now to addrefs you, and to exprefs the feelings of deep-
ed. fympathy and regard we cherifh toward you, in the peculiar
and embarraffing pofition in which you are now placed.
The occasion of our doing fo at the prefent time is, —that
having heard the minute of the Deacons’ Court read to us,
wherein they feel themfelves unable any longer to guarantee
the amount of ftipend you have hitherto enjoyed, and having
alfo heard your anfwer thereto, that with the propofals of that
court you are unable to comply, but will be compelled in con-
fequence to refign your charge into the hands of the Prefbytery,
—we cannot allow fuch an unexpected and hidden cafualty to
occur, without haftening to affure you, that, deeply as we (hall
regret such a deprivation of your fervices, and in whatever way
the Presbytery fhall decide it, we dill entertain towards you
thofe fentiments of love, veneration, and edeem we have ever
held ; and we feel them more keenly now when we consider
the poffibility of the lofs we fhall fudain, not only in the rela-
tion in which we dand toward you as a people to their beloved
pador, but in the ties of perfonal regard and affection we have
individually experienced at your hands. The anticipation of
the breaking of thofe ties cannot fail to caufe a pang which we
cannot find language to exprefs. In looking for a cause for
our prefent pofition, we are condrained to confefs that we feel
we have finned, and finned deeply, and that God doeth well to
be angry with us. We are fenfible that we have coveted the
envy and praifes of men more than the praifes of God ; and the
extremities to which we are now reduced, we can regard in no
other light than as a jud chadifement for our fins. But we bless
God we are dill enabled to rejoice in His mercy, though He
may fee caufe to remove you from among us. We defire to
blefs His name that He has not extinguiihed in us the defire to


hear the gofpel, but that in fome meafure at lead we are ena-
bled to love the courts of God’s houfe, and wait upon him in
the fandtuary ; and it is our earned prayer that the trials which
now affail us may be overruled for our fpiritual and everlading
good.
We feel that in the part which the Deacons’ Court have a died
in this matter, and the congregation in approving it, fome vin-
dication of ourfelves is neceffary, led the idea fhould be enter-
tained that we had either added hadily and without due confi-
deration, or that we had been negligent in applying ourfelves
to feek the neceffary means to extricate ourfelves from this dif-
ficulty. We are not confcious, however, of either being the
cafe. Of thofe who took the leading part in the forming of
this congregation, fome, we regret to fay, have gone to their
long home, others have left the Colony, and the circumdances
of the few who remain, it is unneceffary for us to enter upon
the tafk of defcribing. It may be worthy of remark, how-
ever, that with the recent fluctuations of our colonial congrega-
tions, there are very few of the original members remaining.
We who now compofe it have taxed ourfelves (even beyond the
means of many of us), to bring matters to a better iffue ; but
it is with grief we date that every attempt we have made to im-
prove the date of matters has only ended in difappointment.
And as from the fmallnefs of our numbers the whole weight
falls on comparatively few individuals, burdened (as we are)
with debt, we see no hope for the future without practising the
most rigid economy. We disclaim all intention or desire (even
the most remote) willingly to reduce the stipend you have
hitherto been in receipt of, but we cannot fhut our eyes to the
fact that we are no longer in a pofition to guarantee it; and
fliould any succeffor to you be appointed, we can in our pre-
fent circumdances offer nothing more.
In these circumstances we feel that, however painful they
may be to us, they are much more fo to you ; and we defire in
all humblenefs of mind to exprefs our united sympathy for you
in the painful position and trials they neceffarily caufe. We


are fully fenfible of, and deeply lament thofe of both a perfonal
and public nature, to which you have been already subjected,
on account of your connection with this church; and the un-
complaining manner in which you endured them, called forth
our admiration and efteem. We willingly bear witnefs to the
perfonal exertions you have made, the fatiguing journeys, both
by land and by sea, you have voluntarily undertaken, and the
pecuniary liabilities you have taken upon yourfelf, in order to
free others from the burden. All thefe confiderations make
our feelings the more acute, and deepen the fympathy we en-
tertain. Any of these trials would have been sufficient to
have bowed down a younger man ; but all of them together, to
a man of your years, experience, and pofition in the Church,
call upon us to adore that hand that has fo bountifully pre-
ferved you through them all.
The times are indeed dark and perplexing ; but we are fuf-
tained by the hope that God, who can bring light out of dark-
nefs, will yet do so in our cafe, and that in His good provi-
dence, a way may be opened up whereby the difficulties that
feem like to overwhelm us may be overcome.
And now, what more can we lay, but add our prayers, that
the fame God who did flrengthen and fuflain you in other times,
may do so again; and that grace, mercy, and peace may be
your portion for evermore.
JAMES W. WAUGH, Chairman.
Sydney, New South Wales,
loth May 1861.
To the Rev. MACINTOSH MACKAY, LL.D.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
It is with feelings inexpreffibly deep
and tender that we bid you farewell on this your departure
for your native land. We could have wifhed to retain you in


this Colony, as one whofe wife counfels, and large experience,
and eminent abilities, would have greatly benefited our infant
Church, and added to our influence in the community. But
we are conilrained to admit the force of the reafons which
have determined you to quit the colonial field, and feek a
home in Scotland for the evening of your days. And it is to
be acknowledged by us with gratitude to God, that if He calls
you to leave us, it is not before a great work has been done,
the fruit of which will remain, we fondly trull, for many
generations. The union effedled here between feveral branches
of our common Presbyterianifm, was the refult, in no fmall
degree, of, your patient and difinterelled efforts ; and the
fuccefs which has attended that event, is the bell proof of
the wifdom that advifed it, and the bell reward for the labours
by which it was accomplilhed. It is the convidlion of this
Presbytery that your prefence in Scotland will be of advantage
to our colonial Church in many ways. We have the moll
entire confidence in your attachment to our caufe, and in
your difcretion as our advocate; and we cannot doubt that
your intimate knowledge of our condition and our wants will
enable you to remove prejudices, and to induce many, qualified
by their gifts and attainments, to choofe Aullralia, and efpe-
cially this portion of Aullralia, as an inviting field for evan-
gelillic labours and minillerial ufefulnels.
It is our eamell prayer that it may pleafe the Lord to fpare
your life for many years, to employ you in His honourable
work in your own much-loved country, to keep you, as in the
hollow of His hand, amid the agitation of the elements, and
gratify our heart, by timely intelligence of your fafe arrival in
Great Britain, and your warm welcome there by many Chrillian
friends and brethren.
In name and by appointment of the Presbytery of Melbourne,
IRVING HETHERINGTON Modr.
JAMES BALLANTYNE, Clk.
Melbourne, November 14. 1861.
