

THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILWAY
grpcccljce
E. W. HAWKEE and B. CALDWELL
ON THE
PEAKE TO ANGLE POLE RAILWAY BILL
AND BY
E. BASEDOW
ON THE
REPORT OE THE TRANSCONTINENTAL
RAILWAY COMMISSION.
BEPBINTTED ZFU-OIM HAIsTSABD.
ADELAIDE;
f / OA
Burden & Bonython, “Advertiser” Office.




hbiss/T 16X1 if
K-s-rr
SPEECHES
ON THE
ANGLE POLE RAILWAY BILL
REPORT on the TRANSCONTINENTAL
RAILWAY COMMISSION.
PEAKE TO ANGLE POLE RAILWAY BILL.
Mr. K. W. HAWKER said that after having listened
to and carefully read the Commissioner’s speech in
moving the second reading of this Bill he failed to see
any reason why we should continue the construc-
tion of the line to Angle Pole, and his objections to
the passing of this Bill or of the extension of the
Transcontinental line any further were strengthened
by a perusal of the evidence given on the Transcon-
tinental Railway Commission, and of Mr. Newland’a
notes, as well as of Mr. Parsons a lecture. The Commis-
sioner’s arguments in favor of the line were—
(l) That a sum of £177,000 had been saved from Commissioner’s argu-
the amount voted lor the section from meats for line.
Hergott to Strangways, an amount due to an
over-estimrte of the cost of the iine.
(2) That the commission took Angle Pole as
the starting point of the line to be construc-
ted on the land grant system.
(3) That from what we knew of the mineral
deposits that existed, the line would pay in-
terest at an early date.
(i) That the construction of the line would lead
to a saving of one ball of the cost of the
maintenance of the telegraph line.
(5) That the Surveyor-General in his evidence had
pointed out that the continuance of the
construction of the line would lead to the
taking up and stocking of a very large area
of country— some hundreds of thousands
of square miles—at a minimum rental of
2s 6d. per mile.
(6) That the day was not far distant when there
would be large towns in picked spots in the
interior, where people would be able to enjoy
all the comforts of life.
(7) That from the evidence of the Transcontinental
Railway Commission we could see that
vegetables and fruits that could be grown
here could be grown at Alice Springs,
Tennant’s Creek, Barrow Creek, the Mac-
Donnell Ranges, and many others could be
grown that we could not grow.
(8) That it would be a line of development, and
would bring us nearer the Northern Terri-
tory.
(9) The hon. member wound up by saying
the line would not pay at once, but in-
directly it would be a good investment.
He believed the chief reason for the Government Work for unemployed,
wishing to go on with the extension to Angle Pole
was to keep the large staff of men they have at work
on the line employed. If the difficulty of the labor


Minerals.
Bridging bad country.
Evidence of Com-
mission.
Description of country,
Hergott to Charlotte
Waters.
Charlotte Waters to
Alice Springs.
question was not a reason, but if it w T as the fact of
their having saved money, then he said we could de-
vote the money to much better purposes.
With regard to the minerals being developed
there had not been found mineral deposits
in the interior rich enough to warrant that
being used as an argument in favor of the
railway. Nor could it be urged as it has by
some that the railway will become part of the
mail route to England, for nothing is saved in dis-
tance. Nor would it be a means of sending goods
from Adelaide to Port Darwin, as the difference by sea
and land was too small. He did not intend to deal
particularly with the question of the employment of
labor, the mineral deposits, of the saving of expense
in maintaining the telegraph line, or the carrying
of goods on the railway, as Mr. Caldwell would
take those points.
The arguments which seemed to carry most
weight with those in favor of this line was
that there is a strip of bad country which
if once bridged over by a railway would enable
splendid country beyond it to be settled and fully
developed, and the produce to be brought down to
Adelaide, and that the rainfall in this good country is
better and more certain than in country further south.
When the question of the Transcontinental railway
was discussed in 1885 the only evidence in print the
House had of the character of the country through
which it was proposed to make it was the journals
of the explorers Warburton, Giles, Forrest, Gosee, and
others, most of whom either went through, or tried to get
through, the country between the telegraph line and
the coast of Western Australia. He certainly was not
favorably impressed with their descriptions. We now
had the evidence given before the Transcontinental
Railway Commission, and he must regret it gave him
no reason to alter the unfavorable opinion he formed
in 1885. There was some difficulty in getting a clear
idea of the country, as no general description had
been given by any one witness, nor had a summary
been compiled from their evidence. He bad
tried to do this. He might tell the House
that so anxious had he been to make it
clear to himself that he had gene through the evidence
three or four times, and had also had the summary veri-
fied by one who had been across the continent
more than once, and who was in communication with
those who had come down from different parts since
he left. He had been able to supply through his
informant a description of portions of the country
to the east and west of the line which
had not been obtained from witnesses by
the commission. This was of course valuable, as
it would be this country which the line was to serve.
The result he had obtained is as follows From
Hergott to the Peake the country was miserable.
From the Peake to Angle Pole there was a belt of
fair country, about two miles wide; beyond this on
both sides the country was stony, like that between
Strang ways and the Peake. From Angle Pole to the
Macumba, about 50 miles, there was about 15 miles
of good country on each side of the line. From the
Macumba to Charlotte Waters, about 150 miles, the
country was not well grassed. There _ were no
permanent waters except at the Dalhousie Springs,
and round these vegetation could not grow owing to
the mineral properties of the water. (The Com-
missioner of Public Works—“ They grow vegetables
there.”! Tes, but generally the effect of the mineral
properties of the water was prejudicial to vegetation.
At Charlotte Waters, where we got into the Northern
Territory, the country changed, and was good pastoral
country up to Alice Springs. There were no per-
manent waters at Charlotte Waters. Five large water-
holes hold water for 15 months after having been
flooded. They had been quite d»y several times. The
telegraph-station stock have had to be taken away
many times and watered at wells. From Charlotte
Waters to Alice Springs the country was good,


especially up the Finke and Hugh on the north-west of
Charlotte Waters, and running almost parallel with
the telegraph line. To the east of the line the good
country did not extend more than 15 miles. ..... „ •
From Alice Springs to Barrow’s Creek was the pick Alice bpnngs to
of the country. There were no natural per- Barrow s Creek,
manent waters, but here were three good wells. , .
From Barrow’s Creek to Tennant’s Creek the coun- Barrow s Creek to
try deteriorated. If hon. members would look at their Tennant s Creek,
maps they would see the blue color extended about
40 miles north of Barrow. Then there was a blank
space of about 110 miles to just beyond Tennant’s
Creek. This meant that the blue was good enough
for stock, but the white had not been taken up owing
to its being such poor country, of which there was at
least 12,000 square miles. Mr. Knuokey said in his
evidence before the commission that from Barrow’s
Creek to Tennant’s Creek the country was mostly
spinifex, and Mr Flint said much the same. (The
Commissioner of Public Works-" The spinifex is not
always bad.”) Horses would not eat it according to
the witnesses unless hard pressed. Mr. Goyder said—
“ From Barrow’s Creek to the north and northeast
the country is inferior till 3 ou get to the neighbor-
hood of the Koper ; thence the character of the
country improves till you get to Port Darwin.”
From Tennant’s Creek to Powell’s Creek the country Tennant s Creek to
was fairly good and consisted of hills and plains, but Powell’s Creek,
the only permanent waters were Reynolds’s, Helen’s,
and Gleeson’s Springs, round none of which
vegetation would grow, and Powell’s Creek
which was fresh water. From Powell’s C'eek
to Frew’s Ponds, about 68 miles, the country
was good, with permanent water in the Newcastle.
Round the Newcastle there were about 2,000 miles of
good country. From Frew’s Ponds to about 18 miles
north of Daly Waters the country wasgoodstock country
though scrubby, but there were no permanent waters.
From 18 miles north of Daly to the Katheiine there
was during the first 66 miles fairly grassed country,
but no permanent waters till the Elsie Creek, and
from there to the Katherine the country was well
grassed, with permanent water.
The country described was nearly all adjacent to the
proposed route of the railway, but as this would not
be sufficient, no matter how good it might be, to pro-
duce enough to make the railway pay. it was necessary , , ,
to see what country was on the east and west of the Country east and west
route. To the east of Charlotte Waters there was as far of line,
as was known a belt of red sandhills and spinifex.
In 1870 Ross struck out to the east to make a sharp
out to Macdonnell Kanges (hon. members would notice
the telegraph line made a curve to the west), but was
stopped by red sandhills. His horses were
three days without water, and he had to return.
In 1875 a Melbourne squatter tried to get through
Charlotte Waters from the Queensland border, but
was stopped by these sandhills and spinifex dose at
the border; so we were justified in assuming the
sandhills extended right across from Charlotte
Scrings to the border.
Further north to the east of the line Mr. Wmnecke Winnecke s explora-
explored the country between Alice Springs, tions east of line.
Barrow’s Creek, and Tennant’s Creek. From Alice
Springs to the Queensland border the country
was described as ordinary country, consisting of
patches of well-grassed country and patches of desert
all the way; the hilly country being well grassed.
There was no saltbush. The bad country consisted of
sandhills, spinifex, and poor scrub. Water was very
scarce There were a few permanent waters, and not
more than three waterholes. From Barrow’s Creek
to the Queensland boundary he described the oentie
portion as a desert, the extreme eastern portion near
the Queensland boundary being very good country,
but there were no permanent waters between
Bartow’s Creek and the Queensland border. From
Tennant’s Creek to the border the first 60 miles
were interior ; after that the country was equal to any
in South Australia. Mr. Winnecke summed up this


country as being one-third good, one-third in-
ferior, and one-third very bad.
Country west of line. On the west of the telegraph most of the country was
miserable Mr. Brown, who was inspecting country
near the Musgrave Range country for a syndicate, in
the development of which they spent £lO,OOO, said his
company was prepared to spend any amount of
money if they had seen any prospect of a return for
their expenditure On his advice they abandoned the
country. Mr. Brown considered the country to the
west of the Feake “a Sahara.” He said that
there had not been any rain of consequence
for four years. "To show how dry it was,”
he said, “ I saw’ the tracks of Gosse’s buggy
wheels in the bed of the Aiberga, and also his
camel tracks eight years after the track was made."
Winnecke west of Alice Mr. Winneoke, who went out 200 miles to the west
Springs
and north-west of Alice Springs, said—“ The plains
are inferior, being covered with spinifex, poor scrub,
and here and there sandhills, but the hilly country is
fair. He could not call any of the waters he saw
permanent; they were small soakage springs, and he
found no waters on which stock could be kept.” In
Forrest’s, Warburton’s and Gosse’s explorations
there was no more hopeful description of the country
west of the telegraph.
Mr. Newland, it was true, said at the end of the des-
cription he gave in the Advertiser —“ As a whole the
country is better than I anticipated ever seeing it,
but it falls far short of the roseate hues
thrown over it by the oratorical extravagances some
of us have listened to, and some of us have
been beguiled by.” Mr. Newland pointed out
that it will be justly urged that he had seen the
country in a good season, but that it was not
altogether so, as in some places rain had not
fallen and many of the creeks had not run,
but he would defy any person to judge Australian
country in the far north unless they had seen it in all
seasons. He saw an extract of a letter by Mr. G.
Holland to a friend, which appeared in the Register
of June 14 of this year. He had been from the Peake
to the Dalhousie, and said “The country at present is
looking remarkably welland went on tosay- ‘‘lfthe
Railway Commission judge the capabilities of the
country by what they see at present it wi'l be a very
unfair thing, as not one season in ten turns out
anything like so good as the present one.”
The Register had summed up the country
in two leaders when writing on this subject—
“ The evidence given before the commission, as
appended to their report, is not only voluminous, but
decidedly interesting. With reference to the country
east and west within 30 or 40 miles of Angle Pole the
accounts are not very encouraging. Beyond these
limits, however, the prospects seem to improve. Out
eastwards towards the Queensland boundary there
is a large extent of pastoral country scarcely
inferior to any in Australia; on the west
there is no useful country until the Musgrave
Ranges are reached, when the traveller meets with a
fairly good prospect. Generally of this whole
country, that is to say the belt within 80 to 100 miles
north and south of the Territory boundary, it may be
said, as Mr. winnecke, the explorer, puts it, that
“ about one-third of it is good, a third is inferior, and
the rest is very bad.” The fact is that in these vast
regions of the interior of Australia vegetation grows
and flourishes only on those portions of the land
which are sufficiently elevated to attract or to
intercept moisture from the air. The traveller
who takes the high road along a ridge of country
usually has a good time of it, while another who takes
the low road finds nothing but a desert. One lessee
of a large tract of country stated that much of the
land is only to be regarded as the Sahara of Australia.
Yet Mr. Goyder, the Surveyor-General, from his general
knowledge of the country, is able to state confidently
that a very large area is suitable for pastoral purposes
and can be let at about 2s. 6d. per square mile.
Newland.
Register summary of
country.


On November 14 the Register, when writing on
the question of the railway being constructed on
the land-grant system, and referring to certain
blocks being reserved for the State, said “ This
of course looks all very well on paper, but when we
come to the actual facts of the case we see at once
that these reservations do not amount to much. Ac-
cording to the evidence of Messrs. Lindsay and Win-
necke, the explorers, and of the Surveyor-General,
there is only a certain proportion of the land, probably
about one-third, which is good even for pastoral pur-
poses.” This is said by a journal which advocated
the construction of the railway by the Government.
We had only to look at the map of the end of the Description of country
commission’s report to see that the estimate of the on map.
Register was correct, that only one-third of the
country to be served by the line is fit for pastoral pur-
poses. That colored blue was stocked, and was, as
he was informed by one who knows most of the
country from his own personal observation, and from
that of his friends, the onlv country worth taking up.
The House would see to the east, where most of the
best country lies, that there is a very large portion
colorea white, while on the west nearly the
whole of it is the same, and even south
of Palmerston, and also on the north coast
the country, though on the seaboard, is not
colored blue. This conclusively showed what an
enormous extent of worthless country there is, and
surely it would be madness to construct a
line of such a length as would be necessary
through country only one-third of which is fit for
pastoral pursuits. .. , . . ,
The fact was that the line, if it ought to have
been made at all, ought to have been taken along
near the Queensland border. Most of what good Good country east ot
country there is lay to the east of the line, and line,
next to none lay on the west, and had the rail-
way line been taken up near the Queensland border
it would have passed through infinitely better land
than it does now, and would have tapped the western
part of that colony. The proposed route of the rail-
way ran on the western side of what good country
there is, instead of through the centre, so that any traffic
it was to take must come from the eastern side only.
As regards agricultural land, from the evidence given Agricultural land;
before the commission he gathered that until you get to
the Territory, and there only on the banks of the rivers,
is any of the land fit for agriculture on account of the
uncertainty of the rainfall.
The Commissioner had referred to vegetables and Vegetables,
fruit Dting grown, but these were grown where
there were springs, and In no quantity. _ The
Sahara would grow fruit if you could irrigate
it. A few vegetables and fruit trees in a few
favored spots is no criterion of what a country
can do. (Hear, hear.)
He would now deal with the climate. In a country to Climate,
be settled at all thickly by white people witn their
wives and families the temperature must not be high
for any length of time. Mr. Newland said—“At
Alice Springs with its elevation the glass for 60 to 70
days in the year registers over 100°. At Charlotte
Waters and the Peake it is hotter still;” but he
pointed out that in the interior of Queensland and
New South Wales this temperature is common. But
the fact of the same high temperature occurring in
Queensland and New South Wales did not make it
more bearable. ,
He saw from the table of temperature at the end Temperature Alice,
of the progress report at Alice Springs that the Springs
thermometrical reoord in the shade is as follows:
Tear 1880, over 90% 178 days; over 100% 76 days;
over 110% 7. Year 1881, over 90% 172 days ; over 100°,
71 days; over 110% 7. Year 1882, over 90% 158 days ;
over 100°, 47 days ; over 110°, nil. Year 1883, over 90%
152 days; over 100“. 61 days; over 110°, 6. Y ear 1884,
over 90°, 170 days; over 100°, 76 days; over 110° 10.
Year leBs. over 90°, 144 days; over 100°, 83 days;
over 110°, 12. Year 1889, over 90°. 152 days; over


Parsons on climate of
Northern Territory.
Droughts.
Sainfall.
100°, 66 days; over 110°, nil.; and Mr. Newland said it
was hotter than that at Charlotte Waters and the
Peake So that if cities do spring up he believed the
inhabitants would need all the comforts of civilisa-
tion. Mr. Giles said that “he has known it to be 120
degrees in the shade at Charlotte Waters, and 103 at
midnight with a hot wind blowing all night,”
“It is true,” he said, “ the therm .meter
was under a galvanized iron roof, ceded, but
that would not aflect the temperatuie at night.”
Mr. Parsons, in the graphic lecture he gave on the
Northern Territory, and which is printed at the end
of the final report of the commission, thus described
the climate of Port Darwin“ People must not make
any mistake about the climate. It was distinctly
tropical on the north coast, and that fact must lie at
the base of all action there. The mean temperature
all the year round is about 75°, and the thermometer
has never been seen lower than 58°. The atmosphere
is dank, steamy, and heavy, with moisture during the
wet season, and dry, parching, and malarial during
the dry season. He was in good health there. But
though they never have the yellow fever, or cholera,
or smallpox, recent events have proved he was wrong
with regard to the last disease ; tut too high praise
cannot be given for the way it was stamped out.
Most of them get smothered with prickly heat, they
melt almost with moisture, and they have to beware
of malaria with its fever and ague. The question
whether life not only is worth the living, but whether
it can be lived at all depends upon the liver, that im-
portant organ becomes a source of constant anxiety.
For the laboring white man it must be said that he
who puts forth his strength in the sun for eight hours
a day during the year through finds out where he
is. So long as the great existing meteorological laws
last the climate will be tropical, and all that can be
done is to minimise the evils that result by care, by
change, and by rest.” That was the description of
the climate given by a man who could not praise the
Northern Territory too highly, and who was in fact
enthusiastic about it. He (Mr. Hawker) asked if that
was a climate in which families of Europeans could
be reared, or a climate which would allow
the settlement of a large European population.
That a great portion of the country which this line
was to serve and develop suffered from droughts
there was no doubt. Mr Lindsay was 12 months
going through the continent, and had no rain till he
got near the coast, where they had a thunderstorm.
Mr. Hewish said at Strangway Springs that he had
known severe droughts, and in answer to the ques-
tion, “ How long have you been without rain ?”
replied—“ We may say we have been at one time
practically three years without ram. There was next
to no feed, the stock were dying off, and things
could not have been worse.” And when asked
if the bushes grew during the drought he said
there was not rain enough to do them any good.
Hon. members had only to read the accounts given
by the different explorers, especially on the east of
the line, to see how terribly the country suffered
from drought. They might remember what Mr.
Brown said in his evidence, that no rain had fallen for
nearly four years on the west of the Peake, and he saw
Gosse’s tracks eight years after they had been made.
Hon. members mu-t not be misled by the increase
of the rainfall at Alice Springs, and in the Nor-
thern Territory. If they looked at the table at
the end of the progress report of the commission they
would see that nearly all the rainfall was in the
summer months, and not in the winter. The result
was a heavy rainfall which brought up the grass
and herbage very quickly, and the herbage
was withered off by the first great heat.
To show what a large proportion of rain fell in the
summer and what a small quantity fell in winter he
had taken the mean annual rainfall of the months of
November, December, January, February, and
March, and compared them with the fall of the re-


maining seven months. It was as follows, and was
very surprising Alice Springs—Total, 11-796 ; Bar-
row’s Creek. 13 978 ; Tennant’s Greek, )7'276; Powell
Creek, 18140. Five months, November to Match—
Alice Springs, 7‘373; Barrow’s Creek, 9 944; Ten-
nant’s Creek, 13 601; Powell’s Creek, 15,656. Seven
months, April to October—Alice Springs, 4-423 ; Bar-
row’s Creek, 4 034 ; Tennant’s Creek. 3 675; Powells
Creek, 2 484. Daly Waters—Total, 29 235; Katherine,
39-647; Pine Creek, 43 525; Port Darwin, 63 266.
Five months, November to March —Daly Waters,
26-374; Katherine, 36 351; Pine Creek, 38-896; Port
Darwin, 55 335. Seven months, April to October-
Paly Waters, 2'861; Katherine. 3-296; Pine Creek,
4-630; Port Darwin. 7 931. Or there fell in the seven
months from April to October—Alice Springs little
less than one third, Barrow more than one-third,
Tennant’s Creek more than one-fifth, Powell’s Creek
less than one-eighth, Daly Waters little more than
one-twelfth. Katherine one-twelfth, Pine Creek little
more than one-tenth, Port Darwin a little more
than one-ninth of the whole annual rainfall.
It was said that the railway would develop the
pastoral country, and be a great boon to the pastoral
lessees. Of course he admitted that it would cheapen
the cost of transit of the small amount of stores taken
up, and the fencing-wire, and it would also enable
the lessees to get down what wool they might grow
cheaper than by the present means. It was said it
would enable them to bring their sheep and cattle to
market, which they otherwise would not do Now,
the question was whether it would pay to bring stock
down from the so-called good country, especially the
Mac Donnell Ranges, which were 1,036 miles from
Adelaide. With regard to the cost Mr. Rus-
sell said“ The present price from Farina,
440 miles, is £1 per beast by special arrange-
ment, and for a single lot at 335., so from the
Mac Donnell ranges it will cost about 50s. per head.’’
Mr. Russell complained that the charge he paid is
exorbitant, and said he would not care to truck
them at £2 6s. when the price in Adelaide is £5. As
to whether it would be practicable to bring stock
down 1,000 miles it will take at least 75 hours. In
America they are not allowed by Act of Congress to
keep the stock for a longer period than
28 consecutive hours in the cars without unloading
them for rest, water, and feed for a period of five
consecutive hours. Now, where will he the facilities
for getting food and water along this line, especially
in the bad country, which was bridged over, and even
if they had them they would not find that cattle
taken off these far north runs would eat whatever
food was given them on a long dry journey. As to
whether they would be trucked regularly there was a
strong opinion that in good seasons they would not
be, and in bad seasons if the price was low in Adelaide
it would not pay. From the evidence given to the
commission he found that Mr, Lennon thought the
cattle from Stuart’s Creek would be trucked from
Farina to save part of the railway cost. Mr. Mais
said he did not think in any case owners north of the
Peake would truck from the Peake station at such
times as they can travel their stock down to Hergott.
Cattle were now travelled from the Gulf of Carpentaria
to Melbourne without any great difficulty.
Even if this country could carry all the stock some
estimated and the railway was made, where would they
find a market? It had been suggested that in India
and other portions of the east there would be a great
demand for meat. Now what were the facts. The
majority of the inhabitants of India are not meat-
eatingpeople, and furtherthanthatan agent in Adelaide
was instructed to make enquiries as to the probability
of there being a market for fat stock in India, Java,
Singapore, and a firm of leading merchants in
Calcutta wrote to him that the consump-
tion of the small Indian cattle at Calcutta
for the Commissariat department was about 380
per month, and the price w-as about 8J rupees,
Trucking stock.
Market.
India and East as a
market.


or, at the present price of the rupee, 13s. 6d. per
hundred pounds. The writer went on to say there
might be a probability of a contract being entered
into with the Indian Government to supply the
Andaman Islands, but this would not amount to
much, as the prisoners were most'y from India, and
therefore not meat eaters. The replies from Singa-
pore, Batavia, and Sourabaya were all unfavorable, in
fact the only stock Batavia was likely to take were a
few milch cows. When they considered the cost of
taking the cattle to India, and it would amount to
quite £4 per head, there was not very much margin
for profit at 13s. 6d. per 100 lb.
Coat of transport of He did not think he would be far wrong in saying
cattle. the cost would be at least £4 per head, for one of the
steamship companies would not take cattle under that
price from Port Darwin to Sydney, and said the num-
ber must be not less than 150 head. Nor did the price
seem exorbitant when they remembered that fittings
would have to be put up, and food and water supplied.
Water would be a large item in taking up space,
especially when going through a hot climate.
Freezing establish- It had been suggested that freezing establishments
ments. might be put up, but for those to be a success there
must be good paddocks to keep the stock after they
arrived at the establishment till they were wanted.
The difficulties to contend against would be enormous.
In America, whsrefrozen meatwas sent from Chicago to
New York and Boston, the ice tanks were examined
every two or three times or once in 24 or 3fi hours,
and if necessary were replenished with ice and salt,
and the speed on those lines was greater than we
would be able to afford. They must also take into
consideration that hardly any freezing companies had
paid in Australia, and that at the present price of
frozen meat even with freights reduced to
IJd. per lb it did not pay. The price of meat
was brought down in consequence of the com-
petition from New Zealand, the Argentine
Republic, and the Falkland Islands, and America.
Removal of stock in bad One of the great advantages of the line seemed to be
seasons. to those who gave evidence that it would enable the
Sastoral lessees to remove their stock In bad seasons,
[r. Gcyder’s evidence in reply to the question,
would the construction of the railway mitigate the
consequence of bad seasons to stockowners, was—
“ Yes, the railway would permit the removal of the
cattle in bad seasons to better parts of the country.
The rainfall is frequently very partial, and in one
part of the country there may be good feed and water
when north and south of that country is all dry. If
the railway existed the stock could be taken off
to some place where there was feed, and
when they were fat they could be brought
down by the same means to market, whereas they
cannot now always be got down over the dry belts of
country even when fit for market.” Mr. Warren said
much the same thing ; but he would like to point out
that if this railway was going to develop the country
it would all be taken up, and where were they going
to move their stock to then? Those who were fortunate
in having a good season would object to other people
bringing their stock on to their places; and further,
experience showed that if a bad season comes it was
cheaper to let the stock die than to try
and remove them. If this capability of re-
moving stock was to be one of the benefits of
the railway then the country was not worth going to
such an enormous expense to try and develop it.
Line remunerative. As to whether the line would be remunerative they
had the opinion of Mr. Mais, who did not think so;
and on the same point Mr. Pendleton said: — “I
would like to say that the extension of the line beyond
Hergott can scarcely, in my opinion, be expected to
pay interest for some time to come, though it should
return more than working expenses.” Those are the
opinions of experts; and several others said it would
not pay interest for some time to come. The Com-
missioner did not expect it to pay at present, but
thought it would be a good investment,


They must not forget, however, that only about Interest on money
300,000 persons would have to pay the interest on the borrowed.
It was urged in favor of the line paying that already Great Northern paying,
the Great Northern line was bringing in over 2 per
cent, but hon. members must not foreret that a por-
tion of that line passed through agricultural country,
and that wheat formed a large item in its traffic
returns ; they must also remember that Hergott was
the starting point for all goods sent to Queens-
land, and the point to which the cattle
came from Queensland for the Adelaide market.
If this country was as good as some thought it would
have been fully stocked long before this. , , , ...
The want of a railway did not deter Queensland Country stocked with-
country just as far from markets being taken up. out railway.
Western Australia was being stocked from Queensland,
and cattle were travelled from the Gulf of Carpentaria
to Adelaide.
The fact was the country was not good enough,
and it would never pay to take it up. Wealthy
men might take up large areas, and carry them
on by the help of their capital, but they had only
to read Mr. Newland’s description of the re-
quisites necessary to develop the country to
understand the matter. Mr. Mew land was
member of the commission, had travelled
as far as Alice Springs, and was as well ac- Newland on requisites
quainted with the country as any one. He said:— to develop country.
“ If I am asked the question, what are the requisites
to ensure success in such an undertaking, I answer
either men who are prepared to spend years of their
lives at it until the few stock they begin with increase
—men who will live hard, work hard, and die hard ;
or capita), cipital, capital. And to push the country
on as its most ardent sons desire a combination of
both is necessary An influx of capital from both the
old world and the new, with the experience, skill,
and aye, speculation that years ago poured into
western New South Wales and Queensland. I maintain
the combined available strength and wealth _of
South Australia would scarcely make an impression
upon an area so vast under conditions demanding,
not only the expenditure of thousands, but millions.”
The last argument of the Commissioner in favor of South Australia s posi-
the Transcontinental line upon which I will touch was tion with regard to
that it would bring us nearer to the Northern Tern- Northern Territory,
tory. He did not think hon. members realised that if
the Northern Territory produced a profit we had no
right to it. All we had a right to was what we spent
in the Territory, and we were really developing their
country. On the other hand, if the Northern Terri-
tory became a failure South Australia was responsible
for its debts It was a case of the Northern Territory
being able to say, “ Heads I win, tails you lose.” So
sure as the Northern Territory became a flourishing
country and could stand by itself and it paid to
separate from us, so sure would it separate.
He failed to see what advantage the Tt rritory was to South Australia im-
us, Could we force them to take our produce ? What ports into Northern
produce did they take from us compared with what Territory,
they took from the other colonies and other countries?
He found on looking at the list of Imports and exports
that out of £27,000 worth of 15 principal articles, in-
cluding boots, drapery, wearing apparel, food, and
machinery, over £lB,OOO was imported from other
countries and a little over £B,OOO from South Aus-
tralia. In fact flour was the only important article
imported from here in greater quantities than from
other places.
He had gone thoroughly through all the evidence
on this subject, because he felt certain the matter
was not understood by the country. He had not
confined bimself to the extension of the line to
Angle Pole, because the Commissioner argued in
favor of the construction of the whole line. After
going into the matter carefully he found all the
evidence against the extension even to Anrle Pole.
Rich mineral deposits had not yet been found in the
interior. (Mr. Solomon—" Precious stones ”) Well,


they had yet to be verified, and until they were they
could not be reckoned in the matter. Then there
would be no saving in the mails, nor could they
expect the railway to compete against the sea traffic.
He asked the House not to permit this extension, but
to devote the money to some better purpose ; and he
asked them to condemn any proposal of any Govern-
ment which might lead to any extension of the
Transcontinental railway at the expense of the coun-
try. Let them bear in mind that the interest paid on
the money borrowed for the construction of this rail-
way would have to be borne by a handful of people
who were still suffering from the effects of a severe
depression caused by excessive borrowing, bad sea-
sons, and low markets. We had already built over
640 miles from Adelaida towards the centre of the
continent, and were constructing 150 miles from Port
Darwin. Let them wait and see what was the effect
of those portions in developing the country they
passed through. We. a people of some 300,000 souls,
were not the persons to undertake this gigantic work.
Let them leave it to the future and to the proper
time. If they did this he felt sure they would not
only save the colony from the burden of increased
taxation, but would actually save an in
accumulated interest which would by the time
the line paid equal the amount of the capital
expended in constructing it. It was objected
by many when it was proposed to sell the land
to pay off our deficit than they had no right
to part with the heritage of posterity. He contended
they had no right for a matter of sentiment to Jay a
burden on posterity which would mortgage their
heritage to such an extent that they would be obliged
to repudiate these debts or be crippled in paying
them off; and because he believed this extension to
Angle Pole would tend to bind the colony to complete
the Transcontinental line he would oppose the Bill.
Mr. CALDWELL congratulated Mr. Hawker on his
able and exhaustive speech. He rose to oppose the
second reading on the ground that the time has not yet
come when there is anecessityforconstruetingthis line,
although he had no doubt it must come sooner or later.
Further than to provide for the expenditure of a cer-
tain sum of surplus money, supposed at one time to
have been required for the construction of a portion
of the Great Northern line or lor getting o.'er the
“unemployed difficulty,” no just cause had been
Shown, or he would venture to say could be shown
why this line should be constructed at the present
time, and these reasons were not sufficient to justify
the undertaking.
In the first place, even supposing we have an
unexpended balance on this particular line, we
know that in other directions expenditure had
Mileage already built.
Time not come to con-
struct line.
Expenditure gaining on been gaining upon revenue at an alarming rate,
revenue. Let hon. members examine some of the papers
lying on these files, and it would become apparent
that the time has nearly come when all un-
warrantable expenditure should be put a stop to.
On looking at page 12 of the Statistical Register for
1886 it would be seen that during the 10 years pre-
ceding that date the expenditure on account of
Expenditure on public public works showed a strong upward tendency,
works for last ten In 1877 the total expenditure on public works was
years £1,281,936 17s. 3d. During the year ending June,
1886, it was £2,329,072 4s. Bd. showing an increase in
the year’s spending over the same time nine years
before amounting to exactly £1,047,135_ 7s. Bd., oran
average annual increase on the operations of the 10
years of £373,309 19s. 2d. In other directions expen-
diture had also been gaining upon us. On the same
page, under the heading of “General Expenditure, ’
we found results come out wonderfully similar. The
average expenditure during the same 10 years
showed as £2,045,318, and the average for the year
1886 was £2,234,395 6s. 4d., or £189,077 3s. above
the general average. .. . .. ,
With the exception of a reduction in the general
expenditure of last year amounting to £220,412 17s.


4d., on the expenditure of the previous year, during
every year since 1877 the expenditure had been con-
tinuous and progressive. But when we saw that the
general revenue of 1886 is lower than the revenue
of 1885 by £334,322 10s. 4d. ; the reduction in the
expenditure of the same year was surely impera-
tive. Sections Nos. 8 and 9 in the “Statistical
Register of 1886” were worthy of the consideration of
the Commissioner of Public Works and the very
careful attention of all representatives of the people.
When the expenditure was steadily and unmis-
takably gaining upon the revenue the time must
come when the public works policy of the colony
should be run on different lines. He said, therefore,
it did not matter very much whether we had or had
not a balance in favor of the construction of a sec-
tion of this particular railway line.
To be brief, he said most emphatically that we Cannot afford to make
could not afford to proceed with the work. The the line,
finances of the colony were certainly in » most
unfavorable condition. This was at least one and
one very good reason why the northern line should
not be extended at present. _
Another reason was that there was no real justification
for continuing the work, even were we in a position to
do so. If it could be shown that we were not going No rich deposits of
to lose money by the line, if it could be shown that minerals,
between the Peake and Pine Creek there was a patch
of auriferous or argentiferous country awaiting de-
velopment, then we would have some justification in
pushing the undertaking with all possible speed. But
such had not been shown. Both Mr. Warren and Mr.
Lindsay had spoken with great caution with respect
to minerals, and the fact stated by Mr. Warren that at
a depth of 300 feet they pulled up portions of petri-
fied timber did not look like hopeful indications for
gold. (The Commissioner of Public Works—’ 1 Yes, I
have pulled up petrified timber many
times from gold shafts.”) However, he con-
sidered the prospects of gold discovery
were not sufficiently hopeful to justify the Govern-
ment in asking the House to sanction this expenditure.
Then, too, the difference between the extreme points Difference by sea and
by land and sea was not sufficiently great to justify laud, too small,
the work. Unless the difference in distance was very
considerable no railway could possioly compete with
advantage against steamboat transit, which was
being improved every month. In this instance
the saving in distance was very much less than
half—2oo mi.es less than half.
Now. with all the special facilities which had been
allowed in the construction of the great Canadian lines
experience taught that thev had not been such un-
qualified successes, and yet between important points
it could be shown that the saving in distance effected
by them was about as one against four. The odds
were, therefore, against us, as the distance from
Adelaide to Port Darwin by land was 1,950 miles
and by sea only 3,500 miles _ . .
If the Northern Territory was going to be a success- Produce will go to Port
ful settlement, and there was no reason whv it should Darwin,
not be such, produce was bound to gravitate towards
the northern seaboard, and by far the larger half -
at least two-thirds-of the heavier goods, whether
from Port Adelaide or Port Darwin, were sure to
be carried by steamboat. It was not likely that a
passenger traffic on a narrow-gauge railway line
would compensate for the loss of a goods traffic.
The chances were against the establishment
of a European settlement, and the House had
shown a tendency to discourage the settle-
ment of Asiatics, consequently so far as the
human eye could see we were not justified
in building upon a probable passenger traffic.
Now let them see what could be said respecting a Saving of expense of
reported saving in the Postal and Telegraphic Depart- telegraph line small,
ment. The Commissioner had represented Mr. Todd
as stating on examination 11 that the proposed railway
line would lead to a saving of one half the present
cost of maintenance of the telegraph line." Tne cost


was stated to be something like £26,000. The balance
to be carried to the interest of the railway would
therefore be £13,000. This was not a very large
amount to help to keep up a failing rail-
way return. But what did Mr. Todd say ?
Mr. Todd said—“ The extent of the gain would de-
pend upon the route followed by the railway. The
telegraph line would have to be made to follow the
course of the railway, and the expense of shifting
might be very considerable. The telegraph line
would be so much safer and so much more readily
maintained if it ran along the railway route that it
would be necessary to shift it if the railway did not
follow the same course.”
Mails no saving in time. In the conveyance of mails from Britain Mr. Todd
i - i ■ j il A ...I«.i ht/mil<l irnvit oilrvVi^
plainly said the saving of time would be very slight.
He admitted it would be an advantage if com-
munication wt-re opened up with China and
the Straits Settlement.
He had shown that the financial condition of the col-
ony did not justify the work ; that there was no single
point, as far as the development and settlement of our
interior were concerned, which could be adduced in
favor of It, and a careful examination of the state-
ments made by Mr. Hawker confirmed him in this
opinion ; that neither the transit of goods nor pas-
sengers could be calculated upon, and that the mail
service was not likely to be benefited to any appre-
ciable extent.
The solitary reason lor proceeding with the work
seemed to lie in the fact that the Commissioner had
an unexpended balance of £177,000 to work upon, and
that there was likely to be a troublesome unem-
ployed difficulty coming to the front again.
The unexpended balance, however, need not trouble a
Government which has a deficiency of over £1,000,000
to provide for, especially when it had. been clearly
shown by the hon. member for Flinders that the
greater part of the deficiency had been caused by
robbing ordinary revenue to make up a shortcoming
resulting from the mistaken applications of loan
money. The £177,C00 conld therefore very profitably
be used in the reduction of the deficit. (The Trea-
surer—“ No.”)
How respect s ng the unemployed difficulty, which
was one of the peculiar developments of the time,
he would remind the Commissioner of Public
Works that we could not be expected to con-
tinue making provisions to meet It. The railway
would not have been at present extended to the
Peake had it not been for that diflficulty, and as
the Peake section of the line had been finished
without the disappearance of the trouble, from that
point the work must be continued to Angle Pole.
When this point was reached the difficulty would
Still be found to be something like—
“ That circle bounding earth and skies
Allures irom far, yet as I follow flies ”
He feared we would never be able to overtake it.
People were intended to work, but if he mis-
took not we were encouraging them to lean
too heavily upon the Government.
In giving relief in India it had been found most
expensive and most unsatisfactory to send men away
long distances from their wives, families, and friends.
Aecordirg to Sir James Oaird, who visited India in the
interests of a famine commission appointed by the
Imperial Parliament, it seemed just as well to give the
people the money and allow them to remain
at home, for the system of relief woik gave
satisfaction to no one. „ , .. ,
Water would find its own level if left alone and so
was it with labor. By continuing a system of relief
when the affairs of the colony were in a normal con-
dition mistakes were sure to be made, and we could
not well estimate the consequences of these mistakes.
The unemployed difficulty, if the eigne of the
times were to be correctly interpreted from the
standpoint of the present, was most certainly a
growing difficulty, and if taken under the fostering
Unemployed difficulty.
Belief works in India.


care of Government would grow up into most serious
and formidable proportions The producing and Relief works interfere
manufucturing industries in a young country should with private enter-
be able to absorb all available labor Such would prise.
have been the case had not public works beyond the
actual requirements of the people been unwarrantably
pushed on. .
Before the comprehensive policy of public Immigration,
works stage in our progress had been reached
laborers had to be imported for ordinary purposes.
After a certain point had been reached even our public
works were unable to absorb the stream of population
which had been induced to flow into the colony. As
a consequence it was found that we were actually im-
porting population at a considerable cost for neighbor-
ing colonies. This importation was discontinued, and
yet it was found necessary during the late years of
depression to provide relief works for that portion of
our population which was unable to find employment
at the legitimate vocations of the colony.
Now, much as he respected the claims of humanity,
much as he respected the pleadings of the great army
of the poor, he must protest against this disposition
to throw all the burdens of all the people upon the
shoulders of Government With an accumulated Debt,
liability amounting to over £19,1)00,000 the time had
come when we should begin to veto the further
growth of liability. He again repeated that it was
not because of any want of feeling towards the working
classes that bade him oppose the continuation of this
work, but the reverse. It was because lie did not
think many of them were sufficiently acclimatised to
do work to the advantage of themselves or the State
in such a locality, for If there had as yet been no great
sacrifice of life there had most certainly been a sacrifice
of comfort and a sacrifice of health. (The Commis-
sioner of Public Works —“It is a very healthy
country.”) He was surprised to hear the Commis-
sioner say that. (The Commissioner of Public Works
—“ Facts speak for themselves. There is nothing for
the doctor or dispenser to do.”) He was aware of a
number of one of the healthiest families in South
Australia who went on the Strangways Springs run 15
or 20 years ago, and came back to their father’s home
in Smithfleld one after the other almost ruined
in constitution. (The Commissioner of Public
Works— “ They didn’t take care of themselves.”)
He was stating facts which did speak for themselves.
Let the producing classes have every possible relief,
and they would very soon look about for assistance
and find employment for the now unemployed. Expe-
rience at any rate had proved that State super-
vision in this respect must have an end. Ex-
perience had proved that it was very question-
able policy to provide distant employment for men
who had wives and families dependent upon them.
It was correctly stated that the Government was now
competing with private enterprise. It would be better
to shovel the money at our disposal into the pockets
of private individuals than to continue voting away
large sums for the purposes of relief.
As the construction of that section of that portion of .
the line now under consideration was most emphati- Mines in South
cally a relief work it could not be opposed at a better Australia,
time than the present—the mineral discoveries in
South Australia proper were said to be very encourag-
ing ; the pastoral year, so far as quantity was con-
cerned, was said to have been a success ; the harvest
over the greater portion of the colony was believed to
be abundant. There should therefore be a reasonable
outlet for labor. For these and for other reasons he
would oppose the second reading of the Bill. (Hear,
hear.)


REPORT OP THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAIL-
WAY COMMISSION.
Mr. BASEDOW moved—“ That, in the opinion of
this House, effect should be given t 0 the report of the
Royal Commission on the Transcontinental railway."
He felt a question of this magnitude could not be
settled at such a late period of the session ; still he
wished to initiate the discussion, so that the House,
and later on the country general.}', might consider
the matter. In answer to the question— Is it ad-
visable at all to build such a line ? he did not intend
to reiterate all that had been already said by Mr.
Ward in 1885, but would only refer hon. members to
his arguments as given in “ Hansard ”
The principal points in favor of the line proposed
were that it would unlock our great interior, and it
would connect the two ends of our territory together,
and also with the rest of the world. The conclusion of
Government should not the commission was that it is desirable to construct the
build line.
line, but that it is not desirable that the Government
should build it, but that the work should be executed
on the land grant system. We should have to wait
many years for the Government to construct the rail-
way. (Hear, hear ) Its length was about 1,200 miles,
and Mr. Mais estimated the cost at from £3,000 to
£4,000 per mile. At £3,500 a mile the total cost
would be £4.200,000 at the least, and
the interest invoiced at 4 per cent, would
be £168,000 per annum. Was It likely that
the country would consent to add over £4.000,000
to our national debt, and pledge itself to an extra
payment of interest of £168,000 ?
The evidence of Mr. Goyder showed that the country
affected bv the proposed line would be about 340,000
square miles in the Northern Territory, and 100,000
square miles in South Australia proper. He did not
quite agree with the latter estimate, because he believed
that if we continued the line to Angle Pole, some of the
land south of the 26th parallel would be as well served
as if it were extended to the boundary of South Aus-
tralia proper. However, taking the figures as they
stood, we had 440,000 square miles to be benefited, part
of which was leased and brought in a revenue during
the first seven years of 6d. per square mile, and during
the next 18 years of 2s. 6d. per square mile. Taking
it that all this country were leased, we should have
440,000 square miles leased at 2s 6d, a square mile, or
an annual rental of £55,000. This meant that we
should have still to pay as interest on the railway
more than three times the amount we are likely to
receive from the rent of the land benefited.
Then with regard to the receipts from the traffic,
Mr. Mais’s evidence was as follows:- “ Question 1229.
What is your opinion of the prospects of traffic on
the line to the Peake?—l think as far as Hergott
the traffic will be sufficient to pay working ex-
penses ; beyond Hergott you lose the Queensland
traffic, and we have only our local traffic of the
interior to depend upon. 1290 Is there any
chance of the line beyond the Peake paying working
expenses ? - Personally I should think not, but my
knowledge of the trade of that part of the country is
very limited. I do not know whit amount of stock
there now Is north of Hergott. I do not, however,
think that in any case owners north of the Peake will
truck from the Peake station at such times as they
can travel their stock down to Hergott, and thus save
part of the railway charges.” Mr. Mais thus showed
we would not be likely to get our outlay back again.
He asked Mr. Flint “Supposing the line were built
have you any idea of the traffic it would be likely to
carry ?” and he replied—“ In the present state of the
country the traffic would be almost nil, and it would
remain so till the country is more settled."
Then Mr. Knuckey, who was very well acquainted
with the country, was asked— 1 Do you think it would
be advisable to extend the line beyond the Peake V
Cost of line.
Country served by line,
Rent of country served.
Receipts from traffic.
Trucking stock.
Enuckey.


And he replied—" I do not think it should be done by
the Government." He was further asked—" Is there
sufficient good country beyond the Peake, about the
Mac Donnell Ranges, to justify the construction of a
line to bridge across the desert country ?” And his
answer was—•• Ido not think so. I should say not.”
He would like, too, to call attention to the reply of a Warren,
practical man like Mr. Warren. He said, after com-
plaining very bitterly of the way in which the settlers
were treated by the railway authorities, and pointing
out the difficulties under which they were laboring,
that he did not think if the railway were continued
by private enterprise the same state of things would
continue, and that private people would consult their
own interests better.
Mr. Giles, in reply to his question, “What is Giles,
your opinion as to the advisability of building a
line of railway into that country?” said—“l should
hardly like to venture on an opinion on that
point.” Also asked—"Do you think a' railway
would improve the value of the country for purposes
Ot occupation, and induce settlement ?” he replied—" I
hardly think so. I hardly think there would be any
traffic at first for the railway to carry. But perhaps
that is not the only point of view from which to look
at the matter. It must not be forgotten that the rail-
way would be part of the overland route to India, and
therefore to England.”
He thought from the few quotations he had made
that hon. members would agree with him they would
not be justified in presuming it would be a success.
(Hear, hear ) It was not at all likely that they would
be able to make the line pay working expenses.
The whole of the receipts from the country under
consideration were £lB,OOO, and he believed that up Receipts from country,
to the present the expenditure exceeded that amount.
If the Government were to prepare a balance-sheet
showing the receipts from that country, and the ex-
penditure in the soape of police protection, poet and
telegraph offices, &o , he believed that it would be
seen that the expenditure was greater than the re-
ceipts. If they went in for building that line they
would have an additional expense of interest in the
shape of at least £168,000, and would be recouped by an
addition of about £3•',000. Therefore, he thought he
was justified in saying that the undertaking would be
a financial failure, and if it was put to the
count-y he was sure they would decide against
it and the Government who proposed it.
But it was not necessary that the Government should Not necessary for
build the line. It was in evidence that there were Government to make it.
large capita’ists in England who were looking out for
ventures for the sake ot employing their superfluous
capital. Mr Brown, m his evidence, told the com- Land grant,
mission he was sent out by a syndicate in London to
find out an outlet for the money which was so plenti-
ful there, and that he was about to enter into an
agreement with the '-overnment of Western Australia
for the construction of a line from Perth to Eucla.
Since then Mr. Brown has been out on an exploring
expedition, and he dared say that members had read
the account of his experiences. Mr. Brown gave the
commission to understand that the syndicate he
represented had an idea of constructing that line lor
a concession of ltf.ooo acres per mile. If that could
be done in respect of the country intervening between
our boundary and Perth, Western Australia, he be-
lieved we had every prospect of our territory, which was
equally as good and somewhat better, being taken up
by a syndicate.
He was given to understand that there were
gentlemen in Adelaide and others waiting for the
result of this investigation who were willing to
undertake the construction of the line on the land-
grant system, and why they should be able to do it at
a profit whilst the Government could not was ex-
plained by Mr. Thomas Walker, a practical man, in his
evidence before the commission.
Mr. Walker was asked by Mr. Burgoynelf Walker,
you reduced the earthwork to a minimum and put


Work done by private
company.
Private company v.
Government railway
Goyder on line paying.
in as little ballast as possible do you think a
line could be built through the interior at a cost
of £2,C00 per mile?-1 think so I would put in
the best rails and half round sleepers, which would
be just as good as square sleepers, and not so
costly. You would not want many stations in a
country like that, and what stations there were would
be of an inexpensive character —not like one we are
putting up in New South Wales which cost £7,000,
though perhaps £750 would meet all the
actual requirements of the traffic for some time
to come. I would go in for cheap _ stations.
The proper time for expenditure in that direction |s
when the traffic is so far developed as to make it
worth while. Ii the traffic never comes at all to the
extent that you expect it, then you are not burdened
with so much interest to pay. I would like to say
that it is absurd to draw up specifications providing
for absolutely faultless timber such as no one ever
sees, or to select as a sample brick out of a lot of
10,000 or 50.000 bricks, which no one can hope to
equal in the bulk. The only result is, as I have said
before, that in practice a good deal of modification of
the requirements falls to the inspectors, and what one
inspector will pass another will not, which introduces
a great element of uncertainty. A margin has to be
provided for that, for which the Government has to
pay the contractor.
1469. You have no reason to suppose that the
work would be worse done bv a private com-
pany than by a contractor under the Government?
—No; I would provide for that by the specifica-
tions, and if Mr. Mais had nothing else to do but
to supervise the work and see that the company
carried out the specifications he would be the very
man to have the work efficiently done. 1470. Would
it be an advantage to the colony that the line should
be made by a company instead of being made by the
Government?—l think so. It would be only making
bad worse to go on borrowing money to make the
railway. 1471. I think you scarcely understood the
drift of my question. Would it be an advantage in
this way, that the settlement of the country would be
promoted by a company having a large interest in the
interior?—Yes ; I think so. The company would try to
make the line pay, and would probably succeed. I have
observed in Sydney that the Government there cannot
make the tramways pay in spite of an enormous
traffic, but I would be very glad to make one of a
syndicate to take those tramway s over. 1472. A great
deal of the land in the interior is now unoccupied ; do
you think that settlement there would be much pro-
moted by the construction of the railway through the
interior ?—That is a subject to which I have paid no
attention. lam simply a railway contractor, and look
upon the matter only from that point of view.”
Then the witness was asked br the Hon R. O. Baker—
“ Perhaps, however, you might give us your idea on
this point. After the railway was made who would
be likely to make it pay its working expenses sooner,
the Government or a private company ?” He replied
—“ I think a company would do that They would
keep down the expenses by personally interested
supervision. I know that in my own business I find
that it makes a lot of difference if I am away for a
short time from the works. It cannot be helped. It
is the same thing, but in a greater degree, with
Government undertakings. Those whose own money
is not at stake cannot be expected to be so
economical as persons whose capital is in-
volved, in the success or failure, to practice economy ”
Nearly all the evidence was in favor of carrying out
the line by private enterprise. (Hear, hear ) Some
people feared that 111 results woulo follow the vesting
of large blocks of land in the hands of private persons.
Mr. Goyder was asked at question 474 “ Are you
of opinion that if the line were built there would be
any probability of the traffic proving remunerative ?
—That is a question that would require careful con-
sideration. It depends, of course, very much upon


the capital cost of the line. Unfortunately the South
Australian practice has been to make our railways
an expensive monument to the skill of the engineer.
I hold that our railways ought to be constructed
cheaply and managed with economy, and given those
conditions I believe the Transcontinental line might
be made a remunerative undertaking. Have you
formed any idea of what the cost per mile
ought to be?—l should make it on a totally
different principle to any hitherto adopted here, and
I would rather not say at what I would estimate
the capital cost. If you go in for traversing moun-
tains and making big tunnels, viaducts, and earth-
works, you swell up the first cost as well as make the
traffic difficult and expensive to work, because every
ounce of traffic has to be taken up the hill and down
again. I should prefer to skirt the hill and go a little
way round if necessary, following the contour of the
country on easy levels Then as to the working of
the traffic, I should like to adopt the American
system of letting the staff necessary for passenger
traffic purposes travel with the train. Another grave
fault of our present system, in my opinion, is that the
best site in a new township is reserved for the rail-
way. and a lot of land is thus locked up which cannot
be sold, and out of which the State derives no benefit.
By the Hon. B. 0. Baker—l daresay you know that
in many places in America the railway companies
do not build their stations or depots at all, but
ask other people to pay them a premium for the
privilege of putting the station up and using a portion
of it as an hotel ?—Quite so.
By Mr. Basedow —You are strongly in favor of
the line being constructed by private enterprise
and not by the Government ?—Yes ; and my reason
for that is, that in private ventures of that kind
the whole of the intelligence of the shareholders
is brought to bear to influence traffic and make
the lines remunerative That does not always
hold good in the construction of Government lines,
where the motive is not so strong in the direction of
making the lines pay as in making the works them-
selves very substantial and very safe.
You are not afraid of land monopolies arising out
of the land grant system ?—On the contrary, you can-
not create a monopoly in land. The people who would
take the land up would do so with a view to utilising
it. It has been said that in patting with our land we
are parting with our capital; but, for my part, I
consider that when we part with our land we are
simply bringing our capital into use.” (Hear, hear.)
That was also his own opinion.
At the present time there was a lot of land In South
Australia which for all the practical use it was might
just as well be in the moon. (Hear, hear.) It would
therefore be an excellent thing to arrange if possible
in the terms of the report of the commission for the
construction of the line. Even now at the fag end of
the session he would like to take the sense of the
House on the report so that the Government
might be encouraged to take action to carry the
recommendations of the commission into effect.
(Hear, heat, and Or. Cockburn—“ Oall for tenders.";
Yes, let tenders be invited. He was confident
that offers on the basis of the report of the com-
mission would be forthcoming. (Hear, hear) The
tenders might be in and the whole matter con-
sidered next session in the light of the offers received.
At any rate no further time slvuld be unnecessarily
lost. He was opposed altogether to borrowing more
money to continue the line beyond Angle Pole.
(Hear, hear ) He believed, however, that there were
several parties who were prepared to tender on the
basis laid down in the report of the commission. He
would strongly commend a careful perusal of the very
interesting details contained in the report to the con-
sideration of the House. (Cheers.)
Burden & Bonython, Printers, Adelaide.
Railway stations in
America.
Land monopolies.
Tenders


