

ON THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC
CHURCH
Extracts from letters of C. W. Leadbeater
to Annie Besant, 1916 —1923
COMPILED BY
C. JINARÂJADÂSA
1952
ADYAR




ON THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC CHURCH


ON THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC
CHURCH
Extracts from letters of C. W. Leadbeater
to Annie Besant, 1916—1923
COMPILED BY
C. JINARÂJADÂSA
1952
THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING HOUSE
ADYAR, MADRAS 20. INDIA


ON THE LIBERAL CATHOLIC CHURCH
THERE are in the safe of Bishop C. W. Leadbeater, which
is in my custody as his legatee, certain letters from
him to Dr. Annie Besant ; I publish extracts from the
letters without any comments. The footnotes are mine.
C. JINARÂJADÂSA


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney , July 25, 1916
Wedgwood has arrived, and is in good health. His
consecration to the Episcopate has had the unexpected
result of putting him practically at the head of the Old
Catholic movement as far as the British Empire is con-
cerned, all his colleagues (except, I think, one) in it being
Theosophists ready to work under his direction. This
being so, he desires most earnestly to offer the movement
to the World Teacher as one of the vehicles for His
force, and a channel for the preparation for His Coming.
1 took him therefore to the LORD MAITREYA at the
Festival, and He was graciously pleased to accept the
offer, and to say that He thought the movement would
fill a niche in the scheme, and would be useful to Him.
From what He said I inferred that He Himself had so
guided events as to produce this curious result, that a
branch of the Catholic Church, having the Apostolic
Succession in a form which cannot be questioned, should
be entirely in the hands of Theosophists, who are willing
and eager to do exactly as He wishes. He explained
that this was a method of bringing over the Holy Orders
of the old plan into the new one, and that this Old


Catholic Church might very likely be the only branch of
Christianity which would wholly and officially recognize
and follow Him when He comes. He does not wish it
to be aggressive in any way, but to go on quite quietly
for the present, carrying on its services for its small con-
gregation in London (as it is doing), gradually drawing
round it those who love the Catholic ritual, but want a
Theosophical interpretation of it and of the doctrine of
the Church. It will slowly spread, but will be ready
to receive a sudden impetus when He wants to use
it ; it is to mark time now, but to be prepared to
march forward when the order comes. With His per-
mission Wedgwood has consecrated me as a Bishop,
on the understanding that I am at perfect liberty to
wear my ordinary dress, and am in no way bound
to perform any ecclesiastical ceremonies or take any
outward part in the work unless I see it useful to
do so, but am to act as intermediary between the
LORD and this branch of His Church, referring to Him
any points of action or of doctrine upon which it
desires instruction.
An interesting little glimpse of occult ways came to
me the night after my consecration. My own Master
referred very kindly to it, and spoke of the additional
power to help that it had given to me ; and then He
remarked : “You thought you had given up all prospect
of a bishopric when you left your Church work thirty-two
years ago to follow Upasika 1 ; but I may tell you that
it would have been in this very year that you would
1 H. P. Blavatsky.


have reached it if you had remained in your original
work, so you have lost nothing except the emoluments
and the social position, and have gained enormously in
other ways. No one ever loses by serving Us ! ” That
struck me as curious, for I had never thought of it in
that way.
C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, September sth, 1916
We wish for your presence every day while we are
working at the reconstruction of the Catholic Ritual.
Your splendid gift of language, your wonderful power of
putting things poetically, would be invaluable to us. This
thing ought to be well done —the Ritual of His Church,
the only one combining the power of the ancient Church
with a true Theosophical expression of the real relation
between GOD and man ; all the greatest poets of the
age ought to be at work on it, not a couple of obscure
though earnest gentlemen who have no special capacity
for expression, whose productions are mildly common-
place ! The consolation is that our effort is merely
provisional ; it may fill the gap for the moment, and may
presently be replaced by something more worthy. Yet
who now living but you can write this permanent Ritual ?
For it must conform exactly to the old thought-form, and
yet contain no word that is untrue, no thought deroga-
tory to the Love of GOD and the dignity of man who is
a part of Him. Well, we will do our best, but we fully
recognize that the contract is beyond our capacity.


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney , December 12th, 1916
The night before last we had the honour of submit-
ting to the LORD MAITREYA the revised Ritual of
the Mass to be used by the Old Catholic Church, at
which we * have been working for many months. We
wished again and again that we could have had your
invaluable help in this task, for you have the gift of
language which is denied to us, and we felt so hopelessly
inadequate. The greatest poets and writers of the day
were needed for such a work—not two obscure Bishops
in a suburb of Sydney ! Our only qualifications were
familiarity with ecclesiastical forms, and a very deep
anxiety to do exactly what He wants. Our instructions
were to preserve the old thought-form and the working
of the old magic—the effect of the various acts at different
stages, the descent and return of the Angel of the
Presence, etc. —but “to take all the brown and grey out
of it and to substitute Gothic architecture for classical ”.
This we have done as well as we could, but apparently
not even yet quite sufficiently. It seems that the Great
Ones inspired the wandering bands of Freemasons (who
built most of the great Cathedrals of Europe) with the
idea of the Gothic type precisely as a physical plane
attempt to guide them towards the kind of thought-form
which it was wished that their religious services should
erect; but they were singularly slow in seeing the analogy.
They began in a slavish, well, say obsequious, and
* C. W. Leadbeater and J. I. Wedgwood.


shrinking attitude, regarding GOD as a Being who had to
be propitiated, begging Him to hear them for a moment
before destroying them, to have mercy upon them, and
generally acting as though He were an ill-conditioned
tyrant instead of a loving Father. So their devotional
thought made on the whole a flat-roofed sort of building
—a dead level of nervousness and anxiety, with frequent
depressions of slinking terror :
(I speak of course of the majority, not of the great
Saints, and I am but repeating what He Himself said to
us.) He wished us to substitute for this the splendid
swift uprush of the Gothic, dotted constantly not with
saucers of depression, but with spires and minarets of
ecstatic love and devotion :
Well, we have done what we could, but to make these
changes and yet keep the essential part of the old form
was no easy task. The Lord was so gracious as to tell
us that our result is a great improvement on anything that
has been done before, and that it will do very well to go
on with ; but I think He regards it as an intermediate
stage on the way to a Mass of Affirmation rather than


of prayer, in which we shall no longer ask GOD to do
for us all sorts of things which we ought to be doing for
ourselves —in which we shall not remind Him that He
did this or that long ago to the children of Israel, but
shall address all such explanations to our congregation,
and turn to Him only when we directly invoke His
Power in the great magical acts, and when we pour
ourselves out before Him in uttermost love and adoration.
But we must bring people along gradually, and this
already departs widely from their preconceived ideas.
He accepted it most graciously, altering only the expres-
sion “ Lamb of GOD, who takest away the sins of the
world,” which we had left in because of its age, though
we did not like it.
TALK BY C. W. LEADBEATER TO A GROUP
Sydney, about December, 1916
We submitted our Mass and received some short
comments on it. I think, if one may venture to speak of
such exalted Beings in such a way, and to use such a
phrase, that Our LORD was in rather a hurry. He had
something else on hand, because He disposed of the
Mass rather in a hurry. I will read you what the LORD
MAITREYA said :
“ Wherever possible, it is eminently desirable that all
public services should begin with a procession, which
passes singing among the people. The Asperges should
always be said or sung at every public Mass, and even
at a private and solitary Mass the Priest should dip hi s


linger or a sprinkler into holy water, and therewith
sprinkle the Altar thrice, cross himself once, and sprinkle
thrice with his back to the Altar. Then he should recite
the Collect which calls upon the Angel of the Mass.
Incense should be used at all Masses, however small
be the censer.
“ Please bear in mind at every point that, however
desirable the edification of your congregation may be, it
is not the primary object of the Mass. The drawing
down of the force and the formation of a perfect instru-
ment for its distribution must be the chief consideration.
In older versions of the Liturgy this has been subordinated
to the private preferences of individuals ; it will be well if
you can avoid that. The Priest must not think of himself
at all; he is either acting as My representative to the
people, or is leading the people in their approach to Me ;
in either capacity his efficiency will be impaired if he
thinks of himself as a separate person. Therefore there
must be only the one absolution, which he speaks in My
Name at the beginning of the Service. Under no circum-
stances should he kiss the Altar, nor should there be
kissing of hands or other objects ; all that had its place
in an earlier and different form of civilization, but is quite
unsuitable now. The only ceremony approximating to
that which I wish you to retain is what is called The Kiss
of Peace, though even for that I should prefer another
name-f The Salutation of Peace, or The Embrace of
Peace.
“ There is no harm in throwing in Latin phrases
where you are sure that every one present understands


and prefers them; but take care that they are not
used where they might lead to a suspicion of your
motive. Your * Dominus vobiscum ’is always addressed
to the congregation, and should therefore always be
spoken towards it. You do not offer blessings to the
Apostolic Angels, but rather receive them from them,
I inspired you rightly as to all these points when you
were working upon this before ; why seek to change
them now ?
“ The number of Collects is unimportant ; they
should not be unnecessarily multiplied in any of
your Services, though it is well to make the usual
commemorations. You have done well to adopt the
traditional chant for the Sursum Corda, and also
in deciding to separate and simplify the words of
consecration ; as for the Bread you say, “ This is
My Body,” so for the Wine you should say, “This
is My Blood ” ; those are the actual Words of Power,
whatever you may add afterwards. It is well to sing
or recite the hymns after the consecration as I gave
them to you, and not to substitute others. The Priest
should refrain from touching the holy Altar with his
hands. By all means make optional the use of the
remarkable prayer which your theologians unkindly
insist upon attributing to Me, 8 though in its present
form I have certainly no wish to be considered res-
ponsible for it. I approve the omission of the Last
Gospel, and the use of the First Ray Benediction after
Mine.”
* The Lord’s Prayer.


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, March / 9th, 1918
Last night the LORD MAITREYA was gracious
enough to receive some of us in regard to business
connected with His Church.
REPORT OF A TALK GIVEN BY
C. W. LEADBEATER AT THE HOUSE OF
T. H. MARTYN
Neutral Bay, Sydney,
Sep. 25, 1918
The Lord, I suppose two years ago, sent for the
Master Morya, and, so to speak, asked His permission
we ll, not exactly His permission—but said that it 4
would be useful, and would He consent to it being used.
Of course the Master Morya was very glad to do so. I
suppose that was done because the E. S. technically
belongs to the Master Morya, and so it would be
courteous to consult him with regard to the use of that
particular invocation. Now, let us see what lay between
them. Yes, as far as I can see, the idea is that that may
be used, but that in the hands of many, it would be in
the nature of a tremendous Benediction ; but no one but
ourselves would be conscious which it is. The permission
given certainly involves the printing of the thing, and its
use by everybody ; but it will mean much more when
used with the knowledge and the thought behind it.
* The First Ray Benediction.


The fact is, it 6 is put in exactly the same way, and in the
same way as is the other Benediction. The other Bene-
diction is not an actual statement : “ The Peace of God,
which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds . . ~” that is to say, “ May it keep your hearts and
minds ” ; it is a wish. It is very much more as we do it ;
but the words indicate a wish, not that the Peace of God
is upon you but, may it be upon you. The form of the
words is the same in each case ; but, most assuredly, we
know that we are commissioned to give a great deal
more than a wish, when we pronounce the Benediction 5 ,
The President * wrote and said, of course, “ Anything
that He wishes you may use ; we feel greatly honoured
at the selection.”
C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, 7th April, 1920
The LORD Himself stands behind them all, 7 and
utilizes to the last ounce every thought of devotion and
reverence which arises in connection with any of them ;
and He has been more than gracious and condescending
in the help which He has given us with this His latest
fledgling. He was so kind as to ask us to place the
ritual in His hands, and in a very strange and beautiful
way He made its aura or its higher counterpart a kind
of coruscating cylinder of light which He then passed
6 The First Ray Benediction.
6 Annie Besant, the Outer Head of the E. S.
7 All forms of Religion,


between His hands, thereby instantaneously detecting
certain flaws in it which He at once pointed out and
instructed us to rectify. The fact that He deigned to
take this trouble showed to us how keen was His
interest in the work which He had given us to do. Also
He told us to ask questions from the Master K. H. upon
points as to which we were uncertain, and the informa-
tion which we gained in this way was of the very greatest
value to us. Much of it I have incorporated in The
Science of the Sacraments. Afterwards, when it was
going through the press, Wedgwood thought it would
be desirable in some ways to alter certain parts of it to
make them agree more closely with earlier tradition ;
but when this was brought before the LORD, He said
with a smile : “No ; 1 inspired you rightly at the time ;
you had better leave it alone.” We felt very happy
about that, because it seemed to imply that He had
thought it worth while to set our thoughts moving along
the right line from the first.
C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney , May 14, 1920
I do not think that I ever sent to you a copy of the
message which the LORD MAITREYA sent to Wedg-
wood when he first came out here as a Bishop. 1 enclose
one now, for 1 know that everything which He says is
always of interest*
8 The two lines which follow and make the heading of the Message are in
the handwriting of Bishop Leadbeater.


Message from the LORD
MAITREYA to a Bishop .
“ Not for a moment would I have you sancti-
monious or hypocritical, proud or self-conscious ; yet
I would that your mission should be ever present in
your mind. Be natural, yet let your nature be one
with Mine, as Mine is with the FATHER. That is
the possibility which I have given to my Bishops
through the link which I have made with them ; yet
can this link be kept bright only through constant
use. Close and perfect is the communication which
I have opened ; it is for them to keep it open, and
for this sleepless vigilance is needed. This gift I have
given to them not for their enjoyment or advancement,
but that through them My flock may be fed. They
have been many to whom through the ages I have
offered this ; yet few have understood it and used it
aright, I have chosen you to hold it in these last days
of this dispensation, and to occupy until I come ; and
I know that the burden which I have thus laid upon
your shoulders is a heavy one. You know more of what
it means than many have done, and to bear it as it
should be borne will need all your strength ; yet I say to
you that you can achieve if you will. See to it that
you fail not in your trust. As I said to those whom
I chose twenty centuries ago, so I say to you now :
* Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world V


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney 9
. . . Some months ago Wedgwood sent you a type-
written copy of the revised ritual of the Mass. It was
suggested by the LORD that we should conclude that with
the beautiful passage which you wrote in the form of
admission for the E. S. —that which speaks of the Peace
which passeth understanding and ends with the words
“ the One Initiator, and see His Star shine forth.” 1
presume that when we print the Mass, as I think we
shall shortly do, in pamphlet form for the use of our
people, we must not include that, as it has never been
made public.
IJ This extract from a letter should appear in the correspondence of the
year 1916. When putting all the material together 1 knew of this extract, but had
only a copy which 1 had made in 1937, and I was anxious before incorporating it
to find the original. It was not with the indexed letters, though I searched for it.
It was only after page 14 had been printed that 1 found the fifth page of the
original letter, which had been mixed up with general correspondence and put
on a different shelf of the safe. The first four pages of this original letter, which
probably contained very confidential news, had evidently been destroyed by
Dr. Besant when she handed over to me all the letters to be kept by me.
I well remember Dr. Besant telling me, in connection with this request to
incorporate the First Ray Benediction at the end of the Mass, that she had
cabled her consent.


The following Notes are among the files in Bishop
Leadbeater’s safe. I print them from the copy which is
with me.
Much of this material was later incorporated in
Bishop Leadbeater’s book The Science of the Sacraments .
C. JINARÂJADÂSA


INSTRUCTIONS
(Undated)
“ It would be well, both in Baptism and in the Mass
and all your other Services, if you inserted at all critical
points words capable of being explained as indicating
what is really being done.”
Marriage
The idea of the Marriage Service is to open the
people each towards the other astrally and mentally,
then to draw a ring round them ; they re-acting upon one
another are intended each to intensify the other’s spiritual
life, so that the amount of force that can be poured
down upon them shall be greater than the sum of what
the two would do separately. Of course, there are many
cases in which this result is not achieved ; a very real
and careful co-operation is required, and many people
are not capable of giving this. It exacts a very high
standard ; it is aimed at keeping them perpetually in
love with each other, and each certainly sacrifices some-
thing. A man standing by himself is free to pour himself
out in all directions —he can do this unselfishly and gain
Z


results ; in order to gain this closer linking they are
focussed on each other more, and the idea is to procure
better results by means of this ecstasy of devotion. If
this is successful, the intensification produced is greater
than what they could reach separately. It is intended to
bring the two together in the way in which all humanity
should be, and eventually will be, brought together.
Quite a number nevertheless feel that something has been
lost ; few men after marriage are quite the same to their
friends. It is better not to risk repulsion by drawing the
auric ring round them before you have, as it were,
scratched up the new surfaces so that they may grow
together.
Vestments
The Cassock is the Priest’s distinctive robe ; it blots
out the things of the ordinary world and keeps him
going well in himself so that his thought is centred on
the work.
Alb : The white linen acts as a sort of armour and
prevents to a large extent outer interference. The breaks
in it, where the apparels are, allow radiation of the force.
In the ordinary Service it is sufficient to cover the trunk
with the surplice, the influence rays out through the sides
as well as from the bottom. In the alb the whole man
is isolated.
Amice : This should turn to fill in space between
the chasuble. It is best to have a red apparel also upon
the amice.


Rochet : The Bishop wears flame-coloured cuffs in
order that the power of the Holy Ghost may spray out.
Linen should be used not cotton, as the latter does
not repel influences to the same extent. Linen is emi-
nently a strong shield. The power does not radiate so
well through the linen therefore apparels are used.
Some vestments keep the man all right within him-
self, in a magnetized shell. Others are designed to ray
out the force upon the congregation.
Cope : The cope is like a magnified stole, the force
rushes round the gold strip. The Hood on the back of
the cope is a centre for storing the force. There should
be a basis or fringe of gold on the hood. Gold is better
than silver ; you can do all things with gold, only some
with silver.
Chasuble : The Gothic form allows of a bigger flow
of force. It should reach down nearly to the knees.
The power courses through the Priest ; his effort
then turns the force in the direction required ; for instance,
to the faithful departed. The Chasuble is intended to
concentrate the force. It was originally made sleeveless,
circular in shape, or ovoid. This ovoid shape connected
with the piscina—this is unintelligible at present.
The Chasuble works upon the principle of induction.
There is a circulation of force in the Priest, this largely
enters at the top of the head, then at the consecration a
line of fire runs in through the hands. This comes from the
Second Logos through the Buddhic principle of the LORD
MAITREYA. This sets up a current on the outside.
This induced current follows the gold line on the chasuble.


Force rushes round the narrow edge of the chasuble,
rushes round the yoke, and with great force down and
out of the pillar. Large torrent with Gothic shape ;
banks at angles in other shape. Also rushes down stole
and out of fringe. These forces tend to turn upwards,
though the garment is shaped like an extinguisher to
turn them down so that they flow out towards the con-
gregation. The circle on the back glows like a sun. If
it were not for the stole and amice the force would rush
out around the head. The gold on the stole at the back
attracts the force, which then rushes down the stole and
out of the fringe. The force seems to boil inside the
chasuble and produces induced currents outside.
The current from the Host rushes through the Priest,
and out at the back of the chasuble towards the People.
In front the pillar acts as a kind of shield, the force
rushes up this ; excitation would be produced otherwise.
When the Priest turns towards the people, the current is
reversed. All the forces take very graceful forms. When
rushing around the corners of the Latin cross, the force
banks up like a bicycle track. The gold cross on the
stole is to cause forces to converge on cross instead of
raying out of the head. They are drawn down also from
the medulla and then shoot down the stole. The cope is
not shut in front, therefore it is not used to work at the
people from the back, as with the chasuble.
Maniple : When the Priest makes the sign of the
cross over the consecrated Elements, there is a great
sense of pressure or tension. The outrush of force is
well guarded by the right-hand, but not upon the left.


Therefore the fringe on the maniple is designed to catch this
force and send it in and through the Priest, so that it does
not escape at the left of the altar. He banks up the
force. The placing of the left Hand on the breast, while
the crosses are made with the right, is to present fringe of
maniple broadside on.
Magic of Rays
Each Ray has its own fine of Yoga, and develops
centres differently. Some of these are not particularly
appropriate to the present day. Some Rays collect force
from some centres and turn it down to others. There are
two thousand four hundred and one varieties of Elemental
Essence, and each Ray uses them differently. The most
perfect vehicle for the LORD would be one born on His
Ray, also those people who came over from Venus. The
Sixth Ray has not specialized much in the use of the
intelligence. It works more with the medulla, and taps
the force there. The force there is near the surface and
can be drawn out. If the brain is used much the force
tends to radiate at the top of the head. According to
another system that force can be taken through the throat
centre. The Bishop’s appeal to the people is greatly
through the heart, therefore he uses the pectoral cross.
The paternal love of the Bishop works out through the
pectoral cross. You can collect force from various centres
and send it out through one.
Mitre : The Bishop draws the three forces through
the Triple Atma, and so down. The interval between the


Logos and the Bishop is great. Hence there are inter-
mediate stages. The LORD is one of these and belongs
to the Second Ray. He is a manifestation of the Second
Logos more than He is of the First and Third. The
three forces coming through Him come through the
Second at that stage ; whatever comes through the
Second takes two sides, two sexes, positive and negative.
The force flows to the Bishop through his mitre when
certain things have to be done. The mitre catches these
two phases of the force. There should be three divisions
on each side of the mitre. When you want the three-
fold force brought down from the Christ, the mitre is used.
It is not needed at Mass generally, because you take in
force from the front. It was seen that on one occasion
when the force accumulated in the head and overflowed,
it ran out of the lapels of the mitre into the border of the
cope and so out upon the people.
“ I shall use whatever you have, but if you want to
get the best results with the least expenditure of force use
these methods.” If these methods and vestments are
used, more can be done with the Master’s force.
Crazier : Desirable to have three sections.
Focus and centre in knot. If people were touched
with this knot physical cures would be a possibility.
Intense centre of living fire, influence shoots up. Physical
and etheric strongest there. Other grades of force are
there also, but physical and etheric are like an outer
body. It is best to have definite partitions of filters in
the Staff, made of chalcedony, chrysoprase, jade or
jasper.


Division I. This blocks back physical and etheric ;
astral, mental, and higher force rushes up. Curve checks
uprush, turns it, and makes it easier to direct it. The
portion from first to second division affects the emotions
principally, encourages devotion and so forth. The
portion from the second to the third division checks and
holds in the mental aspects of the force, so would tend
to encourage high thinking. The little knob at the
termination affects principally the causal body. The
whole Staff is permeated with Buddhic influence ; Buddhi
can permeate all principles if only people would let it.
It is well to have a sapphire at the large knot or knob.
Also the spikes coming from the Staff allow these
different grades of the force to flow out from the different
sections of the Staff upon the people. One scheme
would be to have a sapphire at the knob, rubies upon
the astral portion, emeralds upon the mental, and then
a diamond.
There is a connection between the pectoral cross
and the Staff, probably complementary. The Crozier
can act simultaneously in several directions ; it acts
upon the Bishop, it receives from him, and also rays
out power upon the congregation. We shall probably
find that this arrangement is closely associated with
the forty-seventh proposition of the first book of
Euclid. When the Star is evoked M , the Crozier should
be held.
The centre in Crozier has many layers ; to get at
the real heart, you have to go very high up. At the
** At the end of the First Ray Benediction.


highest level, the thing in the centre showed a blinding
light in three points, white, blue and rose.
These can only be seen by the Triple Atma in
ourselves ; they are an expression of the same thing in
Him. They are far stronger in the Crozier than their
present development in Bishop Leadbeater.
Various Croziers were examined, those of Bishop
Harold Brown and Archbishop Kelly and Cardinal
Newman. None of them exhibited much power save
that of the last. Archbishop Kelly’s had a dull glow
at the heart of it ; it seemed to come mainly from
the devotion of large numbers of people. Newman’s
Crozier glowed. The Church appears to be very inert ;
the great fact of the Mass remained—even that limited
in its power ; the side-avenues are practically choked
up. Some of the men do understand a little. Some
of the Croziers examined have a rosy glow, largely
reflected from the thoughts of the man who used them.
But there seems no idea of their real use ; the link
is sterile.
Baptism of Adults
Baptism is intended for infants, the omission of
the ceremony cannot be made up for in later life.
For grown-up people it is mainly a matter of form,
although a wholesome and beneficent influence is
exercised.
The questions formulated were : What portion of
the Baptismal Ceremony would usefully be performed


in the case of adults, (a) who had never received Baptism
but were about to be confirmed, (b) who had received
Nonconformist Baptism, (c) who had received Anglican
Baptism, wherein the oils are not used.
The administration of the chrism is not without its
use, even the making of the cuirass, especially in those
young and unmarried. Confirmation is of greater im-
portance to older people. All these are part of a
scheme, they follow in definite sequence, and when not
taken at the time originally intended they are to some
extent a form only, though not without their general
use. Admission to the Eucharist need not in any
way depend upon these ; but that everything may
be in order, it has been well that you have done as
you have.
The operation of Baptism on a baby is very far-
reaching. The power rushes through the whole creature
and cleans it up very thoroughly. The adult has already
established some of these conditions for himself, but not
so perfectly ; a modus vivendi is established, the currents
are flowing much in the way that Baptism would have
caused them to flow, but the corners, so to speak, are not
cleaned up ; much of the aura seems unvivified, indeter-
minate matter not doing much ; tendency of lees to settle,
dregs to be formed. There is much less of all this when
a person has been baptized in infancy. Adult Baptism
cannot obviate this. There is in the child a clear field
for action, in the adult not so. But the cleansing of the
gateway is useful; the thought-form is the same, but
there is a difference of conditions in which it works so


great that the Baptism is not operative to the same
extent. The scheme is arranged to have a clean sheet on
which to write. The chakrams are already open ;it is
possible to develop and increase the size of an adult
chakram, but the baptismal way is not the way to do it;
it should be done from within. The things you are trying
to do, in the case of an adult, are already done, and
done less perfectly than if you had done them in
infancy.
We pour divine life into form, but we associate with
it a kind of spirit who becomes individualized, becomes
a kind of Deva instead of a sylph. This is how a seraph
is made, the seraph who loves most. The LORD has
used this scheme of the Sacraments for helping on this
other evolution. For an adult a different type of entity
is given, lacking in what is almost the mother-love of the
seraph, but which can be developed into a keener
intelligence—more worldly-wise. The guardian angel
grows by the work he does ; he individualizes. The
man helps and is helped. If we leave the work to
be done solely through the sacramental channel, the
thought-form of the Christ chooses the entity and does the
work. But if we can see and do this we can save Him
trouble. A more worldly-wise entity is needed for the
adult. There is something half cynical about the creature
made for a grown-up, he does not seem to be expecting
very much. The baby’s is optimistic, full of love and
hope and schemes for the future —vaguer perhaps. There
is a difference in him of later evolution ; he belongs to a
different order of angels.


Questions
Is it worth while repeating Confirmation conditionally
in the case of those who have received it according to the
Anglican or Eastern rite ?
“ Confirmation is not a prerequisite for the reception
of the Holy Body and Blood ; but it is desirable where
people wish it, and would in certain cases be of great
use, of less use in others. A matter to be recommended,
but not to be insisted upon. There is no necessity for
any of these things, but it should be understood that they
are helpful, and that the help may often act in unexpected
directions. The sun is shining, you may as well come
out into the sunshine.”
Confirmation
At the preliminary blessing of the Holy Ghost,
“ May the blessing of the Holy Ghost be upon you, and
the power of the Most High preserve you in all your
ways ”, you bore down simultaneously into perhaps a
hundred brains. This blessing is to prepare the way ;it
widens out the connection between the Ego and his
vehicles. The blessing goes into the Ego. Then later
the Holy Ghost is given. The object of this blessing is
to stretch everything. Then you proceed to fill up the
holes. The vow is propounded. The Bishop takes the
hands of the candidate in his, and the vow goes up
through him to Christ, from Whom the response flows
down. At the words of Confirmation, the whole of the


Triple Atma is set going at three levels. At the words
“ Receive the Holy Ghost ”, there is an outpouring from
the Third or lowest level of the Holy Spirit Aspect ; at
the words “ Whereunto I do sign thee ” etc., an out-
pouring from the second level of the Holy Spirit ; at the
words “ I confirm thee ” etc., an outpouring from the first
level of the Holy Spirit Aspect. These are in the direct
line of descent from the Holy Spirit. At the words, “In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost ”, a further outpouring or continued outpouring
takes place. At the words “Father” from the First
Level into the Atmic principle reflected into the etheric
double ; at the word “ Son ” from the Second Level into
the Buddhic principle, which is reflected into the astral
and inflames that ; at the word “ Holy Ghost ” from the
Third Level into the higher Manas, which is reflected into
the lower Manas. The Confirmation gives the man an
opening through which a constant flow can be kept going.
There is a closer connection between the Ego and its
reflection and also between the Ego and that of which it
is an expression. Part of the work is to scour him out,
therefore the chrism is used. Confirmation makes a man
well armed and equipped for the battle of life.
The top spire reaching through the Buddhic and
Atmic planes belongs to the Episcopate ; this extends
down through the main bell, working at the causal level
which appertains to the Priesthood ; the deacon draws
from the lower rim of the bell, mainly astral.
When a higher grade of ministry is conferred, not
only is a tube pushed up higher but also it is widened ; so


that it can transmit a greater volume of power. All force
comes through from the highest planes, but the question
arises at what level can it be effective. The deacon
seems to work mainly at the astral level. The reservoir
represents the official and guaranteed force—the irreducible
minimum. Besides this, and counting more largely than
was at first supposed, is the personal equation. The
ordained minister has a link made at his appropriate level
with the LORD MAITREYA ; he becomes “ His man ”.
There is a line which goes not to the reservoir but
through to Him, The Priest is united with Him, becomes
in a certain sense an outpost of His Consciousness,
potentially, up to the causal level —like a pupil. It is his
part to vivify this connection and become more and more
a personal manifestation of the Lord. Priests and Bishops
by the thousand use only the mechanical part and not
this more direct individual connection.
The Bishop becomes linked with the Triple Spirit of
the Lord, reaching up to two higher levels, Buddhic and
Atmic. Thus the blessing may come through the Triple
Atma of the LORD, to that of the Bishop, that is why he
gives the triple cross.
The Priest draws it at the causal level through the
diagonal line, and therefore gives one cross only.
An Anglican Bishop was seen, “ with over-flowing
side whiskers not knowing in the least what he is doing—
but a very good and painstaking man ”, He had not
opened up this connection, but is merely administering
his diocese. Some of the Romans are fine, but many
are not. (Bishop) K. is rather attenuated, he might see


for he is quite psychic ; and might rise to the height of
his opportunity.
One to six represent the Logos, also Principles of
LORD MAITREYA. Orders —sympathetic vibration —
magnetization—very close relationship with Christ. If the
man likes to do it, he could become a very close representa-
tion of the Christ down here. Deacon ; six linked to twelve,
power over thirteen. Priest; five linked to eleven, six to
twelve, power over fourteen. Bishop ; three linked to
nine, five to eleven, six to twelve, power over fifteen, also
four to ten. The deacon should be acquiring knowledge
and developing the higher and lower Manas. The Priest
should be developing at the Buddhic level ; it is desirable
to develop knowledge before the sweep of the Buddhic
powers come into operation. The Bishop becomes a
manifestation of the Christ principle, capable of raying
that over his congregation.
Minor Orders
Not part of the original Institution. A distinction must
be made between blessings and those ceremonies which
give definite powers. There are only three orders in the
true sense, Deacon, Priest, and Bishop. These put the
recipient in definite relation with the Christ as representing
Him, and through Him the Logos Himself. Minor Orders
have their uses but do not rank in this way. He ordained
these three. Early in time it was thought desirable to
have a period of probation for the Diaconate, as the latter
is a probation for the Priesthood. It was desirable that


men should have that period of probation before the
definite link with Him was made. They, therefore, took
their vows a year before time, that was the Sub-Dia-
conate, a definite setting apart from the world.
At an early stage the laity were encouraged to take
a part in work by being set to read. In earlier days the
Bishop used to send round charges when unable to visit,
like the Epistles of St. Paul and modern Pastoral Letters.
They were constantly read, and the laity were often set
to read them. It was felt that those who were entrusted thus
should be blessed. There were also lay-readers. The
readers of the law in the Jewish Synagogues were very
important. Then came the idea that any who took part
in the work of the Church should be blessed. These
acolytes were set apart by a solemn blessing, that each
might do it in God s Name. Exorcists were called in to
help the Priest, those who were found able to do this,
who had strong wills and mesmeric force. It was not
intended that people should pass through these grades in
definite order. Different powers were given to different
sets of people. This arrangement having come into being,
advantage is taken of it to give people help.
The cleric dedicates himself to the Divine Service ;
he is not prevented from marriage ; but is willing to make
some sacrifice in his life for the Divine Service, to give up
worldly amibition, for instance, for the sake of helping in
religious work. Hence the cutting off of the hair as a
token of sacrifice. The long and scented hair was con-
sidered a great glory in those days. They shaved com-
pletely in imitation of the holy men of old generally.


There was some purpose for this in the case of the latter
—the free passage for the force when they were trying to
arouse the chakram at the top of the head, cleanliness, etc.
This was not for these boys, but they imitated the general
custom. Next the doorkeeper gives a general purifica-
tion and astral control. The lector gives an illumination
and strengthening of the mind. The exorcist, working
mainly through the causal body, gives a control of the
lower vehicles and the will. The acolyte gives the bless-
ing more at the Buddhic level. It was felt desirable that
for the service at the altar persons must develop the
power of receiving spiritual force. The Minor Orders
do not necessarily give these powers, but give to
the people a superior opportunity of doing it for
themselves.
A clear distinction must be between the Orders of
Sub-Deacon and Deacon, and the Office of Sub-Deacon
and Deacon exercised at High Mass. They are not at
all the same thing and the names originally were different.
A Sub-Deacon should not really officiate at Mass. The
prayers coming at the end of the acolyte ordination are
three in number. They were intended to ask for him the
qualities of the other three minor grades, that is to say
Minor Orders. The acolyte must develop in love and
service.
The questions to which the above is an answer are ;
(a) the effect of Minor Orders ; (h) why in the Roman
Church since about the 13th century is the Sub-Diaconate
ranked as a Major Order ; and the Episcopate regarded
as the “ plenitude of the priesthood ”,


Question : Why the imposition of one hand in con-
ferring the Diaconate, and of both at the Priesthood ?
The Bishop should hold his Staff when he confers the
Diaconate. The effort of breaking through the crust and
opening up needs the Staff ; for the conferring of the
Priesthood he is available in a different way, and the
further power can be given through the principles of the
Bishop himself.
Question : Why the two impositions of hands in
conferring the Priesthood (the second of latter introduc-
tion), and what does each do ?
The first imposition is intended to give the power of
the Christ Himself, of the Second Aspect ; the other
gives the power of the Holy Ghost, which also, of course,
comes through the Christ. The first goes deeper in.
The Christ’s power is always silent, has not yet reached
the level of speech, but the Holy Ghost pours out in
tongues.
Question : Historians state that the practices of
reservation of the Blessed Sacrament for Worship and
Benediction thereof are not primitive. Seeing how
valuable these are why should this be ?
Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament is a com-
paratively late and novel introduction.
Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament involves the
coming of an angel again. The thought-form merges into
the Priest while he gives the Benediction ; that given
is the blessing of the LORD. The LORD looks down
(Avalokiteshvara) through different avenues. The Bishop
gives the ordinary Benediction with a force that comes
3


from the Three Aspects of himself, vivified by the third
line in him, the three levels of the Holy Ghost. When
the Benediction is given with the Blessed Sacrament, all
is vivified by the second line in him, it is a Benediction
of the Second Ray. That is also in our ring, linked with
Him. At this Benediction, the Christ Himself is standing
there. The humeral veil is worn because it is not well
that hands should touch so great a thing. It is the
blessing of the Christ in Person, and all that it means.
Benediction with the Blessed Sacrament held in the
hand was given before ; but the LORD Himself tries
experiments, and tries new methods of pouring out
blessing. He did not invent this while upon earth, but
later. The advantage of this ceremony is that whereas
in the case of the Mass the consecrating force can only
be called down before noon, this force being already
there can be utilized at any time.
High Mass
In what way does High Mass differ from the ordi-
nary methods of celebration >
Fundamentally there is no difference. The ceremony
is surrounded with glory and beauty and so intended to
stir up the hearts and minds of the people, and make
them more receptive. There is thus more for the Angel
to take back with him. Music is a sort of entity or
congeries of entities ; when music is offered in the Mass
it is an offering of the Music-Deva, not the Gandharvas,
which the Angel takes back. Every one using music is


to that extent associating himself with a very great music-
angel. The earth is a great intelligence, and music is
one of the faculties of earth. You help the earth to
express himself when you play or sing. The earth can
materialize some of these thought-forms of himself.
Question : The anointing of hands with the Oil of
Catechumens at the Priesthood ; of hands and head with
chrism at the Episcopate ; what do these do ?
Oil of Catechumens is constructive, used in the
building up of forms. The anointing is a setting apart of
the hands for saintly service, a forming of them for trans-
mission of that tremendous power. The hand of the
Priest is a specialized thing that can transmit blessing.
The anointing brings the opening forces to bear upon
them, and endues them with power whereby, along the
lines that you make in the anointing, the influence can
pour out, the two fingers that touch the Host. It is not
so much that you set up lines of force in the aura, but
rather a higher working altogether. It is like the magneti-
zation of steel ; the anointing operates so that certain
forces can pass through the hand and tempers the hands
so that they can bear forces. It is not only a consecra-
tion, a setting-apart, but a preparing the spiritual side of
the Priest so that he can conduct the power and there is
the idea associated with this of being able to conduct that
power safely. It is like conducting fire, and without the
anointing this might be dangerous. The power of the
Host may work very curious results in unworthy sur-
roundings. For example there are stories of the Host
burning up a vampire.


The chrism works at a higher level ; its power is
purifying on the lower levels, and on the higher levels it
is a vehicle of the Divine Fire. Its higher side is power.
The effect is similar to that upon the Priest but at a
higher level ; things flow through the head of the Bishop.
It was clearly intended that every Bishop should have
the Brahmarandra centre turned up, so that he can emit
through that centre. Forces come down along different
lines and intensify one another. The double imposition
of hands upon the Priest is partly for that purpose. In
Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament you have an even
more extreme example of this inter-working. You have
the blessing of the Christ, then that of the Host, another
aspect, and that reacting again upon the power of the
Holy Ghost working through the Priest. Thus you
have a tremendous power, like the play of celestial
lightning.
Question : Does the Roman rite of ordination to the
Priesthood confer any powers greater than the Anglican ?
The Priest is the persona of Christ, and has the keys
to open the Reservoir. But a great many lines of activity
are opened up by collateral ceremonies ; these do not
seem to exist in the same way for the Anglican. What
was said about the inter-action of these different lines
of force applies also in this case.
Touching the thought-atmosphere of the different
Churches, the following was gained. The Roman, the
Anglican, and Greek : possibly each has something which
the other has not so fully, and each has limitations. The
Roman has magic worked out in detail more perfectly


than the others ; but he seems to be arrogant, the magic
is the great thing and not its effect upon the people. He
thinks more of the power of doing it, the power of the
Church, than of the people for whom he does it. The
Anglican and Greek are less effective in some ways, but
more human. The Roman represents the Shiva Aspect.
There is more kindliness, but less efficiency in the Angli-
can. The Greek is very devotional, but the devotion is
of a curious type. It does not seem to be connected
with intellect of our sort at all. There seems no broad
intelligent grasp of things; it is rare ; intellect seems in
abeyance—unencouraged—and when it exists it appears
to be a power of hair-splitting. When they have bored
into the essence of things, they have no power of relating
things to each other. This applies even to some quite
big people. They would have wasted their time over the
homoousion controversy. They bore in and get at the
innermost feeling of a thing. It is a semi-Atlantean
method.
Question : Why Priests also impose hands at an
ordination to priesthood and not to the diaconate ; is this
only to give the witness of the Church, or does it transmit
power of any special character ?
The Bishop lays on hands and pours in divine force ;
it opens up the aura of the man, which swells prodigious-
ly ; while thus swelled out and sensitive, the Priests
give their quota and they are channels. Some may be
on a Ray which is not the Bishop’s, and so give something
additional to him. No power is thus conferred but
something may be given that is useful for a candidate’s


development. At the Diaconate the man is not already
opened up, and therefore these powers cannot so well
be poured in. The conferring of the Diaconate is more
like a surgical operation, a splitting of the man. If two
Bishops are present at an ordination to the Diaconate
only one had better do the work, it is better that one
type of influence alone should perform what is done. A
Priest sitting in the choir performing no sacerdotal
functions is more magnetized in the presence of a
Bishop, is a better channel, and should be more
effective.
Question : At an episcopal consecration is each
Bishop an independent channel of power, and supposing
that by some mischance the consecrator were no Bishop,
would the act of another Bishop simultaneously imposing
hands remedy the deficiency, even though he said no
words ?
Yes, each Bishop is an independent channel of force.
If one Bishop taking part in the ceremony were no
Bishop, he would not affect the ceremony either way.
The other Bishop would effect the consecration, because
he would have the intention of consecrating, and would
have the formula of consecration explicitly in his mind.
It makes no difference that he does not give to it vocal
utterance. The consecration in the Mass would be
effective if the Priest had the words of consecration and
the requisite intention in his mind, even though he did
not say those words aloud.
Question : Is there any particular cogency in the
generally accepted “ matter ” and “ form ” of Sacraments


or may it be said that the doing of some action and
the saying of words clearly indicating the power
to be conferred, on the part of one duly qualified,
suffice ?
Certain arrangements were made ; the more closely
they are adhered to the easier will be the working of
the rite. It would work with a certain amount of latitude.
It would, for example, be more difficult to work through
red-currant wine, more trouble would be caused. That
is to say, part of the force would be used in working. It
might be that more force would have to be poured out
or that less result would be produced.
Question : The doctrine of intention. Could Bishop
Ryle for example, by explicitly stating that he did not
intend to ordain his candidates as sacrificing Priests but
only Gospel Ministers, render nugatory what his Church
intended him to do, or would the Higher Self, knowing
better, operate without being hindered by the mistaken
notion of the personality ?
The answer to that was : “It is not Bishop Ryle
who ordains, it is I.”
Question ; Would it be a possibility to ordain a
woman ?
These forces as now being used could not be sent
through a feminine body safely at all; an entirely different
arrangement could be made, but it would be a different
arrangement. All priestesses in olden days were priest-
esses of Goddesses. The side of devotion represented
by the Blessed Virgin is for women ; she has taken the
place of Astarte and Isis.


Question : At what level does Absolution work ?
It may work in etheric matter, astral or mental ; it
works in all three, sometimes in one, sometimes in an-
other. Man has created a twist or distortion ; that is
combed out with lines of fire wherever it is. It gives
evolution to particles of matter also.
Postures of Laity according to Roman Usage
Taken from The Mass and Vestments of the Catholic
Church by the Right Reverend Monsignor John Walsh,
published by Benziger Bros.
Low Mass
Kneel during entire Mass, standing only for Gospel,
and (in some places) for Credo. It is permissible to sit
from Credo to Sanctus, and again from after the Com-
munion till the last prayers are said.
High Mass : (1 think he means Missa Cantata). All
stand during Asperges. Kneel from beginning of Mass
till Gloria begins, then stand. Sit when Priest sits,
during notices and sermon. Stand during singing of
prayers except at requiems. Sit during Epistle, stand
for Gospel and while Priest says Credo. Kneel while
Officiant recites and choir sings Et incarnatus est a . Sit
for Offertory, rise when Priest begins Preface, and kneel
at Sanctus. Sit during Purification, stand for last prayers,
kneel for blessing, stand for last Gospel.
u And was made flesh.


Solemn High Mass : Same as above, but stand not
when Priest sings Gospel but Deacon M . Stand when
Congregation is censed.
Vespers : Congregation stand as Celebrant enters,
kneel when he kneels at altar for preparatory prayers.
Then rise with him, and stand till first Psalm is intoned.
Sit during Psalms, stand for Chapter, Magnificat, Incens-
ing of Altar, singing of prayer, during anthem of Blessed
Virgin Mary, and concluding prayer.
Benediction ; Kneel from beginning to end. If
Te Deum is sung all stand, but genuflect at Te ergo
quaesumus M . When Blessed Sacrament is replaced in
Tabernacle all rise. All persons entering or leaving
Church when Blessed Sacrament is exposed must genu-
flect on both knees and incline the head and shoulders
moderately.
Asperges : People stand, they do not kneel with Priest.
Question : Is every call on the Reservoir a touching
of His Consciousness ?
Not quite in that way. The force comes from the
Reservoir, but He sends it. An analogy : A man living
here, may still have an image vivified by his Ego in some-
body else’s Devachan. He is unconscious of it down
here. His consciousness, so much greater than every facet
perhaps within it, but not quite an act of volition in our
sense,
Biretta : Like cork in a bottle ; where there is violent
excitation it prevents waste of force—highly charged
u Query : but not stand when Deacon sings Gospel, not Priest.
M Therefore we beseech Thee.


battery. As Priest goes into church the battery is waking
up and keyed for action. Whilst the will directs the main
current of force, there is still much boiling of force. The
blessing is given with right hand, worked by left side of
brain ; therefore there is no rib on biretta so that the line
of force lies open on that side.
Because people do not understand these schemes,
and in order that it may work with ignorant priesthood,
it is hedged around with innumerable little precautions.
A man who understands could do a lot of these things
by will ; for example, an etheric materialization would
serve instead of some of the Vestments.
Zuchetto : Chrysostom and others did not wear the
Zuchetto. Do not seem to find it up to the sixth century.
Wolseley had one — A.D. 1500 odd ; not universal even
then. In Rome about this time some wore it, others did
not ; the Vestments were many and complicated.
Mantelleta and Mozetta : A cherry-coloured Mantel-
etta was seen, worn over the Stole. Silk holds in the
force, and it flows out from the Manteletta in front of the
Bishop. The Bishop under these conditions is not him-
self acting as the direct channel, that is to say celebrating ;
much is stirred up in him by sympathy, it is collected and
poured out through the front of the Manteletta towards
the Celebrant and helps him. The Bishop is a high
power battery, excited by induction, and the force pours
out towards the Celebrant. This induction force ap-
parently does not require metal for transmission. The
Manteletta should be of silk. The lining, that is to say,
should be of silk. The Mozetta not open at front, it is


however shorter, and the force surges out from the bottom
of it and around the Bishop. Therefore the pectoral cross
is worn outside the Mozetta but inside the Manteletta.
The cross is a permanent receiving and discharging
station, one of the links of the Bishop with the Christ.
The Bishop of higher dignity who wears the Mozetta
is supposed to be more highly evolved. The lower
grade Bishop needs the opening in the front of the
Manteletta so that the force may be collected and
radiated out in a special direction ; but the higher-
grade Bishop is assumed to have more force and
can afford to allow it to flow out in all directions
around him, to ray out upon the choir, in addition to the
Celebrant. The force also pumps out through the red
buttons of the Mozetta. It turns up around the Bishop
who is like the stamen of a flower, the colour produced
forming the petals of it. For the same reason the
Manteletta has no sleeves, so that the force may be able
to flow out along the sleeves of the Rochet and especially
out of the flame-coloured cuffs.
Ecclesiastical Colours : The scheme turns upon the
order of colours in the spectrum. On great occasions
the full power of the white light is turned on ; on other
occasions the colour at one end of the spectrum is used ;
on other occasions that at the other end, and on still
others the colour at the middle of the spectrum. The
violet is piercing, actinic, cleansing, almost exciting ; the
red is a tremendous glow, but encouraging, heartening,
warming, shining ; the green represents sympathy,
balance, loving-kindness, it is that kindly sympathy and


interest which we should feel at all times to all people.
Green represents the intermediate condition, the balance
of forces. White is the combination of all, the highest
joy and greatest exaltation. With the violet the force
is more turned upon yourself perhaps, it makes you a
good channel, it is to make yourself perfect and ready.
Therefore used for exorcisms. Also for healing. The
red, the ever-burning fire of inspiration, represents more
the force turned out. It is an immense outpouring and
radiation of love. The fact that the sunlight is split up
into colour is symbolical of the action of divine love on
man. It expresses itself almost better in gold than in
white M . The blues and yellows are a compromise ; they
appear to have been tried and found not sufficiently dis-
tinctively separated. The Church year is split up among
these things with intention —all is part of a scheme for
developing the different sides of people by the slow steady
influence of colour playing upon them the whole time.
The greater forces, such as those in the Mass, are a little
gently coloured by the colour of the day ; there is, so to
speak, a gentle pressure always in the background.
Marriage : It is doubtful if in a second marriage the
same thing as in the former could be fully done.
Question : Was the cassock originally black ?
In Constantine’s time they wore a white garment.
That was in Italy and the Eastern Church generally.
Thomas a Becket wore much our own episcopal colour.
The people around him, perhaps monks, wore brown.
Priests generally at this time appear to have worn a
14 See Appendix A at end of pamphlet.


shade of russet brown. (The same colour, I believe, is
permitted by the English canons.)
Candles : The candles, of course, have their sym-
bolical significance and possibly utilitarian significance
also. These ceremonies working largely on the Holy
Ghost line work on a line of fire. At one time the
candles were blessed and each differently. In the earlier
times they appear to have had practically invariably the
six big lights, not the two or four that we sometimes use
now, nor the two standard lights in front of the altar.
The six represented the other six sub-rays of the Second
Ray. The cross is the intensification of the Ray, which
does not need another light save on very big occasions.
The seventh light is used at pontifical High Mass over
the cross, because of the Buddhic influence raying from
the Bishop. The Blessed Sacrament reserved in the
Tabernacle is supposed to represent the seventh light,
and is possibly a manifestation particularly of the second
sub-ray of the Second Ray. At one time these six
candles appear to have been sprayed with different oils,
to give them their characteristic sub-influences. At a
later date there appears to have been no uniformity of
custom in regard to the use of candles.
Bells ; At special points of the Service, various
ways are tried of spreading the force —more lights,
incense, bells, these are vehicles for the force. The
scheme is to affect people in all ways according to tem-
perament and their particular receptivity.
Preface : At the Preface in the Mass you call the
attention of the Orders of Angels, all of whom are


represented. At another time the attention of the
saints is called. The Mass converges many kinds of
power.
Sign of the Cross : The Sign of the Cross is the sign
of the Second Ray ; pentagram, one of the signs of the
Seventh. In blessing, Second Ray force is pouring out
over the people from the three levels. You can send out
force by will without using the sign, but a force flows
more readily through its appropriate sign. The sign calls
or attracts the Elemental Essence, nature-spirits and lower
Devas of that type. If they were minerals they would
crystallize along those lines. Each Ray has its own
benediction which is an expression of its peculiar force.
There is a Ray whose sign is a dot.
Extreme Unction : When a man is obviously dying,
it is well that the Church should dismiss him with her
blessing, giving him a final impulse towards good by the
viaticum, and then sealing up the centres so that no
undesirable use can be made of the corpse either by the
man himself or by others. It was not at all intended that
physical sense organs should be anointed ; what possible
object could be gained by that ? Ecclesiastical unction is
meant to be employed in curing etheric disease. Most
diseases are complicated by nervous affections and any
which are can be helped by unction intelligently applied.
The Priest should put himself into touch with the healing
force, and make himself a channel for it ; he should accu-
mulate it, conserve it, and direct it by his will. He should
make the work of the healing Angel as easy as possible
by intelligent co-operation, both in his own mental


processes, his actions, and the vestments which he wears.
Archangel Raphael.
Another Note on Vestments: In her modification of
the vestments, the Church has for a long time considered
convenience rather than efficiency, as is shewn in the
modern curtailment both of the chasuble, and the sur-
plice ; and you have now a good opportunity for improv-
ing your practice in that respect. You should comprehend
that in the Minor Services, and under ordinary conditions.
My force is most readily sent through the intensification
of the natural force of the Priest, and in that case the
surplice and the stole are appropriate ; but the surplice
should reach at least to the knees, should have only a
small circular opening for the head, and should have
sleeves wide enough to reach the sides when the arms
are fully extended. Such a surplice with a violet stole
should be worn at Extreme Unction. The Celebrant at
Mass is specially clothed for that Service in the Sacrificial
Vestments which have been found most effective ; the
same is true of the officiant at Vespers or Benediction.
In these latter cases different forces are evoked in addi-
tion —forces which play outside the surplice, and are
most conveniently accumulated and conveyed by vest-
ments of silk and gold. In the Mass those higher forces
occupy the arms most of the time —hence the tight sleeves
of the alb ; but the apparels provide doorways, and that
which is turned towards the congregation is generally in
use. The arrangement for the forces wielded by a Bishop
is quite different—hence his rochet, with flame-coloured
cuffs. Care should be taken about all these matters ;


unnecessary divergences from pattern cause trouble which:
could easily have been avoided.
Colour: The colours of the spectrum are all in some
way connected with Aspects of the Logos; we especially
put ourselves under the protection of, and raying out of,
certain influences and certain types. We are not capable
of bearing the radiation of, or responding to, the whole
of the force of the white light all the time, and are there-
fore prepared for this stage by the influence of these
separate portions of the light. The Church’s seasons are
also a kind of sacrament arranged for the welfare of the
people. On these great festivals the influence is stronger,
more of the Christ’s power is poured down ; if people
have gone through the preparation for the season, it is
more easily possible to assimilate this great outpouring
of power.
Healing Department : Archangel Raphael.
Order of Angels : Ministers of the Logos.
Administration of the Chalice : It is desirable that
the Chalice shall be administered to the laity, but the
problem is how to do so without objectionable dis-
advantages.
These are questions, to which the answers became
plain as we proceeded ; they are included here as being
likely to suggest points for the book.
Notes on Sacraments ( Continued )
Baptism : The Church teaches that Baptism admin-
istered by a layman with ordinary water suffices —even


if the layman be a non-Christian and himself unbaptized,
for instance a Jewish doctor.
The value of the signing with the cross, the breath-
ing, the giving of the salt, etc. Reference to the
fact that as administered by the Low Church or
Non-Conformist people, who do not believe in the
magical side of the Sacrament, there has been neglect
to see that the water flowed upon the candidate, and
in some cases they have deliberately evaded the use of
water. Refer to Matthews’ book Are Anglican Orders
Valid ?, pages 58 onward, and particularly pages 80
and 81.
Confirmation. Some have maintained that the
matter of Confirmation consists in the imposition of
hands, some in an unction with chrism, some in
either separately, while others require a combination of
both. One hand is used in the Roman rite, because
the other hand is required for the holding of the
Staff.
In the Eastern Church Confirmation is administered
by a Priest with chrism blessed by the Bishop. It is also
administered immediately after Baptism to infants ;
possibly this may be a survival of the tradition of anoint-
ing with chrism at Baptism.
Question ; At what age approximately should it be
administered ?
That depends very much upon the individual con-
cerned. The Lord pointed out that some children at
the age of seven knew more than some others were
likely to know for the rest of their lives.
4


The Holy Eucharist. It is desirable that the Chalice
should be administered to the laity, but the difficulty is
one of method.
Absolution. Setting aside the element of- counsel
and direction, is the absolution of the Priest likely to be
more efficacious when the penitent has made oral con-
fession ? In the case of a person obviously in earnest,
is there any objection to giving absolution after he has
made his confession privately, and if it has consisted less
in detailed analysis of faults than in a general intention
to amend ?
Marriage. Why is marriage said to be indissoluble ?
The Effect of Priesthood
Silent imposition makes 7, 10, 12 glow sympatheti-
cally, opens oblique line. Second imposition links 5 to 11,
enormously widens 6to 12. “ The Grace of Thy Bless-
ing ” (consummation) opens the way down to the
physical brain. Consecration of the hands, first arranged
for distribution of diagonal force, second for distribution
of force from 5, Lastly special blessing to Priest.
The cross of the Blessing of the Holy Ghost was
intended to do what the second imposition of hands was
introduced to do later on. As a Deacon the line between
6 and 12 is opened up, a diagonal is now run into that,
but this cross did not open 12 sufficiently to receive and
transmit force. Therefore it is desirable to widen it more.
The second imposition appears to be supplementary, was
added since, for greater freedom of the working of the


power. The line between 7, 10, 12 is connected between
ordinary principles of Ego.
They are much intensified to make them a better
reflection ; in the second imposition 12 is opened out so
as to allow force from the diagonal line to flow out better ;
there would be a great congestion otherwise.
The next cross is for the opening to the physical
brain. It is supposed to work from the brain up through
the pituitary body, but if you can get inside of the mental
and work down also, the result is better. The blessing
floods the etheric brain, runs up the pituitary body
(possibly also pineal), up between the kind of bottle-neck
between the two planes, and so influences proximate
astral and mental matter.
The whole thing rouses the finer parts of each atom
to respond to forces, the spirillae running around the spiral.
The coarser kind of force runs through the middle of the
atom. (Rosy Cross etc.) ; then finer force through spirals,
then still finer through the spirillae of which the spirals
are composed.
Effect of Diaconate
The first cross seizes upon the principles which have
been cleansed by the crosses in the Litany, and works up
through them and the Antahkarana, so as to widen that
connection between personality and Ego. If you can
consciously work up through the pituitary body and
simultaneously in the reverse direction, so much the
better. The second cross is aimed at the causal, you


descend upon the causal and open it up so as to make a
clear run down. Then the Holy Ghost is given, and that
should hold the channel open. That warms up the higher
levels sympathetically, and when the stole is given the
cross should be made over the heart, so that any awaken-
ing of Buddhi shall be conserved and increased. The
final cross represents a general intensification of what has
been done. Its purpose is to thicken the walls of the
Antahkarana, a kind of ... 1 to harden them and hold
them firmer in this expanded form. It is as though a
frame-work were built up within, so that the widened
channel cannot contract.
There is a distinct advantage in providing for an
interval between the diaconate and the priesthood, during
which this Antahkarana in its widened form can have
been consolidated.
Effect of Subdiaconate
The first cross opens up the man as in the-
Diaconate, the second pours forth in and down. The
general purpose of these rites is to enable the Ego to
express himself more freely through the personality. The
giving of the distinctive vesture, the amice, maniple and
tunic, represents the qualities which should be developed
by the man who has laid himself apart from the life of
the world for the helping of humanity, namely, control of
speech, service to others, and cheerfulness and absence
of depression.
1 W id missing in text.


Further Notes upon the Consecration of a Bishop
Forty or fifty cases were observed. One gentleman
very early went to St. Thome I —probably the original of
St. Thomas story. There were cases where one Bishop
alone performed the consecration, probably because no
others were able to be present ; other cases where six or
eight were present. Somewhere one Bishop is conse-
crator and other Bishops act as the Deacon and the sub-
Deacon at the Mass. They impose hands, but other
Bishops present hold out hands toward the candidate. In
earlier times hogsheads of wine were rolled in by servants,
later they got smaller. The loaves were like small buns.
The torches were practically twigs tied together.
Angels. The Angels are ever round the LORD
MAITREYA ; they leap forward to go with His thought,
so it is said that He sends an Angel to do so-and-so, as
in Asperges.
Holy Water. Where you need water you need fire,
where earth you need air. Earth is solid, water is liquid,
air gaseous, fire etheric. Etheric side of chlorine is fiery,
therefore salt used in holy water.
Force pours in through Bishop (who is in living
touch with Christ), pours in through corresponding centre
by natural affinity.
At consecration of Mazel 2 a fiery triangle was made
over his head from our crosses, reciprocally and to Him.
A line also from the Staffs and again from Hosts on Altar.
* A suburb of Madras, where is the Roman Catholic Cathedral.—C. J.
2 J. A. Mazel.


Possibly three Bishops make this (possibly a reflec-
tion of this at High Mass). This schema did not work
with Burt \
1 L. W. Burt, who was only a Priest as he was consecrated a Bishop only-
in 1939.


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, June 15, 1921
1 am sending you by this mail a copy of a hymn-
book which I have just got out for the use of the Liberal
Catholic Church. I do not, of course, suppose that this
kind of thing has any special interest lor you, but 1
always feel it a duty to send you specimens of every-
thing that we issue, so that you may know exactly what
is going on. This hymn-book does not appear important,
but it represents a great deal more trouble and hard
work than you would be likely to suppose —work which
has extended over the last three years. 1 have had to
write sixteen hymns for it myself, to add verses to thirty-
eight, and doxologies to one hundred and thirty, besides
going over every hymn in the book and seriously modi-
fying about nine-tenths of them. If you have time to
glance over the first page of the Foreword, you will see
what I have done with them and why I have done it.
I have also had to compose quite a number of hymn
tunes to suit the more erratic metres ; you will find those
in the Musical Supplement, which 1 am also sending
to you. All this is not your line of work, 1 know, but
somebody has to do it, and it seems to have been thrust
upon me, just as the compiling of the Liturgy was
entrusted to me and to Wedgwood four years ago.


C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, September 2, 1921
In case any question is asked, allow me to repeat,
as head of the Liberal Catholic Church here, that it has
never at any time sought to influence the Theosophical
Society in any way whatever, and that it desires nothing
from the latter but ordinary courtesy and abstention from
misrepresentation and vilification.
C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney, September 24, 1921
I had not, however, realized, until I heard my Master
say so, that the Master the Count had ever inspired
casual hymn-writers. The idea had never occurred to
me, but of course I see at once how useful it might be,
since thousands of people sing the words of popular
hymns and get to know them by heart ; therefore any
attempt to widen out the conceptions embodied in them
and to instil into them noble and inspiring thoughts might
have widespreading results. The writer of the particular
hymn to which reference is there made is Frances Ridley
Havergal, who was also the author of that very beautiful
hymn to the World Teacher, “ Thou art coming, 0 my


Saviour,” which contains references eminently suitable
for the Order of the Star in the East. For example :
“ Coming ! in the opening East
Herald brightness slowly swells ;
Coming ! O my glorious Priest,
Hear we not Thy golden bells ? ”
The hymn, from which the Master quoted a line, begins :
“ From glory unto glory.” 1 I hunted for it in Canon
Julian’s Dictionary of Hymnology and found the following
remarkable passage :
“ Concerning this hymn the author says that it was
the reflection of ‘ that flash of electric light, when I first
saw clearly the blessedness of true consecration. I could
not have written the hymn before ’”. It seemed to me
that was rather a striking and entirely unexpected corro-
boration of the idea of the Count’s inspiration.
1 See Appendix B at the end.


THE HEALING SERVICE
C. W. LEADBEATER TO ANNIE BESANT
Sydney , May 25, 1923
A demand was made by a number of our own
congregation of the Liberal Catholic Church that the
number who had been disappointed 1 should be allowed
to avail themselves of the Healing Service according to
our ritual. I therefore held one on Sunday last, at which
seventy patients were treated. We had no instantaneous
cures, but nearly every patient testified to very marked
improvement. If the patients desire it (and I think they
will) I shall probably continue these services at intervals,
as I am reasonably certain that in many cases their
diseases would yield to repeated treatments. There is-
evidently an exceedingly interesting field of study there.
I think that this question of what I suppose we must call
spiritual healing has hardly been approached in the past
in a scientific spirit. Men have regarded such cures as
direct interpositions of the Almighty, defying the natural
action of His own laws ; and so either the patient has
been cured instantaneously or condemned as not having
1 In gaining admission to healing services of a Mr. James Hickson, a
layman of the Church of England, reputed to have considerable curative
powers, and then in Sydney on a “ Healing Mission


sufficient faith to allow a cure to be effected. It seems
to me that this is one of many methods of curing disease
—a method which may be instantly effective in some
cases, but only gradually effective after what we may
call repeated doses of the force in others ; and perhaps
not applicable at all in yet other cases. Our Healing
Service calls for a “ Healing Angel ” ; in response to
that there came a colossal and most dignified Angelic
figure whom I have never seen before. Beyond a kindly
smile of greeting, he took very little notice of us, but
appeared to be pouring streams of force not only upon
the patients, but upon other members of the congregation.
The power which he brought to bear was tremendous —
so much so that two people fainted, and many others
were affected in various ways. I shall endeavour
humbly to make his acquaintance, if he will permit me
to do so, because I think he could give us much valu-
able information, and possibly show us how to use his
tremendous outpouring of force more effectively and
economically. When 1 have collected enough facts to
be able to say anything definite, I might perhaps make
a useful article out of it.




APPENDIX A
A most striking parallel to what is stated on p. 44,
that the white ray of the Sun is divided into the colours
of the spectrum, is the effect of the repetition of the
Gdyatrt by the “ twice-born ” Hindus. This most sacred
prayer in the Hindu religion appears as a verse in a
hymn of the Rig Veda, and the Lord Vaivasvata Manu
made arrangements so that when this verse is repeated
there is a direct outpouring from the Logos upon the
individual. This outpouring rays out from the man in
seven streams, each with one colour of the sun’s white
light. There is a description by C. W. Leadbeater of all
this action, in an article he wrote about the Bharata
Samaj Ritual, which was constructed under the direction
of J. Krishnamurti in 1925, and in which he himself
officiated as the first purohit or priest.
The Gayatri is usually said almost in a whisper and
never aloud except in the Bharata Samaj Ritual, where
the whole congregation repeats it five times at several
points. The following is what C. W. Leadbeater says
about the effect of this prayer :
“ As all Theosophists know, it is an invocation to
the Sun —of course really to the Solar Logos, who
stands behind that greatest of all symbols ; and


the great shaft of light which immediately pours
down upon and into the reciter comes as though
from the physical Sun from whatever direction
that Sun may happen to be. The effect is
especially curious when the Sun happens to be
below the horizon, for then the shaft comes up at
once through the earth ! This shaft is white just
slightly tinged with gold ; but when it has filled
the very soul of the reciter he promptly shoots
it from him again in seven great rays having
the colours of the spectrum. It is as though
the singer acts as a prism ; yet the colour
rays which dart forth are , of a shape the
reverse of what we usually find in such cases.
Commonly when we send out rays of spiritual
force they spring forth from a point in the body—
the heart, the brain, or some'other centre as the
case may be ; and as they shoot out they steadily
broaden fanwise, as do those shining from a
lighthouse. But these rays start from a basis
wider than the man himself —a basis which is the
circumference of his aura ; and instead of widen-
ing out they decrease to a point, just as do the
rays of a conventional star, except that they are
of course cones of light instead of mere triangles.
Another remarkable feature is that these seven
rays do not radiate in a circle in all directions, but
only in a semi-circle in the direction which the
reciter is facing. Furthermore these rays have a
curious appearance of solidifying as they grow


narrower, until they end in a point of blinding
light. And a still more curious phenomenon is
that these points act as though they were living ;
if a man happens to come in the way of one of
them, that point curves with incredible rapidity
and touches his heart and his brain, causing them
to glow momentarily in response. Each ray
appears to be able to produce this result on an
indefinite number of people in succession ; in
testing it on a closely packed crowd, we found
that the rays apparently divided the crowd be-
tween them, each acting on the section that
happened to be in front of it, and not interfering
with any other section.”


APPENDIX B
THE HYMN INSPIRED BY THE ADEPT
This remarkable hymn “ From Glory unto Glory”
of Miss Frances Havergal was written by her in two
sections. In December, 1873, she wrote twenty verses,
but of these only six are found in the hymn-books,
where necessarily in congregational singing more time
cannot be allocated to one hymn. In this part of the
hymn the author, who was full of intense and purest
devotion, is pouring out her devotion to her Lord and
Master and continually remembering Him in various
aspects of His glory. Three years afterwards, in 1876,
she wrote a continuation, but under the title “ Far More
Exceeding”. Nevertheless this part of the hymn also
begins* “ From Glory unto Glory ”. It is this second
section that is so unusual as coming from a devotional
Christian writer, for Miss Havergal’s imagination goes
beyond the bounds of this earth and its affairs, and con-
templates the Glory of God as it rays out on “ systems
unto systems ”, She contemplates :
“ From glory unto glory,” till the spirit fails ; and then
Illimitable vistas still opening to our ken.
Mysterious immensities of order and of light.
Stretch far beyond our farthest thought, as thought beyond
our sight.”


Evidently, the inspiration received by her was
grasped in its entirety only after three years.
The wonderfully majestic quality of this second part
of the great hymn is seen in the sixteen verses which
follow ;
FAR MORE EXCEEDING
“ From glory unto glory ! ” Thank God, that even here
The starry words are shining out, our heavenward way to cheer !
That e’en among the shadows the conquering brightness glows,
As ever from the nearing Light intenser radiance flows.
“ From glory unto glory ! ” Shall the grand progression fail
When the darkening glass is shattered as we pass within the veil ?
Shall the joyous song of “ Onward ! ” at once forever cease,
And the swelling music culminate in monotone of peace ?
Shall the fuller life be sundered at the portal of its bliss,
From the principle of growth entwined with every nerve of this ?
Shall the holy law of progress be hopelessly repealed,
And the moment of releasing see our sum of glory sealed ?
The tender touch of moonlight, with an orbit quickly run,
The lustre of the planet, circling slowly round the sun,
The mighty revolutions of its million-heated blaze,
“ From glory unto glory ” lead our far-expanding gaze.
Then onward, ever onward, through the unexplored abyss
(Dark barrier between the suns of other worlds and this).
Until the measure-unit mocks the grasp of human thought,
And space and time commingle while the clue is feebly sought.
Till, in that wider ocean, deep calleth unto deep,
Star-glories with attendant worlds, forth-flashing as they sweep
Around their unseen centre, that point of mystic power,
In unimagined cycles, where an age is but an hour,
5


Then ! onward and yet onward ! for the dim revealings show
That systems unto systems in grand succession grow.
That what we deemed a volume but one golden verse may be,
One rhythmic cadence in the flow of God’s great poetry.
That what we deemed a symphony was one all-thrilling bar,
Through aisles of His great temple resounding full and far ;
That what we deemed an ocean was a shallow by the shore !
Then ! onward yet, in eagle flight, through the Infinite we soar—
“ From glory unto glory,” till the spirit fails ; and then
Illimitable vistas still opening to our ken.
Mysterious immensities of order and of light,
Stretch far beyond our farthest thought, as thought beyond
our sight.
But the starting-point in heaven shall be no “ glory of the moon,”
No planet gleam, no stellar fire, no blaze of tropic noon ;
From “ glory that excelleth ” all that human heart hath known.
Our “ onward, upward,” shall begin in the presence of the Throne.
“ From glory unto glory ” of loveliness and light.
Of music and of rapture, of power and of sight,
‘ From glory unto glory ” of knowledge and of love,
Shall be the joy of progress awaiting us above.
“ From glory unto glory ” that ever lies before.
Still wondering, adoring, rejoicing more and more,
Still following where He leadeth, from shining field to field,
Himself the goal of glory, Revealer and Revealed !
“ From glory unto glory ” with no limit and no veil,
With wings that cannot weary and hearts that cannot fail ;
Within, without, no hindrance, no barrier as we soar ;
And never interruption to the endless “ more and more ” !


For infinite outpourings of Jehovah’s love and grace.
And infinite unveilings of the brightness of His face,
And infinite unfoldings of the splendour of His will.
Meet the mightiest expansions of the finite spirit still.
O Saviour, hast Thou ransomed us from death’s unknown abyss,
And purchased with Thy precious blood such everlasting bliss ?
Art Thou indeed preparing us, with love exceeding great.
And preparing all this glory in such “ far exceeding weight ’’ ?
Then let our hearts be surely fixed where truest joys are found,
And let our burning, loving praise, yet more and more abound ;
And, gazing on the “ things not seen,” eternal in the skies,
“ From glory unto glory,” O Saviour, let us rise !
Frances Ridley Haoergal
April 1876


Printed by D. V, Syamala Rau, at the Vasanta Press,
The Theosophical Society, Adyar, Madras
