

M f
ST AP?' COMMANDER GOWLLAND R.N
A brief outline of Public Services of the late Commander Gowlland
from the Sydney Mail, October 17th,, 1874 and the Town & Country
Journal, August 22nd., 1874*
John Thomas Ewing Gowlland, the son of a Lieutenant in the Royal
Navy attached to the Coast Guard Service, was bom 10th, July, 1838 at
Leysdown, Kent, England and was educated in the Royal Naval School,
Greenwich, He left the School as its Captain of 800 boys to enter the
Navy as Master's Assistant in 1853*
After short service on the "Victory" at Portsmouth Harbour, he
joined the "Rhadamanthus" and was engaged in Channel Service until he
was appointed to the "Archer", Captain Heathcote. The "Archer" joined
the Baltic Squadron under the command of Sir Charles Napier and took
part in the bombardment of the Ports of. Riga. Although only 16 years
old, Commander Gowlland was entrusted with the "Anna Maria" one of
the"Archer*s" prizes and safely returned the vessel to England where
he received a modal for this service.
He next saw service on the "Ganges" and was engaged in a survey
of the Chincha Islands under the command of Admiral Baynes, In 1858
he joined the "Plumper" surveying ship under command of Admiral
Richards (late Hydrographer-in-Chief) then engaged in the survey of
Vancouver's Island and Straits and determining the North American
boundary. The service at Vancouver’s Island was a perilous one but
Commander Gowlland f s manly bearing secured him the goodwill and co-
operation of the chiefs,and for his active part in the survey was’
given special thanks by the Hydrographer for his excellent charts.
He was transferred to the "Hectate" which completed the Vancouver
survey then visited the Sandwich Islands and Sydney, This was
Commander Gowllands first appearance at this port.
In 1864 he was appointed to the "Hydra" as first assistant
Surveyor and was employed in the Mediterranean* Prom this ship
Commander _Gowlland was appointed to the Australian Survey in 1865 as
Chief Assistant under Captain Sydney* On the retirement of Captain
Sydney in 1867, he received the command of this survey on which he
he was employed until 1873 when he returned to England and was promoted
to Staff Commander,
In the year 1871 he commanded the "Govenor Blackall" when a
scientific company from Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane
went to the north east of the Australian Continent to view the total
eclipse of the sun, Six months after, Commander Gowlland took
command of the Relief Expedition in search for the brig "Maria" after
her disatrous attempt to reach New Guinea, Por his services in these
expeditions he was presented with a handsome piece of plate and
received the thanks of the Premier, Sir James Martin,
Commander Gowlland married in Sydney, a daughter of the Hon.
Francis Lord, M.L.C, by whom he had three children. He was a
Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, Member of the Royal Society
of Victoria and a Member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. As
well, Commander Gowlland was the author of several pamphlets on the
winds and currents of the Eastern Coast of Australia and of many
articles on marine matters which appeared in the press. It was after
his return from being promoted to the rank of Staff Commander and
whilst engaged in the survey of the harbour of Port Jackson that
the melancholy accident occurred which caused his death.
