

0 A rp
Q>lo
sen
Catfjebral Cfjurcb of &t. &nbreto,
®xtm of S>erfnce
for ttje
Jfuneral of tfje late
honourable
3Jol|tt (Elm stum Prison
A former prime Minister of llje (Eommonmealtlj
of Australia.
OTjurSbap, 20tb Jgobember, 1941,
at 21 p.m.


of is>crbtte.
&*nt*nr*a.
iPaalm xc.
Lord, Thou hast been our refuge: from one generation to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the
world were made: Thou art God from everlasting, and world without
end.
Thou turnest man to destruction: again Thou sayest, Come again, ye
children of men.
For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that
is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as Thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep; and fade
away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the evening it is
cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in Thy displeasure: and are afraid at Thy
wrathful indignation.
hast set our misdeeds before T’-,c: and our secret sins in the
light of Thy countenance.
For when Thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years
to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are three-score years and ten; and though men
be so strong, that they come to four-score years; yet is their strength
then but labour and sorrow; so soon passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of Thy wrath: for even thereafter
as a man feareth, so is Thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.
Turn Thee again, 0 Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto Thy
servants.
O satisfy us with Thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and
be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that Thou has plagued us
and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.
Show Thy servants Thy work: and their children Thy glory.
And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper
Thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper Thou our handy-work.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.


Bjeaann.
1 Corinthians XY., 20 to 58.
Atoms.
Most Rev. The Archbishop of Sydney.
iSfiimn.
Now the labourer’s task is o’er;
Now the battle-day is past;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the tears of earth are dried;
There its hidden things are clear;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the penitents that turn
To the cross their dying eyes,
All the love of Jesus learn
At His feet in Paradise.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace;
Christ the Lord shall guard them well
He who died for their release.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
‘ 1 Earth to earth, and dust to dust; ’ ’
Calmly now the words we say;
Left behind we wait in trust,
Till the resurrection day.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
Amen,
■prajjpra.
jJHarclf in
A. H. Pettifer, Acting Government Printer.


