

"SZSsj fuss
11
(skuitsl an)r;
THE FUTURE COTTON-FIELD OF GREAT BRITAIN:
With the prospects and advantages which it holds forth to persons of moderate Capital, to Farmers and others of limited
means, and to the industrious classes generally of the United Kingdom.
I happened to visit the District of Moreton Bay, which was then the Northern portion of the great Colony of New South
Wales and but little known to the Australian Colonists generally, for the first time, in the year 1845. Struck with
the extraordinary capabilities of the Country generally, during my stay, there were two things particularly which arrested my atten-
tion and impressed themselves strongly on my mind. First, the fitness of the Moreton Bay District for being madethe seat of a
separate and distinct Colony, and the desirableness of having such a consummation effected at the earliest possible period; and
Secondly, the remarkable adaptation of the soil and climate for the growth of Cotton and other semi-tropical productions by an
Agricultural population to be imported from Great Britain and Ireland. Moreton Bay and its capital, Brisbane, are about the
same distance from Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, to the Northward, as Port Phillip, and Melbourne, the capital of
Victoria, are to the Southward, And while I found the climate perfectly salubrious for a European population to be
engaged in industrial pursuits of any kind, I also found the Cotton plant growing luxuriantly, wherever its growth had then been
tried, merely from curiosity, and exhibiting a product of the finest quality.
Knowing that the Legislative Council of New South Wales, (of which I was then a Member,) would never willingly
park with a single Acre of the vast territory which this Colony then comprehended, I addressed a series of letters, during a
visit which I made to England, in the years 1847,1848 and 1849, to Earl Grey (who was then Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies,) strongly recommending, for reasons which I stated at length, that in the Bill which was then in preparation for the
better government of the Australian Colonies, there should be inserted a proviso enabling Her Majesty, whenever she might
deem it expedient and necessary, to separate from New South Wales, and to erect into a distinct Colony, the territory, then called
the Moreton Bay District, to the Northward of the thirtieth parallel of South latitude. And to my great gratification, although
to the extreme mortification and annoyance of most of our Colonial Legislators here, I found, when the Act referred to was
finally passed by the Imperial Parliament in the year 1850, that it did contain a proviso to the effect recommended; and that
proviso, I am happy to add, has eventually proved the Magna Charta of the New Colony of Queensland. Even with this Parliamen-
tary enactment, however, the consummation to which it pointed was not realized without an arduous and protracted struggle ;
for it was only during the past year that the separation of the Moreton Bay Country from New South Wales, under the designa-
tion of Queensland, was finally effected, the proclamation to that effect having been issued only on the 10th of December, 1859.*
The first Parliament of Queensland was held during the present year ; and, immediately before its prorogation, the
following very gratifying notice wis taken of my humble services to the New Colony, by his Excellency Sir George Ferguson
Bowen, the Governor, and the Parliament of the Colony :
“ Government House, Brisbane, Queensland,
17th September, 1860.”
Sir,
At the request of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland, I have the honour to transmit herewith, a copy of the Re-
solutions unanimously adopted by the House on the 14th instant, thanking you for your “ able and successful efforts to effeet
the separation of Moreton Bay from New South Wales, and to found the Colony of Queensland.”
I beg further to assure you, on behalf of myself and of my Government, of our full and cordial concurrence in the
sentiments of the Assembly, as recorded in the enclosed Resolutions.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
G. F. Bowen.
The Rev John Dunmore Lang, D.D.,
&c., &c,, Ac.
f
QUEENSLAND.
Extract from the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, No. 53, Friday, 14th September, 1860.
Mr. Lilley moved without previous notice :
* Notwithstanding the separation of Queensland, New South Wales is still as large as all Great Britain, Ireland, and Frane® uni-
ted, But Colonial Legislators are able enough, in their own estimation, to govern a whole continent. .


e given to the Reverend John Dunmore Lang, D D., for hia able and successful
[oreton Bay from New South Wales, and to found the Colony ot Queensland.
2.—That this Resolution be transmitted to his Excellency the Governor, with a request that he will be pleased to
foiward a copy of the same to Dr. Lang.
Question put and passed.
(True Extract.)
(Signed) Lewis A. Bernays,
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly.
Legislative Assembly Chamber, Brisbane, 14th September, 1860.
The other particular with which I was also strongly impressed on my first visit to Queensland, in the year 1845, was
the peculiar adaptation of the soil and climate of that country for the growth of Cotton by a British free population ; for I
was strongly of opinion that the extensive production of the raw material for the manufactures of the mother-countiy by free
labour in Australia, would eventually give the death-blow to the monstrous and iniquitous system ot negro slavery in America.
I accordingly submitted, to gentlemen of the highest standing in connection with the Cotton trade and manufactures, in Man-
chester, Liverpool and Glasgow, during two visits I made to England, first in 1847-1849, and afterwards in 1852 and 1853, a
whole series of specimens of Australian Cotton, of the quality of which these gentlemen expressed their highest approval; a
specimen which I exhibited to a Cotton-broker in Glasgow, in the month of May, 1853, having been valued at upwards of half
a-crown a pound. But, as Lords Napoleon observes very feelingly, doubtless from his own bitter experience at Boulogne and
Strasburgh, that “ great undertakings are seldom successful on the first attempt,” I was altogether unsuccessful on both of these
occasions in interesting the Cotton-lords of the mother-country in the growth of Cotton in Australia, so as to induce them to
lend their assistance in any way for the promotion of the emigration of an industrious population from the mother-country to
grow Cotton in Australia.
There is now, however, through the wise and beneficent legislation of the First Parliament of Queensland, a prospect
for the introduction and settlement in that Colony of an agricultural population trom the mother-country, to grow
Cotton and other produce suited to the soil and climate, such as will unquestionably lead to a speedy and extensive emigration
for these purposes, from Great Britain and Ireland, and such as no encouragement to be offered in the mother-country could
ever have supplied. The following are the 20th and 21st clauses of an Act to provide for the Alienation of Crown Lands, passed
by the Parliament of Queensland, on the 17th September, 1860.
Land orders may be given to Emigrants.
’ 20. — a It shall be lawful for the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, to issue to any adult immigrant
who shall have come direct from Europe to the Colony of Queensland but not at the expense of the said Colony or to the per-
son who shall have paid for the passage of such immigrant a land order for the amonnt of £lB and after ■ such immigrant shall
have resided not less than two years continuously within the said Colony and if not previously a British subject shall have been
naturalized then to issue to such immigrant a further land order for the amount of £l2 Provided that two children over the
age of four and under the age of fourteen respectively shall be reckoned as one statute adult under this Act Provided also that
every such immigrant shall have complied with and shall be of the class comprised within the immigration regulations for the
time being in force in the said Colony.
Premium for Growing Cotton.
21. —“ In order to encourage the growth of Cotton within the said Colony it shall be lawful for the Governor with
the advice aforesaid to issue land orders during the next three years to the extent of £lO and during the two years next fol-
lowing the said period of three years to the extent of £5 by way of premium for every bale of good cleaned Sea Island Cotton
without any admixture of damage or discoloured and weighing 300 lbs. the growth and produce of the Colony which nay be
exported to Great Britain and during the said periods one-half the above premiums shall be given for the common descriptions
of Cotton.
And to carry out this truly patriotic object, the same Parliament authorised, by the following clause, large reserva-
tions of Lands eligibly situated, and suitable for agriculture, both along the Coast and in the Interior, that there might be no
delay in the settlement of emigrants arriving from the mother-country, either at their own cost, or at that of
other?.
Agricultural Reserves.
10. —“ Within a period of Six Months after the passing of this Act it shall be lawful for the Governor with the
advice of the Legislative Council by proclamation to define and set apart for agricultural occupation not less than 100,000 acres
on the shores or navigable waters of Moreton Bay, Wide Bay, Port Curtis, and Keppel Bay and also within five miles of all the
towns whose inhabitants shad exceed 500 in number reserves of at least 10,000 acres of land and also such other reserves as
the Governor with advice aforesaid and with the approval of the Legislature shall from time to time think fit and the land
sp defined and set apart- shajl be surveyed and shall be called Agricultural Reserves and shall not be submitted to public auc-
tion but shall be sold at the fixed price of Twenty Shillings per acre subject to the provisions hereinafter contained in that be-
half Provided (hat it shall be lawful for the Governor with the advice aforesaid by proclamation to withdraw and deal with as
country lands or otherwise the who/e or any portions of such reserves but that at no time after the survey shall there be loss
(ban half of (he above quantity open to selection within the said agricultural reserves.”
These are all admirable arrangements, and they indicate the highest wisdom and the most enlightened patriotism.


Persons of moderate capital who may be disposed to engage in Cotton cultivation in Queensland, may thus be enabled to carry
out with them whatever number of families and individuals of the working classes they may require as servants and labourers,
virtually passage free, as they will be amply compensated for the outlay they have incurred on their behalf, in the extent of land to
which they will be entitled under the Act. Small tenant farmers struggling at home to eke out a scanty subsistence for their
families, after meeting the various demands upon their industry for rent, taxes, tithes, and poor-rates, will be able under this
liberal proviso, after paying their own passage out, to obtain immediate possession of a Freehold Farm, of as fine land as
ever the sun shone on, and of an extent sufficient to employ all their energies for the future, with no landlord, tax-gatherer, or
tithe-proctor to make them afraid. And young men and women of the class of servants or artizans, who have saved as much
from their past earnings as will pay their own passage out, will be able to secure for themselves a small farm of 30 acres
each to settle on, as soon as they have earned a sufficient amount and sufficient experience in the service of others, to war-
rant their doing so, with the fairest prospect of success.
There is a very numerous class, however, of reputable families and individuals of the industrious classes in the mother-
country who might be exceedingly desirous to avail themselves of these prospects, but who could not afford to pay their own
passage out to Queensland, in any other way than by contributing small amounts, either weekly or monthly, tor the purpose, on
the principle of the Friendly or Benefit Societies of the mother-country. How, then, will such persons be enabled to effect
their emigration to that colony ? I answer—they will be able to do so with perfect facility and with perfect safety to all con-
cerned, as follows; —
In the year 1850, the Imperial Parliament, desiring to afford additional facilities for the emigration of persons of the
industrious classes, passed an Act to amend the Friendly Societies Act, and to extend its provisions to Emigration ; giving Societies
for such an object a Parliamentary Constitution, and placing their funds under proper guardianship. Shortly alter the passing
of this Act, numerous Emigration Societies were projected, and a few came into actual operation, in London and throughout the
United Kingdom. But this question presented itself at the very outset of their enquiries, viz. :—-How were the Societies which
had contributed considerable amounts from their General Funds to promote the emigration of members who had drawn Emi-
gration Tickets, or were otherwise eligible for assistance from the Common Fund, to be repaid their advances by the emigra its
after their arrival at their destination ? I was consulted on this point when in England in 1852, by a deputation from an Emi-
gration Society in London, which reckoned on having not fewer than a hundred thousand members, as soon as they could sat-
isfy the public on this point. They proposed, as far as these Australian Colonies were concerned, to have agents in Sydney and
Melbourne respectively, who, after the Society’s beneficiaries, emigrating to New South Wales and Victoria, had been six months
in the Colony of their destination, were to receive from them small weekly or monthly instalments from their wages, in repay-
ment of the advances they had received from the Society. I was asked how this plan would work —to which I could only re-
ply that it would not work at all; that the expenses of such agencies would be enormous; that even if the emigrants were
willing to re-pay their respective loans or advances, they might find it impracticable to do so, when dispersed hundreds of miles
away, over countries larger than all Great Britain and France together; and that if the agents should have recourse to legal pro-
ceedings in any case, the result would be absolutely ruinous to all concerned. When asked, however, whether there was any other
means of effecting the object of such Societies in Australia, I replied that there was ; for as it had long been one of the princi-
ples of the Government of these Colonies to render the Waste Lands available in one way or other for the promotion of Immigra-
tion, a Company established by an Act of one of the Colonial Legislatures, to purchase land for the promotion of Immigration,
could effect the object without either expense or risk to the Emigration Societies in the mother-country, which should make ad-
vances to their beneficiaries from their Common Funds; and I pledged myself to the representatives ot various Societies of this
kind, both in England and Scotland, at their own particular request, to do my utmost to get such a Company established on my re-
turn to Australia.
I did not succeed, however, in effecting this object till the close of ths year 1855, when an Act of the Legislature ot
New South W ales, of which I was then a member, was passed to incorporate The Moreton Bay Immigration and Land Com-
pany, for the express purpose ot creating an inexpensive and effective agency in Australia for the safety and protection of Emi-
gration Societies to be established at home, under the Imperial Act of 1850. Certain legal doubts however having arisen here after
The passing of this Act, and the Government of the day being unfriendly to its operation, it has remained in abeyance until
now. But the passing of the Crown Lands’Act above referred to in Queensland, has at length removed all difficulty in the
case there; and the Moreton Bay Company’s Act will now come into beneficial, and I trust, extensive operation, through a
whole series of Emigration Societies to be established under its auspices in the mother-country. It is my intention (D.V.), to
proceed to England once more by the Overland Mail of next month ; and although the main object of my voyage is a
totally different one from anything of this kind, I shall certainly do what I can to establish Emigration Societies under the aus-
pices of the Moreton Bay Company, in those parts of the mother-country—principally Scotland, the North ot England and the
North of Ireland —with which lam best acquainted. My son, Mr. G. D. Lang, recently a member of the Parliament of New
South Wales, who is now also on the eve of embarking for Europe, although by a different route, will, no doubt, lend his assist-
ance in some way or other during his stay in England for the furtherance of this important object.
The climate of Queensland, as I have already stated, is perfectly salubrious. The four Summer months —November,
December, January and February—are certainly much hotter than the summer in England ; but with common precaution, field
labour even then, can be pursued with perfect safety. During the other eight months of the year, the climate is delightful; re-
sembling that of Madeira, to which invalids are so frequently ordered by the Faculty from Europe. There are millions ot acres
in Queensland of as fine land as any in the world; and not only the productions of Europe, but those ot the Tropics —the
common and the sweet potato, wheat and maize, English garden vegetables, and the Cotton plant, the banana, the pine-apple,
and the sugar-cane —all grow together, and grow luxuriantly. As a specimen of the extraordinary fertility of the soil ot this
region, I may mention that, on visiting the Clarence Diver on one of the last days of August last, f saw a young peach tree in
the garden of the Rev. J. Collins, of Grafton, from eight to ten feet high, and covered with blossoms; and Mr. C. observed, on see-
ing me looking at it, that the peach-stone from which that tree had grown, had I eon planted so recently as in the month of
January last —less than eight months before.


The Cotton plant, I may add, grows luxuriantly, and produces well on to two bales of clean cotton of 300 lbs. each
per acre. The cultivation of it is as simple as that of potatoes and turnips ; and the gathering of the crop, which is an impor-
tant part of the labour, may be performed'with perfect facility by women and childre'n. If brother Jonathan could only have so
splendid a prospect for Cotton-growing as Queensland now presents, he would be off to avail himself of it at once with all his
niggers. But, God be praised ! there can be no Negro Slavery in Australia.
The population of Queensland is at present about thirty thousand. Brisbane, the capital, is beautifully situated on the
Brisbane River, which is there nearly a quarter of a mile broad, about fifteen miles from its mouth. It has a population
of about five thousand, and is one of the quietest towns in the Empire; the inhabitants, who are of all the leading religious
denominations in the mother-country being, with very few exceptions, an industrious, virtuous, and Church-going people. One
of the Acts of the First Parliament of the country, was to abolish all State-Aid for Religion, while an excellent system, both
of Primary and of Grammar School education, was established, and will be liberally -supported.
In short, although Queensland is in the Temperate and not in the Torrid Zone, the settlement of a numerous and indus-
trious agricultural population in that Colony, to avail themselves of its extraordinary capabilities, and to develop its vast re-
sources, will unquestionably realize the glowing idea of the Rev. Mr. Kingsley, in the following passage :
“The ideal of what a tropical white nation might be, when properly acclimatized (and acclimatization is now perfectly
easy to the decently sober and prudent man), is, if we will but let our imagination soberly work out the details, too dazzling to
be dwelt on long without pain, beside the fearful contrast which the social state of Europe presents to it at this moment, and
is likely to present for many a year to come.” —Kingsley s Miscellanies, ii. 10.
On the moral and religious aspect of this great question, I shall not enlarge ; but the Christian philanthropist has
only to look to the multitude of the Isles of the Western Pacific, to the East, and the multitude of the Isles of the Indian Ar-
chipelago, to the North of Queensland, to be satisfied that that Colony is at this moment one of the most important centre-points
for civilization and Christianity on the face of the Earth. “A white nation,” of the right stamp, may indeed do great things there,
of which millions and millions more will be glad. As an instance of how much may be effected, in what Lord Bacon
calls “ the heroic work” of colonization, with very limited means, I ,may state the following
facts ;—Twelve years ago I succeeded, in the face of much discouragement and opposition,
in sending out from England to Moretou Bay about six hundred persons in three different ships.* They were nearly
all members of different evangelical Protestant communions ; and they acted conformably to their profession from the period
of their arrival at their destination. They found the district, which had previously been a penal settlement, the most irreligious
and demoralized in New South Wales, and they have transformed it by their influence and example into the most orderly and
religious. A strong effort was made by the aristocracy of the country, immediately after their arrival, to get the settlement
transformed into a penal colony, in order to supply the squatters or flockmasters with cheap labor; this, however, thev
strongly resisted—and they did so successfully, as was acknowledged before a Committee of the House of Lords in 1856. They-
agitated incessantly also for the separation of Queensland from New South Wales, till it could be no longer withheld; and it
was mainly owing to their influence and efforts that State-aid for religion was abolished in the first Parliament of the New
Colony. The famous six hundred of the Crimea were, doubtless, richly deserving of all the honour and glory they received
from their country ; but here are other “ six hundred” who, perhaps, have earned “ double honor” in afar different field. I
trust, my own intended voyage home will lead to an emigration to Queensland of not fewer than from twenty to fifty thou-
sand persons of a similar character.
JOHS OTIMQEI L&m, D.
Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney,
And one of the Representatives of the City of Sydney,
in the Parliament of New South Wales.
Sydney, New South Wales, Bth November, 1860.
* My voyage to England, in the year 1847-1819, originated as follows From Ist January, 1841, to 30th June, 1842, there had been
imported into New South Wales, which then included both Victoria and Queensland, 25,330 statute adult Immigrants at the public expense;
their passage out having been paid from the Land Revenue of the colony. Of these immigrants, 1G,892, or two-thirds of the whole number
were from Ireland, chiefly from the South and West, and almost all Roman Catholics; while only 8,438 were from England and Scotland toge-
ther. At this rate, had the system in progress been continued, New South Wales would have very soon become a second edition of Ireland, a
mere province of the Popedom. To prevent any such consummation, however, I determined, on the resumption of immigration, after a few
years of depression which the colony had experienced in the interval, and during which it had been discontinued, to proceed to England at the
period I have mentioned above, to give an impulse to Protestant emigration to Australia from England and Scotland. It was much easier at
that time to induce emigration to Port Phillip or Victoria, and my efforts in that direction were correspondingly more extensive, but by no
means so remarkable in their results as in the case of the emigration to Queensland.
Sydney: FRANCIS MASON AND CO., Steam Machine and General Printers, 105, York-stfeet, near Barrack-street.
