





66 S 2. A
R. RAWSON PENFOLD, founder of the
Penfolds Wineries, arrived in Australia
from England in 1844, and brought with
him cuttings of vines from France and
Portugal. He planted the first vineyard at
Magill, about five miles from Adelaide,
the capital of South Australia.
In a few years the demand for Penfolds Wines became
very great, and Dr. Penfold continued developing the
industry. The third generation are now in active
control, whilst members of the fourth generation
occupy positions on the staff. Progress and quality
have ever been the firm’s aim.
Product of generous sunshine, rich sandy loam and
ironstone soils, and the skill of experts who have de-
voted their lifetime to perfecting their products,
Penfolds Wines are recognised a credit to Australian
industry and Empire resources,
Dr. Rawson Penfold.


ROM 1850, Penfolds South Australian Wineries gradually grew owing
to considerable trade with the other Australian States, and with the
coming of Federation branches were established throughout Australia,
and the wines became Australia’s standard of excellence.
Penfolds annually crush more grapes than any other Australian wine-
maker, and are proprietors of the largest wineries in Australia. In
Sydney, they occupy probably what are the largest city cellars in the world. They
also distil and blend large quantities of grape Brandy, which is under Customs
supervision as to quality and age until marketed. At Minchinbury Vineyards
Penfolds make and mature Australia’s most famous Sparkling Wines.
Every effort is made to ensure that Penfolds Wines embody the maximum of
medicinal and food values. All wines are analysed, tested and examined under the
microscope before being blended and marketed.
PENFOLDS VINEYARDS AND DISTILLERIES.
VINEYARDS. ETC.; /WvT
N.S.W. SOUTH AUSTRALIA (j(
SPARKLING VALE MAGILL - - GRANGE VINEYARDS 1 1
ALLANDALE - - - - DALWOOD HOME PARK VINEYARDS \\\
GRIFFITH - - - - MINCHINBURY McLAREN - - - - EDEN VALLEY \ ,
DISTILLERIES;
GRIFFITH. N.S.W. ADELAIDE HILLS, S. AUSTRALIA
NURIOOTPA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA EDEN VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Grange Vineyards, Magill (near Adelaide, South Australia).


N Australia, wine-making has reached a very high
degree of excellence and the Australian public
proclaim Penfolds as their idea of wine wisdom.
The soil and climatic conditions of various parts
of the great continent have been able to reproduce
to perfection the conditions necessary for growing the
grapes, and the wines possess an individuality that finds
appreciation from the ordinary drinker of beverage wines
and the most fastidious of connoisseurs—there is a wine for
every pocket, and there is value in each grade. A well-
known maxim in Australia is: “Be not without Penfolds
within.”
'T^^^'Penfolds
v, 2*^/1


1.l fl II 111 I■ I I ■
iM&S mfc&k
Portion of the 60,000 hogsheads of high-class wine undergoing their many
years of restful maturation.


Queen Victoria Buildings, Sydney. Penfolds Offices ground floor and the
largest city cellars in the world underground. The enormous local trade makes
it necessary to carry a stock of over half a million gallons in these city cellars.


Each vat in the four rows illustrated holds 2,200 gallons. This represents
13,000 bottles to a single vat.


PENFOLDS NURIOOTPA WINERY, ONE OF THE WORLD’S LARGEST WINERIES.
When it was explained to General Pau, on a friendly visit from France in 1918, that this, one of Penfolds eleven wineries, handled 1,500.000 gallons of
Wine per annum by itself, he exclaimed: “Gigantic! Why, a Vintner making one hundred thousand gallons in Europe is looked upon as a magnate.


ACH of Penfolds eleven Vineyards and Wineries has been
carefully chosen for situation, soil, drainage and every detail
bearing upon the production of perfect grapes. The
diversity of the Penfold Vineyards confers a further benefit;
their varying nature enables the Company to produce the
various kinds of grapes most suitable to the thirty-five types and grades
of wines which it markets. The Vineyards are situated in different
States, thus ensuring a continuity of supplies, as it is inconceivable that
failure of the Vintage could affect the whole of the Vineyards.
Australia is a land of great distances and thus offers abundant
varieties of soil and climate. The Griffith Wineries in New
South Wales are as far from Perth, in Western Australia, as
London from Baghdad.


London to Berlin
Newcastle^ SYDNEY CELLARS
MELBOURNE CELLARS
Map shewing Penfolds Vineyards and Cellars, also comparative distances.


INCHINBURY, Penfolds famous Sparkling Wine, is pro-
duced by the same process as in the Champagne district of
France. The fermentation takes place in the bottle. The
machinery used in producing Minchinbury was brought
especially from France. Some idea of the care bestowed
upon it can be gleaned from the fact that every bottle is handled over
200 times before it is ready for the market.
The rich chocolate loam soil of Minchinbury, produces a special quality
of grapes having a delicacy and flavour unattainable elsewhere in
Australia. The vines grow to perfection and are entirely free from disease.
It is interesting to note that Minchinbury obtained its name from its first
owner, Major Minchin, a British officer, who had served under Welling-
ton, just on a hundred years ago.
hm
Sr®? l
Minchinbury is known as the vineyard where the bubbles grow.


Corner of underground cellars at Minchinbury shewing section of shaking tables.


ENFOLDS Hospital Brandy is distilled from wine
made from specially grown grapes. The principal
distilleries are: Barossa District Oistillery, Nuriootpa,
South Australia: Adelaide Hills, Magill, South Aus-
tralia; Griffith Distillery, Murrumbidgee Area, New
South Wales, and Eden Valley Distillery, Angaston,
South Australia. The Distillery at Nuriootpa is
acknowledged by experts to be one of the best in the world, and the
establishment boasts one of the largest pot stills in existence, the
receptacle holding 5,200 gallons. The same expert care and attention
is employed in every department of the preparation of Penfolds
Brandy as with Penfolds Wines. All Penfolds Wineries are equipped
with the most modern and up-to-date handling methods, from the
extracting of the juice to the corking of the bottle, in most instances
very many years later, the wine has had the most meticulous care.


A corner of the distillery at Magill, South Australia.


S>ft- Sll
Fermenting tanks at Griffith, N.S.W., shewing 300,000 gallons of crushed
grape juice gradually fermenting into Wine.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
, i l2 . £ 20 A




