

THE APOSTACY
OP THE
MAJORITY OF THE FREE SYNOD OF VICTORIA
THE PROTEST
OP THE
FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND;
THE TRUE CHARACTER OE THE NEGOTIATIONS FOR UNION WITH
THE SYNOD OF VICTORIA
IN COMMUNION WITH THE
ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
REVIEWED BY
AN AUSTRALIAN.
EDINBURGH:
ANDREW ELLIOT, 15 PRINCES STREET.
1858,


“ The right of protest, dissent, and remonstrance, both judicially and extrajudi-
cially, ought to be conceded and kept sacred, although this is apt to be forgotten
by those very societies which have derived their separate existence, and taken their
discrimininating designation, from the existence of this right.”
Thomas M‘Crie. D.D.


THE APOSTACY, Ac.
The Headship of Christ may be fairly taken as the great doctrine
for which the Presbyterian Church has had to struggle, during
the present age. Scotland, from north to south, and from east to
west, is the distinguished battle-field on which the standard of
spiritual independence was raised. After a conflict of ten years’
duration, the Free Church emerged from the strife, protesting,
both by doctrine and practice, against the sinful defections of the
Erastian Establishment. But the great principle which produced
that memorable epoch in church history—the Disruption of 1843
—was not confined, in its operation, to Scotland. Throughout
the British dominions, the same testing principle sifted the
churches. For a time, indeed, it was thought, in Australia, that
the separation of the two elements—the evangelical and the mo-
derate—was unnecessary. But only for a time: it was soon dis-
covered that there was no neutral ground of compromise, on which
these two could stand together. The very tardiness with which
the Colonial representatives of the Church of Scotland pro-
ceeded to Disruption, proves the universal action of the principle
at stake.
In Victoria, then known as Australia Felix, and in the year
1846, two parties began to occupy ground corresponding exactly
with that of the two mutually protesting bodies in Scotland.
The Free Church, founded by the Rev. James Forbes, adopted
the standards of the Disestablished Church in the mother
country, and with her they entered into communion and corre-
spondence. On the other hand, the Presbytery of Melbourne ad-
hered to the ground of the Erastian Establishment, and submitted


to the claim of statutory connexion with her. And, as we shall
see in the sequel, this connexion was not severed, when the
Presbytery was created into the Synod of Victoria. Still farther,
besides “adhering to the Testimony of the Free Church of Scotland
. . . and the Protest taken by Dr David Welsh and others, on the
18th day of May 1843,” Mr Forbes and his brethren, when they
became numerous enough to form a Synod, drew up what is called
the Fundamental Act. This document is deserving of special
attention, as it embodies the Protest against the Colonial repre-
sentative of the unfaithful Church at home. The important
paragraph in which that Testimony is contained, is as follows:
“ This Synod do condemn, and, by God’s help, resolve ever to
testify against, all interference of civil magistrates with the
spiritual affairs of Christ’s house, and against all ecclesiastical
bodies countenancing or submitting to such interference, either
directly or indirectly.” At this hour, the Free Synod, as repre-
sented by the late Majority, considers herself “ solemnly, and
deliberately, and unanimously” bound to unite with the Synod of
Victoria, and is publicly and officially fraternizing with her, while
more openly in communion and correspondence with the Scottish
Establishment than she has been for some years past! This
unhappy result is the product of certain negotiations for a union
of the Presbyterian Churches of the colony, which have been in
progress for some time, and of which we shall have to give a short
sketch, only, however, in so far as regards the two bodies of whom
we are more immediately treating. We shall thus bring clearly
to light, the course of procedure which ultimately landed the Free
Church in a position which compromises her character and prin-
ciples. Also, in tracing the course of events after the time at
which the fatal step was taken, we shall find her betrayed, almost
immediately, into the performance of a series of those oppressive
and unconstitutional acts, which marked the reign of Moderatism
during last century.
Before entering upon his task, the writer begs leave, in a single
sentence, to warn the Scottish reader, that for the character of
much that may come under our notice, the actors are responsible,
not the reviewer. Our subject naturally falls to be considered in
two divisions,—The Fact of the Apostacy, and—The Fruits of the
Apostacy.


I. THE FACT OF THE APOSTACY.
In building up the Church of Christ in a new country, it na-
turally happens, that while some old difficulties are avoided, there
are new dangers to be encountered. To what extent men who
occupied opposing positions in Scotland, may approach each other
with terms of peace in Australia, is a question deserving of some
attention. The spiritual independence of church courts, and the
rights of the Christian people to choose their own pastor, are not
invaded by the local Legislature of Victoria. Nay, more, there is
a prominent grievance which vexed the Church of Scotland during
Erastian rule, namely, Patronage, for which, as yet, there is no
scope in Australia. These considerations may be taken as afford-
ing some ground for entertaining the proposal for uniting the
Presbyterian Churches. A scheme of Union has been in view for
some years, by the different sections of Presbyterians, but we have
to do only with the negotiations which took place between the
Free Synod and the Synod of Victoria.
A series of doctrines held in common by both parties, was
drawn up as a basis; while the satisfactory adjustment of the
points of difference between them, as well as the general business
of the whole movement, was entrusted by each Synod to its Union
Committee. The doctrinal platform, or basis, to which both
parties agreed, became known as Articles of Union ; which, for
the present, we shall view in the form in which they appeared at
the time when the two bodies agreed to unite in November 1855.
Generally speaking, these articles have given satisfaction to Free
Churchmen, inasmuch as they embody the distinctive principles
of the Free Protesting Church of Scotland, so far as it is possible
for a very brief and abstract statement to do so. But farther than
this, there was a prevailing opinion that the members of the
Synod of Victoria regarded them in the same light. It seems
never to have been doubted, at the initial stage of the negotia-
tions, that, as soon as some mere preliminaries were arranged, and
the Union consummated, the combined body would be in a posi-
tion to forego all communion and correspondence with the
Erastian Establishment. So lofty were expectations of this kind,
that Free Church ministers were encouraged to look forward to


the day, when the unfaithful Church at home, would be left with-
out a representative in Victoria, and when the few whom she had
here would be marshalled in the ranks of the conqueror. These
bright illusions were all dispelled in due time.
It was satisfactory that all parties were pleased with the
Articles, and particularly gratifying to the Free Church, to find
her own principles embodied in the Basis. Still the reader may
remember, that the Headship of Christ, and the rights of the
Christian people, are clearly enough contained in the Confession
of Faith; and yet the Established Church retain this compend of
doctrine, while they have trampled under foot the two great
principles just referred to. The question arises, Could not a
moderate just as readily subscribe the Articles of Union as the
Confession of Faith? Thus, while any one signing the Basis in
good faith, and otherwise qualified, would be received by the
United body whencesoever he might come, yet, it was felt that
as a rule, it would be desirable to have an arrangement that new
ministers should come from the Free Church. The Basis being
abstract, it was necessary to have a material guarantee, in the
shape of an agreement or understanding, that there should be no
application for a supply of Pastors from the Scottish Establishment.
Were the churches here able to obtain preachers for their
congregations without going home for them, they would doubtless
be in a position to avoid the rock on which these Union negotia-
tions were destined to split. In the meantime we are dependent
upon Scotland for the men required, and it is in connexion with
this fact that the rule of j)resent duty must be applied. So long
as the problem remains—shall the Free Synod here, acknowledge
the Free Church and the Established Church of Scotland alike? it
must return a negative answer, in order to be faithful to itself.
But when circumstances change the dependent condition of the
churches, the course open to them may be quite different. The
problem may become—Shall we forego the more distant com-
munion of the Free Church of Scotland, in order to form an in-
corporated Union with the representative of the Scottish Estab-
lishment here? And we-can readily conceive conditions under
which such a Union would be desirable. For example, in the
course of two generations, the Free Church of Scotland may have
become much degenerated from her pristine purity. On the other


hand, the representative of the Church of Scotland may have be-
come, through revival by the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, very
evangelical in its whole tone of preaching and practice. And —
always supposing the contracting parties to he independent of
foreign interference, in such a case, the alliance would be desir-
able, and calculated to promote the interest of the Church of
Christ. But, we repeat, in the meanwhile, this is a problem which
we are not called to consider. We are not prepared to say that
all the churches here are so independent of foreign interference as
is necessary in order to union, nor that the Free Church of Scot-
land has degenerated, nor that the Synod of Victoria has become
so distinguished for evangelical'character, as to complete the list
of requirements above referred to.
We have already seen the views of the Free Church party on
the Articles, and we have noticed that the Basis seemed to be re-
garded in the very same light by the Synod of Victoria. How far
future events confirmed this identity of view we shall proceed
immediately to unfold. So far back as February 1854, the Rev.
Mr Hetherington, Convener of the Union Committee of the Synod
of Victoria, performed the first overt act which produced a doubt
in the minds of Free Churchmen as to the real character of
the Union. This gentleman had occasion to publish, in the Argus
newspaper, a report of the progress which had been made with
the negotiations; and he referred to the Standards of the Church
of Scotland as those to which the combined bodies were to adhere.
Dr Cairns, Convener of the Free Union Committee, was startled
at this, so was the Committee, so was the Presbytery, and so was
the Synod; and none the less so, that, in answer to inquiry on the
subject, Mr Hetherington had given a very unsatisfactory reply.
The Free Synod, at its next meeting, instructed their Union Com-
mittee, in carrying on the negotiations, to “ fix definitely the
source whence ministerial supplies were to be obtained for the re-
quirements of the United body. On the following day, the
Synod of Victoria took up the question, and their minute informs
us that they “ objected to any recorded arrangement to the effect
that ministerial supply should only, be taken from the iree
Church.” The word recorded, which we have here put in italics,
is important, as it gives us a glimpse into the real cause of so
much misunderstanding between the two contracting parties. As


a matter of common conversation amongst ministers, there was no
doubt about getting the necessary supplies of preachers from the
Free Church of Scotland. The willingness of individuals in the
Synod of Victoria, that every new pastor should come from that
source, was not concealed. But this willingness of individuals,
however frequently expressed, and however publicly urged, was
mere sound, and could never be appealed to as evidence in any
way binding the whole body—not though each member of that
body had, in his own private capacity, uttered the sentiment in
question. Hence the necessity of fixing definitely the source of
ministerial supplies, for if the Free Church compromised herself at
this point, it was felt that the Articles alone, being abstract,
would not preserve her character.
The Synod of Victoria steadily and successfully resisted every
attempt on the part of the Free Church to secure the arrangement
so much desired. In an evil hour, Dr Cairns got a single word
inserted in the Articles, which, as he thought, got rid of the diffi-
culty, while, at the same time, the honour of his Church was safe.
In the sth section of the Basis, the United body claim the power
of determining the relation which they shall hold to other
churches; and the opening clause bears, that the combined Synods
shall be at liberty to hold communion and correspondence with
all other faithful Presbyterian churches. The Free Convener
thought that the term faithful was sufficient to exclude the Scot-
tish Establishment. A moment’s consideration, however, will
convince the reader, that the insertion referred to did not in any
way “ fix definitely” the source of ministerial supplies. The Basis
was as abstract now as it had ever been, and it was not possible
that it should settle the important practical question of supplies.
We may here take early occasion to apprize the reader that new
sources of difficulty were being produced—viz., the official minutes
of the Synod of Victoria positively objecting to any recorded
arrangement that ministers should be obtained only from the
Free Church. The part which unrecorded understandings played
in the negotiations, gave the whole Union movement, at this
earlier stage, the appearance of a Secret Treaty.
Mr Hetherington was again the person destined to bring to
light the important fact, that the Articles of Union were still
exposed to all the danger of an Erastian interpretation. Part of


the business of the Union movement consisted in obtaining an
amended Temporalities Bill, in order to secure the property of the
Free Church in the United body, seeing all risk, civil as well as
ecclesiastical, was to be encountered by her in this extraordinary
coalition. A document had been drawn up by Dr Mackay, setting
forth the danger here referred to, and is known under the name of
the Memorial. On this certain strictures were made by Messrs
Hetherington and Clow, in a document called the Annotations,
and frequently referred to in the history of the Union, It was
quite clear that the gentlemen who drew up the document enter-
tained an Erastian regard to the Scottish Establishment. The
sentiments to which they gave expression attracted the notice of
the Eree Church, and a correspondence on the subject arose
between the Committees. Mr Hetherington was authorized to
declare as follows concerning the position of his own party:
“They do not regard themselves as debarred by the Articles of
Union from holding ecclesiastical communion and correspondence
with the Church of Scotland!” They go on to say that they
assume this to have been known by the Free Church! Not only
so, but they proceed to explain a provision whereby, in the United
body, a mutual concession would prevent ministers from being
placed in an unpleasant position from circumstances which
would inevitably arise. The concession is, “ That the United
Church, in holding communion and correspondence with other
churches, shall, in no instance, call on any minister to per-
form any act which he conscientiously considers to be inconsis-
tent with any solemn engagement with which he had entered
while a member of the Church to which he had previously
belonged/' For example: If a communication should come from
the Scottish Establishment to the United Church in Victoria, as a
concession the Erastian party will not hold Free Churchmen bound
to answer it; and, in the reverse case, should an official note come
from the Free Church of Scotland to the United body here, as a
concession, Free Churchmen are not to expect Erastians to hurt
their consciences by answering it! The document embodying these
offensive propositions was official, and is still in existence. In the
two editions of published “ Extracts" no withdrawal of the Minute
in question is to be found. Nay, we shall have occasion to see
that, while a list of withdrawn documents is given, the one to


which we refer, and another as bad, are both omitted in the Index
Expurgatorius. That which we have just been reviewing bears
date June 28, 1855.
Two important facts were clearly established, viz,, That the
Synod of Victoria did not exclude the Church of Scotland from
the number of faithful churches, in virtue of the word inserted
into the fifth section of the Basis; and secondly, that the task of
fixing definitely the source of ministerial supplies, was one to
which the Free Convener was quite unequal. After the revela-
tions of sentiment which had been made on the part of the Union
Committee of the Synod of Victoria, all prospect of union must
have been dreary in the extreme, to those of the Free Church
whose hearts beat truly in unison with their principles. Yet the
negotiations were destined to continue. Suddenly a new hope
dawned on the Unionists. It was made out that the Annotations
were not an official document, and therefore that the Synod of Vic-
toria were not specifically bound by the views therein set forth—as
if, indeed, they could possibly be worse than that official minute
which we were but a moment ago discussing. These Annotations
had been in existence for nearly a year, they had come before Com-
mittee, before Synod, and before legal counsel, and now they fell
to the ground as not official. The Scottish reader will here be
reminded of Dr Cairns' letter to the Witness, in which is given a
formidable list of four very serious irregularities, perpetrated in-
discriminately by Committees, Synods, and leading men. He who
studies the ecclesiastical history of the Presbyterian Churches of
Victoria, as developed during the last three or four years, will
find utter and reckless blundering at almost every step of his pro-
gress. And we have now to draw attention to the grand central
Free Church blunder of the series—the Geelong Report of Dr Cairns.
All the fears entertained at one time regarding the source of
supplies of ministers, appear to have been pushed aside by the
more pressing evil of the positive claim put forth by the Synod of
Victoria to commit the United Church to communion and corres-
pondence with the Scottish Establishment. All parties appear
now to have been so entangled in the Union, that much less would
satisfy them than at an earlier stage, before Free Church feeling
had been worn down to a minimum, and perhaps below it. Ac-
cordingly, to understand the Geelong Report of Dr Cairns, it is


evident that the Free Synod would be satisfied with the mere
withdrawal of those statements of attachment to the Scottish
Establishment, which had been so perseveringly made by the
Synod of Victoria. Could these statements be swept away, most
of the Free Church party would be willing to enter the Union—
trusting partly to the satisfactory character of the Articles, and
partly also to the superior number of Free Church members which
would be in the United body. It may be fearlessly asserted, that
if the Synod of Victoria had been a half more numerous than the
Free Synod, there would have been no union in the face of all the
Erastian sentiments expressed by the former body, and its positive
refusal to “ fix definitely ” the source of ministerial supply.
But we must proceed with the Geelong Report. In the place
now mentioned, and on the 6th November 1855, the Free Con-
vener announced that the Synodical Committees of the two
churches entrusted with the management of the Union negotia-
tions, had agreed to the withdrawal of all documents on both
sides, which stood as obstacles in the way of uniting. There was
to be nothing before the two bodies but the Articles of Union,
and the Temporalities Bill. One of the brethren was called upon
to offer thanks to God for the successful issue to which the nego-
tiations had been brought; and next day instructions were given
to make arrangements for the consummation of the Union. But
notwithstanding this formidable array of preparations, the whole
movement had actually reached a similar stage of maturity at a
former period. Fifteen months before this time, when the Synod
of Victoria agreed to the introduction of the word faithful, “ the
negotiation was held to be complete.’" The ministers got instruc-
tions to address their congregations on the subject of union, and
the two Moderators, after some preliminaries, were to make
arrangements for the final consummation. Yet we have seen
that the Union was arrested by the discovery of palpable Eras-
tianism in the Synod of Victoria. On the present occasion,
however, the fatal leap was taken by the Free Church, while all
the Erastian claims of the other party were still in existence.
This forms the culminating point in the mismanagement of the
whole business, and must therefore be explicitly developed.
We call the attention of the reader to the two following consi-
derations in connexion with the Geelong Report of the Free Con-


vener, viz., the official and binding nature of the transactions referred
to, and the documents mentioned as withdrawn. As to the former
of these, it will be remembered that the Union negotiations were
entrusted by the Synods to their respective Committees. What
the Synod approved of, as from its Committee, necessarily bound
the whole Church. Yet, it is to be understood, in all cases of an
official Report, that there are materials in possession of the report-
ing party to which he can appeal if required. It is obviously
contrary to all reason that a Synod should be bound by what the
Convener of another Synod’s Committee might choose to embody
in his report, without proper warrant, whether through misap-
prehension or wilful and criminal misrepresentation. Still farther,
in case a Convener misleads his own Synod, whether through
stupidity, or negligence, or wilful perversion, or attempting a
stroke of policy, there is an appointed way of ascertaining the
fact, and he may be brought to the Synod’s bar under impeach-
ment. Applying these considerations to the Report of the Free
Convener, we observe the official character which it bears. It
professes to state authoritatively the arrangement to which the
two Committees had agreed, these being the parties severally
instructed by their Synods to transact the business connected with
the agreement referred to. Had the two Conveners merely, or
even two Conveners and a Committee, made the arrangement, it
would not have been binding; because on one side there must
have been only a Convener without his Committee, and we have
seen already that, as soon as it was observed that the Annotations
were not official, they fell to the ground.
Secondly, We have to draw attention to the documents referred
to in the Report, namely, the Annotations and the Minutes of
June 28th and September 3rd. The first two of these we have
already described. The last of them, the Minute of September 3rd.
1855, is a short note from the Union Committee of the Synod of
Victoria, withdrawing the Annotations. We have seen that these
were not official, and, therefore, they required no withdrawal,
although, after all, they were of such a character as might after-
wards have occasioned some trouble to the Free Church. But
upon examining the official note cancelling them, we find what is
apparently set aside in one paragraph revived in another, and
that, too, in a more dangerous form. There were Erastian senti-


ments in the Annotations , but that document was of doubtful
importance, whereas the same sentiments in the official note were
authoritative. In point of fact, the case was now much worse
than before. The disease was well nigh fatal, but the remedy was
ten times worse. Such was the dangerous Minute of Septem-
ber 3rd.
The announcement by the Free Convener, that all these offen-
sive documents were cancelled, removed the ground on which
some Free Churchmen had opposed the Union. But, feeling still
very uneasy, they had # resolved, as soon as the parties united, to
quit the colony. It was soon discovered, however, that very
serious objections could be raised against the validity of the whole
proceedings ! Discerning persons in the Synod had begun to see
that the Free Convener was extremely lax in his notions of busi-
ness; that, remarkably well fitted for popular usefulness by his
warmth of character, evangelical and fluent preaching, he was yet
by no means a safe guide in church courts, and certainly no match
for Mr Hetherington in negotiation. This latter gentleman, on
the other hand, was almost a perfect contrast to the Free Con-
vener. He was most exact and cautious in the wording of docu-
ments, and well acquainted with all that constitutes their validity
or invalidity. So far as he was concerned, the Annotations,
written by him and Mr Clow, were, strictly speaking, no irregu-
larity, though they certainly proved the writers to be Erastians.
The published minutes bear, that the document in question was
drawn up according to appointment; and it had, in fact, served its
purpose, as affording materials for the guidance of legal counsel.
We have seen that Mr Hetherington has followed perseveringly,
consistently, and successfully, one even course of securing docu-
mentary evidence of attachment to the Scottish Establishment;
and it were strange indeed if, at the last hour, the Free Convener
should have been the man to out-general his rival so far as to pro-
cure the removal of the Augean heap.
Some of those who had seen reason to fear that the Free
Church would be brought into a slippery position, by the negotia-
tions, and conferences, and committee meetings, which were be-
coming more and more complicated from year to year, were
anxious to see the terms in which the withdrawal of the Erastian
documents was couched. The bubble burst all at once! There


was no such thing in existence! We shall make clear the two-
fold nature of the extraordinary blunder of the Free Convener, by
a direct comparison between his own Report, and a document
subsequently drawn up by a Joint-Committee of the two Synods,
and professing to give the “ true state of the case.”
First, We have already drawn attention to the official character
of the Report, as emanating from one Committee, and professing
to embody what had been agreed to by the other. In the circum-
stances, no agreement could be satisfactory which was not com-
mitted to writing, and which could not be appealed to as legal evi-
dence. Accordingly, Dr Cairns was asked in Synod, if he had
obtained the withdrawal which he had announced, and which
could be of use to posterity? The Free Convener, whose notions,
as we have seen, are very lax on all points of business require-
ments and propriety, replied that he had ! And we are quite
willing to believe, that between confusion, alarm, agitation, and
lurid glimpses of himself as impeached for misleading the Synod,
he may have persuaded himself, in the excitement of the moment,
that his own Report was document enough in the case. As to any
proper warrant from the other Committee, he was soon driven to
acknowledge, that he took the word of Mr Hetherington!—a
Christian gentleman! Thus, when questioned about his Report,
the unsubstantial nature of it soon appeared. Not only was there
no written warrant binding the two Committees for the guidance
of their respective Synods; but the minute of the Joint-Committee,
giving the true state of the case, declares, with respect to the
withdrawal of the documents, that it was agreed by the Conveners,
&c. Here, then, is the precise point at which the Free Church was
committed to a false position, in consequence of the Report. In
this document it was announced, that the Committee of the Synod
of Victoria had withdrawn their Erastian claims— whereas, they
had never done so ! nor was it consistent with their whole line of
policy that they should do so. As to what the Conveners agreed,
it was worthless, even though it had been embodied in a written
document; for the A nnotations, chiefly the work of Mr Hether-
ington, one of these Conveners, fell to the ground, in so far as
they were not official; and the mere word of the same gentleman,
or of any other Christian gentleman in similar circumstances, was,
if possible, of still less value.


Second, We have to compare the Report and the “ true state
of the case,” regarding the individual documents said to be with-
drawn. We can scarcely conceive anything more humiliating
than the position of Dr Cairns in the Joint-Committee, while draw-
ing up the minute just referred to. His own Report had an-
nounced the withdrawal of the Annotations, and the minutes of
June 28th and September 3rd, as the work of the Committees;
but the true state of the case reduced the Committees to Con-
veners, and, as these last had not been authorized to transact the
business, the whole negotiation was invalidated. Still farther,
after declaring that the three documents above referred to had
been withdrawn, he takes his seat among a Committee which
passes over the two official documents complained of, and, instead,
singles out two formidable Free Church papers, namely, the
Memorial, and an elaborate Analysis of the Annotations, and
proclaims these as withdrawn. To such a ruinous conclusion did
the Free Convener bring the negotiations for union! We may
observe, in closing our examination of the Report, that the docu-
ment, professing to give the true state of the case, affords conclu-
sive evidence against the parties who published it; and accord-
ingly, it is not wonderful that, in the second edition of their
Extracts, they have suppressed it.
We have had to dwell, at some length, on the committal of the
Free Church to a false position, not only on account of the
intrinsic importance of the fact itself, but also because of the place
occupied by the Free Convener, as chief delinquent in the case,
and also chief prosecutor against those who still continued to
desiderate evidence that the principles of the Church had not been
compromised. Before proceeding, however, to consider the sum-
mary and oppressive acts which followed, it may be desirable to
glance, for a moment, at the civil and ecclesiastical position of
the Synod of Victoria. We have seen her Erastian interpretation
of the Articles of Union, let us see how she stands in reference to
foreign interference.
It may be summarily announced, with regard to all the Churches
here, that they are not in the least molested by the local Le-
gislature. More particularly, neither of the two Churches with
which we are now concerned have ever had to complain of annoy-
ance from the Government of the Colony. The source of danger


on this head, like the source of ministerial supplies, takes us at
once to Scotland. One of the parties here, the Free Church of
Victoria, is confessedly, on all hands, free of all external inter-
ference, but the same cannot be said of the Synod of Victoria,
At first, this body existed as the Presbytery of Melbourne, under
the jurisdiction of the Synod of Australia. In 1854, it was con-
stituted into a court, independent of the Sydney Synod. The
record of the event runs thus:—“ They resolved, and agreed to
record on the present occasion, their firm determination to main-
tain a separate, distinct, and independent position, and especially
to assert their uncontrolled and perfect freedom in the management
of all their spiritual and ecclesiastical concerns, agreeably to the
standards above described.’' The assertion of independence is
sweeping enough, but the real amount of freedom actually claimed
by the Synod is necessarily limited by the rule given at the
close. The standards above described happen to be those of the
Established Church of Scotland. Accordingly, all this assertion
of spiritual liberty is quite compatible with the Erastianism and
unfaithfulness of the Mother Church.
Still farther, the new Court assumed the designation of the
Synod of Victoria, under which title it became known to the local
Government. An Amended Temporalities Bill was passed through
the local Legislature, to regulate the temporal affairs of the new
body, and give it a recognised standing. In the preamble to the
Amended Bill, the assertion of independence is again very sweep-
ing; but the enacting clauses, from which alone the law of the
case is determined, bring us again to the Standards of the Church
of Scotland. Accordingly, Free Churchmen soon became doubt-
ful of the sufficiency of this bill; for, if the action of the Synod of
Victoria is to be regulated by the Standards of the Church of
Scotland, there could be no Union. The question raised was this,
Does the Amended Bill sever the statutory connection between
the Synod of Victoria and the Scottish Establishment? It was
agreed by all parties that the best legal advice in the land should
be sought. The Reply from Judge Pohlman was, that the present
Amended Bill did not sever the connexion, and that, to render the
property of the Free Church safe in the United body, a new Bill
would be required. This important announcement was embodied
in the Geelong Report of the Free Convener. In the meantime,


then, the Synod of Victoria is in connexion with the Church of
Scotland, to such an extent as to imperil the property of parties
that might unite with her. The position of the Free Church was
now extremely delicate. The very Report, which declared the re-
moval of the Erastian documents which had been obstructing the
Union, also announced the startling fact of an Erastian connexion
of a legal kind, between the Synod of Victoria and the Scottish
Establishment. It was thought, indeed, perhaps very inconsider-
ately, that a Bill affecting the desired severance could be easily
obtained. Yet the Free Church could not be too cautious of com-
promising herself while the Erastian connexion lasted. Her
wisdom was surely at fault, when she expelled four ministers and
three elders before the passing of a Bill which may never be
obtained at all.
We have yet to examine the position occupied by the Synod of
Victoria with respect to the Scottish Establishment, in an eccle-
siastical point of view. According to the well known principle,
both in civil and religious government, jurisdiction and represen-
tation are relative and correlative. Where the one is, the other
ought to be. It is plain enough that the Synod of Victoria is not
represented by any of its members in the supreme judicatory of
the Scottish Establishment; the latter, therefore, should exercise
no jurisdictional control over the former. But we know that
many abuses exist in the Church of Scotland which ought not to
exist, and which involve a departure from Presbyterianism. It
may be true, as a principle, that where there is no representation,
there should be no jurisdiction, but the parties who ought to
have advantage of the principle may be destitute of the manliness
and courage to assert their rights in the case. The consequence
is, that the innovation prevails. Still farther, it is to be remem-
bered that many of the Colonial churches were obtained before
1843, and in these the Scottish Establishment may plausibly
assert that she has some interest. But we shall speedily see what
her claims actually are. Deploring the idea of a disruption in the
Colonial Church, the Synod of Australia sent to both Assemblies
in Scotland, in 1845, a series of Resolutions, declaring willingness
to be on friendly terms with both parties. The finding of the
State Assembly was: “ That said Resolutions of necessity imply,
on the part of the Synod of Australia, a total repudiation of its


statutory connexion with the Established Church of Scotland, and
a virtual denial of the authority of the government and discipline
of that church as determined by law.” Here we have statutory
connexion, government and discipline, as determined by law, and
as this deliverance emanated in 1845, the legal determination here
referred to, involves Aberdeen’s Bill, and all the abuses which
produced the Scottish Disruption two years before. In the face
of all these, the claim of jurisdiction without representation, makes
but a small item in the list of defections from Presbyterianism
which can be charged upon the Church of Scotland.
In a subsequent part of the deliverance from which we have
just quoted, the State Assembly of 1845 “ instruct their Colonial
Committee, should the Resolutions to which reference has been
made, continue to be adhered to by any minister belonging to the
Australian Synod, to take all competent steps in their name in
vindication of the rights and privileges of the Presbyterian popula-
tion of Australia still maintaining their connexion with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland.” A Colonial disruption was thus un-
avoidable. The Rev. Mr Forbes had to quit his church and
manse, and become the solitary, but intrepid founder of the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The person who succeeded to
the building which Mr Forbes had to leave, was the Rev. Mr
Hetherington, whose name occurs so prominently and frequently
in connexion with the Union negotiations. The gentleman just
mentioned, and some others still in the Synod of Victoria, sub-
mitted to the foreign interference which now convulsed and dis-
rupted the Colonial Church; and the question naturally arises—
How' are these men in a position to form a union, especially with
the Free Church, without consulting the Scottish Establishment;
and if they must ask advice from such a quarter, how are they in
a position to negotiate a union at all?
But it may be that the Synod of Victoria now see the error, if
not sinfulness, of submitting, as some of them did, at the time of
the Colonial Disruption, to the interference of an Erastian church.
Perhaps they are willing now, not only to assert their indepen-
dence by words, but by action, as Mr Forbes did. We have seen,
indeed, that they are Erastians; but even as such, possibly they
are not disposed now to acquiesce in the dictation of a foreign
body. We shall speedily see, however, that they are still, what


they ever have been. This will be demonstrated by one or two
incidents. Immediately after the Free Church was committed by
the baseless Eeport of the Free Convener, Dr Mackay had occa-
sion to make a remark in Synod regarding a certain prejudice
against uniting with the Established Church, as thus Free Church-
men would appear to be going backward, whereas “instead of
going back to the Established Church, the ministers of the Es-
tablishment were coming over to them." The Synod of Vic-
toria immediately obtained from Dr Mackay an explanation of
this language, to the effect that ministers coming from the Church
of Scotland, and joining the Union, would be coming over to what
he considered essentially Free Church ground: but so, in fact,
does every Erastian who signs the Confession of Faith. The ex-
planation was accepted, but accompanied, in the public report, with
some notes and comments. The Synod are represented as speaking
as follows: “ Many persons had understood it as referring to the
Synod of Victoria; whereas, so far from the Synod having receded
from the position it occupied, the principles which are laid down in
the basis of the proposed Union have been held by its members all
along. These principles are: the right of the Church to govern
its own affairs free from all external interference or control what-
ever; and the right of the Christian people to have an effective
voice in the choice of their own ministers. The members of the
Synod have invariably maintained these principles ever since their
arrival in the colony. They are prepared to contend for them at
all hazards.” John Knox himself could not have used more deci-
sive language; and yet all this comes from men who have homolo-
gated the position of the Erastian Establishment “since their
arrival in the colony," if not before it, and now maintain broadly
that they hold still the same principles which they maintained
then. It is well those gentlemen have given us a practical canon
of interpretation, whereby we may be able to understand the
words which they employ. According to the rule now referred
to, the rights of the Christian people to have an effective voice in
the choice of their minister, would be effectively enforced, if need
be, by a double file of muskets protecting the nominee of a
patron, as he made his triumphal entry to take possession of the
walls of a parish church.
The question arises—What attitude does the Scottish Establish-


rnent assume towards the Union movement ? The Basis of Articles
came before the State Assembly in 1857, and received nearly as
little favour as the Resolutions of the Synod of Australia, twelve
years before. The Colonial Committee got very strict instructions
to watch over the progress of events in regard to the Australian
Union, and to collect all information on the subject. What pre-
cise communications have emanated from that Committee to the
Synod of Victoria, will no doubt be known some time or other;
meantime, the latter body has taken a notable step, which deserves
to be referred to here. At their meeting in last December, “it
was agreed that an application should be made to the Church of
Scotland for four additional ministers, and a Committee was
appointed to address a letter to that effect to that Church.” At
an earlier stage of the Union movement, and before Free Church
feeling had been worn away, and Free Church principles com-
promised, and Free Churchmen expelled from the communion of
the Majority, such a step would have terminated for ever all
farther arrangements. But the time had long since passed away,
when the Free Convener, and his Committee, and his Presbytery,
and his Majority, were startled at the name of the Church of
Scotland. Since this application was published, Dr Cairns and
Mr Fraser have taken part in the ordination of a minister of the
Synod of Victoria!
A step recently taken by Mr Hetherington’s congregation is
deserving of some notice here. A document was drawn up by
them, and signed, at their request, and in their name, by their min-
ister, purporting to be a Memorial to the Members of the Confer-
ence of the Presbyterian Synods on Union, and bears date January
sth, 1858. The Memorialists, in their preamble, set forth the
duty, the desirableness, the advantages, and facilities for uniting;
also, they urge the importance of avoiding everything in the Arti-
cles of Union which would prove a stumbling-block to any parties
willing to join the United body; and as they proceed to request a
number of most startling concessions for themselves, they assure
us that “ they humbly conceive that in so good a cause, the
greatest honour will belong to those who 'yield the most.” The
changes desiderated by the Memorialists involve both omission
and alteration. The following words in the third Article are to be
left out; <! And that, with these and the like functions, it is equally


presumptuous and unwarrantable in the magistrate to interfere,
and faithless and sinful in the Church to permit or submit to
such interference.” Also, in the fifth Article, the word faithful
is to be omitted. In the fourth Article an alteration is proposed,
as they “ deem it essential, that the unfettered right of each con-
gregation to choose their own minister from any section of the
Presbyterian Church, should be firmly secured in the Basis of
Union;” and they “deprecate any interference with this right on
the part of the Church Courts.” Accordingly, what is hostile to
this right is to be expunged, and a clause inserted in accordance
with the views just expressed. It is more than two years since
the two Synods agreed to unite. The Free Church have held
themselves “ solemnly and deliberately and unanimously” bound
to enter into Union with the Synod of Victoria, and have expelled
seven members of their own Court for continuing to express fears
that the negotiations were not satisfactory. It is, therefore,
rather extraordinary to find a document from Mr Hetherington’s
congregation, signed, in their name, and at their request, by him-
self, proposing such radical changes in the Basis. Still farther,
whatever be the official value of the paper which we are reviewing,
it cannot be forgotten that no man in Victoria has exerted himself
more strenuously than Mr Hetherington in behalf of this Union.
It may be safely said, that, but for his determined efforts to keep
up the movement, it would have gone to pieces several times; and
probably without him it would never have been initiated at all.
In view of all this, and of the attitude assumed by the last State
Assembly, the following statement of the Memorialists is highly
instructive: “While they would be willing to make any sacrifice
of their own views, which Christian charity may demand, yet they
fear that, unless the Conference is prepared to make concessions
on the points submitted by your Memorialists for their considera-
tion, the time has not yet arrived when the Union of the Presbyte-
rian Churches in Victoria can be satisfactorily accomplished!”
It may be proper to make a reference here, on closing the first
part of our subject, to the Free Church of Scotland. To what
extent she will countenance the defections of her wayward
daughter in Victoria, or whether she will countenance them at all,
remains for herself to determine. The question of the Australian
Union came before the Free as well as before the State Assembly


of 1857. The former declined giving any opinion on the subject,
stating, however, that they had confidence that their representa-
tives would not compromise Free Church principles; and that
they trusted no Union would be entered into with another body
at the expense of disunion among themselves. The excommunica-
tion had taken place, however, before the hope of the Free As-
sembly was uttered; and it will be seen from the foregoing pages,
that the writer regards the fact of the compromise as equally cer-
tain with that of the expulsion. Still farther, some hints can be
gathered from the correspondence of the Colonial Committee with
the Presbytery of Van Diemen's Land, applicable to our present
subject. In a letter, dated Edinburgh, May 10th, 1846, and
written by Dr James Buchanan, Colonial Convener, the following
passage occurs; “If, in the designation of your Presbytery, there
be a clause, as there was in that of the Canadian and Aus-
tralian Synods, in which you are described as a Presbytery in
connexion with the Established Church of Scotland; and if, in
consequence, you must henceforth look for the supply of a Gospel
ministry to the Colleges and Courts of the Establishment, there
can evidently be no hope of a cordial and permanent connexion
such as could be satisfactory to either party." In the same letter
are the following words: “ The testimony which you have borne
to our principles is valuable; but we attach a higher value still to
any decision which would secure for your own colony the supply
of a pure Gospel ministry in time to come.” Six years afterwards,
viz., in 1852, correspondence took place between Dr Lillie and Mr
Bonar on the subject of a Union of the Presbyterian Churches of
Van Diemen's Land. In a letter written by the latter of these
gentlemen, who was now Convener of the Colonial Committee,
the following passages are to be found: “It might seem sufficient
for this purpose that we both signed the Westminster Confession;
but as the Established Church still professes to hold by that
Standard, and to subscribe it, it becomes absolutely necessary to
distinguish in what sense we adopt it.” With regard to the sup-
ply of ministers for the wants of the colony, Mr Bonar says that
the men obtained must not be “Voluntaries on the one hand, nor
Erastians on the other.” It is also necessary that they “do not
approve of, and cannot act upon the principles of the Establish-
ment as it at present exists in Scotland.” Which of the two


parties here—the majority or minority—has the more faithfully
acted upon the principles indicated in the extracts now taken
from the correspondence of two successive Colonial Conveners, the
writer humbly conceives to be rendered pretty manifest in the
foregoing pages.
11. THE FEUITS OF THE APOSTACY.
In the course of the foregoing pages, the reader, we feel assured,
will agree with us, that materials have been brought under review,
quite sufficient to cause uneasiness in the heart of any true Free
Churchman. We have had mainly to do with the more formal
work of examining documents, ascertaining sentiments, and de-
tecting policy; we shall have now to draw attention to the practical
results which began almost immediately to be evolved, after the
Union had been formally ratified by the Free Synod. Our observa-
tions are now to be clustered around three different centres:—the
suppression of a motion in Synod for the production of the official
documents of the Union Committee; the censure of Mr Paul for
publishing a pamphlet; and the crowning act of excommunication,
whereby four ministers and three elders were driven from their
seats as members of the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria.
The fatal mistake made by the Free Convener was soon dis-
covered. It was found that the withdrawal which he reported
had never been in existence. A very serious and responsible duty
now devolved upon those who became aware, that the whole Church
was committed to a position, from which she might have to re-
treat with tarnished laurels. Having anxiously watched over the
negotiations so long, it was not likely they would cease their vigi-
lance when, apparently, it was more necessary than ever. Accord-
ingly, the first step was to arouse the Church to a sense of the real
nature of the position into which she had slidden. The Rev. Allan
MacVean moved in Presbytery an overture to the Synod, that the
official documents of the Union Committee be laid on the table.
Although this took place after the agreement to unite, yet the Ex-
Convener (Dr Cairns) urged no particular objection. Still, he
preferred that the subject should be brought by motion before the
Synod, and to this Mr MacVean assented. In the higher court,


however, the Ex-Convener himself vehemently resisted the motion,
and it was lost by a large majority. Here there was nothing,
strictly speaking, unconstitutional. A motion may be set aside,
and discussion on the subject to which it refers, evaded, by moving
the previous question, as was done in this case. By this resort
frivolous controversies may be avoided, and loss of time prevented;
at the same time, a majority may exercise the privilege so unwisely,
as to produce lasting dissatisfaction, and eventually rend the
Church. The motion now set aside was to the effect that the
official documents of the Union Committee “ be laid on the table
of the Synod, for the information and satisfaction of the ministers
and office-bearers of this Church/’ According to the preamble of
the subsequent vote of expulsion, this “ was found by the said Sy-
nod to be irregular and disorderly, and not to be permitted or
tolerated,” and was interpreted as an attempt “to open up anew,
and go back upon the question of union,” which had been “ finally
settled.” (?) This very language is enough to make one afraid that
all was not right.
The motion of inquiry “for the satisfaction of ministers and
office-bearers,” being thus summarily disposed of, it devolved upon
the minority to determine what step should be taken next. It
was certainly not saying much for the magnanimity of Mr Hether-
ington and his party, if he would plead the bond, and hold the
Tree Synod committed to unite with him, although they had made
a fatal error in arranging with himself the title deeds, as it were,
by which their principles ought to have been secured. Accord-
ingly a pamphlet was published by the Rev. Arthur Paul of St
Kilda, pointing out that the Synod of Victoria was not in a posi-
tion to form a union with the Free Church, creditable to the latter;
and also that the agreement to unite had been made while certain
official documents were in existence, positively claiming to the
United body the right of communion and correspondence with the
Established Church of Scotland. The treatment of this production
marks a very distinct stage in the downward course of the Ma-
jority.
At a pro renata meeting of Synod, in January 1856, according
to the minute, “ It was unanimously agreed to proceed first to the
consideration of Mr Paul’s pamphlet.” A motion was immediately
made by Dr Cairns, to the effect, that whereas the pamphlet con-


tained grave charges of “ deliberate unfaithfulness and corrupt
motives,” against the Synod, “the said Arthur Paul is deserving
of severe reprehension.” After several amendments had been put
and lost, the motion was carried, and Dr Cairns was ready with
another, to the effect, that whereas Mr Paul had been found guilty
(?) of conduct deserving severe reprehension, “ the Moderator do
now reprehend him accordingly.” This done, still following the
motion, the Moderator called upon Mr Paul to acknowledge his
error, which of course Mr Paul could not do.
The short paragraph now written gives rise to a number of im-
portant considerations. In the first place, it is curious to notice
that our colonial Tertullus, “the orator who informed against
Paul,” with so much vehemence, would himself have been moved
to the bar of the Synod, to answer for his unfounded Report, had
not the suppression of the motion for the documents, saved him.
But though lie has escaped the bar of the Synod, he must run the
gauntlet of history.
Secondly, It is worth noticing the interpretation put upon the
pamphlet. Any one who reads it will find that it is more calmly
and temperately written than controversial productions generally
are. We venture to say that in Dr Robert Buchanan's library of
Disruption pamphlets, there are few characterized by less bitter-
ness than this of Mr Paul; yet charges of “ deliberate unfaithful-
ness and corrupt motives ” are extracted from it by the ex-Con-
vener. As is usual in such cases, no minister has been more
copious in the use of violent and abusive language than Dr Cairns
himself, and this applies to church courts, public speeches, and
even Sabbath addresses. An ordinary person, hearing this Rev.
Father delivering himself, from the pulpit, of a cataract of offen-
sive language against the members of a rival Synod, and imputing
to them “ diabolical motives ” and “ deliberate treachery,” might
be simple enough to imagine that these accusations were about as
bad as the “ deliberate unfaithfulness and corrupt motives ” tor-
tured out of the pamphlet.
Thirdly, We have to proceed to still more serious animadver-
sions on the censurer of Mr Paul. When a charge is brought
against a minister, according to the Form of Process, (chap. vii.
sec. 5) he should get a “ formal citation in writ,” “ with a list of the
witnesses' names,” “ at least ten free days before the day of com-


pearance." The wisdom of such arrangements is obvious. They
are, in fact, the most important preliminaries to a trial. Mr Paul
was found guilty without any of this trouble. The ex-Convener
delivered a speech, and made a motion, that the person complained
of be censured. The citation, the names of witnesses, and the ten
days' notice—these were all dispensed with; and by a species of
ecclesiastical Lynch law, he was declared censurable, and censured
accordingly at once. At no stage of the proceedings against Eben-
ezer Erskine was there a more summary disregard of all constitu-
tional forms.
Fourthly, We get, at this point, a most instructive glance into
the structure of the Majority. As to the leaders, we see that
they are prepared to take upon themselves what a whole General
Assembly of Scottish Divines would shrink from, except during
the reign of Moderatism. We have seen under what conditions
they can pronounce a man— “found guilty.” As to the remainder
of the Majority—the mere mass so far in the background, they
have an alternative: they either saw nothing irregular or tyran-'
nical in the procedure, or if they did, they had not spirit enough
to express themselves.
Fifthly, In the minutes we find that it was moved by the
Rev. Mr Miller, that it was incompetent “ at this stage ” to take
up the case of Mr Paul. This requires explanation. Immediately
upon the publication of the pamphlet in November 1856, an
attempt was made to censure the author, but it was unsuccessful.
Accordingly the intention of the motion is, that to take up the
same case a second time is contrary to recognised usage, and
therefore incompetent; or what the Majority, in the reverse case,
describe as “ irregular and disorderly, and not to be permitted or
tolerated."
But there was a reason for taking up the pamphlet a second
time. It had been silently working its way amongst the public,
and strenuous efforts were made by the Majority to compel Mr
Paul to withdraw it. We can thus see that a mere censure of the
writer of it was not enough. We-can also see some meaning now
in his being required and called upon to “ acknowledge his error ”
and “ retract' his charges. But as Mr Paul refused to do so, a
Committee was appointed to deal with him. A paper was drawn
up by Mr Tait, which said nothing with a deal of skill, while it
26


bore the form of an apology, and was presented to Mr Paul for
signature. After consultation, it was signed, and immediately
published by the Majority as a retractation. Of course, it was a
simple matter for the author of the pamphlet to answer for him-
self, and point out the real nature of the retractation; and it is
worthy of notice that, although drawn up by Mr Tait, it leaves
Mr Paul in possession of ground fatal to the Union, for it contains
the saving clause: “While I still retain my opinions of the posi-
tion and relation of that Synod as involving Erastianism,” &c.
The author of the pamphlet was a member of the Free Union
Committee, and also its clerk. All important documents, there-
fore, came under his notice, and if he was so confident regarding
the fatal nature of the error committed, as to publish a warning
pamphlet—a rare thing in Australia —his voice was certainly
entitled to some serious consideration. If some dangerous minutes
were still in existence, he might be supposed to know their real
importance; and if the Church was acting on the supposed exis-
tence of certain title-deeds as security for her principles, Mr Paul
might be expected to know, as clerk, whether these deeds had
ever been obtained or not.
The publication of the pamphlet introduced a new element—
the people. The reader must forget Tanfield, when he thinks of
our church courts in Victoria, attended, as they are, by perhaps a
dozen strangers. But, at the meeting at which Mr Paul was cen-
sured, the general audience was very considerable; and not only
so, but they gave unmistakeable evidence of sympathy for the ac-
cused. It is not impossible, that this public interest had its own
influence on the Majority; for, at the close of the meeting, a
gleam of hope irradiated the prospects of the Minority. Instruc-
tions were given to the Joint-Committee, that “they should inquire
at the members of the Synod of Victoria, or the Committee,
whether, in the distracted state of things which had arisen in both
churches since 1855, it would not be expedient to forego the pur-
pose of Union.” Three months afterwards, the minutes of this
meeting were read in the Free Synod, but the instructions above
given, had, in the meantime, been transformed into a mandate, to
“ confer with the brethren of the other Synod, as to the state of
opinion among their own people, as well as among the people of
the Free Church, in regard to the relations of the Synod of Victoria


to the Established Church of Scotland, and the practicability of
coming to a more definite and clear understanding on that sub-
ject, than has hitherto existed.” The clerk of Synod who executed
this transformation was the Rev. John Tait of Geelong. The Min-
ority, of course, objected to the accuracy of the minutes, and dis-
sented, but as to the rest —they held their peace!
It was clear, now, that the Union movement was to be continued-
With such a leader as Dr Cairns, and such a clerk as Mr Tait, and
such a Majority as were now stereotyped together, it is obvious
that no ordinary difficulties could arrest the destined Union. Nor
is it likely, from what we have seen, that the scruples of the Mi-
nority were satisfied, nor their confidence in the Unionists increas-
ed. A collision was the natural result. The Free Synod met in
conference at Geelong, on the 7th April, 1857, to consider what
was to be done, in the circumstances in which parties were now
placed. The ex-Convener, as usual, was spokesman on the side of
the Majority. He laid before the Minority, a statement embody-
ing. (1)> The grounds on which it was still determined to proceed
with the Union; and (2), that the Majority are “ shut up by the
very nature of our Presbyterian Constitution to require of the
Minority, that, while retaining their own sentiments and views,
and recording their dissent, so far as they see necessary, they do
not actively resist and oppose the carrying out of this deliverance
and this covenant,” otherwise they must retire in peace, or submit
to discipline, there being no other course, “ without utterly setting
at nought the fundamental principle of Presbytery.’' To this
the Minority replied, (1), That they disowned the general views
of Presbyterian Church government, assumed by the Majority; (2),
that they were willing, nevertheless, to come to a pacific arrange-
ment, and retire from the Church; and, (3), that questions of pro-
perty should be equitably determined.
The two previous paragraphs supply the link of connection be-
tween the censure of Mr Paul's pamphlet, and the Expulsion, to
which latter event we now come. The ecclesiastical thunders of
the dominant party were about to be launched more formidably
than ever. A very long document was read, setting forth the steps
which had been taken towards Union, the agreement which had
been entered into with the Synod of Victoria, and a long list of
charges against the Minority. We have seen that the motion for


the production of official documents, was lost, but its services are
now turned to account in swelling the catalogue of offences com-
mitted by the Minority. Also, we have had the pamphlet under
review, twice already, but now we have it for the third and last
time. We extract the following, viz.: “ And whereas these breth-
ren have, some of them by addresses to their congregations, and
holding congregational meetings, and some of them by letters in
the public press, and all of them by the public expression of
opinion, continued to condemn and denounce this Synod as un-
faithful to her principles, and have stirred up and fomented opposi-
tion and resistance on the part of people ill-informed in regard to
the merits of the whole question, and have been taking active
steps for dividing and disrupting the Church, while they are still
under her authority, and subject to her jurisdiction.” We feel as-
sured, that the reader, who has breathed the free ecclesiastical at-
mosphere of Scotland, will agree with us, that it is no light matter
to be under the authority, and subject to the jurisdiction of such
a Synod!
The short and easy method, now followed by the Majority, of
expelling seven members of Synod, by a tempestuous speech, a
long motion, and the vote of a majority, is at once tyrannical and
unconstitutional, and opens a wide door for ecclesiastical despotism.
The main objection against the Minority is, that they agreed to a
Union, which they subsequently sought to break up, the reader is
left to imagine, without any cause whatever; as the ex-Convener
is, naturally enough, very,shy of reference to that Geelong Eeport
of his, which ought to have brought him to the bar of the Synod
under impeachment. We have seen a minister found guilty,
without any trial! Now, we have seven members of Synod
expelled, according to the novel ecclesiastical method of a motion
and a vote, but without the “ citation in writ,” “ the list of wit-
nesses' names,” and the “ten free days before compearance.”
Moreover, according to their own account of themselves in the
motion of expulsion, the Majority were “ shut up by the very
nature of our Presbyterian constitution,” to require of the Minority
to submit under dissent, or retire from the body. In civil matters
the case would stand thus. Lord Palmerston might be conceived
speaking as follows, were it indeed possible for such a statesman
to speak in such an unprecedented manner: —“ As there is a mino-


rity opposed to the continuance of the war in India, Her Majesty’s
Government are £ shut up’ by the very nature of our British Con-
stitution to require of said minority, that they submit under dis-
sent, or retire peaceably from Parliament.” Such procedure would
set all Britain in a blaze; nor would it quench the flames to urge
still farther, that the minority had given grievous offence to Her
Majesty’s Government, “ some of them by addresses to their con-
stituencies, and at political meetings, and some of them by letters
in the public press, and all of them by the public expression of
opinion.” To get rid of obnoxious parties, some misdemeanour
must be proved against them, after trial, according to the
appointed process. Summarily to eject a member, or any number
of members, on the speech-and-vote system, can only be done by
a new law, which must be submitted to the provisions of the
Barrier Act. “ The fundamental principles of Presbytery” con-
jured up by our ecclesiastical rulers, was never even passed into
an Interim Act, for enabling a majority expeditiously to expel a
minority, according to some show of constitutional procedure.
We shall presently see that the conduct of the dominant party, in
this transaction of the Expulsion, was as indefensible as that which
produced the first Scottish Secession.
The leading features of resemblance between the policy which
drove Erskine and his associates from the Church of Scotland, and
that which has produced the schism in the Free Church of Vic-
toria, are the same, and can be stated in a few sentences. In the
first place, We have, in both, a serious tampering with the con-
stitution of the Church. The dominant party in 1732 passed a
law, not only without, but even against, the requirements of the
Barrier Act. We have just seen the Majority assuming powers
which simply supersede all law, and set aside the most essential
forms of Presbyterian discipline. Secondly, We have, in both
cases, a series of vexatious and tyrannical acts against a single
individual, and ending, in each case, in the excommunication of
four ministers. Passages were picked out of Mr Erskine’s ser-
mon, just as out of Mr Paul’s pamphlet; both were censured, and
required to express sorrow; and both refused to do so. When
Erskine appeared before the bar of the Assembly, he had occasion
to complain of his accusers as follows: “ I shall only add, as an
evidence of the keenness of their spirits, that they were going on,


as is plain from the minutes, to judge the appellant censurable
before ever they had allowed him to see or hear a material libel
they had formed against him; and this favour was not allowed
him, when he demanded it, without a great struggle, and the
solemnity of a vote.” The extent, to which all this unworthy con-
duct was exhibited by the Majority towards Mr Paul, has been
unfolded in the preceding pages.
We have thus made our way as far as the Expulsion. Four
ministers and three elders were excommunicated; and a fifth
minister, the Rev. John M'Dougall, was not included in the final
list, on account of the mere accident of his being absent by reason
of very delicate health. We have seen how the Minority were
treated while in the Synod; it is interesting to notice how the
same harsh and oppressive policy was exercised towards them, so
far as possible in the circumstances, after the expulsion. The
proceedings, which we have been examining, soon came before the
public. The most influential q>aper in Victoria, in an article
headed “ Ecclesiastical Oppression,” declared against the policy as
subversive of liberty; and illustrated the treatment of the expelled
dissentients by reference to Polish history, in which it appeared,
that, when unanimity of counsel was necessary, the Majority re-
sorted to the expedient of massacring the Minority! Besides
this article, emanating from the Argus newspaper itself, there
appeared in its columns numerous letters containing pertinent
references and questions concerning “ The Form of Process,” and
the laws of the Church. The general reply to all positions taken
up by the Minority and their friends, was, that the expelled
party had agreed to the Union, and then sought to break it up
—a miserable shuffle, to which we have had occasion to refer be-
fore. But amongst the writers who distinguished themselves at
this time, we find the name of the Rev. William Henderson,
Moderator of the Majority. This gentleman had censured Mr
Paul, and expelled seven members from his own Synod; and as
these were now beyond his jurisdiction, he warned the country
against them in the following manner. Writing to the editor of
the Argus, he says: “ Sir, As Moderator of the Free Presbyterian
Synod, I think it right to caution your readers, that the four
ministers who met yesterday in John Knox’s, have no manner of
right or title to that designation.” Still farther, this adherence


to the name is described as “ morality of precisely the same sort
with that of the man who has been expelled for misconduct from
some situation, but who continues to do cl little sly business for
himself in the name oj his former employer.” Mr Henderson
himself will throw valuable light on these dignified passages in
the sequel.
But let us proceed with the Majority from the time of the ex-
pulsion. The ejected party, ere retiring, laid on the table of the
Synod a Protest, of which the following was the concluding sen-
tence: “And we hereby declare that, by reason of the coercion
now exercised, we are not at liberty to express and maintain our
conscientious views in this place, and as truly and constitutionally
i epresenting the said church, we adjourn the present meeting of
Synod, and hereby do adjourn, to meet/' &c. The said church
was, of course, the Tree Presbyterian Church of Victoria. Pos-
sibly the Majority were a little startled at this aspect of affairs.
Seven men, knit together by the Common bond of excommunica-
tion, constituting a rival Free Church, nay, claiming to be the
true and constitutional Free Church itself, certainly presented a
more formidable front than they would have done as seven subjects
of discipline. It was clear the Majority might have more to do
with these men yet. A Committee was at once appointed to
answer the “ mis-statements and perversions" of the Protest.
But were the expelled parties to be left in quiet possession of their
churches and congregations? When a minister is deposed, or
excommunicated, it is usual to “ preach his church vacant," so
that the people may be at liberty to take steps to get a new
pastor. Accordingly, Mr Tait of Geelong declared his willingness
to preach vacant the churches of the expelled ministers, though he
should die in the act! The martyr spirit of this gentleman was
curbed, however, and the churches were not preached vacant.
Nevertheless, they were not by any means lost sight of. Next
day the Presbytery of Melbourne were appointed to meet in
Chalmers Church, Melbourne, and instructed to look after the in-
terests of the congregations whose ministers have been declared to
be no longer ministers or members of this church, namely, John
Knox, Melbourne, St Kilda, Kilmore, and Brunswick, and to take
such steps as may be necessary in each case. But here again the
Majority were relieved of all farther trouble in the matter, for the


congregations met and declared bodily for their misters. The
extinguishing policy of the Majority began to point, now, in the
direction of failure. Two fierce assaults were accordingly made
upon the congregations of the Minority. One of these was at St
Kilda, but the result was a new church to Mr Paul. The other
was at Kilmore, to which several ministers have been sent to
oppose Mr Maxwell; but this gentleman has kept his ground, and
one of his rivals has gone over to the Minority.
The ruthless conduct of the Majority is farther developed by
their official correspondence with the government. A Deputation
of their Synod speak as follows regarding the parties expelled:—
“ Tiie case is aggravated by the fact that the Free Church has
acted with studied consideration towards the separated ministers.
She has raised no question about property. She has not even
alleged her indubitable legal interest in the property connected
with the congregations which still adhere to these ministers.” Her
“indubitable legal interest” hacl been provided for, in an earlier
paragraph of the document from which we quote. Thus “ minis-
ters who have been deprived by a final sentence of the supreme
ecclesiastical judicatory, do, in virtue of that sentence, lose the
emolument of their office, the property held by them as ministers
oj the church is involved in the decision that ejects them,” —uidess,
of course, as in a civil question, it may be competent for the
ejected party to get redress from the magistrate. The case, then,
stands thus; The decision of the Synod is final, no matter what
the case may be, whether heresy, immorality, rebellion, or contu-
macy. Also the decision of the Synod involves the property of
the expelled party. Accordingly, Mr Henderson, in applying for
the stipends in the usual way, intimated to the Government, that
certain ministers were no longer within the pale of the Free
Church of Victoria, and so not entitled to the usual State aid.
We can now understand something of the studied consideration
spoken of by the Deputation. The legal interest of the Synod in
the property of the expelled ministers was indubitable, inasmuch
as the emoluments of office were involved in the decision of ejec-
tion—so the Majority thought. We can also explain a certain
amount of leniency in the remarks of the Deputation. They say,
“ Anxious for peace, the Church has abstained from every move-
ment calculated to irritate or embarass, and is willing that these


ministers should receive their proportion of the Government grant
just as before. How far the Church had abstained from every-
thing calculated to irritate and embarass, the reader who has
perused the foregoing pages, is in a position to judge; and, as to
their accommodating spirit towards the Minority, we have seen
above that nothing of the sort was embodied in Mr Henderson’s
application to the Government. A glimpse into the real state of
matters may be obtained from the opening sentence of the docu-
ment from which we have been quoting: “The Deputation have
learned with surprise that Government have determined to refuse
all payment of the usual grant of money as salaries for ministers,
and to assist in the erection of ecclesiastical buildings—the reason
assigned being, the claim of certain individuals, lately members of
the Synod, to be regarded as the true Free Church, and entitled
to all the immunities belonging in law to that Denomination.”
Little as they had expected it, the Majority were actually begin-
ing to feel the pressure of the argument which they had attempted
to bring to bear upon the Minority. In point of form it was
necessary for the expelled party to lay claim, as the constitutional
Free Church, to all the immunities belonging to her in law, al-
though, on their part, they gave the Treasurer to understand that
they did not desire to appropriate more than usually fell to their
share.
The legal position of the Minority and Majority respectively,
before the Government, is of some importance, and the elements
of a decision on the question may be laid before the reader. The
Deputation of the Majority thus plead their own case: “As a
corporate body, the Free Church is known to the State, and to the
law, only through the medium of her constitution. That con-
stitution is embodied in a document called the Fundamental Act,
and which is subscribed by all ministers, and office-bearers, as the
comprehensive standard of the Church.” Again, the “ Free Pres-
byterian Church of Victoria occupies the same constitutional ground
that she ever did, she has altered no law, abandoned no principle,
and repealed no ordinance. In reference to a proposed Union
with the Synod of Victoria, the Synod of the Free Church pre-
pared articles in strict conformity with its own standards or
Fundamental Act.” Nothing could bring out a clearer case against
the reasoners, than the juxtaposition of the two passages now


quoted; the articles may be as good as, or much better than the
Fundamental Act. The question with which a lawyer would
have to deal, is not one of similarity, but identity. The articles
may be like the Fundamental Act, but still they are not that act
itself. Nay, it might be argued that there must be some im-
portant difference involved at some point, whether by excess or
defect, else, why go to the trouble of drawing up a new series
of articles at all? As the Deputation rightly say, the Free Presby-
terian Church of Victoria, as in the presence of Government, stands
on the ground of the Fundamental Act, certainly not of the
Articles.
But would the case be argued solely on the ground of the
mere technicalities now referred to? Would there be nothing
to plead more substantial than the narrow question of simi-
larity and identity? When we compare the two documents,
the Fundamental Act and the Articles of Union, we shall
find a serious omission in the latter. The former was drawn
up in the view of the sinful complicity of some of the colo-
nial churches with the defections of the Erastian Establish-
ment in Scotland, and therefore embodied, as it was intended to
embody, a testimony against them. After fencing off the civil
magistrate from meddling with spiritual things far more ably and
completely than is done in the Articles, the Fundamental Act has
the following: “ And this Synod do condemn, and by God's help,
resolves ever to testify against, all interference of civil magistrates
with the spiritual affairs of Christ’s house, and against all eccle-
siastical bodies countenancing or submitting to such interference,
either directly or indirectly; and against all tenets, principles,
practices, and acts, by which such interference on the part of the
civil magistrate, or such submission on the part of ecclesiastical
bodies, may be countenanced What we have now quoted is the
closing paragraph of a section which begins as follows:—“ Fifth,
That as the members of this church have been called, in the Provi-
dence of God, to testify, on behalf of the truth, that there is no
other Head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ,” &c. The
Testimony which Mr Forbes and his brethren felt called upon in
Providence to lift up, is abandoned in the Articles! However
true it may be, as put by the Deputation, that the Free Synod
has “ altered no law, abandoned no principle, and repealed no


ordinance,” yet it is a simple fact, that in the Articles, the Testi-
mony of the Fundamental Act is abandoned. It is highly proba-
ble that, in any law court, the omission now disclosed would, in
view of all the circumstances of the case, be pronounced tanta-
mount to a radical alteration in the constitution determined by
the Fundamental Act. The sentiments of the Synod of Victoria
regarding the Established Church of Scotland, could be proved
from official documents; and her Erastian views, in this respect,
make her the very object of the Testimony contained in the Fun-
damental Act. It is true, that an announcement was once made
to the Free Synod, that all official statements of attachment to
the Scottish Establishment have been withdrawn by the Synod of
Victoria; but it has fully transpired that this announcement was
groundless. In this state of matters, it is not wonderful that the
Treasurer, who submitted the whole affair to the law officers of
the Crown, should feel some hesitation in acknowledging the
Majority as constitutionally occupying the ground marked off by
the Fundamental Act.
But, when the logician failed, the orator came forth. Accord-
ingly another deputation, consisting of a number of gentlemen of
all shades of religion, headed by Dr Cairns, proceeded to the Go-
vernment offices. Mr Haines, the Chief Secretary, who corresponds
to the Prime Minister in Britain, is addressed as follows, by the
reverend leader mentioned above: “ The present Deputation, con-
sisting of gentlemen belonging to the different sections of the
Presbyterian body, and also to other denominations who see that
an important principle is involved in the present question, desire,
with deference, to represent to you, in the most emphatic terms,
that the conduct of Government in withholding the money grant
due to ministers and congregations of the Free Church, on the
ground alleged, that other parties have asserted that they are that
Church, is manifestly an unconstitutional assumption of power
which belongs only to the State in its Legislative capacity, and is,
in fact, a confounding of all order and jurisdiction.” Again: “We
do not hesitate to assure you, that we express the general senti-
ment of the Presbyterians in the colony, and of many, and, we
believe, the vast majority, of all denominations, when we venture
to describe the present policy of the Government as an injustice
for which no plausible defence can be urged, and as an affront to


the Church, for which it is not easy to frame, or even to imagine, a
colourable excuse.” When the organ of the Majority opens fire
upon the Chief Secretary, and continues the cannonading in the
style above exhibited, we can readily imagine him to be one who
will make short work of those who cross his path in his own judi-
catory. The clamorous representation, from which we have quoted,
was occasioned by the refusal of the Treasurer to pay the stipends
till the question should be adjusted, Who was the true Moderator?
seeing the salaries require to be paid through the head of the
denomination. Here, again, we find the very engine, which the
Majority had forged to bear down with crushing weight upon the
Minority, now pressing upon themselves; and the quotations,
above given afford us proof of the equanimity with which they
bore it.
At the next meeting of the Synod of the Majority, Mr Hender-
son gave in his report regarding the steps taken with the Govern-
ment about the salaries, and this afforded another occasion of
bitter lamentation. He, who had cautioned the public, that the
expelled ministers had no manner of right or title to the designa-
tion which they continued to assume, had now to proclaim to his
Synod that, although he had got money from the Treasurer, yet
his signature had been positively disowned as the official repre-
sentative of the Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
CONCLUSION.
We have now to look back over the ground which we have
traversed with mingled feelings of indignation and sorrow; —of in-
dignation at the ruthless and unjustifiable conduct of a reckless
church party, and sorrow at the most disgraceful business that has
yet happened in the Free Church. The Majority have apostatized
from the Protest of the Free Church of Scotland, inasmuch as
they have undoubtedly done so from the Protest of the Free Pres-
byterian Church of Victoria. They have miserably entangled
themselves in a Union with a Church which is in open communion
and correspondence with the Church of Scotland, and which
claimed the right of being so for the United body. They have
resisted the most decisive warnings, and at length proceeded to


persecute those who continued faithful to the honour of the
Church. They have been publicly fraternising with a body which
is in statutory connection with the Erastian Establishment of Scot-
land. They have been very patronising of Moderates, while they
have been most intolerant of genuine Free Churchmen. In their
public speeches they have done much to lower the tone of Free
Church feeling, without elevating that of Moderatism. They have
joined in the pitiful, unmanly, and un-Free Churchman-like wail
about the probability of Presbyterianism going down in the colo-
nies ! And, as if to help out their own doleful predictions, they
have rent their own Church into two sections.
It cannot be that the parties who have been the chief agents in
this unhappy result, should escape scatheless. The history of the
Union negotiations has brought a cloud over the Free Church
character of the two Fathers, sent out a few years ago, to give
stability to the rising body. They had gained honour to them-
selves in having signed the Protest, and taken part in the great
Disruption struggle in 1843. But they have tarnished, in Aus-
tralia, the laurels which they won in Scotland. Dr Mackay came
from Sydney to be present at the Expulsion, to give weight to
that unprecedented procedure, and to startle his Highland
countrymen by his new views and confessions concerning the
Disruption. Returning to the scene of his labours in Sydney, he
took his place in his own Synod, to oppose everything that sa-
voured of the Free Church. From the published proceedings of
that Synod, it might easily be supposed, that the Dr Mackay, who
dissents from everything that refers to 1843, was some benighted
Erastian who had, by mistake, made his way into the wrong
Synod. His moderatizing policy, however, was completly defeated
by the Rev. William MTntyre, who has been nearly twenty
years in the colony, and therefore knowing, much better than Dr
Mackay can do, the insidious and dangerous nature of colonial
moderatism, has accordingly girded on his armour to ward off
thet hreatening evil. With regard to the other Father, referred to
above, a still darker stain rests upon his memory. Dr Cairns be-
trayed the Free Synod to a false position by his Geelong Report;
and, by his motion, the unconstitutional act of Expulsion was per-
petrated. In following out the ruthless policy of the Majority,
his name occurs with nauseous frequency. Let us charitably hope


%
he may yet have “grace given” him to retrieve the character
which he has forfeited. He goes down to posterity as the author
of the first schism in the Free Church!
About twelve years ago, a new church was founded in Victoria.
It began with one minister and a small band of adherents. The
Rev. James Forbes, the person now alluded to, was one of the
most evangelical, and faithful, and most thoroughly Presbyterian
ministers who have yet laboured in £he Australian colonies. The
church, planted by the zeal and piety of such a man, grew, and
prospered, and soon distanced the Representative of the Establish-
ment, notwithstanding the advantages of vastly superior numbers.
But the apple of discord, in the shape of a Union movement, has
entered the Free Church, the name of its intrepid founder has
been aspersed, and misrepresented by his own successors, and she
herself has been rent in twain. It was fitting that the cloud
which, for a time, has overshadowed the one, should send forth
the bolt that has shivered the other. But those who have lightly
treated the name of Mr Forbes, have been unable to hold the
ground which he so firmly occupied. They have allowed them-
selves to be drawm away from it, and have left it in possession
of parties, wdiose ecclesiastical existence they took the most un-
justifiable means to extinguish. It is once more but a small party
that occupy the position of Mr Forbes, amid obloquy, and hatred,
and mountains of misrepresentation, in the colonies and in Scot-
land. But they are steadily progressing, as their founder did.
Already, within one year of their existence, their number of
ministers has been doubled, and there are more congregations
seeking pastors at their hands than they are able to supply.
PRINTED BY ANDREW JACK, CLYDE STREET. EDINBURGH.




NOTE OF EXPLANATION.
The writer begs leave to mention the circumstances in which the
“ Apostacy ” now appears in Victoria. It was prepared in the Colony
from the most copious documents to which access could be obtained, and
was sent to Scotland to be printed. It was published and distributed as
early as May, 1858, a copy having been put into the hands of every
member of Assembly, and a considerable number having also been distri-
buted amongst ministers in the large towns throughout Scotland. The
Publisher had instructions to send out several hundred copies, which were
to be similarly disposed of here. A package of them was accordingly
transmitted through Messrs, Cowan & Co., Edinburgh, and Messrs.
Callender, Caldwell & Co., Melbourne, to Messrs. W. M. Bell & Co., Mel-
bourne. It only reached the Colony, however, by the “ Eagle,” which
arrived on the 30th March of this year.
Melbourne, August 30, 1859.
