



J. Lurnley




PHYSICAL, SEXUAL,
AND
NATURAL RELIGION:
BY
A STUDENT OF MEDICINE.
LONDON:
EDWARD TRUELOVE, 240, STRAND,
TEMPLE BAR.
1855.


J. 8. Geikvxs, Printer, 6, lied Lion Court, Fleet Street.


DEDICATED
TO
THE POOR AND THE SUFFERING.


PREFACE.
Had it not been from the fear of causing pain to a relation,
I should have felt it my duty to put ray name to this work ; in order
that any censure passed upon it, should fall upon myself alone.
I feel deeply indebted to Mr. Truklove for the service he has
done me in its publication; and the more so that he has been
actuated, by no means by a full acquiescence in its opinions, but by
a generous desire to promote the free discussion, and earnest in-
vestigation, of the most important, though unfortunately most
neglected, subjects. In particular, he is desirous to afford ex-
pression to whatever may throw light upon the great social
difficulties, and the condition and prospects of the poor and
oppressed classes. He wishes to give to the author the opportu-
nity of advocating his views, and to the reader that of examining
them, and forming his own conclusions.
I earnestly hope that the time is not far distant, when each
individual shall be enabled freely to bring forward his conscientious
beliefs, without incurring the intolerance of others; and when the
subjects of the following pages shall be generally understood,
openly discussed.
THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.
PART I.
PHYSICAL KELIGION.
Physical Religion 1
Man the Physician 9
Woman the Physician 14
Subjective Medicine 20
Life and Death 23
Health of Towns 28
Mental Disease 36
Spiritualism 40
PART 11.
SEXUAL RELIGION.
Reproduction and Development 5S
Diseases of the Male Generative Organs 76
Evils of Abstinence 80
Excess 84
'i Abuse 87
Spermatorrikea 98
Venereal Diseases 108
Balanitis 112
Gonorrhiea 110
Syphilis 188
Diseases of the Female Generative Organs 157
Chlorosis 165
Hysteria ‘ 176
Sexual Excess 186
Diseases of Menstruation 188


Amesorrihea 190
Vicarious Menstruation 197
DySMENORRIHEA 198
Menorrhagia ; 201
Leucorkhcea ~. 205
Disorders at Menstrual Decline 211
Inflammations op the Sexual Organs 213
Acute Ovaritis 21G
Sub-acute Ovaritis 218
Inflammation of the Womb 220
Acute Metritis 222
Chronic Metritis 223
Ulceration of the Neck of the Womb 225
Venereal Diseases in the Female 234
General Remarks on the Sexual Diseases 238
Prostitution 241
Law op Population 272
Abridgment of the Essay on “ Population” by Mr.
Malthus 275
Mr. Mill and Others on the Law op Population 315
Poverty, its only Cause and its only Cube, with the
Solution of the Social Problem 331
| PART 111.
NATURAL RELIGION.
Dignity, Liberty, and Independence 399
Natural Religion 427


PART I.
PHYSICAL RELIGION.




PHYSICAL RELIGION.
There is nothing from which mankind in the present day suffers
more, than from the want of reverence for the human body. The mass
of men, even the most cultivated, are content to pass their lives in the
deepest ignorance of its structure, and of its most simple laws. All
active sympathy with its fate, or interest in the infinitely varied
details of its health and disease, is handed over to the medical pro-
fession, into whose modes of thought, aims, and principles of action,
the public care not to eater. In the education of childhood and youth,
no knowledge of the body is imparted, no instruction given for the
conduct cf the future physical life. No reverence is inculcated for
physical laws, no aspirations cherished after physical excellence.
Beauty of form, that imperishable source of joy and stamp ol'nobility,
to be perpetuated through successive generations, so far from being
held out as an object for our reverence and constant endeavour after,
is rather regarded as a dangerous snare, and vanity, which may mis-
lead men from the path of virtue. Physical strength is held in slight
estimation by those who cultivate the intellect, and they who take
delight in the sports and exercises which call it forth, are rather looked
down upon as men of low tastes. Bodily health, the proof of a vir-
tuous physical life, is not proposed as a chief end of our eudeavours, nor
regarded as an honour to its possessor. It is rather thought of as a
blessing bestowed by providence, or inherited from our parents, with
the attainment of which the individual’s self has comparatively little
to do. The laws of health are as little reverenced as understood.
While the infringement of a moral law involves the deepest guilt, and
is considered worthy of infinite punishment, ,to break a physical one,
and thereby incur disease, is not deemed an offence at all, but only a
misfortune. The animal or sensual passions as they are called, are
viewed in a most degrading light, and the youth is warned to beware of
indulgence in them, and rather to train himself in the vastly nobler
enjoyments of the moral and reasoning faculties. These are thought


to be of a much higher and loftier nature than the others, which it is
their duty to control and direct. Men set no high value in their
theories on life itself, which some even view in the light of a penance,
while they regard death as the greatest blessing. Length of life, and
its proper and only beautiful termination in extreme age, after the
gradual extinction of the vital powers, is by no means considered a
noble goal for man’s aim. The ill-regulated mind rather shrinks from
the idea of natural decay, and admires much more the lamentable fate
of martyrdom, or the premature death of interesting youth, just nature’s
punishment for broken laws. The whole material universe shares in
this neglect with the body, its representative in man. The physical
sciences with their infinite treasury of novelties and wonders are fol-
lowed only by a few devoted adherents, while to society in general they
are an unknown region. Besides this, all the so-called manual pursuits,
are held as vastly inferior in dignity to the mental ones, which, under
the name of the learned professions, claim for themselves the highest
place in man’s respect. The fine arts, sculpture and painting, and the
mechanical arts, all of which are concerned with material objects,
although their dignity and powerful influence are daily more and more
felt, are yet very far from occupying their due position.
In short, in whatever direction we look, we find that the body and
matter in general hold a very secondary place in man’s reverence. We
see that almost the whole of mankind, with the exception of the few
who expressly follow material pursuits—grow, live, and die, with their
thoughts and interests turned in quite a different direction. It is mind,
and not body, moral and intellectual, not physical themes, which possess
their heart.
“Spirit," they say, “is infinitely higher and nobler than matter; the
sonl is the truly glorious part of our humanity. Does it not constitute
the attribute of man, by which he is raised above the rest of nature to
thelikeness and comprehension of the Deityhimseif? How poor in com-
parison is the body, its humble companion, whose tardy movements and
coarse sensibilities but clog its etherial essence! The latter shall soon
perish, and with it all its excellences; but the other, glad to be released
from its prison-house, shall soar away into everlasting bliss. Why then
waste our time in laying up treasures that corrupt? Let ns, first of all
things, attend to our spiritual part; and then, even though our body
perish, we have still saved that which is alone all-sufficient.” Thus do
men reason, and thus are all their sympathies and aspirations bound up
in their spiritual welfare. As they judge of themselves, so do they of
others. A well-spent moral life, and endeavours to elevate the spiritual
condition of others, command their warmest admiration; bnt of a
virtuous physical life they have no conception; and for the struggles and
aspirations of those, who have sought to ennoble men physically, little
sympathy. While the names of poets, moralists, and mental philosophers,
are in every mouth, and their lines and precepts in every heart; few are
acquainted even with the names, far less with the deeds of those who
„? Te s ‘ n . ven ' nt^ e ?ause of the human body. It is well for them, physi-
cians and physiologists, if they escape the charge of materialism, or the


disgust attaching to the charnel-house or vivisections. Sad is it indeed
to look back on the fate of the apostles of the body! For if any ideal or
object of pursuit be looked down upon, or not sufficiently reverenced, those
who follow it will necessarily share in that irreverence. Therefore, has
the clergyman, who has the cure of souls, been for ages held in much
higher esteem and love than the physician, who has the cure of bodies.
And not only have these professions been ranked on such principles,
but every other profession and calling has had its place assigned by the
same standard. The spiritualist has ever been esteemed above the mate-
rialist ; the thinker above the doer ; the musical composer above the
finished musician; the dramatic writer above the actor; the mental above
the manual pursuits. A few mental directions of man’s energy are
elevated above the others, and chiefly honoured, so that the young man of
liberal education, is impelled by all his accustomed sympathies and
feelings to adopt one of them, whether or not it be fitted for his nature.
According to this gauge, the nearer a man’s pursuit approaches to
pure spirit, the more is he esteemed—the nearer to matter, the less.
Whence, then, has arisen this extraordinary and arbitrary mode of
judging of the elements of nature ? Who has presumed to settle the claims
of precedence between the twin elemental principles of the universe; and
thereby cause so powerful an influence on man’s existence? If we look
for the main source of this universal preference for spirit, and things
connected with it, we shall find it in the Christian religion. This
religion, springing as it did out of the ancient Hebrew worship, which
delighted in representing the infinite material universe, as dependent on
the nod of a supreme spiritual Self-existent being, is essentially a
spiritual faith. According to its doctrines, the Deity himself, from whom
all things originated, and to whom all are subject, is a spirit, infinite,
eternal, and unchangeable. He first called matter into existence, and
imposed on it laws after his own will, reserving to himself the power of
changing or annihilating them, whenever he thought it necessary.
Man, the wondrous compound of mind and body, also owed his origin to
this spirit; who gave him life by a pure act of his will. Believing then
in the infinite supremacy of the spiritual element, and worshipping it
exclusively, he naturally bestowed his chief reverence on the represen-
tative of the Deity in himself. Hence his soul was the grand object of
all his thoughts, while the body was little regarded, or at most borrowed
a reflected fight from its more favoured companion. The soul, it was
believed, was joined in some mysterious way to the body at birth, and
condemned for a brief period to travel through this life in its company,
clogged and confined by its ignoble associate. At death, however, it re-
sumed its own privileges as spirit, infinite, eternal, and unchangeable, and
soared away into an immortality of weal or woe, while its desjflsed
companion was consigned to the darkness of a grave, and to disgusting
decay, from which the ignorant mind shrank with abhorrence.
Who could entertain such views of the nature and ultimate destinies
of the twin parts of man, without becoming almost entirely absorbed in
the fate of the one, and as wholly neglecting that of the other? Such
is the Christian doctrine of life, and such the effect it has had on man.


■Wherever it has made its way, supported by the beautiful character of
its oricinator, it has given an intensely spiritual direction to men s minds ;
and their tastes, judgments, social scale, and various pursuits, have been
modified by it in the way mentioned above. . .
But physical religion is diametrically opposed to the Christian ana
spiritual beliefs. It can allow none of them, seeing that they give to
mind a superiority over matter, and so deprive the latter of its rightful
place in the affection and reverence of man. Its fundamental proposi-
tions are—matter is as noble as spirit, the body as the soul. To separate
the one from the other is to destroy the truth of nature; to place the
one above the other is a monstrous presumption, destroying the harmony
of the universe, where all things are equally important, and where the
laws of one substance never yield to those of another.
The belief that the Deity is a spirit is completely untenable. The
natural theologians, who have attempted to prove it, and who, doubtless,
have followed the same line of reason as the ancients, who proposed the
doctrine, argue thus:—“ In the universe around us, we everywhere see
marks of design; from this we must infer a designing mind, reasoning
by analogy from what we find in ourselves.”
But they forget, that the mind which designs in man, is inseparably
connected with a vitally organized brain ; therefore, to conclude that the
designer of the universe is pure spirit, is to reason against all analogy.
According to our experience, mind is invariably found in connection with
a brain, and never creates matter.
Not only does physical religion deny the possibility of spirit having
originated matter, or of the laws of matter being ever in one iota subject to
those of spirit, it cannot allow aprerogativetotheone, in any particular,
over the other. Thus it entirely denies the possibility of the immortality
of the one without the other. Such a belief tends inevitably to destroy
the equal place both should hold in our reverence, thus entailing the most
ruinous consequences. The narrow conception of salvation for the one,
without, or even at the expense of the other, is utterly condemned by
physical religion, according to whose views no scheme of salvation can be
received, which omits any part of humanity. Onr bodily and mental
interests are inseparably bound together, and no part of us can rise or
fall, without the rest taking a share. Thus physical evil always infers
moral evil, and the reverse. Our body cannot be diseased without our
mind becoming so likewise.
It is the duty of all men to study the laws of their body, no less than
those of their mind. If they do not, if they have not sufficient reverence
for the body to take due care for its healthy development either in them-
se ves or m others, when they break any of its laws, which they arc
certain to do, it will be little excuse to plead ignorance. All moral sin
may exactly m the same way be resolved into ignorance, but nature
no such exc u se. The conduct of our physical life is just as
difficult as that of our moral one. To live a virtuous phvsical life deserves,
therefore, as great admiration and praise as the other. The ennoblement
vLr„f H 7 m and in ° thers is j ust as hi S h an aj ™ man as
mat of tin, spirit. Can yon have a healthy mind without a healthy


brain ? Certainly, this is impossible, -whatever mistaken moral views have
led some to suppose. Therefore provision for the one is as lofty, and
moreover, just as difficult an endeavour as for the other; and indeed the
only true method of attaining the highest development of man, is by
equal regard and attention to the interests of both.
The man who is only conversant with spiritual reasoning and mental
phenomena, who has confined his attention to the region of mind, and is
ignorant of the body with its infinitely complex states of health and
disease, is incapable of a true and comprehensive view of man—in the
same way is he, who knows only the physical side, equally imperfect.
In every act, every thought, every relation of man, there are a double
train of forces at work, and he who attends only to the one is not fitted
to reason on the whole result. In every act presented to the eye of the
moralist, there is a physical line of causation, equally important, equally
difficult to unravel, which must be taken into account, before he can be
said to reason on man, as a whole being, at all. Therefore, since the
moralist and the physicist have hitherto been separated in the world’s
history, we possess no comprehensive or true views of man, and our
reasonings both in morals and in medicine will all need complete revision
by minds equally conversant with body and mind, and their several
phenomena of health and disease ; and ready to assign to each their due
importance, unbiased by partiality for either.
There has not yet lived a man, who has done this for the world ; who
has brought to bear on the problem of life a brain equally trained in
spiritual and bodily experience, educated equally in the phenomena of the
mental and material universe. Unstirred by the unhappy party dis-
tinctions of spiritualism and materialism, seeking instruction on all parts
and sides of nature, omitting equal reverence to none, would not he show
more fully than our fathers have done, his duty and devotion toman and
to nature ?
But physical religion does not leave it to us as a matter of choice,
whether we will study the laws of our body or not; it enjoins their study
on all men as a duty, second in importance to none.
If you do not wish to live a physically virtuous, that is, a healthy life,
you are an immoral being; if you do, there is but one way to it; study
the laws of health and obey them. Physical virtue is as lofty an aim for
man as moral virtue, and no man can be called good, who does not com-
bine and aspire equally after both. To break a physical law is just as
culpable as to break a moral one, and therefore all physical diseases must
bo regarded as a sign of sin, and as little in the one case as in the other,
can ignorance be received as an excuse. No man whose body is diseased,
whether hereditarily or individually, can be called a virtuous being.
All moral and all physical excellencies may be mutually resolved into
each other, for a noble mind or a good or true spirit may be just as fairly
regarded as a noble and true brain, and all physical good may equally be
traced to a moral one. Thus, by following the trains of thought of
spiritualist and materialist, we will be able, equally legitimately, at one
time to resolve all things into spirit, at another all into matter.
Beauty of form, and physical strength and activity, as well as health.


should be sought after, and rained no less than beauty and power of mind.
Is the development of the brain to be the supreme object of man s aspira-
tions ? A fuller wisdom will show us, that we must value equally all our
parts, since no one can thrive alone. Ugliness aud bodily imperfection or
deformity are always marts of sin, and show us that some error has been
committed, or that we have not duly sought after bodily excellence.
Physical beauty, whose expression forms the glorious ideal of the painter
and sculptor, is as high an aim as any other that could be proposed. For it
is inseparably associated in nature’s plan with all other beauties and
powers, and we can attain to truth just as surely by following beauty, as
by any other path. In fact all the ideals of man which are founded on
a reality in nature, are equally infinite, and therefore equally capable of
forming a religion. For there is not one religion, but as many religions
as there are parts of nature to absorb us in their pursuit. The real re-
ligion of each man is that pursuit and that idea, which most bolds his
heart, and which awakens in him a lofty enthusiasm. It is the percep-
tion and feeling of the infinite, and our duty to aspire to it, to which the
name of religion has ever been given. Unfortunate the pursuit and those
who follow it, which has not its own equally recognised and equally
reverenced religion.
Spiritualism is at present the great obstacle to this recognition ; to the
extension of the idea of Catholic humanity, which is now pervading the
civilised world; the equal reverence for all men and for all parts of nature.
It is the prevailing error of past and present times, and is not confined
to our own country merely, but extends perhaps over all the globe. It is
the true aristocratic element in our society, which interposes its chilling
barriers between men's hearts, for where there is not equal mutual
reverence, there cannot long be true love. Itself at first an advancing
revolution, it has now become a stationary despotism. It has shown no
quarter to its ‘opponent materialism, which at present as a theory can
scarcely be said to exist in the world, and is not therefore much to be
dreaded as an evil.
It is spiritualism, that men of our age have to fear, and do what they
may, tney will find it almost impossible to extricate themselves from its
prejudicing influence, so subtly is it interwoven in all our thoughts and
feelings. For the man who has not paid equal attention to physical pur-
suits, and to the study of the human body in its varied phases of health
and disease, must be a spiritualist, and his unequal knowledge of the dif-
ferent parts of our nature, while it shows his preference for the one, will
bias and falsify all his views on man as a whole.
As all parts of our nature are of equal perfection, and therefore all
equally claim our reverence, it cannot be for a moment allowed, that the
so-called animal passions are of an inferior kind to the spiritual. They
exercise an influence on man just as divine as any other, and shape and
mould the human character as powerfully and as nobly. It is not the
&“f “ a “ to ,® a y Tlu ? P ar ‘ of my nature is more beautiful or more
noble than another, let me therefore cultivate it chiefly.” llis duty is to
study to perceive an equal beauty in all, aud to endeavour that all shall
be duly and equally developed.


If a healthy life be the crown of the physical virtues, death in all its
forms, except the natural spontaneous one of gradual decay in old age, is
the greatest of all physical sins. The gravity of a physical sin is to be
measured by the severity of the disease, nature’s punishment; and when
death follows, the physical sin must have been the greatest. All pre-
mature deaths, therefore, are sinful, and abhorrent to physical religion,
showing that the evil powers have been at work. It matters not what
other noble qualities, moral or physical, the individual may have had; if
he die before his time, bis life is an imperfect one, and so far must be
condemned.
The death of martyrdom, which has been so dangerous an example to
the world, is but a confession of the imperfect state of existing things.
“ All men around me are sinning,” says the martyr, “ therefore must I
also sin, and submit to a mutilated career in order to save them.” Beauti-
ful, truly; but the highest ideal allows of no sacrifice of any real good.
It is by no means martyrdom, or premature death in any conceivable
form, that men are to aim at; but rather a physiologically perfect life,
perfect in every stage, perfect in its natural termination. It is from the
want of a reverence for our physical life, from an inadequate appreciation
of Its infinite value and majesty, and the duty that we lie under, to guard
it as a most sacred possession, that the recklessness of life, both in them-
selves and in others, in great part arose, which has been, and still is, so
dark a stain on mankind.
The grand aim of the natural and only beautiful death should be kept
steadily before the eyes of all throughout life. To live and die naturally,
and to help others to do the same! Have we ever thought how much of
virtue, of duty, of religion, lies in this aim, apparently so simple, yet in
its attainment so infinitely difficult ?
As physical religion teaches us to reverence the body as highly as the
spirit, so does it also teach us to view with equal reverence all the
different parts and organs of the body itself. There are few things from
which humanity has suffered more than from the degrading and irreverent
feelings of mystery and shame that have been attached to the genital
and excretory organs. The former have been regarded, like their corres-
ponding mental passions, as something of a lower and baser nature,
tending to degrade and carnalise man by their physical appetites. But
we cannot take a debasing view of any part of our humanity, without be-
coming degraded in our whole being. It would be bard to enumerate all
the evils which have flowed from this unhappy view of the genital
organs; whose functions and influence are second in importance and
in transceudant perfection to none. Their health and disease have been
neglected, their misfortunes have called forth rather the sneer and the
reproach than the divine pity and assistance which should wait upon all
error, physical and moral.
I have endeavoured elsewhere, in the treatise on the sexual organs, to
give a short sketch of their laws, which should be studied and obeyed by
all men and women as reverentially as those of any other organs, else
will their consequent ruin involve the ruin of the whole being. Before
the calm eye of nature, all flimsy veils of morbid modesty, shame, and


indolence, vanish like a dream; and when she demands penalty for broken
laws, such excuses die away on the lips of the offender. .
In the same tray that physical religion enjoins reverence for the genital
organs, so does it prohibit all low and degraded ideas connected with the
organs of excretion. All such are an abomination unto it, and it will
not hold him guiltless who stoops to entertain them. Every one should
endeavour absolutely to free his mind from these unhappy views of
our ancestors, and learn to regard all parts of his body with the same
reverential eye, undisturbed by feelings of mystery, shame, or disgust.
Too long alas 1 too long have these indignities defiled our humanity, and
baffled the efforts of the physician! What sufferer from the diseases of
these organs has not had his woes aggravated ten-fold by these unhappy
feelings f The universal study of anatomy, enjoined on ail men by physical
religion, will alone succeed in dissipating these morbid and irre-
verent ideas.
But in what direction can we turn our eyes, and not find man de-
graded by the want of physical reverence ? Have not all the various
classes, who follow material pursuits, become themselves degraded,
from the want of a religious enthusiasm for them? Hare not the
physician, the artist, the actor, the labourer, and artizan, become de-
graded thereby ? If a man have not a sufficient reverence for his pur-
suit, it will hang a dead weight round his neck, and sink him to the
level of a mercenary drudge. It is deplorable to see the way in which
some of these glorious branches of human endeavour are looked down
upon, not only by society at large, but by their own followers. The
noble profession of the actor or actress is viewed in so degrading a light
by society that it is almost ignored. Is the perfection of art in that
vocation, which forms as integral an ingredient of our social life as
any others, less difficult in its attainment or less unbounded in its in-
fluence than they? In a more perfect state of society it will not be
viewed so.
-The interests of all concerned in physical studies or pursuits, are,
no less than the physician*®, bound up in thospread of physical religion.
Without it, medicine is, as it has been up to this time, comparatively .
paralysed, and can have but a minor influence on the physical regenera-
tion and progress of man. How can the voice of the physician bo
heard, if he can urge only the feeble motives of expediency, while the
moralist and clergyman have at their command the armoury of duty and
religion, with the array of eternal rewards and punishments, to enforce
reverence for their precepts ? To all of these assumptions of spiritual
superiority, as it has been seen, physical religion inexorably returns a
denial while it claims, and will have from ail human beings, exactly an
equal share of their reverence. The individual and the ago which resist
those claims shall not escape punishment, but shall surely suffer; not
that it loves spirit less, but that it loves the whole man more. The true
interests of the spiritualist are no less involved in this, for, where in-
justice is done, all must suffer. *


MAN, THE PHYSICIAN.
The noble science of medicine has never yet received due reverence
from mankind. This arises chiefly from the cause that has been men-
tioned above, namely, the want of reverence for the body, the special
object of its attention. In the neglect shown to their subject, medical
men have shared, and thus has the profession become a little world in it-
self, separated from the interests and real sympathies which only mutual
understanding can give, of the main world around them. The physician,
to the eyes of other men, appears as one apart, who is initiated into
mysteries which their imagination dreads, yet dwells upon; who is de
voted to studies, the materialising and debasing influences of which are
still, in the light of the nineteenth century, vaguely whispered of, though
society is now-a-days too polite to utter openly the coarse and irreverent
accusations of our forefathers.
It is not, however, with the degradations of the physicians of the past
that I have to do ; those who will may find the records' of them in
history, and having studied them, will be prepared by their light to read
the condition of the physician of the present. For the seeds sown by our
ancestors still flourish among us, and long will be the struggle before the
prejudices against medicine and its followers, and the materialising ten-
dencies of the science, be totally uprooted. It is rarely that we see in
the writings, even of the most cultivated men of past times, the medical
profession alluded to, except with a sneer at their low-miudedness, or
expressed contempt at their want of skill. It would have been better for
these writers and for society, had they rather tried themselves to solve
those problems of health and disease, which medical mtu knew so little
about.
But what was there to induce these men of lofty ambition and great
powers, to devote themselves to 'a subject which shut them out of the
sympathies of the world ; which offered to them few of the prizes of fame,
influence, or even that, which, with the true philanthropist, outweighs all
other rewards —the wide love and sympathy of their fellow beings 1 Truly
there was little in the body, neither religion, poetical ideal, nor wide-
spread human interest to invite their regards. . Hence there have been
comparatively few of the most powerful and genial minds in the medical
profession • as these, with their insatiable demand for human sympathy,


chose the more certain paths to it. Poets have shunned it, and therefore
has the poetry of the body, as lofty and as beautiful as any, never yet
been adequately conceived; religious and moral philosophers have shunned
it, and therefore, have its religion and morality remained unrecognised.
How much has been lost by this, the body will yet make us feel.
Neither in former times nor at present has the youth even a fair choice
given him, at his entrance upon life, of adopting the medical profession.
His whole previous education, none of which has been concerned with
physical studies, and more especially with the study of the human body,
gives him a bias to mental ones, the more powerful in proportion to the
abilities he has shown. Hence in the present day, if a boy distinguish
himself at school, or a youth at college, medicine is the last profession
either he or others think of his entering. It is completely out of the
sphere of his own sympathies and associations, which are bound up in the
great world of poetry, literature, religion, and morality, to which medicine
is almost unknown. Do not these facts show the little reverence in which
the medical profession is held? While these things are so, men may
render it lip-service, saying. “ Oh, medicine is a noble calling, what
could be more honourable than to heal the sick and comfort the afflicted !’*
But with such vain words no true physician will be satisfied, knowing that
the hearts of the faint praisers are in reality far from us. I have heard
it said by a medical man, “No one who has any money, chooses medi-
cine as a profession," and as a general rule this is true. Few who have
free choice enter it; no man of independent means takes it as the delight
and recreation of bis leisure hours, for the sake of study and science, and not
of art and practice. Medicine is generally looked upon as a calling of a
prosaic, plodding, and uninteresting, if not of a materialising and disgusting
nature, which repels the man of ardent mind. Hence it is comparatively
seldom entered from disinterested love or aims of a lofty character. It
is too often viewed by those who adopt it, as a mere art, whereby to
make their bread; and in general it is chosen by men not of the highest
mental culture, or of even moderate fortune.
Of course, there are many brilliant exceptions to this, but I speak
merely of the general rule. It is true that the further they proceed in
their pursuits, the more devoted becomes their love for them, for who can
know any part of nature without loving it ? So that there is no class of
men perhaps who ultimately become more enthusiastic in their profession
than medical men. From the time they enter the dissecting room,
and having got over the unpleasant feelings caused by their previous
prejudices, learn at every step more and more to love and admire the
wondrous new world they have been admitted to, until they quit the scene
of their labours, the ruling passion of love for the human body in all its
ages and stages, joys and sorrows, the stronger that to them alone have its
secrets and its beauties been unfolded, waxes more and more powerful in
the true medical breast. But their love, intense as it often is, is by no
means generally ofa pure nature. So far from wishing to extend to men in
general the knowledge which has been to them the source of so much
enjoyment and advantage, they have done all they could to prevent others
having an access to these secrets. r
They have constantly discouraged all unprofessional attempts to reason


on medical subjects, by hints of the dangers of little knowledge, and by
keeping up as much as possible the mysteries and technicalities of their
science. ■ Even any attempt by a medical man to enlighten society on
his subject has ever been discountenanced by his brethren, and sneered
at under the name of popular medicine.
A true physical religion will introduce very different views on these
subjects. Jealousy, always the mark of some error, has long been an
acknowleged fault of medical men. This feeling, called forth by their
wish to reserve for themselves the monopoly of their subject, has pervaded
their minds, as is ever the case, in other directions also, and the mutual
jealousy of reputation among the members of the profession has become
proverbial. How could it be otherwise, seeing that they have to do with
a public which has no true standard, by which to judge their merits ?
which cannot distinguish between the pretender and the real man of
science ? with whom all the unreal accessories of affected manners, boast-
ing phrases, and the assumed mystery of wisdom, have more weight than
the dignity of knowledge and the simplicity of love ? What medical man
has not felt the unpleasantness of having to deal with those who have no
true standard of judgment ? How many have been seduced by this into
the endeavour, rather to cheat the uninitiated, and to hide their own igno-
rance, than to attain to true knowledge? The faults of medical men lie
in a great measure at the door of society, and a physically ignorant and
incompetent society—such as now exists—must have comparatively igno-
rant, incompetent, and slovenly physicians.
According to the amount of physical knowledge and discrimination
possessed by men in general, will be that attained to by physicians them-
selves. Until all men become more or less physicists, as all have become
more or less moralists, the profession itself will remain in comparatively
a degraded state.
The want of a sufficiently high and comprehensive aim has also had a
very prejudicial effect on the medical character. Too few have pursued
it from disinterested motives, or from a pure wish to benefit mankind in
the highest degree possible by its practice. Such an aim, recognised in
other branches of human endeavour, has comparatively seldom been deeply
felt by medical men, however ardent may have been their devotion to
science. We hear the love and advancement of science much talked of
among them, but the love of humanity comparatively little. Not that
love should be more highly esteemed than knowledge—that common error,
which has done, and still does, so much harm—but the claims of both
should be equally felt and equally dwelt upon. In this respect, viz., the
prominence of the feeling of devoted and disinterested love for man in the
medical character, there are, I know, many exceptions to what I have
stated, but they who well know the medical profession, will recognise,
that in this matter their aspirations stand far below a desirable level.
How could it be otherwise? Have they not been left to themselves,
withdrawn from the eye and criticism of the world, and when did secrecy
and irresponsibility not lead to carelessness and indifference ?
Another great cause of the lowering of the tone of the profession, has
been the fact that the first men in it are so overwhelmed with practice,


that they have little time for attending to the moral dignity of them-
selves or their brethren, for purifying and analysing their aims and
position, and elevating their ideal—a work which demands much reflec-
tion, and solitude, without which reflection is impossible. They become
too completely absorbed in (Impractical business of their lives, and have
scarcely even time to keep up with science on their own subjects,
much less to take a comprehensive view of all, or to enter on the nicer
moral questions which surround the medical position.
There are certainly great advantages to be gained from this tho-
roughly and constantly practical life, and many are the valuable works
which distinguished physicians have given to the world ; but there are
other advantages which cannot be obtained in this way. Every science
and mode of life require to be viewed from various points ; and there
are aspects given to the pure scientific inquirer, who works out his
problems, in solitude or society, according as he sees the necessary
paths to knowledge; collecting, comparing, and reflecting on ever
Increasing stores of experiences from all quarters ; which aspects can-
not be revealed to him who is overwhelmed by practice. Now, there
are very few who have pursued medicine in this scientific spirit, re-
solutely refusing to allow themselves to be engulphcd by practice,
and thus lose the power of always advancing in knowledge. Practice
is necessary to make a great physician, but too much practice is de-
structive.
Another, and perhaps, next to the want of religious reverence for
their subject—the greatest cause of the impairment of the dignity of the
profession, is the narrow view that has been taken of its sphere. Medi-
cine, according to the common acceptation of the term, is merely the
management of the body in disease-not the healthy, it is thought, but
only the sick need the physician. Thus, while the moralist has a
relation to all men in every state and stage of life, the physicist has
merely a little corner assigned him, and the most of men pass through
the greater part, or perhaps, if they are particularly fortunate, the whole
of their lives, thankiug their stars that they never had anything to do
with doctors! Thus did the name become almost a bugbear, which an
ardent nature shrinks from assuming, always bringing with it sad and
unpleasant aasociations, so that it is used even to frighten children 1
But how different is the true sphere of the physician 1 ° His subject is
by no means limited to the diseased body, but embraces the whole life
of man in health and disease, for health has its laws and its treatment,
no less difficult, no less necessary, than disease. It was from this im-
mense omission, that so little attention has heeq paid till within very
recent times, to hygiene, and the prevention of disease—these mighty
subjects which are now proceeding to change tiie face of the world—
subjects, which have scarcely yet been adopted into medicine proper,
and are not taught in the schools. As soon as these vast ideals began
to be conceived, it was immediately seen that medicine bore the closest
relation to every human being, in health as well as in sickness; that
P' ! -' s 'P al knowledge " as needed by man at every step through life,
exactly as much as moral knowledge—that without the former ail


mental acquirements and cultivation, were the sport of chance, and
proved too often in vain; that not only was it needed to prevent
disease, hut to fortify and elevate health itself, which, without a
hygienic life, was not health ; that to it alone could men trust to attain
to a healthy old age, and transmit an untainted constitution to their
posterity.
But there are many other paths of medicine, which are yet unex-
plored, and which must be laid bare to the world, before the medical
sphere receive its duo completeness, and the profession bo fully knit
to the sympathy of men. Ho who would be enabled to take a true
and comprehensive view of the subject, should study no less the
spiritual than the bodily part of man, in health and disease, for they
are indissolubly united; and the one cannot be understood without
the other. He must show how and in what manner, the physical
enters equally with the moral element into every human question.
Insanity, and the various diseases of the mind —of which there is a
peculiar one to correspond with every diseased bodily state -all should
come under his patient investigation. To understand the diseases of
the body and to prevent them, he should have an extensive acquaint-
ance with the physical habits of all the different classes of society;
and, as a knowledge of their mind is as important as of their body,
with their mental habits also. The various arts and sciences, moreover,
he should aspire to become acquainted with ; for, if he be not conver-
sant with the musical, mathematical, or mechanical world of ideas, and
sympathies, how shall he know the different causes of health and
disease, physical or mental, that operate in each of these; and how
shall he be able to prevent or cure disease in them, or to elevate their
physical state ? He should seek to enter into the thoughts of poets,
of religious and moral thinkers ; for all of them are in their own sphere
physicians, and their every thought has a physical and medical import.
This is not to be done by one man, but by the persevering and com-
bined efforts of many, and not until the intimate connection of medicine
with all the other sciences has thus been shown, and generally recog-
nised ; and until the public are as well informed on physical as on
moral subjects, and as fully convinced of their paramount importance,
will the medical profession hold its due place in their esteem, and
exercise Us natural influence on human affairs.


WOMAN, THE PHYSICIAN.
Mankind can never have a comprehensive view of any subject, untii
the mind of woman has been brought to bear upon it, equally with that
of man. The two sexes have separate points of view ; different thoughts,
feelings, and modes of judgment; and no theory of life, nor of any part
of it, can be complete, till the distinct views of each have been formed
on it, and mutually compared. The religion, the morality, the duties
of woman, differ no less from those of man, than their bodily organi-
zation, and the states of health and disease, to which it is subject. No
religion, no moral or physical code, proposed by one sex for the other,
can be really suitable ; each must work out its laws for itself in every
department of life. Therefore have women, properly speaking, at present
no religion, physical or moral, no morality, and no medicine. They
trust to man for these, unaware that themselves alone can solve their
life's problem in its minutest particular. I am aware of the great
progress, in various directions, which many of the sex have lately made,
but there still remains an immensity to be done, as none feel more than
they do. Women have hitherto been content to regard the universe
and themselves through men’s eyes; and their self-consciousness is thus
very imperfectly developed. The attainment of self-consciousness is to
be gained in the same way as that of man, only by discovering their
moral, intellectual and physical relations to all parts of nature. Hence
there is no subject, which man has conceived or shall conceive and
pursue; which woman should not also conceive and pursue according
to her peculiar powers. Until she shall do this, neither she nor man
will have a full or natural conception of the whole, as one of the grand
sexual paths towards it will be unexplored.
There is no department of knowledge, from which woman has been
more debarred than from medicine. It was often thought unadvisable
for man to penetrate the mysteries of the body, for woman it was held
almost a sacrilege. The narrow ideal which our imperfect conceptions
have shaped for woman—of purity, modesty, love, and grace, which
are supposed to constitute her peculiar and sufficient sphere—revolts


from the very thought of her engaging in pursuits of presumedly so
opposite a character. In all ages and nations has the development of
woman been crippled and impeded by man’s interference. Like the
Chinese bandaging, and the Turkish prison-house, does their conven-
tional character at the present day among ourselves confine their natural
energies and prevent their expansion. Innocence, purity, chastity,
delicacy—let us rather read ignorance, morbidity, disease, and misery:
how long shall this semblance of a moral character hang about the neck
of woman ? Does nature move thus with downcast eye, and sidelong
regard, fearing everywhere to encounter objects it is ashamed to meet ?
No; the front of nature is calm, open, and fearless: her steady gaze
penetrates everywhere beneath the sun, and if man or woman would
be in harmony with her, they must emulate her fearless deportment.
Hence should neither woman nor man shrink from the view of decay
and death; they should meet them boldly and by wrestling with them,
learn to embrace them too in their sympathies, to know that they are as
sublime and beautiful parts of our being as any other. Who can value
an existence spent in hiding from the presence of the inevitable, which
will meet ns in every step through life ? By our knowledge of the de-
structive side of nature, and our acknowledgment of its equal justice and
beauty, we are brought into harmony with the whole; while without
this knowledge our characters remain most imperfect. This side has
ever been assiduously hidden from woman in other things as well as in
medicine, and thus has her character suffered infinitely.
No pursuit would have a better effect in restoring the balance of the
female character than medicine, in which the destructive processes meet
us on the very threshold, and command our most devoted attention.
Nothing could be better adapted for unspiritualising woman, as well as
man, and for restoring her to the realities of life and of the material
universe. Here is the scene of our human joys and sorrows; our real
trials and triumphs. Ah! not for woman only, but for all of us, is
mother earth our paradise, our everlasting abode, our heavens, and our
infinity! It is not by leaving it, and our real humanity behind us, and
sighing to be anything but what we are, that man will become ennobled
or immortal. Is this our gratitude for all that has been done for us, for
the grandeur and sublimity by which our life is surrounded ?
But medicine does not rest its claims on woman’s reverential study,
any more than on man's, merely on the feeble grounds of expediency.
It is not the “ rights ” of woman that are concerned, but her duties.
On her as well as on man, the study of her physical part and its laws, is
enjoined by nature, as a religion and a duty, second to none in its claims.
All those who do not study them, as is the case with all women, and
nearly all men in the present day, live a life of sin, and are under the
ban of nature. Ignorance of the physical laws is in woman no less cul-
pable than in man ; and nature has no excuse for the softer sex for any
breach of them. Uallantry and cumbrous chivalry enter not into her code
towards them; shq does not load them with lip service, and yet deny
them access to her heart’s recesses. She lies there, open and inviting to
the gaze, with one calm and impartial front turned towards both sexes
alike.


The consequences of the want of physical reverence and knowledge in
woman, have been as disastrous, perhaps more so, than in man. The igno-
rance and carelessness of women, in all things appertaining to their bodily
welfare, is proverbial, and the despair of the physician. Men may
perhaps, as has been said, be brought to attend to their stomach when
death is staring them in the face; but to make woman attend to hot
bodily state, aid reverence the laws of health in her own person, is too
eften a hopeless endeavour. But in all things, in all matters in life,
this want of the feeling of duty to themselves, which is so often erro-
neously praised under the name of unselfishness, characterises women.
They have never deeply thought or felt tvhat it is right for themselves
to do: what are the laws of their being, moral or physical, which they
must obey. They have taken the will of man for their law, instead
of that of nature; and yielded to him with little thought of their own
duties. They have sanctioned by their apathy towards all other objects,
the fallacious words of the poet, that “ man is made for God only,
woman for God in him.” Docs this deserve man’s gratitude or appro-
bation ? would he then wish to absorb in himself woman’s thoughts,
and allegiance, jealous of the claims of all the rest of nature which
demandsno less her love, jealous of her attention and reverence for the
laws of her own being? Alas! such has been and is too much the case;
but this jealousy is a most narrow and mistaken feeling. We cannot be
happy, unless woman be happy ; and it is impossible she can be so, if
she do not study and reverence her relations to the rest of nature as
well as to iis. Nature will not be neglected for man; and it demands
her love. Can we love nature for woman ? can we live her life, bear
her penalties for error, die her death for her ? If a woman do not
herself possess moral and physical knowledge, which are inseparable
from a genuine love of nature ; if she do not possess them of herself
and for herself, will all the knowledge on these subjects that was ever
possessed by man, bear her safely thiough her life ? Nothing can ever
come to us from another, everything we have we must owe to ourselves;
our own spirit must vitalise it, our own heart must feel it: for wo
are not passive machines—women, any more than men who, can be
lectured, and guided, and moulded this way and that; but living beings,
with will, choice, and comprehension, to be exercised for ourselves at
every step in life.
All the sciences, all the arts, wait at present for Woman's hand and
thought, to give them new life and impulses; and none solicit her attention
more imperatively than medicine. The physical organisation of woman
is, in many respects, different from that of man ; their physical lives are
different, their heabhy and diseased sensations different. If the merely
objective consideration gives one man so imperfect an idea of another, how
much more imperfect must be his idea of woman, based on similar grounds?
We cannot explain woman ; her diseases, many of which are quite peculiar
to her sex, are a mystery to us, which no objective reasoning will ever
resolve. Woman alone, by her trained self-consciousness, can represent to
ns her peculiar sensations, and when these are disordered, it is she alone
who possesses in her own sex the healthy standard, wherewith- to com


pare them. When she relies on man to explain or to cure her, she leans
on a broken reed. Nay, more than this, it is a sad error for either
man or woman to believe, that it is the part solely of the physician to
cure them. Men and women must equally co-operate in their cure;
there is no royal road to health, nor is it often to be obtained by the me-
chanical pouring of medicine down the throat. Here, as in all other parts
of life, it is to be regarded as the reward of individual exertion; our own
body must labour for it, and our own reason and good endeavours must
co-operate to the best of our powers. To throw the whole responsibility
on the medical shoulders, is an evil which leads to the most ruinous
results.
Each sex has a relation of objective reasoning to fulfil towards the
other. Each has to reason for the other on all subjects ; criticise, and
endeavour to mould the other, according to its conceptions of what is just
and good; and in every way strive to present to the other as complete as
possible a picture of the aspect it bears towards itself. But, hitherto, man
only has thus reasoned on woman. Man has been for ages shaping his
model of the female physically and morally; dwelling upon, and en-
deavouring to elevate, and perfect her ideal, as it appeared to him. In
medicine too, man alone has reasoned on woman; she has never ventured
to think for him, and to render him his portrait in return. How much
men lose by this, has been deeply felt in the moral world, where there are
constant complaints, that woman, with regard to man, knows not her
own mind, and therefore, that all men come in a manner alike to her.
She will not criticise, or at least not reflectively, and, therefore, little de-
pendence can be placed in her judgment of men, which is guided in great
measure by caprice or conventionalities. In medicine this is even more
the case than in morals; and not till woman shows her care for us by
the keen investigation of our physical part with all its healthy and dis-
eased states, shall we have a satisfactory picture of our wondrous two-
sexed humanity. Docs woman’s heart never prompt her to this ?is she
never urged by the sight of the sufferings or death of those near and dear
to her, to make herself something more than a cup-bearer in the sick
room ? Docs intense lore never suggest to her that there may be secrets
in nature, kept for her solution alone, which tardy science would without
her slowly or never reach ? Do these things never awake in her an
earnest determination, that will make its fray through all obstacles,
to work for those she loves, and for mankind, regardless of the wonder or
stare of those, whose laugh would soon be hushed to a prayer for her ?
For a fountain of admiration for virtue and noble endeavour springs
perennial in the human breast, and never yet did man trust to it and
was deceived.
But rarely, alas! too rarely, does woman succeed in choosing for herself
an independent path. She is yet too weak from the swaddling clothes,
and can scarcely be expected to surmount the great obstacles which
obstruct her freedom in almost every direction. When the first glow of
self-reliance and independence, kindled by her intense feelings, has passed,
doubts and irresolution succeed; the old woman, trained in long passive
habits, and dependence on the opinion of others, re-asserts its sway; and
o


after a sad and agonising struggle, she falls back into the accustomed
beaten tracks, and her noble aspirations for the unknown and untried are
dissolved like the melting vapour. “ How should she presume to think for
herself; how did she ever imagine she had the power to open up, or the
privilege to enter upon a new world; why was she disturbed by elevating
thoughts, she whose soul was so conscious of its own weakness and utter
nothingness ? The very wish to serve mankind, and develops herself in
unaccustomed ways, was a deadly sin, showing the secret presumption of
the heart, and the pride of the intellect. Oh, no 1 humility and gentle
submission were her element;and love and contrition, not bold aspirings,
her duty;" and thus is she in all probability, sooner or later absorbed into the
Christian ideal, which by the mesmerism of the supernatural fascinates
all those who lose their self reliance. For the power exercised by any
dogmatic belief, whose essential characteristic ever is, that it reposes on
faith, not on reason, is in exact proportion to the want of self-reliance of
an individual in his own reason. Those who propose such doctrines, and
those who receive them, alike forget, that the propositions they subscribe
to are absolutely impossible; that there is no such thing as faith, not
grounded on reason. Individual reason, good or bad, right or wrong, is
at the bottom of every one’s nature, and a man or woman’s religion, right
or wrong, must always be their own, whether they will or not, and cannot
be that of any other.
Instead of urging woman onwards on the untrodden paths of new
virtue and enterprise, Christianity tends greatly to keep her back, in
the same way that it prevents men in general from reverencing duly
the body. If the salvation of her soul ny entertaining certain beliefs,
and educating her mind and her life on certain all-absorbing feelings
of love, purity, and devotion—if this be the one grand necessity for her,
the all-sufficient crown of her existence, why imperil it by seeking to
develops herself, or benefit mankind by such dangerous paths, as
medicine; or, to give another example of a so-called unfeminine pursuit,
the stage? Are not both professions more or less degraded in the eyes of
men, and shall she not share in their degradation ? are they not, es-
pecially for woman, scandalous, if not unheard of? what shall she gain
by exposing herself to all the trials, temptations, seductions, and ma-
terialising influences which surround them, compared to the one thing
needful, she endangers by the attempt? But more than this, does not
the study of medicine, besides the mysteries of the body, with its sexuali-
ties, its putrescences, all of these subjects from which her uncultivated
imagination has hitherto shrunk in alarm or disgust, does it not necessi-
tate an acquaintance with the various habits and diseases, brought on
by every vice, every sin of man and woman ? Must not the venereal
and genital diseases of both sexes be revealed to her eye, and studied
with unaverted gaze? Must not she mix and converse with every class
of human beings, with the debauchee of the one sex, and the prostitute
of her own ?
, this ml jst she do, and far, far more besides. She must learn
to shrink from nothing, and from no human being. She must learn
to regard all with an equal love and reverence, totally irrespective of


their actions ; for in this consists the true character of the physician of
the soul or the body—not to hate and reproach any, but to love and
succour all. Does the true physician refuse to devote equal care to the
worst case of sin or disease, as to the least ? Nay, he loves and tends
it, even the more, the more it requires his love. The true friend of
man turns the same face of benevolence towards all; towards all, his
endeavours are the same; namely, to benefit them to the utmost of his
power.


SUBJECTIVE MEDICINE.
Every human life has a two-fold aspect, a subjective and an objective
one. The first is the view it presents to an individual’s self; the other,
to those around him. In order that we may have a comprehensive know-
ledge of any individual, we must enter into both these views. Medicine,
which embraces the whole physical life of man in health and disease,
is also naturally divided into these two parts, both of which are equally
necessary to render the science complete. One part of the knowledge
of an individual’s physical state, is to be got by the observation of the
physician; the other can come only from the revelation of the indi-
vidual himself.
Now in the latter part, namely, in subjective medicine, the science
is as barren and incomplete, as was that of religion or morality, before
men began to think for themselves on these matters. Neither in medi-
cal works, nor elsewhere, have we anything at all approaching to
satisfactory subjective descriptions of disease. Very few medical men
have ever thought of allowing their patients to speak for themselves in
their reports of cases. Intent chiefly on arriving at physical facts and
physical conclusions, they have paid comparatively slight attention to
the mental state of the patient, which forms no less integral a part of
the disease. Thus, in questioning a patient, they strove as much as
possible to bring him to the physical point, checking his digressions,
and the outpourings of his suffering heart. It is this want of sym-
pathy and value for the mental part of the disease, and the mere at-
tention to the physical, that has proved one of the chief barriers between
medical men and the public. But it is no less the physician’s duty to
embrace in his reverence and scientific attention the mental element,
than it is that of the moralist to embrace the physical. Both have
suffered equally from the omission, and such a division of labour in so
indissoluble a compound as man, cannot but lead to the most imperfect
results.
Every one must have felt, in reading medical works, the dull and
mechanical tone, which the want of the subjective clement imparts.
Instead of the intense glow of life and individuality, with which each
stamps his own soul’s or body’s tragedy, in a personal narrative, we
have all pruned down to a sober routine list of facts and symptoms,


evidently not designed to interest men generally, but merely the scien-
tific few. How many are cheated by such a method ! The patient is
deprived of the appeasing of that yearning demand for sympathy, which
dwells in every human bosom, and which, though it has not yet been
fully awakened for physical, as it has been for moral woes, surges in the
breast of every sufferer with an agony that increases by resistance, and
will yet overwhelm the world. Who can bear to have merely a calm
and dispassionately scientific view taken of his fate or of his woes, which
to him are in themselves an infinite world ? But society, too, lose as
greatly as the patient. Not only do they forfeit the valuable lesson of
experience, and the deep impression for good, which no dull routine
description that does not reach the heart, can excite, but they lose the
power of giving sympathy and consolation, as blessed as the receiving;
for we cannot sympathise with that which we do not intimately under-
stand. And the physician himself, and science, lose in as great a degree,
not only by the blunting of the feelings caused by mechanical views of
living and thinking beings, but also in their insight into the psychology
of health and disease, which is as valuable a part of medical knowledge,
as any other, and as important for the prevention and treatment of
disease, and the advancement of health. Every physical state has its
peculiar mental one, and to discover what this is, and what influence on
the mind all bodily states from so-called perfect health, to hypochondria,
insanity, delirium, or death, is a most essential branch _of medical science.
This psychology of health and disease is to be obtained only by the study
of every individual’s mind compared with his bodily condition, and a full
knowledge of this is to be arrived at only by his own revelations. We
want a whole man to know and sympathise with, not merely a body or a
soul.
How few subjective records of physical life are to be found in history!
Among the numerous autobiographies that have been written by so many
noble human beings, who has given to us any but the most meagre de-
tails of his physical life, even though its history may have been the most
extraordinary, the most sadly eventful of the twin parts of his nature ?
Hence do all those men present to us most imperfect pictures. Through
all the tissue of their lives we know not what physical threads have been
interwoven, and therefore we can pass no satisfactory judgment on them-
selves or their actions. Bat how immensely does the world lose by not
having the fruits of their physical as well as their moral experiences!
Had their penetrating minds been as keenly directed to the physical
goods and evils they encountered, as to the mental ones; had they used,
each in his own case, the subtle insight which personal experience alone
gives, would the world have been in so wretched a physical state as it still is,
with so low a physical standard, that health is not health, and that there
is a skeleton in every house, and a disease, secret or open, gnawing at the
vitals of almost every one of us! Would we be still stumbling on from
age to age in the same erroneous tracks, and falling one after the other
like sheep, into the same physical pit-falls ? • ’
If it be impossible to build a moral world out of objective reasoning
alone, it is no less vain to seek to build a physical one with these poor
materials.


If we seek for a physical criticism on men of past ages, we must say,
«We have not the elements for it; we know them not, they knew not them-
selves, and their physical motive influences escaped their consciousness.”
Shall we be content to remain in the same undeveloped unconscious state;
shall we continue still to view ourselves and our neighbours with a
spiritual eye only, and thus for ever remain hidden from ourselves and
from them ? If we will not remain thus ignorant, we must imbue our
minds equally with physical knowledge; we must study the language of
the body, a language not confined to an age or a nation, but wide and
universal as humanity, in order that we may attain to a higher self-
consciousness, and be able to interpret ourselves and comprehend others.


LIFE AND DEATH.
These form the two great divisions of human existence. They are
the sums of the various forces which are at work within us. The one
is the result of all the constructive, the other of the destructive processes.
In man’s body the two several processes of reparation and destruction,
of life and death, go on together throughout the whole of his existence.
If it can be said of him that he is living at any moment, it may be no
less truly said of him that he is dying ; for it is only through constant
death that we live ; through constant waste of tissues that our forces
are supplied. Thus we see that even of life, death forms an integral
part; that the processes of destruction are equally necessary and equally
valuable to man, with those of construction. If the destructive processes
be impeded at any moment, disease is just as certainly produced as if
the others be impeded.
But there is always an exact analogy between the body and the mind.
There is no bodily truth, which is not represented by a spiritual one;
no physical law which is not reflected in a moral law; as there is no
change in the mind without an exactly corresponding change in the
brain. Therefore in the moral world also, we find the same powers of
construction and destruction balancing each other. These are known
under the names of belief and scepticism. Like the parallel powers in
the body, these different kinds of moral processes are equally necessary,
equally valuable. If the powers of scepticism have not their full and
natural scope, if their healthy destructive processes be arrested, man
must, suffer just as certainly as if the powers of belief were impeded.
Death and scepticism are just as essential and as much to be reverenced,
as life and belief.
In the body, every particle dies in the very act of living; and so does
a truth, as soon as it is conceived, become a falsehood. It has been
acutely said that nothing but what is new is true ; and every new truth
must to the old be false and destructive.
Nothing can be erected by one process in the body, which will not be
destroyed by another ; and. so nothing can'be erected by one part of man’s
mind which another will not overthrow. Nothing can be affirmed which
cannot be denied : nothing believed which cannot be disbelieved, iv There
is a destructive and sceptical tendency in man’s mind, just as infinite,
just as insatiable, as a constructive and believing one.


As death springs from life, so does life ever arise from death. As
denial is evolved from affirmation, so does new belief ever arise from
scepticisms. Had there been the possibility of arriving at settled truths,
by which men could abide, the infinity of nature would not have been,
recognised; but scepticism for ever prevents the possibility of limiting
her domains. Scepticism or destructiveness is therefore the grand power,
which nature has given to enable us ever to preserve the sense of infinity.
While life gathers together, defines, and bends to its will the elements of
our being, death constantly strives to disperse and restore them to their
former freeeom. It is good for a man that life shall at one time prevail;
it is no less good for him that death shall at another time prevail.
One part of man strives powerfully and victoriously for life and belief;
another as powerfully and as victoriously for death and denial, But as
they not only alternate with each other, but go on simultaneously during
the whole course of existence ; therefore in our moral nature are trutn
and falsehood, belief and scepticism, necessarily going on together,
whether we recognise this or not. To constitute a well-balanced mind
the destructive and sceptical workings must keep pace with the construc-
tive ones. If the former processes are interfered with, or not sufficiently
called into play, the mind will become diseased. Again, if the believing
and constructive part of the mind have not equal scope, diseases will like-
wise be produced. The equal claims and necessities for both should bo
recognised by us.
But hitherto this has been little the case. Instead of feeling the
equal value of these two sides of our nature; instead of paying equal
reverence to the destructive side, we have striven as much as possible to
hide it from our thoughts and sympathies. We have averted our faces
from death and scepticism, forgetting that these are as inevitable, and,
therefore, as beautiful parts of our being as life and belief. Until igno-
rance, error, and finiteness, are banished from the world ; until life
stands by itself and is not inseparably linked with death, throughout oui
whole existence; until, in short, man have a totally different nature from
what he has, so long will every thought, every feeling, every moral and
physical acts have its necessary amount of sin, destruction, or imper-
fection. Since this is so, if we avert our face from sin, destruction, and
death, we can know but little of man ; we can see but one half of his
being, and our knowledge of that will be radically defective. Man’s
wishes and thoughts must be in harmony with his nature or he will surely
suffer. If we wish to exclude death from our thoughts ; if we wish to
have absolute life, absolute virtue, or absolute belief, at every point nature
will rise in arms against us. Death will overwhelm us with anguish and
disappointment; sin, the inevitable, will bind us, clinging to our heart-
strings, and clogging our every thought, scepticism, the infinite, the
inexorable, will crush to pieces our flimsy beliefs and fill our bosoms with
terror and dismay. If we refuse to recognise them ;if we hate the idea
of death or scepticism, and do not acknowledge their equal powers ; if
we impede their healthy destructive actions, disease and misery will
most certainly result. But if on the contrary we acknowledge their
natural beauty; if we study them and learn to take delight in their


contemplation, we shall soon perceive, that the powers we shunned are
in reality our glorious privileges, and that without them our life were
shorn of its sublimity. It is only by embracing them, that we shall be
in harmony with nature, and attain to a fuller knowledge of our mys-
terious being. The weapons of destruction, will be to those who reve-
rence, and learn to use them, most powerful for the service of mankind.
Scepticism and all the destructive iorces are not toys for the young mind
to play with, till it obtains a settled faith—but glorious privileges to
be carried with us, and constantly exercised for knowledge and for im-
provement throughout life; acting in continual harmony with the
constructive powers. The individual or the society who fear scepticism
or natural death, must live in constant discord and antagonism with
'nature; and will not be at peace till they have embraced them in
their sympathies. There are few things, from which we have suf-
fered, and still suffer more, than from this grand error; even at the
present day, scepticism and death, along with all the destructive
'forces, are subjects from which the mass of men shrink. Scepticism,
that transcendent power, has become a sort of watchword to their ears,
the very sound of which torments, if it does not horrify them; and in-
deed it, like death, will remain a horror, till it be recognised as a bless-
ing and delight.
With regard to death, as well as its ministers, man is in the most un-
happy antagonism with nature. He shrinks from the idea of death on
every side. Although he cannot but admit physical death, when it is
brought before his eyes with the certainty of physical demonstration, yet
he claims for his soul or spiritual part complete immunity from the
common lot, and by so doing utterly subverts the harmony of nature. He
will not bear to have it said, that the soul and the body are inseparably
linked in their destinies, and yet this is a fact so certain, that nature
challenges it as an axiom in all our reasonings.
It is true that matter never dies, nor - loses any of its properties, but
it changes its combinations, which do not retain their identity. By
gaining more and more insjght into the wondrous processes of material and
spiritual development and change, never for a moment attempting to
separate where nature has joined—by following the universal laws of
induction in this matter, as well as in all others, we may hope to
discover our true relation to the infinite on the destructive side of life
as on others, but by no other method is it possible. Too long
have these subjects been withdrawn from science and the common
sense of man, and given over to the mere assertions of authority
and self-styled instinct; and the consequence is, that they have
remained a dead unproductive theme amid the living and expanding
sciences around. The voices of men are silent on these great subjects of
the futurity of the individual and the race; no one likes to speak of them,
except those whose opinions on the infinite are so well known, and so
little grounded on reason, or any satisfactory principles, that their words
fall dull and powerless on our ears. Meanwhile, Life and Death —the two
indefinable mysteries, the beautiful twin brothers of eternity- move on
through the universe, in perfect and loving harmony and mutual under


standing, heedless of our theories, and inscrutable to the prejudiced eye.
All gaze on the one, all knees bend before him, but the other is despised
and reviled; we loathe him, we shrink from him, as from pollution. We
do not seek to know his laws, we do not wish even to look upon his face.
But by this we lose immensely in knowledge, power, and happiness.
There is no greater loss to mankind at present, no greater waste of
treasures unpurchaseable by gold, than the way in which our bodies are
disposed of after death. Instead of every one of us having the utmost
reverence paid us, having every part of us analysed attended to in
death as in life, with as persevering care and devotion ; being neglected in
no scrutiny which science can devise, as a means of approaching nearer
to the mystery of our peculiar being, and of general humanity; instead
of all this, we are shunned as a pestilence, our dearest friends fear to
look on us, and shrink from mentioning even our names ; and our in-
valuable remains, instead of still in death blessing their companions, who
remain behind, in a manner, in which they could not, while living, are
huddled out of sight, and consigned to the thankless worms. Death
was intended by nature as the grand key to the meaning of life, by
which alone man could arrive at her secrets; but this priceless boon we
wantonly cast away. Nay, so far are we from eagerly seeking to avail
ourselves of this privilege, that we shrink from the very idea of using it.
Some few years ago, there was so great' a prejudice against the dissection
of human bodies, that it was regarded as one of the greatest punishments
for the criminal, that his should be so treated. And even yet the preju-
dice against the examination of the dead pervades all ranks of society.
The dissecting room is viewed with a kind of horror and disgust; it is
thought about the last degradation for a human being to be brought
there. None are dissected except the friendless ones, who die in the hos-
pitals and poorhouses, and whose latter hours are often embittered by
the knowlege of the fate which awaits them. Their relations, if they
know of their death, are too poor to bury them, and can but lament over
the miserable alternative, llut even to obtain an examination of the
body after death, to discover the nature of the fatal disease, is no easy
or pleasant task for the physician ; often it is absolutely impossible.
The mistaken friends will not hear of such a thing, and view with a kind
of horror the physician who makes the proposal. Matters are not quite
so bad among the richer classes; but among the less educated they are
most painful to all parties. How well do I remember the sickening
feelings of degradation I had when living in hospital, where our exami-
nations of the dead bodies, far from being sympathised in by the heart-
felt interest of the patients and their friends, were viewed with loathing
and horror; ourselves regarded at times as butchers, and every attempt
made to baffle our laudable endeavours. The patients were afraid of dying
in hospital, and would sometimes cause themselves to be carried off, when
nearly at the last gasp, to escape those whom they regarded as the sworn
foes to the decency of death. No provision had been made to allow of
the examination of the dead, and therefore it was done clandestinely by
the physicians and students; and at every death there was a'series of
stratagems between the doctors on the on? hand, and the friends of the


deceased on the other, to effect or prevent the examination. At these
most indecent and degrading scenes the deep glow of sorrow and indig-
nation entered my heart. What then, are we to be considered butchers
for doing what love and duty enjoin upon us ? Shall the sympathies of
men shrink from us because we take the necessary mode to serve them ?
Shall the cause of mankind suffer, and all of us be alike degraded by
these most sinful impediments, thrown in the way of our religion and
our science ? Who will submit to wrongful degradation ?
But if we find these unhappy prejudices so dominant among the poorer
classes, it is because the rich and better educated entertain them also.
In these classes also, how often do the thoughts of friends shrink from
the examination, which in every case should be made. Are the ways of
death so easy, that in any case we can afford to pass them by without
the profoundest consideration? Bat it is not merely to discover the
nature of the fatal disease, that our bodies claim the attention of man
after death.
No human being, man, woman, nor child, should die, without being
dissected in their every nerve and fibre, as carefully, as minutely, as re-
verentially, as love and science can suggest. To squander such glorious
subjects for our contemplation, the most perfect types of material organ-
ization, on the grave, is the greatest and most wanton waste that is
now committed by man. At present the supply of human remains, is in
this country too scanty, even for the instruction of the medical profession;
when every educated human being, man and woman alike, shall study
anatomy, as one of their chief duties and privileges, we shall learn better
the uses of universal death. Human anatomy and physiology are the
key-stones of the physical sciences, and without them all attempts to in-
terest man or woman in the latter—to make them comprehend them, or
their own relation to the material universe, are utterly vain and imprac-
ticable. He that does not know anatomy, can have but a skin-deep
knowledge of man. Therefore, as it is impossible for any of ns to live a
good or true life without self-knowledge, every one should study anatomy.
He or she who does not, sins; and any one who throws impediments in
the way of our obtaining this indispensable knowledge, also sins. Instead
of shrinking from this necessary path of duty, we should account it a
great privilege. Has any one so little love for man, so little reverence
for truth, that he would not consent, or rather earnestly desire, that men
should not neglect him after death; that he should bo able even in death
to serve them, after death’s own incomparable manner; that in death as
in life he should be judged of, and thus a wider and deeper revelation of
his being, obtained! lie who is not dissected after death, has an imper-
fect fate, and must so far remain unknown to us. Not only this, but he
in this particular, does less good to his kind, and therefore less deserves
their gratitude than he who is. Until the educated classes feel deeply
these things, and bring themselves and the medical profession into har-
mony, by being every one in his heart and sympathies, no less than in
his knowledge, a physicist, how can we expect that our poorer neighbours
will view these matters aright? How many sore feelings, how much
anguish to patients, friends, and physician; how much degradation to all
will be spared, when we attain to truer ideas of life and death!


HEALTH OF TOWNS.
Large towns are the grand arena of disease of all descriptions. It is in
them that the various causes of bodily suffering, both physical and moral,
operate most powerfully, and produce their most fearful results. It is to
them, therefore, that the physical reformer must chiefly direct his atten-
tion ; it is their evils that most urgently claim the sympathy and pity of
every feeling heart. What a difference is there between the physical
state of town and country! In the vigourous rustic, where the rural
population are not sunk in poverty, we see health glowing in every fea-
ture ; we can note the action of pure air and bracing exercise in his
ruddy cheek and stalwart frame, and delight in the joyous hilarity of his
ready laugh, the sign of an exuberance of health. But how sad a con-
trast does the townsman present? Even in the appearance of the richer
classes, when we enter a town, we may observe a wide difference from
their country neighbours of the same rank. The pale cheeks of the
young ladies tell of late hours, lives spent within doors in reading, work-
ing, or exchanging visits, or of exercise limited to a saunter along a
fashionable street. In the young men too, how constantly do we observe
the signs of the evil effects of the town’s influence. Here we pass the
student, whose sallow complexion, quickened pace, and absorbed expression,
show how much his body and external senses are neglected for his more
cherished pursuits; there the pleasure-hunter, whose jaded looks let us
guess the nature of his nocturnal dissipation. Scarcely even the health-
iest among them, but presents some indication to the instructed eye, of
the infinity of noxious and weakening influences of the city.
But let us quit the better streets, and wander through the quarters
occupied by the poor. Let us penetrate to the core of the crowded city
and view the corruption which harbors there. In this part, the most
sadly interesting of all to the sympathising eye, where my feet have often
lingered and my heart saddened and burned within me, the rich man is
rarely to be seen; it is separated from the haunts of the more fortunate
by a broader line of demarcation than that which severs land from land,
or sea from sea.
™*ta scene of woes too deep for tears, does the poor’s quarter pre-
sent. Little children with pale sickly faces, blear-eyed, covered with


eruptions, with rickety limbs, and scrofula written in every feature,
playing about among the gutters, if such beings can be said to play at
all! Men and women, still pale, and all prematurely old and haggard,
with the furrows of care ploughed deep in their brows, and a common
expression of despondence and anxiety. Here we see the deep yellow hue
of incurable liver disease, brought on probably by intemperate habits;
there the puffy watery face that tells of the kidneys degenerated from
similar causes; next the hollow ghastly visage of the consumptive, the
labouring chest of the asthmatic, or the defaced features of the unhappy
victim of syphilis. Wherever we go, care, squalidness, and disease,
meet our eyes.
From such a scene, let us go with what appetites we may, to admire
the beauties of the city, the works of art, magnificent buildings, gardens,
and institutions, of which the wealthier citizen is so proud. Alas! how
little compensation can these offer for the human ruins we have been con-
templating! The splendid edifices and luxuriant gardens, where the
happier children of the rich are fenced from all harm, and allowed to
grow up in the sunshine, like the young flowers, contrast too painfully
with the narrow filthy streets, dilapidated houses, and scrofulous features
of the unfortunate little ones, whose playground is the kennel and crowded
thoroughfare, fraught with so many dangers.
Can we be contented with bestowing our thoughts and our expendi-
ture in beautifying the more fortunate parts of our cities, in erecting
monuments to the dead, and grand buildings for the wonder and admira-
tion of the stranger, while we thus neglect our poorer living brethren ?
Shall we take pride and glory in our towns, in whose secret recesses,
which the stranger cares not to see, and which the citizen avoids as an
eye-sore and focus of infection, corruption riots at its pleasure ? One
town vies with another in its beauties, natural and artificial, but docs
any fully feel the noble aspiration to excel, not in architectural beauties
alone, but in the dutiful and loving provision made for the physical well-
being of all its citizens? Should we not earnestly feel the desire to be
able to pass ourselves and to conduct the stranger, not through magni-
ficent squares or splendid streets alone, but through every part, every
lane and alloy, and to feel that there is none we are ashamed to meet,
none which our brotherly sympathies have not entered, and invested
with a peculiar and equal beauty ?
How very far are we at present from so blessed a condition! There is
not a large town in the country which is not a disgrace to our nation;
not one which does not cry out to heaven against us. There is not one
which is even moderately healthy; not one which is not hideously dis-
eased. If men had given to their own bodies, or to the bodies of their
fellow beings, the thousandth part of the devoted attention and enthusi-
asm they have given to their seuls, should we have come to this!
Our ancestors knew little about the laws of health. They built their
streets narrow, their chambers small; they huddled their buildings as
closely together as possible, leaving few if any open spaces, either as
squares or gardens, which are the lungs of a large town —without which
it must languish and suffocate.


Our better informed generation builds in a more healthy manner,
although among us too, there is often little or no provision made for free
air, but our improvements are almost entirely confined to the quarters of
the rich. The poor succeed to the houses we have long abandoned, which
are now, besides their radical defects, rendered ten times as unhealthy
by their old age, the surrounding extension of the city, and their over-
crowded population. Hence these quarters are the focus of disease; no
one abides in them for any time without being destroyed physically and
morally ; the unhappy children, it not cut off, as the great majority of
them are, during the first few years of life, grow up pale, weak, vicious,
criminal; the healthiest stock becomes in a few generations extinct, and
the vacuum thus created is filled by new healthy victims, who are soon
brought through the tedious chronic processes of destruction to a similar
end; syphilis and typhus have it here all to themselves, and spread from
hence over the whole city.
What avail all the exhortations of the preacher, or of the moralist; what
our penal codes and our hospitals, while these things remain so 1 If the
town be itself diseased, nothing which lives in it will be healthy. Will
all the prayers ever poured out under the skies widen these streets one
inch ? will all the penal codes, all the medicines that are, or shall be known
to man, make up for the want of the air of heaven ? It is good to bind
up the bleeding heart, to console the sufferer; it is good to cure disease,
when a cure is possible, but it is better that the suffering or disease should
never have existed.
What then can we do to remedy this hideous blot on our civilisation,
to restore to health our great towns, and thus be able to enjoy the free Jom
of our cities, and inspire the fresh air ourselves without the remorseful
consciousness, that our neighbours are gasping, languishing, and dying,
for the want of it? For it is pure air which our large cities especially
require; it is the want of that, which most of all destroys them ; and
the admission of it to every part is the grand problem of the physical
reformer. Ho other immediate cause of disease, among the innumerable
host which operate in large cities, is at the present day nearly so impor-
tant. Others may more attract our attention and are better recognised,
because they are more palpable; but this invisible agent, with its insi-
dious chemistry, saps the foundations of our being, while it eludes our
observation. In its subtle menstruum how many poisons enter into our
frames ? Every infection, noxious exhalation, and destroying product of
destruction, by its agency penetrates to our inmost bosoms, and taints us
at the core.
No living thing, plant, animal, or human being, can live in a tainted
atmosphere, or can have health or enjoyment, unless pure air and sun-
shine have free admission to it. Hence the stunted diseased state of the
scattered trees in the midst of a crowded city. Do we think that a man
can flourish, where a plant languishes ? But even these plants have
many advantages over the poor man. They live at least in the open air,
so as to obtain the greatest benefit possible from the atmosphere, impure
as it is; while he is confined to the house, nearly the whole of his exis


fence, toiling in musty, airless rooms, where the sunshine, almost as ne-
cessary as pure air for the health, never penetrates.
To remedy these immense evils a radical change will be needed in the
construction of our large towns, and in the habits of the citizens. Every
care that enlightenment and philanthrophy can suggest, should be expended
in the remodeling of our old towns and poors’ quarters. No new street
should be allowed to be built in a large city, of less than a certain width,
in proportion to the supply of fresh air ; and in those which have been
bequeathed us by our ancestors, we should never rest till we have suc-
ceeded in altering them to a healthy standard. But there is nothing
perhaps of so much importance, or which is so totally neglected in the
poorer districts, as that open spaces should be left at intervals, in the
midst of the most crowded parts, to serve as reservoirs of fresh air. These
small parks should be simply covered with grass, with a few trees here
and there, whose healthy effect in decarbonising the atmosphere is shown
by science; and whose flourishing condition would be a test of the salu-
brity of the air around. Unfenced by envious railings, they should be
freely open to all. Although all the community, young and old, would
benefit by such spaces, yet to none would they be so great a boon, nay,
so absolutely necessary, as to the children. These have as yet no business
to occupy their day, and it must be spent in play somewhere, whether
in the filthy musty rooms, or in the dangerous thoroughfares.
One’s heart sickens over the thought of a childhood spent in such places.
No wonder that thus they become spectres instead of children; that about
two-thirds of them die of scrofulous diseases, and that the rest grow up
withered and stunted, with watery blood and cold dull hearts. Shall we
love and care for our children (for all children are ours as belonging to
our common humanity) less than for the animals and plants ? In truth
it seems so, when we observe, as we often do, in large towns, public gardens,
or meadows, from which the children of the poor at least, are totally ex-
cluded, whether for the sake of a few wretched plants, or from mere
caprice.
To the feeling heart there is no spectacle more delightful, than that of
healthy and happy children sporting on the grass, and at every breath and
every frolic, laying in stores of health, which in after years shall bless
themselves and the city which gave them birth. There is no spectacle so
miserable, as that of the pale, dirty, spectres of the streets, building mud-
pies, peevish and quarrelsome, the future tenants of the hospitals and
gaols. As long as the children have the streets alone to play in, there is
no hope for them. The high streets are ever dangerous, and on this
account they are often kept at home by their parents.
Nor is it of much use that there should be parks and gardens, outside
the city, even though it be of moderate size. Little children can go but
a short distance to seek their play-ground, and it it be not close at hand,
they will confine themselves to the puddles before the door. One grass
park in the middle of their homes, is to the children of more value
than all the churches, monuments, or institutions of the city.
Besides the making of these lungs to the town, the widening of the
stricture! streets, and the improvement of the houses everything should


be done to bring the inhabitants as much as possible into the open air
All of us lire far too much in the house; but the poor artizan, at his con-
stant sedcntaryemployment, is almost entombed in it. That man is a chief
benefactor to his species, who by shortening the working hours, by the
discovery of means of amusement, social pleasures, or any other in-
ducements, prevails on his fellow citizens, to spend as much of their time
as possible in the open air. Any human being who spends his or her
life without passing a considerable portion of each day in the open air,
lives a life of sin. The open heavens are nature's temple, and those who
do not reverence her, she will not reverence. We should endeavour as
much as possible to carry our enjoyments and our pursuits, nay, as far
as may be, our meals and our studies into the open air.
The close domestic life for which our country is so proverbial, is much
less healthy in this respect than that of the continent, where the inha-
bitants of town and country often almost live in the open air, taking for
months together, many of their meals, and most of their social pleasures
in it. It is not the difference of climate nearly so much as the difference
of manners, which prevents us from adopting such admirable customs.
In the present sickly state of society, especially among the poorer
classes, the poor townsman works during the whole day, at a sedentary
trade, which confines him to the house; and then instead of being able to
pass the evening in the open air, which might make amends for the un-
healthy day, he spends it either at home, in the tavern, or in some place
of public amusement, as the theatre, whose pestilential atmosphere is
well known.
Evening lectures and mechanics’ institutes, good though they he, will
not atone for the want of the open air. Amusements are as necessary
for man as instruction, and form no less important a part of his real
duty; for without joy and hilarity, the man and the child will alike be-
come diseased. It is a mistake too to suppose, that a taste for amuse-
ments exists naturally, while one for information requires to be cultivated.
The taste for amusement and the pleasure derived from it, need constant
cultivation through life, both by the individual and the society, and those
who neglect this will surely suffer.
Nothing is more hurtful to man’s health, physical and moral, than an
austere, serious state of mind, which cannot be amused, and is constantly
prone to gloomy views. This serious cast of mind is one of the great
evils in our national character, especially in the Scotch; our theory of
life, favoured by the Christian religion, is a serious one; we cannot un-
derstand the equal beauty and truth of the laughing philosophy, and this
has the most unhealthy effect on both mind and body.
There is nothing in which this serious view of life operates more bane-
tully, than in the influence it has on the mode of keeping the Sunday.
Inis day is our workman’s only holiday; the day in which his weary
labours have a pause, and hehas time to enjoy the fruits of his toils. On
is day he should lay in a stock of health, happiness, and content, to
rry m through the week, to delight him in his retrospect and prospect.
Released from the necessities of his sedentary life, he should spend his
nnday entirely in the open air—in the country, if possible, bracing his


lungs and limbs by the unwonted exercise. Haring one day's respite from
the serious monotonous life of work, his Sunday should be devoted to
amusement, gaiety, and hilarity, as bois'erous, as free and unrestrained,
as possible. With every hearty laugh the burden of his cares will be
lightened, and his heart will open to the love of his fellow creatures. In-
stead of this, the admirable and religious manner in which the Sunday is
spent, for the most part, on the continent, how sad and melancholy is our
Sunday to him who has an insight into the laws of health, physical and
moral, and an interest in the welfare of his fellow beings.
Instead of the working classes being exhorted, and induced by every
temptation of cheap and numerous railway trains, public gardens, and
promenades, with musical bands and various social amusements, (for it
requires no slight inducements to prevail on a pale and sickly frame to
make any effort for its own regeneration) to spend their whole day in the
open country air; they are pressed by every means into the church ser-
vice, amusements are forbidden, and even to go out to breathe the fresh
air, is in many parts, especially in Scotland, scarcely thought proper. In
the latter country, especially, all thoughts of the mind, all acts of the body
lie under a restraint more galling to many, than even the week-day con-
finement. The thoughts, it is said, should then be serious, the bodily de-
portment sober and sedate. No amusements are permitted, even to sing
or whistle is looked upon as a sacrilege. Even the little children are
prevented from playing, and their toys lie idle. Many of those whose
bodies have been pining in narrow rooms the whole week, and who would
now, if left to nature, burst into the free air with the exuberant delight
of school-boys, spend their day at church, still sedentary, still serious. ,
But far more of the poor inhabitants of our large towns, do not go to
church, as they must have excitement; and where do the unfortunates,
ashamed to be seen abroad, resort to? To the tavern, where they con-
sume nearly as much whiskey on the Sunday, as on all the rest of the
week together. I have no hesitation in saying, that our Sunday is one of
the chief causes of the drunkenness in our large towns, for which the
Scotch are proverbial, and which is one of the greatest national causes of
disease and misery. In the country, and to the hardy rustic, the evil
effect of this day is not so manifest, but to the blighted artizan of the
city, it is destructive. Alas! how dots the heart which has rejoiced over
the happy continental Sunday, sadden at the contrast!
But we should not only grieve at such things, but seek to enforce the
reverence for the natural laws, which have been neglected. We should
earnestly endeavour to make it clearly understood, that the moral and
physical laws, are exactly of equal sacredness, and that to be ignorant of,
or to break either of them, is equally culpable. Thus we must recognise
that it is a great sin for any man, whose body from confinement during
the week, requires fresh air and exercise, to go to church on a Sunday;
it is no less a sin in those who endeavour to induce him to do so, of throw
obstacles in the path of his physical duties, in defiance of the interests of
his being. I say these things, in the deep conviction that unless all of ns
learn to reverence the physical, as much as the moral interests, of our-
selves and our neighbours, there is no safety for man.
D


Is the question of the air we breathe a slight matter, or one easily
solved? Is the construction and health of our large towns, and their
teeming populations, each individual with a claim on our sympathy,
which cannot be over-estimated, a trivial thing, which is to be left to the
doctors, the sanitarians, and those who busy their heads with these simple
physical questions? A simple question truly, the false solution of'"which
has entailed on us such an infinity of evils, such a labyrinth and abyss
of miseries, that it will require the most strenuous untiring efforts of man-
kind for generations, with ail the genius and self-devotion of tho wisest
and most persevering men, to enable us in part to escape. It will not be
in a day, scarcely in a century, that men will recover from the contempt
and neglect that have been shown to the body and ail its requirements.
Besides the above mentioned means for ensuring a supply of tresh air
in a town, every precaution should be taken to prevent its contamination
by noxious elements. The most baneful and important of these in our
large towns is the smoke, whether from private houses or from public
works. This pollutes the air by poisonous gases, and still more by the
small particles of coal and soot, so that the carbon enters into the very
core of the citizens. No smoking factory should be tolerated in a large
town; every one should be forced to consume its own smoke. Until
this is done, there is no safety for any of tho inhabitants, but more es-
pecially for the poorer classes, who dwell in the neighbourhood of these
sooty giants, more pestilential than the dragons of old. Society should
by common consent, enforce the consumption of the smoke, which could bo
easily accomplished, and should not rest till this be obtained. If they
• cannot afford to change these things, can they better afford to forfeit
their own or their neighbours’ lives by them ? There is never a gain by
that carelessness aind want of attention, which neglects the laws of health
in their full perfection. Whenever any individual’s health or forces suffer,
there is a dead loss in every way to society, as well as to himself, and tho
sin as well as the penalty must be shared by all.
Nono of the exhalations in a town, whether from graveyards or sewers,
are, I believe, nearly so fatal to health as smoke; although the former also,
are often very injurious, and should be carefully guaided against. But
the smoke in some towns, especially in London, is ruinous to the health
and strength of almost every one who dwells amid it. In this town, there
arc but few public factories, and the chief part of the smoke comes from
private houses. Until this be got rid of, every human being who lives in
London, will suffer more or less in health, and tho whole race of its in-
habitants must be deteriorated. It has been shown, I believe, to be per-
fectly practicable, by conducting the smoke from tho different houses in
each row into a common vent, and there consuming it, to prevent any of
fhese deleterious sooty particles from escaping into the air. Scarcely
anything would be of equal value to the town as such a measure, if
universally adopted.
lluch has been done of late years to improve the ventilation of the
houses of the rich, and of those parts of public institutions, which are set
apart for them. But how littlo in either respect has been done for the
poor. How pestilential are the upper galleries of our theatres! How


many a fever and consumption might be traced to them! How wretched
and unwholesome are the rooms of their own houses! How little has
been done to make themselves feel the sovereign importance of fresh air,
the religion and duty which they owe to their bodies 1 It is seldom that
the women among the poorer classes in the large towns ever leave their
houses, except on necessary errands, and when they thus become diseased,
a constitutional walk is beyond the power of their medical adviser to
obtain.
But religion and duty form bat one part of our lives, not one whit
superior in importance to others. A life guided by principle alone or
chiefly, is an imperfect one, and by no means the ideal of humanity,
which with its innate demand for freedom, cannot bear to feel itself the
slave of laws, and is spoiled in its completeness and beauty by such a
feeling.
Thus there should be inducements of pleasure, happiness, and sponta-
neous choice, to lead us along the paths of duty; and in the matter of air
and exercise, it is not to be expected or desired, that man or woman should
take them merely on principle or as a duty. They are too often prescribed
as medicines, like the moral virtues, without means being taken to com-
bine their benefits with the happy freedom of spontaneous choice, without
which ail medicines or duties are imperfect.
Therefore, constant habit from early infancy, teaching us to regard
fresH air as a necessary of life; all manner of inducements and social
pleasures linked with the idea of the open air, should combine with the
recognition of our religious and dutiful relation to it, to make men eagerly
seek after it, in every condition and circumstance of life.
There is another great reason of the awful degradation of our poor
townsmen. It is the separation between them and the richer classes.
Had there been any bond of union, any connection of intimacy, of friend-
ship, of social enjoyment; any heart sympathy or understanding between
them, could the unfortunate poor have got into such a wretched state?
Had the foot of the wealthy often sought the streets, had it ever passed
the threshold of the poor, and beheld the stifling squalor behind it, had
his sympathies been mixed with those of his fellow-being in but an infi-
nitesimal proportion of that amount which our common humanitydemands,
could these evils have remained so ? No; it is in great part because the
poor have been excluded from our friendship and sympathies, because we
are class conventionalists, and not real men, because we have no commu-
nion with them at home or abroad, that there have arisen such miserable
evils in their state. Neither physically nor morally, can the poor be suf-
ficiently elevated, save by the habitual mingling among them, for mutual
instruction and sympathy, of those who have more time and opportunity
to cultivate their various faculties.


MENTAL DISEASE.
It is not yet sufficiently recognised, that the mind has its health and
disease, exactly like the body, dependent on fixed natural laws. The
term, mental disease, is restricted to insanity ; but it must be viewed
in a much wider sense, comprehending every case in which a mind
suffers by erring against any natural law. If our thoughts and our
feelings are in harmony with truth and nature, our minds will be
healthy and happy ;if not, they will be unhappy and diseased. Sor-
row in the mind corresponds to pain in the body ; wherever it is found
it is a mark of sin and disease.
Whenever we observe, cither in ourselves or in others, any grief, we
may be certain that some evil is the cause of it. Happiness is the
sign of moral health ; it is one grand gaol for human aspiration, just
as physical happiness or health is in the material world. Joy and sor-
row are our guides to truth, showing us where we are'right, and where
wrong, in the exploration of our being. Wherever we find joy, «e
should seek the cause and follow it; wherever sorrow, the reverse is
our duty.
But sorrow, in another light, may be regarded as a kind of good l
thus having an exact analogy with bodily disease. It is now well
known, that the body never works for its own destruction, but con-
stantly for its preservation; and thus, that all disease is an effort of
nature to regain health. Thus if a man receive a bodily injury—for
instance, a blow, inflammation or pain will follow. These conse-
quences constitute a disease ; but still they are necessary for the res-
toration of the part to health; therefore they may be called a healthy
disease.
In like manner let us analyse all the destructive processes of the
most complicated forms of disease —of cancer, consumption, &c.; we
will invariably find that all of them, though they are rapidly des-
troying life, are yet used and intended by nature to save it—one of
the most wondrous and instructive paradoxes in our being. In
exactly the same way, sorrow, fear, and all the evil or diseased states
of the mind, are nature’s remedies for an injury received by it; and is
their most unlimited and destructive developement we shall still in-
variably recognise the natural and necessary struggles for good, to


which man’s nature, physical and moral, is essentially bent, like
the plant to the light. Thus we feel sorrow naturally, for any cala-
mity which befalls us, or those we love : this sorrow is always a dis-
ease in us; while it remains, we are in a state of imperfection, or sin,
if you will. Still, without it, as in the case of the bodily inflamma-
tion, we could not be restored to our healthy equilibrium, and thus it
may be called a healthy disease, or a good evil. The inflammation
was a thing heartily to be deprecated and prevented; so was the
sorrow.
llut the inflammation, or other bodily disease, may far overstep the
limits necessary for the restoration of health ; the injury received may
have been too severe, or the constitution too feeble to resist it. The
consequences may become themselves causes of new evils, and endanger
the safety of the whole economy. In the same way the sorrow may
pass all healthy bounds, and become itself the main cause of disease.
The physician is always on the watch to see that the inflammation do
neilher more nor less than is necessary to restore health, and so must
we watch over sorrow. If it become chronic and linger in the mind,
we must use all means to eradicate it.
All the depressing and sorrow-causing passions and feelings are also
diseases of the mind. Fear, jealousy, anxiety, or ennui, are all signs
to us that there is evil somewhere, of which we must seek out 'the
cause, however obscure, and remove it, before the suffering mind regain
its health. Nay, more, every error in judgment, every untruth of
thought is, like every untruth of bodily conduct, a cause of disease.
The mind and the body are inseparably linked together, so that the
health and happiness ol the one involves that of the other. Thus if
the mind be diseased by any of the evil moral states, the body will
also become diseased ; while all bodily disease equally necessitates a
want of sanity of mind. Every imperfect moral state, at once reacts on
the body, and if it be very intense, or long continued, the body will be
deeply injured. Thus does our mental element play as important a
part as any other, in the causation of physical disease, and to cure the
latter it is just as often requisite to apply remedies to the mental, as
the bodily state. To do this, we must first be able to recognise what is
mental disease, and then to tieat it according to the principles of men-
tal health.
But men, in general, do not recognise moral disease, they do not
allow sorrow, fear, &c., to be diseases; and instead of wishing, or
feeling it their duty, to escape from them, often hug them to their
bosoms and glory in them. There is as yet, scarcely any defined or
tangible moral science ; we think and feel according to the caprice ot
the hour, and when long-continued misery, arising from our ignorance
of the laws of our mind, has involved us, body and soul, in ruin, we
pride ourselves cn our woes, and glory in our contempt of them !
Truly this is carrying paradox rather too far. We say sorrow is good,
for it chastens and elevates the mind, teaches it new lessons and sym-
pathies, and gives it a loftiness and intensity of aspiration, which we
should not iiave had without it. This may be true in some cases, but


shall wc say, because good has come out of evil, that the evil itself is
good? Let us take the parallel case of bodily suffering, of which too
many of us have had so sad experience..
To have passed through a long and tedious illness, may have given
us some insight into the mysteries of humanity, that would else have
been hid from us, may have purified our hearts and intensified our
love and sympathy for our fellow-beings ; but for all these blessings,
however dear to us, and however loath we should be to part with them,
can wo say that the bodily disease which caused them, was not of it-
self an evil to be shunned and prevented in every possible way? The
more we have suffered from it, and therefore the stronger influence it
lias had in moulding, possibly in some respects for good, our moral
character, the more earnestly will we seek to prevent any human
being again suffering, as we have done. What else is the value and
consolation of experience? It is not the disease, not the sorrow,
■which is good, but the power we may have gained by it, to serve our
fellow-beings, and to give them the fruits without the thorns of our
experience.
Hut if some gain, in a measure, by sorrow and disease, how 7 many'
lose utterly! "What shall all bis experience avail a man, if lie is de-
stroyed before lie can use it, or if he he not conscious of its value, as is
so often the ease ? Who does not feel on looking back on his life, that
nil its sufferings, physical and mental, arose from evil causes, that the
beauty of his life is dimmed by every one of them, and that ho might
have been a far better and higher being, had they been ail removed?
The physician’s powers to save, are in great measure based on his
acquaintance witli disease: nay, unless there had been disease, he
could not even understand health ; but does be on that account wish
to see disease in himself or in others? It is even so with the moralist
too; without his knowledge of and sympathy with sorrow, and ins
experience of its causes, he cannot benefit the sufferer; but shall lie
on (hat account, desire to see sorrow that he may alleviate it ? Every
bodily disease in ourselves and others, takes away from the perfection
of our common life ; so does every sorrow that we may undergo, de-
tract from the beauty and integrity of our moral nature. He that
sorrows for others, confesses that he joins in the common lot and com-
mon imperfection of mankind ; for we are so linked together, that if
one suffer, all must suffer. There is no such thing as necessary, or
therefore essentially beneficial, bodily disease; there is no such thing
as necessary, or essentially beneficial sorrow. Therefore a man of
sorrows must be a diseased, and cannot be an absolutely good man.
The ideal of a perfect life, physical and moral, that to which humanity'
should aspire, is one that knows not disease or sorrow.
Any one, who has suffered bodily, or mentally, and who has not ?
will say, “Be not like me, lam sinful; whatever experience I may
have got, my life is a blemished one, and the one character to which
you should aspire, is that which is not tainted by disease or sorrow.
There is none good but one, and that is the unattainable ideal, un-
dimmed by the sorrows and sufferings of imperfection.”


If it be asked, how do we know that sorrow is a disease or an evil ? the
answer is, by observing its effects on the body. The human body is the
touchstone of moral truth, its health or disease istangible, and demonstra-
ble; and through its means alone, do moral questions admit of full de-
monstration. We see that joy and all the allit-d feelings are linked most
closely with physical health and.well-being; whereas sorrow and all its
ministers, cause derangement and ill health of the bodily functions, in a
measure exactly proportional to their intensity and continuance. They
interfere with the healthy performance of nutrition, reproduction, or se-
cretion ; under their influence the stomach becomes disordered, the bodily
powers enfeebled, and if sorrow be much aggravated or prolonged, the
sanity of the mind as well as the body may be completely destroyed.
If we have not a true idea of what is health and what disease, it is in
vain to expect to attain the one or avoid the other. The physician of
mind or body cannot cure a man if there be a disease lurking in the sys-
tem, which is not recognised, and which may yet be at the bottom of all
the symptoms. Thus, how often do we see vain attempts made to cure
by physical remedies, diseases—as indigestion, debility, &c., whi in
reality may have their origin in a habitually depressed, anxious, or serious
state of mind, and can be cured only by its removal. In this country
especially, where such states of mind are so frequent, where emulation,
over-work, serious views of this world and the next, so frequently cause
a chronic state of mental anxiety dnd despondency, indigestion has, among
the richer classes, much more frequently a mental than a bodily origin.
The physician who does not recognise and pay equal attention to the
mental diseases, with all their distinct natures and causes, is as incapa-
ble of treating a human being, as the moralist who neglects the physical.
The treatment of mental is as infinitely difficult as that of bodily di-
sease, and cannot be attained, but by the profoundest study of all the va-
rious causes of sorrow, and all the other imperfect and diseased mental
states. Sorrow is not to be regarded any more than physical disease, as
arising of itself, or sent to us by providence; that most unhappy error,
which still blinds so many of us to its true nature, serving as a cover for
our errors, and excuse for our supineness in not removing them. It in-
variably depends on some fault in us, or others, and on us it is incum-
bent to bear the blame, and to endeavour to remove the cause.


SPIRITULAISM.
Although I hare already spoken on this subject in the first of these
essays, yet it appears to me to be of such vital -importance, that I
would wish to add a few farther remarks.
By spiritualism is to be understood the modes of thought and feel-
ing, which seek to elevate mind above matter, and take a greater
pleasure in mental than in physical pursuits, and in the cultivation of
the moral than of the physical virtuosi
Spiritualism is one of the most widely diffused of all diseased modes
of feeling in the present day. It pervades the minds of almost all the
educated classes in this country. If each of us, whether Christian or
not, analyse our own thoughts and feelings, we shall find that we are
deeply imbued with spiritualism; ingrained into us by our earliest
education, and by the prevailing moral atmosphere around us. Ail
the educated classes instinctively prefer moral to physical excellencies,
and aspire rather to the former than the latter.
To be a distinguished poet or thinker, to acquire renown by literary
merits; to have a cultivated intellect, a Warm heart, and deep sym-
pathies—all of us aim at these, and regard with comparative indiffer-
ence, if not contempt, the physical virtues of a powerful, athletic, and
healthy frame, and the excellence in feats of bodily prowess. Little
reverence is paid to these virtues, if possessed by any one, but all bow
down in admiration before a man of superior mental powers. The
tastes moreover of the great mass of the educated classes are tho-
roughly spiritual. Literary pursuits, intellectual enjoyments, poetry,
morality, and spiritual religion, engross their attention; but the
physical sciences, and bodily sports and exercises, have but little
comparative interest for them, and the equal claims of the physical
laws of life, to their study and religious obedience, are unfelt. The
educated classes seem to think, that athletic frames and a keen relish
for bodily exercises and sports, are characteristics of the poorer classes,
and that their own peculiar province is the cultivatiou of the mind
and not of the body.
But there could not be a mistake more fatal to happiness or to the
real culture of mankind. The consequence of this has been, that the
two sets of virtues are rarely seen uuitedin the same individual; but,


as a general rule, the pnysical virtues are found, if found at all, in
the poor; and the mental ones, in the' rich and educated classes. A
strong, robusi frame, is seldom seen among the men of letters, or the
members of the learned professions. They are for ihe most part, a
puny, degenerate race, whose bodies are too weak for their over-
worked minds. But they care little for this, unless it tells palpably
upon their sensations in the form of indigestion, nervousness, or some
other of the Protean evils of spiritualism. What is it to them though
their body is weak, provided their mind is strong? They console
themselves with boasting of the triumph of mind over matter, the
vainest boast ever uttered by man; and feel, it may be, even proud of
their physical insignificance.
But this is a most dangerous error. No one of our powers, either
mental or physical, can ever be neglected with impunity. If the man
of letters does not suffer sensibly, from his one-sided culture, and
from the weakness of his physical frame, his unfortunate children shall
assuredly do so. They will be born exactly so far degenerate, puny,
and exposed to disease, as he has failed in his attention to his bodily
powers. Unhappy are the children of the feeble spiritualist, what-
ever renown he may have won for himself from short-sighted mortals,
by his literary achievements. But he who neglects his bodily powers,
need not hope to be truly a healthy writer or thinker. If the body is
feeble, puny, and prone to disordered sensations, and if there be not a
keen relish for the pleasures of the senses, such as proceeds from
healthy and well-exercised bodily organs, the mind will to a certainty,
be wanting in some of the elements which aid in forming true literary
excellence. There will be a want of healthfulness, of serenity, of sus-
tained vigour, of natural tastes and enjoyment of life, which are the
characteristics of a healthy and equally-balanced mind.
Spiritualism has weakened immensely, not only the body, but the
mind of man, for the one cannot be enfeebled without, to an absolute
certainty, dragging with it the other. There is a conspicuous want of
manliness, not only in the bodily, but the mental character of our age.
This has been fostered of late years by the long continuance of peace;
whose numerous advantages have been, in some measure, counter-
balanced by this great evil.
In former times, physical courage and manly vigour were considered
excellences inferior to none; but war having, until recently, been
almost unknown among.us, there was little scope or estimation for
these virtues. Hence the world has been gradually sinking more and
more into spiritualism, under the enervating influences of a spiritual
religion. We have been losing our healthy relish for bodily exercises
and enjoyments ; setting up intellectual, at the expence of corporeal
pleasures ; and despising and neglecting our bodily powers, until our
manliness and vigour have been tainted at the core. Let any one com-
pare the educated classes among us at present, with what they were in
the times of the ancient Greeks and Romans, or with some of the hardy
peasantry in the present day, and he will see the immense difference
in physical virtue. Let us walk through the crowded streets of our


large towns and observe the pale faces, spare and puny frames of those
we meet, and we shall form some estimate of the awful state of physical
degeneracy in which we live. Scarcely shall we see a single one, man or
woman, whose physical state is not a disgrace, and a profound grief, to
our humanity.
But it is not in the outward appearance alone, and in the want of
manly strength, and nervous energy, that we see this degeneracy, it is in
the wide-spread prevalence of the deseases of debility. Chief among these
stands consumption ; the terrible destroyer of our race, by whose hand
one sixth of our population perishes, and from whose baneful influence
but few families among us wholly escape. Consumption is the sure and
unerring sign of physical degeneracy, and the enfeeblcmcnt of the physi-
cal powers, and this age is pre-eminently to be called “the consumptive
age'* of the world. The disease never was so prevalent as it is at present,
and one of its most certain and prolific causes is spiritualism. Do we
think that any one of us, whatever be his mental merits, can allow his
physical strength to decline, can leave his bodily powers uncultivated,
without becoming degraded and imperfect, and without paying the sure
penalty? Will nature spare cither him or his children for neglecting
the one part of his being, whatever he may accomplish by the culture of
the other? No; she demands that an equal and impartial attention be
paid to all the faculties, and that an equal interest be taken in physical
as in spiritual culture. There is scarcely one of us of the educated
classes, whose physical state is not a disgrace to him. Poor, weak, di-
minutive, thin, pale, puny, dyspeptic beings we are, unworthy of the
name of a man, whatever learning or mental attainments we may possess.
We may dazzle our fellow-men by these one-sided accomplishments, we
may win their short-sighted praise; but we shall not cheat nature, nor
reap ought but her punishment for us and our children.
When our day of physical affliction comes, as come it certainly will, to
every one whoii'-glects his body, when the retributive hand is laid heavily
on ourselves or our children, then shall we feel the vanity and delusive-
ness of our preference for one set of our faculties above the other.
It is true that the average length of life, is gradually increasing, but I
feel convinced that this is accompanied by a compensatory diminution of
health and strength in the human frame. The longer average of life is
produced, I believe, chiefly by our increased knowledge of the nurture of
children, and the substitution of long wasting chronic diseases, for the
short and fatal epidemic of small pox, fever and ague, dysentery &c.,
as well as the ravages of wars, which were formerlyso prevalent. It is
also favoured by the increase of the preventive, compared with the posi-
tive, check to population (as advocated by Mr. Malthus, whose views will
he considered subsequently,) by which means an individual may refrain
from reproducing his species, and thus secure to himself a longer life, at
the expense of losing his share of offspring, together with other evils here-
after to be mentioned. In less civilised countries a large proportion of
children die, from the general ignorance of the mode of rearing these
tender beings; while in our times, when the importance of fresh air,
avoidance of undue exposure, &c., are better recognised, the rate of infant


mortality lias areally decreased, and delicate children are kept alive till
the time of puberty or thereabouts, then to perish by consumption. This
difference in.the mortality of deli' ate children, tells greatly on the ave-
rage of human life, but comparatively little on human happiness. So
docs the substitution of slow chronic inferable diseases for short and de-
cisive ones.
The diseases of debility are the prevalent and characteristic ones of the
present age. Consumption, dyspepsia, and nervous weakness are uni-
versally diffused through our country, but were comparatively little
known, more especially the two last, among our ancestors. They were
decimated at intervals by terrible acute epidemics, such as small pox,
ague, scurvy, &0., which have now become almo’st extinct, ow;ng to the
splendid discoveries of medical science.
We surpass them also greatly, in prolonging the lives of invalids, and
in our general medical treatment. In less civilised communities, as
among the lower an-mals, any one who falls into bad health has compa-
ratively little chance of recovery, as he is either neglected or baaly
treated. 33ut can it be said, that we have really gained by the substitu-
tion of these miserable diseases of debility, some of which may indeed
permit a man to drag on a life in death, till a great age* but poison all
his enjoyment ?
It is a common, and I believe a very true remark, that our constitu-
tions are not nearly so strong as those of our forefathers; and while that
is the case, let us not boa<t of the longer average of I’fe. A long life, if
sad, is barely preferable to a short and vigorous one. The longer average
of life, like other marks of apparent progress, is a vanity and a delusion,
and helps to blind us to our actual state of physical degradation.
The mind as well as the body has degenerated in manly vigour under
the influence of spiritualism. A morbid effeminacy pervades all our
moral atmosphere. There is a want of healthy enjoyment of life, as
must always be the case when the natural pleasures of the senses
are disparaged, a want of self-reliance, of manly vigour, and courage, in
the mental character of all of us. Thousands among us are so mudi
oppressed with shyness and the want of self-confidence, that it looks as
if we felt almost ashamed of living at all.
There is a pervading timidity in declaring our real convictions on the
most important matters, especially on religion and on sexual love, which
are, as far as open and candid discussion is concerned, almost interdicted
subjects among us. A sort of doleful spiritual whine meets our ear on
every side, as if man, the mightiest and most glorious of all the mani-
festations of nature, existed only on sufferance, and were too vile to
deserve anything but sorrow and humiliation. The fear of the opinions
of others is one of the most prevalent of all feelings in our society; a
feeling which U more destructive than almost any other, to sincerity and
manliness of character. We are afra ; d of departing one step from the
beaten track of conventionalism, for fear of incurring the odium of cur
neighbours. How unlike is tins to the manliness and self-reliance of
those, who have dared death and torture rather than disguise their
principles!
How different is the morbid state of sorrow, self-abasement, irreso


lution, despondency, or despair, which we observe so prominently in our
modern poets and writers, from the manly vigour, healthfulness, and
enjoyment of life, which is so delightful in the authors of the Elizabethan
age. There are certainly many other causes than spiritualism, which
have helped to work this change; the great social difficulties, which are
only of late years coming to be adequately recognised, are enough to load
the hearts of each of us with sorrow, if not despair; but besides these, a
great part of the mental morbidity is caused by spiritualism, which blights
all healthy enjoyment of life, and weakens the mind with the body.
The spiritual religion which is dominant among us, by its threats of
endless punishment, and its constant inculcation of the weak and effe-
minating qualities of humility and resignation, has broken in a great
degree the spirit of man. No man can seriously entertain the belief in
endless punishment, without his whole nature being demoralised, and
without being cowed into a state of fear as to his own and his neighbours
actions, incompatible with manly dignity and freedom. Humility and
resignation are, it is true, often desirable virtues, but neither they nor any
other conceivable modes of feeling, can be always termed good, and to
inculcate them in a wholesale way is to do infinite mischief. To be con-
stantly urging them upon those who are already broken in spirit from
shyness, want of self-reliance, energy, and the power of actively enjoying
life, (which are just the prevailing defects in our characters at present),
is exactly like the old system of repeated bleeding and purgation, now
happily abandoned by medicine, by which the whole energy o the con**
sticution was graduilly exhausted. Whit is wanted in mind as well as
in body at present, is not piety nor tenderness, nor humility, nor spiritual
fervour; but self-reliance, manly energy, and an active enjoyment of
life; in a word, health.
Health of body and mind, should be the chief aim of mankind, not
pietism or spiritualism, or any other one-sided ideal, which our imperfect
religions have set up; ail blessings are comprehended in health, for it is no.
obtainable except by a well-regulated conduct of all our faculties of body
and mind alike. Where there is not an active and keen enjoyment of life
in all its different parts, where there is not happiness, there cannot be
health ; and where there is not health there cannot be virtue. It is ab-
solutely impossible for either body or mind to be truly healthy and well-
balanced, when the chief attention is paid to one set of faculties, and the
others are comparatively neglected. Tbisgreit truth has been completely
disregarded in our theories or life, and the consequences have been most
disastrous to all of us.
However powerfully spiritualism has operated in degrading man, it has
far more degraded woman. The physical virtues are scarcely thought to
belong to her province at all: strength, vigour, courage, and activity, are
not considered feminine virtues, bu*, if possible, rather detract from
woman’s peculiar charms in the eye of spiritualism. Hence the physical
character of women, is, as a general rule, degrad d to the last degree;
poor, weak, nervous, de'icate beings, who can scarcely wilk lialf-a-raile,
whose muscles are unstrung, and whose nerves are full of weakness and
irritability.
Compare the ladies in our ball-rooms, or the women iu our streets, with


the strong healthy country girl, or with the women of Ruben’s pictures,
and their awful inferiority in physical virtue will be seep. Not only to
her own health and happiness is the physical degeneracy of woman de-
structive, but to our whole race. The strength and bodily power of woman,
is just as indispensable to the health and strength of mankind, as that
of man, for the vigour of the child depends as much on the mother as on
the father. It is a folly to desire to see powerful and athletic men,
without desiring to see the same virtues in woman; such a division of
the virtues is absolutely impossible.
The mind of woman is as much enfeebled as her body, by spiritualism.
A vigorous relish for sensual pleasures, an energetic of the sciences,
and especially of the physical ones, is thought unwomanly, and the sex is
limited to a narrow range of thought and feeling, which cripples all the
mental power.
It is in vain to hope that a mind will be powerful, if certain subjects are
forbidden to it ; if death and the evil side of nature are hidden, as they
are at present from woman. Such interdictions prevent any true power
or freedom of thought and feeling; for who cares to study nature, if they
are only allowed to advance a short distance, and if all the subjects
necessary to give completeness to their views, are shut from them as from
children? In the emotions, as well as in intellect, woman is bound in
the effeminating bonds ofspiritualism. Love, tenderness, and humility, are
thought to be the special female virtues; and the qualities of self-relianc**,
energy, and mental intrepidity, are rather discouraged than otherwise, by
those who wish to keep up the unfortunate state of dependence, in which
woman exists at present. Hence the character of woman is full of weak-
ness and irresolution, fear of theopinion of others, and hysterical emotions,
which are diametrically opposed to health and strength of mind. Woman
is, as a general rule, dwarfed in body and mind, by her one-sided and narrow
spiritual culture.
Spiritualism has not only prevented us from taking an equal interest
iu the physical sciences, and attending equally to our physical culture;
it has also blighted the progress of moral science. This is shown not only
by the narrow and erroneous views of mental health and disease, and
their treatment, of which mention has already been made; but also by
the existing state of mental and psychological science.
The spiritual moralists have ever maintained, that there is a complete
and fundamental difference between the mind of man and those of the
inferior animals; so that no true comparison could be instituted between
them. But this is an enormous error, and has stood in the way of all
philosophical acquaintance with the human mind. The truth is, that
there is not, and cannot be, by one single iota, a greater difference be-
tween the mind of man and the minds of the lower animals, than there
is between his body and theirs. Every conceivable shade of mental u.ll-
- must be accompanied by an exactly equal difference in the shape
and substance of the brain; and the brain of man must differ exactly in
the same degree, not one atom more or less, from the inferior brains, as
hU mind from the inferior minds. Now until the body of man was com-
pared, minutely and perseveringly, with that of the lower animals, down


to the very humblest, it is well recognised that we did not understand it
at ail, that we had no true and philosophical knowledge of it. Professor
Owen refuses to give the name of “Anatomy” at all to the mere dis-
section of the human body; that, he says, is, merely “anthropotomy,”
while “anatomy” is a terra merited only by the whole comparative
science.
But exactly on the same principles, we must recognise, that there is at
present no true science of “ Mind,” at all; we have no real “Psycho-
logywe have merely an anthropo-psychology. There ■ has' never yet
lived a man, who deserved the name of a moralist; there have merely
been humanity-moralists.
A true knowledge of man’s spiritual and moral nature is to be obtained
only in the same way as that of his body, namely, by the comparative
examination of the minds of all living beings, and by tracing our facul-
ties upwafds from their simplest expression in the humblest animals, to
their most complex state in man. Until this be done in mind, as it has
been done in the body, there can be no real “mental science,’’ and we must
continue, as we are at present, in the dark, as to the meaning and origin
of our faculties. The science of Comparative Psychology, though it has
yet scarcely an existence, opposed as it has been by our narrow concep-
tions of the human mind, will ultimately be recognised as equally indes-
pensable with comparative anatomy, in order to attain to a true know-
ledge of man.
The morbid ideas of spiritualism are well seen in the little reverence
that is paid to the bodily appetites. It is by no means thought a great
merit to have a good appetite for food: nay, many people, especially
effeminate ladies, are rather ashamed of it, and abstemiousness is often
practiced as an evidence of refinement and spirituality. A keen relish for
the pleasures of eating, is thought coarse and unbecoming, especially in
women; the attention, it is thought, should rather bo directed to in-
tellectual enjoyments, and the mind, as little as possible, occupied with
the pleasures of the senses. But these are most dangerous and destructive
errors. The truth is, that a good appetite is one of the greatest virtues
cither man or woman can possess, and is one of the things.of which, far
from being ashamed, they have most reason to be proud. It is one of
the best of all signs and tests of health, and of a well-spent physical life.
No one who has not a keen appetite is deserving of the name of a good
man or woman ; and the individual who allows his appetite to languish
or to be habitually feeble, is equally reprehensible with him, who permits
his feelings of love or truth to become blunted.
The vigour of our bodily appetites is the test and the invaluable safe-
guard of our virtue, if we attend to it; by the keenness of our appetites
we shall know whether our physical life is a true and healthy one; but if
wfneglect them, disease and destruction are certain sooner or later to make
us repent it. A good appetite for food is just as great a virtue, and just as
much to be adm red wherever it is seen, as an ardent love and just
appreciation of truth and beauty. The same principle applies to all the
other physical appetites. By these tests, it can be seen how exceedingly
unhealthy, or in other .words, sinful, are the lives of thegreat majority of


those of us who live in towns, and work constantly at sedentary occupa-
tions. Our appetite languishes, and is rarely strong; and this should bo
taken as the unerring sign that the powers of life and virtue are growing
feebler, and those of death and evil gaining the ascendancy.
When the appetite is habitually feeble, consumption, or the other dis-
eases of debility, will to an absolute certainty, bo induced, either in the
individua’ls seif or in his posterity, if the same want of physical virtue
continue iu them.
The great physical problem is to endeavour to secure to all human
beings, the essentials of life in abundance; and in the purest form. Air,
water, food, healthy exercise for all the organs &c., to procure for every
human being the power of enjoying these in their greatest purity should
bo our steadfast and religious aim—an aim as iofiy and as difficult as
any ever proposed by man, and to be zealously aspired after, not only by
the physician and the sanitary reformer, but by every man and woman
among us, as comprehending the most important essentials of virtue. If
we cannot habitually breathe pure air, eat abundantly of wholesome food,
and obtain healthy and sufficient exercise for our various organs and
faculties, let us not deceive ourselves ; it is absolutely impossible that we
can live virtuous lives. Pure air and wholesome food are just as indis-
pensable necessaries of virtue, happiness, or true religion, as any con-
ceivable moral qualities. This has never yet been sufficiently attended
to; for mankind have not become generally aware of the exactly equal duty
they owe to their body and mind.
Ail our tastes and modes of judgment are more or less perverted and
effeminated by spiritualism. As an instance of this, the prevailing
opinions with regard to beauty may be taken. To have delicately cut
features, a prettily turned, figure, neat little feet and hands, and a sweet
and amiable expression, are considered the chief beauties iu a woman.
But health and strength are in general scarcely at all considered. Now
the truth is, that without these fundamental qualities, there cannot be
real beauty. Health is the very first essential of beauty; and permanent
health, continuing for many generations, cannot possibly exist without
great physical strength, for the active exercise and natural life which en-
sure the one, ensure the other also. Elegance iu shape and form arc
something, and are sufficient in a lifeless object to constitute beauty, but
in a living being health is a far more fundamentally important quality.
Strength, power, and activity, are also among the most essential of all
parts of beauty, in woman as well as in man. Without strength, which
is to be obtained only by the active and regular exercise of the body in
out-of-door pursuits, health cannot long continue, and will soon decay, if
not in one generation, then in the next; and without health the beau'y
oven of form and expression will soon disappear.
We hear little tiny delicate girls, who have perhaps a prettily chi-
selled face, and an interesting pallor of complexion, called beautiful;
but the truly instructed eyo can see iu them but mournful proofs of
the physical degeneracy of our age. Height of stature, and weight of
body, not produced by fat, but by healthy and powerful muscular de-
Tdopement, are in woman as well as man, a great part of true beauty.


In large towns, the stature always becomes diminutive under theinfln.
cnee of a smoky and confined atmosphere, and the want of exercise;
and hence the stunted, pale, and puny appearance of the inhabitants of
London, and others of our large towns. Let us never be deceived into
confounding the symptoms of delicacy and imperfect nutrition, which
we see among them, with true beauty. Let us not regard the tiny
waist, the little impotent feet and hands, the delicate complexion,
even though they belong to our own selves, or to those we love most
dearly, as really beautiful; such a judgment confounds all principles
of good and evil. True beauty cannot possibly exist among those who
have lived constantly amid the smoke of a large town. The golden
rule in the cultivation of beauty should be, seek first health and strength,
a powerful frame, and a healthily cultivated mind, and all the rest
shall be added unto you.
In man, physical beauty is looked down upon, and intellect is
thought his peculiar province. This is an admirable instance of the
false and short-sighted judgments of spiritualism. A man who culti-
vates his personal appearance, and takes a pride in bis athletic and
handsome figure is called a coxcomb; while the puny delicate man of
letters, who exults in his mental superiority, and the feeble care-worn
clergyman, who boasts of the triumph of mind over matter, are thought
to have a noble and excusable pride. In truth, physical beauty is
exactly as important and desirable in man as in woman, and is just
as much to be cultivated and admired in the one sex as in the other.
The attention and reverence for physical beauty, is one of the best
safeguards of health and manly vigour. Beauty of face and figure is
only to be maintained, and perpetuated to coming generations, by ex-
ercise of our bodily powers, and is one of the best signs of a well-
spent physical life. A powerful and a handsome frame is just as valu-
able as a powerful and beautiful mind. From the want of attention
to their personal beauty and to the culture of their bodies, we sec
men becoming slovenly and ungraceful, thin pale and sallow from
wasting their looks and their health over the midnight lamp; we see
their hair dropping out prematurely, their faces getting ploughed by
the wrinkles of thought and care before their time, their teeth decay-
ing and dropping out under the influence of a failing digestion, their
noses filthy with snuff; their figures, which might have been manly,
powerful, and agile, becoming weak, stooping, and exhausted, as if »
breath could blow them over. Where is a woman to find in these
learned scare-crows the glowing realisation of her youthful dreams
of love ? A lady said to me a short time ago, “ What can be the
reason that men are so dreadfully ugly ? I was looking round the
lecture-room the other night, and positively I scarcely saw a single
handsome face. The most of them were very plain and vulgar, and
very many, especially the elderly men, had such distorted and mis-
shapen faces, that it was painful to look at them. We don’t see this
in the lower animals, we don't see in them that perversion of features,
those bloated, wizened, and unhealthy countenances, with all the
features out of proportion, which we see in men. What can it be that


makes men often so very ugly?” In truth the great want of physical
beauty and manly strength and elegance of frame, which is so wide-spread
among us, and which is so blighting to the romance of love, is as dis-
tressing and as deeply to be deplored as the prevalence of moral evil, of
which in fact it is the outward and visible type. No qualities of mind
can make up for this sinful and miserable neglect of the body.
The unnatural practice of shaving, has tended must powerfully to in-
crease this disregard of physical beauty in man. It has done so, by in
reality destroying man’s beauty. The peculiar beauty of the male coun-
tenance consists very much in its contrast with the female one, by the
possession of those hairy appendages which impart to it a dignity and
manliness. The beard is peculiarly a sexual distinction, it only appears
at puberty, and is intimately connected with—in fact, is the outward
expression of sexual maturity, of that which distinguishes the man from
the woman and the boy. To cut it off is to effeminate the male face,
and has a greater effect than is generally supposed in weakening the
sexual feelings between man and woman, which are powerfully awakened
by contrast. It is thus a part of those effeminating and debilitating
influences on the sexual feelings, which have so much degraded the vigor
and manliness of all of us, as I shall endeavour to show hereafter. It
spoils the natural ideal of manly beauty, aud that admirable contrast
between the two sexes, by which each acts as a foil to the other, and the
peculiar sexual characteristics of each, are duly symbolised and called
forth.
It is not by spiritual, but by physical reformation, that mankind can
at present be chiefly benefited. Even were the views of our moral teachers
with regard to the moral virtues correct; even though mental health were
substituted as the object of men’s aims, instead of the diseased spirit-
ualism, which is now inculcated, comparatively little could be done at
present by any moral training. It is physical and not spiritual religion,
of which we are at present most urgently in need. More could be done
in a few years by due attention to the physical virtues, than in a century
by moral exhortations, however pure and exalted; for the physical virtues
are those which have been far the most neglected, and stand far the most
in need of attention. The moral virtues themselves are to be promoted
at present chiefly through the physical ones, for in the present awful
state of physical degradation in which we live, it is a vanity to imagine
that high mural excellence can prevail. Therefore, the social, sanitary
movements, together with the earnest culture of the bodily powers by
every one of us, are at present the most important means to elevate
mankind.
We should not be contented with a low standard of physical elevation.
We should make it our religious aim, that every one of us, man, woman,
and child, should possess a large, powerful, vigorous frame, whose blooming
health shall set consumption and the other diseases of debility at defiance.
Each man and woman should take exactly as much pride in the cultiva-
tion of the bodily, as of the mental virtues, feeling deeply the grand truth,
that the interests of our race are just as much bound up iu the promotion
of the one as of the other.
it


We should not be content till the thews and sinews, the powerful bodies
and manly minds of our ancestors, are again become prevalent among us,
and are blended with the advantages of our increased civilisation, with
our greater enlightenment and refinement, and a longer average of life.
We should cultivate all those sports and manly exercises, which promote
bodily health and vigour, just as sedulously as we cultivate the moral
virtues, and should have an equal honour for physical, as for mental ex-
cellence, wherever we see it. We should learn to take an equal pleasure
and to have an equal reverence for the sensual as the.intellectual enjoy-
ments, for the physical as the mental sciences, and in every thing to
attain to an impartial and well-balanced sense of the equal grandeur of
the material and the moral universe, of a true Physical and Spiritual
Eeligion.
end op part i.


PART II.
SEXUAL RELIGION.




PART II.
SEXUAL RELIGION.
REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPEMENT.
The subject of the following essays—namely, the nature and laws of
the sexual organs, with their diseases, and the allied evils of poverty
and hard work, is, it appears to me, by far the most important of all
subjects for our consideration in the present day. There is nothing
unfortunately, which has been so much neglected, and on which such
wide-spread ignorance prevails ; and yet I feel convinced, that there is
no subject so deeply affecting the interests of man. From the mystery
and secrecy in which sexual matters have been involved, and from the
consequent want of due attention to them, the whole of our moral and
social philosophy has been rendered unsound at the core, and the pro-
gress of our race has been blighted.
Before entering upon the diseases of the sexual organs, which arise,
as all diseases do, from our disobedience to the natural laws, and
upon the associated evils of poverty, I shall give a short sketch of
these organs and of the function of reproduction.
I entreat the reader's attention to this, not only from the surpassing
interest of the subject, hut because some knowledge of the nature of
the sexual organs is necessary to follow the subsequent descriptions
of their diseases. There is no part of physiology which is less under-
stood by the generality of mankind, and yet (here is not one of deeper
interest, and which more urgently demands the attention of us all.
Reproduction has been, and still is, viewed as a mysterious and in-
comprehensible subject, with which none hut scientific men should


have to do; and feelings of sexual bashfulness and disgust have re-
strained the generality of mankind from acquiring a knowledge of
these organs and their laws. But such feelings are unworthy alike of
the dignity of man, and the infinite perfection of nature.
Mature demands our calm and reverential study of all her works
and laws alike; she has given us no organs which she intended to be
shrouded in mystery and concealment; but on the contrary she lays
her mighty commands upon us to seek to become acquainted with
every one of her all-perfect productions. It is not for us to pick and
choose among her works, which we please to attend to, and which we
please to avoid; but to pay a like reverential study to all. If the
sexual organs be omitted, the knowledge of all the rest of the human
frame will avail us little; and we should seek to acquire just as true
and as thorough an insight into their laws, as into the processes of
respiration or digestion. I have already dwelt upon the sacred duty
that rests upon all of us, both men and women, to study a subject
which concerns us so nearly as the human frame; and of all the
bodily organs there is none which should have more special attention
than the reproductive ones, which have been so much neglected by
our ancestors. No others are so deeply implicated in the most urgent
problems of the present age. All of us should therefore strive to
divest ourselves of the childish and degrading feelings of morbid deli-
cacy, which foster the ignorance on these subjects, and have been the
causes of greater miseries to our race than almost any others, as I
shall endeavour hereafter to show.
Dr. Carpenter in his most admirable work on General and Compara-
tive Physiology , says of the function of reproduction, “ a very unne-
cessary degree of mystery has been spread around the exercise of this
function, not only by general enquirers, but by scientific physiologists.
It has been regarded as a process never to be comprehended by man,
of which the nature and the laws are alike inscrutable. A fair com-
parison, however, with other functions, will show that it is not in
reality le a s comprehensible or more recondite than any one of them;
that our acquaintance with each depends upon the facility with which
it may be submitted to investigation; and that if properly inquired
into by an extensive survey of the animated world, the real character
of the process, its conditions, and its mode of operation, may be under-
stood as completely as those of any other vital phenomenon.”
All living beings, both plants and animals, have a limited existence,
and the race is kept up by a constant succession of new individuals.
It is a law which we never see departed from at present, that every
living organism has sprung from a pre-existing organism. The doc-
trine of spontaneous generation, which held that in some cases living
beings might originate out of lifeless matter, and which was formerly
very prevalent, has gradually lost almost all its supporters, and “ has
not now any claim," says Dr. Carpenter, “to be received even as a
possible hypothesis.”
Another law which seems at present to be universal, is that every
living thing springs from a parent like itself, so that the different


species do not pass into each other, although great modifications may
arise from the influence of external circumstances, especially in the
lower organisms.
All living beings are endowed at birth with a certain degree of vital
power, by which they are enabled to develope themselves into their
perfect form, and to maintain themselves in it for a season. This
power is called the germinal capacity , and it varies in degree in differ-
ent beings. In all, however, it sooner or later becomes exhausted, and
the race would perish, were it not that the germinal capacity is re-
newed by an act of generation, by which a new individual is produced,
and endowed with a new measure of vital power. Thus then, life and
generation are antagonistic; the former exhausts, while the latter re-
news the germinal capacity. In their essence also, the two processes
are quite opposite. All the actions in which the germinal capacity
manifests itself, are accompanied by the subdivision and continuous
growth of the minute cells, of which our frame is built up, whereas
generation consists in the very reverse of this—namely the reunion of
the contents of two cells. By this reunion a new impulse is given, and
the fading powers of the parent are produced afresh in the offspring.
It seems almost certain from the most recent discoveries in physiology,
that such an act of true generation occurs in every living being, whether
plant or animal, and is absolutely necessary in all to prevent the vital
powers from dying out. But it is only lately, that this has been recog-
nised. Formerly, it was believed, that many of the lowest classes of
plants and animals never truly generated, but that their race was kept
up entirely by gemmation ; or, in other words, by buds or offshoots, and
not by seeds. It was supposed that no true generation took place in the
large class of plants, called the Cryptogamia, or flowerless plants, which
include the sea weeds, mosses, lichens, ferns, &c., but that these propaga-
ted only by little buds or spores. But it has lately been discovered, that
both in the lowest species of these plants, namely, the inferior sea-weeds,
and in the highest, namely, the ferns—a true act of generation by the
reunion of the contents of two cells does take place, and, therefore, we may
conclude that it occurs in the other tribes also ; although it has not yet
been seen in them. In the same way, true generation has been detected
in some of the very lowest animals, and may be presumed to exist in all.
In very many of the lower plants and animals, the ordinary mode of
reproduction, is by gemmation, or budding. Gemmation consists in the
sprouting of- a new individual from some part of the body of an old one.
Gemmation is essentially the same process os/ission, by which many of the
lower tribes of plants and animals propagate. In fission, the parent
splits into two nearly equal parts ; each of which is developed into a com-
plete individual.
A familiar instance of propagation by gemmation is seen in the potato
and in fruit trees. These plants are commonly propagated by buds, which
are either inserted in the ground, or engrafted on another tree, instead of
being sown by seed. This method of reproduction can be continued for a
long time, but not indefinitely ; for, after a certain time, the germinal ca-
pacity dies out, and has to be renewed by an act of true generation, which


jr'ives birtlito a seed. Tims, however long gemmation maybe contin-
ued, it must at last, in all living beings, give place to generation.
Among animals, a very interesting instance of gemmation, is seen in
the Hydra or Polyp. This little animal, which lives in the water, at-
taching itself by a sucking disc. to some solid substance, and fishing fop
its food with its long tentacles, propagates ordinarily by gemmation,
little polyps spring like buds from its surface, and when fully developed,
are cast off and become independent individuals. But in the polyp, like
the potato, a true generation also takes place, by means of the reunion of
contents of two cells, and thus eggs are formed from which young are
hatched. Gemmation continues, like the crops of buds and leaves on a
tree, till the cold weather comes on, and threatens the animal with
death. Then it gives place tothe true generative act, by which eggs that
can stand the winter’s cold, and are hatched in spring, are produced.
Another very remarkable instance of gemmation occurs in the insect
called Aphis. This is the only insect gemmation occurs, for in-
sects are too high in the scale of being for such a mode of reproduction.
The parent Aphis gives birth in the autumn to true eggs, which are
hatched by the warmth of spring; but the young so produced, remain im-
perfectly developed, unprovided with sexual organs, and give birth to a
new family, without any sexual intercourse. Their offspring, which are j
born alive, beget others in the same way, and so on, during the whole
summer, and it is only when the cold of autumn checks this process, that
the young are developed into perfect insects, provided with complete sex-
ual organs ; and that a true act of generation takes place by which fer-
tile eggs are produced. In this case, by one act of generation, so much
germinal power is imparted, that no more is needed till after many repe-
titions of gemmation. Here the process may be called internal gemma-
tion, for the young are born alive from the female passages ; but it is
essentially the same with external gemmation, which takes place from
the surface of the polyp; both of them consisting in the production of
new individuals without previous sexual intercourse. By this means an
incredible number of offspring may be produced by the Aphis. It has,
been calculated, that if all lived, about six thousand millions would re-
sult from five repetitions of the process of gemmation ; and this process
is repeated twenty times in the year, so that the numbers following a
single generative act, pass the power of our imagination to conceive.
None of the higher animals ever propagate by gemmation, but inva-
riably by true generation. In them the germinal capacity is so much
expended in producing all their complex organs, and in maintaining their
integrity, that it has not the super-abundant developemehtal power
which enables it to give rise to new individuals. The only modes in
which the persistence of this developemental power is shown, is in the
regeneration of parts which are accidentally lost. Thus the lobsters and
spiders can reproduce whole limbs, when the old ones are torn off* or inju-
red. In man this cannot be done, although there are one or two extra-
ordinary instances on record, of fingers &c., being completely reproduced ;
but in general the only parts of our frame which can be regenerated, are
those which are of the simplest nature, and thus most like the lower or-
56
SEXUAL HELIOIOX.


ganisms. Such are the bones, which are of a simple chemical compo-
sition. Avs hole bone with its muscular and ligamentous attachments
can be regenerated, and this is truly a more complicated process than the
restoration of entire limbs in lower animals. Those parts also, which
arise by a simple process of nutritive repetition, as the small blood-cells
&c., can be regenerated, and also connecting parts, such as nerves and
blood-vessels, which lie amid the other tissues. With these exceptions,
no part of the human frame can be restored if injured, but only repaired
by a lower form of tissue. The power of regenerating parts is, as might
be expected, greatest in those humble being* which usually propagate by
gemmation. Thus the hydra may be divided into fifty pieces, and each
piece will reproduce the whole animal- Many animals which do not
propagate spontaneously by gemmation, will reproduce their entire struc-
ture if artificially divided; as, for instance, some worms and star-fishes.
When this artificial fission succeeds, it shows that there is a natural ten-
dency to spontaneous gemmation.
A very curious phenomenon, which occurs in the reproduction of some
plants and animals, has been termed alternate generation . In this the
parent gives rise to an offspring unlike itself, which lives independently,
and in its turn gives birth to a progeny, which is like the original stock.
Thus the Hydroid Polyps dcvelope buds, which have the form of
Medusae (jelly-fishes,) and these after living independently for some time,
give birth to the original Polyp. In the same way, the Fern developes
small buds, called spores, which when cast off, grow into a little plant to
which the name of pro-embryo has been given. This in its turn gives
birth to a Fern. Here the grand-child, and not the immediate off-
spring, is like the parent. But in all these cases of so-called alternate
generation, it is to be carefully remarked, that one of the generations
is produced by gemmation and the other by true generation. Thus the
medusae come from buds, while the polyps they give rise to come from
eggs. In like manner, the spores are buds, while the pro-embryo which
springs from them, contains true generative organs, and gives birth to a
seed, from which springs the young Fern. In all cases the immediate
product of the true generative act is the same. Thus the expression
“alternate generations’* is incorrect, and it may be seen, that this is
only in appearance an exception to the law, that every being resembles
its parent.
The occurrence of gemmation has led to much interesting discussion on
the question, “ What is an individual ?’’ If every part of an organism
which can exist independently and re-produce the rest, is to be considered
an individual, it would do violence to many of our usual ideas on the
subject. For instance, in many trees, the buds will grow if detached and
planted—nay, some trees spontaneously detach buds, or bulbels, which
grow into new plants. But not only will buds do so, but even single
leaves in some plants, as the Bryophyllum; and not only leaves, but even
fragments of leaves. The very lowest forms of plants, (such as the red
snow,) and animals, (as the gregarinae) consist of a single microscopic
cell. This cell is a complete individual. It breathes, feeds, digests, re-
produces, lives, for and by itself. It is certainly a separate individual,
and so do we name the seed of a plant, or egg of an animal, because they


are capable of living independently and reproducing the whole. The
individual life of the human egg in the womb, is considered as sacred ae
that of the adult; and to cause its abortion, when it is no bigger thaa
a nut-shell, is deemed murder. Now, why should not the same name of
“individual” be given to every fragment of a leaf, which is capable of
living alone 1 And why should not a tree be called a huge collection of
individuals, instead of a single individual ? Professor Owen and many of
the first scientific men do so regard it. But it must always be remembered
tb at there is a great difference between an individual produced by gem-
mation and one produced by true generation.
The individuals produced by gemmation, such as the Polyps, or the
buds or bulbels of a plant, are not really homologous (or essentially cor-
responding) with an individual such as man, who is produced by an act
of generation, but are rather comparable to the different parts of his
body, which are produced by a process truly resembling that of gemma-
tion, namely, the subdivision and continuous growth of cells. Gemmation
is only a form of nutrition, (the processes by which the body is nou-
.rished and maintained), and like it, exhausts instead of renewing the
germinal capacity. Each little cell in our body, maybe called an indi-
vidual, and we may be termed a congeries of individuals, nearly in the
same way as each bud and leaf of a tree may be so styled; each little cell
in us lives a life of its own, and the chief difference between it and the
leaf-bud is, that it cannot exist if separated from the rest of the frame,
nor re-produce the whole. Dr. Carpenter proposes to call all indi-
viduals produced by gemmation, Zooids (or apparent beings), and to
restrict the term Zoon (or true being) to the collective product of one
generative act. Thus it would need both the Medusa and the Polyp to
form one true being, analogous to a perfect plant or animal; and the potato
with all its buds and all their descendants till the germinal capacity is
exhausted, should be regarded as forming only one complete individual.
It is generally in the presence and absence of the sexual organs, that the
two zooids, proceeding from the same stock, principally differ. One of the
chief purposes of the alternation of forms seems to be the dispersion of
the species of plant or animal; and thus the zooid which contains the
sexual organs, and produces eggs, consists frequently of little more than
these organs, furnished with locomotive appendages.
In investigating any organ or function, the usual, and the best way to
proceed, is to follow it upwards through the scale of being; for the sim-
plest and most comprehensible form is found in the humblest organism,
and after becoming acquainted with that, it is comparatively less difficult
to unravel the mysteries of complex scructures. IndeecJ it is utterly
hopeless and impossible to comprehend a being like man, either physically
or mentally, without comparing him with all other living beings, and
without tracing upwards his organs and his faculties, from their simplest
condition, as it appears in the lowest plants and animals. When we do
so compare him, we are struck by the fact, that the essentials of life, and
the essential nature of all the organs and functions, are the same throughout
all the chain of being, and that it is only in the accessories that the in-
finite variety which we observe, exists.


This is well seen in the function of generation. The generative act is
essentially the same in the very humblest plant as in man. It consists
in the reunion of the contents of two cells. A cell is a very minute body,
invisible to the naked eye, with a thin transparent wall, containing va-
rious substances. It generally contains a nucleus , a small dot formed by
a collection of granules, and in this the chief powers of the cell generally
seem to be centred. It seems to be the point of attraction to the mat-
ters which the cell absorbs, and to be prominently engaged in the produc-
tion of new cells and other vital operations. Cells propagate in several
ways, sometimes by subdividing into two, each of which again subdivides
into two more, and so on till a large mass is produced, just like fission in
the lowest plants and animals; sometimes by giving birth to new cells
in their interior; which are liberated by the bursting of the parent &o.
The cell feeds by absorbing nourishment through its walls; and it is from
the transformation of cells that almost all the living tissues—the muscles,
nerves, blood-vessels &c., are built up.
Now, the very simplest being consists of a single cell, which is not
usually found alone, but in masses produced by these processes of mul-
tiplication ; each single cell however, being capable of living independently.
Each cell performs all the essential vital functions for itself. It feeds
and it reproduces by itself. In them, the simplest form of generation,
or as it is here called conjugation, is seen. In this process one of these
cells approaches close to another, and then they burst, and their contents
are mingled together, and from the mass so formed, new cells arise, which
give birth to an immense progeny by the ordinary processes of cell-growth.
In this process there is no apparent distinction of sexes, both cells seeming
to take a similar part in the generative act. Conjugation has been best
studied in the zygnema, one of the Algae. This little plant consists
simply of a filament of cells, united end to end in a single row. Two of
these filaments approach each other and stick together, and then the
intervening walls burst, and the whole of the contents of one filament
are emptied into the other. This shows that here there is some sexual
distinction between the two sets of cells.
Now this intermingling of the contents of two microscopic cells is the
real essence of the generative act throughout the whole chain of being,
and is exactly the same in man as in the humblest plant. The difference
is only in the accessories. In the more complex organisms the function
of generation is not exercised by every cell, but is confined to a certain
set of cells, specially set apart for the purpose, and elaborated by special
organs. There are also complex organs developed in both sexes for effec-
ting the union of these cells; and in proportion as mind becomes developed
in ascending the scale of being, more and more complicated emotions and
ideas are interwoven with the generative act. But all these are access-
series, and the most impassioned enthusiasm and exaltation of love has
for its essential object to effect the union of two microscopic cells, and
thus continue the race. In this we see an example of the invariable law
of developement, namely, the progress from the general to the special. The
simplest forms of generation are the most general, they are common to
all living beings, and as it were include the subsequent accessory devel-
opements, as the little egg potentially includes the future adult.


In the Mosses and Ferns these accessories of generation are considerably
mote complex. In these plants we find two sets of organs, essentially
corresponding to the male and female sexual organs of animals. These
organs in ferns are found on the pro-embryo, which is monoecious, that
is to say, possesses both the male and the female sexual organs in the same
plant. The male organs are called antheridia t and correspond to the anthet
of a flowering plant and to the testicle of an animal. They consist of
large parent cells, each of which gives birth to a number of smaller cells
inside it, and in every one of these secondary cells there is a small spiral
filament, furnished with long cilia or hair-like bodies, by whose constant
vibrations it is moved rapidly about. These spiral filaments are called
phytozoaires, and are analogous to the spermatozooids, which exist in tiie
semen of animals, and which they greatly resemble in appearance. The
female organs are called pislillidia, and correspond to the pistil in flow-
ering plants and to the ovary in animals. In them lie the germ-cells,
corresponding to the ovules of flowering plants and the eggs of animals.
The phytozoaires, which are let loose by the bursting of the cells which
enclose them, penetrate to the germ-cell and conjugate with it just as
the cells of the zygnema do with each other. By the intermixture of the
contents of these two cells, which takes place by transudation through
their walls while they are conjugating, a fertile germ is produced, which
grows up into the fern.
In Phanerogamous, or flowering plants, the sexual organs are found
in the flower. They consist of the anthers, containing the pollen, and
the ovary containing the ovules. In the anthers the pollen grains, or
sperm cells, are produced. These are elaborated by a complex process,
as is always the case with important secretions. Two or throe genera-
tions of cells, produced one within the other, are needed to elaborate
sufficiently the little pollen grain, which corresponds to the phyto-
zoaire of the ferns and to the spermatozooid of animals, being the male
conjugating cell. It has two coats like other cells, the outer of which
is hard, and has several little pores in it, while the inner one is
very delicate. The ovule, or germ cell, on the other hand, is pro-
duced in the ovary. It corresponds with the egg or female con-
jugating cell of animals. Conjugation takes place between the sperm
and germ cell as follows. The pollen, set free by the bursting'ol
the anther, falls upon the stigma, or end of the pistil, which is covered
by a viscid secretion. By this the pollen swells, and then its inner coat
is protruded through the small pores in the outer one, and insinuates it-
self downwards in the shape of a long tube, among the loose tissue of the
style, till it reaches the ovary. There it impinges upon the germ cell,
and thus conjugation is effected, and their contents mingled, just as was
done by the self-moving filaments of the Fern. By the mixture of the
contents of the pollen cell, and the germ cell, a fertile seed is produced,
from which springs the plant.
In animals, while the essential nature of the generative act remains
just the same as in plants, the accessories gradually rise in complexity.
Except in the very lowest animals, there are special organs set apart for
reproduction, and these produce the sperm and germ cells, the sperm


ctozoolds and the eggs. The sperm cells are elaborated in organs, called
testicles; which are generally composed of long and delicate tubes. In
these tubes, the parent cells of the sperm are envolved, which contain
self-moving microscopic bodies called spermatozooids. These are quite
analogous to the phytozoaires, and are found throughout the whole an-
imal kingdom, with the exception of the very lowest species. They have
the form of a lengthened filament with a little oval head and a long and
very delicate tail. By this tail, which is in constant motion, they are
propelled amid the viscid fluid, in which they float, and which is called
the liquor seminis, or seminal liquid. They were long thought to be
animals from their peculiar movements, but are now recognised to have
no claim to that title. The movements, like those of the phytozoaires,
are owing to mechanical causes, and help to bring the spermatoozoids
into proximity with the egg. These little bodies are the active
agents in impregnation, the immediate fathers of us all; they find their way
to the neighbourhood of the egg, and conjugate with it, thus producing
a fertile germ. They are discharged from their parent cells by the
bursting of the latter, and are then conveyed by the duct leading from
the testicle into the urethral canal, whence they are poured into the fe-
male organs, in the act of copulation. They retain their fertilising
power for but a short time after their discharge in warm-blooded ani-
mals, namely, birds and mammals. In birds, their movements cease
in a quarter of an hour after their discharge. In the cold-blooded ver-
tebrate animals, —namely, reptiles and fishes, and in the invertebrata,
they can live much longer, and remain active for days and even
months in the female organs, fertilising several crops of eggs in suc-
cession.
The germ cells or eggs are produced in organs called ovaries. These in
many animals are exceedingly like the testicles, being tubular and vesicular
glands. So they are in the human embryo, for our organs, in their gradual
developement in the womb, pass through stages similar to those which re-
main permanent in the lower animals. Among all adult vertebrated ani-
mals, including woman, the ovaries are solid bodies, composed of dense
fibrous tissue, in which the germ cells or eggs lie imbedded. Each egg is
enclosed in a parent cell or ovisac , called the graafian vesicle, and con-
sists of Vi yolk sac, with a . little cell called the germinal vesicle, amid the
yolk. The egg of some animals, a», for instance, of the fowl, is very large,
but the egg of woman, and of all the mammalia, is so small as not to be
visible to the naked eye. The size varies according to the degree of de-
velopement the embryo is to reach at the expense of the egg alone; for it
is on the yolk of the egg that all embryoes are first nourished. The
egg on quitting the ovary, before fecundation, consists only of the yolk sac
with its contents; in its passage down the oviduct it often receives, as in
the fowl, a covering of albumen or white, and a shell.
The means which nature adopts to effect the union of these sperm and
germ cells, are very various throughout the animal kingdom. In the
lowest animals sonsciousness and volition are scarcely at all awakened,
and their actions seem merely of an automatic kind. In them there is
probably no more sexual feeling, nor sexual effort, than in plants. Many


of them are, like plants, hermaphrodite, each individual having both sets
of sexual organs, and preparing both sperm and germ cells, which fer-
tilise each other automatically. But as we ascend the scale of being, and
mind becomes gradually developed, the sexes are no longer united in one
individual, but are divided ; one individual producing the sperm, and ano-
ther the germ cells, one possessing the male and the other the female gen-
erative organs.
AH the higher invertebrate and all the vertebrate animals are mono-
sexual. In them, accordingly, the union of the two sets of cells is effected
by sexual intercourse, for which nature furnishes a special set of acces-
sory organs, and to which each animal is impelled by desires, strong and
complex in proportion to the power and elevation of its being. Some
animals, such as the snail, are hermaphrodite, but not self-fertilising;
each individual has both male and female genital organs, but the con-
gress of two is necessary for fecundation, each impregnating the eggs of
the other. Others, such as fishes, have but an imperfect provision
for bringing together the sperm and germ cells. The female sheds her
roe in the sand, and then the male pours over it his seminal fluid. But
in this way, very many eggs are wasted, and hence the enormous num-
ber of eggs which many fishes produce. In the higher animals, there is
a much more perfect sexual union. The male is furnished with an intro-
mittent organ, called a penis, which penetrates into the vagina of the fe-
male, and sheds the semen there, so that it is brought into close prox-
imity with the egg. Hence, in the higher animals, the eggs do not need
to be so numerous, as their fecundation is much more certain.
The sexual system of the higher animals may be divided into three
parts; namely, the germ preparing organs, comprehending the testicle
in the male, and the ovary in the female; the germ transporting organs,
which convey outwards the semen and the eggs, and which consist of
the vas deferens in the male, and the oviduct in the female ; and the
emitting organs, the penis and the vagina, which serve also for sexual
intercourse. Of these the first are the essentials, the others the access-
ories. These organs are gradually developed, becoming more and more
complex and.specialised as we ascend the animal series, or follow the
processes of developement in the human embryo, or other embryo of the
higher class of animals. I shall give a short description of them as they
exist in man, entreating the reader’s attention, in order that the subse-
quent account of their diseases may be better understood.
In man there are two testes or testicles, suspended in a bag, called the
scrotum, by the spermatic chord. They consist of a mass of thin and de-
licate tubes, which if unravelled would form a continuous tube of about
one thousand feet long. In these tubes are produced the parent cells of
the seminal fluid. These cells elaborate the spermatozooids, which in
man are very small, requiring a high magnifying power to be visible.
They resemble those found in other animals, having a broadened oval
head and a long tail, by which they are rapidly moved about in the se-
minal liquid. The length of time they may continue to exist when
poured iuto the female organs, is not exactly known, but probably it is
but short. Pure water soon puts an end to their motions, but in a denser


fluid, such as mucus or urine, they can live for some time. When the
semen is matured, the parent cells burst, and discharge it into the tubes
by which it is conveyed into the vas deferens, a single larger duct which
leads from each testicle, and conveys the semen into the penis. The vas
deferens is tortuous, and forms a thick convoluted mass called the epidi-
dymis, just on leaving the testicle. It conducts the semen upwards through
the spermatic chord, then winds round the bladder, and meets a duct
coming from one of the two seminal vesicles, which are narrow pouches,
about an inch and a halt long, in which the semen is stored up so as to
form a sufficiently copious discharge. After the confluence of the ducts
from the testis and seminal vesicle, the common duct receives the name of
Ejaculatory canal, of which there is one on each side. They open into
the urethra or urinary canal, at the base of the prostate gland. The pros-
tate is in shape something like a chestnut, and surrounds the urethra just
after it leaves the bladder. It is nearly an ounce in weight, and is one
Mthe firmest glands in the body. It secretes a thin fluid, like a very thin
mixture of milk and water. This fluid is increased in quantity like the
seminal fluid under venereal excitement, and it mixes with the latter as
it is being ejaculated through the penis. It probably serves to dilute the
semen, and to lubricate the canal. It is not however to be regarded as
essential to fecundation, for the power of procreation often remains when
the prostate is greatly diseased.
The body of the penis, or emitting organ, is composed of the two cor-
pora cavernosa, and the urethra. The former are on the upper surface of
the penis, and constitute its main bulk. They are composed of what is
called erectile tissue, (like the nipples in the breast, and the wattles on
the head of a cock), the erection of which is caused by a suddenly in-
creased flow of blood being sent to it by the arteries, under the stimulus
of a sexual desire, and its exit being checked by muscles which com-
press the veins. Erection is not producible by will, but by sexual
emotions.
The urethra, or urinary canal, commences at the neck of the bladder,
and terminates in its external orifice, in the glans penis. It is divided by
anatomists into three portions, namely, the prostatic, which is surrounded
by the prostate gland; the membranous, where the canal is somewhat
contracted in its passage under the arch of the bony pelvis, and where
stricture is most apt to occur; and the spongy portion.
The head of the penis is called the glans or nut. It is covered by a
prolonged piece of skin, called the prepuce or foreskin, which can be drawn
back in most individuals, and helps to preserve the sensitiveness of the
glans. At the base of the glans are a number of little follicles, which
secrete a whitish sebaceous matter.
Of these organs the testes are the essentials, the others the accessories.
The testis prepares the seminal fluid; the vas deferens conveys it outwards
to the seminal vesicles, where it is stored up till required; and the penis
ejaculates it into the female organs, where it meets with the germ cell
or egg.
In woman the sexual organs may be divided in like manner into three
sets, the germ preparing, transporting, and emitting organs; the ovaries,
oviduct, and vagina. The external slit or opening of the female organs


is called tlie vulva, and it is bounded by the two labia or lips. In the
anterior part of the vulva is a small erectile organ, analogous in form
and structure to a diminutive penis, differing however in not being perfo-
rated by a canal. It is called the clitoris, and is highly sensitive like the
glans penis. It is probably the chief organ of sexual enjoyment.
At the posterior part of the vulva is the opening into the vagina, the
passage which leads up to the mouth of the womb, and into which the
penis is introduced in coition. The vagina is about four inches long, and
is very distensible, so as to admit the passage through it of so large a
body as the child. It is membranous, and surrounded by bands of mus-
cular fibres, which form a sphincter or closing muscle, which constricts
the o'ifice of the vagina, where it joins the external genital fissure. In
the virgin, before connection has taken place, there is generally a fold of
membrane which stretches across the mouth of the vagina, leaving how-
ever space,for the passage of the menstrual discharge. This is called
the hymen or maidenhead, and was formerly sought for as a test of vir-
ginity, as it is generally ruptured in the first sexual connection, but it is
now no longer depended upon. The pain felt in the first intercourse is
caused by the rupture of this membrane, and the forcible dilatation of
the vagina.
The vagina leads up to the uterus or womb, which opens into it at its
upper and anterior side, about three inches from tha orifice of the
vagina. The womb, that most important and wonderful organ, the first
cradle of the human race,is, when unimpregnated, a small flattened pear-
shaped body, about 3i or 4 inches long, and 2} broad, whose broad end is
uppermost, while its lower end rests on the vagina. It is a hollow mus-
cle like the heart, and like it, is composed of involuntary muscular fibre,
whose actions are not dependent on the will.
The upper and broadened part of the womb is called the body, and t}ie
lower, which is narrower, is the cervix or neck.
The cervix is the part which rests on the vagina, and in the middle of
it is a small opening, leading into the womb, called the os uteri or mouth
of the womb. It is so narrow as only to admit a small sound. The
womb conta'ns two little cavities, one of them in the body, the other in
tire neck. They can hold about equal quantities of fluid, namely, about
nine or ten drops. Between them there is a narrow passage called the
os internum or internal mouth.
There are considerable anatomical differences between the body and
the neck of the womb. The body is of a low vitality, consisting of mus-
cular tissue, closely welted together, and with very few blood-ve>sels; its
cavity also has a very imperfect and rudimentary mucous membrane.
The neck, on the other hand, has a higher vitality, it is much better
supplied with blood-vessels, and its cavity, which is called the cervical
canal, is lined by a thick mucous membrane, studded with numerous
secreting follicles. Hence the neck is much more liable to inflammatory
disease than the body, and hence also, it is rare that inflammation spreads
either to the substance, or to the mucous membrane of the latter, though
when it does so, it is exceedingly chronic and obstinate, like all in-
flammations in tissues of low vitality.


The ovaries, -which, like the testes in the male; are the most essential
of all the generative organs, as they prepare the germs, which the others
only serve to bring together and foster in their growth, are two small
bodies, in size and shape like an almond, which are attached by mem-
branous folds, called the uterine ligaments, to either side of the womb.
Towards each of them a very minute tube, called the fallopian tube or
oviduct, proceeds from the cavity of the uterus.
The fallopian tubes are not united to the ovaries, but are provided
with a bell-shaped mouth, which erects itself and clasps the ovary, when
an egg is about to be discharged.
The inside of the vulva and vagina is lined by a mucous membrane,
which secretes, like similar membranes in other parts, a colourless
fluid, serving to lubricate the passage.
The female sexual organs lie between the bladder in front, and the
rectum or lower portion of the intestines behind. The urethra or urinary
canal, is very short and wide in the female, not being more than two
inches in length. It opens into the vulva, immediately in front of the
orifice of the vagina. Behind the vulva, and separated from it by a space
about an inch and a half in length, which receives the name of the per-
ineum, is the anus or opening of the intestine, which runs up behind the
Wall of the vagina. The uterus and ovaries lie between the bladder and
the rectum in the middle of the pelvis, (which is the lower part of the
skeleton of the trunk, and is formed by the union of the haunch-bones
and others). The knowledge of these relations between so important
organs, and the intimate nervous connection which exists between them,
explain why in pregnancy, or in diseases when the womb alters in size
&c., the contiguous organs may be disturbed in their functions.
The generative organs in both sexes are the last in the body to arrive
at maturity. They are quite immature at birth, and it is not till the
epoch of puberty, that they become fully developed. Puberty consists
essentially, in the ripening of the sperm and germ cells. It takes
place in the male at about the fifteenth or sixteenth year, and it is
only then that the seminal fluid begins to be elaborated by the testi-
cles, and that the young man becomes capable of reproducing his
species. Other changes accompany this maturation of the sperm cells.
A larger supply of blood and nervous influence is sent to the sexual
organs, and they grow rapidly, and hair appears about them. The
larynx also becomes wider, and the voice deeper and rougher, and fresh
vigour and energy pervade the frame. The sexual desires are also
awakened, and become very powerful; while involuntary emissions of
the seminal fluid with erections of the penis occur at times during
sleep, showing the maturity of the sexual system.
In woman, puberty occurs in our country, generally between four-
teen and sixteen years of age. In hot climates it is one or two years
earlier, and in cold ones later. It consists in the maturation of the
reproductive organs. An increased supply of blood and nervous in-
fluence is sent to these organs, so that they rapidly acquire their full
developcment, and begin to exercise, as in the male, a most powerful
influence over the rest of the constitution, physical and moral. All


the sexual organs, together with the breasts, increase in size, and hair
grows upon them. When the organs are fully developed and the eggs
are ripe, there commences that wondrous chain of periodical actions,
known under the name of menstruation or ovulation (the monthly lay.
ing of eggs). At intervals, generally of four weeks, sometimes of a
few days more or less, one egg, or in some instances more than one, is
ripened and discharged from the ovary. This is accompanied by a
periodical flow of blood to all the sexual organs, so that the ovaries
become red and turgid, and the vagina and vulva have a dark red hue,
instead of their usual pink one. At the same time blood is discharged
from the cavity of the womb, and escapes from the external genital
fissure in drops. This is called the menstrual discharge, or the cata-
menia (in ordinary parlance, “ the courses ” or “ monthly illness ”) and
lasts for from three to five days, amounting to about as many ounces.
Menstruation in woman corresponds exactly with the period of heat
in female animals, and differs only in the unessential particular, that
in woman there is an external sanguineous discharge. In all, the
essence of the process is the periodical flow of blood to the sexual
organs, and the maturation and spontaneous discharge of eggs from
the ovaries.
This theory of menstruation—namely, that it is connected with the
spontaneous discharge of eggs, is one of the most recent and most impor-
tant discoveries in physiology. Formerly, it was believed, that eggs
were discharged from the ovaries only in consequence of sexual inter-
course, and subsequent to fecundation, but now it is well ascertained
that such is not the case. It was M. Raciborski who first discovered
the fact of the spontaneous discharge of eggs, quite independently of
any intercourse with the male, and who showed clearly that impreg-
nation does not take place before but after the egg quits the ovary, and
while it is in the oviduct. His theory has been corroborated “by many
subsequent observers, and is now received by the great majority of
scientific men.
The egg escapes from the ovary by the bursting of its ovisac or pa-
rent cell, and falls into the bell-shaped mouth of the fallopian tube,
which, during the menstrual period, applies itself to the ovary and
embraces it tightly. It is in this tube that fecundation takes place, if
there have been previous sexual intercourse. If not, the egg passes
slowly down through the fallopian tube into the cavity of the womb,
where it continues to live, and to be capable of impregnation for a few
days, then dies, and is discharged from the external passages. If
fruitful intercourse have taken place, the seminal fluid, shed in the
vagina, enters the mouth of the womb, and penetrates into its cavity,
aided partly by the movements of the spermatozooids, partly by the
action of little hair-like cilia, with which the mucous lining of the cer-
vical canal is covered. It then mounts into the fallopian tubes, and
there meets with the egg on its descent. The spermatozooid conjugates
with the egg, just as the two reproductive cells do in the humblest
plant, and by this union a new human being is produced. It is worthy
of remark, that the essential part of the generative act, namely, the


meeting of the sperm and germ cells, is as totally unaccompanied by
consciousness or volition on our part, as it is in the lowest links of
the chain of being. In us also, generation is truly an. automatic pro-
cess.
The fecundated egg now enters the cavity of the womb, and proceeds
to develops itself into the future human being. The mouth of the
womb becomes sealed up by a tenacious mucus, secreted by neighbour-
ing glands, and the womb gradually enlarges, as the foetus or embryo
becomes developed within it. For its developement the powers of the
mother’s economy conspire; a connection is effected between the blood-
vessels of the foetus and of the parent, a plentiful supply of blood is
sent to the womb, and the monthly discharge is suppressed. Thus
from the blood of the mother the embryo is nourished and grows apace,
and the womb also grows to an enormous size, so that at the end of
pregnancy the little pear-shaped body has, without any thinning of
its walls, become a huge globular mass, upwards of a foot long, and
eight or nine inches broad, within which lies the infant, floating in a
liquid, whose soft and yielding volume protects its tender limbs, as
well as its mother, from injury. After nine calendar months have
expired, the womb, which is a large hollow muscle, begins sponta-
neously to contract, and expel its contents, the vagina and vulva be-
coming at the same time relaxed and loose, so as to permit the pas-
sage of the child through them. The womb’s contractions, which take
place at regular intervals of from five to twenty minutes, or there-
abouts, (gradually increasing in power and frequency,) and occasion,
together with the dilatation of the passages, the pains of labour, pro-
verbially so excruciating, first dilate the mouth of the womb, and
then gradually force down the child, head-foremost, through the
vagina and vulva into the world, which extraordinary distension is
performed without any harm to the child or rupture of the maternal
tissues. Having expelled the child, and shortly afterwards the pla-
centa, or after-birth, (the mass of blood-vessels by which the embryo
drew its nourishment from the blood of the mother), the womb con-
tracts into a hard ball, and in a few days has returned almost com-
pletely to its original size. These extraordinary developements and
actions are peculiar to the womb alone among muscles, and are with-
out a parallel in the human frame.
The physiological explanation of the venereal act is the following.
At the stimulus of a sexual desire, the only true and healthy stimulus,
the blood rushes into the erectile tissue of which the penis is
composed, and thus it becomes capable of penetrating into the
vagina. Its erection is aided by the contraction of muscles at
its base. The sensitive nerves on the surface of the glans, gradually
roused by friction to a state of intense excitement, transmit this to
the brain and spinal chord, which by a reflex action cause spasmodic
and rhythmical contractions of muscles, which compress the seminal
vesicles, and expel the seminal fluid with considerable force through
the ejaculatory ducts and the urethra into the vagina of the female.
Let it be carefully observed with regard to the perfection of this act


that no stimulus but the normal one—namely, a venereal desire, should
be needed to cqll up a full erection of the penis; that the excitement
and sensation of delight experienced, should continue constantly in.
creasing till it reaches its acme, which should be neither too soon not
too lingering in its arrival; that the pleasure experienced depends in
great measure on the manly vigour of the organs, which have not been
exhausted! by any of the causes hereafter to be mentioned; that all
dalliance or protraction of the act is enfeebling to the organs and
effeminating to the whole constitution, physical and moral; that after
coition a feeling of drowsiness is often experienced, none of which con-
siderations are rashly to be neglected. All our bodily functions and
actions have their ideal perfection, just like the moral types, upon
which it is most important that the attention of man be fixed, for it is
only by his knowledge of, and regard for, these, that he will under-
stand how to conduct his physical life.
In the inferior animals, the seminal fluid is secreted only at inter-
vals. This frequently occurs in the spring, and at that time the testi-
cles increase greatly in size and furnish the sperm in abundance.
During the rest of the year they shrink and remain inactive. The
females also will admit, the male only during the period of heat,
namely, while the eggs are being ripened and discharged, at which
time alone they are capable of impregnation. In woman also, the
sexual desires are strongest just after the menstrual discharge. , Sexual
intercourse however, and sexual enjoyment are, in her case, by no
means confined to this period; a privilege which is consistent with the
higher endowments of intellect and self-restraint possessed by the
human race.
The reproductive powers cease far sooner in woman than in man.
In her they terminate with the cessation of ovulation, which generally
takes place from the 45th to the 30th year. The sexual desires and
enjoyment do not, however, cease then. In man, the power of procrea-
tion remains much longer; it may last, if the constitution be vigor-
ous, till extreme old age. Old Parr showed himself capable of repro-,
ductiou in his 142nd year; and it is to be observed, that the continuance
of strong sexual desires, instead of being regarded as a reproach to old
age, as is often done, should be held one of the best of all signs of a
healthy and well-spent physical life. It is the premature exhaustion
of his powers and desires that disgraces a man; their long retention
ennobles him.
-After the egg is fecundated, the processes of development immedi-
ately commence in it. By deveiopemeut is meant the series of changes
which the egg passes through, until it reaches the form of its parent.
The phenomena of developement are of surpassing interest and im-
portance. They are the best guides that we have to the systematic
»l»»sification of plants and animals, and by studying them we obtain
k»« greatest insight into the origin and the meaning of life.
The womb is the workshop of organisation ; in it take place those
mysterious and occult transformations, by which the microscopic cell
is changed into the perfect being. Hence, very great pains have been taken


by scientific observers in watching the developemental processes in the
cmbryoes of a vast variety of plants and animals, and in endeavouring to
gain a knowledge of the wondrous plan on which nature builds up the fab-
rics of the animated world. An immense number of the most interesting
facts have thus been ascertained, and several most important laws dedu-
ced from them; but the subject is wide and deep as nature, and much
remains to be done before the relations between the various phenomena
are clearly perceived, and the plan of organic structure satisfactorily
made out.
Probably the most important law of developement yet discovered is
that which was first clearly enunciated by Von Baer, “ that develope-
ment always proceeds from the general to the special.’’ By this, is meant
that the earlier stages of any embryo are always the more general, that .
is, common to a greater number of living beings, and that by each suc-
cessive stage of developement, it becomes more specialized, and gradually
proceeds through less and less general types of structure, till, at last, it
ends in the individual. This will be better understood by an illustra-
t on. The human embryo is at-first exactly like all other embryoes, and
like the simplest form of a living being; namely, it is a simple micros-
copic cell. All living beings commence with this, and there is no dis-
tinguishable difference between the germ of the humblest plant and of
man. This, then, is the most general form of life. As yet, it is impossi-
ble to say whether the embryo is an animal or a vegetable. Soon, how-
ever, the special marks of animality appear, but it is impossible to say, to
which great class of animals the embryo belongs, as it contains charac-
ters, which are general in all. Gradually, however, and by successive
stages, it becomes apparent that the animal is vertebrated, next that it
is a mammal, and afterwards that it is of the human species. Lastly, the
sex becomes apparent along with the peculiar and special characters
which distinguish one individual from all others. In this, we see an ex-
emplification of the great law of progress from the general to the special,
which law comprehends every fact yet known. The scientific classification
of plants and animals proceeds in the same way fi om the general to the
special. One great type of structure for instance, is found to be general
throughout a large division of the animal kingdom: the modifications
of that type are formed according to less general types; and thus we
proceed through a series of less and less general, or more and more
special types, till we get to the species and individual. Thus are formed
the kingdoms, sub-kingdoms, orders, families, genera, and species of the
botanist and zoologist; nay more, it is exceedingly probable, as Dr.
Carpenter says, that the whole scale of being from the simple cellular
plant, up to man, has been developed in the course of myriads of ages,
according to the very same law, as that which presides over the deve-
lopement of any single being. The organisms which first originated
on the surface of the earth were probably those of the most general
form ; and every plant and animal has successively arisen in strict ac-
cordance with this great principle of gradual progress from the more
general to the more special.
From this account it will be seen, that the embryoes of all beings


invariably resemble each other during some part of their developement,
however unlike the adults may be; and that a man is not more dis<
similar to the humblest plant, than he is to his own self when corn-
mencing life. Those animals are most nearly related to each other,
whose developement proceeds furthest in the same direction, and those
are most widely separated, which soonest diverge from each other in their
developement. The fact that the powers of nature are sufficient to pro-
duce a human being from a single cell, make it more comprehensible to us,
how they may of themselves have sufficed in the lapse of ages to developo
the great chain of animated existence. In truth, the developement of maa
in the womb, is just an epitome of the developement of the whole living
world; beginning in a single cell, and ending in the wondrous perfection
of humanity. It is the key, could we but rightly understand it, to the
whole natural history of the origin and succession of life upon our planet.
Nature here as it were repeats in miniature, and in the space of a few
months, those grand evolutions and developements, which it cost her
millions of ages to accomplish.
Another great law of organic structure is the unity of type. By this
is meant that a number of beings are formed upon the same fundamental
plan, and have the same essential organs differing only in their relative
developement. In the animal kingdom there are four great plans of
structure, on each of which a large class of animals is built. These
are the Radiate, the Molluscous, the Articulate, and the Vertebrate plans.
All the animals constructed on any one of these, and more especially on
the highest or vertebrate plan, are strictly comparable with each other.
Thus all vertebrated animals are formed according to the same archetype
or ideal plan, and all of them hare essentially the same organs, although
an organ which is largely developed in one animal may be merely rudi-
mentary in another. A vertebrated animal however is not in the same
way comparable with a radiate or articulate one, for their plans of struc-
ture are widely different. Still, a very close and remarkable connection
exists between the very lowest members of the vertebrate class, and the
other classes, namely the molluscous and articulate ones. This is shown
in the extraordinary little fish called the Amphioxus, whose peculiar or-
ganisation was only lately pointed out. It is the lowest of all known
vertebrate animals, and approaches in many respects very nearly to the
lowest forms of the other classes. This is one instance of the general
and instructive fact, that it is the lowest members of the various groups
of living beings, which resemble each other, and not the highest of an
inferior class and the lowest of the one above it, as is sometimes sup-
posed.
Moreover, all animals and all plants are comparable together in their
earliest embryonic stages, and therefore there is doubtless some much
more general plan of structure, which includes all living beings, could
we but understand it. Newton, when reflecting on the wonders of ani-
mated nature, said, “ 1 cannot doubt that the structure of animals is
governed by princinles of similar uniformity with that of the rest of the
universe.”
The vertebrate type to which man belongs is common to four classes of


animals, namely fishes, reptiles, birds, and mammals. These are all
formed on the same plan, and possess essentially the same organs, and
the great difference we see in their shapes, arises from the wonderful way
in which the same parts are modified in different animals to suit special
purposes. Thus the wing of a hat is essentially the same as the hand of
a man; the only difference being that the bones are developed in an ex-
traordinary degree, and connected together by a membrane adapted for
flying. The vertebrate type exists in its lowest and most general form
in fishes, and gradually reaches its highest and most specialised one in
man. The human embryo in the womb passes through an analogous
series of stages. It presents the characters successively of the embryonic
fish, reptile, and bird, and all its organs successively pass through tran-
sitory stages, which remain permanent in these inferior animals, and
thus gradually reach their final highly specialised and complex form.
In this adherence to a fixed type, and to immutable laws, we see the
signs of the workings of nature, which are so different from those of
man. All the works of man, or of any voluntary being, are directed to
the accomplishment of some design, and we are constantly imputing the
same designs to the works of nature. But this is a great error. The
works of nature are produced by unconscious agencies, which do not
operate from design, but from necessary adherence to fixed laws. Rudi-
ments of organs appear sometimes in the embryo and then fade away
again; and parts often remain through life in a rudimentary state, and
without subserving any purpose in the economy, but merely showing the
fixity of the laws of developement, and the necessary adherence to one
type. Thus it is not from design that we are endowed with any of our
organs, but from necessity; the eye was not given to us in order that we
might see with It, but we see with our eye, because it has been developed
in us, in obedience to the resistless laws of progressive evolution.
The first processes of the developement of the human being, are as
follows. The microscopic egg, it has been said, contains a minute yolk,
and a little cell in its centre called the germinal vesicle. When ripe, this
germinal vesicle becomes filled with young cells in its interior, then
bursts, prior to fecundation; and if the egg be then impregnated, devel-
opement begins in one of these liberated young cells. It multiplies itself
by splitting into two, and these two into four, and so on, just as the
simplest plant or animal does. Each of the cells so produced draws
round it a part of the yolk, which becomes invested with another cell-
wall, and thus a mulberry mass of cells is* formed, each having a share of
the germinal capacity. The spermatic power, derived from the union of
the contents of the spermatozooid and the egg, is shared among all the
cells which spring from the one first fecundated, and by this power the
cells are enabled to transform themselves into the various organs of the
body and to deyelope the faculties of the mind. It is a great law of
developement, discovered by Professor Schwann, that all the'tissues
and organs in the body commence in cells, just in the same way as the
entire organism. Nature never forms any tissue, whether a muscle, a
vessel, or a nerve, directly by the aggregation of molecules, but she first
makes a cell, and this cell is transformed into the tissue. All our organs


originate in masses of cells, which are the most general form of living
tissue, and their gradual developement takes place by the special tranj.
formation of these cells. When once a cell has been transformed into i
tissue, it loses its power of undergoing further developement, and hence
the phenomena of gemmation in the lower organisms arise from the fact,
that a number of the original germinal cells which are endowed with tie
spermatic influence, remain untransformed within them. Thus the buds
of a plant are produced from the central pith, which consists of untrans-
formed cells, and the Polyp buds spring from germinal cells, which remain
untransformed within the body of the parent. The more cellular a plant
or an animal is, the greater in general is its power of propagating bj
gemmation, for the germinal capacity of the cells is not exhausted bj
their transformation.
The generative organs are in all animals the last to attain their full
developement. In man they, like the other parts of the body, pass
through states resembling the permanent forms of the genital organs in
the lower vertebrate animals, and gradually rise through the fish, the
reptile, and the bird, to the mammal, and ultimately to the human type.
For a long time the external organs of generation in the embryo are so
alike in both sexes, that they are undistingnishable ; their form is general
to both male and female, but gradually the special characters of the sexes
are produced. It is from the persistence of this embryonic similarity
that the malformation called hermaphroditism, is sometimes occasioned.
Developement is arrested at a certain stage, by some cause or other, and
the external genitals continue to present the characters of both sexes.
Several very curieus cases of such hermaphroditism have taken place, in
which the individuals have passed their lives, married, and been received
in society, as belonging to a different sex from their true one; and the
mistake has in some cases been discovered only on minute investigation
after death. Other cases have occurred, where even the most scientific
men were totally unable to come to a conclusion as to the sex of the in-
dividual, from the appearance of the external genital organs during life.
These cases, in which there is merely an arrest of developement in the
external organs, are called spurious hermaphroditism ; but it is doubted whe-
ther there ever was a case of true hermaphroditism, namely, where the
essential generative organs, the testicles and ovaries, were fully developed
in the same individual, and both sperm and germ cells produced, as is the
case in hermaphrodite animals, as the oyster or snail, or in monoecious
plants.
But a theory has lately been proposed, and received by many of
the profoundest anatomists, that in truth all living beings, including
man, are hermaphrodite. This deeply interesting view is supported by
many facts in the animated world, and seems consistent with the fund-
amental unity of type. We have seen that in the lowest plants there
seems to be no distinction of sex between the conjugating cells. Both of
them seem to have the same reproductive properties, and to combine in
themselves the sperm and germ power. On ascending the scale we find
very many plants and animals possessing both sets of sexual organs,
ome of them self-fertilising and others not. In the snail, both sets of


organs are fully developed, but a double sexual congress is necessary to
impregnate the eggs. Now in the higher animals, including man, there
is great evidence to show that each individual is really hermaphrodite,
ana possesses both sets of organs, and the only difference in this respect'
between them and the snail is, that one set of organs remains rudi-
mentary and undeveloped in each sex. Man has the male organs fully
developed and the female ones in a rudimentary state, and vice versa.
Thus, the clitoris in the female is in reality the male penis. In the em-
bryo the two organs are so alike, as not to be distinguishable; but the
developement of the clitoris is arrested at an early stage, so that it remains
small and imperforate, while the penis increases in size, and is closed
beneath so as to form the urinary canal. In like manner the womb is
represented in man by a minute cavity called the sinus pocularis in the
prostate gland, &c. Thus, according to this view, the difference of sex is
rather apparent than essential, and all of us are truly hermaphrodite
beings.
Before taking leave of the interesting subjects of generation and de-
velopement, some singular reflections arise on considering these wondrous
phenomena. '
We call each human being a distinct individual, because he has been
produced by an act of generation, and lives independently. But in truth
we are not distinct individuals. Each of us is formed of a part of his
two parents, a part which is indeed separated from them, but which once
was included in their individuality. Hence we are merely a part of our
parents, largely developed, and existing independently; and therefore, a
man who has given birth to children, does not wholly die at death, but a
part of him survives in his offspring. In this way, man is in a manner
immortal on this earth. Children of the same families are in reality
parts of the same parental organisms; allied to each other something
like the different buds on a tree, or different polyps on a compound polyp
stock, except that they spring from two instead of one parental orga-
nism, and the connection between them has been cut at an early stage.
But the whole human family, whether they are descended from a sin-
gle pair of first parents, or from many, are so connected together by in-
termarriage, that in reality they form one great consanguineous whole.
The progenitors of all of us have at some time or other formed parts of the
same body. Thus, mankind may be termed one great composite indivi-
dual, instead of a collection of individuals, nearly in the same way as the
compound polyp. We form an organism, whose earlier parts are dead,
and whose life is ever renewed afresh to tie latest posterity by the re-
union of certain of its component parts.
Following the same train of thought further, it may be said that we
are in the same way, though more remotely, connected with all other
living beings, and form with them one great individual; if it be true,
as everything leads us to believe, that we have been developed in con-
tinuation with them. This great unity of life should serve to bind ns
more closely to our fellow men and to all living things, and to increase
the heartfelt sympathy between the different races and individuals of
mankind. However widely separated by time and circumstances, we are


in reality all parts of the same being, and our interests are indissolubly
woven together. It is as impossible for one class of human beings to be
wretched without ultimately affecting the happiness of all the rest, as for
one organ of the body to be long diseased without involving the others.
Another interesting reflection connected with the subject of genera-
tion is, that every child must include in itself the mingled qualities of its
two parents. Neither parent furnishes alone, the embryo, as was at one
time believed, but both together, by the union of the sperm and germ
ceils. Therefore the child is just midway between the parents, and can
possess no quality which did not exist in them. The qualities of the pa-
rent, both mental and bodily, are blended together in the child so as to
form a third being. The parental characters may indeed be disguised,
as the properties of oxygen and hydrogen are, when they combine to
form water; but still they must be there, and it is most interesting to
trace them.
By an analytic comparison of the child with its two" parents, we may
gain an insight into the laws, just as definite and fixed as those of che-
mistry, or any other part of nature, according to which two sets of quali-
ties of mind and body are blended together, so as to form a third. If
we possess any prominent gift of mind or body, the seeds of it must have
existed in our parents; and whether we inherit a good or a bad con-
stitution, and a healthy or a delicate mind, depends entirely on them,
subject of course to the modifying influence of circumstances. It is
"commonly and vaguely said, that such a child is like its parents and such
another unlike; but the truth is, that every child is the mingled essence
of its two patents, and must, if we look deep enough, be a thorough re-
presentation of them. The laws of hereditary transmission, and of the
commixture of parental properties in the child, are as yet little under-
stood, but are a most important province for investigation.
Neither is it yet known what decides the sex; what are the causes
which produce at one time a male, and at another a female. Some in-
teresting experiments on this subject have been made on plants, (and
here, as elsewhere, it is only by studying the problem in the lowest organ-
isms, and so reducing it to its simplest expression, that we can hope to
solve it) and it has been shown that in some monoecious flowers, male
organs alone are produced, if they be subjected to an excessive heat with
little light; and female ones alone, if these conditions he reversed. But
with regard to the decision of the sex in the human being, nothing cer-
tain has been discovered.
Having thus given a short sketch of the phemonena of generation and
developement, I proceed to that which I believe to be by far the most
important of all subjects, in the present state of the world, namely, the
diseases of the generative organs, viewed in connection with the evils of
poverty and hard work. I shall give a short description of these diseases,
and endeavour to trace them along with poverty to their great , primary
source.
It is in vain to treat of disease as a separate subject in the manner gen-
erally pursued: almost all prevalent diseases depend primarily on some
SEXUAL RELIGION.


great cause operating widely throughout our society, and unless they are
traced to this, and means be taken to remove it, they cannot possibly bo
remedied or prevented. There is not a better instance of this than the
sexual diseases. These are inseparably bound up, as will appear here-
after. with other great social miseries; and thus the researches of medi-,
cine are so thoroughly interwoven with those of political economy, that
neither science can lead to any good result without the other.
It is from the want of perception of the dependence of these, and many
other diseases, on deeply rooted social difficulties and errors, that so little
has yet been done to prevent them. It is from studying disease as a se-
parate entity, and not tracing its causes far enough back, by which its
dependence on the great social embarrassments, and its inseparable con-
nection with other fields of inquiry would be seen, that the efforts of
medicine are so frequently frustrated. It is not by endeavouring to cure
individuals merely that human health can be advanced; if the main-
spring of the disease remain hidden and unattended to, individuals may
indeed be cured, but an endless succession of new diseases will constantly
arise, so that the health of the race on the whole will make no advance.


DISEASES
OF THE
MALE GENERATIVE ORGANS.
Ir is deeply to be regretted, that mankind are in general so little ac-
quainted with the laws of bodily health, and the penalties or rewards
consequent on their observance. In the young world, it was long the
custom to leave the care of men’s spiritual welfare in the hands of a
certain class, and it is only after progressive reformations, that we can
clearly see how vain it is for ns to trust to another, in matters where our
own knowledge and judgment are required.
The case is the same now-a-days with man’s bodily welfare; he is too
pre-occupied by other pursuits, to pay attention to this, and delivers
himself over id health and sickness to the guidance of chance or the
physician, a passive unreasoning instrument.
And yet but little reflection is needed to show us, that in this, as well
as in spiritual and moral matters, our own knowledge and independent
judgment are required at every step in life; that if we have not as full
a knowledge of the body and of the paths to physical health and disease,
as of the mind and the phenomena of its virtues and vices, out life is the
sport of chance, and our brightest hopes are all liable to end in disap-
pointment and misery; that no mental culture or moral excellence will
avail us, if we are borne to the ground by bodily disease. The laws of
our body will not be neglected; tney demand our attention, and woe to
him who offends against them.
Shall we then, like our ancestors, be content to remain as children, on
matters of such infinite importance? It is said, that a little knowledge
is a dangerous thing, but truly none at all is still more dangerous, and
far more unpardonable. Deeply convinced as I am, that there is no
safety for man, till the laws that regulate our bodily health and disease
be as well known to all, as any of the other most widely-spread branches
of knowledge, I shall endeavour in this essay to give a short sketch of a
class of diseases, perhaps mote fatal at present to the health and hap-
piness of our race than any other, and also from their peculiar nature,
if possible, less understood by the world at large.
It is of the diseases of the genital organs that I shall speak, to which
man and woman ace most liable in the years that follow puberty. This
is probably at the present day the most dangerous period of life, with
the exception of the first year or two of existence; not so much because


more die in it, but because the foundation of many chronic lingering di-
seases is then laid, which may embitter all the rest of life's cup.
The great danger of the period arises from the fact of the genital
organs, these mighty powers for the happiness or misery of each indi-
vidual, then coming first into play; and from the lamentable ignorance
in which youth, and indeed the whole of society, is plunged, as to the laws
of these organs. There is no subject at oresent on which such a dense
cloud of ignorance, prejudice, and every imperfect and degrading feeling,
lies brooding, as upon the genital organs, and their whole nature and
duties. To raise this veil of obscurity and shame, which degrades -the
sexual part of man, and to strive to show, by the lights which modern
research has thrown upon it, the simple and beautiful natural laws to
which it is subjected, like other parts of the economy, shall be my en-
deavour in this essay. It is not sufficient that all men should become
acquainted with the laws of health, as has been so admirably dwelt upon
in some late popular works on physiology; it is necessary also that we
should be acquainted with the history of disease ; for it is as important
that we should be aware of the penalty for breaking a law, as of the
reward for obeying it.
The great causes of the deplorable ignorance and prejudice which pre-
vail on sexual subjects are, first, the erroneous moral views which are
entertained regarding them; and, secondly, the ideas of mystery and
shame which are attached to them, and which must be completely over-
come throughout society, before we be rescued from the innumerable evils
that overwhelm mankind at present from their diseases. Mystery
always causes ignorance, which is of itself sin, and the parent of sin ;
and therefore every one of us should seek entirely to rid ourselves of such
feelings on sexual subjects, and to view that part of nature, like all others,
with the calm and reverential spirit that the pursuit of truth de-
mands.
PUBERTY IN THE MALE.
This period, which generally occurs about the age of fifteen or sixteen,
is accompanied by important changes in the economy, connected with
the developement of the genital or reproductive organs. Were anatomy
and physiology as well known os the comparatively unimportant dead
languages, it would be unnecessary to explain to any one, with a liberal
education, the nature of these changes. They consist mainly, as has
been already mentioned, in the production of a new secretion, called the
seminal fluid, by the testicles, and the simultaneous growth of the gene-
rative organs, and increase of strength and manliness in the whole
frame. With this new bodily developement, come the fresh and power-
ful feelings of sexual love, and the young man is impelled to new energy
of thought and action.
It is at this time that the senses, and that part of our nature, which


we have been unhappily in the habit of regarding as a sort of slave ot
rebel against the other mental faculties, demand their free scope ; and
if these animal passions be unheeded, or unreasonably repressed, tie
whole organism is liable to become diseased. This is the season lot
youthful gaiety, and the amusements in which the two sexes join it
friendly intercourse; for passionate love with all its hopes and feats,
delights and griefs; in short for that part of our experience, which ve
are meant to draw more from the exercise of the passions, than from
reflection. “ The man who reflects is a depraved animal,” said Konssean;
and the paradox, however exaggerated, is too often applicable to tie
youth of our time, prematurely enfeebled by care and thought. For
our country is sadly deficient in those amusements so necessary for tie
health and happiness of youth; too frequently the free and joyous com.
munion which should prevail between the two sexes, is overawed by tie
asceticism of our morality, and shrinks into morbid shyness and bash,
fulness, rendering distasteful the most agreeable society. How con-
stantly do we see young people, poring over books till they become mere
thinking machines; or so intensely spiritual, that it would seem they
had escaped from their bodies; or with natural tastes so perverted, that
they become at last almost incapable of vigorous manly love! These
evils arise from mistaken ideas of their duties to themselves and to their
neighbours, from ignorance of the great sexual laws, which I shall now
endeavour to the best of my knowledge to explain.
LAWS OF THE SEXUAL ORGANS.
One physiological law of supreme importance and universal application
in our constitution is, that every several member must, in order to be
vigorous and healthy, have a due amount of exercise, and that of the
normal kind. Thus the eye must have light, the limbs motion, the
intellect reflection, and our appetites and passions their normal grati-
fication, else will they infallibly become enfeebled and diseased. Either
excessive or deficient exercise is injurious; and in order to have a well-
balanced bodily constitution, (just as much our honor and our duty, as
a well-balanced mind), we must obey this law. The generative organs
are subject to it as well as every other, and hence we shall see the duty
and necessity of their having due exercise from the time of their ma-
turity, which takes place at puberty, till that of their decline. If this
be neglected, they will be enfeebled, and although in some cases, when
other parts of the system take on a vicarious action for the unexerciscd
genital organs, according to another admirable physiological law; in
other words, though, by directing the mind to other thoughts and pur-
suits, and strengthening the frame by exercise, (according to the advice
so often given by physicians to the youth of both sexes, whose health is
suffering from their ungratified sexual appetites), though thus in some


cases health and vigour may apparently be retained, yet it is compara-
tively rarely, and only in very favourable circumstances, that this Till
be the case; and even in these, Ido not consider the health perfect,
where one organ or passion acts vicariously for another, and has thereby
double work to do. I feel convinced, that when we have a far higher
standard of health than passes current in the present sickly state of our
society, such deviations from it will not be permitted.
If on the other hand, the genital organs be excessively exercised, they
will in like manner become enfeebled; just as the excessive indulgence
and dwelling on the feeling of love, detracts from the beauty of the
moral character; as is exemplified in some amatory poets, and in the
dissipated pleasure hunters, who sacrifice all the rest of their nature to
this one passion.
Further, if the mode of their exercise be not the normal one, the con-
sequences will be still worse, for nature allows no departure from her
plan with impunity. By the most beautiful and delicate adjustment,
she has so united our health and happiness to the natural and normal
mode of sexual gratification, that we cannot depart in the least from
it without being Injured. This, every one will understand to be the case
in the injurious habits of self-pollution; but it is not so generally un-
derstood, that even in sexual intercourse, the more intense and genuine
is the passion felt, the more will its gratification stimulate and elevate
mind and body. Love should be real and intense, free from all fear and
suspicion, in order to produce its best effects on man. 'When mercenary
or clandestine, in which case the mind is suspicious, solicitous, or, es-
pecially on the female side, apathetic, it cannot be said to be normally
indulged.
I now proceed to speak of the diseases of the genital organs arising
from the ignorance and neglect of these laws of healthy exercise. These
constitute a most important class of diseases, which may be named the
genital diseases, in contradistinction to the venereal ones, from which
they are totally different. The former arise from neglect of the laws of
healthy exercise, &c., and are not infections; whereas the latter are pro-
nagated by contagion, and are of a completely different nature.


EVILS OF ABSTINENCE.
It is most unw : se to suppose that our chief duty with regard to our
appetites and passions is to exercise self-denial. This quality is far from
being at all times a virtue; it is qui'e as often a vice; and it should by no
means be unconditionally praised. Every natural passion, like every
organ of the body, was intended to have normal exercise and gratification i
and this it is to which every individual and* society at large should as-
pire. It is always a sign of imperfection in an individual, or in society,
if the normal requirements of all their members be not duly provided for.
At present, in this country, abstinence or self-denial in the matter of sex-
ual love is much more frequently a natural vice than a virtue; and instead
of deserving praise, merits condemnation, as we may learn from the mode
in which all-just nature punishes it. Wherever we see disease following
any line of conduct, we may be certain it has been erroneous and sinful,
for nature is unerring. Sexual abstinence is frequently attended by con-
sequences not one whit less serious than sexual excess, and far more
insidious and dangerous, as they are not so generally recognised. While
every morqlist can paint in all its horrors the evils of excess, how few
are aware that the reverse of the picture is just as deplorable to the im-
partial and instructed eye!
The young man enters on the period of puberty with an imagination
glowing with the ideas of love and romance he has read of, or conceived in
his own visions of happiness, and all these receive ten-fold intensity from
the stimulus of the new bodily developement. If this have no natural
outlet, the consequences may be most fearful and deplorable. Thrown
- upon himself by the asceticism of our morality, he is very liable to con-
tract the habit of solitary indulgence, the baneful effects of which I.
shall describe under the head of the abuse of the sexual organs. If* he
do not: if, persuaded by the theoretically received, but by no means
generally practised, views on moral subjects which surround him, he ab-
stain from all sexual gratifications, he is exposed to the following evils, of
which, if we look around ns, we may see too many examples. Haunted
by amatory ideas, and tormented by frequent erections of the sexual or-
gans, the spirited youth wars manfully for the citadel of his chastity;
he takes refuge in study, in severe bodily exercise, in platonics, the un


juppy one I and reasons on love instead of feeling it; and perhaps at last
is 10 unfortunately successful, that the strong sexual passions and erec-
tions vanish together. But not with impunity, do we triumph over any
part of our nature. He now becomes restless and dissatisfied, he loses his
serenity and active vigour of mind, he is distracted by nervous irritability
and probably dyspepsia, that frequent attendant on mental anxiety; weak
and exhausted, he cannot fix his attention on the objects he would wish
to study; his intellect, formerly vivid and elastic, has become turbid and
sluggish, and instead of the objective and impetuous passions of youth, he
becomes morbidly shy and bashful, wrapping himself in subjective spe-
culations, so that the very thought of woman's society is often distasteful
to him Poor fellow! is this the result of his imagined good conduct?
Xay, but the penalty for a youth unphysiologically spent. If we examine
into the cause of this train of evils, we shall find it to be the enfeeble-
ment of the genital organs from disute, besides the exceedingly per-
nicious effect, that a powerful natural passion has when repressed upon
all the rest of the mind. Subject to the frequent excitement of erotic
ideas, the genital organs have been denied all normal exercise, and the
effects of this are now manifest. The penis may be shrunk and flabby, the
testicles soft, and even, in extreme cases, greatly atrophied; the erections
which, when vigorous, are a sign of power in the organ, have in great
part disappeared, and perhaps involuntary discharges of the seminal fluid
have been established. These discharges, when they occur unfrequently
and in a healthy person, have often but little bad effect on the health,
although perhaps they should always, when proceeding from abstinence, be
considered as a warning that sexual exercise is required; they occur gen-
erally at the time of puberty, as a sign of the maturity of the organs ;
but when they are frequent, proceeding from irritability and enfeeblement,
and acquire a morbid habit of recurrence, they form one of the most mis-
erable diseases to which man is liable, and which I shall describe more
fully under the head of spermatorrhoea.
If this disease be established, the young man sinks gradually into a
gloomy hypochondria, an invariable attendant in a greater or less de-
gree, on any seminal weakness; he begins perhaps a system of mental
analysis, which may lead, according to his disposition, to a hopeless
scepticism, or to a religious melancholy; society is a burden to him,
and the love of his friends an annoyance. His health becomes much im-
paired, all the symptoms marking nervous weakness, for such is always
the effect of loss of the seminal fluid. Night brings no consolation
after the gloomy day, for .he lives inconstant dread of nocturnal dis-
charges of .-emen, which weaken him so much, that in the morning he feels
as if bound down by a weight to his couch. He goes from one physican
to another, but is probably rather injured than benefited, for all but
the natural remedy, namely, sexual connexion, can do little good, and
may do much evil. And how few English physicians are there, who
have the courage, even if they have the knowledge, to prescribe, nay even
to tell the patient, of this one and only physiological remedy! No; overawed
by the general erroneous moral views on these subjects, they shrink from
their duty of asserting the sacredness of the bodily laws in opposition to
c


all preconceptions. At most, perhaps, some more scientific physician
■will tell the unhappy sufferer from abstinence, that marriage is the only
thing for him; bat this is like the prospect of the distant shore to tit
drowning man. It would be the most rash and immoral act, fbr 3
man hypochondriacal and impotent, to stake another’s fortunes, as well
as his own, on so uncertain a chance; were it even possible that it
should change his robes of grief for a marriage garment, in so sudden a
manner. The true and only remedy for the evils arising from abstinent*,
is a moderate indulgence in sexual intercourse, together with the freedom
from study, exercise and amusements in the open air, and other means of
satisfying the wants of our animal nature. By these means, if the disease
have not progressed too far, and if the constitution have not been tam-
pered with by unnatural remedies, health and happiness will in general
be soon and readily restored. Vigour of body will return along with a
generous self confidence and manly bearing, without which youth is rot
itself.
It may be objected to these facts, that there are others, who remain
strong and healthy, though they be rigorously abstinent. This maybe
true in some cases, where the constitution is strong, the temperament
not very erotic, and the pursuits not of too sedentary, indolent, or stu-
dious a nature. Rut there is nothing that leads to more unphilosophical
views, than this idea, that what one man may do with comparative
impunity is equally safe for another. Complete sexual abstinence is in
every case un evil, and more especially so in the years immediately after
peberty, as then the imagination on sexual subjects is most vivid and
powerful from their novelty, and also from the instinctively sensuous
direction of that part of life; in after years, when the body has gained
greater firmness of fibre* and the mind more sedateness and reflection,
especially if the sexual passions have been duly and naturally gratified in
their fitting season, the injurious effect of abstinence is not so great. We
may observe on looking around us, every different degree of its evil effects; in
some young men it may proceed to the extreme results I have mentioned
above, the establishment of great seminal weakness, and total loss of
energy of mind and body; while in the majority of cases but minor de-
grees of lassitude of body, and irritability, depression, and sluggishness of
mind will be produced, a benumbed and confused state of the mind being
a very frequent and characteristic symptom; but in no-case will the phy-
sical and moral nature of a man who is rigorously abstinent, be so high
as it should be, had it the due and necessary stimulus of moderate sex-
ual gratifications.
What prevents this certain truth from being acknowledged, is the fact,
that all but married love, which it is impossible for the young man to ob-
tain, is so degraded by the commonly received moral views on sexual sub-
jects, that the youth who indulges in it, is necessarily to a certain
extent degraded, besides running great risks from the venereal diseases,
which have been so shamefully neglected and looked down upon. Hence
the young man is placed in this most unhappy dilemma; either he must
be abstinent, and in so doing not only make himself wretched, dissatisfied,
or diseased, by the repressing of the most powerful passion, on the due


rtrahtloa of which the whole of his youth's and manhood's developemcnt
depends, more than on perhaps, any thing, else at the time, but also be
false to his duty, and the principles of physical religion, which enjoin the
due exercise of all parts of his body; or, if he follow the dictates of his
nature, he has to indulge in an intercourse generally, nay invariably, of
a most degraded kind, where true love, honour, openness, and sense of
tight, are replaced by mercenary, suspicious, and heartless feelings, and
the obscure sense of sin and degradation ; besides this he runs the risk
of catching venereal complaints, which may destroy his whole life, and
which from their nature, mode of origin, and the degrading light in
which society regards them, are the most painful and bitter of all
diseases.
To remedy these great evils, it is the part of every well-wisher of his
find, and more especially of all the youth, to endeavour to attain a truer
knowledge of this most important subject in its physical and moral aspects,
and to remove the mass of ignorance and secrecy which surrounds it, and
to which so many have been sacrificed. The principle which should be
kept steadily in view is—that a due and natural amount of exercise for
the organs, and gratification of the passions connected with them, should
he aimed at for every individual in society; and that if a society be so
constituted, that this cannot be obtained, there must be something radi-
cally defective in its constitution, which we should seek with all patience
and diligence to rectify; that abstinence and excess are alike pernicious,
and that an individual is equally culpable, if he allow mind or body to be
weakened or thrown off its balance, by either too much repressing or too
much indulging these natural feelings ; and that the ideal of a good cha-
acter is as little possible, with the exclusion or imperfect exercise of the
sexual passions, as of any other natural or virtuous quality.
Hence, we must acknowledge, that every, man, who has not a due
amount of sexual exercise, lives a life of natural imperfection and sin ;
and he can never be, certain how far nature’s punishment for this will
proceed in his case. I am well aware how intricate and difficult are
many of the social questions, which are involved in these relations of the
sexes; but such questions are incapable of solution without reference to
the physical laws of the generative organs; and nothing but confusion
and misery can arise from the mysterious way in which these subjects
are at present viewedt The youth of both sexes are at present almost
uniformly suffering to a greater or less degree from the evils caused by
this ignorance; the female sex especially, as is seen in the matter of pros-
titution, are placed in the most appalling and heart-rending position of
degradation and in which any class of human beings, not even
excepting the slaves, have been placed in the world’s history; and such
evils are more than sufficient to show the inadequacy of our present moral
views, and toniake ns strive in.every possible manner to gain more in-
sight into so important a subject.


EVILS OF EXCESS.
The evil effects of excessive venereai indulgence are not so often met
with among us as those of abstinence or abuse. The reason is, that then
are many natural checks on excessive sexual intercourse, which do not
exist in solitary indulgence. Besides this, any abnormal gratification of
the sexual passions is much more dangerous both physically and morally,
Ilian the natural one.
Venereal excesses arise in many cases more from ignorance and impru-
dence, than from confirmed sensuality. There is nothing perhaps, in
which constitutions differ more, than in the amount of sexual exerciso
they can severally bear. Among men wo shall find every degree of differ-
ence in this respect, from those of exceedingly erotic temperament and
powerful frame, like the extreme case of a Greek mentioned in M. Lalle-
loaud’s work on spermatorrhoea, who for years indulged in sexual con-
nection on an average fourteen times a day, to those who are injured by
indulging oftener than once, or at most twice, a week. The cause of
this difference lies, first, in the nervous temperament; those who are of
an erotic disposition being caeleris paribus, more capable of, and less in-
jured by immoderate venereal indulgences than the more lymphatic; also
in the strength or weakness of the muscular developement; and also to a
great degree on men’s habits of life. Those who take plenty of exercise
in the country air and live well, are less subject to injury from frequent
venereal indulgence, than the studious or indolent. Nothing seems to
have greater influence in weakening sexual power than overwork of the
brain. The student is therefore liable to suffer from slight excesses, which
w ould bo unfelt by one of more healthy pursuits. In this matter, as in
all other physical gratifications, we must sedulously bear in mind, that a
greater indnlgence demands from ns greater exertions to maintain the
balance of the constitution. Thus if a man drink, smoke, or exercise his
brain, or his sexual organs, to a great extent, he will infallibly become ex-
hausted and diseased, unless he at the same time take plenty of exercise
in the open air, and live otherwise a healthy life.
Although it is difficult to give any general rule in a matter, in which
different constitutions vary so much, yet it may perhaps be said, that
about twice a week is the average amount of sexual intercourse of which
the majority of those who live in towns are permanently capable, without


injury; while for the dnicate, once a week, or even less, may often hesnffl-
jieut. But each individual should he guided by his own sensations; and
thenever he feels at all exhausted or enervated by sexual indulgences, he
sloold recognise that he has exceeded his natural powers, and practise
neater moderation. Excesses are often committed from ignorance of the
amount of sexual intercourse which the constitution can bear; as well as
from the desire to please, and not to appear deficient in what is justly re-
garded as a proof of manly vigour; but no man should allow himself to be
tempted to exceed his true powers by such feelings, nor should any woman
permit so dangerous an error. A great deal of mischief is done by two
persons of unequal constitutions being matched together, as is so frequently
seen in married life. Here the wife either exhausts the husband, or the
husband the wife, the weaker party being constantly tempted to exceed
their strength. This shows us, that in all sexual relations, as in the other
relations of life, we should have a careful consideration for the health and
happiness of others, as well as of ourselves, and never allow our partner
to overtask his or her energies for our own gratification. It is not so
much from selfishness that such a mistake is made, as from ignorance,
and still more from the lamentable morbid delicacy, which prevails on
tcxual matters, and which prevents all open and rational conversation
on them, even between those who have the most intimate knowledge of
each other.
Those who are most frequently found to suffer from venereal excesses are
young married couples, especially if they be of weak constitutions, and
excitable temperament; young men of very dissipated habits; and those
who are at the same time, hard students. The effects are very similar to
those of abstinence —namely, increasing weakness, nervous irritability,
loss of appetite, impaired digestion, hypochondria and disgust with life,
and distaste for female society; mental irresolution and enfeeblement,
and all the symptoms of nervous exhaustion, which may well be expect-
ed to follow the lavish expenditure of a fluid so vitally important as the
femen. A weakness of the genital organs is here also produced, and in-
voluntary seminal discharges may be established, which will reduce the
patient to the last degree of wretchedness. Besides this, the moral cha-
racter, in the very sensual and dissipated, becomes selfish, and in many
other respects most imperfect and lamentable; results which we should
endeavour to remedy by training the mind to self-denial, exercise in other
directions, and the noble aspiration for the happiness of others equally
with their own ; just as in the opposite case of abstinence, we had to urge
attention to the gratification of the sensual passions, as constituting
no less important a duty.
As for the treatment of disease from excesses, if the case be a slight one,
and the result of ignorance, the individual should be warned to be more
moderate, to take exercise in the open air, the shower bath, and other
means of strengthening the constitution; and at the same time not to give
himself up so much to the relaxing and effeminating feelings of love and
sexual pleasures, which never fail, when too much indulged in, to detract
from the beauty and health of the whole character. It is from being
too exclusively devoted to these feelinjs, that southern and oriental
nations, amatory poets, and also many of our youth of both sexes with


keen and ungratified passions, lose the beauty and force of their charac.
ter; that luxury and effeminacy have crept in and spoiled the chili,
zation of so many lofty empires. The true principle is, that all parts of
our being should be alike duly exercised; that none should be either too
much repressed, or too prominently indulged; and this balance of chj.
ractcr is what we should aspire to attain.
We shall not in general have nearly so much difficulty in checkin;
excess in this case, as in that of solitary indulgence; for, as ilousscausayi
in his Emilio, “ Shouldest thou fall into the unhappy habit of self-pollu-
tion, my poor Emdle, I would pity thee; but I would not hesitate t
moment; I would bring thee at once to know woman’s society, well aware
that it is far easier to detach thee from her, than from thyself.” This,
as will be seen hereafter, is the height of science on the subject.
But if the case have proceeded far, we may hare to deal with the most
aggravated form of seminal weakness. The patient may hare involuntary
nocturnal, or, still worse, diurnal discharges. In this case it will be re-
quisite to resort to powerful remedies. Cauterization of the prostatic por-
tion of the urethra, over the mouths of the ejaculatory ducts, has been
found by M. Lallemand very serviceable in such cases, but it should not
be done till other hygienic means have failed; and, as M. Lallemand ex-
pressly cautions us, it should not be applied more than twice in the same
case, as this will shew the benefit it is capable of doing. But it is an in-
finite pity, that the disease should be allowed in any case to proceed so
far unchecked; for, if they only knew their duty, few would be so foolish
or unrestrained as to risk all their hopes in life in the headlong pursuit
of 000 sensual em'ovmcnt.


EVILS OF ABUSE.
I come now to consider one of the most serious and frequent causes of
disease in youth; one which ruins more constitutions than enters into
the conception of the uninstructed. Any one who reads M. Lallemand’s
work will see, that hy far the majority of the worst cases of seminal
weakness are owing to this cause. Its evil effects are confined to no
one class, but are found in all ranks of society; and there are few rocks,
on which the health of more individuals is wrecked. The unfortunate
habit of solitary indulgence or masturbation, is frequently contracted
at schools or elsewhere, and often adopted more out of sport or ignorance
of the consequences it may lead to, than from any more serious purpose.
However, the habit grows on the young man, and if he be not diverted
from it, may gradually master his powers of mind and become almost
irresistible. Some of the cases given by M. Lallemand show the sur-
prising extent to which this practice may be carried; some of his pa-
tients owned, that they had been in the habit of exciting seminal emis-
sions from ten to twenty times daily, and this during a long period of time.
In others, a far more moderate indulgence soon brought on the worst
results; for in this, as in the case of venereal excesses, different consti-
tutions will be very differently effected. Hence, of those who acquire
the habit, some may escape with little injury, while others may bring
on the most intractable seminal disease, which will prostrate their powers.
Those who are most likely to suffer, are young men of a shy and retiring
disposition, whose bashfnlness prevents them from stepping across the
gulph, which in this country separates the sexes. Others of a more
forward character, though they may for a while indulge in the practice
(which, were the truth known, probably few men have not done more
or less) yet soon relinquish it, for the more natural and infinitely more
desirable sexual intercourse, and thus any injury they may have done
themselves is soon corrected.
But in the case of the shy or studious youth, or the sensualist, who
is too absorbed in the pursuit of his new pleasure to think of any other
consideration, the habit, once formed, has a great tendency to increase.
The more it is indulged, the weaker does the will become, and the more
perverted tho imagination; the shyness increases to a morbid degree, and
indeed this great irresolution and timidity is one of the most marked


signs of the existence of the practice. After it has been continued (or
a length of time, proportioned to the frequency of its repetition, and
the strength of the individual, the powers of the constitution begin gti.
dually, or sometimes suddenly, to break down. All the symptoms of
exhaustion and debility, which have already been described, as conse-
quent on seminal weakness, appear. Nocturnal, and in the furthet
progress of the complaint, diurnal involuntary seminal losses take place.
The countenance often becomes pale and wan, the sight weak, the frame
emaciated, and the whole nervous system much enfeebled. Incapacitj
for study or any mental exertion, gradually comes on, and may proceed
in extreme cases to such an extent as to border on idiocy. M. Lallemand
gives several cases, where idiocy or insanity was produced by the long
continued practice of this habit. The moral effects are as striking as
the physical. Morbid shyness and timidity, especially in female society,
is one of the most frequent effects, and is much more marked in these
cases than in weakness resulting from abstinence or excess. The pa-
tient looks like one conscious of some secret shame. Poor fellow! this
very dread, so uncalled for, of the judgment of the rest of us fallible
mortals, is one of the chief obstacles to his emerging from the slough
of despond. There are of course many also of bolder disposition, in
whom this shyness is not so marked.
All these symptoms are connected with, and dependent on, the enfee-
blement of the genital organs from abuse, and the consequent involuntary
discharges of the seminal fluid. This is probably the first thing to ex-
cite the youth’s attention and alarm, at the consequences of his acts.
Awakened from his sickly joys by the frequent occurrence of nightly pol-
lutions, (which I shall describe more fully under the head of sperma-
torrhoea), he is horror-struck at finding himself entangled in the net of
disease. His imagination heightens tenfold his real danger; and when
he finds that his strength daily decreases under this fatal drain, aud
that nothing he can do will arrest it, he at length resorts to medical
advice, overcome by shame at his confession, which he thinks will sound
dreadful to the medical ear. Did be but know how little the physician,
who has seen the worst that disease and rashness can do, thinks of judging
either his boyish folly or his complaint too seriously. Lucky is he
if his tale come to the kindly ear of a benevolent and skilful man, whose
object will be to bind up the wounds of his bleeding conscience, and cure
his malady, and not to the advertising and generally ignorant empiric,
who builds his fortunes on the sufferings of his fellow-beings.
It is a disgrace to medicine and mankind, that so important a class
of diseases, as those of the genital organs, have become the trade and
speculation of unscientific men, because forsooth they are looked upon
unfavourably by society, and even by some of our own profession. Until
this class of diseases receive due respect from all, and till no greater
blame attach to them, than to any other violation of natural laws and
consequent disease, so long shall we be disgusted by the degrading ad-
vertisements of “silent friends,” “cures for certain diseases," &c., in
reading which one’s breast glows with indignation and sorrow, or, if he
be a sufferer from these miserable diseases, sinks to the dust iu hum;-


liation. The very existence of these degrading advertisements shows
the erroneous mode in which the sexual organs and their diseases are
regarded; and it is not the empiric on whom the real blame for them
should rest, but the spurious delicacy which makes a mystery of all
these subjects, and thus inevitably consigns them to the destructive and
mercenary treatment of this body of men. Is not the misery entailed
by these complaints desolating enough, without the consciousness of the
reproaches or contempt of our fellows, instead of their heart-felt pity ?
What generous mind does not feel the beauty of M. Lallemand’s remark,
‘•lnstead of blaming these unfortunates, ought we not rather to pity,
and still more to relieve them?” Let us go yet a step further in the
path of the true physician, acknowledging it as our principle, ever
to reverence and love every human being, totally irrespective of his
actions; and in all cases not to seek to hate or reproach, far less to
despise any, but rather to love and benefit them to the utmost of our
power. There is no subject in which these beautiful principles of the
true physician are so lost sight of by the world, as in all sexual matters;
whoever offends against any law of the prevailing moral code, how-
ever little grounded on truth, or however much his errors may have
been owing, as in this matter of self-pollution, to the unnatural strict-
ness of the code itself, is visited by a shower of contempt, hatred, and
all evil passions: whenever any one ventures to dispute the moral code,
.society treats him worse than a dog; in short there is perhaps no subject
at present, the very mention of which rouses such a host of prejudices,
and so completely deprives a man of his usual moderation and common
sense, as the sexual one.
But such a state of things has lasted too long and cannot continue;
too many of us have deeply suffered, and keenly feel the degradation
caused to mankind by so scandalous a treatment of a subject so near
to its deepest interests ; and it would be desirable that those who en-
tertain truer and more rational views on sexual matters, should ener-
getically strive to introduce a better and happier state of things than
now exists. Times have changed since the so-called animal passions
endangered by their excesses the other parts of-man’a nature, when
the sympathies and exertions of the physicians of mankind were en-
listed on the side of the latter; at the present day, it is our sensual
part which is unduly repressed, and thus must philanthrophy change its
aspect. It is amazing, how little general philanthropy has yet done
for these sexual diseases, or indeed for any disease; and yet what spec-
tacle i< more deplorable, than the noble spirit of man wallowing in the
gulph of misery, into which these and the numberless other fleshly ills
plunge him! He who has known the depths of physical impotence
or agony, feels how slight in comparison seems to him all purely mental
suffering. I would not enlarge so much on these things, were it not
in this essay, my earnest purpose as much to prevent disease, as to
describe its nature and cure. And how shall disease be ■ prevented,
unless all of us become keenly alive to its infinite evil and misery, and
learn to sympathise as profoundly in physical as in moral suffering ?
Nothing has done more harm to medicine and to humanity, than the
low and grovelling ideas attached most irreverently to some na rts of the hu


man body, and especially to the organs of which I am treating, and the
excretory organs. Unhappy mortals, it pleases us to make a jest or a
mystery of these parts of our frame and their necessities. We would be
purely spiritual and soar above these bodily indecencies, and strive if we
can to forget them. But they will not be forgotten, and all our folly re-
turns on our own beads. If we do not reverence and study them, and
their laws, exactly as much as any other parts, our sufferings will surely
teach us our neglect. The one great remedy for this, is to make anatomy
and physiology as well known to all men and women, as any other
branch of necessary knowledge. Then will the mystery, shame, and dis-
gust, disappear before the most perfect, and in all its parts equally beautiful,
type of material organisation; and the mind, ever degraded by mystery
and ignorance, lose its morbid feelings in the clear light of truth. With-
out the hope that these changes will ere long be effected,.how could we
behold, without a feeling of despair, victim after victim perishing of the
same disease, through ignorance of its nature and cause ?
The disease before us—namely, self-pollution, is one of the most fatal
examples of this ignorance. Who is there to warn the youth against this
habit, and to instruct him in the laws of his sexual nature? Society
stands aloof with the air of offended purity; the subject is an interdicted
one, even to family confidence ; the youth is thus left to his own devices
in utter ignorance of the way to guide this new power, which, at that
time of life, sways, and was meant to sway the whole being, more absolutely
than almost any other feeling; and thus are thousands rained with-
out a hand being stretched out to save them.
The true and only preventive means for this most ruinous habit, is to
instruct youth in the laws of the genital organs, and to alter the strict-
ness of the moral code; of which subject I shall speak morefully hereafter.
As long as the present rigorous sexual code continues, so long will the
whole of our youth of both sexes be liable to this disease, along with the
other genital and venereal complaints. Masturbation is practised only
because the natural sexual intercourse cannot be attained, or because
its attainment is difficult and dangerous. Were it readily attainable
without the danger of disease and the degradation of illicit intercourse,
masturbation would rarely if ever be resorted to, and one of the most
fearful and prevalent causes of disease, moral and physical, eradi-
cated.
I now come to speak of the treatment of the evils arising from mas-
turbation. It is in vain to seek to cure such a patient, when once semi-
nal weakness has been established, without natural sexual exercise. In
this disease it is doubly requisite, not only to give a healthy exercise to
the enfeebled parts, but to prevent a morbid one; and we may be assured
that even in the most favourable cases, where the patient’s will is still
powerful, and the beauty of his character but little obscured, he will not
long be able to resist entirely, but unless a natural outlet be given for his
rsions, he will sooner or later recur in some degree to his former habi's-
is not enough that he be informed of the true physiological’remedy,
but the necessity and natural duty of it should be impressed upon him ;
as ho will otherwise most frequently be deterred from using it, e ther


by bashfulness, irresolution, or fear of contracting disease. There are
some physicians, who, convinced by M. Lalicmand’s eloquent demon-
stration of the necessity of this remedy in such a complaint, mention
it indeed to the patient, but in so careless and unimpressive a way
(as if they were ashamed of their advice, or made a jest of the matter.)
that the patient never adopts it; and indeed it is evident, that in the
existing sexual circumstances of our society, there must always exist con-
siderable obstacles to its adoption.
If there be much seminal weakness present, sexual intercourse should
at first be moderate, according to the universal law for the exercise of
weakened organs ; but afterwards, with progressing health, its frequency
may be increased. In this way, attending meanwhile to the general
health, by exercise, bathing &c., the symptoms of debility will gradually
dissappear. The gloomy hypochondria and mental confusion will rise, like
mist,'from the brain ; the sexual appetites and erections will become more
powerful; the involuntary seminal discharges cease; the patient will
regain his health, spirits, and self-confidence; his perverted imagination
will be corrected, and he will again begin to take pleasure in the beau-
tiful world, and in the society of mankind. There is no more interesting
mental phenomenon, than this gradual and steady progress from the
depth of gloom, to the healthy light of day, under means so simple and
natural. The cure, if the disease have gone far, may bo slow, and
almost imperceptible in its gradations, and from two or three mouths,
to a year, may be required. It is not to be expected in some eases, when
the constitution has suffered severely, that a restoration to health, as
perfect as before, will be obtained ; but whatever dregs of nervous weak-
ness may remain, the patient will still be inexpressibly thankful for the
blessed change.
There are many adjuncts to the treatment of this complaint; such as in
some very bad cases, cauterization of the urethra, the occasional passage of
a bougie to strengthen the canal, and other matters connected with diet
and regimen; but these I shall describe more fully under the head of
spermatorrhoea, and they are all subsidiary to the main part of the treat-
ment, sexual intercourse, to which they should be merely preparations
or accessories. I shall end the description of this disease with a case which
occurred under my own observation, and which is full of instruction on
many points.
A young man about fifteen years of age, of active, studious, and erotic
disposition, but of almost feminine bashfulness, as is so often the case in
this country, discovered by chance the practice of self-indulgence.
Delighted with this easy mode of satisfying his passions, which had for
a long time been the source of unrest and torment to his vivid ima-
gination, he indulged in it, being in the habit of exciting two or three
discharges daily, for the space of about a year. During this time ho was
studying at college, and with distinguished success. At the end of the
year he began to feel his health declining; lie grew rather weak, his
bowels became constipated, and involuntary discharges of semen began to
appear in the night, daring sleep. His excited imagination and ignorance
of bodily disease at once filled him with terror at these symptoms. He


read an article on Onanism in the Encyclopaedia, written by sum. ...
quatedhorror-monger, and of course applied all the extreme eflects m!'tins
disease to his own case. He, the favourite of fortune, loved and admired
by all, the centre of so much hope and promise, to bo threatened with an
abyss of wretchedness and degradation, where it seemed as if all the
world had a right to revile and despise him! Poor fellow, ihat glance
let him far down into the depths of human woe!
He was not so careless or ignorant, notwbhstanding all hi* shame, as
to let himself waste away, under this seminal drain, which none of ]n>
own endeavours had the least effect in checking, without seeking auvuv;
so he consulted, with tears of fear and shame, a medical friend, who
quieted him by telling him his complaint was a common one, trifling, and
easily curable; and in fact by applying some counter-irritant oint-
ment, and a coarse of tonic medicines, be did succeed in stopping the
discharges.
How different would his future fate have been, had the true phvsio-
logical remedy of .sexual intercourse been at that time applied! Then
would the matter have indeed been a trifle and rapidly cured. But the
physician merely prescribed for the elf ct, without seeking to remove
the cause; for in such a case to abstain from self-indulgence, even if
this can be effected, is not to remove the cause; but the organs weakened
by abstinence from normal sexual intercourse, injured by abuse, and
still more exhausted by the involuntary discharges, require to be gradu-
ally restored to vigour by regulated sexual exorcise.
In this case, the patient was so much terrified by his first warning,
and had besides so much firmness of moral character, that he at once gave
up the practice of self-pollution. For about a year and a half, he re-
mained in pretty good health, except that he was often troubled by con-
stipation, a very frequent symptom in seminal disease. At the end of
this period, while still at college, he began to perceive his health again
declining, but this time the symptoms were different. He became sen-
sible of a growing confusion of mind, and inability to fix his attention on
his studies. Having completely abandoned the practice of masturbation,
and there being no appearance of seminal discharges, (which had probab-
ly however been going on in the insidious form of diurnal ones, which will
be described hereafter) he could not discover the reason of this ; but his
medical friend, a man of first rate eminence, told him it was a determi-
nation of blood to the head, that he' should cut his hair close, sponge,
exercise &c. However the cause of his symptoms was soon indicated.
Involuntary seminal discharges soon began to appear in the night, and
inspired the unfortunate youth with all his former horror. Though it
was close upon the end of the session, and high honours awaited him, he
threw up all without the least hesitation, and devoted his whole energies
to the cure of his complaint. He applied to the same physician, who had
by this time heard of Lallemand’s great work, and, without reading it,
which would have shown him, how erroneous was the practice he adopted,
at once applied cauterization to the internal surface of the urethra. This
is a measure, which is advisable only in cases of extreme weakness, where
there is no prospect of checking the destructive discharges by milder
xi:al re.


neans, But in this case, the weakness was nut e’scesxivf*. the il scharges
vere seldom more than four or five in the week, (iltiumgn they pro-
jably accompanied by diurnal unconscious ones, which neither pu.’eiu nor
physician were aware of,) and the result of abstinence from sexual iu-
.ercourse, doubly injurious to the previously weakened o gaus. A due sex-
ual intercourse would here, beyond all doubt, have soon given new
trength to the organs, and health to the patient; and re?tored to the
ight of day, and to his sorrowing friends, a valuable life. But it was
.ot yet to be so, and a deeper lesson of sorrow was to be engraven on the
nmost heart of the youth.
The cauterization caused some pain and a retention of urine, for which,
iter trying baths &c., it was necessary to pass a catheter. The opera-
jon was repeated after a short interval, and this had the effect of stop-
ping the nocturnal discharges, and relieving the patient for awhile. Then
tried a long pedestrian tour, during the whole of which his health was
pretty good. But as soon as he came home, his remorseless persecutor
reappeared. The nocturnal discharges began, again and with them Lis
former grievances. The constipation became obstinate, and, as he had
the kind of superstitious fear, so common in this country, of having his
bowels unopened, even for a single day, he used a warm-water clyster
daily, for nearly a year. He applied again to the doctor, who, with per-
sistent ignorance, continued to apply from time to time the severe and
totally uuphilosophical remedy of cauterization, which always produced a
temporary, but never a permanent relief. Witoin the space or a year he
• tutorized the urethra seven or eight times, a praciice highly and ex-
ressly reprobated by M. Lalleraand.
The poor young man was, during all this time, in ihed3pths of wretched-
ess and degradation. He tried every kind of exercise, on horse and
>ot, in athletic sports and games, but nothing could give him any es-
mtial relief. At last the nocturnal emissions became rare, and grad-
ally ceased entirely; but instead of improving, he grew worse. This
ilusive occurrence is generally found in such cases, and is especially
oticed by AI. Lallemand.
He says that his patients often told him, that they had been worse,
. ince the cessation of the nocturnal discharges. In such cases they cease
rom the increased weakness of the organs, which now pour out the sem-
ual fluid by day, when the patient goes to stool or makes water, without
ny pleasurable sensation, or at most a slight titillation. When
liurnal pollutions are fairly established, the disease has proceeded
ar.
All his studies were now neglected, and his energetic spirit consumed
self in the gloomiest hypochondria. He resolved again to try travel,
id he found that by this means, and perfect abstinence from study, he
mid keep his disease in check, though his confusion of head remained the
ime. By these hygienic means, invaluable in the treatment especially
* chronic disease, his muscular developement remained good, and in out-
mi appearance he seemed in vigorous health ; a fact often observed by
.. Lallemaud, in patients, whose nervous system was shattered by the


disease in the worst manner, and who might even be reduced to the
verge of idiocy.
He now settled for a couple of years on the continent, and from the
change of scene and of associations, his spirits began to rise a little, and
the unhappy one ventured to fall in timid love. But his day dream was
soon ended. Unable long to abstain from study, he began to learn a
foreign language, and after applying to it cautiously for less than two
months, his health, unable to bear this slight burden, broke down worse
than ever. > His sleep became dreadfully disturbed, so that he feared to go
to bed. After sleeping for a couple of hours, he would wake from some
frightful dream, with a crushing oppression in his head and stomach, so
that he could scarcely turn on the pillow. After lying in a heavy leth-
argy for a short time, as if his whole body and especially his brain, were
turned into lead, he would again sink to sleep, to awake again after a
short interval with the same exhausted feelings aggravated; and thus
would the weary night go by, leaving him in the morning so prostrated
that he could hardly rise. A few nocturnal discharges appeared at this
time, but soon ceased. He became perfectly incapable of reading,
which had never before been the case. On attempting to read even one
page of a light book, he felt a crushing sensation in his head, and his
stomach began to work and ferment as he called it, and if he persisted,
this soon grew so oppressive, as to force him to stop.
He sank at once into the greatest despair and disgust at life, and also
at the object of his love. He girt up his loins for travel, which he found
to be the only thing that kept his foe at bay, and walked in solitary
moodiness for a couple of mouths, over adistance of about eight-hundred
miles. This gave him a little relief, and on his return home, his nights
were not quite so bad; but sti l he'live! in a sort of lethargy, unable to
open a book, and spent most of bis day lying on a bench in the open air,
weighed down by a stupor which he dare not indulge by going to sleep;
else, as he expressed it, he thought he could have slept on for months,
as he always felt more exhausted and lethargic on wakening than on
going to sleep. If he had an emission in the night, the next day would
be one of double gloom.
In this manner, with a life in the open air, and total abstinence from
books, he gradually slept away some of the worst symptoms. His nights
became pretty good, and his spirits and intellect began to recover a little,
though the total inability to read still continued. Like the flower that
ever anew opens itself to the sun, as soon as the bitterness of the wind
has abated, his mind at every intermission from its sufferings, struggled
to unfold itself to the warmth of lore and hope.
The fermentation of self-conciousness now began in his mind, as it.
does whenever we have time and peace to reflect, and analyze ourselves
and our position. His views began to widen, and his hopes to revive
partly under the influence of a new attachment he had formed; and, as
he became enthusiastic under the conciousness of increasing knowledge
of life and the dear-bought lessons of experience, his ardent mind turned
him towards the busy world, in the hope of being able to do some good to


others even with his impotent brain. Bat as soon as he began to direct his
mind to any pursuit, he perceived the helplessness of his state. He could
not dream of entering into any profession which required study, and for
any other he had at the time no inclination. Thus after several strug-
gling months, he sunk into a still deeper gloom, than any he had yet
experienced; he blamed himself for not having the courage to finish his
miserable life by suicide; his mind became half-addled by its physical
weakness, and by the wear and tear of his passions, so that he seemed to
himself ever on the verge of madness, and probably, had his constitution
not been naturally a very tough and strong one, he might haye become
so; unable to rest anywhere, he tried several physicians, and systems of
cure. Homoeopathy, to which he gave a short trial, had no effect, and
the water cure, with all its immense curative powers in chronic disease,
afforded but little benefit. He stayed at a hydropathic establishment for
two months, and gained considerably in muscular strength and weight,
but the cerebral impotence continued as before.
He now got hold of Lallemand’s work, which he contrived with diffi-
culty to peruse, and gained from it the knowledge of the true sexual re-
medy for his case. However, this only added to his wretchedness, for there
ensued a struggle between his knowledge of the means of cure, and his
morbid bashfiilness, in which the latter ever prevailed.
He went over to Paris for the purpose of consulting M. Lallemand,
who told him that by employing the physiological means, namely, sex-
ual intercourse, he would certainly recover. However bis insuperable
bashfulness, and powerless will, made it impossible for him to follow this
advice, though convinced of its necessity. He returned to this country,
and another year passed by in the same impotent and hypochondriacal
state; his mind tortured by a divided and paralysed will, and restlessness
and irritability making him a burden to himself, and a sorrow and mys-
tery to his friends. He was then advised to try change of climate by
some of the English physicians, (not one of whom, though acquainted
with'his past history, knew, or would recommend, what was necessary
in his case,) and he set off for a long tour in the south of Europe. On
his way however, he passed through Paris, and again consulted M. Lal-
lemand, who was surprised that his previous advice had not been followed.
M. Lallemand, as he always does, demanded a written account of his
case, and having read it, said, that all that he should advise, was, duly
regulated sexual intercourse, and washing the genital organs every morn-
ing with cold water. By such means, health would gradually he restored,
though it would probably require about six months to complete the
cure. This time, these necessary means were at length adopted. Coi-
tion was at first permitted only once a week, and nothing that could have
an exciting effect on the organs, such as being in female society, which
called forth the venereal desires, taking spiced dishes &c., was allowed in
the interim. A bougie was also introduced to strengthen and tonify the
organ, when it was found, that there was a stricture of the urethra, pro-
duced by the previous cauterization. Dilatation of this, became of course
a prominent part of the treatment; for stricture is itself one of the most
dangerous causes of seminal losses, and had doubtless in this case greatly


aggravated the disease ; and in two months the patient began to feei a
slight improvement in his symptoms, and to entertain new hopes. How-
ever, he now contracted a gonorrhma to his excessive chagrin. In the
course of it he had bubo, and swelled testicle, the pain and tedium of
which, besides the complete arrest of his treatment, brought him of course
back to his former despair; for in a long chronic disease, after years of
hopelessness and constant relapses and disappointments, far slighter evils
are sufficient to prostrate the patient’s fortitude.
The gonorrhoea lasted for six miserable months, in spite of all sorts of
treatment, but was at last cured. After its stoppage, the treatment of
the stricture, and the regular sexual intercourse, both of which had been
of course entirely arrested, were renewed; and the stricture being by a
treatment of two months, sufficiently dilated, health began gradually to
return. He began almost imperceptibly, to recover the power i f reading,
and his nervous tone, physical and moral. Gradually, the gloom, which
had so long brooded over his mind, was dispelled, and after about seven
years of as great misery and impotence, as often falls to the lot of youth
to endure, he began again to waken to life. Since then, his eonvalesence
has progressed steadily, under the constant use of the natural means of
health, and he has been able to enter on a profession, and to study with
energy and vigour, though his mind has by no means its first elasticity,
which could not be expected, after such long illness.
However, though his health will probably ever remain somewhat deli-
cate, compared with those whose constitutions have not received sm h
rude shocks, and though a strictly hygienic life is more evidently neces-
sary for him, than for the more robust, yet has he cause for inexpressible
thankfulness for the blessed change in his state, and to the hand that
saved him.
In reading the above history, which gives so imperfect a sketch of the
years of real suffering, that clouded the brightest days of a young and
ardent spirit of no ordinary energies, let us regard it, not as a mere in-
dividual case, but as a type of a whole class, and involving most of the
moral questions on sexual subjects, whose true solution is of such immense
importance. Who was the true and good physician, the saviour of this
youth ? It was he, who, undisturbed in his dear perception of natural
truth and duty by world-wide prejudices, could give him the invaluable
results of his years of patient enquiry on the subject, and thus with the
certainty of demonstration enable him to escape from his abyss of misery
to the world of hope and joy. The ignorant physicians on the contrary,
were they, who, influenced by the common moral prejudices on these
matters, left the door to bis recovery for ever barred against him; and,
had there not been truer views, and a braver and more scientific_man to
apply them, would have permitted the unhappy sufferer to drag ion his
miserable life, and probably in a few years to have sunk into idiocy or
hopeless hypochondria, a horror to himself and a cause of the deepest
affliction to his friends and relatives. These things are true, and no
fiction, and the world must before long admit them. The subject of love
cannot, more than others, bear the supernatural mode of reasoning. In
it, as in all others the world is escaping at the present day, from the


assumptions and dogmas of the supernatural, to the clear and demon-
strable region of nature; and it is only by examining every individual
ease, as it occurs in nature, that we shall attain to true views on the
subject.
Would that all mankind could learn to consider of infinite importance
the fate of every single individual! We do not live, joy, and suffer for
ourselves alone, but every one of ns is a type of the whole of humanity,
sad it we could understand all the wants and requirements of his being,
we would understand those of all mankind. We are too ready to sacri-
fice the interests of the individual, for what is falsely called the general
pod. No good can be general, which does not include the good of every
being in the universe. The real interests of each individual will in-
tariably be found, if we search deeply and patiently enough, to be inse-
parably bound up with those of all mankind.
The true physician cannot bear the very name of sacrifice. If we begin
by sacrificing the interests of any individual, which of us is safe 1 Are
we not all individuals, and essentially implicated in every question
which involves the rights or duties of any human being ? Every single
case of disease is of infinite importance to one individual, namely, to the
sufferer, but of no less real importance to us, as also individuals, liable
ourselves, or our children, and friends, to the same evils ; and world-wide
theories must fall, if they unrighteously stand in the way of his cure.


SPERMATORRHŒA
OR,
INVOLUNTARY SEMINAL DISCHARGES.
Havino now treated of some of the chief canses of this disease, I shall
proceed to give a fuller description of its nature and symptoms. Until
the researches of M. Lallemand, although recognised, it was very little
understood, haring been involved previously in the mystery and ignorance
which brooded over all sexual subjects, and which even to a greater de-
gree obscured the diseases of the female genital organs, as we shall see
hereafter. It was whilst observing diseases of the brain, that M. Lalle-
mand was first led to suspect, and examine into, the effects of seminal
disease on the male system. Having once got hold of the clue, he followed it
with the most admirable steadiness and sagacity, and after twenty years
labour, he laid bare to the world, in his work on “involuntary seminal
discharges,” published only some few years ago, a host of the most im-
portant and original facts, exemplified by the histories of cases written
by the patients themselves ; which throws over the whole work the sad
and living interest that subjective descriptions alone can give. His dis-
coveries are in their originality and importance comparable with those of
any other medical benefactor of his race, but are yet comparatively little
known, or at least openly admitted and approved by our profession in
this country ; for this chief reason, that, shaking as they do the very
foundations of the theoretical morality between the sexes, they are opposed
by a host of prejudices.
Unhappy is it at all times when we have to do with supernatural pre-
judices, the most difficult of all to overcome; trebly unhappy is it, when
they stand between a miserable sufferer and his rescue from what is almost
worse than death. Had they, who would rigorously enforce abstinence or
chastity, on him who is wasting from the surface of the earth from its
effects, but a glimpse into his real hell of misery, they would pause, and
at any rate wipe their hands of so dangerous and responsible a matter, as
interfering with those who can and will rescue him. Men will not now-
a-days submit to be made auto-da-fea of, for the edification of their zea-
lous neighbours.
The venereal and genital complaints would be the most painful of all,
were it only for the painful feelings which they almost invariably rouse
in the breasts of those, who have suffered much from them. While in


(ther complaints, the public sympathy is at least with the sufferers, and
ill efforts that love and skill can devise, are made for their relief, in these
diseases, and these only, quite the reverse is the case. So far from pity-
ing and relieving, the public do all they can, however little they know
what they are doing, and how sinful their feelings are, further to degrade
and desolate the unfortunate sufferer, and throw every obstacle in the way
of his recovery. Therefore, there is no class of diseases, which is charac-
terised by such irritability and bitterness of feeling in the abused victims,
none which so spoils the moral character, however noble it may be.
Oh! that we may yet live to see these most ruinous and unhappy feel-
ings disappear from the human breast; that the sexual diseases, perhaps
the most important and widely spread of all at present, may be, like the
rest, included in the true brotherly love and sympathy of all of us; and
that every thing may be done to promote their cure, and to banish them
as far as possible from the world, which they have too long desolated!
By spermatorrhoea, or involuntary seminal discharges, is meant the
loss of seminal fluid without the will of the patient, which, when it occurs
frequently, constitutes, as we have seen, a most dreadful disease. These
discharges may be divided into the nocturnal and the diurnal. In the
nocturnal ones, the patient has generally a dream on some venereal sub-
ject, an erection of the penis, and a discharge of semen, and wakes just
as the discharge is taking place. This form of the nocturnal emissions,
which may occur in the strongest men, and is generally attendant on
the period of puberty, is the least injurious, as it contains all the elements
of the venereal orga except that, Ixion-like, the dreamer embraces a
cloud.
Many persons, who live a life of abstinence, have such emissions, at shorter
or longer intervals, for years, and yet remain tolerably strong and vigorous.
However, they are always suspicious, and prove, even when they do not
reduce the strength, that the genital organs are ready for, and in want
of due exercise, just like the feeling of muscular irritability which we have
when we take no exercise. All such warnings, if long disregarded, are
apt to be followed by enfeeblement and disease. When this does take
place, the emissions increase in frequency, and the patient begins to feel
his health declining. The emissions may now take place nightly, or even
three or four times in the night in bad cases, and this soon brings on a state
of great exhaustion. The proportion in which nocturnal emissions weaken
the strength in any one, must determine how far they constitute a dis-
ease. Sometimes, when few, they are of little consequence; at other
thues, if frequent, they bring on the greatest prostration and melancholy.
’ As the disease progresses, discharges take place without a venereal
dream or erection. The patient wakes suddenly from a stupor, just as
the discharge is pouring out, which he will try in vain to check; or, per-
haps, he does not wake till after it is over, and then, as a lethargic con-
sciousness, which of itself tells him what has taken place, slowly awakens,
ho puts down his hand and sickens with despair, as he perceives the
fatal drain, and thinks on the gloomy morrow, which will follow
As the disease advances still further, the organs lose their natural
powers of pouring forth a large quantity involuntarily at one time. The


semen becomes thinner, and deteriorated in quality; and as fast as it
forms, it drains off, whenever any exertion is made ; as at stool, in going
into a cold bath, in making water, or even in thinking on a venereal sub-
ject. These constitute the diurnal involuntary discharges, which an
always a sign of a worse form of the disease, and greater weakness.
When the patient goes to stool, he will observe, that after he has ex-
pelled the contents of his bladder, a few drops of a thick viscid whitish-
looking fluid, like the mucus from the nose, follows, and if he has to ust
much exertion, as for instance, to overcome constipation, more of this
will appear, with a sensation of slight venereal titillation; and, at last,
though rarely, even an erection and a full discharge may be produced;
the semen may also, though more rarely, appear before the stream oi
urine. If this fluid be examined, under a microscope, it will be found to
be semen from the presence of the spermotazooids. In the urine, if se-
men be discharged also in making water, it floats about like a cloud, and
can be recognised by the same test. This mode of recognising the disease
by the microscope is a very valuable one, and reveals frequently the cause
of the most obscure symptoms. It is to be observed, that a cloud is very
often present in urine, which contains no semen.
When spermatorrhoea has existed long, the semen sometimes becomes
much deteriorated in quality, so as to be incapable of serving for impreg-
nat on. The spermatozooids in these cases are sometimes scarcely
to be recognised, and do not appear to have their normal develope-
ment.
As soon as the nocturnal emissions have become so numerous, that
the patient's constitution cannot support the drain, the powers begin to
break down. The one prevailing feature in all the symptoms caused by
seminal losses, is weakening of the nervous system. There is perhaps, no
chronic disease, not having its seat in the brain itself, in which this part
becomes so enfeebled. The signs of nervous exhaustion are at first slight;
a feeling of weakness on rising in the morning, especially after a noc-
turnal emission, and still more after two or three in the same night; a
sort of mistiness or haze in the thoughts, and dimness in the sight, while
the eye loses its lustre; enfeeblement of muscular power, with irritability
of its fibre, often shown by palpitation of the heart, (so constant an at-
tendant on nervous exhaustion,) which has caused in many cases,
groundless fear of organic heart disease ; indigestion and constipation,
from insufficient nervous tone; and wasting of the frame more or less.
In different patients, different parts are chiefly affected. Thus one ( who
has probably not studied hard, and in whom the brain is not the vul-
nerable part,) will not complain so much of his head, but rather of in-
digestion, emaciation, and muscular debility; whilst others retain the
appearance of blooming health, whose mind may be greatly en-
feebled.
However on the whole, there is a great and striking similarity in the
symptoms of all affected with the disease ; which will enable him who has
well studied, readily to recognise it, and will afford to every intelligent
patient, in the interesting histories contained in M. Lallemand’s worki
a transcript of his own sensations.


As the disease advances, all the symptoms become aggravated. The
patient gradually and slowly sinks into the greatest emaciation and
weakness, if unrelieved ; be becomes impotent, i. e. cannot have sexual
connection, for the weakened brain can no longer call up an erection in
the no less weakened genital organs ; or if sexual connection be effected,
theemissiou comes almost immediately, and with little enjoyment. Along
with this, there is often at one time a disgust at, and at another a morbid
lashfulness in the presence of women. The mind may be variously affected,
according to his disposition; he may become savage and repulsive, so as to
avoid the society of his friends, and feel hatred and disgust at mankind;
or gloomily despairing, hypochondriacal, and timid; the intellect gradually
loses its clearness and elasticity, and ceases to obey the powerless will,
which may seek in vain to bend it to attentive thought, and this may
proceed even to insanity or idiocy, in the worst cases; but though these
extreme results have taken place, let us hope that, as the disease and its
care become better known, it will rarely again be allowed to proceed so
fir. For it is one which advances slowly, so that many years would be
required in general to bring a man to this state ; and its treatment, if
judicious, is in most cases very effective; unlike many other, far more
intractable, though not so miserable, diseases.
It is one of the most grievous diseases of humanity, but one in which an
immensity might be done, which is not done, for its prevention and cure.
Would we could say as much for all diseases! When we think of cancer,
organic heart disease, &c., of the first of which the causes are almost
unknown, while we often see the second produced in a day under our eye
in rheumatic fever, to cause years of insupportable anguish—states hard of
prevention and incapable of cure—how does the thought of all the
miseries that poor humanity is exposed to, awake our pity! Give us but
a glimpse into the nature and cause of a disease, and shall we not more
heaven and earth to prevent it!
Spermatorrhoea is not likely to cause structural disease in the chief vi
tal organs, contrary to what has been thought. Many a patient and
physician have been deceived in believing that the functional diseases of
the head, heart, stomach, &c., produced by seminal weakness, proceeded
from an organic affection of these parts themselves. Many have con-
sulted M. Lallemand, believing themselves to be labouring under such
diseases, or consumptive, in whom the emaciation and weakness pro-
ceeded from the far more manageable spermatorrhoea. In particular,
very many of that class, to whom the name of hypochondriacs has been
given, as an excuse for our ignorance of their malady, and its cure,
nave been discovered to be affected with this disease, in which hypo-
chondria, or a gloomy state of mind, is perhaps the most constant symp-
tom.
In male animals, such as the bull, dog, &c., in whom this disease has
been observed, the very same effects, moral and physical, have been found,
as in man. The animal became solitary, gloomy, and unwilling to be
disturbed; retired from his fellows, and gradually grew weak, emaciated,
and at last sank exhausted.
As for the termination of the disease ; if left to itself, it has a constant


tendency to increase. The patient may after years of suffering, sink into
the lowest stage of weakness, and die. M. Lallemand describes tout
cases, in which death was caused by a kind of apoplexy, characteristic
of this disease, and induced by the exhausted state of the brain. The dis.
ease has in many cases proceeded to insanity, and idiocy; in one case,
which was cured by treatment, the patient had lost the knowledge of his
friends, and the power of speech." From this extreme, there are of course
infinite gradations, up to perfect soundness of intellect. M. Lallemand
makes many observations, full of interest, on some of the distinguished
men of past times, whom he suspects to have been affected by this disease;
and as far as we can judge of them by their own description of their symp.
toms, his suspicions seem well founded. From the description of his ill-
health which Eousseau gives in his confessions, and of the sufferings,
which brought on his death, having previously reduced him to a state
almost of madness, Lallemand judges him to have laboured under sperma-
torrhoea, which produced many of the extraordinary moral and intellect-
ual effects, depicted by that unfortunate man with such matchless vivid-
ness, To the eye of Lord Brougham, Rousseau is a man of rare, but
narrow genius, full of vice and crime; while, to the penetrating gaze of
the truer philosopher, he is a sad, and infinitely instructive instance of a
most noble mind, struggling under the inevitable ruin of a secret bodily
disease. Ido trust, that this will be the last century, when any one
will believe himself qualified to judge of man, a physico-psychical
being, while in utter ignorance of his material part, and its workings.
Are the laws and diseases of the body a less important part in man’s
history, than every sophistical idea, proceeding from the countless theory-
spinning brains, that have left their webs in the lumber-room of moral
and metaphysical speculations ?
Pascal, he also suspects to have had the disease, and probably so had
Sir Isaac Newton, who is said to have lived a life of strict sexual absti-
nence, which produced before death a total atrophy of the testicles,
showing the natural sin which had been committed. It is certain that
his matchless intellect declined after middle age, and it is even said, I
know not with what truth, that he almost lost his mind late in life. It
is a disease, whose progress is greatly favoured by study ; and as no
human brain can withstand it, we may well believe that very many eases
of premature mental decay have been owing to it. No man is safe from
a greater or less degree of seminal weakness, who does not exercise his
genital organs, or reproductive part, as duly as the brain, stomach, or
any other organ.
The appearances found after death, in patients labouring under this
disease, complete the chain of inductive reasoning. M. Lallemand found
in many cases, the ejaculatory canals widened, and their orifices inflamed;
the testicles generally much softer than natural, and some other signs
showing the diseased state of the genital organs.
I have already described several of the principal causes of the disease,
in speaking of the disuse, overuse, and abuse of the genital organs.
Jt. Lallemand met with several instances of the disease, among Roman
Catholic priests, who rigidly adhered to their vows of celibacy, (one of the


most flagrant instances of the ignorance of, and disregard for, bodily
aws) ; many among young men, who had brought it on by masturbation
it school, and elsewhere; many among old debauchees, exhausted by ex-
jesses and venereal complaints. Other causes of it are found in anything
which weakens or irritates the genital organs. Thus a very common and
most important cause is a gonorrhoea, especially if it have lasted for a
long time.
In this case, the inflammation gradually extends down the canal, till
it reaches that portion where the ejaculatory ducts empty themselves,
and thus often gives rise to most obstinate spermatorrhoea. A stricture
in the urethra is also a very common cause. The urine arrested behind
the obstruction, distends the canal, and enters into the ejaculatory ducts,
which become widened, and thus may great seminal weakness be brought
on. The debility and hypochondria, which often forms so marked a
characteristic of strictnred patients, is in most cases attributable to the
loss of semen. Another cause—(which operated in one of the most in-
teresting of M. Lallemand’s cases, written by the patient himself, and
giving the most graphic and affecting picture of ms unaided fruitless
struggles with his terrible foe,) is the existence of ascarides, a species of
small worm, in the adjacent intestine. The constant irritation caused
by their neighbourhood occasioned the discharges.
The immoderate use of tobacco, and of malt or spirituous liquors, has
also a very weakening effect on the genitals, and predisposes to disease.
They also aggravate the nervous symptoms in those affected with the
disease, and should be entirely abstained from. When the nervous system
loses its tone, from any debilitating cause, such as seminal weakness, it
cannot bear the least irregularity. It is a distressing feature in the com-
plaint, that the patient cannot indulge in any snch sensual gratification,
without injuring himself; slight irregularities, which would not be felt
by one in health, cause dreadful jarring in his shattered nerves.
Other predisposing causes, which render a man more liable to the
disease, and the disease itself, if once established, more difficult to cure,
are, naturally weak and imperfect genital ogans, which in some
tare cases do not develope themselves at puberty, but continue
through life in the rudimentary state; a long foreskin, or a con-
genital phymosis, (which consists in the inability to draw back the foreskin
over the glans,) in which case, unless great attention bepaid to cleanliness,
the sebaceous matter collects round the base of the glans, becomes acrid,
and causes irritation. In many of M. Lallemand's cases there was a
long foreskin, large urethral orifice, flabby and soft testicles and scrotum,
flth a feeble growth of hair. Where the length of the prepuce favours
irritation, he practises circumcision.
He gives also one or two cases, in which seminal discharges habitually
took place backwards into the bladder, instead of forwards, and in which
the patients sank gradually into the impotent and exhausted state. This
was caused, by their having been in the practice of checking the discharge
when about to come, by compressing the urethra, in order to prevent
impregnation; a most dangerous habit. Anything at all abnormal in the
venereal act, such as dallying with it too long, or any other effeminating
practice is very weakening to the organs and the nervous system.


Let us not imagine that this disease is of rare occurrence; the extreme
effects are indeed not so common, perhaps, as those of some other diseases;
but from its peculiar nature, the ignorance of the laws of the genital
organs among men and women, and the great difficulties which oppose
the natural healthy exercise of the sexual organs, there are probably
few men, who hare not suffered more or less in their health, moral and
physical, from sexual derangement.
Never do we see that ignorance and mystery do not lead to disease and
misery; and can we suppose, that so vitally important a subject as the
human body generally, and the sexual organs, of which we are more par-
ticularly speaking, can remain unknown, and their laws unstudied,
without the most grievous consequences ? One great reason, why men do
not take a more vivid interest in, and do not more reverently study
bodily laws, is that their rewards and punishments are bid from them: all
insight into disease is confined to the physicians, and thus the valuable
lesson is lost to the public. For we learn reverence and respect for laws,
just in proportion as we are brought into close relation with them, and
have the opportunity of seeing how their observance and neglect affect
us, or our neighbours. Thus, until all men are called upon to witness,
make themselves acquainted with, and pass judgment upon the various
states of physical health and disease, no less than on the moral ones, they
will never take a due interest in the study and observance of the phy-
sical laws.
With regard to the cure of spermatorrhoea, from what has already been
said, it will be seen, that the great object is to bring the genital organs
into such a state, that they shall be able to enjoy and profit by suffi-
cient and normal exercise. To arrest the spermatorrhoea, and then leave
the organs to be again enfeebled from disit se, is as profitless, as to cure
a broken leg, and allow the patient to remain ever after on the sofa.
The indications for treatment in every case of seminal weakness, are, as
in all other diseases, first to remove the cause of the complaint, secondly,
to remedy the effects, and thirdly, to restore the constitution as far as
possible to its original strength, by enforcing attention to physiological
laws, whose infringement has caused the disease. Thus, if on examination
we find a stricture, it must be, if possible, dilated ; if ascarides, they must
be dislodged. If the patient trace his ill health to a former gonorrhoea,
the urethra should be explored by a bougie, and if the irritability be ap-
parently caused by chronic iraflaramation of the mucous membrane over
the ejaculatory ducts, M. Lalleraand recommends the application of the
armed bougie. This instrument, intended to cauterize the internal sur-
face of the urethra, consists of a metallic bougie, through which a
stilet is passed, containing at its end the caustic nitrate of silver, with
which he slightly touches the tender part of the urethra, on which the
irritability seems to depend. To this application, M. Lallemand, who was
the first to introduce it, ascribes very great virtues in many intractable
tases; and it certainly possesses wonderful powers in checking spermatorr-
hoea. However it should be used only in bad cases, or in those arising
from gonorrhoeal imflammation, when sexual connection, and hygienic
means are incompetent to check the discharges; it should he applied very
slightly, and in no case more than twice. We have seen above its rash


application produce stricture, (not an uncommon occurrence), a disease
often more difficult to cure than the spermatorrhoea itself. Dr. Dawson,
a pupil of M. Lallemand, has introduced another application, which ne
believes from long experience to possess many advantages over the nitrate
of silver. He uses an ointment, composed of iodine and the chloride of
zinc, which he applies directly to the surface of the prostate gland, by
means of a bougie passed along the urethra. The advantages of this pre-
paration are, that the application does not give the‘least pain, (while
cauterization by the nitrate of silver is somewhat painful), and does not
hinder the patient from going about as usual. It also produces a more
satisfactory and lasting cure, by removing inflammation, and any swelling
of the prostate gland, which may exist; and this swelling of the gland is,
according to Dr. Dawson, very frequently present in bad spermatorrhoea.
With regard to the natural remedy of sexual intercourse,' it is of great
consequence that it be duly followed. We must remember that the
organs are in a very feeble state, and hence that an immoderate exercise
at first, might have an effect directly contrary to our desires. Hence
coition should at first be very moderate; once a week, or so; and should
be gradually increased with the waxing powers. The signs of its favor-
able action are, an increase of tone both of mind and body, improved appe-
tite, spirits, and self-confidence. The patient should not be much in the
company of women at other times, if they excite venereal desires, which
are not to be gratified. He should live in the open air, take enough of
exercise, but not too much, which might weaken him and cause a seminal
discharge.
Medicines will be found generally not only of little use, but of positive
injury. Here, as in so many other complaints, they are often used as an
excuse for doing nothing, and tend to take off the attention of the patient
and physician from the one grand and really efficient remedy. Purgative
medicines are almost always ill-boj-ne in this disease, but a clyster of
warm or cold water should be used frequently, if there be constipation,
which has a very bad effect in promoting the diurnal discharges, by the
exertions it causes at stool.
Wine, beer, vinegar, &c., are also bad, and should be avoided, espe-
cially it there be a stricture, when they should never be indulgedin. Very
great care must be taken that the patient in the progress of the treatment
do not contract a venereal disease. In him it is ten-fold to be dreaded,
for it arrests his cure, greatly complicates his case, and is dreadfully dis-
heartening tu one who has suffered so long. This risk is often made an
objection to the sexual mode of treatment, but it is one which does not
call in question its scientific truth, but merely its practical advisability.
Of course the patient should be most earnestly cautioned against this
danger; and unless a reliable connection can be obtained by him, which
is unfortunately too rarely the case, he should sedulously use the pre-
ventive means 1 shall speak of under the head of venereal diseases.
Still, even though such a disease be contracted, it will not often stand
much in the way of a scientific treatment, which will ultimately conduct
the patient to health.
The introduction of an elastic bougie, once every week or fortnight,


to give tone to the canal, is highly recommended by M. Lallemand ; and
even when this is not employed, the passage should always in this dis-
ease be explored by a bougie, which gives hardly any pain, to ascertain
whether there be stricture, or unusual tenderness at any part.
He also recommends mineral baths in many cases, and 1 should advise
much more strenuously the water cure, (though of course only as an ac-
cessory to the sexual treatment,) as by far the most concentrated and
systematic hygienic treatment hitherto introduced. Were I to express,
how much 1 admire and what results I hope for, from this immense
addition to therapeutics, the praise might seem extravagant; though not
to those, who know the paramount importance of the physiological or
natural conditions of health, so ably explained in the works of Dr. An-
drew Combe, Liebig, and many others.
It may seem strange, that men well conversant with the natural
laws of health, should not admit, how admirably in most respects
the hydropathic system, when skilfully applied, carries out these
principles; being, as it were, the concentrated essence of the ordinary
and natural means of health, upon which it is of such infinite importance
that the minds of all of us, both in health and disease, should be fixed.
How can those, who should know better, talk of this system, one of the
greatest marks of the age’s advancement, as in the same category with
homoeopathy; from which it differs utterly, except in the single respect
that its claims have been too arrogantly and exclusively asserted, as is
always the case with new doctrines, which have to establish a position for
themselves in our esteem ? As for homoeopathy, it is quite different
from our natural experiences of the influences, which produce health and
disease; and as such, —(although it should not, now-a-days that it has so
large a body of followers, be treated with neglect, but rather patiently
investigated, and disproved, if found false,) it lies far from the beliefs and
conceptions of the most of ns. But the water cure is systematised com-
mon sense; exercise for weak and lazy muscles, pure country air for
pining lungs; powerful, regular, and invigorating baths for skins, all
their lives suffering from hydrophobia; cold water and plain food, for
blood pampered by wine, and spiced dishes; may not these, which go to
the very root of so many of the diseases of man, be expected to do more
good in general, than courses of double-edged medicines, so often pre-
scribed for effects, while the causes remain unremoved 1 If any one read
the works of some of our best physicians, as Holland, Forbes, Andrew
Combe, and many others, he will see how much an essentially hydropathic
treatment enters into the most scientific medicine of the day, and be
prepared for the desirable adoption of some of the most valuable- hydro-
pathic remedies, such as the wet sheet, (a cold water bandage, extended
to the whole body), the douche, and vapour bath; and ultimately, (and at a
period, it is to be hoped, not far distant,) —for the union and incorporation
in one, of the two systems, without which hydropathy can exercise
comparatively a slight influence on the health of society. At present
however, it is rather homoeopathy and hydropathy, from their both being
classed and run down together, that seem inclined to make common cause.
To prevent this disease, like every other—a subject, whose vast im


portance is as yet only dimly conceived—we must seek to remove all the
causes of it. Some of these consist in other diseases, as for instance,
gonorrhoea, a most important cause, which by producing stricture or
chronic inflammation of the mucous membrane, is the ultimate origin of
the spermatorrhoea.
The modes of preventing disuse, overuse, and abuse, of the genital
organs, have been shortly considered above; and consist chiefly, as does
the prevention of all diseases, in universally diffusing among all human
beings, men and women, a knowledge of the laws and structure of the
body, and of all its organs, and in affording them the power of obeying
these laws. There is no other possible prevention of disease, than
knowledge of the laws of health and the history of disease, and rever-
ence for them, as universally spread as any branch of human knowledge
may be.
In taking leave of this part of my subject, I must beg the reader, if he
wish to obtain a further knowledge of it, and an insight into a field of
moral and physical experiences, teeming with novelty and importance,
that he read M. Lallemand’s great work on involuntary seminal
discharges, of which so imperfect an idea has been given in this
essay.


VENEREAL DISEASES.
I now come to a class of diseases, much better known and almost
more widely spread, than the true genital diseases, which I have been
describing; nay, it may be said, than any other disease. For there is
scarcely a corner of the globe in which they are not to be found, and
they knot and gender most of all in the very heart of our civilization.
Like the poison in the cup, they embitter all youthful love, and breed
suspicion, hatred, and despair, among young and trusting minds. Like
the dragon of the gardens of old, they bar the gate often of very sal-
vation upon youth. Not only are the poor, wretched, friendless daughters
of pleasure their victims, but the respected wife and hapless child are
thus often rotted from the surface of the earth. They fall alike on the
inexperienced and the most dissipated ; and, like the old laws, have as
severe a punishment for a first transgression, as for the old offender.
And who dares, in the present day of morbid morality, to take up the
cause of these neglected nay, often despised and abhorred victims, and con-
tend with adequate energy again.-1 the ravager, that spreads corruption
from the lowest to the highest ranks of society, so that there is scarcely a
family, scarcely a constitution, untainted by it! No one among the
fair-weather moralists will approach the subject, or if they do, it is
only to make corruption and degradation ten-fold more overwhelming
to the unfortunate sufferers. Nothing is done by society at large, no-
thing by any philanthropic individual heart, to try in the least to pre-
vent this hideous evil; and thus is an incalculable amount of misery
permitted to continue among us. Even for the very reason that others
neglect, laugh at, or reproach the victims of these sexual diseases,
especially when they are poor and friendless, and the voice of their
bitter woe is dumb, should they claim double reverence and sympathy
from every generous breast. Oh, ye poor ones! shall I not respect your
desolation and shame, when the Levite passes by on the other side 1
An immensity could be done to check these diseases, and great and
laudable hare been the efforts made in France to this end; although
never, in any part of the world, have adequate means been taken to pre-
vent any disease, nor will there be, till all men become deeply impressed


with the importance and sacred duty of this endeavour. There is scarcely
any disease which does the same degree of mischief, physically and
morally, to mankind. Can any of us still believe that physical evil can
exist without necessarily causing moral degradation ?
By putting a check upon these diseases, the axe would be laid to the
very root of a great many of the most fearful evils that infest mankind,
and of which they are the fountain-head. Scrofula, consumption, in-
sanity, mercurial poisoning, stricture, and an innumerable host of other
ills, may often be traced to this source. Does it not then become our
sacred duty to arrest and nip in the bud these miseries ? Let none of us,
whether men or women, say, “ It belongs not to me to attempt to remedy
these evils, nor to meddle with such a subject.” The commandments to
love and to know, to benefit not ourselves only but all others, lie equally
on all; and the generous heart is urged to advance the good, and repress
the evil, on all subjects alike, which come within its comprehension.
The venereal diseases are divided into two great classes; the virulent,
and the non-virulent. The first class consists of syphilis, the second of
gonorrhoea and its modifications.
The non-virulent diseases, which I shall first describe, are those which
are merely local, and do not in their progress contaminate the general
system. Their effects are, therefore, for the most part, not so lamentable,
as those of the virulent affections. The non-virulent diseases consist in
an inflammation of the mucous membrane, which lines the glans and the
urinary canal of the penis, excited by the contact of irritating matter
deposited during sexual intercourse. This irritating matter is, in the
immense majority of cases, the product of a venereal disease in the
female, although in some few instances, it may arise from a
leucorrhcea, or white discharge, to which women are very subject (a
simple inflammation of the vagina, not arising from any infectious
source). Therefore, it must not be concluded, that a woman from whom
a gonorrhoea is contracted, is necessarily labouring under a venereal dis-
ease ; though this is the case in the vast majority of instances.
According to the different part of the mucous membrane of the penis,
which is affected, the disease has received different names. Thus when
the smooth surface of the glans, with the opposite surface of the foreskin,
is inflamed, the complaint is called balanitis, (the termination, itis, always
means inflammation of, and is applied to every organ in the body) or
external gonorrhoea. When the interior of the urethra is affected, it is
called simply gonorrhoea, (commonly styled clap,) which is much the
more common disease.


BALANITIS.
The most frequent cause of this disease is the contact of gonorrhoeal
matter in sexual intercourse. It may also, though very rarely, be caused
by the monthly discharge in the female, or by the whites; and it is fre-
quently found in boys, who allow the secretion of the sebaceous glands
to accumulate under the foreskin, and become acrid. It is a disease,
which depends on the presence of the foreskin, and is never found in those
who have been circumcised; and therefore it might in every case be pre-
vented, by washing the glaus well, after any sexual connection, where
there is a possibility of contagion; a precaution which should never be
neglected.
Balanitis, or inflammation of the glans, begins with slight itching,
which is soon followed by heat and swelling of the part, and by a more
or less purulent discharge from beneath the foreskin; which swells also,
sometimes to a great degree, so that it cannot be drawn back over the glans.
This disease is generally readily curable, especially if taken in time, and
it seldom becomes chronic; but in some cases, where circumstances, such
as a dissipated mode of life, and allowing the inflammation to run on from
neglect, combine to exasperate it, the consequences may be very serious.
Mortification of the prepuce may result from the intensity of the inflam-
mation, and the strangulation of its blood-vessels by the swelling; and
proceed, if not checked, to the destruction of the whole penis.
Balanitis is a complaint easily recognised, but it is often difficult to tell
whether it be complicated by the virulent affection of chancre or syphilis.
A chancre may exist under the foreskin at the same time as the running
from the glans; and it cannot, in some cases, be detected, from the inability
to draw back the foreskin, owing to the swelling and inflammation. Its
existence is then only to be discovered by the test of inoculation, which
I shall describe hereafter in speaking of syphilis. However, its existence
does not alter the treatment, which is as follows.
The treatment of Balanitis, in its mild and common form, is very
simple. It consists in washing the parts well, and keeping the foreskin
and the glans separated by a piece of dry lint, to be changed several
times a-day. This will generally suffice to effect a cure. No method
is more efficacious in arresting discharges from mucous surfaces which


lie against each other, than keeping them separate by some dry sub-
stance ; as the two hot and inflamed surfaces act like mutual poultices,
and keep up the discharge. First wash and dry the part, then intro-
duce a piece of dry lint at the base of the glans, and draw the foreskin
over it. If the parts be much inflamed, nothing has so great an effect
in reducing the inflammation, as passing a stick of nitrate of silver
lightly over them, so as simply to whiten the surface, which should be
previously dried by lint; and on the subsequent days, the part should be
washed with Goulard’s lotion, and dry lint kept constantly applied.


GONORRHŒA.
This disease is a greatly more important one than the preceding, not
only from its much greater frequency, but also from its severity,
and from the grievous effects it in too many cases leaves behind.
Yet there is no disease, which the young and thoughtless are more
in the habit of making a jest of; and while the inexperienced regard
all venereal diseases with the anxious fear that ignorance inspires,
the initiated often take a pride in telling of the dangers they have passed,
and in drawing a ludicrous picture of the sufferings the novice has before
him. It is often held rather a proof of manliness and experience among
the youth, to have had a few claps, like the scars of the German duellist;
and as they do not, like syphilis, leave a Damocles’ sword, in the shape of
secondary poisoning, suspended over the head, the suffer.ngs they may
have caused are soon forgotten, or but used for banter, by the many,
whose vigorous health has brought them through in triumph. But far
different is the tale told by the unfortunate, already struggling under the
burden of a weak—it may be, scrofulous constitution; by him, whose
shyness makes such a complaint anything but a subject for public glori-
fication ; by the exhausted sufferer from spermatorrhoea or other causes,
whose reviving health has received a rude arrest from this new enemy;
by him, in whom gonorrhoea proves the cause of stricture, seminal weak-
ness, diseased prostate, and other miserable complaints, which bring the
proudest head to the dust; by the unhappy infant, who at life’s portal, is
deprived of sight by the mother’s disease ; in short, by the countless host
of victims to those diseases of which this unreverenced gonorrhoea is the
origin.
What have the genital organs done, to deserve that their diseases, so
serious, so universally spread, should he treated so differently from any
others? “Offended against the moral laws, ’’ says the moralist; and
the youth, whose instincts whisper to him a truer morality, would
disarm the censure by submitting to the penalty with a laugh—a laugh
but the rattle of his chains ; as if death, or any of his artillery, were to
be merely a subject for jesting! Thus,- favoured by the neglect of the
mistaken moralist, by the irreverence of the youth, and the ignorance
and heedlessness of the poor girls, whose degradation in the eyes of the


world cannot be increased by their spreading the poison, which they
themselves have received, this yellow stream of misery is permitted to
flow ever onwards, while scarcely any efforts are used for its prevention.
To prevent these diseases, it is first of all requsite that they, ( like the
subject of digestion and the laws of the rest of the human body, which
have been dwelt upon with such admirable and religious enthusiasm by
Pr. Combe, and others,) be rescued from their secrecy, and become
universally known to mankind, and not alone to our profession; and
that they be no longer made a subject for jesting and reproach, but
viewed exactly in the same light as all other diseases —namely, as offences
against natural laws, but equally claiming our pity, our reverence, and
our every effort to cure them.
Gonorrhoea, commonly called clap, consists of an inflammation of
. the interior of the urinary canal. It is caused by the contact, during
sexual intercourse, of matter secreted by the female organs, affected
with a similar disease. Its symptoms are as follows. Within a few
days after an impure connection, some itching and heat are felt at the
orifice of the canal, and soon a discharge appears, at first thin, but
in a short time becoming thick, yellow, and purulent. Then scalding
begins to be felt in making water, as it flows through the inflamed
canal; and the inflammation, which began at the orifice, travels
gradually downwards, the symptoms meanwhile increasing in severity.
When the disease is at its height, great pain is felt in making water ;
and sometimes the swelling of the walls of the canal is so great, that the
urine can scarcely, if at all, be passed.
Chordee also is often present in severe cases, which consists in the acute
inflammation causing the effusion of lymph (the plastic substance of
which the solid tissues of the body are built up) around the walls of the
urethra; and this lymph, which has always, when poured out from tho
blood-vessels, a tendency to coagulate and harden, makes the penis so stiff,
that when an erection takes place, the under part cannot go along with
the rest, and a curve or chordee is produced, causing great pain. These
erections take place chiefly at night, excited by the warmth of the bed,
and cause the patient frequently to waken with a start by the violence of
the pain. Often have I laughed, though against my soberer judgment,
at the ludicrous descriptions of his sufferings by a fellow-student ; with
what lightning speed he would wake, bound out of bed, and seek the
comfort of the cold hearth-stone, or the still greater luxury of a cold wet
sponge placed on his loins, allowing the water to trickle down; and then
how relentlessly his enemy pursued him all night through, with its elec-
trical arousings, just when his wearied senses were dropping to rest.
If the gonorrhoea travel very far down the canal, or the inflammation be
very high, the prostate gland, the neck of the bladder, or even the bladder
itself, may become inflamed, but these very serious and lamentable
occurrences are fortunately not very common. A more frequent oc-
currence is inflammation of the epididymis or upper part of the testicle,
which must always be regarded as a serious and important complication.
Buboes, or swellings of the glands in the groin, are sometimes caused
I


by simple gonohrroca, but rarely, not' more than once in a hundred
cases.
The gonorrhoeal discharge may vary in colour and smell, being gene-
rally of a greenish yellow, sometimes tinged with blood, but this is of
little importance. Like other inflammatory diseases, gonorrhoea gen-
erally tends, in process of time, to a spontaneous cure. Thus in a fort-
night it will probably have reached its greatest severity,' and after re-
maining stationary for a week or so, it will gradually decline: and in
some cases, where the constitution is vigorous, cease without treatment
But this is not to be expected, and the disease has a great tendency to
become indefinitely chronic, unless actively treated: and I shall now
describe the treatment of the different stages.
This is divided by Jl. Ricord (the admirable’ surgeon, who has the
charge of the great Venereal Hospital in Paris, with greater op-
portunities of observing the venereal diseases than any man in Europe,
and who has done perhaps more than any other to throw light on their
nature and treatment,) into the abortive treatment, and the treatment
of the acute and chronic stages; all of which are distinct from each
other.
. By the abortive treatment, (which it is peculiarly important for the
public in general to bo acquainted with, as their prompt adoption of it on
the very first signs of the disease can alone make it available,) is meant
the endeavour to arrest the disease at its very outset; an object much
more desirable than to permit it to run on to the acute stage, in which
it is so severe, and sometimes so intractable. Tho abortive treatment
consists in using injections of a solution of nitrate of silver, which has an
unequalled power in altering the character, and arresting the inflamma-
tions, of mucous membranes. Tho solution should he very weak, in the
proportion of one-fourth of a grain of the nitrate, to the ounce of dis-
tilled water, and should be used as follows :
A glass (not a pewter) syringe should be half-filled with it, and the
fluid injected into the urethra, and allowed to remain for a minute or
two. Those injections should bo repeated once every four hours, for
forty-eight hours. They will cause some little pain, and a slightly
rosy, purulent discharge, which is to bo looked on as a good sign, show-
ing that tho disease will soon yield. No spirituous liquor or heating
food should be taken. Neither warm baths nor any other relaxing
measures should bo used during the abortive treatment, which if duly
and early enough employed, will effect a cure at once in a half of the
cases, according to Eicord’s experience. '
I need not dwell on the immense importance of this method, and of its
being generally made known to the public ; so that those who have been
exposed to infection, may seize the very first signs of disease, and so save
themselves all the pains and dangers attendant on gonorrhoea. This
treatment is of great value to the public, but little to the surgeon, as in
general, especially among tho poorer classes, (who never attend to a dis-
ease, till it has caused them some great inconvenience.) he sees the case
too .late for its adoption. It can ha used only in the first day, or perhaps


two days, of the discharge, on the very first appearance of the yellow-
matter, and before much redness and inflammation have been set up, as
then it would only aggravate the disease. After the twelve injections
have been used, cubebs or copaiba should be taken for a few days, in the
doses hereafter to be mentioned, all sexual intercourse and spirituous
liquors avoided, and in a fortnight the patient may resume his usual
habits. It is no easy matter to nip in the bud an incipient gonorrhoea,
and unless all these directions be carried out, the complaint will probably
return in a day or two (for it has as many beads as the hydra), andmay
then last for months. This treatment is without any risk of causing
stricture or other evils; which, by catting short the disease, it rather
tends powerfully to prevent.
Instead of using injections, copaiba or cubebs alone will very often suc-
ceed in checking the .disease at its outsets They should be given the
moment the first drop of yellow matter is perceived, and should be used
in rather larger doses than those adapted for the later stages, as the
object is to cut the disease short at once by vigorous means. Thus two
or three drachms of cubebs should be taken thrice a day. M. Ricord
says, that this abortive treatment is more likely to succeed, where there
is little or no pain or scalding, in the commencement of the disease; and
also that even although it fail in wholly arresting the discharge, it never
fails to modify and mitigate the symptoms, so that by persisting in reme-
dial measures, the disease is generally brought to a close in from fifteen
to twenty days. He says, moreover, that much harm is often done by a
popular prejudice against trying speedily to arrest the discharge ; whereas
his object always is, to cure the disease as quickly as is consistent with
caution in the use of the remedies; for, he says, the danger of a gonorr-
hoea depends upon two things; first, the severity to which the inflamma-
tion is suffered to attain, and secondly, its duration.
But if the golden moment have been allowed to pass, or if the abortive
treatment have failed; if the symptoms have gradually increased in seve-
rity, and there be present much scalding in making water, with heat,
redness, and swelling at the orifice of the urethra, the abortive treatment
can no longer he applied, as it would exasperate the inflammation.
Antiphlogistic (or anti-inflammatory) treatment should now be used.
The patient should take plenty of mucilaginous drinks, as barley-water,
syrup and water, or plain cold water, to render the urine as little irrita-
ting as possible. He should rest on a sofa, and have low diet. A gene-
ral warm bath every night for from a half to one hour is an excellent
means of quieting the inflammation. Local warm baths are not so good,
as they tend to congest the part. Leeches may be applied to the peri-
neum (the space between the scrotum or pouch of the testicles and the anus
or opening of the intestine,) but not to the loose skin of the penis itself,
as in that situation their bites may be followed by erysipelas. Some
authors recommend cubebs and copaiba in this acute stage, but Ricord
does not approve of them ; for he says, they often do more harm than
good, when the inflammation runs high, and, besides, lose the virtues
they would have had, in a later stage. The bowels should be freed by


purgatives, which cool the system, and so subdue the inflammation; and,
if it run high, tartar emetic should be given.
This medicine is the most powerful means of subduing active inflamma-
tion in almost all parts of the body; except where, from the nature of the
organs inflamed, it cannot be given, as in inflammation of the stomach or
bowels. If given in sufficient doses, it brings on a state of extreme sick-
ness, which, as can readily be understood, is the most powerful opponent
of inflammation. This invaluable medicine, whose general adoption now-
a-days in inflammatory diseases has superseded in very many cases the
use of the lancet (which, by its expenditure of the vital fluid, is a remedy
never to be resorted to, if safer means can be found), may be given in doses
of from one-fourth to one-half a grain, in an ounce or two of water, every
two hours, according to the quantity found requisite in each case to cause
the state of nausea.
The chordee, which will be more severe in proportion to the violence of
the inflammation, and also to the depth it has reached in the canal, should
be treated by avoiding everything that could excite erections. These are
generally caused by the warmth of bed; therefore a hard mattrass and
light bed-clothes should be used. M. Ricord praises camphor very highly as
a sedative in chordee, and gives it either in pills with opium—namely, six
grains of camphor, and one grain of opium, made into two pills, to be
taken at bed-time; or ten grains of camphor, one of opium, the yolk of
an egg, and four ounces of water, given in an ejection, an hour before
going to bed.
By thess antiphlogistic means, the intensity of the gonorrhoeal inflam-
mation, will probably be subdued, and the scalding, heat, and other signs
of acute inflammation diminished, although the yellow purulent discharge
still continues copious. The patient should now begin to take some of
those remedies which have a specific action, and most powerful control
over gonorrhoea—namely, cubebs or copaiba. These are both remedies of
very great value, and in the great majority of cases succeed in curing the
complaint, if skilfully used. Sometimes the very first doses will reduce
the discharge to a single drop in the morning. Copaiba is a kind of resi-
nous balsam, with a taste which to many is exceedingly nauseous ; and
so it has been ingeniously enclosed in little gelatinous capsules (ihe capsules
de Mothes) that are equally efficacious with the plain balsam ; which may
itself be taken in water, or suspended in a mucilaginous liquid. Cubebs
—a hot pepper-like powder, containing as its active ingredient a volatile
oil, very similar to that which is the active principle of copaiba (both of
which volatile oils may be taken pure, and are thus equally efficacious,
and not so apt to disagree)—may be used in the following formula, which
is exceedingly effective, and in some constitutions succeeds much better
than copaiba. Take two or three ounces of cubebs, and make them into
a paste with honey. Begin with three tea-spoonsful the first day, and
increase the dose taken on the following days to five or six tea-spoonsful,
drinking at the same time plentifully of barley-water, milk of almonds, or
other mucilaginous drink, so as to prevent the cubebs from irritating the
stomach or kidneys. The medicine acts equally well if taken merely in
water, in similar doses.


These medicines should not be given up as soon as the gonorrhoea has
ceased, for, if so, it would most probably re-appear; but they should
be continued for a few days longer, in gradually diminishing doses. Some
constitutions are most benefited by one, others by the other; so that if
the one do not succeed, we may have recourse to its fellow.
But we cannot expect to find such a thing as an unalloyed blessing,
and thus there are evils, which in some cases arise from the use of these
medicines. Among them is a rash, which they sometimes bring out over
the body, attended with smart fever, and arrest of the gonorrhma; which
however returns when the rash disappears. It seems to be owing to a
disordered stomach, and to exposure to cold and damp, which should be
carefully avoided, while taking the medicines. Copaiba also sometimes
causes nausea, diarrhoea, and griping, which, when slight, need not be
attended to, except by avoiding cold, damp feet, &c. Cubebs has in some
few cases, when given in too large doses, caused symptoms of inflamma-
tion of the stomach, which occurrence must be guarded against by ceasing
at once the medicine, if any incipient signs be perceived.
Cubebs are also often adulterated, and may thus prove injurious, and
should, as well as many other medicines, be got at the best druggists.
All medicines are to be viewed as double-edged weapons, in themselves
most important causes of disease, and being so, we should desire to use
them as rarely as possible.
At the same time that these internal remedies are used, Kicord em-
ploys, whenever the inflammation has been sufficiently subdued, a local
treatment also, as the conjunction of both is much more certain. In-
jections of nitrate of silver, of the strength before recommended—namely
one fourth of a grain to the ounce of distilled water, should be employed
as before directed, viz, twelve in the forty-eight hours, when they may be
stopped, and the internal remedies continued. In some old standing
cases, when the mucous membrane has become relaxed and thickened, this
injection may not be sufficiently strong to produce the reddish discharge
and other signs of salutary action; and, if so, it may be increased
to from one to two grains, to the ounce of water.
There are different forms of the chronic stage of gonorrhoea, whose
treatment I have been describing. In some cases the yellow discharge
continues as thick and copious as in the acute stage, although the scald-
ing in making water is in great part, or altogether, absent. In others
the discharge is reduced to what is called a gleet, in which it has lost its
yellow colour, and has become nearly colourless, like gum, or small
shreds of vermicelli; in other cases no discharge is visible during the
day, and only a drop or two, gluing together the orifice in the mornings,
remains.
These gleets, though some persons care little for them, are to others
a source of great annoyance, in proportion to the susceptibility of their
nature, moral and physical; and they often, by their long continuance, and
by inducing stricture, or, as we have seen above, spermatorrhoea, bring the
patient into a state of the most miserable hypochondria.
Some cases of chronic gonorrhoea, or gleet, are exceedingly obstinate,
and resist all sorts of treatment, causing endless annoyance and im


patience in those affected with them. Thus they often last for months,
and not nnfrequently from one to two or three years ; and llicord men-
tions one which lasted thirty years ; so that it is of immense, importance
that, by a vigorous and well directed treatment at first, the risk of such
consequences should be prevented. A gonorrhoea is not a complaint to
be trilled with; in some constitutions it is exceedingly difficult to subdue,
whether from their weakness, incapability of bearing the remedies, un-
healthy relaxing life of confinement, neglect, want of self-restraint in
applying for, a sufficient time the remedies, or abstaining from drinking,
and other sensual enjoyments ; and perhaps above all, from the unfor-
tunate and pernicious social feelings on the Subject of this disease,
which cause it to be concealed, prevent the sufferer from applying for
assistance in time, hamper and obstruct all the remedies employed, and
too often reduce the patient and the humane physician to despair of the
cure.
There is no matter perhaps in which concealment does more harm to
mankind, than in this of genital and venereal diseases. The grand
point ever to be kept in view, in remedying diseases, is, that they be
treated as early as possible. Not a moment should be lost, on the first
appearance of any disease, in taking measures to arrest it; for the first
few golden moments are often the most important of all. Now, the
miserable shame and fear attending on venereal and genital complaints,
in almost all cases, prevent the inexperienced youth, and still more the
woman, from applying for relief, till the irrevocable time is past; till the
mischief is fully developed, and the disease riots and revels in its strength,
exulting at our impotence to arrest it, and proceeding to bring cu
consequences which no man can answer for, and which may be most
disastrous. Must we not then consider the odium attaching to venereal
diseases, as being most sinful in every individual who entertains it, since
it is the cause of so many miseries to man and woman?
If a gleet have lasted a long time, we should try to make out, in each
separate case, the cause of this chronicity. And first, the canal should
be explored with a bougie, to see whether there be not a stricture, whicli
is a frequent cause of lingering gleet. Sometimes, when the inflammation
lingers deep in the canal, at the orifices of the ejaculatory ducts, there
are frequent seminal emissions in the night, which aggravate in their turn
the gleet, and frequently are the cause of bringing back a gonorrhoea,
which was on the wane. From this exhausting complication, ail the
horrors of spermatorrhoea may in time be established. In such cases
slight cauterization of the walls of the urethra, over the mouths of the
ducts, with M. Lallemand's porte-caustique, has sometimes an excel-
lent effect.
Impotence may be caused in this as in other cases by spermatorrhoea;
and here I may say a few words on this subject, which to many is one of
great importance. Impotence may be the result of anything which tends
to weaken, cither mentally the venereal appetites, or physically the geni-
tal organs. Mentally, the most frequent causes of impotence are—hard
study, which consumes the nervous power in a different direction ; and
still oftener, all the depressing emotions, such as fear, shyness, apathy,


&C.) which by their admixture, destroy the force of the venereal appe-
tites. Physically, a want of tone in the genital organs, which are
scarcely capable of full erection, at least solely at the stimulus of venereal
desires; want of exercise of the organs, which, like all others, are greatly
strengthened by habitual exercise; spermatorrhoea, or the general
exhaustion of the frame from long disease of any kind. If the disease be
ofmental origin, John Hunter’s advice was, that a man should sleep
with the woman, with whom he was impotent, resolving to have no con-
nection with her. A man may be impotent with one woman, into his
affections towards whom any of the paralysing feelings enter, and may
not be so with another. As a preventive or cure of impotence, the
regular exercise of the genital organs, and a healthy life in the open air,
without the exhaustion of protracted study, are the best of all means.
Besides this, it must be remembered, that there are great natural con-
stitutional differences in these powers in different individuals, and each
one must be contented with those which have been given him; and not
waste his thoughts and strength, as is so often done, in vain regrets that
they are not greater than is natural to him.
Sometimes a gleet will persist in spite of all the above-mentioned
remedies, which may not have the power of wholly stopping the discharge,
but perhaps of reducing it to a single yellow or gummy drop in the
morning, which will not be driven away, and, the moment the remedies
are discontinued, increases rapidly till the running be as bad as ever.
Sometimes too, the remains of a chordee may continue after the gon-
orrhoea is cured. In cases of obstinate gleet, various means should be
tried.
It must always be borne in mind, that diseases do not become chronic
and lingering without a cause. Chronic disease is always a sign, that
either the part effected, or the constitution generally, is too weak to
throw off its enemy. In a healthy man living in the country, and still
more in the vigorous savage in the woods, disease rarely becomes chronic;
but wounds and inflammations heal with surprising quickness, aided or
unaided, so great aro the natural powers. But in the poor unhealthy
townsman, the case is very different; every indefinite disease, like in-
flammation, &c., tends to become chronic, from the weak powers and un-
healthy life. This constitutional weakness is in many cases the chief
cause of the continuance of a gleet, and must be remedied, before the
latter can be got rid of. Thus the man who has _an old gleet, should
adopt the most bracing life possible; should be in the country, and
always in the open air; should live regularly, rising early and going
early to bed; should take cold baths, twice or even oftener, daily,
remaining in the water only a short time, and always taking a smart
walk afterwards, to restore the circulation ; and probably a good remedy
also, is the cold sitz-bath, taken several times a-day, with a walk after
it. These directions which will apply to many other chronic diseases,
should at once be adopted, if the powers of the constitution seem inade-
quate to cure the disease; for delay is, in this complaint, like all others,
only wasted time, besides favouring the evil consequences, which may
arise from old gleet. Along with these general means, a local treatment


by injections should be used, employing the milder astringent, the sul-
phate of zinc, (which is often more successful than the nitrate of silver,)
in the proportion of one or two grains, to the ounce of water: this to be
used twice or thrice-a-day, and continued for eight or ten days. Other
astringent injections may be employed, as the decoction of oak bark, &c.
By these means, the bracing change of air, and alfresco life, along with
the local astringents, the complaint may almost always be subdued, if
they have a due trial; but without the general means, all local ones will
often prove unavailing.
Before proceeding to the complications of gonorrhoea, I may mention,
that the disease is sometimes, and not very infrequently, produced by
other causes than infection. A yellow discharge may be excited by hard
drinking, or by undue exercise of the sexual organs, especially in those in
whom there are some lingering remains of inflammation from a former
gonorrhoea, or who suffer from an irritable prostate gland. To these
cases the name of spurious gonorrhma has been applied. They may often
be distinguished by commencing suddenly with little or no previous
itching; and by the discharge appearing to come at once from the inner
part of the canal, and not beginning at the orifice and gradually passing
inwards, as in the true disease. They are in general mild, and readily
curable by a few injections of the solution of nitrate of silver, or sulphate
of zinc.
1 shall now speak of some of the complications which may arise in the
course of a gonorrhoea. Buboes, or inflammatory swellings of one or
more of the glands in the groin, sometimes, though rarely, occur; but
are in general readily subdued by applying a few leeches and poultices,
and using the tartar emetic. In a gonorrhoea, buboes depend merely on
the neighbouring irritation, in the same way that a swelling of contigu-
ous glands may be caused by a blister. They generally arise in the first
week in simple gonorrhoea, when the inflammation is at its height.
Another much more serious complication of gonorrhoea is Epididymitis
(commonly called swelled testicle,) or inflammation of the epididymis, the
upper part of the testicle. It was long thought, that in this affection
the testicle itself was inflamed, but this is fortunately only rarely the
case. Inflammation of the epididymis is occasioned by the gonorrhoeal
inflammation, when it has reached the orifices of the ejaculatory ducts
far down in the canal, causing sympathetic inflammation of the epidi-
dymis at the other end of the seminal duct; according to the law, that
the two extremities of a canal may be sympathetically excited, without
intervening inflammation. As the gonorrhoea must have penetrated far
down in the canal, before it reaches the ejaculatory ducts, we do not find
inflammation of the epididymis come on early in its course. It seldom
occurs before the third week of gonorrhoea, and from that till the end of
the fifth week, it is most common. This is an important fact, as it ena-
bles us to be on our guard against it, and take precautions against its
occurrence.
The chief means of prevention are, to cure, if possible, the gonorrhoea
before the third week, and to wear a suspensory bandage for the testicles;
to avoid anything which would increase the inflammation of the urethra;


and above all, to be on the watch for the first symptoms oi the affection
of the testicle, and nip it in the bud, which, in general, might readily be
done.
These first symptoms areas follows. About the fourth or fifth week
of a gonorrhoea, the patient may feel a slight aching pain in the groin,
which gradually extends down the spermatic chord, and fixes in a small
spot at the upper and back part of the testicle (generally the left one,
which, from want of the support given by the trousers to its fellow, is much
the most frequently attacked). On feeling this spot it will be found
that the epididymis is here enlarged, hard, and tender to the touch.
The gonorrhoeal discharge is probably at the same time a little diminished,
and seminal emissions are liable to take place at night, and are fol-
lowed by increased pain in the testicle, lasting for some hours; but as yet
there is no blood mixed with the seminal fluid. If the patient now at
the golden moment take the warning, and attend to these first symp-
toms ; if ho give the organ the most perfect rest, by remaining con-
stantly in the recumbent posture for a couple of days, foment the parts
with warm cloths, and take a dose of opening medicine to cool the
system, the affection will subside entirely, and none of the following
serious symptoms will arise. But if he neglect them, as so many do,
chiefly from ignorance of their nature, heedlessness, or a foolish reluc-
tance to be laid up for a couple of days, when by so doing, they would
avoid weeks of suffering, which will most certainly follow; or finally,
from that most deplorable dread of their disease becoming known, which
so constantly operates in this case, where confinement to the sofa is ab-
solutely requisite; if he walk about or take other exercise, even the
slightest, the disease will advance very rapidly. The affected testicle now
becomes greatly swelled, and exquisitely tender and painful. The con-
stitution sympathises with it, and a good deal of fever arises. The
gonorrhoea often stops entirely, from what is called revulsion, but begins
again when the other affection has subsided. When the swelling of the
testicle has been very rapid, the pain is most excruciating.
The course of this affection, severe though the symptoms be, is in
general favourable, where the constitution is good. Under the use of
appropriate antiphlogistic treatment, the inflammation and swelling
subside, but some enlargement and hardness of the epididymis almost
always remain for some time, and pain and consequent relapses are
liable to occur from sexual intercourse for months after; evils which are
to be guarded against by the continued use of the suspensory bandage,
and abstinence from, or but rare indulgence in, sexual intercourse, if it
cause pain. The testicle in general regains all its reproductive powers:
which consolation we are enabled to give the patient, from the knowledge
that in the great majority of cases, it entirely escapes the disease, and the
epididymis alone is affected.
But in many cases unfortunately, the result of epididymitis is not so
favourable—is most disastrous. This is especially the case in scrofulous
constitutions. In these, the inflammation of the epididymis has a great
tendency to become chronic, and gradually to engage in its progress the
whole testicle, causing slow suppuration in it, or the deposition of tuber


cle, (that degenerated product, which is the sign of scrofulous disease, and
may bo deposited in any part of the body, causing consumption in
the lungs, mesenteric disease in the abdominal glands, &c.,) in iu
substance, which in time softens, and causes complete disorganisation
of the whole testicle. Meanwhile the feeble constitution, from the long
confinement and weakening treatment of such an affection, may gradually
fall a victim to consumption. How frequently do we we see in hospitals
such lamentable results of the despised gonorrhoea! In the same way
that scrofulous disease may be thus roused by epididymitis, so may in
those predisposed to it, the still more formidable disease of cancer. The
indurated and enlarged state of the epididymis which is left behind, some-
times at a future period, excites cancerous degeneration in the part;
from the law that previous inflammation in an organ makes it particu-
larly liable to cancer, in those who seem to have a natural predispo-
sition to this disease. When we contemplate even the possibility ol
two such fearful diseases resulting, how great should be our endeavours
to prevent the epididymitis, which may give rise to them, and still mote
the gonorrhoea, which is the source of them all!
In the treatment of epididymitis which has passed the incipient stage,
we must use energetic means to arrest the inflammation. In the first
place, it is absolutely necessary that the patient remain in the recum-
bent position ; the testicle should bo supported, so as to take the
strain off the inflamed chord, and leeches should be applied to the groin,
or perineum, but not to the loose skin of the scrotum, where they might
cause erysipelas. Besides this, the patient should take pretty large
doses of tartar emetic with epsom salts, a mixture whose effects in redu-
cing the inflammation are sometimes wonderful. It may be used as
follows:—Dissolve two grains of tartar emetic, and two ounces of epsom
salts iu a pint of water, and take four ounces every third hour, till great
nausea and purging be produced. (Of course the medical attendant will
prescribe such or other fit remedies, but it is very desirable that the 1 public
should be acquainted with the general actions of tho most valuable
medicines in the various diseases.) This most powerful of antiphlogistic
medicines will sometimes effect a cure in twenty-four hours. Poultices
should be applied locally.
When by these means the inflammation has been checked, and the pain
is lessened, but the swelling remains, compression should be applied, a
powerful mode of speedily restoring the testicle to its original size. This
is to be effected by straps of adhesive plaister, passed round the testicle;
some horizontally, and others vertically, so as to cause a moderate and
equal compressi >n. Pressure is one of the most effectual means of causing
the absorption of any effusion, after the inflammation, which caused it,
has abated. The great swelling of the testicle, in this disease, arises from
the effusion of serum, (the watery part of the blood) into the tunic or case
which encloses tho testicle. The application of compression will occasion,
for a short time, some increase of pain, but this will soon subside; and,
if the method is to succeed, in a few hours the strapping will become quite
loose. As soon as this takes place, the straps should be removed and
others applied, so that no reaction shall follow; which would probably


be the case, wore the compression not carried forward uninterruptedly.
But if at the end of an hour, after applying the first strapping, the pain
do not subside, we may infer, that here compression will not succeed; re-
move the straps, and continue antiphlogistios. By compression, Mr.
Acton, (the pupil and friend of M. Ricord, whose valuable work on ve-
nereal diseases embodies the experience of his master,) has seen many
testicles reduced to their normal size in twelve hours ; and in two hun-
dred well chosen cases, which he saw, no bad results followed its use.
The next disease arising from gonorrhoea, of which I have to speak, is
one of very great importance, from its frequency, and its disastrous con-
sequences in many cases.
Stricture of the urethra, consists of a narrowing of the calibre of that
canal, which may be caused in several ways. Thus it may arise from a
fall or a blow on the perineum, which ruptures the urethra, and may
cause, when the wound heals, a great narrowing, perhaps even oblitera-
tion, of the canal by the contraction of the cicatrix. This is the most
dangerous and difficult to cure of all forms of stricture, for the cicatrix
of a wound is so hard, that it cannot he distended or absorbed, as takes
place in the cure of other strictures. Chancre, or syphilitic sore in the
urethra; vegetations which grow from the walls of the passage, irritated
by some long discharge; and some other causes, may also produce
stricture. But by far the most frequent cause is gonorrhoea, and espe-
cially when that disease has continued long in the chronic stage, or when
the patient has had several attacks of it.
Stricture from gonorrhoea may consist either in a relaxed and swelled
state of the mucous membrane, which proves an obstruction to the urine ;
or, which is much the commonest form, in the deposition of lymph at
some pointbeneath the membrane, which in time by its coagulation, hard-
ening and contracting according to its natural tendency, as before ex-
plained, becomes callous, and narrows the canal gradually more and more.
This, the usual form of stricture, is generally limited to a narrow band,
not more than one or two lines in length, as if a ligature surrounded the
canal at the point; but sometimes it is much longer. In most cases,
there is but one stricture; but sometimes two, and in a few rare cases,
several, in the course of the canal. The situation of a stricture is gene-
rally far down in the canal, at the membraneous part.
These permanent strictures form a most important class of diseases. It
may well be understood how dangerous to the system i* any obstruction to
the passage of a fluid of such vital importance, and so constantly formed,
as the urine. I will describe some of the disastrous results which may,
and often do, follow stricture, if it be not early detected and removed. It
will be seen that these effects are all felt in the parts behind the stricture.
When a stricture exists in the urethra, the urine, which is arrested
behind it, and can escape only with difficulty, gradually dilates the por-
tion of the canal behind the stricture, and may enter into the mouths of
tbe ejaculatory ducts, and so give rise to the most inveterate sperma-
torrhoea. Many of Lallcmand's cases were owing to this cause, and he
says that the marked hypochondria into winch strictured patients so
often fall, even when they do not know that,they have any disease, is


generally owing to the seminal losses, whose characteristic effect in
producing hypochondria we hare seen above. Proceeding further bad-
wards from the stricture, we come to the bladder, which, in cases of long
standing stricture, is very liable to become diseased, and in the following
way. It becomes gradually hypertrophied, i. e. it increases in the thick-
ness of its muscular coats, trom the greater force needed to expel tba
urine, and its capacity is increased. This is in accordance with a general
law of the economy, whereby organs can, within certain limits, adopt
themselves to new exigencies. In the same way the heart becomes en-
larged and thickened, when there is a similar obstruction in its valves.
The urine, prevented from freely escaping, and retained in the bladder,
putrefies there, as it would do out of the body, (for the vital preservative
power of the bladder to prevent putrefaction lasts only a short time),
and the putrid urine irritates the bladder, and causes disease of its in-
ternal or mucous coat, which discharges large quantities of muens.
The bladder becomes so irritable, that the patient is constantly tor-
mented by vain strainings to pass water, though there may be only i
few drops in the bladder, and their passage causes intolerable pain ; and
thus the unhappy sufferer can get rest neither by night nor day. This
disease of irritable bladder, is described by Sir Astley Cooper, as the
most painful one he had to witness.
If we go back a step further, we come to the kidneys, those most
vital organs, and they too, are liable to become diseased in the
course of the evils. The urine, retained in the bladder, is prevented
from escaping freely from the kidneys also, which secrete it. Be-
sides, the irritation is propagated to the kidneys from the bladder, by
the law of sympathy, and from these causes the kidneys may become
organically diseased; a necessarily fatal affection, whose palliation is
unfortunately all that is left for the physician.
Another terrible accident, which not unfrequently happens in old,
neglected, and very narrow strictures, (and how common is such neglect
in the poor, who have never been taught the duty they owe to their
bodies!) is the bursting of the urethra behind the stricture, and the in-
filtration of urine into the surrounding tissues. It is in strictures that
have become almost impervious, the urine escaping perhaps only drop by
drop, that, in one of the violent efforts of straining, which this state of
things calls forth, the urethra, weakened by long disease, gives way, with
a feeling of present relief. But soon the dreadful effects follow. The
urine by its irritating qualities, acts like a strong poison on the parte
unaccustomed to it, and very speedily causes their death, and with
that, if the surgeon do not act with great promptitude and skill, the
death of the patient too.
On reviewing this sad list of diseases, it will be seen, how they all de-
pend by a backward chain of influence, on the stricture ; and thus that
the first step either for their prevention or cure, is the cure of the
Stricture.
Sir Benjamin Brodie has well said, that there is no class of diseases
so important and so dangerous, for which so much can often be done, as
for the urinary diseases. But in order to do this, they must be treated


in liras; and it is to be borne in mind as a general law in strictures
thit the earlier they are treated, the more easily they are cured. It is,
then, of immense importance that the public, who alone can observe and
discover for themselves their early symptoms, should be well acquainted
with these.
In few diseases is minute attention on the part of the patients more
necessary, than in stricture ; as it is a disease, which almost always
remains undetected, till it has gone a considerable length. Many—nay,
we may say, the great majority of patients, live for years without know-
ing, that they have a stricture; and during that time they may suffer
from.hypochondria or increasing debility, of which neither they, nor
their physicians know the cause. For, from the pernicious feelings of
delicacy prevailing on sexual subjects, physicians generally neglect to
inquire into the history, past and present, of the genital organs in each
patient, who presents himself with chronic or obscure disease; and thus
do sexual diseases constantly escape detection, though they may be at
the root of all the symptoms. It is a general rule now in scientific medi-
cine, introduced especially by the admirable French physicians, M. M.
Louis, Andral, and others, in questioning patients, to inquire minutely
into the past and present state of all the important organs in the body,
of which the genital ones, both in man and woman, ate among
the most vitally influential; and this rule should always be followed,
especially when a case is in the least obscure or complicated, as most-
chronic diseases are. Among young people in particular, in whom the
genital organs, and the passions connected with them, may be said to
he the keystones of the being, an inquiry into the sexual history of all,
men and women alike, should never be omitted. From this morbid
delicacy, which cannot but be veiwed as culpable, both in patient and
physician, thousands of diseases pass undetected and uncured.
The hidden existence of a stricture may at length be discovered,
whether from the gradually increasing difficulty of making water, ac-
cording to the natural tendency of strictures to become narrower; from
the vigilance of the patient or physician, or other cause. Thus the early
symptoms of this disease, as well as of all others, should especially be
studied by the public, as it is themselves, and not the physicians, who
generally have opportunities of knowing these.
And first, in whom may stricture be expected to exist ? lie who has
had frequent gonorrhoeas, or in whom that disease, the great cause of
stricture, has lasted for a long time, should be particularly on his guard
against stricture. If the gleet still continue, and have lasted long, a
bougie should be passed, to see whether a stricture be not keeping it up.
If the gleet have ceased, the individual should be ready to notice any
diminution in the size of the stream of urine, which is the chief sign of
stricture. Other signs are, if, after making water, the last drops cannot
be discharged, but are retained behind the stricture, and dribble away
afterwards: also in seminal discharges, the feeling that the semen is not
freely ejaculated from the orifice, but slowly wells out after the orgasm
is over, having been retained behind the stricture; also the slow escape of
the urine, which cannot be propelled far but drops to the ground near
the orifice of the penis.


If from these symptoms, one, who has had gonorrhoea, be led to suspect
he has stricture, the sooner he has it investigated and treated, the better;
for a stricture cannot exist long without causing evil effects in the ex-
ceedingly important parts behind it.
I do not wish to make men imaginative or over-anxious, in their soli,
citude about their health, by dwelling on these matters ; the fallacious
objection which has been always made to the public s learning anythin"
of that which may preserve their health and their life, and which it is not
only expedient for them, but their solemn duty, to become acquainted
with ; —an objection which could be made exactly with the same force to
our learning any new truths, and escaping from any old ignorance what-
ever ; but 1 wish, as far as I may, and as the generous co-operation of
my readers can effect, to prevent these most miserable disasters, which
the apathy and ignorance of us all have hitherto allowed to be so very
common. What generous heart does not exclaim, on witnessing the
quivering lip, the anguished brow, and the feelings full of bitterness, de-
gradation, and despair, of the unfortunate victims of these and other dis-
eases, “On me, on me be the guilt; it was my heartless prejudices, my
ignorance, my apathy, which stood in the way of the prevention of all
this woe 1 What have I done, what can I do, to atone for this neglect,
and to prevent in future, as far as lies in my power, the occurrence of
like calamities ?”
I now come to the treatment of permanent stricture. This consists, in
the great majority of cases, in the dilatation of the stricture, by means of
bougies or narrow rods, made of various materials —as metal, wax, or
elastic substances, and of a series of sizes; and in most cases this treat-
ment is successful. Strictures caused by gonorrhoea, depend for the most
part on lymph being effused by the violent inflammation, beneath the
mucous membrane, and not being afterwards absorbed. This lymph has
a tendency .constantly to increase in hardness, and at the same time to
contract; which explains the gradual narrowing that takes place in most
cases of stricture. This shows ns the great importance of having stric-
ture dilated early, before the lymph has become too hard.
The mode in which dilatation is effected, is the following.' A bougie
of moderate size is first introduced, and if this cannot pass into the blad-
der, a smaller one is tried, and so on till one bo found which can enter
the stricture; and this at times, in very narrow strictures, can be effected
only by a piece of catgut, and with the greatest difficulty. When this has
entered the stricture, which grasps it tightly, it is left there, according to
Ricord’s practice, until it can be moved easily through the stricture;
which, in most curable cases, soon takes place. It is then removed, and
any irritability of the canal, which may have been excited by the presence
of the instrument, is allowed to subside; and on the following day the
same instrument is introduced, and if it enter readily, it is withdrawn,
and another of a little larger size substituted. This is allowed to remain,
like the former, till it move readily; and thus the treatment advances
daily till the widest dilatation is obtained, which is possible or necessary.
In this manner a cure may be effected in most cases, in a space of, time
varying from three to six weeks or so, according to the size and hardness
of the stricture.


Strictures have a great tendency’ to return after being cured, and to
prevent this, the patient should, after his cure, pass an instrument of
requisite size every fourth day for the first fortnight, and once a week for
some time after. As this tendency to return often continues indefinitely,
he will probably bo obliged to pass one once a month, or at other intervals
according as he finds it necessary, during the rest of his life; and to
this end he should learn to pass them himself, which, with a little care, is
a very simple operation in an open canal. In the course of the treat-
ment, the urethra, which may at first have been very irritable, becomes
generally quite habituated to the instruments, so that they cause little
aneasincss.
The mode in which dilitatlon acts, is not by mechanically widening the
stricture, so much as by causing the absorption of the effused lymph under
the pressure ; according to the same law, by which wo have seen above,
that compression rapidly reduces the size of the enlarged testicle.
Besides the above method of slow dilatation, there is another, praised
very highly by M. Lallemand, namely, rapid dilatation; which, however,
M. Ricord and most surgeons disapprove of, as relapses are so common
after it. It consists in introducing first the largest bougie the stricture
will admit, leaving this until it becomes readily moveable, then withdraw-
ing it, and replacing it at once by another of a larger size, and so on in
succession, till the largest sized bougie can be introduced. By this treat-
ment, a cure can often be effected in less than forty-eight hours. Pro-
bably in many cases, where there is not too much irritability of the canal,
to bear the protracted presence of the instruments, and also where the
intelligent co-operation of the patient aids in preventing the closure of
the stricture again, the rapid method would be a great advantage, but of
this I cannot speak from personal experience.
Dilatation is by no means applicable or successful in all strictures, and
therefore in each the nature of the constriction must first be determined.
Stricture depending on indurated chancre in the urethra (which will bo
described hereafter), is generally not far from the orifice, may bo felfchard
and gristly exteriorly, and is in general accompanied by symptoms of se-
condary syphilis in other parts of the body. This stricture would only be
exasperated by dilatation, but will usually yield with readiness to the
general constitutional remedies for secondary syphilis. Stricture, result-
ing from the cicatrix of a wound, as from a fall or blow on the perineum,
where the urethra has been ruptured, will not yield to dilatation, how-
ever long continued; as the cicatrix, being organized, is not absorbed
under pressure, and constantly returns to the same state, nay, —contracts
still closer. The only thing to be done in these most intractable and me-
lancholy cases, is incision, which is accomplished by introducing a knife,
concealed in a hollow catheter (a bent tube, like the bougie, only with an
opening at its end), down to the stricture, and then pushing it out, and
so dividing the obstruction. After that, a large catheter is introduced,
and left for some days in the bladder, to prevent the cicatrix uniting
again. In this way many such cases are cured; but others, of a worse
nature, give rise to some of the most difficult and fatal operations in sur-
gery. It is chiefly in strictures produced by gonorrhoea, that dilatation
is successful, in which the obstruction consists of effused, and as yet


unorganized lymph. These are generally far down in the canal, anl
tightly grasp the instrument. If they have been too long neglected,
their lymph becomes organized, and so hard that they may be almost
as intractable as a cicatrix; and the surgeon must often be content, if
he can introduce through them a bougie of two or three lines in dia-
meter.
Stricture is also sometimes caused by vegetations, which are gene-
rally situated near the orifice, and bleed very easily, when a bougie
is passed. These are not easy to remove, and are very apt to grow
again. A softened puffy state of the mucous membrane, after a long
gonorrhoea, may also cause stricture, and this is perhaps the most
easily curable form; to wit, by injections, or slight cauterization with
the nitrate of silver. In speaking of injections, it may be remarked,
that it is a common belief, that they are a great cause of stricture, but
the best authorities on the subject, as Bicord and Sir B. Brodie, deny
that they are so, if used judiciously, i. e. not during the acute stage of
gonorrhoea, nor of improper strength.
With regard to the prevention of stricture, and with it the host of
serious evils it gives rise to, we must in the first place use every means,
social and individual, to prevent its great cause, gonorrhoea. If this
disease, however, should be incurred, we must bear in mind, that the
sooner it is cured, the less risk will there be of stricture. Thus, if
the gonorrhoea be stopped at its outset by the abortive treatment,
neither stricture nor any other evil will ever occur. If the gonorrhoea
have; by neglect or misfortune, degenerated into a lingering gleet, and
so stricture been produced, its early detection, and prompt treatment,
will in general readily remove it.
Besides these permanent forms of stricture, where there is a lasting
change of structure in the canal, there are two other varieties of a less
serious nature —viz. the inflammatory, and the spasmodic. Inflamma-
tory stricture is a temporary obstruction of the canal, with fre-
quently complete retention of urine, from the swelling caused by
inflammation. This form may occur in the acute stage of gonorrhoea,
or after cauterization of a part of the canal. For this affection, which
is generally easily remediable, soothing measures should be used first,
viz., a Dover’s powder, and thirty or forty drops of laudanum in a
clyster ; and if these measures are not sufficient, a small clastic catheter
should be passed, to draw off the urine, and then the soothing measures
continued.
By the fpasmodic stricture is meant one which depends merely on
temporary spasm of the muscles, surrounding the urethra ; which in
irritable constitutions, if stimulated by an acrid state of the urine,
sometimes contract spasmodically and so prevent the emptying of the
bladder. The sign that a stricture is spasmodic, is its occurring sud-
denly in a person, who has till then been able freely to pass water.
These spasms are generally brought on by drinking freely of spirits,
or wine, which make the urine very pungent and irritating; so that
when it attempts to flow along the canal, the muscles contract spas-
modically on it, and obstruct its passage. Thus a person during, or


after a debauch, may suddenly find himself quite unable to urinate,
ard after trying several times, if he he not relieved, his vain efforts to
strain out a few drops will become most agonising; his face flushed,
and covered by sweat, and his whole frame quivering with the fruit-
less efforts. Hut the case should never be allowed to proceed so far,
for here, as well as in other diseases, the sooner relief is obtained, the
less injury is doue to the parts. Luckily, relief for the time is
generally easily rendered. The patient should be put to bed, warmth
applied, a Dover’s powder given to favour sweating and relaxation of
the fibres; and this alter a few hours should be followed by a dose of
opening medicine, when be will generally be able to pass water in a
full stream. Opium, whether given by the mouth or in injection, is
the most powerful of all means of relaxing spasm (except the very
recently introduced chloroform), and in this case of spasmodic strict-
ure, thirty or forty drops of laudanum, used in injection, is a most
excellent remedy, superior in efficacy to the warm bath, which is also a
valuable anti-spasmodic. In cases which have been allowed to run
on, till the patients’ straining and sufferings are very urgent, or where
the above means do not overcome the spasm, the smallest sized elastic
catheter should be passed.
But though relief may generally be given in spasmodic stricture, it
has a great tendency to return according to the universal law of habit,
especially in irritable constitutions, and where drinking is persisted
in; and thus in different cases, it occurs from once in the fortnight, to
perhaps once in the year. Now it is a known natural law, that
functional diseases —of which this is one, have in process of time, a
great tendency to become organic and permanent, and thus may a
spasmodic stricture at last become a permanent one. Therefore he,
who is subject to it, should be doubly careful to avoid all its causes.
These include every thing which weakens, and so renders irritable the'
nervous system, such as late hours, too hard study, &c.; and above
all, what in all cases of stricture becomes of the very highest impor-
tance, he should forswear the use of fermented liquors. There is
perhaps no disease, in which spirituous liquors are so uniformly in-
jurious, as in strictures of every kind. He should also exercise the
genital organs in duly regulated sexual intercourse, for nothing gives
tone and strength to muscles, and deprives them of morbid irritability,
more than a proper amount of exercise. Also sponging the genitals
with cold water, morning and evening, is one of the best tonics for
this, as well as every other case, where they are effected by irritability
or weakness.
Spasmodic strictures are very important, not only in themselves,
but because they constantly complicate and aggravate permanent
stricture. When a man has a permanent stricture, he may get on
well enough, as long as he avoids drinking or other causes of spasm,
but as soon as he indulges, he is liable to have the stricture completely
closed by spasm, which requires the use of a catheter for its relief;
and this may sometimes be a very difficult matter, if the permanent
stricture be narrow. How constantly are these, and all other evils,
K


seen in onr hospital and dispensary practice, among the ignorant, negli-
gent, and neglected poor!
It is not science that at the present day is most required in medi-
cine; there is scientific knowledge enough, accumulated by the efforts
of ages, to build a new world for man, such as has scarcely yet been
conceived, were it only vitalised by the earnest love and reverence of
ns all. it is not the head so much as the heart, which is most needed;
and were there more physicians, who partook of the noble enthusiasm
for the prevention of disease, and universal diffusion of natural know-
ledge, which animated Dr. Andrew Combe and others, our country
and mankind in general would not long continue in their present state
of physical misery and degradation, which in so many respects every
one must see and lament. With our national strict allegiance to law
and duty, and power of self-denial, did we but know our true laws
and duties, there is no people which might be expected more earnestly
to study and reverence them. But enthusiasm, or any ardent, appeal
to the feelings of society upon medical subjects, has generally been
coldly regarded, if not sneered at, by the profession, in the few instan-
ces in which it has been attempted. Medical men seem generally to
suppose, that their peculiar province lies merely in the plain, matter-
of-fact, physical treatment of disease; and leave the sympathetic
appeals and wordy lamentations over human ills to poets, clergymen,
and others, whose ignorance of real disease betrays them into the most
false and exaggerated views ; and who must keenly feel how utterly
vain and useless is all their sympathy to alleviate or to cure a bodily
disease. But though enthusiasm and sympathy are often of little
comparative importance in the management of disease, yet, without
them, no great impression can ever be made on mankind; and in
respect of the prevention of disease more especially, the arm of the
physician is paralysed without them.
Obstruction to the passage of urine may be caused by another most
serious disease, besides stricture, viz., by chronic enlargement of the
prostate gland; which, as was previously mentioned, surrounds the
urethra at its deepest part, where it loaves the bladder. This is a dis-‘
ease of elderly life, very rarely occurring during youth, or middle age,
at which time on the contrary, stricture is most common. The most
common cause of it, as of most diseases of the urinary passages in
man, is gonorrhoea; which when it makes its way far down in the
canal, is sometimes very difficult to eradicate, and gives rise to irrita-
tion and unhealthy states in the prostate gland, which later in life
favour the developemont of the disease in question. Other causes often
assist, or of themselves occasion it, such as excessive venereal indul-
gences, hard drinking, which is so especially hurtful in all urinary
diseases, from the kidneys and their appendages being the vehicles,
by which the stimulating liquids are carried out of the system ; also a
sedentary life, which favors the morbid growth of different parts, by
preventing the balanced circulation of the blood attendant upon exer-
cise.
Enlargement of the prostate, so as often to cause some slight incon


reniencc, takes place naturally in almost every man, along with other
changes, which mark the approach of old age, suoli as the hair becoming
trey, "earthy deposits in the coats of the arteries, &c.; so that, when it
does not exceed this limited degree, it may be called natural and
healthy. But in many cases the enlargement proceeds beyond these
hounds, and the prostate may attain a size twice or thrice—nay, even
ten, or fifteen times its natural one ; an enlargement which finds a
parallel only in the goitres, caused by the monstrous growth of the
thyroid gland, surrounding the throat.
From the enlargement of the prostate, the bladder becomes some-
what irritable, and the urine flows slowly ; but these first symptoms
generally attract little attention, till from some accidental cause, as
wet feet, hard drinking, or venereal indulgences, the swelling sud-
denly increases, and causes complete retention of urine. But the dis-
ease frequently, from not being understood or attended to by the
patient, proceeds much more insidiously, just like stricture. The
urine is gradually expelled more and more frequently and slowly, the
patient not having the power entirely to empty his bladder at once.
The consequence is, that some of the urine, being constantly left in
the bladder, undergoes the same putrefying changes, that were men-
tioned in speaking of stricture. This causes disease of the coats of the
bladder, and perhaps the formation of stone ; diseases, especially under
such circumstances, of a most lamentable and often hopeless nature-
Ultimately the kidneys also may become diseased, and lead to a neces-
sarily fatal termination. It will be seen from this description how very
serious are the effects of this disease in many cases, and it generally
shatters and prostrates the moral character of a patient as much as
the physical.
With regard to the treatment, its early application is of paramount
importance. If the enlargement be not detected, till disease of the
coats of the bladder have been produced, the treatment will be ren-
dered much more difficult. The great object to be kept in view in
treatment, is not to try to diminish the size of the prostate, which is
for the most part, beyond the power of medicine; but to prevent the
evil effects, which must result from an obstuction to the free passage
of urine. Therefore the treatment here, as in so many diseases, is not
curative, but palliative, or preventive. However, if treatment be
adopted early, and strenuously persevered in, the patient may live to
an old age with scarcely any inconvenience from the enlargement.
The grand essential in the treatment, as was pointed out by Sir
Evcrard Home, is the constant use of the catheter. By this instrument,
supplying the want of the natural powers, the bladder should be com-
pletely emptied of urine twice a day, as soon as it is discovered that
the patient has not the power of voluntarily emptying it completely.
By this simple means, if unremittingly persevered in, all the ill effects
which would inevitably follow from the retention of the urine, are in
many cases entirely obviated ; and the man, who, if untreated, would
have sunk to the grave, amid the most wretched sufferings, may carry
his grey hairs thither in peace after many years of a grateful life.


But besides this chronic enlargement, the prostate is subject by no
means infrequently to acute affections, which are generally caused by
gonorrhoea; and it is these, which lay the foundation of its more
serious diseases in elderly life. The prostate or the mucous membrane
covering it, becomes sometimes inflamed, either from the gradual ex-
tension of the gonorrhoeal inflammation down to that part of the
canal, or, still more frequently, from the use of violent remedies to
arrest the discharge. It is dangerous to use too powerful means to
stop the discharge while at its height; for such are very liable to
throw the inflammation bachcards upon the more important organs,
such as the prostate, testicle, bladder, &c. The symptoms of inflam-
mation of the mucous membrane, covering the surface of the prostate,
are, an uneasiness at the end of the glans, and an urgent desire to
pass water. The urine gives little pain in passing along the canal,
but great pain is felt in forcing out the last drops, along with the
sensation, as if a foreign body wore being expelled from the bladder.
There is a very frequent desire to make water, and the moment the
mind thinks of doing so, the impulse becomes irresistible. These
symptoms depend On inflammation of the mucous membrane of the
neck of the bladder and prostate, and are soon relieved by restoring
the gonorrhoeal discharge, whose injudicious arrest is generally the
cause of them.
But the substance of the prostate is not unfrequently inflamed, and
this is more serious. The great irritability and incontinence of urine,
which are symptomatic of inflammation of the mucous membrane, maj
have greatly subsided, but the urine is now expelled with some diffi-
culty and without force. There is also deep-seated throbbing pain in
the perineum, increased on pressure. The orifice of the urethra is red,
and the end of the glans has a dark reddish blush. On examining the
prostate by the finger, passed into the bowel, it is found a little swol-
len, and there is pain on firm pressure. The discharge becomes thin
and gleety, and not so purulent as before, and there are sometimes a
few drops of blood in straining at stool. These are the symptoms of
subacute inflammation of the prostate in gonorrhea, as it generally
occurs.
In the more acute and violent inflammation of the prostate these
symptoms are all aggravated. There is often complete retention of
urine from the swelling of the gland. The pain in the perineum is
increased, and shoots round to the loins, thighs, &c. The discharge
quite stops, aud the redness of the orifice increases. Examined
through the bowel, the gland is hot and very painful to the touch ; and
the patient has constantly the feeling, as if there were a foreign heavy
body in the bowel. Acute prostatitis often ends in abscess. As long
as a gleet continues, inflammation of the prostate is liable to he
brought on by cold or damp, or excesses in drinking.
Inflammation of the prostate often becomes chronic, the symptom!
growing less intense, and assuming a slow wearing character, most
prostrating to the bodily and mental powers. In chronic inflamma-
tion the pain in the urethra and the weight in the bowel continue,


though duller and more obscure. There is great irritation of the anus,
accompanied often by piles. The discharge is slight, sometimes a mere
colourless gleet, but now and then purulent. This often leads to perma-
nent enlargement, and is the most frequent cause of this dangerous
malady under the ago of forty.
These affections of the prostate are a serious class of diseases The
prostate is a very important gland, not so much perhaps on account of
its own functions, as from its position. It surrounds the neck of the
bladder, and therefore its diseases often most dangerously interfere with
the discharge of the urine. Through it also the seminal ducts pass, and
therefore its inflammation is very apt to cause seminal disease. More-
over the affections of the prostate have a dreadfully depressing effect on
the spirits, and on the bodily sensations. This-is probably owing to the
intimate connection of the prostate with the seminal ducts, and with the
sexual powers; otherwise it is not easy to account for the overwhelming
feelings of obscure and undefinabie misery, which oppress the sufferer
from these diseases. He feels as if bent down by a weight of lead; and
there are.perhaps no diseases, which more thoroughly unman a patient,
than these. They moreover frequently lay the foundation of incurable
enlargement of the prostate later in life; which, especially if it be neg-
lected, is one of the most miserable of all diseases, and utterly breaks
down a man, physically and morally. The only way adequately to pre-
vent this miserable class of diseases is to prevent gonorrhoea.
There is another, and a common affection of the prostate, not of so
serious a nature, but which causes a great deal of misery. It is called
irritable prostate. In this there are obscure sensations about the region
of the gland, viz., uneasiness in the perineum, weight in the bowel,
rather frequent desire to pass water, and a slight gleet, just enough to
moisten the linen. The orifice of the canal has a peculiar appearance;
it is rather more patent and redder than natural. If the patient drink,
or indulge much in sexual intercourse, the discharge may become puru-
lent, and is often mistaken for a fresh gonorrhoea. On going to stool
there are often a few drops of a fluid, like a thin mixture of milk and
water, pressed out of the urinary canal, by the passage of the faces,
before the stream of urine comes. This is the prostatic fluid. The urine
moreover, in this and other prostatic affections, is often turbid with a
white cloud, caused by the secretion of alkaline phosphatic salts. These
symptoms depend on irritation of the prostatic portion of the urethra,
and of the ducts and follicles of the prostate. It'is often, like the other
prostatic affections, very obstinate, and depresses the mind of the patient
greatly. It is frequently accompanied by spermatorrhoea with all its
prostrating effects.
Mr. Adams in his excellent treatise on the prostate, gives directions
for the treatment of these various diseases. He has found the Chia tur-
pentine, given in five grain doses thrice a-day, a very valuable means of
checking the gleety discharge, which proceeds from the surface and folli-
cles of the prostate.
There is yet another and most lamentable consequence, which is liable
to follow gonorrhoea. This is an inflammation of the eyes, or ophthal


mia, caused by the accidental contact of any of the gonorrhoeal discharge
with the eyeball. If the slightest particle of this matter be conveyed bv
the fingers or other substances soiled by it, to the eye, the most frightful
form of inflammation of that organ will speedily be set up. Gonorrheal
ophthalmia is perhaps the most violent of all, and the usual methods
applied in other diseases of the eye, generally prove here of little avail.
The ipflammation may run so high, that the eye bursts and sight is
irrecoverably lost in twenty-four hours. Generally one eye only is
affected; but great care must be taken, especially in the night, that none
of the yellow matter from it enters the other, or both may be lost. It
is an affection much more common in men than women, chiefly because
the male organ, being necessarily so much more bandied by the patient,
makes contagion more apt to take place.
In the treatment of this disease, almost everything depends on its
adoption as early as possible, for if the inflammation be once fully
developed in all its fury, medical aid can do little to save the eye.
Therefore all who suffer from gonorrhoea, should be especially careful
that none of the discharge come in contact inadvertently with their
eye, taking care to dip their fingers in water if they touch the matter;
and if any symptoms of redness, itching, or a feeling as if of sand rolling
under the lids (the usual symptoms of commencing ophthalmia) be per-
ceived, they should at once apply for assistance, as it is only the abor-
tive treatment, or the attempt to nip the disease in the bud, that can
here be expected to save vision. The abortive treatment consists in
using a strong solution of nitrate of silver, of four or five grains to the
ounce, so as to change, if possible, the character of the inflammation.
This should be repeated at intervals, if the disease be checked by it: but
if it have proceeded to the acute stage, other powerful remedies will be
necessary, to give the patient a chance. Thus, bleeding from the arm,
leeches round the eye, as well as the caustic solution, should be used;
and in some few instances, if these means be energetically employed,
sight may be saved.
But it is not only in the adults affected with gonorrhoea, that it may
by contagion destroy vision: infants at birth not unfrequently lose both
eyes, if their mother happen at the time to have a gonorrhoea. The dis-
charge enters into the child’s eyes, as its head is passing through the
vagina, and in two or three days after birth, inflammation, with the dis-
charge of pus, heat, and swelling set in ; and in many cases both eyes are
lost in spite of all the efforts of the physician. Many of the unfortunate
tenants of the blind asylums, who awaken our pity in the streets, have
lost their sight at birth in this way.
Having now given an outline of most of the important diseases, which
may and very often do, arise from gonorrhoea, I come next to the most
interesting question; how is this disease, the fountain of so much misery,
to be prevented? Prevented it will never be, till mankind in general be
roused from their apathy about all physical evils, and most of all about
the venereal complaints, and set themselves earnestly to work, to prevent,
and, as far as possible, eradicate them. This is one of the diseases, whose
prevention is comparatively easy, as we know well its cause, which is


pngle and definite. To effect its prevention therefore, what we want is
earnest endeavour and co-operation. In our own persons we should care-
fully avoid spreading the disease, and in others we should do all we can
to prevent their catching it, and to cure it if caught. We should seek,
above all, completely to do away with prostitution, which is the grand
cause of the venereal diseases. I shall speak hereafter of the mode in
which this great object is to be effected.
Besides these social and moral means for the prevention of gonorrhoea,
there are means which each individual should use, who wishes in the
present dangerous state of the sexual world, and as long as prostitution
exists among us, neither to receive nor to give infection. No one should
, ever neglect, after a suspicious sexual connection, (and all mercenary
love is to be viewed as such,) to make water immediately, and also to
wash well the genital organs, whether with pure water, or with a chlo-
rine or alkaline wash, which is more effectual, but not so easily to be
had. The external washing will prevent any chance of balanitis, and
will render the occurrence of chancre much less probable. The urine
will cleanse the canal internally, and probably prevent a gonorrhma,
even though the female should be highly diseased.
Even though one has great confidence in a woman’s assertion that she
is not diseased, yet if she have been exposed to infection, these pre-
cautions should never be neglected; as she may communicate a disease
from infectious matter having been retained in her organs, though without
causing disease in her. In tact, it should be recognised as a settled rule
in all mercenary intercourse, as long as it lasts in the world, that both
parties should wash carefully immediately after connection; which sim-
ple precaution, so easy of application, would of itself prevent the great
majority of diseases. It is now very generally adopted, both by men and
women, among those who have experience, self-regard, and prudence in
these matters ; but it is too often neglected, whether from carelessness
or inexperience, or still more from ignorance and intoxication, especially
among the poorer classes. Women of the better description, both expect
and are glad to see precautions used, which are a guarantee of their own
safety, and themselves habitually employ them. Besides these means,
the venereal act should not be prolonged, and ejaculation should take
place, as the semen helps to cleanse the canal.
But by far the most certain preventive of gonorrhoea, and of all
other venereal diseases, is the condom , an artificial sheath for the penis,
male of very delicate membrane; which, if well made, so as not to be
torn, renders gonorrhoea impossible. It is so thin as not very greatly to
interfere with the venereal enjoyment; and, yet from many causes it is
comparatively seldom used in this country. In the first place, the shy-
ness between the sexes, which is much greater hero than abroad, prevents
the man from using, what he may think would show him to bo sus-
picious, or might be disliked, or thought unnatural, by the woman ; who
probably for the most part is perfectly apathetic about the matter, or
would rather be glad to see means used, which would save herself also
from any risk. Moreover, the sheath has been proscribed by moralists,
as an unnatural, and therefore immoral interference with the mormal


act, and final cause, of sexual intercourse; and therefore it is sometimes
difficult to procure it in this country, as it is sold only in a few shops,
which have a low moral character, and in an under-hand way. Nay,
on its first invention and introduction into France, as a means of pre-
venting venereal diseases, we learn from M. Parent Duchatelet, that a
body of medical men, who met to deliberate on the subject, published to
their own shame, their strong disapprobation of the invention and its
author, not on account of the facility it might give to the secret in-
dulgence of sexual desires, unburdened by the fear of offspring, bat
because they held it a sin tot attempt to prevent these diseases! It gives one
pain to think that the good Duchatelet, whose life-time was devoted, like
that of Dr. Andrew Combe, to the prevention of disease, and whose great
work on prostitution I shall afterwards treat of, should have also adopted
this perverted, and in him too strangely illogical, opinion.
It is a very great pity that ideas, many of them so sinful, for by no other
name can one term those prejudices, which stand in the way of the
sacred cause of the prevention of disease, should prove a barrier to the
introduction, and free liberty of using, according to the necessities of
each case, a means which in the present condition of society is of so very
great value. Indeed its discovery, if rightly viewed, may be, and I trust
one day, shall be considered, as a very great benefit to society. As a
preventive of venereal disease, the sheath is most invaluable; with its
aid, one may pass scatheless through'the very midst of infection ; and for
any one in whom disease is particularly to be dreaded, as in a weakly
constitution, or a patient with spermatorrhoea or other evils, its protection
is often the greatest blessing.
But it has fared with this instrument, just as with all other efforts to
prevent venereal diseases; all have been alike discountenanced, or at
best, viewed with apathy, by the mistaken moralist; to whom these
hideous and desolating diseases appear more as a salutary warning to
men, the existence of which he would rather coldly ascribe to providence,
than to his own and other’s lukewarmness. Would that the reader may
feel, as strongly as I do, the injustice, immorality, and want of human
sympathy, contained in such opinions!
When society has become fully alive to the desire to prevent venereal
diseases, as well as all others, then and not till then, will the great value
of the sheath be perceived, as a most powerful means of such prevention.
Meanwhile it were very desirable that it should come into more general
use, and that there should be a greater facility of obtaining it; so that
each individual who wishes to avail himself of it, may readily do so. All
attempts to interfere with its sale, or with the perfect freedom of pro-
curing it, must be looked on as injurious to the interests of society, and
liable to occasion the most deplorable diseases.
Care should be taken that the sheath, if used, should be made of good
materials, not pervious, and that the same one should not be used fre-
quently, as thus it becomes less trustworthy. Along with its use, the
other precautions of making water and washing should not be neglec-
ted ; and were tnese precautions generally made known and adopted
we should have in a short time the number of venereal diseases wonder


tally reduced, and endless human misery, Irate, crime, and bitterness
spared.
Besides these precautions during and after coition, there are some
other prophylactics, ■which are very useful for those who expose them-
selves much to infection, especially if they do not use the sheath. They
are more efficacious as preventives of balanitis and chancre, than of
gonorrhoea; consisting as they do, in means for hardening the external
mucous membrane. Those who have been circumcised, as I stated be-
fore, never have balanitis, and they are also much less subject to chancre;
because the mucous membrane of the glans becomes hardened by constant
exposure, and excoriations rarely take place in coition, into which the
cbancrous matter may find a way. Those who have much promiscuous
sexual intercourse might imitate this, by drawing back the prepuce, and
so keeping the glans habitually exposed, a state of things which in many
persons is natural. This is a powerful preventive of balanitis and
syphilis, and is especially necessary for those, in whom the mucous meow
brane is apt to excoriate and tear in coition, which renders them very
liable to chancre. Under exposure the mucous membrane will become
tough and insusceptible of infection. Sponging with cold water, or
what is more powerful, washing frequently with some astringent, as the
decoction of oak bark, acts also as a preventive by hardening the parts.
However unfortunate a man may be in getting a gonorrhoea, no one
who has a true heart, with love for his kind, will ever give cne to
another. Neither in carelessness nor sport, for as we have seen, it may
be a death-sport; nor from a wish to be revenged on the sex in the per-
son of a helpless girl, innocent at least towards him, and who has so
tew friends, or kind treatment, an action unmanly and unfeeling; nor
from ignorance whether his gleet be infectious—knowing that while a
sign of yellow matter remains, it is probably still infectious, and in such
a case, if he will not abstain, he must wear the sheath; nor from heed-
lessness, irreverence for the girl, want of heart, nor bluntness of con-
science, from which feelings may the reader ever be free. A man in the
present state of society has far less excuse for giving the disease to
another, than a woman, as the latter, from the peculiar form of the
female genital organs, may possibly not know that she is diseased; and
besides she has often the powerful excuses of destitution, the necessity of
gaining a livelihood, friendlessness, and, last not least, her shameful
degradation in the eyes of society to plead for her, while we have none
of these. But I trust that the reader, very far from doing auything to
spread these or other diseases, will rather, to the best of his powers, co-
operate in the endeavour to prevent them.


SYPHILIS.
If the disease, which I have just been describing, viz., gonorrhoea, be
frequently Tiewed in a light and jesting manner, by those who are.unac-
quaiuted with the lamentable consequences it so often occasions, and by
the young and thoughtless,—such is not the case with the much more
formidable and dreaded disease, which comes now before us. While the
former is merely a simple inflammation, rendered frequently serious only
by the vitally important nature of the organs, where it occurs, syphilis
consists in a peculiar and specific poison; which, if it be once fairly in-
troduced into the system, contaminates the whole frame, and produces
the most deplorable effects.
Of all the plagues and scourges of mankind in the present day, this
disease may certainly be said to be the most fearful. It does not
overwhelm us with sudden panic and destruction, like cholera, or other
epidemic evils, which come but rarely, and therefore, however fearful
their visitations, have not a permanent influence on our fate; but it is
always with us, preying on our vitals, and slowly sapping the con-
stitution, moral and physical, of thousands; and these the young, hope-
ful, and vigorous, the pride and the promise of our race. Mankind will
yet, and let us hope ere long, become universally alive to the fearful pre-
judice and inhumanity, which have suffered this disease to run on so long
without any means being taken for its prevention and eradication.
Syphilis, commonly called pox, is the disease produced by a poisonous
matter, introduced into the frame during sexual intercourse. It first ap-
pears locally on the genital organs of either sex, in the form of a small
nicer; the poison of which is in many cases absorbed into the general
system, giving rise to the most dreadful consequences. The symptoms of
the disease are therefore divided into three classes, according as they mark
different stages of the poisoning, local or general. These classes are the
primary, the secondary, and the tertiary.
Primary syphilis consists in a small nicer, secreting a poisonous end
contagious matter, and seated on the part which has been exposed to
contagion. 1 It is produced by the contact of the secretion of a similar
ulcer, with an unprotected surface. When any of the matter of a sy-
philitic ulcer, in an individual affected with the disease, finds its way


beneath the shin or mucous membrane of a healthy person, the following
results take place. During the first twenty four-hours, the point of the
skin where the virus is, becomes red ; in the second and third day, a lit-
tle pimple rises on it; in the third and fourth, the pimple becomes a ves-
icle, filled with clear fluid; on the fourth and fifth, this fluid becomes
thick and yellow, and the vesicle thus becomes a pustule with a slightly
depressed centre, exactly like one of the small-pox pustules. In the
sisth and seventh days, the matter dries up, and forms a crust, which in
a few more days falls off, disclosing a small ulcer, about the size of a split
pea. Its base is rather hard from the effusion of some lymph around; its
sides are abrupt and a little everted, so that it looks as if cleanly cut out
with a punch; its surface covered with a whitish tenacious film, and se-
creting a thin acrid pus, which possesses the contagious properties.
Such is, in many cases, the apparently slight and simple origin of this
terrible disease. A chancre, for so the small ulcer is named, is, in the
male, generally seated on some part of the glans of. the penis, or on the
internal or external surface of the prepuce; sometimes, though rarely,
inside the urethra, like gonorrhma. A chancre is not, like gonorrhma,
confined to mucous membranes; it may arise on all parts of the body
alike, provided the contagious matter be introduced beneath the skin.
Hence, accoucheurs sometimes contract the disease, in examining preg-
nant women affected with it, if they happen to have a scratch on the finger.
To give rise to chancre, a closer contact of its peculiar poisonous mat-
ter is necessary, than in gonorrhoea, which is caused merely by the pus
coming in contact with a mucous membrane. The matter of chancre
however must he introduced below the surface, whether of the skin or of
a mucous membrane, so as to come in contact with the blood, else it will
not act. Hence infection is produced either by its meeting some abrasion
of the surface, or by its getting into a little follicle or pouch, where it lies
dormant for a short time, till it has eaten its way into the quick, and then
it is developed into the ulcer. It may also perhaps, if allowed to remain
long enough, eat its way through a mucous surface by its acrid proper-
ties. If it meet an abrasion, the ulcer begins immediately to be devel-
oped. and frequently without going through tho previous stages of pimple,
vesicle, and pustule; if it has to eat its way through the tissues, some
days may pass before the disease shows itself.
But the primary ulcer is in many cases by no means of so mild and
simple a nature, but may be a most serious disease. There are several
different forms of chancre, occasioned, according to some authors, by
specific differences in the nature of the poisonous matter, but according to
others, (among whom is M. Ilicord, and who believe that there is but one
syphilitic poison), by the differences of constitution in the patients. One
of these is the gangrenous or phagedmnic (or eating) ulcer—a most ter-
rible disease. In it the inflammation caused by the poisonous matter,
runs so high, that mortification is produced, which has a tendency to
spread on every side, destroying the tissues, so that a part and sometimes
even the whole of the penis is lost, and even death may result. This is
by no means an uncommon form of the disease, and in the hospitals
hi our large towns, most deplorable instances of it are constantly to be


seen. Those who admit but one kind of syphilitic poison, assert that
this fearful kind of sore is owing to the badness of the patient’s const
tution. It is chiefly found in young plethoric persons of dissipated
habits, who are weakened by intemperance or other noxious influences.
Others say that the character of the sore depends on the kind of mattu
which produced it, and thus that a gangrenous ulcer is generated by om
of a similar nature. Probably both of these causes influence its dew
lopement.
Another important variety of chancre is the indurated one, in whicbs
large quantity of lymph is thrown out into the surrounding tissue?,
giving it a hard cartilaginous base, which remains after the ulcet ii
healed.
These are the most important forms of the primary nicer, as well from
their local peculiarities, as from their comparative likelihood to give rise
to secondary symptoms. General poisoning of the system may follow all
of them, but it is much less likely to occur after the simple and the pba-
gedamic, than after the indurated chancre. While the former varietia
are followed by secondary symptoms in comparatively a small proportioa
of cases, indurated chancre gives rise to them almost invariably, becom-
ing thus the most formidable of all the varieties of chancre. M. Ricoid,
to whom, more than perhaps to any other, mankind are indebted for the
most valuable statistical and explanatory facts connected with venereal
diseases, says that general poisoning succeeds to indurated chancre in
eighty-eight cases in a hundred.
The poison is absorbed into the system from a chancre by the veins and
absorbent vessels, through whose thin coats it penetrates and mingles
with the vital current; and after a short time generally in from six to
eight weeks, it shows itself by the following symptoms, which have re-
ceived the name of secondary syphilis. Different forms of eruption, fre-
quently accompanied by ulceration of the mucous membrane of the throat,
breakout over the body. In this secondary stage nature tries to throw
off the poisonous matter by the skin and mucous surface. But if the
disease remain still uneradicated, which will probably be the case, unless
proper treatment be adopted, symptoms of a still graver nature will arise,
constituting the third stage, or tertiary syphilis. In this stage, it is
the bones and deeper tissues, which are chiefly attacked. The bones of
the palate, the nose, the skull, the shin, and in general, all the bones
which lie nearest the surface of the body, may become inflamed and mor-
tify, thus giving rise to deep abscesses and most melancholy deformities.
Thus may the disease, when once it has fairly gained admittance into the
system, continue in it for years, causing one after the other, symptoms
ever more and more calamitous; and it is sometimes very difficult wholly
to dislodge it, or to know when the patient is safe from its recurring per-
secutions. But I will speak more fully of these later symptoms here-
after, and meanwhile revert to the primary stage and its treatment.
If a man be so unfortunate as to contract a chancre, it is of the
ntmost importance, that it be destroyed as soon as possible. The shorter
the time it is allowed to exist, the less risk will there be of the occurrence
of secondary poisoning. Thus any one, who has exposed himself to the


chance of contagion, should watch carefully for the first signs of the
disease, and if he observe any traces of the different stages, the pimple,
the reside, the pustule, or the ulcer, he should at once resort to treat-
ment. This should consist in destroying the poison by cauterizing
the sore; if there be a vesicle or a pustule, it should be broken, and a
fine point of the nitrate of silver introduced, and the part thoroughly
cauterized. If an ulcer be already formed, cauterization is still the best
of all methods of healing it speedily, and preventing secondaries. It should
be cauterized at intervals, until the surface presents a healthy appearance,
secreting a simple yellow pus, instead of the thin poisonous matter. It
should be also frequently washed with some stimulating astringent,
which will wipe away the acrid secretion, and harden the surrounding
parts, so as to prevent, if possible, the absorption of the virus. A piece
of lint soaked in this lotion, should also be kept constantly applied.
Bicord uses for this purpose the aromatic wine, a French preparation;
and if it cannot be had, Mr. Acton recommends a lotion composed of
eight ounces of the decoction of oak bark, and half an ounce of the tinc-
ture of catechu, which will answer equally well. Under this simple
treatment, the mild form of chancre generally heals readily in eight to
ten days; and even if left to itself, it may heal in three or four weeks;
and in the majority of cases secondary poisoning will not follow.
In the gangrenous form of chancre, Ricord’s treatment is to soothe
the inflammatory sore, by the constant application of lint dipped in
a strong solution of opium; and, by regulating the diet and other
hygienic means, to brace the depraved constitution of the patient,
which he believes to be the chief cause of this formidable variety of the
disease. By these means, he says, the disease is soon arrested, only
destroying the part first engaged, and being succeeded by a healthy ulcer
that soon heals. Other surgeons prefer to treat it by the most power-
ful caustics, such as the nitric acid, which burns out the poisoned part,
and leaves a healthy surface underneath. Either mode is sometimes
powerless in checking the ravages of the disease, which, as has been
mentioned, may in severe cases destroy the whole penis. If a cure take
place, as generally happens, the reparative processes ‘of nature often
leave much less deformity than might have been expected, even though a
considerable part of the penis may have been destroyed. This form of
chancre is followed by secondary poisoning only in a minor proportion of
cases; although when they do occur, they are usually of a peculiarly
severe nature.
If a chancre become indurated either before or during treatment,
cauterization and the astringent applications should not be resorted to; as
the disease is no longer a simple one, and these means will scarcely suc-
ceed in curing it. The ulcer may indeed heal under their use, but the
induration remains, and is very liable to break out again into ulceration.
Therefore in cases of indurated chancre, Ricord gives mercury, a medi-
cine which seems to have a specific power over syphilis; and under its
action the induration generally soon disappears. The indurated sore
is the only variety of primary syphilis in which he gives mercury; and
his reasons for doing so are, first, that without it the induration is very


difficult to remove, and secondly, that secondary symptoms almost ia.
variably follow this variety of chancre, and the mercurial treatment often
prevents their occurrence.
There is scarcely any question on which surgeons are more divided,
than on the propriety of giving mercury in syphilis. In former times it
was thought to be impossible to cure the disease without it; and the
unfortunate patients were one and all subjected to the most severe
salivation, a remedy which was often worse than the disease. But
it was afterwards discovered, that many cases were perfectly cura-
ble without mercury at all; and hence the non-raercurialists, proceeding
to the opposite extreme, refused to give that medicine, whose baneful
effect on the human frame is well known, in any case. Between these
opposite opinions arose the eclectic school, of which Ricord is one, and
from his immense experience in the Parisian hospitals, there is no one
whose views deserve more deference. He made extensive experiments in
both modes of treatment, with, and without mercury, in all the various
stages, and it is from his results that the treatment here recommended is
chiefly taken. He does not give mercury in any form of primary chancre,
except it be attended with a certain degree of induration. In simple
cases, where most probably no general poisoning will occur, it would be
very injudicious to give so dangerous a remedy as mercury; which is
only to be used when a greater evil is by its means alone to be overcome.
Ricord gives mercury at all times very cautiously and in small doses,
rarely, if ever, producing salivation, (which is an inflammation and swell-
ing of the gums and sides of the mouth, with a profuse discharge of saliva,
caused by the powerful action of mercury on the system), which he sedu-
lously avoids as an evil. He gives generally, one grain of the protoiod-
uret of mercury with one grain of henbane in pill every night to begin
with, and increases gradually the dose by a grain at a time, every five or
six days, if the disease remain stationary; but if healing commences, he
continues at the same dose, and does not leave it off at once, but gradu-
ally diminishes it, after a cure has taken place.
Before Ricord’s investigations on syphilis, it was often impossible to
be certain, whether an ulcer on the genital organs was syphilitic or not,
for ulcers may arise from other causes. The appearance of the ulcer
was the chief criterion by which surgeons were guided; the syphilitic
ulcer having often a peculiar form, which the practised eye readily recog-
nises. But in many cases the ulcer did not present this characteristic
form, and as the statements of the patients, especially females, as to pre-
vious exposure to infection, were unfortunately not to be relied on, it was
often impossible to say whether an ulcer was syphilitic or not; a question
of course of the utmost importance. Ricord however, discovered a cer-
tain and simple test for this, namely, by inoculation. If some of the
matter secreted by a chancre be introduced on the point of a lancet below
the skin on another part of the body, it will give rise to a similar sore,
which will go through all the stages of pimple, vesicle, pustule, and ulcer,
described above. •By this inoculation, (exactly similar to that used in
small-pox, and vaccination,) the mysteries of syphilis were cleared up,
and a means was given for drawing a definite line between different
forms of disease, till then too often confounded. It had often been


thought before, that chancre and gonorrhma were produced by the same
poison, and could mutually cause each other, but Ricord’s test shows
them to be totally distinct. The matter of gonorrhoea when inoculated
will not produce a chancre; it is merely the product of an inflamed mu-
cous membrane, somewhat similar to the thick matter that runs from the
nose, or is expectorated from the chest in a bronchitic attack, (although
there must be something peculiarly acrid and irritating in its nature,)
and hence, no poisoning of the system can result from it. All venereal
diseases are thus divided into the virulent and the non-virulent, distin-
guishable by this test of inoculation; the one capable of causing second-
ary poisoning, the other not. Inoculation is performed by introducing
some matter from the sore under the skin on the thigh of the patient; if
an ulcer forms, it is at once destroyed by cauterization. The sore formed,
bn the thigh is similar in character to the one on the penis; therefore a
gangrenous sore should not be inoculated. Bicord never permitted him-
self to inoculate one individual with matter from another ; and there-
fore it is not known whether, in such a case, a similar variety of sore
would be produced.
Animals cannot be inoculated with chancre, —a very singular fact —
whilst it has been recently discovered that the cow-pock, or pustule
formed on the udder of the cow, from which we derive the inestimable
boon of vaccination, may bo caused by the introduction of the matter of a
small pox-pustule under the skin of that animal. Therefore we owe our
protection from that fearful disease to the modification it undergoes in
passing through the system of an animal; one of the most striking and
wonderful facts, presented to us by science, showing how subtly linked
together are all parts of the animal world.
A chancre may, though rarely, be developed inside the urethra, and it
was owing to its secretion being mistaken for gonorrhoea, that the latter
disease was supposed in some instances to cause general poisoning. The
symptoms of urethral chancre are; generally in not less than a fortnight
after the infection, (during part of which time the virus has doubtless lain
dormant in one of the follicles in the canal), a thin yellowish secretion,
sometimes streaked with blood, begins to flow from the orifice of the
urethra. Pain is felt in making water at one point of the canal, and
here pressure also is painful, and perhaps some hardness may be felt.
On opening the orifice of the canal, the chancre may often be seen. By
these marks, and by the fact that the secretion does not begin to flow till
about a fortnight after infection, the ulcer taking some days to pass
through its previous stages, this disease may be distinguished from gon-
orrhoea. Inoculation will, if need be, help to decide the question.
The treatment here is the same as for external chancre, according to
th,e different varieties. If a simple chancre, cauterization and injections
of aromatic wine; if it become indurated, causing stricture, then mer-
cury ;if it be gangrenous, it is a fearful disease, and may extend to the
bladder and cause death, though happily such a termination is rare.
Any of these varieties of chancre may be accompanied or followed by a
Bubo ; which is included among the primary symptoms, as it is a local
complaint, and does not show that the system has become in'ected.


Secondary symptoms are not more frequent, where there has been a bubo,
than where there has not. A bubo, as has been already described, is the
inflammation of one of the glands of the groin. In gonorrhoea it occurs
sometimes, but then it is a simple non-virulent affection, caused merely
by the irritation of tire neighbouring disease. But the bubo which ac-
companies chancre, is often caused by the presence of syphilitic matter
in the gland, 'to which it has been conveyed by the absorbent vessels
from the chancre. In such a case the inflammation of the gland pro-
ceeds rapidly; it swells, reddens, and suppurates, disclosing an ulcerated
surface, which is in fact a large chancre, and secretes the same virulent
inoculable matter as the primary sore. But all buboes occurring durinj
chancre, are not virulent; they may be caused just as in gonorrhtea, by
the simple irritation produced by the neighbourhood of the chancre
These buboes are not virulent, and if they suppurate, the matter the;
secrete is not inoculable. Now, when a bubo occurs during a chancre,
how can we distinguish whether it be virulent or not; whether it be
caused by the absorption of poisonous matter, or merely by irritation!
Before suppuration has occurred and inoculation is possible, it is often
beyond our power to determine whether a bubo be, or be not virulent;
and we can only presume it to •be so by the greater rapidity and intract-
ability of its progress. But this does not make any difference in the
treatment, which should always aim at preventing, if possible, sup-
puration.
Buboes generally occur during the second or third week of chancre,
rarely earlier ; and it is remarked by Eicord, that they occur chiefly when
a chancre is situated at or near the frcmitm or little band of mucous
membrane, which joins the glans and prepuce. The first symptoms of
bubo are, a pain in a gland in the groin, which gradually swells, inflames
and becomes very tender and painful, so as to prevent all motion. The
swelling increases, if the disease be not arrested, and suppuration takes
place attended by shivering. The matter either makes its own way to
the surface, or is let out by the lancet, and an ulcerated surface is left,
secreting a virulent or non-virulent pus, as the case may be. This son
sometimes heals readily, but in other cases, where the constitution is bad,
or the disease very virulent and extensive, it may be tedious and in-
tractable.
In the treatment of bubo, it is of great importance that suppuration, with
all its tedious and uncertain course, should be if possible prevented; and
therefore every means should be taken to cut short the disease. The most
important of all these means is, that the disease be taken in time. When-
ever the least pain or swelling is felt in any gland of the groin, by i
patient affected with chancre, he should at once lay himself up, as every
step of exercise he takes will aggravate the complaint, which advances
very rapidly, and soon proceeds beyond our power to check it. Cold
water or ice should then be diligently applied, and this often at once
arrests the disease. However if the cold do not succeed, or if it seem
rather to increase than to arrest the swelling, compression should be next
tried. This is effected by a spiral bandage, wrapped round the loins and
over a pad placed on the swollen gland in the groin, This means, if em


ployed early, often succeeds in suppressing the disease. But if the in-
flammation gain ground, and be too powerful for these measures, they
must be left off, and antiphlogistics resorted to, viz; the application of
leeches and poultices to the gland, and tartar emetic given internally to
produce nausea, just as in the case of inflammation of the testicle. By
these means also, success is frequently obtained, and suppuration pre-
vented. But often, and especially when the bubo is a virulent one,
caused by the absorption of syphilitic matter, this desirable end cannot be
obtained, and pus begins to be formed in the gland. As soon as suppura-
tion takes place, (which is attended here, as in other parts of the body,
nsuallyby shivering and feverish creeping of the skin), and the surgeon
learns that pus is present by the feeling of fluctuation imparted to the
fingers, the sooner it is let out the better. It is much better to let it out
by the lancet, than to wait till nature makes an opening, because the
latter process ts slow, and accompanied by a greater spread of the ulcera-
tion. When the suppurating surface of a virulent bubo is laid open, it
is to be treated just as a simple chancre, which in fact it is, by cauteri-
zation and aromatic wine; or, if it be gangrenous or indurated, the same
treatment should be used as for the corresponding primary ulcers. When
the constitution is scrofulous, a bubo is often a most intractable and ted-
ious disease, and may bring on tire worst consequences, by the long'
confinement and other weakening influences it necessitates.
I now come to speak of secondary symptoms. These are caused by the
absorption into the blood of the poisonous matter from the primary sore,
and make their appearance generally in from six to eight weeks after its
commencement. They rarely appear earlier than this, but are often
postponed till later, from various causes. Thus a course of mercurytaken
for the primary sore, seems sometimes wholly to prevent, and at other
times to delay, their appearance, so that they do not break out till con-
siderably later than usual. Eicord does not believe that they can occur
after an interval of years, as some authors assert. The dread of this
secondary poisoning is one of the great terrors of the disease, for after the
occurrence of a primary sore, the patient is kept for a long time in
anxiety and suspense, whether the whole system have been contaminated
or not.
Secondary symptoms are not capable of being transmitted by contagion
from one individual to another, and they are not inoculable; but they
are so far hereditary, that the child in the womb may be infected by the
disease of the mother. They consist of various eruptions on the skin,
often attended with ulcerated sore tnroat, and rheumatic pains in diffe-
rent parts of the body. There are several kinds of these eruptions, of
various appearance and severity. Some consist of rosy spots very like
measles, others of pimples scattered over the body, both of which gradu-
ally assume a peculiar copper-coloured appearance, which is very
characteristic of the syphilitic disease. These are the most common and
the most readily curable. Others, which are of a much graver nature,
and are generally found in broken-down constitutions, consist of a
number of small corroding ulcers, scattered over the skin, and covered by
hard dark scabs. This eruption is generally accompanied by great ex-
i.


haustion of the powers, and the patient may even sink under it. Another
form is that called lepra or psoriasis, in which the body is covered by
patches of eruption, on which scales of dry cuticle constantly form and
full off. This scaly disease is exceedingly obstinate and intractable.
Another consists of what are called condylomata or mucous tubercles,
which are smooth fleshy elevations, rising on soft parts of the skin, es-
pecially on the scrotum and groin, and round the anus. They may ex-
tend and cover the whole of these parts, and thus form a most loathsome
mass of disease. Their'surface ulcerates and secretes an offensive fluid,
which however, like all other products of secondary symptoms, is in.
capable of transmitting the disease.
These constitute the most important forms of the syphilitic eruptions;
they are generally preceded or accompanied by feverishness, loss of strength
and appetite, a pale leaden complexion, and sometimes by a pustular
eruption on the scalp, causing the hair to fall out, so that baldness is
produced.
They are often accompanied moreover, by the important and serious com-
plication of ulcerated sore-throat, which begins by redness and swelling of the
mucous membrane at the back part of the mouth, causing hoarseness, and
pain in swallowing. This affection is generally a chronic one, and may
continue for months in this first stage without ulceration, if care be taken;
but at other times, and especially under exposure to wet, or intemperate
habits of the patient, it may become deeply ulcerated, and be very in-
tractable;
Another organ which is often attacked in the course of the secondary
poisoning, is the eye, the iris of which may become inflamed; and if prompt
treatment be not adopted, vision may be lost. This affection is generally
found in very bad constitutions,—in the miserable, half-starved, and in-,
temperate poor of both sexes.
These then, the various eruptions, the sore-throat, the iritis, and the rheu-
matic pains in the limbs, constitute the symptoms of secondary poisoning;
various degrees and combinations of which occur in different cases. It
has been said, that it is chiefly after indurated chancre that they occur; the
other varieties, viz., the simple and phagedsnie, comparatively rarely giving
rise to them. After the poison has been taken into the system, it lies dor-
mant for awhile, and it is generally after exposure of some kind, whether to
wet, cold, or other depressing influence, that these secondary symptoms
appear. The moment that any of them are observed, treatment should
be resorted to; and where this is done, and circumstances are otherwise
favourable, a cure will generally soon be obtained. The favourable cir-
cumstances are, that the constitution of the patient be good, that he should
take every pains to co-operate in his cure by avoiding exposure to cold or
excesses of any kind ; and that his system be not weakened by previous
injudicious courses, of mercury, so as to be intolerant of this medicine,
which is Ricord’s grand remedy for secondary poisoning. In his ex-
perience he has found, that though secondaries may get well without
mercury, merely by care, warm baths, low diet, and other simple means,
yet they prove often very obstinate under such treatment, and are very
apt to return in a severer form, which mercury may no longer have tbs


same power to control. He therefore, gives mercury in the moderate
doses mentioned before, so as never, if possible, to produce salivation, in
nearly all cases of secondary symptoms. Besides this, the peculiar treat-
ment of each of the various symptoms is as follows.— For the different
kinds of eruption, warm baths are exceedingly useful, as they soothe the
skin, and excite it to a healthy action. In most cases they may be taken
twice a week, the patient remaining in them for from half an hour to two
hours. If there be mucous tubercles, they should be kept very clean, as inat-
tention to cleanliness is a great cause of them. They should be washed
at intervals with a solution of chloride of soda, then dusted over with ca-
lomel, and dry lint placed between their surfaces; a method which we
have seen in balanitis to have so good an effect in checking mucous
secretions. The sore throat should be lightly cauterized every three or
four days with the nitrate of silver, and gargled with some astringent
gargle, as the following: four ounces of the decoction of oak, or cinchona
bark, and one drachm of dilute muriatic acid. Great attention should be
paid to diet, and manner of life, which should be strictly hygienic, avoid-
ing late hours, excitement, or any other debilitating influence. A light,
plain, and nutritious diet should be taken during the treatment; and
great care must be observed in avoiding all exposure to damp or cold,
while under the mercurial course.
By these means a cure is generally effected, although some cases are
very tedious and intractable. It is especially in scrofulous and lympha-
tic constitutions that syphilis, like all other diseases, is most to be dreaded,
and when once it has taken root, is most difficult to dislodge.
If, from any cause, whether from the neglect of treatment, or the em-
ployment of injudicious or inefficient means, or, it may be,'from the weakness
of the constitution, or the deep root which the poison has taken in it, the
disease be not eradicated in this secondary stage, other symptoms succeed,
of a still more formidable nature. The secondary symptoms cither gra-
dually merge into them, after having lasted for months, with constant
relapses; or an interval of two or three years may take place between the
cessation of the secondary symptoms, and the outbreak of their still more
formidable successors. In the latter, it is now no longer the skin which
is the seat of the affection, but the deeper tissues, viz: the bones, and the
periosteum or membrane which covers them, and also the submucous or
subcutaneous tissues. This stage of syphilis is styled by Ricord, the
tertiary, t as it generally occurs later than the secondary one; which
usually, though not in all cases, precedes it, and often by degrees merges
into it.
In the secondary symptoms, says Ricord, the specific nature of the
syphilitic poison still remains, although greatly modified by its transfusion
through the economy ; therefore these may be inherited by the child in
the womb, though they are not inoculable ; and they require a specific
treatment by mercury. But in the tertiary stage, the poison is quite trans-
formed by its long sojourn in the system; therefore are tertiary symptoms
not hereditary, and should be treated by general and not specific means.
The tertiary symptoms are as follows: A large abscess may form at the
back of the throat, burst, and disclose a deep, tawney, and sloughing


ulcer, at the bottom of which the dead bone may be felt with a probe.
The root of the nose may bo attacked in the same manner, and large por.
tionsof the bones of the nose and the palate die and come away. H ere it is
the bones of the nose, palate, etc., which are first attacked by inflamma-
tion, either in their substance, or in their lining membrane; and as tie
vitality of bones is of a low character, they soon die when their nutrition
is interfered with by disease, and are then cast off. Along with these
lamentable occurrences, a pustular or scabby eruption often appears on
the extremities; the unfortunate patient, whose constitution has been
reduced to the lowest state by the long continuance of the disease, emaci-
ates rapidly, and, if not relieved by proper treatment, may die from the
hectic induced by the diarrhoea, and profuse suppuration, the-want of
sleep from pains in the bones, loss of appetite, and all the other powers of
nutrition; although death is a result which very seldom proceeds from sy-
phililis, when alone and uncomplicated with other diseases.
In other cases, different bones throughout the body are attacked in a
similar way by inflammation, followed by abscess, suppuration, and dis-
charge of the dead parts of bone. It is chiefly the bones nearest the
surface that are attacked, for instance, the shin-bone, the skull, aad
breast-bone. When disease occurs in these, there are first general rheu-
matic pains felt, which soon become fixed in certain spots of particular
bones, and are very much aggravated during the night, so as to prevent
sleep. In these spots the bones or their lining membranes inflame, and
if the inflammation be not subdued, they may go on to suppuration and
caries, or mortify, and pieces of them come away. It is generally the
bones themselves which are inflamed, more rarely their investing mem-
brane. When this membrane, the periosteum, is inflamed, nodes or
painful swellings are formed, by the effusion of lymph or other product of
inflammation. These nodes are generally situated on the subcutaneous
bones, as the shin, collar-bone, etc. They are very painful, chiefly .at
night; sometimes chronic, sometimes acute, proceeding to suppuration,
and disclosing, when they burst, dead bone underneath. For the perios-
teum not only invests the bone, but supplies it with nourishment from
the numerous blood-vessels, which it contains; and when it becomes in-
flamed and separated from the bone, the latter perishes from want of
nutriment.
Another symptom of tertiary syphilis, is the occurrence of subcutaneous
tumors, (tumors beneath the skin). These occur, like the other ter-
tiary symptoms, in cases where the poison has been long rooted in the
system, and generally long after the first appearance of secondary symp-
toms. They are small tumors about the size of a hazel nut, cither soli-
tary or in several parts of the body, situated beneath the skin or mucous
membrane. They remam perhaps for months indolent, without causing
any inconvenience, but when they have attained the size of a small nut,
they burst and discharge a thin ichorous matter. An irritable little
cavity, prone to inflammation and difficult to heal, is left behind; and
no sooner is it healed, than other tumors spring up in its place, and go
through the samecourse. These tumors may form in the substance of the
tongue and back part of the mouth, bursting and forming splits and fis- j


sores which pour out a fetid discharge, forming a most loathsome disease,
and impeding the movements of the tongue. This affection has often
been mistaken for cancer of the tongue, to which it bears a great resem-
blance in many respects, but it is curable, while cancer unfortunately is
not. These tumors are generally accompanied by other tertiary symp-
toms, as pains and inflammation of the bones, &c.,
Both in the secondary, and in the tertiary symptoms, the co-existence
of various affections gives mutual proof of their syphilitic nature. Thus
we can judge whether an attack of sore throat be syphilitic, by observing
whether there be any other secondary symptoms present, as for instance
a syphilitic eruption. Sometimes it is very difficult to determine whether
an affection be of syphilitic origin or not, as there are scarcely any of the
syphilitic symptoms secondary and tertiary, which are not to a great de-
gree similar in outward appearance to other non-venereal affections.
Thus there are common sore throat; rheumatic pains and inflammations
of the bones; rosy, pimply, and pustular eruptions, which have a close
. resemblance to the syphilitic ones, although of totally different origin.
There are however differences in the peculiar appearance of the diseases,
which generally enable the practised eye to recognise those arising from
the syphilitic poison.
Now it is of immense importance to be able to distinguish between a
venereal and a non-venereal disease, as the treatment in the two cases is
very different. The patients themselves, whose chief interest it is, that
a correct judgment should be formed and proper treatment adopted, too
often, instead of giving every assistance to the physician in arriving at
the nature of the disease, do all they can to mislead him, by denying ex-
posure to infection. This arises from the deplorable social ignorance of
the seriousness and true meaning of diseases, and the necessity of our
having every possible guide to the treatment of them; and still more
from that most pernicious and sinful mode of looking with abhorrence on
venereal diseases, which makes people ashamed to confess them, and
which we have already seen in so many cases to do such incalculable
mischief.
It is especially women, who in these matters destroy themselves, by their
endeavours to deceive the surgeon : they scarcely ever admit, until closely
pressed, their exposure to infection, but seem to expect, that it is enough
for the physician to see their complaint and undertake its treatment, in
the dark as to its real nature. There is no end to the mischief done by
these foolish courses, and by their reluctance to apply for aid till they are
forced to do so by the severity of their symptoms; evils, which lie at the
door of those who take such harsh and degrading views of the genital or-
gans and their diseases.
The treatment of tertiary symptoms is very different from that of se-
condaries. Here mercury, instead of doing good, would rather exasperate
the disease, and still more enfeeble the patient; for the specific syphilitic
nature of the poison is now so much changed, that mercury has no longer
power over it. Kicord’s grand remedy for tertiaries is the hydriodate of
potash. lodine, which is the chief ingredient in this compound, has a
very powerful influence in removing, and checking chronic inflammation


and its effects in the tertiary symptoms are often marvellous. It is given
in the tertiary inflammation of the bones and periosteum of the palate,
nose, shin, skull &c., of which I have spoken, in doses beginning with
ten or twelve grains taken during the day, and mounting up to even
one hundred and twenty grains in the twenty-four hours, if the disease
do not yield. At the same time, the constitution of the patient, which
is generally much shattered, must be supported by plain and nourishing
diet, and braced by fresh air, and other necessary hygienic means. Under
the influence of the hydriodate of potash, the putrid ulceration of the
throat generally soon puts on a healthy character, and heals up; though
the bones and other tissues which have been lost, can never he restored.
For the indolent and painful nodes on the shins and elsewhere, Ricord
uses the following treatment. A blister should be applied over them, and
allowed to rise well. When this hSs been taken off, poultices, or lint
steeped in a strong solution of opium, and covered with oiled silk to pre-
vent evaporation, should be applied. This treatment often acts like a
charm with indolent nodes, though it is of course not applicable to the
acute ones; the severe pain being allayed and the wearied sufferer drop,
ping to sleep, even while the blister is rising.
The water cure is said to be exceedingly powerful in tertiary syphilis,
especially in cases where the constitution is greatly broken down by the
combined effects of the disease and the mercury used in its treatment;
and where the hydriodate of potash fails or cannot be borne. There are
few diseases in which this treatment is said to have produced more
striking results ; and it may be used either alone or in conjunction with
the hydriodate, which it will probably enable the constitution to bear,
and to derive benefit from: for it is to be remarked that many medicines,
which would otherwise do more harm than good, can be taken with ad-
vantage, when the health is supported by a course of hygienic treatment.
Tertiary symptoms, it has been said, are not hereditary, and cannot
be communicated by the mother to the child in the womb. But second-
aries may be so transmitted, and this is the only way in which they can
be communicated by one individual to another. The infant of a mother,
who is suffering from secondary syphilis, will after birth be affected by
the same disease. Sometimes the syphilitic spots are already apparent
on it at birth, but in general they do not appear till some weeks after,
when an eruption of rosy patches or pimples comes out, chiefly in a
neighbourhood of the genital organs and the anus, but also scattered over
the body. They gradually assume that deep copper-colour which is so
characteristic of syphilis. The unfortunate infant becomes peevish and
fretful, and declines in health. A cure is in general readily enough
effected, however, by timely and efficient treatment, which consists in a
mild mercurial course. Mercury with chalk, the mildest of the mercu-
rial preparations, should be given in doses of two or three grains, twice a
day. At the same time the mother should be subjected to treatment, con-
sisting of mercury in the doses proper for adults.
It has been said by some authors, and is vaguely believed by the public,
that secondary symptoms may be communicated by the husband to the
wife, and also that they may be given by an infected child to its nurse, or


tiet versa i but Ricord does not admit the possibility of their communi-
jation in any of these ways. From his experiments by inoculation and
otherwise, and from his immense experience, he has come to the conclusion,
(which we may assume as certainly correct), that except in the solitary
case, where secondaries are transmitted by the mother to the infant in
her womb, they never can arise in any individual, without being preceded
by a primary chancre. This is a fact of great importance, and should
be well remarked, as there are many vague popular ideas as to the possi-
bility of infection being received in other ways than by sexual intercourse;
as, for example, by using the same glass, pipe, &c., with an infected
person; but all these ideas must be discarded as without any foundation.
Unless there be a primary chancre'on the mouth of an individual, caught
by direct contact with infected genital organs, the disease cannot possi-
bly be communicated by glasses, &c.
The above is a short and imperfect sketch of this terrible disease, at
whose very name humanity shudders. This is the pest, which, on its
first appearance in Europe some four or five centuries ago, having been
introduced it is supposed from the new world, and before its nature or
treatment were known as they now are, is said by many authors to have
almost decimated our race; spreading its ravages on every side, among the
highest and the lowest ranks of society. Monarchs have died of it; and
its unhappy victims among the poorer classes, were not even permitted to
rot in peace from the surface of the earth, but treated as the worst of
criminals, and shunned as walking leprosies by their uncultivated and
pitiless fellow-beings. Are these barbarities at an end in our more advan-
ced age? Have we reversed the merciless verdict of our ancestors, and
striven to atone by every kindness and assistance in our power to those,
on whose fellow-sufferers of a former age, was piled a load of contumely
and shame, which blackens the sky, a lasting memorial of the inhu-
manity and moral obliquity of men ? Do we pour balm, instead of poison,
into the wounds of the desolate and miserable ones, who become the prey
of this ravager ? whose genital organs are destroyed, whose constitutions
are ruined, whose bones and hearts are full of aches and miseries innu-
merable, and from whose glazed eyes the light, life, and joy of the world
have faded before their prime?
Alas! would that such were the case. Many a sufferer would almost
be content to die, did be know that he had what every human heart
yearns for, the infinite sympathy and reverence of his fellow mortals;
many a dull heart, sunk in apathy, or hardening into the sullenness of
hatred, would waken again to hope and love, if those of others were not
coldly, and oh! how sinfully, shut against him. For the heart of tho
world is shut against all venereal disease. To the common ear, and
even more, shall it be said ? to those who seek to be called pure and
morally elevated, they are a subject unknown and nearly unheard of; at
least unheard of for any purposes of active sympathy, aid, or preven-
tion—the only purposes for which the true physician's heart loves to
speak or to think of disease or evil, whether moral or physical. They
are regarded as a mystery, and as a degrading subject, into which the
moralist, and still more the female mind, dreads to enter.


Alas for mankind, when any such thing is held a mystery! Aretha
real joys and sorrows of humanity to bo sacrificed to childish and morbid
mysteries ? Mystery and secrecy, born of ignorance and heartlessness,
are certain to corrupt any part of our nature, where they are allowed to
abide. What can we do in any matter of which we are ignorant ? We
are helpless, aidless, powerless to serve, powerless to comfort or advise.
Ignorance and mystery can never possibly be right; they are invariably
in themselves most destructive sins. How many thousands, how many
millions of human beings have fallen and are now falling victims to the
general mystery and ignorance surrounding the body, and above all the
■ genital organs 1 Does nature, like spiritualism, make a mystery of these
things ? Is she too delicate and morally pure, to meddle with them, to
visit these organs with her rewards and punishments any more than
other parts ? Does a sense of shame prevent a man or a woman from
agonising and dying of their diseases ; or will it comfort them, through
long years of misery, which they are ashamed to speak of to their fellows,
or in their premature, and, it may be, unpitied death, that a tinsel of
mock delicacy adorns their shroud ?
There are but two ways; either all men and women must learn to
study the body and all its laws, with the reverence and calm worship due
to all nature’s elements; or they must break these laws on every side,
from ignorance and unrighteous contempt of them, and anguish and die
in consequence. Ho who studies and obeys them is a moral being ; he
who does not, as neither men nor women do, except the professional few,
in the present day, is an immoral being. Forsooth ice will not speaker
these diseases; but nature will, and in the groans from smitten thousands
around us, in every country, we may hear her voice.
There is probably no disease, which has so much corrupted and deterio-
rated the human race as syphilis. Among the poor population, especially
of the towns, it may almost be said, that there is not a single constitution
untainted by it. If the individual himself has not incurred it, some of
his ancestors have, and thereby transmitted to him a constitution more
or less deteriorated. Among the richer classes almost the same might be
said. It is not only the disease itself, but the fearful mercurial poison-
ing induced in its cure, which gives it so pernicious an influence on man-
kind. Nothing deteriorates the human constitution more certainly than
mercury ; it is one of the great causes of disease in our present society.
There is not one of us perhaps, whose constitution is not impaired more
or less by the mercurial poisoning of ourselves or our forefathers. How
great then should be our care to prevent a disease, which, like syphilis, is
rendered twice as dangerous to the race by the remedies which are needed
to counteract it 1 There is perhaps not one who reads this, whose con-
stitution might not have been purer, and therefore whose whole nature of
mind and body might not have been higher and nobler, had there been no
syphilitic or mercurial poison in the veins of man. For, inseparably linked
together as are all mankind, the diseases of the parents descend through
generations to the children, modified and transformed by time and cir-
cumstance.
Syphilis,which corrupts and lays low the strongest constitutions, when


it gains root in them, is one of the greatest sources, along ■with the mer-
cury used for its cure, of scrofula, insanity, and all other diseases and
debilities in their descendants. It is one of the grand fountain-heads of
diseases, miseries, evil moral and physical natures, and their resulting
rices and crimes, by which our society suffers so much. Is this a subject
for secrecy and mystery; one upon which we can be content to remain in
wilful ignorance—nay eren to make a virtue of it; one which our love for
our kind, and interest in its welfare and progress, allow us to pass un-
regarded? Shall we continue to permit this dreadful pestilence to spread
bs desolation, and poison oar cup of life, without taking any measures for
its prevention ? or, it our hearts, are not yet alive to the feeling of the
necessarily inseparable connection of all mankind in good and evil, joy and
sorrow, how do we know, who shall be the next to suffer? that the
next victim may not be a sou, or a brother, or beloved friend ? Alas!
how often are the hopes and, the support of a family blighted, by the ruin
of those nearest and dearest, by this remorseless disease!
No class of human sufferers have been so sinned against, as the victims
of venereal disease. Less sympathy and interest in their late has been
felt by mankind in general, than in that of the greatest criminals, for
the cure and prevention of whose moral diseases many truly noble en-
deavours have been lately made, while the venereal diseases remain
neglected and unregarded; and yet wherein have their victims offended ?
As I shall more fully endeavour to show hereafter, the commonly received
code of sexual morality is most erroneous, and erected in ignorance of,
and opposition to, natural truth; the real natural duties of every human
being (however social difficulties may interfere with the [discharge of
them) towards his reproductive organs, and the passions connected with
them, consisting in their due and normal exercise, for which the social
provision of marriage is quite inadequate. Nature lays one command on
us, Exercise all thy functions, else art thou an imperfect and sinful
being,” Society lays another, “ Obey my institutions and my fashions of
thought, however little thou or any of us may understand their natural
truth or rectitude, or it will be the worse for thee,” Let men reflect,
and decide whose commandments are to be obeyed.
When another and truer moral code, founded on the recogniton to
oar natural duties towards all parts of our being, has become established
among mankind, all will feel the enormous injustice that has been shown
to those who have suffered from venereal diseases, and to the unhappy
girls—the outcasts of society, who may be viewed as the unconscious
martyrs to the sexual difficulties, and whose cause and sufferings must
lie so near to every generous heart. Long, long will it be, oh ye poor
inarticulate ones! ere the dumb voice of your sorrows reach the cold ear
of man, and still longer of your own sister, woman —-whose estrangement
from your side, and the common duties of love and sympathy, is one of
the foulest blots on our humanity; many a one of you shall yet perish,
rot away in anguish with no friend near, with hardened hearts and lips
defiant of the pitiless world; many a one of us, too, shall go down with
you in degradation and misery to the grave, before society receive you
into her bosom, and shed the tear of sorrow and repentance over her


unhappy daughters. And you too, my fellow-men, whose life is marred,
and 'whose intinite nature is agonised and distorted by this hateful dis-
ease, will you only bow your heads to the smiter, and suffer in silence?
Is such your duty either to yourselves or to others ? Is this all the
lesson oflove or of knowledge, that experience has brought? 'Will you
not rather use your utmost endeavours to eradicate this evil; and thus
to feel, and to show others, that you have not suffered in vain ?
We have now come to the infinitely important subject of the proven-
tion of this disease, a matter of as deep an interest for the human
family, as almost anything which could be named. It is a new subject,
like the prevention of almost all diseases. Man has scarcely yet at-
tempted or conceived even the possibility of regenerating the world by
this means. But daily are we becoming more alive to its paramount
importance; daily is the truth dawning upon us, that the body of man
is not one whit inferior in majesty or in influence on his destiny to his
spirit. If he would be virtuous or happy, or deserve the name of a cul-
tivated being, he must attend to the one as much as to the other ; he
must equally seek its ideal developement, and prevent its diseases.
How then is disease to be prevented ? As soon as the question was
asked, and it is only a few years ago that it first was seriously asked, it
was seen that there was but one answer, viz., “ By mankind in general
becoming acquainted with its nature and its causes, and so avoiding it.”
A simple answer, and one which indeed seems self-evident, but involving
what a mighty change in man’s education and habits of thought!
While we are unacquainted with the nature or source of anything, we
have no power over it; but when its cause is known to us we have it
under our control. Now there is no disease of which the cause is more
palpable than syphilis; we see the fountain-head, whence all this tor-
rent of poison has overflowed the world, and by seeing this wo have the
disease in our own power. There is probably no disease, not even infec-
tious fevers, of which the cause is so definite and so completely distinct.
It has but one specific source, and cannot by any possibility, that we
are aware of, arise but by direct contagion. Other diseases have innu-
merable roots ; if you destroy one, another springs up in its place; but
here we have the single solitary Upas tree, and if it were fairly uprooted,
the world would remain ever after, as far as we can see, free from its
influence. Have we thought what a difference the freedom from any
disease, however insignificant, would make in the destiny of our race?
and if so how enormous a change would be effected by the extirpation of
its deadliest foe ; of that which M. Ricord calls “ the most terrible con-
tagion that ever threatened mankind ?" Four centuries ago, some say,
syphilis was unknown in Europe. Shall we never more see these fortu-
nate times ? is this accursed pest for ever to prey on the vitals of us and
our remotest posterity? to poison for ever the loves of the race, and
wound us in the most tender part —sexual confidence and endearments,
turning our love and trust into suspicion and hatred ?
Until mankind make common cause against it, there is no hope of its
radical extirpation ; none even of its powerful repression. Until it has
become a well-known subject to every mind, (and what youth’s path of


life is not darkened by its shadow ?) and has a deep interest in tno heart
of every man and woman, wo are powerless against it; it will triumph.
]sut when our human family ou such points is not divided against
itself; when the-genital organs, their laws and their diseases are recog-
nised with reverence by us all; when more universal sympathies, un-
shaken by class or creed prejudices, have bound men closer together in
mutual confidence; and above all, when love is no longer mercenary,
that chronic disease under which it labours among us—then may we
hope that the total extirpation of our foe is not far distant.
I will speak hereafter of the social means which have been taken in
France to repress syphilis, and which contrast with the melancholy neg-
lect which in this country has so favoured its progress; and meanwhile
I shall mention the measures which each individual who exposes himself
to it should adopt, tor its prevention, as long as this disease and prosti-
tution exist in our society. These are very similar to those already
recommended for the prevention of gonorrhoea. Washing the parts fre-
ijuently with cold water or some astringent, as the decoction of oak, or
cinchona bark, is a powerful preventive. It is still more useful to keep
the prepuce habitually drawn back, and the glans left uncovered, which
makes the mucous membrane tough and not easily abraded. It must be
remembered, that abrasions are one of the chief causes which favor
chancre, as it can eat its way but slowly, and often not at all, through a
mucous membrane or follicle. Abrasions should therefore be carefully
avoided, and if any be present before a suspicious connection, it should
not take place. A narrow vagina favours abrasions both of the male
and female organs. Besides these general prophylactics, the individual
should carefully wash the parts immediately after coition, either with
water, or with alkaline or chlorine washes, which have the property of
destroying the poison. He should also make water, to prevent the occur-
rence of chancre in the urethra, as well as gonorrhoea. Above all, he
should be on the watch, after any suspicious intercourse, and destroy the
disease by cauterization; which means, M. Ricord says, he has invaribly
found successful during the first four or five days, if efficiently applied.
It should be mentioned that the nitrate of silver, unless used very early, is
often not strong enough to destroy the poison, and only irritates the part.
Therefore, in many cases, M. Ricord prefers the acid nitrate of mercury,
which more powerful caustic seldom fails completly to burn out the poi-
soned part, and to leave a smple sore underneath
But there is one safeguard more powerful than all of these, and that is
the sheath. Even where it is used, the parts should still be well washed
after coition, as it may nave been torn ; and besides it does not protect
the scrotum, the groin, and other parts, on which the virus may fce de-
posited, and chancre arise if there be any abrasion. With this invaluable
instrument and these additional precautions, contagion, whether of
syphilis or gonorrhoea, is rendered almost impossible; and well would it
be for our race if its use were more universally spread in this age, when
the genital organs are in so miserably corrupted a state. Nay, it is not
impossible that to this instrument humanity may in part be indebted for
the total eradication of the syphilitic disease. Were we tor instance to


suppose it possible, that all those who expose themselves to the slight,
est risk of infection, should.for three or at most six months (during
which even in untreated cases the contagious properties would probably
die out) to unite in the use of this instrument ; and if the most jealous
watch were put upon all the cases which might remain, and these be
carefully prevented from spreading the disease, and cured as speedily as
possible; in short, were mankind earnestly and unitedly to enter into a
war of extermination against syphilis, as has been done in the case
of wild animals, or other noxious plagues, this terrible disease could be in
a short time eradicated from the world, and become a thing of the past.
The generations of man to the latest posterity would bless the age in
which such a boon had been conferred on humanity! 1
But we are indeed far removed at present from the hope of such an
achievement. The world treats with a sinful neglect ail diseases,
and most of all syphilis. There are few united efforts, few noble aspira-
tions, to shake off any of the physical evils, which desolate our society;
and until a common cause be made against them, as against others, there
is no hope of their eradication. Can physicians prevent disease? .Can
they keep men in healthy or ennoble each individual’s physical, and
through it, his moral nature 1 No :in this matter, as in others, every in-
dividual must be self-governed, must depend chiefly on himself for his
direction in life, for his elevation, or for his ruin. We have our united
political endeavours, our united educational, peace, and other movements,
but where are our united efforts for physical regeneration ?—a matter
perhaps more important than any other at present, as none has been so
much neglected. There are few or no such efforts, because man as yet
knows, and cares little for his body, because mind and spirit rule his
thoughts, and form his religion ; but when we shall have a far wider and
truer religion, and an equal reverence for all parts of our nature, then
will these questions of the eradication of syphilis and other diseases,
claim onr most devoted attention.


DISEASES
OF THE
FAMMALE GENERATIVE ORGANS.
I kow proceed to speak of the sexual diseases of women, and of the
peculiar morbid states to which the female constitution is liable.
Until a few years ago, the subject of female disease was in many parts
shrouded in the profoundest darkness. It is only since the invention
of the speculum by Professor Recamior of Paris, who is, I believe,
still alive, and the gradually spreading use of the digital and ocular
means of examining the female sexual organs, that these affections
have become tolerably understood, and another ample page in the
history of human suffering been opened to us. Thousands and
millions of women have spent years of misery, have languished and
died, for the want of the aid, which knowledge of these affections
could have afforded them.
What is the reason, that so very extensive and important a class of
diseases remained so long hidden from mankind? The one great
reason is—the mysterious and unnatural manner in wnich the female
sexual organs have been regarded. The knowledge of the male
sexual diseases has been, and still is, .most unhappily impeded by the
same cause; but in the case of woman it has acted with tenfold force.
It we attend to the history of the science of female disease, we will
easily understand its very slow progress. The Greek and Latin phy-
sicians, who had not these morbid feelings of sexual delicacy, had con-
siderable knowledge of female disease. They used an instrument,
which some say was similar to the speculum, and have left us descrip-
tions of ulceration of the womb, &c. But after them, medical science
fell into the hands, first of the Arabs, and next of the Homan Catholic
priesthood, who were for centuries the sole physicians. Both these
classes of men were restrained by their religious and moral opinions
from investigating female disease; and thus the knowledge possessed
by the Greeks fell completely into abeyance. “It does however seem
most marvellous,” says Dr. Bennett, in his admirable work on Inflam-
mation of the Womb, “that the influence of these former social condi-
tions should still be felt in the medical profession, should still exercise
an evident control over medical science in England. And yet, unless
we admit that Such is the case, how can we account for the existing
state of uterine pathology, or explain the opprobrium, thrown till


within the last few years, by the governing bodies of our leading
medical corporations, on those who devote their attention to mid.
wifery, and the diseases of females ?” In the standard work on female
disease, by Sir Charles Clarke, published in 1831, ulceration of U e
mouth of the womb, one cf the commonest female diseases, is not evea
alluded to ; which shows how very great was the ignorance of these
diseases before the introduction of the speculum.
This invaluable instrument constitutes an era' in medical science
and in the history of our race. It has been as great a boon to man.
' kind as the stethoscope. It has cleared up innumerable obscurities,
and been the means of giving health and happiness to thousands.
Happy would it be for medicine and for mankind, if we could say that
its benefits have been fully reaped; and that the false sexual delicacy,
which has for ages shut the door of medical aid against suffering
woman, is a thing of the past.
But such is very far from being the truth. Although the world in
other matters has made such advances in enlightenment,^still in tee-,
depths of the dark ages in all things pertaining to sexual feelings.
The sexual organs, especially of woman, are still regarded with ihe
old Hebrew feelings of mystery and shame, as if they differed from the
rest of our humanity; and as if it were either our duty or our safety
to permit their nature and their laws, their health and their disease,
to remain hidden from us. Ido not know any class of ideas, which
produce more unhappiness or more disease at the present day, than
these. Instead of the sexual organs and sexual appetites being st udied
and reasoned upon, in a natural and open manner, exactly as any
other organs and functions of pur frame, the subject is regarded as
one which must be avoided and kept secret. The consequence is, that
the grossest ignorance prevails upon it; that the physical and moral
ideas entertained with regard to it are a tissup of errors; that sexual
diseases and morbid sexual feelings are excessively prevalent; and
that the knowledge and eradication of these diseases is very greatly
impeded.
There is no physician, who is conversant with female diseases, who
does not deplore the false delicacy so constantly found in woman
when suffering from any sexual disease. Dr. Ashwell and Dr. Ben-
nett frequently complain of this, saying that the repugnance of women
to have recourse to the necessary examinations, or to communicate
any information with regard to their symptoms spontaneously, is a
constant cause of delayed and erroneous treatment. It may be said,
that nothing more retards the knowledge, the prevention, and the cure,
of female diseases, than this false delicacy. When a woman becomes
affected with a genital complaint, especially if she be a virgin, or un-
married, she shrinks from informing a medical man; and thus the
irrevocable infancy of the disease, when it is always so much more
tractable, passes away. When she does at last call in assistance, in-
stead of openly informing the physician of her symptoms, as she
would do in any other affection, she tells nothing spontaneously, but
leaves it to him to, elicit the necessary information piecemeal; which


of course is very frequently the source of the most lamentable errors.
Ao-ain, in vast multitudes of cases, where the disorder is considered
not to be of a serious nature, medical aid is not sought at all, but the
woman continues to bear her ills in silence, as long as they are at all
endurable. In this way leucorrhcea, menorrhagia, dysmenorrhcca, &c.
are often borne for years, and cause an immensity of suffering, often
breaking down the health irretrievably. This false delicacy is not
confined to the diseases of the sexual organs; piles, constipation, diarr-
hoea, &c., and morbid states of the urinary organs are also disclosed
by the patient with great reluctance, and often neglected for years,
from motives of false delicacy.
Disease, with our present scanty knowledge of therapeutics, is alas!
difficult enough to treat, when every advantage is given to the medi-
cal man ; but when no alacrity is shown in anticipating it, when the
patient by reluctance and reticence rather perplexes than aids the
diagnosis, and when the means of investigation and treatment are re-
ceived with repugnance, rather than with the anxious co-operation wo
should expect from her, whose interests are chiefly at stake, the task
becomes arduous and unsatisfactory indeed. There is no safety for
woman, till these morbid feelings of sexual delicacy have been
thoroughly eradicated, and till the sexual organs and their diseases are
regarded in exactly the same rational light, as any other part of our
frame; till a knowledge and reverence for these organs have been
substituted for the present ignorance, mystery, and childish and de-
grading feelings of shame ; till their states of health and disease be so
generally understood throughout society, that on the one hand, dis-
ease will be prevented, and on the other, when it does it occur, that it
will be met, as promptly, as openly, and as earnestly, as disease of
any other bodily organ.
The main cause of all diseases is the general ignorance regarding
them, which prevails throughout all but the medical part of society;
and the first necessary step to their prevention, is to remove that igno-
rance and to bring the subject into the clear light of day. There is no
part of our nature, which has been so peculiarly enveloped in mystery
as the sexual part; there is none about which there is such general
ignorance, and in consequence so much disease and misery; and there
is none in which more requires to be done, to remove these obstacles to
human welfare. The mystery attaching to the sexual organs, has, as
it were, overshadowed the whole body. This lies at the root of the
neglect of the study of anatomy, and consequently of the other physi-
cal sciences; which, without human anatomy and physiology, their
keystone, will never be really interesting to man. There are few ques-
tions more nearly affecting our happiness, than to investigate the
causes of the exceptional manner, in which the sexual organs are
viewed, and the origin of the peculiar feelings of mystery and shame
attaching to them, particularly in woman; for these are the chief
causes of the pervading ignorance on the subject, and the vast accu-
mulation of sexual disease and misery.
The Greeks and Romans knew little of these feelings, and it may be


said that they have been introduced and fostered amongst us, chiefly in
connection with the spiritual views of the Christian and ancient
Hebrew faith. There is nothing which more particularly character,
ised the ancient Hebrews, than this sexual mystery and shame, and
also the excessive harshness with which a breach of their moral code
was punished.
Of the intensity of these morbid feelings the following instances may
be given as illustrations. It is recorded that Noah cursed Ham and
Canaan for having seen him naked. A woman after her confinement
was to be considered unclean for a week, if the child was a boy ; if a
girl, for two weeks; then she was to continue in the blood of her puri-
fying thirty-three days for a boy, sixty-six for a girl, (as if there were
some peculiar pollution in the female sex), being forbidden during that
time to touch any hallowed thing, or come into the sanctuary; and
then she should make a sacrifice, to be offered by the priests for her as
an atonement, and then she should be cleansed. If any man’s seed
of copulation should go out of him, he should bathe and be unclean
till evening. Every garment and skin, whereon this seed was, should
be washed and be unclean till evening. Also the woman with whom
a man had lain, should bathe, and be unclean till evening. A men-
struating woman was put apart for seven days, during which she and
everything she touched were considered unclean, and then she had to
make a sacrifice of atonement.
As instances of the extreme harshness of their judgments in sexual
matters, the following may be given. The sons of Jacob treacherously
slew Shechem, and all the males in his city, which they sacked, be-
cause he had lain with their sister, Dinah. The Lord is said to have
slain Onan, for spilling the seed, before going in to his brother’s wife,
not wishing to have a child by her. Tamar, the daughter-in-law of
Judah, disguised herself as a harlot, and was lain with by Judah ; who
afterwards in his character of judge, ordered her to be burnt for thus
playing the whore. According to the laws of Moses, the daughter of
a priest was to be burnt alive, if guilty of prostitution. Both parties
in adultery were to be put to death. If a man lay with a menstrua-
ting woman, and uncovered her nakedness, both were to be put to
death. If a man took a wife and found that she was not a virgin, she
was to be stoned to death for playing the whore. The unnatural
practice of circumcision, wantonly inflicted on helpless infants, still
exists among the Jews, as a symbol of their sexual code and the feel-
ings which gave rise to it.
These awful cruelties, the very thought of which fills us with horror,
are, as far as I am aware, the most remarkable proofs of sexual bar-
barism recorded in history. They illustrate the manners of a people,
great indeed, but semi-savage, which, so far from being to us a model
for imitation, should be a solemn warning for avoidance. And yet
they are the real source of our present views on sexual subjects ; and
thus have caused an incalculable deal of misery to our race, and espe-
cially to the female sex. Probably of all the dangerous modes of
feeling and action, which have been perpetuated by the Bible, none


las had so blighting an influence on the happiness of mankind. Many
of these harsh views have been partly mitigated by time; and it is chiefly
in the case of self-abuse or Onanism, (which superstitious term, in-
tended to inspire a mysterious horror, should be totally discarded),
and also in the breach of the moral code by woman, that their spirit,
at least, has been kept up.
If we analyse these views both in the Hebrews and in ourselves, we
will find that their merciless character depends essentially on the
mystery and shame attaching to the genital organs; which feelings are
so opposed to a true physical religion. Sexual disgust, the product of
these morbid feeling, enters as a peculiar element into all our judg-
ments on sexual matters, blinding us as it were, and depriving us of
the charity and moderation we may possess on other subjects. It thus
doubles the misery of all sexual sufferers, who have to endure, not
only the natural burden of their diseases, but also the unnatural dis-
gust attaching to them. But let us not suppose that it is these unfor-
tunates alone, who suffer from this morbid feeling; it is constantly
mingling itself in all the relations between the sexes, causing impo-
tence, perverted sentiments, and diminished enjoyment both in married
and unmarried life. It infuses a peculiar bitterness into the jealousy
of the pleasures of others, which is no where so keen as in sexual mat-
ters ; and there is probably no feeling, not even religious intolerance,
which has made men take such contemptuous and abhorrent views of
their fellow-creatures. Verily the generative organs have been amply
avenged for the neglect and irreverence with which they have been
treated!
Almost all those, who have been imbued with the Christian beliefs,
have given a great superiority to what they have termed the spiritual
part of our being, over the animal; meaning thereby chiefly the sex-
ual appetites, and enjoyments. The latter they have studiously
endeavoured to degrade and disparage, and they have always striven
to exalt what they call the moral aud intellectual over the sexual en-
joyments of man. They have ever endeavoured to check in themselves
the sexual appetites, and to find their happiness in so-called higher
aims. It was these feelings which gave rise to the celibacy of the
Roman Catholic clergy, (who, as we have seen, were unfortunately for
woman, so long the guardians of the healing art,) and to the system of
monks and nuns, who made it their grand merit to mortify the flesh
by denying their sexual appetites.
The monasteries and nunneries have indeed passed away in some
countries; but the ideas which gave birth to them have by no means
passed away. They flourish neatly as much as ever amongst us,
though we have not the flagrant solecism ol such public institutions.
The pernicious idea of the mortification of the flesh still rules among
us in fact, if not in express word. One of the main Christian beliefs is,
that it is a great merit to crucify the bodily lusts, and to exercise great
self-denial in the gratification of the natural sexual impulses. The
moral and intellectual parts of sexual love are elevated at the expense
of the physical, which is viewed in a degrading light ■ and this has


given an unreal and unnatural character to our society, for the passion
If deprived of its natural physical basis, (which is as beautiful andil
much worthy of admiration as the moral part) is totally incomplete,
and works rather for evil than (or good.
Chastity is considered one of the greatest of all virtues in woman,
and in man too, though in his case it is practically less regarded. We
have no longer voluntary nuns, but of involuntary ones there ate
myriads ; far more in reality than ever existed in any Roman Catholij
country. Millions of women pass a great part of their sexual lives,
and immense numbers pass the whole, in total sexual abstinence’
without any of the enjoyments of sexual pleasures, or the happiness o(
a mother’s affections. For all this incredible self-denial, which causa
more anguish and disease than any mind can conceive, they have for
their reward the barren praise of chastity. But if we examine earnestlj
and without prejudice the real nature of this quality, which is so highly
prized, we shall discover in it a totally different meaning.
Chastity, or complete sexual abstinence, so far from being a virtue,
is invariably a great natural sin. We are short-sighted beings, full
of errors and false theories, but nature is absolutely unerring, and it
is only by consulting her, that we can gain a true knowledge of cm
virtues and vices. If we attend to nature, we shall find that all onr
organs are subject to the same law of health ; the great law of normal
and sufficient exercise. There is no organ in our body, nor any faculty
in our mind, which to be healthy, (or in other words, virtuous,) does
not require its due share of appropriate exercise. The sexual organs
are subject to this law exactly as all others; and, whatever theories
we form about them, nature invariably rewards or punishes them,
according as the conditions of their health are observed. She cares not
for our moral code; marriage has nothing sacred in her eyes ; with or
without marriage, she gives her seal of approbation to the sexually
virtuous man or woman in a healthy and vigorous state of the sexual
organs and appetites, while she punishes the erring by physical and
moral sufferings.
It is strange to observe, and can only be accounted for by the intense
nature of the sexual prejudices, that the law of healthy exercise, which
every physiologist knows to apply equally to every organ, and which
has been sedulously applied to every other organ, has never been in-
sisted on in the case of the genital organs. Hydropathy, whose fun-
damental principle is the scientific application of appropriate exercise
and stimulus to the various bodily organs, and which has, by these
great natural means, had such wonderfully beneficial results, dares not
apply this great principle to the sexual organs ; and is, consequently,
of little power in true sexual diseases. The only man, who has had
the courage and the wisdom to insist on the application of the law of
exercise to genital disease, is SI. Lallemaud in the case of spermatorr-
hoea. Although his conclusive reasoning and experience on this sub-
ject were met with a torrent of obloquy in this country, and still are
neglected by the majority of physicians, yet they are irresistibly gain-
ing ground; and it is now comparatively common among our most


skilful medical men to recommend sexual intercourse to young men
suffering from genital debility.
But for suffering woman no one has yet raised his voice, no one has
applied to her case the only true and scientific remedy; that remedy
which is the keystone of female therapeutics, and without which all
treatment or prevention of female disease is a vanity and a delusion.
The great mass of female sexual diseases, even more than those of men,
arise from sexual enfeeblement, consequent on the want of a healthy
and sufficient exercise for this important part of the system. From the
want of this, the green sickness, menstrual irregularities, hysterical
affections without number, proceed ; and it is utter vanity to expect to
cure, and still more to prevent these miserable diseases, without going
to the root of the matter. It is a certain and indubitable fact, that
unless we can supply to the female organs their proper natural stimu-
lus, and a healthy and natural amount of exercise, female disease will
spring up on every side around us, and all other medical appliances
will be powerless against the hydra.
I would entreat the reader not to prejudge this most important
question, nor to allow his mind to be diverted from a calm and earnest
investigation of the real facta of the matter, by the vehemence of sex-
ual prejudices, which all of us know are so very violent in this country.
Let him survey the state of the sexual world; let him think of the
fearful amount of prostitution, of venereal and genital disease; of
the impenetrable ignorance brooding over the subject, and the tide of
headlong and irrational feelings, which are connected with sexual
topics; and he will acknowledge that surely there must be some grand
error somewhere, to account for so much misery. Love indeed, in-
stead of being one of the sweetest blessings of life, seems rather to be
a curse, to such innumerable evils and miseries does it give rise. Let
him now review our code of sexual morality, and try it by the grand
touchstone of nature ; he will find it a chaos of theories, on which no
two nations are agreed, and in which nature hits boon almost wholly
left out of sight, and authority and bliud prejudices allowed to take
her place. Physical as well as mental health has been disregarded in
framing these codes, and if he open his eyes to their working, he will
see the ground strewn with sexual victims. It is absolutely certain,
that nature meant the sexual organs in either sex to have a due
amount of exercise, from the time of their maturity till their decline ;
and no one who knows anything of the bodily laws, can doubt, that
every departure from the course she points out, is a natural sin; and
she shows this herself by the punishments she inflicts. She forms no
organ, that she does not intend to be exercised; rouses no desires
merely to torment by their self-denial. It is not by shutting our eyes
to these facts, that we can hope to progress either in knowledge or in
virtue.
I know the great natural difficulties, which lie in the,way of the
sufficient exercise of the sexual organs in each individual, and shall
speak of these hereafter, and examine how far they are insurmount-
able. But whether or not it is possible to attain this desirable result,


■we must recognioe, that the diseases, which arise from sexual absti.
nence, are always a proof of a sin against nature, even though from
social considerations it be impossible to avoid them. The principle of
population, as Mr. Malthus has so admirably pointed out, is the tree
difficulty, which stands in the way of the sufficient exercise of the sex.
ual organs in each individual; and it is upon this natural foundation
that all the false reasoning on chastity, self-denial, and self-mortifica.
tion is really supported. I shall speak hereafter of the best way oi
meeting this difficulty; and meanwhile proceed to give a description
of the chief forms of female sexual disease.


CHLOROSIS.
This disease is a very common one, and therefore of great importance.
It is generally found in young girls about, and shortly after puberty,
but it may occur at any age during the continuance of menstruation,
and is not unfrequently found in married women ■who have been exhaust-
ed by various causes, such as miscarriages, over-lactation &c. It
very rarely, if ever, occurs before puberty, or after menstrual decline.
It seems therefore, evidently to be connected with the sexual system;
and it is a disease peculiar to womefl, for although pallor and debility
occur in man, yet genuine chlorosis does not.
The symptoms of the disease are as follows. A young girl, who has
perhaps been always rather delicate, approaches the period of puberty. At
this time, instead of an increase in the strength and vigor of the frame,
coincident with the natural developement of the sexual organs, her health
gets worse, she becomes more delicate, and does not pass on to woman-
hood. The sexual system does not develops itself, or but imperfectly ;
and menstruation, which must be preceded by this sexual developement,
is either absent, or scanty and pale. The disease also very frequently
arises after puberty and menstruation have been established, from
causes which weaken the general health, and especially from such, as in-
terfere with the Sexual functions, or disappoint the sexual desires. The
patient becomes very pale and sickly, and from this deadly paleness the
disease may generally be at once recognised. She loses her appetite, her
strength declines, and slight exercise produces fatigue, palpitation of the
heart, and breathlessness; her stomach becomes disordered, her digestion
difficult, and her bowels are generally constipated. Her spirits flag, she
becomes listless, and prone to melancholy and solitude. If the disease be
allowed to advance, the symptoms all become aggravated. The stomach
is greatly disordered, there is flatulence and heartburn; frequently a
total want of appetite, and at other times a craving for unwholesome food,
such as green fruit, or sometimes even chalk or slate-pencils. The tongue
is pasty and white, and the breath foul. The pallor becomes deeper,
the face is deadly white, with often a kind of dirty greenish-yellow hue,
(whence the name of the disease). The lips and gums are pale and blood-
less. Headaches of fearful intensity are very frequent, with the pain.


or a feeling of weight and pressure, often confined to the top of the head.
There is impairment of all the senses ; sight and hearing are weakened.
The mental powers are greatly impaired; memory and concentrative-
ness fade, while an impotent listlessness and apathy overpower the
mind, or the patient resigns herself to despair. Hysterical symptoms
also generally occur.
In short, there is not a function or faculty of the body or mind, which
is not more or less interfered with ; all of them become enfeebled. The
reason of this is, that the blood itself, which nourishes all these organs,
is impoverished. Chlorosis essentially consists in a watery state of the
blood. That fluid is found in this disease to have lost a great part of
its solid constituents; the clot is very small and dark-coloured, when it
separates, on standing, from the serous or watery part. It is this watery
state of the blood, which causes the deadly pallor, the great debility, the
arrest of the catamenial and fecal secretions, and the failure of the
bodily and mental powers. If we listen with the stethoscope over the
heart or one of the large veins, a morbid rushing noise is heard, made
by the watery blood in passing along the vessels. The serous part of the
blood, when the disease is far advanced, often exudes through the vessels,
and causes dropsy of the legs, eyelids, or other parts.
In different cases different organs are most interfered with. Thus in
one case the prominent symptoms may be connected with the head and
nervous system, such as intense headaches, and neuralgic or paralytic
affections of various parts of the body. In another, the digestion may
be chiefly disordered; while in another, the chest may be the principal
part to suffer. It is in this last case, that there is the greatest danger;
for a fatal issue does not frequently attend on chlorosis, unless from con-
sumption. Unless there be a scrofulous taint in the constitution,
whether hereditary or not, chlorosis does not generally tend towards
consumption, nor indeed to the establishment of any organic disease,
although the derangements of the nervous, digestive, circulatory, and other
systems are often so very violent. But when a girl of a consumptive
family becomes chlorotic, symptoms of consumption are very apt to attend,
and unless prompt and efficient remedies be used, fatal organic disease
will very probably be established. In such a case the pulse is generally
rapid, there is a short hacking cough, with pain in the chest, and there
may be night-sweats, with the other symptoms of incipient consumption.
Let us now examine, what are the causes of chlorosis. They consist in
all those general influences which weaken the young girl; and more
especially in those which weaken or prevent the developemeut of the
sexual system.
The education of young girls is exceedingly erroneous. In our board-
ing schools, and other places of female instruction, very little attention is
paid to the developement of the bodily powers. Stiff and false ideas of
what is proper for young ladies prevail, vigorous and exhilarating sports
and games are discountenanced, and exercise is limited to a lorraal walk.
There is a much greater want of physical religion in the training of
young women, than even of men. Bodily strength, physical courage
and activity, are not regarded at all as female excellences, indeed they


are rather looted upon as unfeminine; and gentleness, quietness, and
an amiable amount of timidity are rather cherished—qualities which
flatter the pride of man, in his mistaken character of protector of the
weaker sex.
But there is no such natural distinction between man and woman. In
woman, exactly as in man, superior bodily strength, physical daring,
and nervous power, are indispensably requisite to form a fine char-
acter ; and these are only to be obtained by strengthening the frame, and
hy training the nervous system to a healthy and elevated vigour. It is
not true, that the masculine and feminine virtues are frequently in con-
trast with each other. The two natures are built on the same original
model, aud in the main, they are alike in their laws. The great law of
exercise of every part applies equally to both sexes ; and in woman, as in
roau, physical strength is more virtuous than weakness; courage than
timidity ; nervous power, than nervous debility; and it is a sign of an
effeminate and unnatural theory of life that these truths are not deeply
felt by all of us. In all the physical virtues, which are just as important
as the moral ones, woman is dreadfully deficient. Her education, and the
erroneous views prevailing as to what is admirable or beautiful in the
female character, bring her up weak in body and mind: her strength is
not developed by sports and proper exercises, and she is feeble and deli-
cate; her courage is not brought out by cultivation, but on the coutrary
repressed, from the mischievous idea that timidity is rather amiable in a
woman, and therefore she becomes nervous and hysterical. Her mind
also is left feeble by the exclusion of the solid parts of knowledge from
her studies, as being unfitted for her narrow sphere in life. Again, the
crippling idea of chastity and female decorum hinds her like an invisible
chain, wherever she moves, and prevents her from daring to think, feel,
or act, freely and impulsively. She must not do this, she must not
study that; she has nothing to do with a knowledge of her own frame
or its laws; she may not read the works, nor acquire the knowledge,
that is open to men; she must not sport nor play bo'sterously, nor go
out unattended, nor in the evening walk alone in the streets, nor travel
alone, nor make use of the thousand and one privileges, which are open to
the more fortunate sex.
If we examine into the origin and meaning of these singular ideas with
regard to woman,we shall find that they are based upon no natural dis-
tinction between the two sexes, but upon the erroneous views of man, and
especially upon the mistaken ideas as to the virtue of female chastity. It
is to guard this supposed virtue, that all the restrictions on female liberty
and female developement in body and mind have arisen. In all ages
and in all countries the treatment of woman has been very irrational.
We know how very oppressive it is at the present day in China and
Turkey; but even among ourselves, the liberty and privileges of women
are very far behind what is just and natural.
Their erroneous education leads to infinite forms of misery, debility,
and disease. “ Were our present system of female education altered,”
says Dr. Ashwell, in his admirable and standard work on Female Diseases,
“chlorosis and the allied affections would he rare, instead of as at present


exceedingly common diseases.” By the cramping and enfeebling training,
the girl receives in early youth, she grows up so delicate, that her con-
stitution is quite unable to rouse to life, and to give adequate vital euergj
to the new set of organs at the age of puberty. The girl is not strong
enough to afford to lose three or four ounces of blood every month, nor
has she, therefore, such superabundant vital powers as to be able to re-
produce her species; for which privilege, nature demands a certain
amount of vigour. This delay in the evolution of the sexual organs at
puberty reacts upon the blood; which, from the want of the new
nervous influences the frame should receive at that time of life, becomes
impoverished, and so the series of miserable chlorotic symptoms is set
up.
But chlorosis may be caused by more peculiarly sexual influences,
Masturbation is said to be a very frequent cause of it, and although this
is a subject, which has not been at all sufficiently investigated, in con-
sequence of the difficulties thrown in the way by the sexual delicacy, both
of medical men and their patients, there is little doubt that these un-
fortunate practises are just as common among young women, as young
men. It is no wonder that patients are unwilling to speak of these
errors; the world, in the spirit of ancient Judaism, looks with such
harshness on any sexual fault, fhat the poor young sufferer would rather
bear any thing than disclose it. Butin reality, society .is itself to blame
for all such errors as unnatural sexual indulgences, in either sex. Until
wo can supply to the violent sexual passions of youth a proper and
natural gratification, we may be absolutely certain, that an unnatural
one will be very frequently resorted to. Instead of the healthy and happy
state of sexual feeling, which a proper amount of the natural sexual in-
tercourse can alone produce, the two sexes in youth are kept at arm's
length; no intimacies are allowed between them, nor any healthy outlet
for the violent and novel sexual impulses. Sexual shame and erabarras-
ment therefore come in to cloud and agitate the mind; and morbid
tastes take the place of the healthy ones, and lead to unnatural in-
dulgences.
Chlorosis is often brought on after the establishment of puberty, by
ungratifled sexual longings, independently of masturbation. These long-
iugs are generally connected with some love affair, in which there has
been disappointment or delay. The poor young girl’s whole being is
absorbed in the one passion, and she pines away, refusing consolation
from her well-meaning, but ignorant friends. It is in vain, that
they seek to divert her by tenderness or varied amusements; it is love,
not friendship, that the mind seeks at that age, and without which it
knows neither rest nor peace. There is no class of human griefs, which
has been to me a greater cause of sadness, than those endured by the
young unmarried females amongst us. People in general have no idea
of the immense numbers of women who pass a single life in this country.
According to the classified returns of the population, made lately, al-
though the number of young men and young women, between the years
of fifteen and thirty-five, is in the country nearly equal, in the towns of
England, there are 230,912 more women than men. In London alone,


there are 72,312 more women. In Scotland the case is the same. In
Edinburgh there are 15,556 more women than men; a larger proportion,
than in any other town in the kingdom. When we think of this, and
consider moreover the great number of men who do not marry, but either
live in sexual abstinence, or content themselves with the society of girls
of the town ; and the very large proportion of either sex, who are unable
to marry till late in life, from inability to support a family ; we will bo
able to form some slight conception of the misery endured by the female
sex, from ungratifieJ sexual desires, want of love, and all the joys of a
family. How often alas! do we see young blooming girls, full of life
and hope, entering on their womanhood, and year after year passing over
them without any outlet for the strongest passions and alfections of
their nature ! Their beautiful natural gaiety and enjoyment of life soon
droop, they become uneasy, discontented, unnatural; the bloom fades
from their cheeks, and the laugh from their lips ; fretfulness and capri-
ciousness succeed to the buoyant sunny disposition; and hysteria, and
the gloomy train of sexual diseases, chlorosis, amenorrhea;, or dysmen-
orrhea, claim them as their prey.
Why do we shut our eyes to these things, or steel our hearts to such
realities ? Is there one among us, who does not know from experience
the universal strength of the sexual passions, and the tortures attendant
on their constant and systematic denial ? Who can bear to see their
life passing away, uncheoted by the sweetest of human pleasures ; to see
their fellows around them enjoying advantages and blessings, of which
they are deprived, without a feeling of deep-seated discontent, envy, jea-
lousy, and despair, rankling in their breast ? On woman too it is especially
hard, for she is, from our unfortunate social arrangements, far more
wholly dependent on love than man. There are many other pleasures
open to man, from which woman, and especially unmarried woman, who
has so little liberty, is debarred. Truly of all the slow and wasting tor-
tures, that ever were endured by humanity, there is scarcely any more
painful to contemplate, than those endured by myriads of women, who
pass their lives amongst us. The halo passes from their lives, the short-
lived dream of romance and poetic love fades into the dull reality of a
monotonous and unfulfilled existence, and the iron eats into their soul.
Chlorosis occurs sometimes also in married women, who have been
exhausted by too frequent child-bearing or by long-continued white or san-
guineous discharges. In short, any wasting or exhausting cause, espe-
cially those which affect the sexual system, physically or morally, tends
to produce it. Amenorrhoea, when protracted, very frequently induces
chlorosis.
I shall now proceed to the treatment of this affection. The great
principle on which this must be based, is to brace and elevate the consti-
tution, and to render the blood richer. If we can effect this, the whole
train of disordered symptoms will disappear, the skin will regain its hue,
the mind its tone and buoyancy, and puberty and menstruation will be
thoroughly established. The girl should be sent into the country, should
be out constantly in the open air, and should take as much exercise as
can be' borne without fatigue. She should also take one or two cold or


slightly tepid baths daily in the hydropathic manner, applying the
cold water for a very short time, and afterwards strong friction, and
taking a walk before and after the bath, to ensure sufficient reaction.
She should keep regular hours, and lire upon a nutritious and whole-
some diet, avoiding slops.
The medicine which is chiefly relied upon in this disease is iron, the
effect of which in enriching the blood, and invigorating the frame, is often so
marked, that some have considered it a specific in chlorosis. It is often
beneficial when given along with the natural means, as pure air, exercise,
&c.; but it frequently fails, and, often cannot be borne by the constitution,
causing flushing and headache. Iron may be used either by repairing
to a chalybeate spring, which is the best mode, or by giving it in medici-
nal doses. One or even two grains of the snlphate of iron may be given
thrice a day. But the iron will probably do harm rather than good, if
the digestive functions be not first improved, and the system prepared
for it. In order to do this, a course of mild purgatives, such as rhubarb
or aloes, is greatly recommended by Dr. Ashwell. But it would be better
if the bowels could be regulated, and the digestion reinvigorated by more
natural means, such as country air, exercise, bathing, and the other ad-
mirable hygienic means so beneficially applied by the hydropathic
treatment. A course of aperient medicine certainly does great good in
some cases, but it is always an uncertain remedy, of a lowering nature,
and is very liable to be abused. In fact, there is an immense deal of
harm done in chlorotic affections by these means, for there is a popular
prejudice in favour of “a good active purgation.” When the digestion
has become better, the appetite improved, and the tongue cleaner, then
the iron should be given.
But a remedy far more essentially important in the great majority of
chlorotic cases, than any medicinal means, is one that obtains at most
but a slight and passing allusion in medical works. It is sexual inter-
course, the direct and healthy exercise of that part of the system whose
enfeeblement or disorder is so frequently at the root of the general
disease. Andral, the great French physician, says, “all lowering
remedies do harm in chlorosis; but it frequently happens that by stimu-
lating the nervous system by the physical and moral ■ emotions of
matrimony, the anaemia (or bloodlessness) is removed, and the whole train
of diseased actions vanishes.” Dr. Ashwell says, “ Marriage is frequently
curative of chlorosis; but as its prospect is in general far distant, and
besides as it is scarcely a proper subject for the medical man’s dis-
cussion, it calls only for a passing allusion.”
But it is assuredly the part of the true physician to seek in every case
the safest and most energetic means for the recovery of his patient, and
to make that known, whatever social obstacles may stand in the way of
its adoption. Had M.- Lallemand thus refrained from pointing out the
true and natural remedy for spermatorrhoea, and from recommending it to
his unhappy patients, many a one who owes to him his restoration to health
and happiness, would now be the tenant of a mad-house, or wallowing in
the depths of seminal wretchedness, a torment to himself and to all
around him. Chlorosis and hysteria in the female are diseases quite
analogous to spermatorrhoea in the male. Both are a general enfeeble


ment and prostration of the system, connected with genital enfeeblement.
jfow in nian we have already seen, that the only real natural cure fur
spermatorrhoea, (without which in almost all cases the disease lasts inde-
finitely, causing its own insufferable miseries,) is a proper healthy exer-
cise for the sexual organs, and a healthy outlet for the sexual emotions
and passions. Spermatorrhoea may be perhaps checked in some cases by
instrumental means, such as nitrate of silver &c., but this is not suffi-
cient to give permanent vigour to the organs, nor to correct thoroughly
the diseased and morbid state of the mind; which can be done alone by
ihe grand natural means of appropriate exercise. In woman the case
is just the same; her pature languishes for the want of the natural sti-
mulus to be imparted only through these organs: her mind and her feel-
ings become morbid from the same cause, and the only true and
permanent remedy is a proper amount of sexual exercise. This would
give an appropriate stimulus to her system, satisfy the natural passions
•which consume her strength, and give to her mind the natural healthy
sexual feelings, instead of the morbid sickly sense of shame and sexual
timidity, which overwhelm her. Sexual intercourse is particularly neces-
sary, when chlorosis has been caused by masturbation; for here there is
cot only a natural habit to be established, but an unnatural one to be
eradicated, and this in both sexes is sometimes a difficult matter. Indeed,
there is no means, which can be relied upon in either sex for checking
the habit of masturbation, except the supply of the normal gratification.
Were such gratifications attainable, masturbation would rarely, if ever,
be resorted to ; and one of the most prevalent causes of bodily' and
mental disease would be extirpated.
1 know the host of prejudices that will oppose the recognition of
sexual intercourse, as the great reroedy k in sexual enfeeblement in woman,
but lam absolutely certain too that it will be recognised. It is in vain
that we strive against the decrees of nature; we may exhaust ourselves
ia forming unnatural theories, and in forbidding any attempt to compare
them with the natural laws; we may be content that the subject should
continue shrouded in mystery, and that our young women should be
racked and tortured by innumerable diseases, rather than allow the least
departure from our prejudiced schemes; we may persecute and anathema-
tise all those poets, philosophers and physicians, who, horror-struck at
the amount of sexual misery, endeavour to find a new path out of the
labyrinth; but not one jot, not one iota, does nature move for all our
vehemence, and she will force us at last, exhausted by our sufferings, to
confess our errors and recoguise her infallibility. I do not see how any
man of common sense, far less a scientific physician, can fail to see, that
nature intended that the sexual organs should be used, as sOon as they
are fully developed. The sexual passions are strongest at that time ;
and we might foresee with certainty, that if the natural intentions be
defeated, disease and misery must result. It is clear too, that for diseases
arising from such a cause, the natural and obvious remedy is to supply
the normal exercise, the want of which occasions the disorder. In the
case of genital enfeeblement in man, M. Lallemand has shown clearly by
the results of his treatment, as well as by his general reasoning, that


sexual exercise is the true natural and efficient remedy; and his views
hare been adopted by a great many of the most enlightened medical men
in this country, and must eventually be accepted by all, however much
they are opposed by Christian prejudices.
Now, I ask, how is it possible that a similar reasoning should not
apply to woman ? In her, too, the sexual organs- are early developed, and
powerful sexual appetites roused; she is liable to analogous states of
sexual enfeeblement and derangement, consequent on the non-exercise
of her sexual organs ; and can any philosophical mind infer otherwise,
than that a proper exercise is the treatment required for her care!
Nay, we find that in the chance cases in which marriage has come to
tire succour of these unfortunates, it has generally proved curative;
and we may be satisfied that if the sexual means were duly used, (which
is frequently by no means the case in marriage, over-indulgence pro-
ducing exhaustion and satiety instead of reinvigoration), along with
other means of bracing the health, very few cases of chlorosis, or the
allied affections, could resist it. But the fact is, that there are few men,
who, on calmly considering the subject, would fail to see that a due
amount of sexual intercourse is one great thing needed to preserve and
restore the health in the youth of both sexes; and it is a common
remark among men on seeing a girl languid and sickly, that what she
needs is venereal gratification. It is impossible'to avoid the conclusion
that the natural exercise is the great means, without which it is ab-
solutely impossible to prevent or cure an immense amount of disease
and misery. When once we have clearly recognised this grand truth,
—certainly one of the most important which the physician, or the moral
philosopher, can apprehend at the present day—we will be in a fitter
position for reasoning upon the possibility of procuring for every human
being this great essential of health, happiness, or virtue: but upon this
question I shall speak hereafter.
There is a great deal of erroneous feeling attaching to the subject of
the sexual desires in woman. To have strong sexual passions is held
to be rather a disgrace for a woman, and they are looked down upon at
animal, sensual, coarse, and deserving of reprobation. The moral emo-
tions of love are indeed thought beautiful in her; but the physical ones
are rather held unwomanly and debasing. This is a great error. In
woman, exactly as in man, strong sexual appetites are a very great
virtue; as they are the signs of a vigorous frame, healthy sexual organs,
and a naturally-developed sexual disposition. The more intense the
venereal appetites, and the keener the sense of the normal sexual grati-
fications, provided it do not hold a diseased proportion to the other parts
of the constitution, the higher is the sexual virtue of the individual. It
is exactly the same with the venereal appetite as with the appetite for
food. If a woman be healthy, and have a frame braced by exercise and
a natural life, she will have a strong appetite and a keen relish for food,
and it is exactly the same with the sexual desires. The strongest appe-
tites, and the greatest enjoyment in their gratification, have been fixed
by nature as the reward of obedience to her laws, and the preservation
of health by a due exercise of all the functions, neither excessive nor


deficient. The man or woman who is borne down by a weakened and
diseased digestion, will recognise strength of stomach and vigour of
appetite to be the greatest of all desirable virtues for them, that which lies at
the root of every other advantage ; anti in the same way he who is wal-
lowing in spermatorrhoea, impotence, and sexual disgust, or the morbid
and chlorotic girl, may recognise sexual power and strong sexual appetites,
as the highest and most important of all virtues for them in their posi-
tion. Other virtues are in such cases a dream and a delusion to the
sufferers —unattainable, or even if apparently attainable, of little real
and permanent advantage. Instead of a girl being looked down upon
for having strong sexual passions, it is one of her highest virtues;
while feeble or morbid desires are the sign of a diseased or deteriorated
frame! Those who have the most healthy desires are the chosen children
of nature, whom she thus deems worthiest to continue our race. In
sexual diseases, the venereal desires are generally deadened or rendered
morbid; and one of the best signs of restoration to health is the return
of powerful sexual feelings.
Before leaving the subject of the treatment of these affections, I would
entreat especial attention to the subject of their prompt and early treat-
ment. Dr. Ashwell says, “ These diseases are very frequently neglected
at their commencement. Menstrual irregularities and general delicacy,
are matters of every-day occurrence, and the disease is often suffered to
attain a great height before advice is sought. 1 have often been con-
sulted in such cases, where, from what the relations had told me, I should
have thought the ease a slight one, and yet I have found it almost hope-
less.” It is, alas! too true that delicacy in young women and menstrual
derangements are at present —at least, in towns —rather the general rule
than the exception ; and when we consider the female training and the
state of the sexual world, we cannot be surprised at this. The standard of
female health and strength is miserably low. If we go through one of
our large towns —London, for instance —we will observe how pale,»thin,
and feeble the young girls are, as a class. Contrast one of them with a
blooming and powerful girl from the country, and we will see the immense
difference in physical virtue. Such low states of the vital powers border
closely upon disease, and favour the occurrence of innumerable diseases.
Pallor, feebleness of frame, want of appetite, and any menstrual irregu-
larities, should never be neglected; nor should a girl be permitted to
grow up in a delicate state, if the means of invigorating her be at all
attainable.
For the prevention of this important disease everymeans must be taken
to elevate the physical powers in woman, from her childhood upwards.
Female education, and the cramping views as to female decorum, should
be greatly altered. Their bodies should be strengthened, just as those of
boys and young men, by active sports and exercises—such as all young
people delight in. They should bo taught that physical strength, courage,
and blooming health are as excellent and desirable in woman as in man,
and they should learn to take as much pride in the physical as in the
mental virtues. It is not for themselves aline, that they elevate their
bodily powers, but for their future offspring also ; pale and sickly mothers


beget pale and sickly children. Solid and real knowledge should 1$
given them, as well as the graceful arts; and above all, that which is fat
the most urgently required in the education both of man and woman—-a
knowledge of the human body and the human mind, with their nature and
their laws. Without the study of human anatomy and physiology, and of
moral and mental science, in short without the study of human nature,
no education is worthy of the name. The ignorance and spurious deli-
cacy of woman necessitate the same deplorable qualities in man ;for no
sexual subject can be freely discussed, or written about, among us, unless
woman also he able to reason upon it.
The nature of the various organs of the body and mind, their purposes,
their states of health and disease, the great law of healthy exercise as
applicable to our whole frame—all these should he pointed out, and thus
would the young woman be prepared to encounter the difficulties of life.
The study of anatomy would do away with the childish and irreverent
ideas connected with the sexual and excretory organs, along with the
mystery and shame, which have done such incalculable mischief. At
present a morbid curiosity is excited by the general ignorance on these
subjects; to gratify which, purient and stupid books are written, which
are read hy immense numbers of all classes and sexes. Fanny Hills,
Aristotles, &c., are eagerly sought for and read in secret, to the degrada-
tion of all parties concerned. Who would care to read such sickly and
ignorant productions if they had an honourable knowledge of the real
nature of our being, and the lofty and dignified sense of our wondrous
humanity, which such knowledge must always impart? The mystery on
sexual subjects keeps men and women constantly in a state of childhood.
Childish curiosity and ignorant imaginations, with a degraded feeling of
mystery, shame, or disgust, varied by a vulgar pretence of kuowingness,
pervade our society on all sexual matters.
The natural sexual feelings, which awaken at puberty, should not be
discountenanced or unduly suppressed in the girl. To do so is infalhb y
to render her morbid and unnatural. In Scotland, where there is a stricter
sexual code than in perhaps any other country, and where the lusts of
the flesh, as they are called, are stigmatised and controlled as much as
possible, sexual shyness and timidity constitute a great national disease,
and cause moro unhappiness among young people, than can well be con-
ceived. The youth of both sexes are so often warned of the sin of in-
dulging ev,n in the very feeling of sexual passion, that their whole
nature becomes distorted, and they become shy and awkward to a most
painful degree. It is indeed bewildering to the young mind,when nature
and human ideas are so completely at variance. Scotland is the shyest
country in the world; and this is among the surest signs of its sexual
code being one of the most unnatural.
When the girl has been trained to the possession of a powerful and
healthy frame, and a healthy mind, invigorated by sound knowledge for
her guidance in life, puberty will be readily and easily established, men-
struation will follow, and she will enter upon womanhood with the fairest
prospect of happiness. But at this period it is absolutely requisite, in
order to maintain and elevate the health, and prevent the occurrence of


serial disease, that she should have before long, a healthy exercise for
the new organs, and the normal gratification of the new desires. If this be
not attainable, all our former efforts will prove in vain, and we shall have
elevated her powers only to their own destruction; for her mind and
body will indubitably be thrown into disorder by the workings of the new
physical and moral influences. She may indeed retain her health for a
time, but gradually menstruation will become irregular or painful, she
will become hysterical and nervous, and discontent and unhappiness will
take the place of her former amiahility. Wc may do what we please in
the way of other healthy influences ; we may bestow every other care on
the nurture and education of our beloved ones ; but it is absolutely im-
possible to make woman healthy or happy without a due amount of sex-
ual enjoyment. Irrespective of the question of its attainability, we may
recognise the indisputable fact, that without it, it is equally impossible to
prevent or to cure the greatest part of their sexual diseases and un-
happiness ; and female therapeutics are an impossible science. If the
sexual organs are to remain, as at present, totally unexercised through-
out a great part, and, in numberless cases, throughout the whole of life,
and if chastity must continue to be regarded as the highest female virtue,
it is impossible to give woman any real liberty; it is impossible to give
her a true and genuine education, and to cultivate her bodily powers and
animal passions, as they should be cultivated ; and it is out of human
power to make the lot of woman other than an unhappy, a diseased, and
a degraded one, as it is at present, when vast quantities of the sex pass
their lives as involuntary nuns, or as prostitutes.


HYSTERIA.
This extraordinary disease is a still more important one than chloro-
sis, from its very great frequency, and the amount of unhappiness it
causes, both to the patients, and their friends. Dr. Ashwell calls it
“The incubus of the female habit,’’ and Sydenham says “Hysterical
affections constitute one-half of all chronic diseases.” From this it may
be judged how very prevalent is this affection in its various forms. It is
peculiar to woman, for although morbid nervous states, weakness, and
excitability, are common to both sexes, when in weak health, the regular
hysterical fits, and hysterical counterfeits, are never seen in man. It is
evidently connected with the female sexual system, for it is not found
before puberty, and it is very frequently dependent upon a disordered
state of the sexual organs or feelings.
A regular hysterical fit presents the following symptoms. Painful
sensations are felt about the navel; these gradually, with a rumbling
noise following the windings of the intestines, mount upwards till they
reach the throat, where they assume the character of a ball, rising in the
gullet, and producingasense of suffocation. Thereis hereevidently spasm
of the passage, just as the abdominal pains are probably owing to spasm of
the bowels gradually mounting upwards. The fit is now at its height,
and a burst of hysterical laughter or crying occurs, followed by a copious
flow of limpid urine, and the patient gradually returns to her usual state.
In many cases these fits occur very frequently, and are brought on by
very slight causes. Any thing that agitates or vexes the mind, or that
exhausts the body, is likely to bring them on.
Besides these regular fits, there are various nervous symptoms that
characterise the hysterical disposition. The patient is weak, excitable,
nervous, and irresolute; very changeable in her likes and dislikes, and
with a general instability of character, showing the delicacy of the nervous
system. There is a want of concentrativenoss, and of the power of con-
tinued effort in any direction. But besides these, there is in almost all
cases some deep-rooted sexual morbidity, which, it we analyse the case
well, we shall find to bo the very essence of the disordered mental state.
If the patient be a single woman (and in the vast majority of cases it is
in the single, and in women who are not happily married, or who are


without children, that the aggravated form of the disease is seen) she is
generally full of sexual shyness and timidity, with a conscious ami stealthy
look, as if she were accustomed to indulge in feelings, whose expression
is forbidden. There is a considerable similarity between the timidity
and self-consciousness of this disease, and that of spermatorrhoea in man.
Doubtless in many hysterical cases masturbation is practised, and serves
to increase the nervous weakness, and the morbid state of the sexual
feelings. The hysterical fits and allied symptoms of nervous weakness
and excitability are very common, and as they are often to a certain ex-
tent under the control of the will, and may continue for years in some
cases, without materially affecting the health, they are frequently treated
only by laughter and sarcasm. But there are many other forms of this
protean malady, which present far more serious appearances. The
common fits, if the patient encounter serious trials and disappointments,
may become so aggravated in character, as to assume the severity of
epileptic paroxysms. In this form of the disease, the patient falls down
as in epilepsy, becomes totally unconscious, struggles and gasps for breath,
foams at the mouth, and is convulsed on one or both sides of the body.
The face becomes blue and livid, and she seems on the verge of suffocation,
to that the fit presents a very alarming appearance, and causes great
terror to those around. It is often very difficult, even for a practised
eye, to distinguish at first this attack from true epilepsy, but there is one
great criterion to guide us, namely: that in the hysterical convulsion,
me larynx, or head of the wind pipe, is not quite closed, as it is in epilepsy,
and the patient can breathe a little, though with great difficulty, la
epilepsy there is complete closure of the larynx, and a total inability to
respire, which makes that fearful malady so much more fatal in its effects.
Besides this, a knowledge of previous hysterical seizures will aid us in
the diagnosis. The insensibility in the hysterical fit is sometimes ap-
parent only, and the patient is not without knowledge of external
things. •
But hysteria does not consist only in fits of greater or less severity, and
in the various symptoms of nervous excitability. Another peculiarity of
this disease is that it counterfeits, or assumes the form of, a vast number of
different diseases. Thus there are hysterical diseases of the spine, hys-
terical asthma, palsy, affection of the joints, retention of urine &c., in
all of which hysteria takes the form, and gives rise to the symptoms of
the different affections; and often so closely, that it it is almost impossi-
ble to distinguish between the real and the spurious disease. This most
extraordinary feature in hysteria is one of the great difficulties in medical
practice, and has been the cause of errors without number. Many a
patient has been long treated for spinal disease, many hare had their
limbs amputated, or their constitution seriously injured by energetic treat-
ment, when there was no real structural disease, but merely a series of
disordered nervous actions simulating one. Hysterical epilepsy is, as
we have seen, one instance of an affection, very difficult to distinguish
from the true one. Hysterical cough and loss of voice are frequently met
with. The cough has a peculiar croupy, spasmodic character, and together
with the nervous loss of voice may be brought on by very slight causes,
N


often by mental agitation. Painful and hurried breathing, simulating
asthma, is also frequent. Irritable and painful stales of the breasts,in
'which these glands are enlarged and indurated, are common, and are
generally found along with amenorrhcea. The most Tiolent colics, last-
ing sometimes for days, are met with, and enormous quantities o(
wind are frequently generated in the intestines, giving rise to pain, ex-
citement, flushing, and frequently hysterical fits. Violent and cir-
cumscribed pulsations of the blood-vessels often excite suspicion of organic
disease in them. Fain and tenderness in the spine is common, and still
more so is a most trying and wearing pain in the left side of the abdomen,
which often continues for years, and is exceedingly intractable. This pain
is probably in most cases, sympathetic of an irritable or inflamed state of
the ovaries or womb ; just as a pain in the right shoulder is sympathetic,
in many cases, of disease of the liver. The most intense and continued
headaches are of very frequent occurrence. They are often so severe as
to drive the patient nearly to distraction. Apparent obstructions in the
natural apertures of the body frequently occur, such as difficulty of
swallowing, retention of urine, &c. Stiff and rigid states of various parts
of the body, such as the neck, the arms, &c. and also paralysis and
spurious affections of the joints are frequent. Affections of the rectum
and of the urinary organs are often simulated. In short there is scarcely
an organ which may not be interfered with, scarcely a disease which may
not be counterfeited by hysteria.
It is often a very difficult task for the medical man, and one requiring
great tact, to distinguish between the true and the hysterical diseases.
A great guide in this matter is a knowledge of the previous history of
the patient, and also a something unreal, transient, and exaggerated,
in the character of the disease before him. The pains in these affections
have not the fixed and permanent character that they bear in the true
diseases, and they shew more the marks of a nervous, than a structural
origin. There are generally too the signs of excitement and nervousness
in the bearing of the patient, and it seems as if she herself does not believe
in the real nature of the disease, but is rather anxious to deceive herself
and her attendants into this belief, and to excite a romantic pity; or in
other cases her fears and her vivid imagination seem to call forth the
symptoms. However it is always a nice, and also a most important
matter, to distinguish between the true and the hysterical affections, fox.
a mistake either way may have very injurious results.
The hysteria of some approaches very near to insanity. The mind
becomes so perverted, so wild, excitable, and violent, that their friends
become alarmed, and sometimes wish to subject them to confinement.
But this should never be permitted, as to put such a patient among
lunatics would be the very way to complete the ruin of her mind.
If we review the endless array of symptoms found in.this disease, and
analyse them, we will find that they all arise from a weakened and
excitable state of the nervous system, depending upon or connected with
a similar state of the numerous and important nerves of the sexual
organs. As chlorosis is mainly a disease of the blood, so is hysteria of
the nerves, though symptoms of both are often found together. The


lexnal system is connected by the sympathetic chain of nerves with all
the important viscera in the body, such as the heart, stomach, and spinal
cord, and irritability and enfeeblemcnt arising in it, is propagated to all
thsse organs, and gives rise to the endless variety of sympathetic affec-
tions mentioned above. A morbul sexual state , both physical and mental,
lies at the root of hysteria. Girls menstruating healthily, and women
happily married, are seldom afflicted with this disease; it is the single,
or widows, or barren women, or such as are indifferent to, or dislike
'their husbands, (which last class, in this country of indissoluble marriage,
is unhappily so large a one) in all of whom some sexual derangement of
mind or body may be suspected to exist, who are its victims.
Hysteria is as much a mental, as a bodily disease, and consists as much
in morbid and disordered emotions, as in disordered bodily functions. The
parts of the body which are liable to be affected, are those which are most
under the influence of the emotions, acting through the medium of the
spinal or reflex nervous system. Thus we all know how much the heart,
the stomach and bowels, the breathing, and the natural orifices of the
body, such as the throat, the anus, and the neck of the bladder, are under
the influence of the emotions. Fear and rage make the heart beat vio-
lently, make orie gasp for breath, produce a choking sensation in the
throat, and take away the voice. Bashfnlness sends the blood rushing to
the face, and often, like other kinds of fear, produces a looseness in the
bowels, or violent desire to make water. It also disorders the sexual
feelings, making a man impotent, and a woman hysterical. The emotions
have moreover a great power over the will; and this explains the palsy
and rigid states of various parts of the body in hysteria, where it is the
will, which is powerless, not the muscles. The emotions exercise also a
great control over the organs of secretion ; hence the flow of limpid urine
which follows the hysterical fit, and the immense secretion of air in the
bowels. The convulsive affections, so often found, whether of a graver or
milder character, depend on the irritability of the spinal cord, excited by
the irritability of the emotions, or the organic nerves, especially those of the
sexual system. According to the principle that all disease is a restora-
tive effort of nature, the fits seem intended to restore the balance of the
nervous system, and patients often say that they feel better and calmer
after them.
A singular feature in hysteria is its imitative character, seen, not only
in its simulating so many diseases, but also in its great inlectiousness.
It has been often observed by hospital physicians, that when a hysterical
girl is admitted into a ward, the disease frequently spreads throughout
the whole band, and all the patients begin to present hysterical symp-
toms. This arises from the great impressibility of the female character.
Woman is constantly in the habit of acting from example, and is very
much under the control of sympathy. Her will is not nearly so strong
nor so firm as that of man in general, and the emotions and feelings
have a greater sway over her mind than his. Probably this arises partly
from the natural difference between them, but it certainly in great part
depends on her imperfect education, (in which those subjects which develope
the reasoning powers, and those actions and endeavours which fortify the


will, are so much neglected,) and on the dependent state in which she lives j
wh ch causes weaken her will and self-control, surrender her to uncon-
trollable emotions, and make her so subject to external influences. We
have a curious parallel to these hysterical sympathies, in the effects of
electro-biology, as it is called. Women are much more generally mes-
mcrisable than men *, and the rigid state of the muscles, the impotence
of will, &c., produced in these experiments by strong external impressions,
arc closely analogous to the hysterical phenomena; and it is probable
that mesmerism might have beneficial results, as a remedy in these
affections.
The causes which pave the way for the developement of hysteria, are
in many respects similar to those of chlorosis, except that they are mors
especially those which act upon the mind and the nervous system, instead
of such as interfere chiefly with nutrition and the elaboration of the blood.
Such are faulty physical and moral education, which leave the nerves and
the mind weak and prone to disorder. But the peculiar causes which
give rise to the disease, are those which excite without gratifying the sexual
feelings, thus rendering these feelings and the sexual nerves morbid and
irritable. This, in by far the most cases, is the cause of hysteria. A
young Indian officer once told me, that hysteria is almost unknown
among the Hindoo women ; and we know that it is a matter of religions
feeling among that people, to procure a husband for a girl, as soon as
menstruation first begins. They think it a sin that a single potential
child should be lost. In this country on the other hand, there is probably
no disease so widely, so universally spread. It is most common among
the upper classes, among whom the sexual feelings are much more promi-
nently developed, from the want of a necessary employment to occupy
the mind, as well as from the various causes—such as novel reading,
poetry, romance, dancing, theatricals, and so many other excitements,
which elevate to the highest pitch the sexual desires, and paint the de-
lights of love in the most glowing colors. But it is found in all classes,
from the palace to the hovel; and in all classes we know, that the great
majority of women pass a large part, and immense numbers the whole of
their lives, without any gratification of the sexual feelings, or satisfaction
of that yearning wish to love and to be beloved, which is the divinest and
strongest instinct in the breast of young people.
Let the reader consider these facts; let him think of who are the
victims of the disease—the single, widows, or women unhappily mar-
ried; let him analyse the pecular mental and physical phenomena of
hysteria, and let him consider the powerful disturbing influence, which
the systematic denial and disappointment of the strongest of our natural
desires must have upon a delicate and susceptible girl; and it it impos-
sible to avoid the conclusion, that this is the main cause of the disease.
The natural emotions are checked and thrown back upon themselves,
and it is inevitable that they should become disordered ; and their dis-
order gradually implicates the whole nervous system. The stream of feel-
ing, instead of being allowed 10 flow onwards in its natural channel in the
eye of day, gladdening and fertilising all around, is pent up in the gloomy
tec. et caverns of the mind, to cause there a deluge and a desolation.


That which should hare been the young girl's pride and delight, becomes
her shame and her torture; she mast conceal, the unhappy one! and
studiously repress her eager and beautiful emotions, and can we wonder
that bewilderment, timidity, and impotence result 1 Nature cannot bear
this constant state of slavery; and ever and anon she shows in the hyste-
rical convulsions, in the wild tumultuous hysterical emotions, or in the
delirious excitement of nymphomania (love-madness,) that she will not
bo repressed. The passions of youth ate a volcanic fire, which in the end
will burst through all obstacles.
Is it the part of a wise and feeling man to refuse to see these facts ?
Whatever we may be able to do, to cure or to prevent these enormous
evils, their main cause is undeniable. Men refuse to look at the melan-
choly results of sexual abstinence, and rather blame the patient for
indulging in sexual feelings which cannot be gratified. It may not be
that their peculiar idolised virtue should be attended by so much misery:
the fault cannot surely be in it, but must be in our own original sin and
perverse nature. Thus, according to the inveterate error of the Christian
moralist, they lay the blame on nature, the all-perfect; and hopelessly
mourn over the evil nature of man, instead of trying to remedy their own
erroneous system.
Hysteria is very frequently associated with diseases of menstruation,
such as amenorrhma, dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, or chlorosis. It is
rather with these, than with the marked inflammatory affections, such as
ulcers of the womb, inflammation of the ovaries, &c., that convulsive
hysteria is found; although the peculiar sexual bashfulness and nervous
irritability are common to all sexual diseases; arising, as has been already
explained, from the morbid delicacy on these subjects. However it would
seem, that where there is a real serious structural disease, the hysterical
emotions are, as it were, calmed by it, and toe imagination bound down
by the real physical suffering. Many young women thus say, that they
would rather have some real physical ailment, than the exceedingly un-
pleasant, vague feelings of nervous weakness, uselessness, and discontent,
which make them miserable without an assignable cause; but which
in reality arise from the want of definite occupation and of sexnal love,
the two great wants in woman’s life. Relations say of a young girl, who
shows signs of discontent and unhappiness, “why is she unhappy? surely
she has everything to make her satisfied, all. her wishes and wants are
suppliedbut they do not see, that by far the most essential of all wants
at that age is not supplied, without which every luxury, every tenderness
of friends or relatives, are to the ardent yonng girl quite insufficient for
her happiness; namely sexual love, and also the power of. working for
herself at something, which her mind tells her is worthy of her energies.
The treatment of hysteria is, as may be expected, often very difficult.
The means usually applied are—as is readily understood, when we reflect
ou the general cause of the disease, and its nature, which is often more
mental than bodily—totally irrational, and uusuited to produce a radi-
cal cute. Dr- Ashwell acknowledges this; he says that “ few physicians
desire the treatment of hysteria; for the symptoms are so variable, one
springing up after another, that different remedies are successively tried
and abandoned, till both the doctor and patient are worn out, and the


disease is suffered to take its course.” In reality, Love is the only phy.
sician, who can cure his peculiar diseases ; and it is vain for a medical
man to expect to supply his place. The passions, which have been re-
pressed and thrown into disorder, must be gratified, and the proper
healthy stimulus giren to the sexual organs, so as to restore their ner-
vous balance, before we can have any rational expectation of a cure.
The mind will thus become contented and happy, the tumultuous emotions
be calmed and restored to health, and the sexual organs will regain their
normal state. Dr. Ashwell says, that marriage frequently cures hysteria,
but hysterical women often make bad nurses, having scanty and innutri-
tions milk. A happy sexual intimacy is the grand remedy in hysteria;
but besides this, various accessory means would often be necessary.
In a hysterical fit, the usual treatment is, to lay the patient down,
loosen the dress, and dash cold water over the head and neck. The
various affections of the head and chest, stomach, bowels, Ac., should be
met as they occur by appropriate means, chiefly by remedies of a soothing
and anti-spasmodic nature. In all cases of hysteria we should discover
whether there be any co-existing genital disease, and endeavour to re-
move it: for hysteria, if depending on such an affection, is never cured
without its prior removal.
But the main object of treatment in all hysterical cases, should be to
go to the root of the disease, and remove the morbid state of the sexual
system and feelings, which causes the general nervous irritability. It is
in vain that wejtreat symptom after symptom, headache, colic, fits ; or'
mental irritability, vehemence, or caprice. We may overcome one enemy
after another, we may load the patient whether with blame or com-
passion, but we cannot cheat nature; and until the required remedy
is applied, the radical sexual disorder in mind and body will continue,
and only become aggravated by continuance.
It is a miserable thing to see the usual treatment of a hysterical girl.
Friends and relations either laugh at, or dislike her; for irritability,
peevishness, and often violent temper are a part of the disease; and that
effeminate amiability which is so highly lauded in the female character,
at the expense of the far higher virtues of force and independent energy,
is sadly defaced by stern nature, whose destructive tendencies will not be
silenced in either sex. Such unkind and mistaken treatment often
aggravates the disease, and pushes it to the verge of insanity, or fre-
quently into complete insanity: for hysteria often ends in this, where the
mind is naturally weak. The medical man must generally content him-
self with treating symptoms, and directs his attention chiefly to bracing
the general health, and at most palliating the affection.
Few medical men pay much attention to the mind, but consider
chiefly the bodily state; and in a disease like hysteria they are quite at
fault, and find their agents powerless. For it is necessary, in order to
remove disease, that we should make an individual happy or contented
(in other words, healthy) in mind as well as healthy in body ; and un-
less we attend to this in hysteria, which is as much a mental as a bodily
disease, we cannot expect success. To produce a happy and contented
mind, we must give the patient that which her nature demands.


lecturing and contempt •will not bully the disease, kindness and pity
Till not persuade it; youth turns a deaf ear to all but its own beautiful
instincts, which for erer point out to it the path of truth ; and none of
these means will produce a quiet and a happy mind, which is essential
to the patient’s recovery. The only one who can cure a hysterical young
woman, is a young man whom she lores, and with whom she may
gratify her natural feelings, and have a free and happy outlet for the
emotions which have been so long disordering her.
Along with this essential for the cure, other means of bracing the general
health and restoring the mental balance should be taken. Change of scene
isespecially advisable, and removal from home influences, which are so often
prejudicial in such cases. Travelling isanexcellent auxiliary, especially a
pedestrian tour,which women so seldom have the power of indulging in;
not because they could not undertake it, but because it is thought indeco-
rous in women. There are few things more salutary or delightful than a
walking tour, whether in pleasant society or alone. It is much more
strengthening than a driving one, and a most powerful means of invigora-
ting the frame. I have frequently heard ladies express a great desire
that they had the freedom that men have, in travelling about, and
especially in making walking tours, which are becoming so common
among our sex. But a girl is never allowed to go about alone, like a
young man; she is subjected to a constant espionage, from which not one
of her actions or motions can escape; and so she is frequently forced to
do things, excellent in themselves, in an underhand manner, to the des-
truction of her sense of dignity and rectitude. It is to guard the great
female virtue of chastity, as has been mentioned above, that alt these in-
tolerable restrictions and espionage, are placed upon the movements of
woman; and as long as the present ideas regarding this so-called virtue
remain, it is impossible for woman to obtain greater freedom. The
difference in the privileges of man and woman, depends essentially on
the difference of their sexual privileges; and until this question is at-
tended to, the various efforts which are being made at present to give
greater freedom and a wider sphere to woman, can have but a very limi-
ted success.
Every young mind, whether in man or woman, burns for romance, love,
and adventure; these are the great natural stimuli to the health and
virtue of youth, the pole-stars which cheer us on, and shed a glory on onr
every-day working-life. At home among her relations the young hyste-
rical girl has in many cases a constant feeling of degradation ; the
emotions which she instinctively feels are the most ennobling and exalt-
ing for her, are coldly looked upon or laughed at; her romantic longings
are sneered down, and the main springs of her virtue trodden in the dust.
Familiarity, in the home circle, far too often breeds contempt; and it is
very frequently a love affair, that first shows a girl what she can be, and
elevates her into another sphere of self-respect. In countries such as
Scotland, where spiritual puritanism reigns triumphant, romance and
love have no quarter shown to them, and all the ardent sexual aspirations
meet with double discouragement. Kindness and reverence should be
used towards the hysterical, instead of the contemptous way in which they


are usually treated, so as to increase their self-respect and self-control.
A great part of the disease consists in a sense of weakness, and want ol
self-confidence. How can a girl have confidence in herself, if all around
laugh at her, and treat her feelings as unreal 1 It must never be thought,
that hysteria is an unreal disease. It is a weakened state of the nervous
system, physical and mental, and the physical weakness and irritability
are just as marked as the mental. It is easy to laugh, but it is rather the
part of the wise and feeling heart to reverence and to cure.
One great reason of the simulation of various diseases, and also of the
vague and unreal nature of many of the sufferings of which the hysteri-
cal complain, is that they are forbidden to disclose the real cause of
their sufferings, or of their unhappiness. In every sexual disease bothia
man and woman, and especially in the latter, the miserable necessity for
concealment makes the patient invent other subjects of complaint; and
thus sexual patients are almost always accused of hypochondria, and
falsification or exaggeration of symptoms. When a man or a woman
suffers, whether in mind or body, they must give some reason for it, and
if they are forbidden by our unnatural ideas of propriety to speak freely
of the real cause, they are forced into deceit; and this is one cause which
greatly heightens the miseries of all these diseases, and is the source of
great degradation to the sufferer. No diseases cause such a feeling of
insufferable degradation as the sexual ones ; and in a minor degree those
of the excretory organs. Not to believe in-an individual is one of the
greatest injuries we can do him, and is as philosophically false as it isunfeel-
ing. It has been truly and beautifully said “Love thy neighbour as thy-
self but the precept “ Believe in thy neighbour as thyself" is not less
true, and still more needed among us. Every man believes in himself, and
knows that his nature is true at bottom ; that his joys and his sorrows
are real, although his external character may be at variance with the
inner man. But it is the part of the moralist and the physician to
endeavour to see into this inner man, which is always real, and seek to
make the exterior correspond with it. It is only when the inner man
is in harmony with the outer, and when a person thus lives a true life,
that there cau be satisfactory happiness. Nature always strives to be
true, and to have a true expression; although in our complex and imper-
fect society her purpose is so often defeated.
If a genital disease co-exist with hysteria, it will be necessary to cure
it, but in many of the functional genital diseases by far the most effec-
tual cure is sexual intercourse; and medicinal remedies will be needed
chiefly in the inflammatory diseases, and in cases where sexual intercourse
and child-bearing prove insufficient. It is important to remark, that
sexual intercourse may frequently fail thoroughly to cure a sexual disease
in woman, while child-bearing, lactation, and the thoroughly new world
of physical and moral emotions which is thus opened up to her, and which
is necessary in that sex to complete the chain of the sexual functions, may
succeed. The immense impulse that is often given to the health of
woman by child-bearing; the change which it produces, dispelling mor-
bid states of body and mind, and giving a renewed freshness and vigour to
both, in those cases whera it proceeds naturally and happily, is well


known. If it be not possible to procure for hysterical women these great
remedies, let us not flatter ourselves that tho disease will yield through-
out our society to any other means. If we must still adhere i o the old
routine, to valerian and musk, assafoetida and opium : to lecturing, per-
suading or upbraiding; the cure of hysterical disease is a physical and
moral impossibility.
As to the still more important question of the prevention of this wide-
spread malady, the same remedy which will cure, will also prevent, like
all the natural remedies. The only possible mode of preventing hysteria,
is by fortifying the general system by the appropiate exercise of all the
bodily and mental powers from childhood upwards; and more especially
by providing for the healthy exercise of the sexual organs and emotions,
as soon as nature requires this. If we could possibly attain this so desi-
rable aim throughout society, hysteria would almost disappear, instead
of being as at present, probably the most widely spread af all diseases,
and therefore creating an enormous mass of misery. It is the most
widely spread of all diseases, simply because, of all the human organs, the
female genital organs and sexual feelings are placed at present in the
most unhealthy circumstances.
Woman’s peculiar torments begin at puberty, and from that time, in
innumerable cases, till her marriage, she is the constant prey of anxiety.
Ungratified desires distract her, endless temptations and excitements
surround her, marriage is for her so critical a step, and yet she has not
the power of selection. The fatal question, shall she be married at all ?
gradually dawns upon her, and the clouds and whirlwinds of anxious and
conflicting passions darken her sky. If these be not natural and real
Bufferings, and if we, are not to recognise and do all we can to remedy this
fearful state of matters, let ns close at once the book of human knowledge,
and give up the farce of philosophy and philanthrophy. It is our part to
investigate diligently and recognise all truths; nor to bend what we see
to a preconceived theory, but rather to form if possible, a theory based
upon all the natural truths. If we do thus in the case before us, we will
see, that unless we can remove the main cause of hysteria, namely, in-
sufficient sexual gratifications, it is totally impossible to prevent that
disease. Let us look this truth steadily in the face, whatever difficulties
it occasions us.
I have now spoken of two of the most important female diseases, which
are dependent, in the vast majority of cases, mainly on sexual abstinence.
Before proceeding to the diseases of menstruation, many of which have
the same cause, I shall say a few words on the subject of sexual excess.


SEXUAL EXCESS.
A vert meagre account is given in medical works of the frequency
or the effects of venereal excesses in the female. Venereal excesses
are not, in this country, nearly so prevalent a cause of disease in
woman as venereal abstinence ; and in this we see the great error of
those, who are constantly declaiming on the evils of the former, while
they never allude to the latter. In the pulpit, and among Christian
moralists generally, we have fearful pictures given of the evils of sex-
ual excess; but in reality they are very rarely seen, compared with
those of abstinence. Men war with shadows, and neglect the dread-
ful realities under their eyes. Chastity or sexual abstinence causes
more real disease and misery in one year, I believe, in this country,
than sexual excesses in a century. We must not include venereal
disease among the evils of excess, as it has nothing to do with it ;it
depends always on infection, not on over-use of the sexual organs.
However there is no doubt that sexual excess is capable of produ-
cing, and that in many cases it does produce, serious evils. Over
stimulus of the sexual system will cause disease and exhaustion ; and
this not unfrequently results in newly-married women. Hysterical
and chlorotic symptoms may be induced in this way by debility, and
various organs may suffer in their functions. This is especially.seen,
when a weak and delicate girl marries a powerful man. Menorrha-
gia is apt to be induced from over stimulation of the ovaries, together
with exhaustion and sexual apathy. In such cases the constitution
should be allowed to regain its strength by separation of the parties
for a time, and greater moderation must be used afterwards. I have
seen several cases, both in men and women, where sexual excesses
after marriage were the cause of great enfeeblement; and there is in
these cases far too much delicacy in the medical man about telling the
parties of their error. Why should such scruples be allowed to inter-
fere with the most important of all considerations—the health and
happiness of the individuals ?
But there is another aspect in which we should view the question of
sexual excess. A moderate amount of sexual indulgence braces and
ennobles body and mind, and heightens the virtue of each • but to be


always thinking on amatory subjects, or constantly indulging in vene-
real pleasures, has a very bad effect on both man and woman, even
though it do not produce tangible bodily disease. The mind becomes
effeminate, and the nerves lose their tone; the power of thought be-
comes impaired, cloyed as it were by sweetness. Nature never meant
that we should be absorbed in one set of feelings, nor steeped in sex-
ual indulgences, as some of the southern nations are. The great
object of our aims should be to cultivate all the different faculties we
possess, and so to vary and perpetuate our enjoyments. Self-denial,
although so much abused in this country, especially in sexual mat-
ters, is often a most valuable quality. But the very way to ensure
the rank and morbid growth of the sexual passions, is to deny them
any gratification. By so doing, let us not suppose that we become
their masters; rather we become their slaves, and they tyrannise over
our thoughts, and absorb us completely. There are no people who
think so habitually on sexual matters, as those in whom love has been
most repressed; the youth suffering from seminal weakness, the
hysterical girl, the single woman, or the priest. Married people soon
become accustomed to the pleasures of love, and learn to divide their
thoughts and affections among the many objects around them; but to
the young single woman love is all in all. This is in one way a true
sexual excess, and shows the folly of imagining that we can defeat the
purposes of nature. Among many of our poets and young female
authoresses we can see the effects of this effeminating one-sidedness;
they can write and talk of nothing but love, and if we analyse their
works, we will find how much this absorption in one set of feelings
interferes with their general developement and happiness. They can-
not escape from the passion, because they have either been sexually
unfortunate themselves, or because their sympathising eyes see so
much sexual misery around them, that they can think of little else.


DISEASES OF MENSTRUATION.
This function which has been aptly called “ the sign and the guar-
dian of the female health,” is so very frequently disordered to a greater
or less degree, that its perfect health is the exception, instead of the
rule, in our society. Dr. Tilt informs ns, that in a large number of
apparently healthy women taken indiscriminately, it was found on
enquiry, that only in one-fourth of them, was menstruation perfectly
free from "morbid symptoms. In the others it was preceded or accom-
panied by more or less disturbance, pain, or uneasiness. Dr. Ashwell
moreover, says of the ovaries, the organs which preside over the men-
strual function, “ No organs of the body seem to be so prone to disease
as the ovaries, for 1 can truly say that I have seldom found them after
death perfectly healthy.” A fellow student once told me, that he was
informed by a female friend, that among the young ladies of her
acquaintance, there was scarcely one in whom menstruation con-
tinued healthy for many years, if they remained single. It was often
healthy at first, but about the twentieth year or so, it gradually be-
came painful, and more or less disordered.
These facts are exceedingly significant, and prove to demonstration,
how very unhealthy must be the hygienic conditions, that surround
the female sexual organs. Disordered menstruation, attended by more
or less pain, is so common, that women look upon it as a natural and
inevitable evil, and unless it be severe, pay little heed to it. But this
is a very false and a very dangerous opinion. That menstruation was
intended by nature to be quite free from pain and uneasiness is proved
as well by our experience of the painless elimination of all the other
secretions, when perfectly healthy, as by the complete absence of
pain in many women, and in those who are otherwise in the most
robust health. Why too are the ovaries so very frequently found
diseased ? Even though the pain might possibly be deemed natural,
this cannot be. It must be concluded, that menstruation cannot be
called typically healthy, where there is any pain or uneasiness
attending it, although, in the present low standard of female health,
very considerable disorder may pass current; and it is certain that
serious menstrual disease is" often induced, by disregarding the


common ana slighter symptoms at its commencement. The perfect
condition of menstruation, which should be to woman so very valu-
able a criterion of health, is at present of little comparative use, if
its warnings are so little heeded.
Child-birth, moreover, (which consists like menstruation in the dis-
charge of an egg, and differs only in the fact that this egg has been
fecundated, and has arrived at maturity) is a much more painful pro-
cess in civilized woman than in the savage, and in some women than
in others. This, which is also a sign of degeneration from the natural
standard of health, is probably owing partly to the feeble developo-
ment of woman, and partly to the disproportionate size of the brain in
civilized man.
I now proceed to the disorders of menstruation, which are so im-
portant as to become serious diseases.


ABSENT MENSTRUATION.
This signifies an absence of menstruation, and is a very common
disease. It is classified under two kinds, the amenorrhoea of sup-
pression, and of retention. By retention is meant that the catamenia
have never appeared; by suppression that they .have been stopped,
after continuing for a time.
Retention of the menses may arise either from a congenital defect
of the sexual organs, or from a want of power in the constitution to
establish puberty, or to set agoing the menstrual functions. Congen-
ital deficiency is very rare, although of all the organs in the body none
are so frequently subject to malformations as the sexual organs, both
in man and woman; nature seeming to find the perfect developement
of these organs her most difficult task. There are some women in
whom the ovaries, others in whom the womb, are naturally wanting
or imperfectly developed, and in such cases of course no menstruation
can take place. In these cases the sexual desires are absent, and the
appearance, tone of voice, &c„ may have somewhat of a masculine
character. However, according to X)r. Ashwell, who has seen a few
such cases, the health is generally delicate, and the mind irritable.
Of course there is no remedy in these cases, and all that can be done
by those who have the misfortune to be born sexually imperfect, just
as others are born deaf, dumb, or blind, is to console themselves with
the reflection that there are many other blessings in the world besides
those of sex; which indeed prove at present too often a curse instead of
a blessing. There is one mode too, in which any natural defect like
this, might be put to advantage, and used for the service of mankind.
Every one who is born defective, stands in an exceptional position, the
sexually neuter among the rest; and has experiences and perhaps
opportunities of insight into nature, that others cannot have. All evil
in one aspect may be viewed as good; and it is well known in patho-
logy, that disease reveals to us important truths with regard to the
nature of health, which we could not have learned in any other way;
and in like manner all monstrosities and congenital deficiencies are
now recognised by physiologists, as among the most valuable of all
revelations of the operations of nature. Some of us in this life inherit


health and happiness, others disease and misery; but all are, in one
point of view, equally valuable and important in the scheme of nature.
Retention of the menses is, in the great majority of cases, owing to
delicacy of frame or other causes, which retard the developemeut of
puberty or the sexual functions; and we should be very slow to sus-
pect any congenital deficiency, unless it be quite apparent, even in
cases where the menses are delayed for years beyond their usual time
of appearance. We have seen that retention often occurs in chlorosis,
and that the frame is here unable to develope perfectly the sexual
organs or to set up menstruation. The feebleness of the system causes
the sexual arrest; and this reacts on the general health, and produces
the peculiar chlorotic cachexy. This kind of retention is found chiefly
among delicate girls in towns, engaged in sedentary occupations, or
confined in unhealthy rooms or factories. But there is another class
of cases, where the menses are kept back; namely, In full plethoric
girls, in whom congestion and torpor of the system, and especially of
the sexual organs, prevent the elimination of the secretion. In these
cases there are the symptoms of fulness of blood, viz. flushing of the
face, giddiness, and oppression of head, specks floating before the eyes,
a full and usually a slow pulse, and alternate heats and chills of the
extremities, showing a disordered circulation. These cases are some-
times found iu robust and plethoric country girls, and in those in
towns, who have had a luxurious or indolent life, favouring fulness of
habit.
I have already described the treatment of the chlorotic cases, which
should consist in a bracing and invigorating plan to establish puberty,
and then the proper sexual stimulus to excite the menstrual discharge,
la the congestive form, means should be taken to remove the plethoric
state. Plenty of walking exercise should be taken, with a cold bath
once or twice daily, and a plain and somewhat sparing diet; in fact
the patient should go for a while into training. These means will tend
to remove the fulness of blood, and will equalise the circulation and
the nervous influence, for which purpose nothing is so effectual as
plenty of active walking exercise. The great natural remedy, the
sexual stimulus, should now be used; and there are very few cases of
such disease, I am persuaded, that would resist these means.
The direct stimuli used at present to excite menstruation are a class
of remedies called emmemgogues, whose intention 1s to stimulate the
sexual organs, and urge them to the performance of their functions.
The ones chiefly used are the mustard hip-bath at 96 or 98 degrees,
taken every night for from half an hour to one, or even two hours.
This is one of the best, and frequently induces menstruation. Various
medicines are also given with the same view. Iron, by enriching the
blood, often causes menstruation, especially in chlorotic cases. Aloes
is very frequently given, and is the best purgative for producing men-
struation. It acts chiefly on the rectum, and by irritating it, produces
the menstrual discharge from the neighbouring sexual organs. It is
well to give it in combination with iron, which prevents it from irri-
tating the rectum too much. Electricity applied to the sexual organs


is in some cases very effective, a single spark sometimes producing the
discharge. Stimulating injections into the vagina, especially one
made of one drachm of the pure liquor ammoniae to a pint of milk
are often very good.
These are the chief means at present used to produce the menstrual
discharge directly; and they arc commonly employed, in cases where,
after the general health has been braced, congestion removed, and pn-
berty established, menstruation still continues absent; where in short
the way has been paved for the flow, and yet it does not appear.
These various moans prove successful in many cases, but they are all
very uncertain in their action, and, like all other unnatural medicinal
means, do an immense amount of harm to counterbalance the good.
Electricity, if much used, may over stimulate and destroy the natural'
nervous susceptibility. Aloes often cause piles, and always derange
the stomach and bowels. Iron is apt to cause fulness, headache, and
giddiness. Besides this, there is not one of them for a moment to be
compared in efficiency, any more than in safety, to the natural sexual
stimulus. It is by this alone that nature intended that the ovaries
should be urged to action, that the proper nervous equilibrium of the
system should be maintained, and the monthly flow regulated ; and it
is an utter delusion to hope to supplant the natural stimulus by iron,
electricity, hip-baths, aloes, or other means foreign and poisonous to
the frame. Ur. Ashwell says that marriage often, though not always,
cures amenorrhoea; and I am convinced that if sexual intercourse were
used early enough in these diseases, before the susceptibility of the organs
is worn out by long disease or by unnatural stimulants; if other means of
invigorating the system were used at the same time, and, if need be,
mustard hip-baths, aloes, &0., sometimes resorted to as auxiliaries,
where the sexual stimulus alone proved insufficient; very few cases of
absent menstruation would resist. We should not then see, as is now
frequently seen, the retention of the menses persisting for years, some-
times for the whole of life, in spite of all our unnatural remedies;
causing endless anxiety and debility, and frequently leading to fatal
structural disease, which, like the vulture, ever hovers round the weak-
ened prey. There will yet come a time, when it will be clearly seen,
that it is as wrong to stimulate the female sexual organs with these
unnatural means, unless in exceptional cases, as to stimulate a jaded
frame and toil-worn mind with whiskey or opium.
“ When menstruation is absent, a woman is never quite well,” says
Dr. Ashwell; the powers of the constitution gradually become dis-
ordered, chlorosis and white discharges are very frequently induced,
and the greatest prostration comes slowly on. Even where menstrua-
tion is retained for many years, we must be slow to suspect congenital
defect, for that is of very rare occurrence, and menstruation in the
great majority of cases comes on at last, even under the present inade-
quate treatment. ,
The amenorrhoea of suppression is a far more common disease than
that of retention; and therefore of ranch greater importance to society;
It is divided by medical writers into two kinds, acute and chronic


suppression. By acute suppression is meant the sudden checking of
the discharge, wnen actually present. The two great causes of this
are, cold, and violent mental emotion. When menstruating women
are exposed to cold, damp feet, &e., or receive a sudden mental shock,
as of terror or grief, the discharge is often suddenly arrested, and acute
symptoms of either inflammation or great irritation in the ovaries and
womb follow. I shall speak afterwards of the acute inflammation of
the womb or ovaries, which is sometimes the result of arrested men-
struation. But more frequently irritation and congestion of the organs
alone result, especially in delicate and irritable women, in whom such
an accident is most likely to occur. Here there is acute pain felt in
the lower part of the abdomen, and a feeling of weight and uneasiness
in the pelvis. The pulse is quick, and the patient is anxious and
excited. Nausea is also a frequent symptom. It is often difficult in
such a case to distinguish whether there be not acute inflammation;
but the character of the pain, which occurs in severe paroxysms with
intervals of ease, and flies rapidly from one part to another; also the
occurrence of hysterical fits or fainting, and other marks which denote
irritation rather than inflammation, will enable the physician to do-
cide. Here a soothing and relaxing treatment should be used. A
general warm bath at 96 degrees should be given (that is, warm, not
hot), and also some purgative medicine, and Ipecacuanha in small
doses, so as to produce nausea, and thus deaden pain and calm down
fever and spasm. The injection of assafeetida and opium into the
rectum often produces an almost magical relief. The injection should
be kept in for awhile with a piece of sponge. By these means the
pain and congestion will be relieved, and the discharge will perhaps
return at the time, though this cannot always be expected. Whether
it do or not, no subsequent treatment should be used, till just before
the next menstrual period, Then'every precaution should be taken to
favour the return of the flow. Fatigue or cold should be sedulously
avoided, the bowels kept free, and hot mustard hip and foot-baths
taken on alternate nights for a few nights previously. If menstrua-
tion occur, all is well; but if it do not, and if white discharges be set
up instead, then the case becomes one of chronic suppression, and
must be treated accordingly.
Chronic suppression is of very frequent occurrence. Its constitutional
effects are somewhat similar to those produced by other suppressed
secretions, such as the bile, the faeces, &c., and indicate, in the first
place, a fulness of blood, and disorder of the nervous system, and
afterwards a gradually increasing debility, and impoverishment of the
whole frame. There are diffused and obstinate headaches, occasional
giddiness, with specks floating before the eyes and dilated pupils. The
surface is irregularly hot and cold, and easily chilled; the bowels are
constipated; there is disordered respiration, palpitation of the heart,
pains in the chest, &c. The health often seriously fails, all the differ-
ent organs being liable to be implicated; and organic disease may be
established in some part. Chlorosis is frequently caused by. chronic
o


menstrual suppression; and hysteria Is very generally found along
with it.
Chronic suppression may be brought on in many ways. An attack
of acute suppression may gradually pass into it. After such an attack
the function may not return or only imperfectly; a painful effort
being made at each menstrual period, and a small quantity of blood
secreted, but this gradually dying away. It may also be caused by
gradual impairment of the health, from the want of the proper sexual
stimulus. This is a very frequent cause; indeed it is rare for a single
woman, especially in towns, to continue long to menstruate healthify. :
Irregularities occur, monthly periods are frequently missed, and men-
struation becomes painful or often ceases.
It must always be kept in mind that the ovaries receive their natu-
ral stimulus from sexual intercourse. The flow of all the secretions
depends on the application of their appropriate stimulus. Thus the
flow of saliva is promoted by the stimulus of food in the mouth; that
of bile by the substances passing through the alimentary canal; that
of gastric juice by the presence of food in the stomach. There is no
secreting organ which can possibly remain long active and healthy,
unless it receive a due proportion of its appropriate stimulus; and
the only appropriate stimulus to the ovaries is sexual intercourse and
child-bearing.
Chronic suppression frequently depends also on ulceration of the
mouth of the womb; and also, as Dr.-Tilt has shewn, on inflammatory
states of the ovaries. Every case therefore should be carefully ana-
lysed, and its peculiar cause and complications ascertained, before a
proper treatment can be adopted. Independently of inflammatory
disease, there is frequently, especially in recent cases, a congested
state of the ovaries and uterus. White discharges are generally found
where menstruation is absent, and show the congested state of the
sexual organs, which it is their object to relieve. Chronic suppression
is also sometimes, though comparatively rarely, the result of slow
organic disease in the ovaries, such as ovarian dropsy, and in this case
is incurable.
In treating this very common disease, it is first necessary that we
should learn the true cause of each case. To do so, it is very fre-
quently necessary, and in probably all cases it is advisable, that an
examination should be made by the finger or the speculum, to see if
there bo any ulcer of the womb, ovarian inflammation, &c. The gene-
ral neglect of such an examination at the present day, is the cause of
an immense number of errors in this, as well as almost all other geni-
tal diseases. The symptoms of ulcerative or ovarian disease are often
so'obscure, that without a physical examination it is impossible even
for the most experienced man to come to a conclusion, whether or not
such disease exist. If it do, and be not discovered, we cannot expect
to be successful in the treatment. No conscientious man thinks of
treating any other part of the body, which is accessible to our view or
our touch, without using every possible means to aid his diagnosis.


There is nothing so satisfactory as ocular inspection, and there is
scarcely any mere description of symptoms, that can be depended on.
Whenever there is disorder in an organ, it is next to impossible to
s ay in any case that there is no structural disease, and that it is
merely functional, without looking at the organ, if that bo at all pos-
sible. And surely it is a very wrong, as well as a very slovenly, neg-
lect of the power which nature has given us of seeing and touching
the womb and other sexual organs, to allow a false delicacy to
interfere with this inspection, in any case where these organs are
implicated. We cannot tell from the mere detail of symptoms exactly
what is the matter even in the very simplest case; and it seems to me
to be a grave dereliction of duty, in both physician and patient, even
to hazard in the slightest, so valuable a thing as human life and
health. If it be the case, as Ido not believe, that it is not advisable
that man should frequently inspect the female sexual organa, and if
these morbid feelings of mystery and shame between the sexes are to
be kept up at any price, let women be trained (as they certainly should
be in any case) to aid in the examination and treatment of these
organs; but do not let it be said of human beings, arrived at the age
of reflection, that they allow such feelings to stand in the way of their
obvious and paramount duty—the conscientious investigation of every
disease by all the means in their power. Until scruples of sexual
delicacy throw as few obstacles in the way of the investigation and
treatment of sexual diseases, as they do in diseases of the throat, eyes,
or ears, it cannot be said that the genital diseases have any fair chance
given them; and such scruples must be recognised as among the most
important causes of the ignorance and neglect of these diseases, and
therefore of a vast amount of misery.
Human life and health are dirt-cheap at the present day, when the
world is so full of poverty, misery, and disease; but I earnestly hope,
that in time, when a higher standard of health prevails, such careless-
ness and imperfections in the modes of investigating disease will not
he generally seen. In our dispensaries—nay, even in our hospitals,
all must deplore the summary and inefficient manner in which diseases
are so often diagnosed and treated. The doctor’s hands are far too
full, and he can pay no adequate attention to the immense numbers,
and consequently the treatment is often a mere farce. These hasty
and imperfect habits of diagnosis are carried into the treatment of all
diseases in all classes; and in fact the amount of disease prevents pro-
per attention to almost any single case.
If, after a proper examination,, the chronic suppression be found to
depend on ulceration of the womb, or on subacute inflammation of the
ovaries, these diseases must be first cured; and then if menstruation
do not return spontaneously, the sexual stimulus and a bracing treat-
ment will probably induce it. If there be congestion of the sexual
system, and a plethoric habit, leeches applied to the mouth of the
womb are very beneficial, together with plenty of walking exercise,
bathing, &0., all of which means tend to equalise the circulation, and
remove local congestions. They thus prepare the way for the beno


ficial action of the sexual stimulus, which in all these cases is the one
that is ultimately to be relied on. When the system is chlorotic ami
enfeebled, a bracing treatment is necessary along with sexual inter-
course; which should be used (here as in other cases where the sexual
organs are in a weak state), in moderation, so as not to overstimulate
the weakened ovaries. This is evidently too the treatment requisite
for the very frequent cases of irregularity or complete suppression of
the menses, brought on by sexual abstinence. Mustard hip-baths or
other auxiliaries may be needed in many cases, and would probably be
frequently beneflcial. Epilepsy, St. Vitus’ dance, and other nervous
diseases, are sometimes dependent on chronic menstrual suppression,
and arc cured by the return of the discharge.
In order to prevent amenorrhoea, care should be taken by women,
not to expose themselves to cold or wet while menstruating. Habit
however accustoms the body to this, and bathing women go into the
sea, whilst menstruating, without injury. Other causes, which are
said sometimes, suddenly to arrest menstruation are, sexnal inter-.
course or violent emetics or purgatives during menstruation, and these
causes should be carefully avoided. Dr. Tilt says, that if women were
generally in the habit of wearing drawers, the number and severity of
sexual diseases would be greatly diminished. These articles of dress:
arc gradually coming into use, but are still not nearly so much worn
as they should be. Cotton stockings too, and thin shoes, expose the;
feet to cold and wet, and are said by one of the French physicians to
ba among the chief causes of the universal prevalence of white dis-
charges among the Parisian women. To prevent chronic suppression,
the great means is a due amount of the proper stimulus for the ova- \
ries, and a healthy life in other respects.


VICARIOUS MENSTRUATION.
This is a curious affection that sometimes occurs in the absence
of natural menstruation, and has been termed “a freak of nature.”
A quantity of blood is discharged from some other organ, generally
the stomach or the lungs, and sometimes this discharge takes place
periodically at the menstrual epochs. It causes much alarm to the
patient, but is not dangerous, and ceases after a time. It is some-
times difficult to distinguish it from true primary hemorrhage ; but
the guiding facts are, the presence of amenorrhoea; the occasional
periodicity, and the absence of the signs of disorder and disease, which
accompany primary hemorrhage. White discharges sometimes take
the place of absent menstruation, occurring at the usual periods, last-
ing the usual time, and attended by the usual catamenial effort.
This is most common in delicate girls at the beginning of menstrua-
tion.
The treatment of these vicarious affections is, to restore natural
menstruation.


DYSMENORRHŒA
OR
PAINFUL MENSTRUATION.
This is, as Dr. Ashwell says, a very common disease, and causes Intense
suffering. In fact the disease, in its aggravated form, is something like the
pains of child-birth occurring every month. It not only causes intole-
rable suffering, but very frequently sterility likewise ; so that a celebrated
physician said of it, “one half of the life of such a patient is devoted to
suffering, and the other blighted by sterility.” “ Single women are par-
ticularly prone to it,” says Dr. Ashwell, “ and it often seems to be asso-
ciated with a tendency to strong mental emotion.” ,
The symptoms of painful menstruation are as follows. Menstruation
becomes irregular, and is sometimes excessive, but generally scanty. The
discharge is emitted with indescribable pain, and is shreddy or clotted;
lancinating and shooting pains are felt in the womb and vagina. Severe
pain is also felt in the loins, shooting towards the groin and down the
inside of the thighs; expulsatory throes, like those of labour, occur, and
the patient bears down, and sometimes, after expelling a clot, experiences
a temporary relief. In some cases where there is considerable congestion
of the womb, what are called “ spurious abortions ” occur. These are
membranes containing a clot of blood, which are expelled from the womb
with agonising throes. Acute pain in the breasts sometimes precedes
menstruation for some days; and in other cases headaches, flushing of
the face, weight in the pelvis, full and quick pulse precede the attack,
showing that there is inflammatory action going on, and foretelling the
coming storm. Sometimes the menstrual pains, after lasting a day or so,
go off, and the remainder of the period is easy; but frequently they last
throughout.
In the intervals there is often no suffering, and at first but slight con-
stitutional disturbance. But gradually the health becomes impaired;
the bowels become now constipated, now loose; there is loss of appetite,
emaciation, and pallor. Profuse white discharges occur during the
menstrual intervals, and sometimes amenorrhoea ensues. The breasts
now become flaccid, and almost cjuite disappear.
; The causes of this excruciating malady are various. It is sometimes
co-e*istent with menstruation from puberty upwards; but often arises
;at a subsequent period. It lasts in many cases throughout the whole


sexual life of the woman, and only ceases at last by the cessation of men-
struation. Hysterical and irritable single women are especially its
victims. It very frequently comes on gradually from impairment of the
general health, as amenorrhoea does; and in the most of these cases in
single women, doubtless depends mainly on the want of healthy exercise
of the organs. It sometimes, but very rarely, arises from a congenital
narrowed state of the os uteri, and cervical canal. In this case it begins
with the commencement of menstruation. It is also frequently depen-
dent on ulceration of the mouth of the womb, or ovarian disease.
In the treatment of dysmenorrhoea, great care must be taken to arrive at
the cause of the particular case before us, and an examination with the
finger and speculum is almost always necessary, else the treatment may
very probably be erroneous. By the use of these means of investigation
it will be seen, whether there be ulceration or ovarian disease. If found,
these must be treated, and their cure, which can generally be effected, it
they are recognised, will probably remove the dysmenorrhoea. If there
be congenital narrowing of the canal, it must he dilated by sponge tents,
and this has in several instances produced a cure. If no inflammatory-
disease be found, sexnal intercourse, along with a general bracing hygienic
treatment should be used, and is by far the best remedy. Healthy exer-
cise is always the best treatment for organs which are in an irritable
nervous state, calming and soothing the nervous excitement, and gradu-
ally training the disordered parts to a regulated and healthy discharge of
their functions. “ Idleness is the root of all evil,” in the various organs,
as well as in the whole being; for when these are not healthily employed,
each in their own special manner, pain and disorder are certain sooner or
later to mark their dissatisfaction. Dr. Ashwell says that “dysmen-
orrhoea is often cured by marriage and child-bearing; but not always,
and aggravated cases occur in married women.” Of course sexnal inter-
course cannot be expected to produce a cure, if there be ulceration or sub-
acute ovarian inflammation; in these cases it will rather do harm.
Impregnation frequently takes place in this disease, and is even more
powerful than sexual intercourse in producing acute; for during the
period of pregnancy and lactation, menstruation is stopped, and the sexual
organs have time to escape from the ihabit of morbid action; and
they receive fresh impulses and a more healthy tone from the new train
of actions during pregnancy. Frequently however, the patients are barren,
and this great natural curative process unavailable
But it is of great importance also to give relief in the menstrual
attack. At the first onset of pain, the patient should take a hip-bath
at 96 degrees, for from half an hour to one hour, and repeat this thrice
a day, going into bed after it, till warmth is restored. Small nauseating
doses of Ipecacuanha, such as halt a grain every hour, should also be
given, which greatly ease menstruation. The injection into the rectum
of 15 or 20 drops of laudanum in a little warm water, is also very good.
To prevent this disease, we must endeavor to eradicate throughout
society, the causes which lead to it. Of these by far the most important
is sexual abstinence. It is chiefly in single women that it occurs, and
whether it be merely a functional disease or depend on ovarian imflam


mation, it is sexual abstinence, ungratifled sexual desires, and doubtless
in many cases masturbation arising from these ungratified desires, which
chiefly cause it. It is also very important, that the slighter pain and
uneasiness in menstruation, so universally neglected, should be met at
the beginning, and should not be allowed to assume an aggravated form.
This is especially requisite, if these pains be not co-existent with men-
struation, but come on later; if menstruation becomes gradually more
painful than it has been, it is a certain sign that there is growing dis-
order, and the causes which lead to this should be investigated and
removed. In many women menstruation is habitually attended with
more or less pain and disturbance throughout the whole of sexual life,
and in these cases the morbidity may be so much a part of the original
constitution, as to be irremediable. Dr. Bennett says “It is only with
the patient herself in health, that you can compare her in diseaseand
thus when menstruation, having been previously easy, becomes difficult,
we may be certain that some morbid cause is at work, which should at
once be attended to, and removed.
Dr. Ashwell says “ Every case of painful menstruation is not to be
called dySmenorrhma; if the pain and tightness in the head and loins,
which have preceded menstruation, pass away as the secretion increases,
it is not dysmenorrhoea.” Although in some women menstruation takes
place without the least pain, yet it is generally accompanied and pre-
ceded by symptoms. These are, fulness in the pelvis, pains in the loins
and ovarian regions, and sometimes bearing down pains of an expulsive
character. These are very general, and constitute what is called the
“ usual catamenial effort.” But these symptoms are not to be looked on
as natural, because they are general. They are a sign of the common
deterioration of the female constitution in our society, and as such are a sign
of error. In the same way child-birth is known to be very much more
painful among civilized nations than among savages. Savage women
bear children with little pain, and I presume that menstruation, which
is a kind of parturition, is in them usually attended with no pain, as it
is with the most healthy women among ourselves. It should be our
endeavour, therefore, to elevate this function in woman to the natural
and typical standard of health, just as in the case of all the other
organs and faculties of our being. The causes of the general sexual
deterioration are the peculiarly unhealthy sexual life of our society, and
especially of its female part; and also the generally imperfect state of all
the physical virtues, in which respect civilized man stand sin such marked
inferiority to his savage brother. It is not our part to pique ourselves on
possessing a different and a higher class of virtues, but to aim at the
equal developement of all, knowing that all are equally necessary to
our health and happiness ; nor to neglect the valuable knowledge we may
get, by comparing ourselves with a ruder part of our race. The female
reproudetive organs, moreover, are the work-shop of life ; all of us are in
fact secretions from these organs, and from the testes of the male; and
if the secreting actions of these most important organs be allowed to be 1
habitually,in a disordered and vitiated state, the effect on the health of all
of us must be most injurious.
200
SEXUAL RELIGION.


MENORRHAGIA.
OR
PROFUSE MENSTRUATON.
Bt this is meant menstruation, characterized by excess in quantity
or in frequency. There are two kinds ; one, in which there is merely
the natural secretion in excess, and the other in which pure blood is dis-
charged by the uterine vessels. The latter variety is recognized by the
presence of clots of blood in the discharge, or by its stiffening the linen,
which appearances are not seen in the normal menstrual fluid. In
the majority of severe cases, there is this direct uterine bleeding.
The symptoms of the disease are the following. The flow of blood at
the menstrual periods becomes much more profuse than natural, continu-
ing for several days longer than it should do. The menstrual periods
are also frequently approximated, so that menstruation occurs every
three weeks, or every fortnight. Thus in many cases the woman is
almost always menstruating; one lengthened period being scarcely over,
when another begins. In the menstrual intervals there is usually profuse
lencorrhoea. In some cases, especially in women who have had children,
the discharge comes on suddenly in gushes, unlike the slow dropping
exudation, that characterizes the natural secretion. The constitutional
effects are those which are produced by a drain on the system, or by loss
of blood from any other part. At first languor and weakness in the
loins; then severe aching in the loins and back, coming round to the
thighs and groins; acute headaches, often confined to one spot, as if a
nail were driven into the head; ringing in the ears, dimness of sight,
giddiness, and sometimes the sensation as if a clock were ticking in the
head; increasing pallor and debility, derangement of the stomach and
bowels, palpitation of the heart; melancholy and nervousness, at times
almost to insanity ; dropsy of the eyelids and feet, from the increasing
thinness of the blood; also sometimes prolapse of the uterus and vagina
from relaxation.
If the disease occur in a plethoric married woman who lives freely, it
is often of an active and more violent character, while in the delicate
(among whom it is much more frequent,) it is rather of a passive kind.
In the former case it is often caused by the application of cold during
menstruation, which, if it do not arrest the discharge suddenly, as we
have seen it often does, may on the contrary, produce a profuse flow,


attended by. feverish symptoms: and the habit of profuse menstruation
icdntiuues at subsequent periods. In these cases menstruation is precc-
ded by a feeling of tension and fulness in the pelvis, with weight':and
throbbing in the womb. The discharge is often emitted with pain and
cxpulsatory throes, the flow lessening during a pain, and increasing on its
subsidence.
The passive form of the disease is of frequent occurrence, and is gene,
rally found among delicate and nervous women. In it there is frequently
little or no local pain during the flow, but extreme debility and exhaustion
is often produced. Although a fatal result is very rare, yet life is often
reduced to the lowest ebb by the great losses of blood. The disease also
frequently occurs about the period of menstrual decline. This takes place
in many women about the age of 44, but in the greater number from 4?
to 50. This period is in many cases attended with great losses of blood
from the womb. These continue long, often for several years, and are
sometimes very excessive. The bleeding sometimes continues for weeks,
or even months, without complete cessation, and the prostration of health
may be extreme. Fear of organic disease, such as cancer, is often ex-
cited by these protracted bleedings, and life is sometimes lost from mere
exhaustion. These hemorrhages may continue for from one to four years,
and yet terminate in health, and the decline of the function.
As the forms of menorrhagia are various, so are its causes. The
essence of the disease consists in an over-excited state of the ovaries,
which discharge too rapidly immature eggs; and in a congested and
irritable state of these organs, as well as of the womb, which gives rise to
the profuse attendant menstrual discharges. When once morbid and
excessive action has been excited in these parts, it is kept up by habit;
and the discharge of eggs and of blood at last assume a passive and habit-
ual character. As chlorosis and amenorrhoea are frequently the effect
of insufficient stimulus to the ovaries, so menorrhagia often proceeds
from their over stimulus. Excessive venery is very apt to produce it,
especially where the sexual organs have been unaccustomed to the vene-
real stimulus. Thus in women who have married late, even a moderate
amount of venereal excitement might induce it. The same may be saidot
delicate and susceptible girls, who take little exercise, and therefore all whose
organs are in a habitually weak and excitable state. But the over stimula-
tion of the organs by too frequent child-bearing is also a most important
cause of the disease. This, together with over lactation, often causes
monorrhagia. Abortion frequently causes, or is caused by, previous
menorrhagia; for this is really an ovarian abortion. The eggs are cast
off by the ovaries every fortnight or three weeks, prematurely, just as the
child is cast off by the womb before the proper time. An inflammatory
state of the ovaries, and ulcers of the womb are frequent causes of
menorrhagia, as of the other diseases of menstruation. Cold, especially
during menstruation, is another frequent cause, producing congestion and
disorder of.'the secreting organs. Dr. Ashwoll says moverover, that the
form of the disease, which occurs at menstrual decline, is caused more
frequently than is supposed, by the avoidance of complete sexual inter-
course, and the consequent derangement and congestion of the ovaries and


womb. This abstinence is, he fears, not seldom practised, to avoidthe
risk of adding to an already numerous family. Masturbation, is also
/without doubt a frequent cause in the single; the excessive abuse.of the
organs being more apt to cause this disease, than an excess in the normal
stimulus. Menorrhagia is in some respects analogous to profuse sper-
matorrhea in the male; the sperm cells and the germ cells being too
rapidly discharged, and in a crude and immature form in the worst cases.
In treating a case of menorrhagia, we must first ascertain its peculiar
cause. An examination by the finger and speculum should be made to
see whether there be any ulceration of the mouth of the womb or ovarian
disease. Dr. Ashwell says that a digital examination frequently reveals
nothing, but a flabby state of the neck of the womb and vagina, and an
os rather more patulous than natural, together with profuse white dis-
charges. If the disease be the result of excessive venereal indulgence, of
frequent abortions, or over-lactation: separation from the husband
should be enjoined for a time, or the child weaned. During the men-
strual intervals, in the passive forms of the disease, every means should
be tried to brace the general health. A life in the open air, with cold
shower baths to the loins and lower part of the abdomen, and also
astringent vaginal injections, should be employed, to cure the leucorrhcea
and give tone to the parts. All causes of excitement of mind or body
should also be avoided, and sexual intercourse either quite discontinued,
or used in great moderation. In the cases of active menorrhagia in the
plethoric, purgatives are useful; or, still better, exercise and spare diet,
with the avoidance of unhealthy excitement.
But besides the constitutional means to be used in the menstrual inter-
vals, especial attention must be paid to restrain the actual flow. For a
few days previous to menstruation great care should be taken to avoid
excitement or fatigue, and the patient should lie in the recumbent pos-
ture a good deal, so as to prevent the congestion of the pelvic organs.
“ Without the use of the recumbent position,” says Dr. Ashwell, “all
means will prove unavailing.” When the flow begins, this posture should
be strictly maintained, and continued till the period is over, as very slight
exertion increases or renews the discharge. The patient should be kept
cool; and if the loss of blood be great, cold clothes should be applied to
the vulva, and over the hips, and astringent injections used. The cold is
not to be applied at the beginning of the period, or it is apt to produce
spasm of the womb, but rather when the natural secretion seems nearly
over, and clots are passed. In some cases, where there is extreme ex-
haustion, every possible means must be taken to arrest the bleeding, for
fear of an immediately fatal issue. Here the best of all means is to
plug the vagina with dry tow. This directly presses on the bleeding
vessels and stops the discharge. The best internal medicine in passive
menorrhagia is the ergot of rye, which has a specific action on the womb,
causing contraction of its muscular fibres. Five grains of the powder or
thirty drops of the tincture should be given every six or eight hours.
. In the plethoric variety, if there be quick pulse, with spasmodic pain
in the womb, attending the discharge, nausea should be induced by one
grain of ipecacuanha given every hour. This is a most admirable remedy.


and relieves the pain, while it lessens the flow. An injection of assafte-
tida and opium into the rectum, is also excellent in quieting the uterine
irritation.
To prevent this disease, its various causes must be extirpated. It occurs
much more frequently in delicate and irritable women; and these, as i r.
Ashwell says, “are a much more numerous class than the robust.”
Until therefore, the general strength of the sex is greatly elevated, we
cannot hope satisfactorily to prevent this disease. The prevailing habits of
sexual abstinence, which render the sexual system weak and irritable, and
prone to over-excitement, must also be changed before adequate preven-
tion is possible. Venereal excesses and masturbation should be carefully
avoided, and only a moderate amount of the natural sexual stimulus
used. Frequent pregnancy can be borne with impunity only by very
robust women; and is full of danger to the delicate, and to those whose
life is not a very healthy one. Over-lactation is very weakening
to the general.health, and especially to the sexual organs, between
which and the breasts there is so intimate a sympathy. Sudden
arrest of the secretion of milk is often the cause of inflammation of the
ovaries; and an unnatural prolongation of suckling may readily make
the ovaries irritable and enfeebled. Ulceration of the womb and ovarian
disease must also be prevented. The avoidance of complete sexual inter-
course, mentioned by Dr. Ashwell, as a frequent cause of the menorrha-
gia of advanced life, is a very important subject, of which I shall speak
afterwards.
Menorrhagia is also greatly favoured by a prevalent idea among
women, that copious menstruation is a healthy sign ; just as it is a
common idea among the poorer classes, that it is healthy to pass much
urine, a belief which favours the progress of diabetes. This belief often
induces women to neglect the disease m its commencement. The amount
of the natural discharge varies in different women, in some being more
abundant than in others ; but each woman should judge by what is natu-
ral to herself in health, and if menstruation become more abundant,
than it has been, should not neglect this indication


LEUCORRHŒA.
Bt this is meant the various non-venereal and non-infections discharges
of mucus, pus, &c., that proceed from the vagina, and are popularly
called “the whites.” Of all female diseases, none is so common as
this. “Few married women, especially mothers, escape it,” says Dr;
Ashwell. The delicate and middle-aged are more prone to it, than the
young and robust, and it is commoner in the married than the single,
like all other inflammatory diseases; thus contrasting with the nervous
functional diseases, which are far more common in the single. The
disease is found in all varieties of severity, from the very mild, to the
most aggravated form.
The discharge is caused by an inflamed or congested state of the mu-
cous membrane of the vagina, vulva, or womb. Hie symptoms of an
acute attack are, a feeling of heat and tenderness in the parts, followed
by a mucous or muco-purulent discharge. There is also,some scalding
in making water, and more or less febrile reaction. If the disease be
not cured, it may gradually become chronic; the pain, heat, and scald-
ing disappear, but a copious discharge continues; and in this chronic
state, the disease has a tendency to prove very obstinate, and to exhaust
greatly the strength. The pain, heat, and scalding, often last also in-
definitely in a subdued form, and are very easily re-excited.
The great cause which renders this disease, as well as other inflamma-
tions of the female sexual organs, so very chronic and obstinate, is the
periodical return of menstruation. This congests these organs, and thus
at every monthly period, fans anew the flame of their inflammatory dis-
eases. Thus these white discharges, when once well established, often
last for a great part of life, and gradually produce the most serious im-
pairment of health. The constant drain breaks down the system, pro-
ducing pallor, debility, pain in the back, palpitations, dyspepsia, &c. and
all the train of symptoms more quickly induced by menorrhagia. In the
young, chlorosis, amenorrhoea, and consumption, are apt to be induced
by it. Prolapse of the womb and vagina, and also sterility, are not in-
frequently caused by it.
In most cases however, the disease is of a milder nature, and produces
only a certain amount of weakness and pallor. Many women, except


when in unusually good health, are never free from leucorrhcea; and,
there is probably no disease so much neglected. It is only when the sym-;
ptoms are aggravated, that aid is anxiously sought. . ■;«
The discharge is sometimes very copious, wetting several napkins in:
the day, and we cannot wonder that this should soon exhaust tho
strength. Sometimes it is not abundant, but very acrid, causingexcoria.
tion of the lips of the vulva and the inside of the thighs. Tho discharge ;
varies in colour and nature ; sometimes it is colourless, and then it is
pure mucus; at other times it is yellow, and then it is pus ; and fre--
quently it is mnco-purulent, which is a mixture of the two characters.
Pus is alway a sign of inflammation, being the matter secreted by an in-
flamed surface ; and the mnco-purulent secretion shows a minor state of
inflammation, such as is found in the chronic stage of leucorrhcea.
Pure pus is very seldom discharged in abundance from the female genital
organs, except in infectious gonorrhoea, when large quantities of it are
formed. The colourless mucus often comes from congestion alone, without
any inflammatory action. A white curdy matter that is sometimes seen
is of little consequence, as it comes from the mucous follicles on the neck
of the uterus when simply congested; whereas a peculiar glairy trans-
parent mucus, like unboiled white of egg, comes from the follicles, inside
the cervical canal, and is a sign of its inflammation, which is an im-
portant affection.
The natural mucous which moistens the passages, is, when perfectly
healthy, never enough to constitute a discharge; but in a great part of
women who live in towns, its secretion is considerably increased for a
day or two before and after menstruation, so as to form a discharge.
This over-secretion, although it is so frequent, and produces so littie bad
effect on the health, that it is not regarded, is a sign of a somewhat con-
gested state of the parts; and the congestion may readily be increased by.
various causes, and give rise to a permanent discharge, or be aegravated
into inflammation. Although in many cases of leucorrhcea, when the
discharge is of a colourless nature, there is merely congestion; yet when-
ever the discharge is yellow, and in almost all cases, in which it has
seriously weakened the system, the disease is of an inflammatory nature..
It is generally impossible to tell certainly, by the discharge, the
difference between leucorrhcea, and gonorrheea. Tho only apparent diff-,
erences are, that pure pus is seldom seen in abundance except in gon-.
orrhoea, in which disease moreover the symptoms are generally more
violent, and the urethra is more apt to be inflamed. And yet there
must be a great difference in the nature of the diseases, for gonorrheea is
very infectious, whereas leucorrhcea is very rarely so; still there are
cases, in which the husband may be infected by a peculiarly acrid
leucorrhcea. However in the vast majority of cases where a man gets a
gonorrhoea, he may conclude that the female, from whom he has con-
tracted it, has a regular venereal disease.
Leucorrhcea is severe and obstinate in proportion to the amount of the
mucous surface affected. In many cases the disease is confined to the
vulva, for it may be cured by applying astringents to that part alone,
by separatingthe labia. But in the sevcrechronic cases the whole of the;


tajina is generally involved, and these cases are very frequently compu-
ted by ulcers of the mouth of the womb, and inflammation of , the
tervical canal.
The causes of this most important disease are very various. ; It is
ffl ost common in married women, and in those who have borne children ;
because after child-birth.the womb does not return quite to its virgin size,
but remains somewhat larger and more vitalised, and the vagina is always
nort relaxed, and more prone to congestion and inflammation, than in the
rirgin. Besides this, abortion and child-birth are in many cases followed
by inflammatory disease of the mouth of the womb, which gives rise to
leucorrhoea. The sanguineous congestion, moreover, of the womb and ex-
ternal passages during pregnancy and child-birth, throughout the whole
of which period the vagina and vulva are of a deep red colour, may re-
main in a minor degree afterwards, predisposing the parts to inflamma-
tory action. It must be remembered, that the more the vitality of any
part is elevated, the more prone does it become to inflammation. Sexual
intercourse also, it excessive, may produce leucorrhoea. The various
diseases of menstruation are in general accompanied by leucorrhoea, which
helps to relieve the congestion, or inflammation, of the other sexual or-
gans. Cold, and the wearing of insufficient clothing, especially thin shoes
and cotton stockings, are also frequent causes.
All these causes are greatly promoted, and the disease, when once
established, is made so very difficult thoroughly to cure, from two principal
reasons; namely, first, the periodical congestion of the sexual organs
every month, and secondly, the very unnatural and sedentary life that
most women lead. They take little exercise, but remain always within
doors, which weakens the general health : and very many of them are
engaged in sedentary occupations, which keep all the pelvic organs con-
stantly in a heated andcongested state, and render it almost impossible
thoroughly to cure severe cases of leucorrhoea. From the same reasons
the rectum becomes inactive, and piles and constipation are exceedingly
frequent in women, and when present, keep up the leucorrhoea.
The custom of two persons sleeping together, which is so general in
this country, is not, I believe, so healthy as the continental one of using
separate couches. It increases the warmth, just as too large a quantity
of clothes would do; and thus is often relaxing, and tends to favour the
origin and continuance of diseases of debility, especially in townspeople,
who require all the cool air, and other bracing influences they can get.
Moreover the involuntary movements during sleep are a frequent cause of
disturbance; and the rest (that invaluable restorative) is seldom so good
as when each individual sleeps alone.
In the treatment of this disease it is of great importance, that means
should be early adopted. There is no disease which women neglect so
often as it is so common; and thus the acute and first attacks of
it are disregarded, and the disease allowed to take firm root in the sys-
tem. la fact women, especially in the lower classes, seldom or never
apply for aid, unless either the acute symptoms are very severe, or the
disease has existed for a long time, and has begun seriously to impair the
health. Women will go about for years suffering from this weakening


malady, if it be at all endurable, and submitting to a languid and imperfect
existence, rather than bring themselves to consult a medical man. It jj
not delicacy alone that restrains them, but neglect also, which is tu,
fortunately very common in women, at least in their own illnesses.
This want of attention to self, is a part of the general self-sacrificim
character pf that sex ; but there is no doubt that, whenever this leafi.
to the promotion of disease, it is a great evil. No woman should
allow any symptoms of ill-health to exist, either from delicacy or neglect,
without taking proper means to remove them.
In acute leucorrhoea, where there is heat, tenderness, and active ia.
fiammation, the treatment should be mild and soothing; rest, a dose cl
opening medicine, washing with tepid water, together with the avoidance
of late hours, sexual intercourse, and other excitements. By these
means the attack will in general speedily subside. But if it do not, and
if the discharge becomes chronic, then the best treatment is by astringent
injections into the vagina; which, if well managed, and assisted by a
regular life, will generally effect a cure. The best astringents are alum,
sulphate of zinc, acetate of lead, oak bark, or nitrate of silver; the first
three used in the proportion of one drachm to the pint of water. The
alum injection is the best for general use, and if used properly, rarely
fails to effect a cure in two or three weeks. But injections constantly fall
because they are not properly used. . The vagina is a long canal, and
unless the injection reach the whole surface affected, a radical cure cannot
be looked for.
The way to give injections is, to support the hips by a hard cushion,
and place beneath the patient a flat bed-pan or other dish; then inject
the lotion, using the pump-handled syringe, and an elastic tube six inches
long, so that the injection will be carried to the end of the vagina. In-
ject about a pint at a time, and retain it for five or ten minutes by a
napkin. This requires the help of another person, but is far more effec-
tual than injecting one’s-self. The injection should be used at first twice
a day, and after a fortnight once a day will be enough. If one kind of
injection fail, another may be tried, and it is sometimes good to vary
them at intervals. When a cure has been effected, cold water should be
injected once or twice a day for some time, to restore tone to the parts.
No tonic is equal to this. Dr. Ashwell says, that there is an unfounded
dread of ablution of the external genitals with cold, or even with tepid
water, but this can do no harm, and is often very beneficial. Its injection
is equally harmless, and frequently of service. The injection of a few
ounces of cold water into the rectum daily, is greatly recommended by
Dr. Ashwell, in cases of inveterate leucorrhoea, where the discharge is
limited to a few drops, but still has produced serious impairment of
health. He has seen the discharge rendered very obstinate by the
habitual use of thick napkins to the parts, which have a relaxing effect.
An excellent remedy in obstinate cases, is to plug the vagina with dry tow.
This dries up the moisture as it flows, and keeps the mucous surfaces
asunder, which is one of the best of all modes of stopping their discharges.
The surfaces act just like poultices to each other, causing relaxation and


indefinite continuance of the discharge. This remedy is not employed so
often as it deserves.
English physicians do not generally make an examination in leucorrhoea,
but this is a great error, and the source of mistakes without number. In
rery many cases leucorrhoea is caused or kept up by ulcers of the womb,
and if they are not discovered and treated, injections can do litte good.
It should be made a rule, that in all cases of leucorrhoea of any severity
or obstinacy, a digital examination at least should be made; and in
general the speculum should also be used, for few physicians have so edu-
cated a sense of touch, as to be able to rely upon it alone. Besides, by
the speculum it can be seen bow high the disease reaches in the vagina,
&c., When leucorrhoea is connected with diseases of menstruation, these
must be cured first, before it can be expected to yield.
The general treatment in addition to the local means is of very great
importance. Sedentary habits, heated rooms, and all stimulants should
be avoided; the patient should live as much as possible in the open air,
and should use cold baths, the coldsbower over the loins, the cold
sitz-bath, and strengthen the frame by moderate exercise. Without these
constitutional means, the local ones will frequently fail in old standing
cases. Moreover it is rery important to persevere for some time in the
remedies; the disease is very obstinate and slow to yield; and unless it
be thoroughly cured, a relapse will probably take place. In this and the
foregoing diseases, and indeed in the treatment of chronic disease in.
general, the best by far of all constitutional mode of treatment is, it seems
to me, what is called the Water Cure; although this name or that of Hy-
dropathy, does not rightly designate the system, which consists in the sci-
entific application of the various natural means of strengthening the frame,
namely bathing, air, exercise, regular diet and hours, together with society
and healthful amusements, in an establishment where every thing is syste-
matically regulated for the restoration of health, and a patient is not subject
to the innumerable temptations and irregularities, which make it so
very difficult to treat chronic disease at home. The water cure is a very
valuable auxiliary in the treatment of sexual diseases, although alone it
generally fails to produce a cure, as it does not include the great natural
remedy for such diseases; still it is said to have a marked effect in regu-
lating and favouring menstruation in many cases.
To prevent this wide spread disease its various causes must be eradi-
cated. Frequent child-birth, and protracted suckling, to which the lives
of so many women are devoted, and which are almost sure to bring on
leucorrhcea, should be avoided, unless the circumstances of the woman are
very healthy, so as to enable her to bear it. A constitution of iron could
not, if subjected to the sedentary lives and hard in-door work which many
town mothers have. These sedentary lives also, which the great majority
of the sex live, must be materially altered, before this weakening malady
tan be effectually prevented. There are few modes of life so unhealthy,
as those of the poor sempstresses and milliners in our large towns; and
their confinement and want of exercise make them very liable to all the
diseases of debility. Women moreover should never neglect the com'
p


men cement of this disease, nor should the habitnal nmcons over-secretion
before and after menstruation, so constantly seen in townspeople, and
denoting a weak and congested state of the seznal system, be allowed te
continue.


DISORDERS AT MENSTRUAL DECLINE.
1 shall now say a few words on the disorders sometimes attending the
cessation of menstruation. It is a very general opinion, that this period
must be attended with illness, but this is a great mistake, for healthy
womeu frequently pass over it without the least inconvenience. Women
themselves regard it as a very critical and perilous time; and this is a
most unfortunate idea, for it causes much needless anxiety, and indeed
often gives rise itself to symptoms of ill-health. There is no more danger
naturally connected with the decline of menstruation, than with its com-
mencement ; and a woman, who is healthy, and who lives temperately,
need not look upon the “ turn of life,” with any apprehension.
The most frequent symptoms of disturbance, observed at this period,
are mental. A hysterical nervous state is so common, as to excite little
attention. The woman has a tendency to solitude, disordered sleep, im-
paired appetite, &c., with frequently a dread of organic disease. In some
cases there is great agitation of mind and nervousness, amounting nearly
to insanity; but soothing quieting means, not restraint, should be used.
Now all these symptoms are so prevalent, most probably, just because
women have an unfounded dread of this period. Their mind is un-
necessarily anxious about it, and this gives rise in very many cases to the
nervous symptoms. Another reason probably is, that in this country,
where there are so many involuntary nuns, it must be a most painful
thought to many, that the season of their youth, the last rose of their
summer, is fading ; that their sexual life has been totally unfulfilled,
and that there is no more hope for them of a child to gladden their old
age. Alas that such lives and such sad thoughts are so common among
us! I believe that if these causes did not operate, and if the general
health of women were stronger than it is, these mental disturbances
would rarely appear; although they are probably in part owing to the
alteration in the nervous currents at the decline, of the uterine functions.
In other cases, in corpulent, indolent women, there is apt to be an in-
creased tendency to congestions and inflammations in other organs, such
as apoplexy, and pulmonary congestion. The reason of this is, that a
periodical safety valve is now shut, and if plethora exist, there is no na-
tural mode of relief for the fulness. In these cases stimulants should bo


forbidden, and plenty of exercise taken, along -with a somewhat spare diet.
But it is a very common and very pernicious error among women, to use
purgatives frequently at this time, and to reduce themselves by spare
diet to avert fancied dangers. A great deal of mischief is done' by this
mistaken opinion, which is akin to the old prejudice among the poor, in
favour of a precautionary bleeding in the spring, which has now happily
almost died out. There is no time of life, and no natural changes in the
system, which call for these artificial precautions. If a woman have been
living healthily and temperately, she may trust with perfect confidence,
that nature will do her own work, without any disturbance; and if she
have been living too luxuriously, and requires to reduce herself, the
proper means is always to increase the exercise, give up inordinate in-
dulgences, and brace the system by natural and not by artificial means.
Tor reducing.plethora and averting a threatened apoplexy, there is, I
believe, no constitutional means so powerful as a course of hydropathic
treatment. Dr. Gully, in his excellent work on the “ Water Cure in
chronic disease," states, that were he to choose the case in which the
benefits of the water cure are most certainly and strikingly evinced, it
would be one of apoplectic fulness.
There is a very general idea, that incurable organic affections, such
as cancer, are liable to come on at menstrual decline, but the cessation of
the natural function can evidently have no tendency to cause them.
These diseases generally occur in both sexes in advanced life, and if there
have been a latent pre-disposition, it may be favoured by the con-
gestion of the sexual organs, which is apt to accompany menstrual
decline, but no malignant disease can be directly caused by it.
The mode in which the cessation occurs, varies in different women.
Sometimes, but rarely, it is sudden ; something having occurred to arrest
a menstrual period, nature takes the opportunity of putting an end to
the function at once. More generally the decline is gradual; there may
be a long interval, and then'an excessive return; then another long
interval and a scanty return, and so on till the function entirely dis-
appears. From months to years may be required to accomplish this
change.


INFLAMMATION OF THE SEXUAL
ORGANS.
The next class of diseases which I shall speak of arc the inflamma-
fitms of the various sexual organs; an exceedingly important
common class. The diseases which have been already treated of, are
often termed in medical works the Functional ones, as they are fre-
quently seen without any structural alteration, to be recognised either
during life or after death. Still, all of them are frequently connected
with, and dependent upon, inflammatory disease, and there has been
a growing tendency of late years, since the more accurate investigation
of the sexual organs by the speculum, to consider them more and
more of an inflammatory nature. Leueorrhea used to be constantly
regarded, as well by the medical profession as by women in general,
as a disease of debility, and ** the whites ” are still prevalently thought
to be only “a weakness.” But Dr. Bennett has shown that in the
great majority of cases of any severity, these discharges are of an in-
flammatory nature, connected very frequently with ulceration of the
.mouth of the womb; and that, instead of being the effect of the dys-
pepsia and general debility usually found along with them, they are
the cause. He has shown likewise, that all the disorders of menstru-
ation are frequently owing to such ulceration. Dr. Tilt has in like
.manner traced many of these diseases to an inflamed state of the ova-
ries, showing that amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, &c.,
are frequently dependent on this cause. Hence arises the extreme
importance, in all cases of these so-called functional diseases, of
making a careful examination, whether they be not connected with an
inflammatory affection.
I shall begin with the ovaries, which are the most important
parts of the female organs. There are very few organs in the body,
which are so little understood, and have been so little attended to,
as these most important ones. In reality they preside over the
female sexual system, just as the testicles do over the male; and
the peculiar sexual sympathies and feelings, both moral and phy-
sical, depend on them, and not on the womb. From their small size,
their hidden position, and still more from the ignorance of their physi-
ology, (for the new views of ovulation and menstruation are among
the most recent discoveries in physiology,) they have been neglected;
and the womb has received the main share of the attention of physi-
cians, and to it were ascribed the various sexual sympathies. Hence
the pathology, (or knowledge of the 'diseases) of the ovaries, is still
quite in its infancy, and medical works are very meagre on this sub


ject.' •It is indeed known that the ovaries are exceedingly prone to
disease, for in no organs are morbid appearances more common after
death. Bnf the causes of these appearances, and the symptoms of dis-
ease, which they produce in life, are still wrapped in great obscurity ;
although the new light thrown on the functions of the ovaries by the
theory of ovulation, and the labours of physicians who are now
earnestly investigating these organs, will, it is to be hoped, soon illus-
trate the subject. Nothing more retards our knowledge than the false
sexual delicacy, which prevents women from speaking of the minor
derangements of menstruation, or of applying for aid in the incipient
stages. Science and the female health alike suffer by this most un-
fortunate feeling. Moreover the repugnance to the necessary modes
of examination is a great obstacle. l)r. Tilt remarks, that it is only
when the patient’s sufferings are habitually intense, or when the
prospect of marriage has overcome her reluctance, that an examina-
tion is permitted ; from this insufficient examination also the disease
is frequently only partially cured, and relapses take place.
The necessary modes of examining the ovaries are through the walls
of the abdomen, vagina, and rectum. All of these must be carefully
used, where there is a suspicion that the ovaries are in a diseased
state; 'and it is fortunate for woman that it is possible by these
means to arrive at a true knowledge of the nature of some of her most
miserable diseases, and to be able therefore to relieve them. But
there are very few physicians, who have the tact and experience neces-
sary to make such an examination with profit. To make a physical
examination, to use the speculum or the finger with advantage,
requires a long and careful training, of the difficulties of which the
public seem to have no idea, but to suppose that all medical men
have such knowledge by a kind of intuition, or as a matter of course.
Now the fact is, that with regard to the examination of the female
organs, and especially the ovaries, very few physicians (have had a
proper training, and most of them have had absolutely no training at
nil. The reason of this enormous medical deficiency is, that such
training does not form a part, unless as a rare exception, of the ordi-
nary medical education, on account of the unfortunate scruples of
sexual delicacy ; and thus the groat mass of physicians, though fre-
quently called upon to treat female disease, are really quite incompe-
tent to do so. Thus unfortunate woman, even when she does reluc-
tantly make up her mind, after long concealed suffering, to apply for
aid, very probably consults a man, who is not much more capable of
forming a true opinion in her case than she is herself.
It is not correct to say, that this class of diseases is specially culti-
vated by certain physicians, and that it is sufficient for these to be
conversant with female complaints ; a large proportion of sexual dis-
eases are masked diseases, whose real sexual nature is not recognisable
without a careful analysis and examination of the organs, by a man
is competent to form a fair opinion on the matter. Although it
is a great advantage, that some men should devote a special atten-
tion to certain organs and diseases, yet every medical man should be


able to examine all the different organs in the body, and have a tole-
rable degree of skill in the management of each. This is especially
requisite for the great proportion of medical men, who live in the
country, and in small towns, where there is no distinction of medicine
into special branches, and each man has to treat every disease that
may present itself.
In the abdominal mode of examining the ovaries, the patient lies on
the back with the legs flexed, so as to relax the abdominal muscles.
Unless however, the ovarian swelling be large, it will not be felt thus.
In examining through the vagina, the patient lies in what is called
the obstetric position, namely, on the side, with the legs drawn up.
The fore-finger of one hand is introduced into the vagina, while with
the other hand the examiner presses on the lower part of the abdo-
men, so as to bring the ovaries within reach of the finger. In
examining by the rectum, the obstetric position should be used. The
ovaries can be felt in this way, even in their healthy state, although
with difficulty; but when enlarged by inflammation they are readily
reached. The finger passed into the rectum can feel halt of the poste-
rior surface of the womb, bulging through its wall, and on each side
the ovaries like two knuckles. When these bodies are healthy,
pressure on them gives no pain, but it does, if they be inflamed. In-
crease of volume can also be recognised in this way. Another method
of examining is by what is called the double touch, the fore-finger
being in the rectum and the thumb in the vagina. This is very use-
ful in recognising tumours between these two passages.


ACUTE OVARITIS.
. Or acute inflammation of the ovary—(itis being the termination used
to signify inflammation in any organ.) It used to be thought by physi-
cians, that this affection was almost confined to the puerperal period,
namely, that period which immediately succeeds child-birth, and during
which inflammatory diseases in the sexual organs are most apt to occur,
and to be of unusual violence. But ovaritis occurs not unfrequently at
other times, as Dr. Bennett has shown, but is constantly overlooked by
the medical attendant, who confounds it with inflammation of the womb,
or with iliac abscess, or “ inflammation of the bowels," a general loose
expression for obscure and undetermined inflammation in some pelvic
organ, of whose nature the practitioner, from his inexperience in the
examination of these organs, is uncertain.
Ovaritis may be spoken of along with the inflammation of that loose,
areolar tissue, which, as well as the ovaries, is contained between the fob!
of the peritoneum, called the broad ligament; for it is not possible to tell
what exact part of these contained substances is affected. The general cause
of this disease is the acute suppresiou of menstruation, whether by cold,
or violent mental emotions. The symptoms are very like those of acute
metritis (inflammation of the womb,) namely, severe deep-seated pain in
the lower part of the abdomen, with a feeling of weight and uneasiness
in the pelvis; also pain in the loins, and tenderness on pressure in the
abdomen. There is fever, with a hot skin and quick pulse. A digital
examination through the vagina, is absolutely necessary here to learn
what part is affected. It is very frequently neglected, and this neglect
is the source of great evils. By the vaginal examination it will be
found, that the painful tumour is not in the median line, but applied to
the side of the womb. It is so closely applied, that it needs some tact to
distinguish them. But it is very important to distinguish between the
two, for metritis generally ends by resolution (or complete subsidence of
the inflammation,) whereas ovaritis generally proceeds to suppuration,
unless very active treatment be used. In this case matter forms, and
escapes in time, either through the vagina or the rectum. Through the
vagina is the most favourable method, for in this canal the pus causes
but little irritation. If the abcess open into the rectum, much greater


irritation with griping and dysentery, frequently lasting for days, is
produced. The bursting of the abscess, and discharge of pus, is rarely
noticed by the patient, unless she be warned to expect it; or if noticed,
is not mentioned, from the reluctance to communicate information spon-
taneously in sexual diseases.
After the discharge of the pus, there is a decided improvement in the
symptoms, and the patient is thought convalescent. But the disease is
by no means radically cured; a chronic state of inflammation still con-
tinues, and this is aroused anew by each return of menstrual congestion.
Fresh matter then gathers, and the former symptoms in a subdued shape
are repeated. In this manner may this lingering affection last for one or
more years; the patient suffering all the time from the symptoms of
chronic inflammation in the sexual organs, namely, pain and weight in
the pelvis, tenderness in the ovarian region, pain in the back, inability to
walk much, and disorders of menstruation. The reason of her state is a
mystery to herself, as well as to her medical attendant, if the real nature
of the disease have not been recognised at first.
From this description it will be seen, what great evils may arise from
not distinguishing this affection from inflammation of the womb, or of the
bowels; which so constantly happens at present, from delicacy and medical
inexperience in these diseases, preventing the necessary examinations. If
this affection were recognised at first, suppuration might in some cases be
prevented by active treatment, and if it did occur, well-directed means
might subdue the lingering remains of the inflammation.
The general cause of this disease in the nnimpregnated womb is sudden
arrest of menstruation. It is very rare that acute ovaritis, or acute
metritis, arises during the menstrual interval. After confinement how-
ever, acute inflammation of these organs is apt to arise from various
causes, especially from too early exposure to cold, arrest of the secretion
of milk &c.; and in this case the peritoneum is very apt to be involved,
constituting a most dangerous and general fatal disease. But in the.
nnimpregnated condition, the peritoneum is very seldom implicated, and a
fatal result rarely, if ever, occurs.


SUBACUTE OVARITIS.
Tnts is a much more common disease than the preceding. Dr. Tilt,
who has lately directed the attention of the profession to the subject,
says, he believes no disease is more common than, though so little under-
stood as this. In subacute ovaritis, in general, the whole ovary is not
'affected, but the inflammation is limited to certain parts, as the Graafian
follicles, &c. The symptoms of this important affection are, a dull pain
in the ovarian region, increased by walking, riding, or pressure on the
part, and also by straightening the leg. The pains radiate from the ovary
to the loins, thighs, and anus, and are of a dull, dragging, and sometimes
overwhelming character. But they are seldom so acute as to make advice
be early sought, and are thus often endured for years. Sexual intercourse
increases the pain. This wearing affection, like other inflammatory
states of the ovaries and womb, deadens the sexual feelings. It very
frequently gives rise to hysteria. It also frequently causes the various
disorders of menstruation, which it produces either directly, or by occa-
sioning a secondary congestion or inflammation of the womb, whose
health depends greatly on that of the ovaries. It-also gives rise to
sterility, which Dr. Tilt believes to be much oftener connected with
disease of the ovaries, than of the womb, although the contrary is the
general opinion.
The morbid appearances so commonly found in the ovaries after death,
and which have been caused by subacute ovaritis, are a red and inflamed
state of the Graafian vesicles, which are sometimes full of pus. They
are also frequently swollen to the size of a pea, denoting a state of
chronic inflammation. The fallopian tubes are frequently found bound
down by adhesions, so that they could not be applied to the ovaries.
This appearance is very frequent in prostitutes, and is one cause of their
general sterility.
The chief causes of subacute ovaritis, according to Dr. Tilt, are,
“excessive venereal indulgence, which sometimes produces it in newly
married women, but particularly in prostitutes, whose ovaries after death
almost always present some morbid lesion ; privation of the sexual stimu-
lus, whether its absolute privation, as in single women, or sudden with-
drawal as in widows, bpth of which leave the ovaries in a congested state I


]jt« marriages, in which the venereal stimulus is liable to prove too
powerful for the ovaries, unused to it; the decline of menstruation, both
jo the case of the involuntary nuns of a society over-stocked with
vomen, and in those who have indulged in venereal excesses; moral
emotions and ungratified desires, which are known in the male sex to
have the effect of increasing the seminal secretion, and naturally have an
joalovous action on woman; arrest of menstruation, which is apt to be
followed by this disease, along with dysinvnorrhtea and hysterical symp-
toms ; gonorrhoea, leucorrhcea &c.” Dr. Tilt remarks, that the want of
the appropriate stimulus to the ovaries, which should promote their
healthy action, is often the cause of their becoming the seat of morbid
affections.
Subacute ovaritis is thus a most important affection, from its great
frequency, and from its obscure nature. There are doubtless very many
such cases existing unknown at present, the hidden root of various
miserable diseases, which cannot be cured without the prior removal of
the ovaritis. Thus very many cases of amenorrhcea, menorrhagia,
dvsmenorrbtea, sterility, and hysteria, are owing to this disease, and in
all these affections a careful examination should be made, if there be any
symptoms of ovaritis.
The treatment recommended by Dr. Tilt is, leeches applied over the
ovarian regions, succeeded by successive blisters to that part, so as to
break the morbid chain of nervous action, and lastly to rub in an oint-
ment composed of mercury and belladonna. The bowels should be kept
open by aperients; and emollient injections into the rectnm, with the
chill taken off, should be used thrice a-day. Three or four onnces should
he injected at a time, (the pelvis being elevated,) and retained as long as
possible. They bathe and soothe the parts affected. By these means,
wliic i can be used only in the menstrual intervals, a radical cure may
generally be effected; and after it, cold water injections, morning and
evening, should be used. Sexual abstinence and a regular healthy life
should be enjoined during the treatment; and for some time after the
care, sexual intercourse should be taken in moderation. Sterility and the
various menstrual and hysterical affections, connected with subacute
ovaritis, frequently cease after its cure.


INFLAMMATION OF THE WOMB.
. I now proceed to the inflammations of the womb, of which mitcli
more is known than of the ovarian inflammations, in great part
through the admirable work of Dr. Henry Bennett. In examining
the diseases of the womb, we have fortunately a much more certain
guide than the finger, namely, the eye. There are two kinds of
specula used, the round and the bi-valve one, the latter of which coj.
sists of two separable blades, and is the best, for by means of it
the mouth of the womb can be opened, and the cervical canal seen,
which is very important, as disease often lurks in this part. But it is
more difficult to manage than the round one, which answers excellent!;
for many purposes. The patient should lie on the back, opposite i
window, in specular examinations, so that the light should fall on the
parts examined. Candlelight will do in the absence of daylight,
though not so good. The womb is also examined by means of the
touch, through the abdomen, vagina, and rectum. It is only when
enlarged that it can be felt through the abdominal walls. Through
the rectum, one half of the posterior surface of the womb can be felt,
as the prostate gland in the male; and unless the examiner be ! ex-
perienced, he may think the healthy womb morbidly swollen. 'But
the genera! mode of examining the womb is through the vagina. • The
fore-finger here readily reaches the mouth of the womb, and can'in
this way obtain most valuable information. ' y \
But the finger, to be a reliable guide, requires a great deal of edn£
cation. Women seem to suppose that all they have to do is to consent
to a digital examination, and all will be ascertained. But the fact is,
that there are very few medical men, except those who give special
attention to midwifery and female diseases, who can diagnose by the
finger many kinds of uterine disease. It is a very difficult thing to
tell by the finger, that the mouth of the womb is ulcerated; and the
proof of this is, that this very common disease remained almost en-
tirely unknown, till the free use of the speculum. It is necessary to
educate the finger by the eye, with the greatest care, before it can he
trusted to. Thus, unless a man’s finger be a very sure guide, be
should always use the speculum also. A woman should consider, that
instead of ending, the real difficulties in the recognition and treatment
of her case are only beginning, when she consults a medical man; but
her mind, if she have had little sexual experience, is generally so much
occupied with the unpleasantness of revealing her disease and consent-
ing to an examination, that she loses sight of the only really import-
ant matters to her, namely, the competence of the . man she consults.


tiul the judiciousness of bis treatment. No patients submit to so much
erroneous treatment, are so much quacked, and have so little to say
in their own case, as sexual patients, especially women; for the un-
fortunate sexual bashtulness paralyses their common sense, and pre-
vents them from reasoning vigorously as becomes grown up human
beings, on a matter of such vital importance to them as their own
health.
A very common and most unfortunate defect in medical men, is a
dislike to confess their ignorance, and very great evils arise from this.
Each one vies with his neighbour in vaunting his own knowledge and
his own success. The great reason is, that the public are so utterly
ignorant of medicine, that anything passes current with them; and
thus is a man tempted to impose upon them, and to pretend to more
knowledge than he really possesses. Public ignorance is certain to
lead to pretence and to deception, and while that continues to exist,
ii is in vain to hope that these will not flourish.
There is no possible remedy for these evils, but an increased know-i
ledge of health and disease throughout society generally, so that they
shall be able to distinguish between true and pretended science, and
to judge for themselves on so infinitely important a matter as tbeir
own health. There is no class of diseases in which there is so much
assumption of knowledge, with so much real ignorance, as the sexual
ones, just because they have been wrapped in such special obscurity.
Every one connected with medicine, even to the midwives and nurses
in our hospitals, affects to talk knowingly upon sexual matters, as if
the most obscure and ill-understood part of onr nature were patent to
them. This assumption is favoured by the profound ignorance and
secret curiosity of the public on sexual matters, and the prido of
appearing to be one of the initiated. In fact, tarn where we may,
there are few things connected with the present sexual state of man-
kind, which are not the source of sorrow aud humiliation to an ingenuous
mind.


ACUTE METRITIS.
Or acute inflammation of the womb, (from the Greek word signifying
the womb,) generally arises from tho sudden arrest of menstruation, when
it occurs in the non-impregnated state. The symptoms are similar to
those of acute ovaritis; severe pain in the hypogastriura, pelvic weight,
fever and constant nausea. A digital examination by the vagina should
always be used to ascertain this affection. The vagina will be found hot
and dry; tho cervix swollen, and often sensitive; while the body of tho
womb is exquisitely painful, any touch causing nausea. Nausea is a
very frequent symptom in affections of the womb, and arises from
tho intimate sympathy between that organ and the stomach. In incipi-
ent pregnancy, nausea generally occurs, and shows the sympathy of the
stomach with the changes going on in the womb. In acute metritis the
passage of the faeces is exquisitely painful, for the womb lies just upon
the rectum, and, in passing, they lift it up.
Acute metritis generally ends by resolution, that is, complete subsidence
of the inflammation, in from five to ten days. It rarely ends fatally, but
in some cases, it degenerates into chronic metritis, which is an exceedingly
wearing and painful affection. This is particularly likely to happen, if
the acute disease be not recognised, (as is frequently the case in the
absence of the necessary digital examination,) and styled loosely “ inflam-
mation of the bowels.” If not recognised, it is not treated promptly
enough; and there are few diseases which cause so much suffering, as
the chronic metritis, which may follow.
The treatment should consist in the application of a large number of
leeches, from tea to twenty, to the hypogastrium. This should bo followed
by large thin poultices to that part, or by warm fomentations, if the
abdomen bo too tender. Internally, tartar emetic should be given in
small doses, which is a most valuable remedy in the majority of acute
inflammations, producing sickness, relaxation, and perspiration, quieting
the pulse, and reducing fever. Gentle saline aperients should also be
given, to soften the fences, and prevent them from irritating the womb,
and to cool the system.
In acute ovaritis the same treatment should be used, and more actively)
to prevent suppuration if possible.


CHRONIC METRITIS.
This disease is generally partial, being confined to the posterior wall
of the uterus. This arises from the fact, that the muscular fibres of that
»all are continuous with those in the neck of the womb, and chronic
metritis is generally caused by the extension of inflammation from the neck
to the body of the organ. The symptoms of the disease are, a dull ach-
ing deep-seated pain in the hypogastric region, just above the pubis; also
still more constantly, a pain in the loins and sacral region, extending down
the inside of the thighs. These pains are increased by walking, and are
accompanied by an oppressive feeling of pelvic weight. On examining
by the finger in the vagina, an extremely sensitive protuberance is felt on
the posterior surface of the body of the womb, sometimes smooth,- some-
times irregular and knotty. Pressure here causes exquisite pain and
nausea. The womb being an organ very delicately poised in the pelvis,
any increase of weight in one part makes it incline in that direction; and
therefore it is in this disease retroverted, and lies upon the rectum,
causing obstinate constipation, and the passage of the feces gives great
pain. There is generally some leucorrhoeal discharge.
The constitutional symptoms are the usual ones expressive of impaired
health, namely, headache, want of sleep and bad dreams, foul tongue,
want of appetite, and dyspepsia. No organ sympathises so much with
the womb as the stomach, and there is very generally nausea, along with
much dyspepsia, present in this disease, A peculiar appearance of pallor
and languor, which is very characteristic of inflammatory diseases of the
sexual organs, and hence called the fades uterina (uterine face) is in no
affection more strongly marked than in this. The patient looks worn out
by habitual suffering. Although this affection is a most wearing and
distressing one, yet it is not incompatible with what a superficial observer
might think tolerable health, especially in the menstrual intervals. But
during menstruation all the pains are greatly increased, and are often
agonising. The disease is of an exceedingly chronic and obstinate nature,
like all inflammations in tissues of low vitality, for instance bones,
ligaments, &c.; and also because it is kept up by the periodical congestion
of menstruation. Indeed Dr. Bennett, who was the first accurately to
describe this, and several other uterine inflammations, says, ho never


nv a case get well spontaneously, as long as menstruation lasted. Hi
says, that in most of the cases he had seen, the disease had continued for
years unknown, the patient haring been supposed to suffer from Irritable
or displaced uterus, or from functional dysmenorrhoea. We see in this,
what miserable and protracted sufferings may arise from erroneous
diagnosis.
lie cause of this painful disease is in some cases an attack of acute
metritis, which is not perfectly subdued. But in general it results from
the extension of inflammation from an ulcerated cervix, and when so, it
is peculiarly intractable.
The treatment is, first to cure the ulceration of the cerriz, if such exist.
This often removes the chronic metritis, but not always, and in these
cases the tenacity of the disease is extreme, and from months to yean
may be necessary for its treatment. The means to be used are, rest in
the recumbent position, with emollient or astringent vaginal injections,
and the occasional applications of leeches to the os, before, during, or
after menstruation. At the menstrual exacerbations, opiate injections
into the rectum should be used, or the inhalation of chloroform, if the
pain be agonizing. The constipation, which is almost always obstinate,
is very difficult to treat. Injections cannot be used, for they cause great
pain. It is a good sign, when the patient becomes able to bear them.
Mild aperients should therefore be used. By these means, long and
perseveringly applied, together with lying out in the open air, whenever
the weather is favourable, tepid sponging, and other modes of bracing
the general health, the disease can almost always be at last cured; bat
this depends greatly upon the patience and perseverance of the sufferer,
and whether she have the power of using the various requisite means for
to long a time.
To prevent this disease, its chief cause, ulceration of the cervix, should
be prevented, or if it do occur should be met by prompt treatment, so
as to prevent its giving rise to this much more tedious and painful
affection.


ULCERATION
OF THE
NECK OF THE WOMB.
, This is an exceedingly important disease, and the greater part of Dr.
Bennett’s inimitable work on the uterine inflammations is devoted to it.
He says it is of infinitely more frequent occurrence than any other in-
flammation of the womb, and is the principal cause of leucorrhcca, pro-
lapsus, painful, scanty, and hemorrhagic menstruation, sterility, abortion
&c. The great frequency and importance of this disease was quite un-
known in this country, till Dr. Bennett wrote upon the subject, and
doubtless in many cases it still remains undetected.
■ The disease consists in an inflamed and ulcerated state of the mouth
of the womb and the surface of the cervix.
The size of the cervix varies naturally in different women, but what-
ever be its size, shape, or direction, it,may be considered healthy, if it be
not inflamed, nor indurated, and if the os be normally closed. When
healthy it has a soft, elastic, and unctuous feel, is of a pale rosy hue, and
not the least painful on pressure.
, Before puberty the womb is dormant, and very little subject to in-
flammation ; but afterwards, the menstrual secrct'on is liable to be pre-
vented, diminished, increased, or arrested, by a variety of social, moral
and other causes. Hence ulceration is not very unfrequently found in
virgins, while in married women, in whom it is much more common,
sexual intercourse is another cause ; and in some very susceptible women
ulceration follows intercourse almost immediately, without immoderate
indulgence. Hence many young females are attacked by this disease
soon after marriage and remain sterile; or if they conceive, are very
subject to abortion. Child-birth often causes ulceration, for the mucous
membrane, lining the os and cervical cavity, is apt to bo contused and
lacerated; and though such contusions rapidly heal, when all goes on
favourably , yet if there be any cause to prevent this, such as the reten-
tion of pieces of the after-birth, &o. ulceration may follow. Women
who have borne children, are much more subject to this disease, for the
womb remains always somewhat more vascular. Ulceration also fre-
quently arises from gonorrhoea or leucorrhoea.
The symptoms of inflammation of the cervix, which generally precedes
its ulceration, are as follows. The cervix becomes swollen and enlarged,
Q


and gradually falls in the vagina from its increased weight. When ex-
arained by the speculum it is of a vivid red hue, and covered by muco-pus,
which must be wiped off in order to see it. This muco-pus must not be
confounded with the white creamy secretion often found in this region,
which is the product merely of congestion, and is seen in many healthy
women before and after menstruation.
When the cervical cavity_is inflamed, the os is always opened. This is
a most valuable sign, for in health the os is invariably contracted: and
whenever the finger in examining meets with a well-marked depression,
instead of a scarcely preceptible orifice, there is certainly inflammation,
and the speculum is indispensable.
The mucous membrane, lining the cavity’ of the cervix, when inflamed
is of a dark livid red hue, and secretes adhesive muco-pus, and a glairy
transparent raucous, like raw white of egg. The presence of this glairy
discharge in large quantities, and an open os, are certain signs of inflam-
mation of the cavity of the cervix.
Ulceration general ly soon follows. It may present different characters;
the granulations sometimes being very small and red. (as they generally
are in the cavity of the cervix,) or large and livid, showing torpor and
congestion of the part. This is generally their form in pregnancy. The
ulcers are never excavated, nor have abrupt margins; therefore they ars
very difficult to recognise, unless by a thoroughly educated finger, and
are constantly overlooked, when a digital examination alone is made.
They present to the touch a soft, velvety, mossy feeling. In almost all
cases the ulcer penetrates into the cavity of the cervix, but never passes
the os internum. An ulcer always secretes pus, whether scanty or abun-
dant ; but when scanty, it is often absorbed in passing through the
vagina, and thus a patient may have no external discharge. Hut in
other cases there is abundant purulent discharge, mixed with mucus
from the congested vagina, creamy milky fluid from the congested
follicles of the cervix, and the glairy transparent secretion from the
cavity of the cervix, constituting copious leucorrhosa. s Tho discharge
is sometimes tinged with blood from the ulcer, especially after in-
tercourse.
The cervix may remain a long time in an inflamed and ulcerated
state, without its volume being materially increased; but very frequently,
especially in women who have had children, it becomes more or less en-
larged and hypertrophied. It sometimes increases surprisingly, reaching
even the size of a man’s fist. The inflammation and swelling sometimes,
though rarely, extend to the body of the womb, constituting the painful and
obstinate affection, chronic metritis. There is generally induration, as
well as hypertrophy; a stony hardness of the tumor, which has been fre-
quently mistaken for cancer, giving rise to the greatest misery and anxiety.
But this mistake need not again occur after Dr. Bennett’s masterly ana-
lysis of the different appearances of the two diseases: and it is a great
consolation to those afflicted with these inflammatory diseases of the cer-
vix, to know that they have little, if any, tendency to degenerate into
cancer. Dr. Bennett says, he has never seen a case so degenerate, even
after many years' continuance.


Inflammatory hypertrophy causes prolapse of the womb, and the neck
ii often carried backwards as well as downwards, so as to press on the
vagina or rectum. This gives rise to a disagreeable feeling of weight and
dragging, as if a body were about to escape from the vagina. When the
patient is sitting, there is the feeling of a tumor pressed up by the seat.
When the cervix is ulcerated, the inflammation generally extends to the
vagina. Sometimes the vulva is inflamed, although the vagina is not;
and this is often attended with a most distressing itching, which is the
source of great torment, sometimes banishing the sufferer from society,
and nearly driving her distracted. This itching, when very great, is
usually dependent on internal inflammation, and is to be removed only by
the prior cure of the latter.
The two other pelvic organs, the rectum and the bladder , are generally
affected, when the uterine disease is severe and chronic. The rectum al-
most always sutlers by being pressed upon, which causes constipation.
The bowel is also often congested and irritable, and much mucus it
expelled with the faces. Piles and prolapsus ani also frequently occur
from the obstruction to the circulation in the blood-vessels of the part.
These diseases are aggravated during menstruation, and add greatly to
the patient’s discomfort. The bladder also becomes irritable, and there it
frequent desire to pass water, with scalding. The irritability of the blad-
der is often caused by the morbid state of the urine, which in this disease
is frequently loaded with deposits. The morbid urine causes a dull ach-
ing pain at the neck of the bladder, and irritability of that organ.
One chief reason that ulcers of the womb are so often undetected is,
that pain is frequently absent, or at least often felt in ether pans. It
is not in the cervix itself that the pain is felt, but in the loins, in the
ovarian, and sometimes in the hypogastric regions. The permanence of
these pains is an important character. Better or worse, they are never
absent; while back-ache from mere weakness is essentially intermitting.
The pains are in general of that dull aching character, which characterises
pain when seated in the sympathetic nerves. But the back-ache is some-
times agonising, as if the back was broken.
Menstruation generally soon becomes disordered. It becomes irregular,
and either too scanty or too abundant. During menstruation all the
above-mentioned pains are greatly aggravated, and the sufferings of the
patient are often very great. Many cases of the most severe dysmenorr-
hea are owing to ulceration of the womb.
Ulceration very frequently causes sterility: and when a patient doe*
conceive, pregnancy is painful and laborious, and abortions frequently
occur. The cure of the ulcer often removes sterility.
It also greatly deadens the sexual feelings, like almost all inflammatory
affections of the womb, or the ovaries, and like the analogous inflammation*
of the prostate gland and testicles in man. This is frequently carried even
to the extent of disgust, although no pain may attend intercourse, and
often gives rise to great misery in married life ; the husband attributing
his wife’s altered feelings to personal dislike and other moral causes.
This, it may be remarked in passing, is one of the innumerable instan


ces of the daily mistakes made in estimating character by ail, who are
not acquanted with physical influences, and bodily disease. In fact it is
not possible for any one, man or woman, however great may he their
knowledge of mental and moral subjects, to form correct judgments of
their fellow beings, unless they are as conversant with our physical as our
moral nature. From the want of this physical and medical knowledge,
all the current opinions upon mankind, religious and moral, social and
individual, are radically vitiated.
The return of sexual desire is to be regarded in this, as in other sexual
disorders, as one of the best of all signs of a radical cure ; just as. the
return of a healthy appetite in affections of the stomach, or the general
system. In ulceration there is frequently pain in congress, but it is fre-
quently absent.
The most marked and prominent constitutional symptom is indigestion,
for no organ sympathises so much with the womb as the stomach. In
general the dyspepsia becomes gradually severe, and leads both patient
and physician erroneously to believe, that it is the real disease. In
all chronic diseases there is no greater source of error than this, to mis-
take a secondary disease for the primary one. In chronic diseases, one
organ after another becomes gradually implicated, and without great care
and skill, the secondary diseases are constantly mistaken for the primary
ones. In this way we have seen that in spermatorrhoea, the source of
the symptoms was always thought, before M. Lallemand’s work, to be in
the brain, stomach, or other organ. In like manner Dr. Edward Johnson
has ably pointed out the fact, that the exceedingly prevalent disease of indi-
gestion is in a great majority of the cases in this country, rather a disease
of the brain than of the stomach; arising from the over-work, anxiety,
&c., to which the mind is constantly subject in our society. Thus in the
case before us, although the stomach becomes greatly disorderd, and the
impaired appetite, the pain, flatulence, &c., absorb the patient’s attention,
in reality these are not the primary disease at all, but merely symptoms
of the ulcerated state of the womb. Dr. Bennett says, that whenever he
sees severe dyspepsia in a young female, he suspects disease of the womb.
For the same reason, whenever we see severe dyspepsia or great nervous
prostration in a young man, we may suspect genital enfeeblement, and why ?
because in youth the sexual system is the prominent one, and is the grand
key to the diseases of that time of life. There are comparatively few dis-
eases in youth, in which the sexual system does not play a prominent
part, either in causing or in complicating them. For this reason,whenever
we see a case of chronic disease in the young of either sex, particular care
should be given to examine the state of the sexual organs.
It is indeed essential in cases of chronic disease at every age. to ex-
amine into the state of all the different organs in the body, and it is
becoming a rule with scientific physicians to do so; but there are no
organs, which are so constantly omitted in this general scrutiny as the
sexual ones, in consequence of the lamentable feelings of delicacy so often
alluded to. Hence the treatment of the diseases of youth is, as a general
rule, exceedingly unsatisfactory and unscientific, and there is no age


which is so constantly mistaken and ill-treated. The sexual organs pre-
side over youth both in health and disease; and to overlook this most
important fact is to ignore nature.
The other viscera also, the lungs, liver, and heart are liable to dis-
ordered action, such as palpitations, severe pain under the breast-bone,
bilious attacks, &c; and consumption is one of the dangers to which this,
as well as all other debilitating diseases, indirectly exposes the patient.
The weakness, pallor, and uterine face are often extreme; but there is
seldom feverishness, and the patient does not look like one labouring
under an inflammatory disease. She is nervous and hysterical, with bad
sleep and frightful dreams, especially when the dull aching pains are
present. There are sometimes mental delusions and dread of insanity,
as in other chronic diseases, which gradually weaken and disturb the
nervous system.
In some cases the local symptoms may predominate; in others, the
constitutional, while the local ones are almost absent; and it is in these
cases that the disease is so apt to be overlooked. Hence the medical mau
can frequently only suspect the possible existence of the disease, and his
task, Dr. Bennett observes, is a very delicate one, for women have such
a reluctance to a digital examination.
The disease tends to last indefinitely, and rarely subsides spontaneously,
before the decline of menstruation. It may exist from ten to twenty
years without endangering life. No disease has been more frequently
overlooked, the back-ache, leucorrhoea &c., being thought to arise from a
“weakness.” This is an inveterate popular error. “The opinion has
hitherto prevailed,’’ says Dr. Bennett, “ that extreme general debility
may exist spontaneously in the female, but it does not do so in her, any
more than in the male, without some tangible reason; either there must
be some organic disease present, or she must be exposed to very bad hygi-
enic conditions.”
Ulceration of the cervix not unfrequently occurs in virgins, as Dr.
Bennett was the first to point out. He says that to it may be referred
most of the cases of severe and obstinate dysmenorrhea a, and inveterate
leucorrhcea, occurring in them. “ These cases” he says, “ are very deli-
cate, but the scruples of delicacy must be overcome; no such feelings
prevent surgical relief being offered to girls with-disease of the rectum,
anus, &c., though here it is equally repugnant.” “In most of the cases I
have seen,” he say i, moreover, “ the disease had existed for years unre-
cognised, and it is certain that some of them must have perished. I have
restored to perfect health many young females, who were mere wrecks,
and had lost all hope of recovery. It would bo an opprobrium to medical
science, if this disease, when discovered in the virgin, should remain
untreated.’’
So strong is the language, which Dr. Bennett finds it necessary to use
in speaking of the feelings of false delicacy, even among medical men ;
for it must not be thought that these scruples are confined to women
alone. In fact in this respect unfortunate woman is as much sinned
against as sinning, and the scruples of medical men, and of surrounding
friends, have frequently as much to say in the neglect of their diseases, as


their own morbid delicacy. There is one simple axiom of morality in all
these matters, that whatever feeling stands in the way of the most satis-
factory examination and treatment of disease, whether in the virgin or
married woman; and whether such feeling exists in the patient herself,
in her friends or medical attendant, it is to be considered a serious moral
error. Human health and disease, happiness or misery, are far too
sacred to be sacrificed to such morbid ideas. Woman has already suffered
too deeply from this deplorable false delicacy; and every one who feels
for his fellow creatures, and for the dignity of mankind, should endeavour,
that such feelings should be rooted out from among us.
Ulceration is not unfrequent in pregnant women, and is said by Dr.
Bennett to be the key to most of the accidents of pregnancy, such as ob-
stinate sickness, hemorrage, and abortions. There is here generally
copious leucorrhoea, and frequently pain in congress, and slight hemorrage
after it. The patient is racked by pains, thin and debilitated, and waits
for delivery as the only term to her sufferings, which she believes to be de-
pendent merely on the pregnancy. Ulceration was not known to be fre-
quently present in pregnancy, till Dr. Bennett wrote, chiefly in con-
sequence of a groundless fear of using the speculum in pregnant women.
The disease when detected, is generally easily curable, and should bo
treated as early as possible to prevent abortions.
Abortions, and laborious child-birth, frequently cause ulceration, and
here the prominent symptom is the continuance of hemorrhage for many
weeks. When such hemorrhages do occur after delivery, and are succeeded
by leucorrhoea, they generally depend on ulceration, and it is in these
eases that chronic metritis is most apt to be induced.
Ulceration is sometimes found after the cessation of the menses, and
is generally the remains of former disease; for menstrual decline does
not always cure inflammatory uterine diseases, though it very fre-
quently does so. The ulcerations in advanced life sometimes arise
from gonorrhoea. They are much more difficult to cure than in young
women.
It will be seen from this description, that ulceration of the neck of the
womb is a most Important disease. It is very common, and causes most
severe and prolonged sufferings. When we reflect on this, and also on the
many ages that have elapsed before this disease was revealed to us through
the speculum, we may form some slight idea of the immense amount of
female misery it has caused. Myriads of women have dragged through a
life of wretchedness, or have at last sunk beneath the slow undermining
ravages of this relentless foe. And it is certain that even at the present
day, there are many who are suffering from this disease unrecognised;
although from the masterly analysis of Dr. Bennett, which is a model of
medical description, it has been clearly exposed, and would very rarely
escape detection, if the speculum were used as often as it should be, or
if the finger of medical men were duly trained to the investigation of fe-
male disease. Although the use of those necessary means are obstructed
among all classes of women, it is especially in virgins, that mistaken
scruples are allowed to interfere; and there is no doubt that very many
cases of this and other sexual inflammations exist at present among them


unrecognised, and causa an immensity of suffering. Amenotrlicea and
dysmenorrhcea are of frequent occurrence in the virgin; and these diseases
are frequently owing to ulceration, or subacute ovaritis.
The treatment of this disease is one of the most satisfactory of all.
Ulceration, if left to itself, tends to last indefinitely, and rarely subsides
spontaneously while menstruation lasts; but there is scarcely a case
which will not yield to good medical treatment. However great the de-
bility, or protracted the sufferings, the disease may in most cases be cured,
and the patient restored to health and strength.
The principles of treatment in ulceration of the cervix are, first, to sub-
due inflammation by emollient and astringent vaginal injections, and by
leeches; and secondly, to modify by cauterization the ulcerated surface,
to as to substitute healthy reparative inflammation for morbid ulcerative
inflammation.
The application of leeches to the os relieves congestion and favours the
cure; but they are not indispensable, and it is wrong to apply them fre-
quently. When they are applied, a small plug of cotton tied by a thread,
should be fixed in the mouth of the womb, to prevent them biting in the
cervical canal, where they cause agonising pain; while on the cervix, they
cause no pain. The emollient injections consist of linseed tea, or milk
and water, cither tepid or cold. They should be retained in the vagina
for some minutes, and are very soothing; and chiefly useful, where there
is much irritability, increased by astringents. The astringent injections
are of very great value in ulceration, as well as in leucorrhoea, and may
succeed alone in curing slight ulceration. But this is not to be expected,
and the grand treatment for the ulcers is cauterization. The ulcers gene-
rally pass into the cavity of the cervix, and thus are out of reach of in-
jections. Much time is often lost in using injections, and it is much better
to use the speculum and cauterization at once. The caustic generally
used, and frequently sufficing for the cure, is the nitrate of silver. The
application of this invaluable salt, generally at once arrests the ulcer,
which becomes smaller and healthier, and secretes healthy pus. It should
be applied every fifth or sixth day, till the ulcer is completely healed; for
if it be left to itself, no matter how far the healing process have advanced,
it will fall back again. The last part of the ulcer to heal, is that which
dips into the cervical cavity; and to treat this, it is necessary to have a
bi-valve speculum, by which the os can be opened, and the ulcer within
cauterized. If this is done, there will never be a relapse, but if any of the
ulcer be left, relapse is almost sure to occur. Astringent injections should
be used, as well as the cauterization.
By these means a cure is generally effected in a few weeks, if the ulcer
is small and recent. Even in livid and fungous ulcers, the nitrate
of silver produces a clean and healthy state; but here it is seldom
strong enough to cause complete cicatrisation. It is best applied in the
solid form, except in the cervical canal, where a strong solution may be used
on a hair pencil, lest the solid stick break. If it does run down on the
neighbouring tissues, it does rather good than harm, for its action is not
at all violent. Its application to the cervix causes little pain, but more to
the cervical cavity. After the pain has abated, there is generally a lull


in the symptoms; but if the nicer be then left to itself, it soon again
becomes irritable, and the patient often begs for the re-application of the
caustic.
When the ulcer is large and unhealthy, the nitrate is not strong enough
to produce a cure, and in this case the acid nitrate of mercury should be
used. This is the best of the more powerful caustics. From ten to four-
teen days should intervene between its applications. In these cases from
six weeks to three months may be needed for the cure. But sometimes
all these means fail, and the ulcer, partly healed, becomes stationary,
generally in the cervical cavity. Then the most powerful of all caustics,
the potassa fusa, should be used. The pain is little more severe, than
in ordinary cauterization with the nitrate of silver, sometimes even less.
Dr. Bennett says, he has scarcely ever seen bad effects follow even se-
vere cauterization, and he infers that this treatment does not involve
more risk to the patient, than the minor surgical operations, such as tooth-
drawing, opening abscesses &c. Still, he says, all surgical operations
have some risk, and he has twice seen acute metritis brought on by weak
astringent vaginal injections.
The cure of ulceration by these means removes slight hypertrophy of the
cervix; but in many instances after the ulcer is cured, hypertrophy re-
mains, sufficient to drag down the womb ; and this will probably cause
return of the ulcer, as the cervix remains red and congested. This hyper-
trophy, Dr. Bennett says, never resists the melting influence of the
potassa fusa, which is by far the best, and indeed the only necessary kind
of treatment for it. The purpose of the application of this powerful
caustic is not to burn away the swelled part, but only to excite a certain
amount of inflammation. This extends to the swelled and indurated
tissues, and they melt, and are absorbed. The artificial ulcers, produced
by the potassa, always heal readily in from four to six weeks ; and this
shows the rationale of the treatment of diseased ulceration by cauteri-
zation.
After the cure of ulceration and hypertrophy, the cervix rises in the
pelvis ; and although it may not regain • completely its position, yet if all
inflammation be subdued, it seldom causes any uneasiness, and vaginal
injections of cold water are all that is needed. ’ There is considerable
difference of opinion among those conversant with female disease, as to
the effect of displacement of the womb. Many physicians think that
the displacement of the womb backwards or forwards, or its prolapse, is
frequently owing to mere relaxation of the ligaments and vagina, by which
it is kept in its place. Dr. Bennett however, and many others, are
strongly opposed to this idea, and assert that the womb is very rarely dis-
placed, except as the result of inflammation of some part of its substance,
which increases its weight, and makes it incline in one direction. They
say that unless there be inflammation present, it is veryrare that displace-
ment causes any uneasiness whatever; and that the artificial and mecha-
nical means of support, such as pessaries, which are in very common use,
are almost always productive of evil, rather than good, as they only in-
crease the inflammation, which causes the displacement. Dr. Bennett
says that in forty-nine cases out of fifty, where pessaries are now used, the


patient is injured rather than benefited. Cure the inflammatory disease,
»hich is almost always the cause of the displacement, and the womb will
regain its position; and even if it do not entirely regain it, will cause no
uneasiness. Dr. Bennett says that almost the only cases requiring pes-
saries, are those where there is complete procidentia, (by which is meant,
that the womb has fallen completely out of the vagina,) which does not
yield to the removal of the inflammation.
In ulceration the patient should remain as much as possible in the
recumbent position, especially after cauterization. Carriage exercise,
and even a gentle walk, more for air than exercise, are good, if they can
he borne. Sexual abstinence is always necessary. The torpid and irri-
table state of the rectum, should be treated by the daily injection of about
half a pint of cold water after breakfast. This is a most valuable remedy.
After the cure of the ulcer, the secondary diseases will gradually dis-
appear.
“The system,” says Dr. Bennett, “ seems almost always to have the
power of rallying even when depressed by a long life of disease. One of
the most striking results of a cure is the removal of the fretful, irritable,
and hysterical state of mind, which so often accompanies this disease,
and which deserves pity rather than blame, for the irritability is all but
uncontrollable. The treatment of the disease is very satisfactory. Women
who have been for years in misery, stranded as it were on the shores of
life, have a resurrection, and are restored to happiness and usefulness.”


VENEREAL DISEASES IN THE FEMALE
These diseases in the female are of the same nature as in the male,
namely gonorrhoea and syphilis—the non-virulent, and the virulent affec-
tions ; but the different form of the sexual organs causes some important
differences in their progress and treatment.
Gonorrhoea in the female is characterised by swelling of the lips of the
vulva, redness and inflammation of the mucous surfaces, and a copious
discharge of pus. The irritation, pain, and itching, are often intolerable.
The entrance to the vagina may bo much swelled, and excessively tender.
The urethra is also frequently inflamed, which is seldom the case in com-
mon leucorrhcea; but the scalding in passing water, is not nearly so
great as in the male. The disease generally extends, unless early
checked, to the whole internal surface of the vagina, and neck of the
uterus, and often to the cervical canal.
' During the acute stage, the tenderness of the parts forbids the use of
the speculum; but after it has subsided, that instrument should be used,
and the walls of the vagina are then seen to be either simply red and tur-
gid, or covered with isolated patches of redness, vesicles, pimples, or
superficial ulcers, the products of the inflammation, and not of a syphilitic
nature. After the disease has lasted some time, the mouth of the womb
is always more or less affected ; it is swelled and red, and generally
covered with small ulcers or granulations.
The treatment is divided into three parts, as in the male; namely, the
abortive, and the treatment of the acute and chronic stages.
With regard to the first of these, M. Eicord says, “ Women rarely
consult a medical man soon enough to allow of the gonorrhcea being cut
short in its developement; either because they do not acknowledge the
disease till it is too late, or because they do not at once perceive it.
However, if applied soon enough, that is to say, within the first two or
three days, astringent injections and applications would be generally
crowned with success, in cases where the vulva, vagina, or uterus is
affected.”
Were the immense importance of arresting this disease at the outset
generally known by women, and did not a morbid delicacy, or culpable
neglect so often interfere, (and even among prostitutes, the first of these


feelings operates as powerfully as perhaps in any other class of women,)
the most protracted sufferings might be spared. But the disease, in
almost every case, is allowed to run on to the acute stage; whose violent
symptoms and tedious course show the folly of procrastination. The most
absolute rest is now of very great importance, along with sparing diet,
and general baths. But the local treatment is the most essential. The
diseased parts should be separated from each other, and emollient
fomentations with solutions of some narcoflc substance, as opium or poppy-
heads, applied to allay the irritation. A piece of lint, dipped in this solu-
tion, should be placed between the inflamed lips. Injections into the
yagina cannot be used at first, from the swelling and tenderness; but
ihould be employed as soon as possible, and repeated several times a day;
sad, if not too painful, a roll of lint dipped in the same liquid, should be
introduced into the vagina, and wetted thrice a day. Sometimes the acute
stage resists these soothing means, and, if so, they should not be long con-
tinued. In these cases the nitrate of silver applied in the solid form, as
in balanitis, often produces a wonderful effect. After its use, a roll of dry
lint should be introduced to keep the mucous surfaces apart.
When the acute stage has subsided, the main treatment consists in
injections , as in the case o f other vaginal discharges. Emollient injections
should be used, in general, tepid ; astringent ones, cold. In the female,
cubebs and copaiba are of little comparative use, for they scarcely act on
tbs vagina. Their action only extends to the urethra, by which canal
they are carried out of the system. Where the urethra is affected in the
female, they should be given.
The best injections, as has been mentioned before, are solutions of alum,
acetate of lead, sulphate of zinc, tannin, decoction of oak bark, &c. Their
strength should be gradually increased, as the acute stage is further past,
till an ounce to the pound of water is used; for it should be observed that
much stronger treatment, whether abortive or otherwise, can be used in
the female than in the male ; where the narrowness of the canal renders
strong applications hazardous. By means of these injections, and plugs
of lint dipped in the same liquid, and kept in the vagina, M. Ilicord says,
that he succeeds in curing sixty cases in a hundred, and in a period of
from twenty to sixty days.
But the chronic stage often resists all these modes of treatment, and is
very tedious. In these cases, where the discharge seems to be kept up by
theheat and moisture, high up in the vagina, an excellent plan is to fill that
cavity with dry lint, renewed twice or thrice daily. If the surgeon him-
self apply this, which is much the best way, he should use the specu-
lum. This is often succesful, especially where the discharge is white and
milky, and the cervical canal is not involved.
If there be any change of tissue keeping up the discharge, it must be
first cured. Ulcerations and papular granulations should be cauterised
with nitrate of silver, previously drying the parts with lint.
After the cure, injections of cold water should be used twice daily for
some time, to give tone to the parts. They should be omitted four or five
days before and after menstruation.
Although a radical cure can generally be effected by these means, and


although M. Kicord's enegetic treatment is so often successful; s t;]|
it is obvious that very great care and perseverance are necessary, on the
part both of the patient and surgeon, to produce this result. Unless the
injections be properly given, which, as was formerly mentioned, is most
effectually done by another person: unless due care be taken by ciami.
nation with the speculum and other means, thoroughly to cure the changes
of tissue, which are so frequent both in the vagina and the cervical canal ■
a radical cure cannot be expected. Now in this country these essentials
of success are very rarely present. Mr. Langston Parker in his able
work on Venereal Diseases, says, “ Many causes contribute to render the
treatment of gonorrhoea in the female tedious and unsatisfactory; and
the disease more difficult to cure in this sex, than in the male.” Tims,
he says, “ I believe that gonorrhoeal diseases in the female are very rarely
completely cured. This in most cases arises either from neglect on the
part of the patient; or the want of a proper knowledge of the disease,
careful examination of the parts affected, and an appropriate topical medi-
cation on the part of the surgeon.”
We see from this what fearful deficiencies there are in medical educa-
tion and medical treatment, with respect to the sexual diseases of women;
deficiencies which are caused by the morbid delicacy on these subjects.
The treatment of gonorrhoea in the female is, in the hands of very many
medical men, a mere farce; the prevailing morbid delicacy has prevented
them from acquiring a due knowledge of these diseases, interferes withtht
necessary modes of diagnosis and treatment, and is a ready excuse for
evading the troublesome and long continued means which are demanded
for a cure. In this way, not only are the unfortunate patients themselves
left uncured, but the disease is suffered to spread to thousands, and cause
incalculable misery.
Although gonorrhcea is so much more difficult to cure in woman than
in man, (partly from the above reasons, and partly on account of the
periodical return of menstruation, and also the large extent of surface
affected) it is not of nearly so dangerous a nature ; because it is not
liable to cause diseases which interfere with the passage of urine. The
urethra in the female is much wider than in the male, and stricture very
rarely occurs. Enlargement of the prostate, later in life, cannot in this
sex be dreaded; nor can seminal disease be excited. The peculiar danger
of gonorrhoea in man arises from the narrowness and vital importance of
the canal where it occurs, and the connection of this canal with the gen-
erative functions.
However, the disease in the female may cause very great evils. Its
long continuance, like inveterate leucorrhcea, may greatly bi eak down the
strength, and favour the occurrence of other diseases. Ulcers of the
womb too, with all their miseries; subacute ovaritis, and the various
lesions of the ovaries and fallopian tubes, which are so often found in
prostitutes, are frequently owing to this cause.
Syphilis in the female is in its main characters similar to that in the
male. There is one thing to be carefully remarked, that primary
chancres almost always occur on the external parts ; namely, in the vulva,
and not in the vagina or uterus. They are very rarely seen on the womb,


the virus being apparently almost always deposited on the external parts,
or at least not taking effect on the others ; probably because abrasions
are less frequent on them, and the mucous secretions wash away the
poison.
The treatment of the disease in its different stages, primary, secondary,
and tertiary, is the same as when it occurs in man.
For the prevention of venereal disease in the female, the parts should
be washed immediately after any mercenary intercourse, the lips of the
vulva being separated; urine should also be passed to cleanse the urethra.
These precautions are almost as effectual in woman as in man, for infec-
tious matter, especially syphilitic, is so often deposited in the external
genital fissure. The use of the sheath by the male of course protects
the female also, and is by far the most certain preventive. The practice
of washing is very frequently neglected by women from heedlessness, or
from an unfounded dread of using cold water to these parts. M. Bicord
says, “ were women more cleanly, venereal diseases would be much less
prevalent.” He says moreover, that infection is very frequently given by
a woman, in whose organs the poisonous matter is retained, although
without affecting herself. These cases would often be prevented by
washing.
But the great method of preventing venereal disease in the female, as
well as in the male, is to prevent prostitution or mercenary love; on
which subject I shall speak hereafter.


GENERAL REMARKS
ON THE
SEXUAL DISEASES.
Tm above descriptions comprehend most of the functional and inflam-
matory diseases of the sexual organs in women, which form by far the
greatest part of the diseases of these organs. Ido not here speak of tin
organic malignant diseases, such as cancer, chiefly because the cause of
these fearful affections is not yet known, and consequently a knowledge
of them is not of such importance to society. Besides, however terrible
these incurable diseases may be, and however dreadful the sufferings
they frequently cause to their unfortunate victims, still they are compa-
ratively so rare, that they are not of such social importance, as some of
the much slighter diseases, nor do they cause on the whole nearly to
much human suffering. The importance of a disease depends on the total
amount of human suffering it causes; and I believe that by far the most
important class of sexual diseases are those, which arise from sexual absti-
nence, or abuse; and which are characterised by genital enieeblemcnt,
giving rise to general debility and mental irritation, discontent, and despon-
dency. These are universally spread throughout our society in the pre-
sent day, and spring naturally from the universal difficulties opposing
the heal thy exercise of the sexual organs. There are innumerable varieties
and degrees of this enfeeblement; and very frequently, both in man and
woman, the disease may be more of a mental than a physical nature, con-
sisting in discontent, apathy, or irresolution, from the repression of the
natural passions, without there being any tangible disease of the sexual
organs.
The prevention of disease is one of the great leading ideas of this age.
It is of very recent origin, and was not really and energetically urged on
the attention of society, till the writings of Ur. Andrew Combe and some
others within the last half-century. Before that time the prevention of
disease was little thought of; as society, who were too much occupied with
spiritual religion and national animosities to pay much attention to the
bodily health, left the whole matter to the physicians, who attended solely
to the cure and not to the prevention. But this is evidently of little com-
parative use; for society is little benefited, although disease be cured, if
its cause be allowed to continue, and thus new diseases constantly per-
mitted to succeed to the old ones. But in the prevention and eradication


of disease, society is evidently even more directlv interested than the phy-
sicians ; and it is the former also, who by change of habits, and by their
own intelligent exertions, can alone prevent it. Therefore, as soon as the
idea of the prevention of disease was earnestly adopted, it was seen that
the only possible mode of effecting this, was by getting the co-operation
of all mankind. The great cause of disease was at once seen to be the
general ignorance of the laws of health; and hence arose the many admi-
rable popular works on medicine, which have lately appeared, and which
are among the most valuable parts of medical literature. It is not by
the mere advance of science among medical men, that the health of man-
kind can, be elevated or diseases prevented; but by the general knowledge
of all.
Several excellent popular treatises have been written on the various
bodily functions, and popular descriptions of many forms of disease given;
but with respect to the sexual organs, nothing of the kind has been done,
except some meagre description of the venereal affections, and fancy por-
traits of the traditional evils of excess. But of the real state of the
sexual world, and of the natural laws which preside over these organs,
no popular description has yet been given. And yet there is no subject
on which knowledge is so much needed by all mankind. There is none
upon which the general ignorance is so profound; none on which depend
questions of such vital importance in morals, health, and political economy.
The sexual organs moreover are the citadel of the ignorance and degra-
ding mystery, in which the whole body is shrouded from the eyes of the
public; and until they and their laws become generally understood by
all educated men and women, mankind will never possess a due knowledge
of the human frame. There is no part of our social fabric in so miserable
a state as the sexual part; and Ido not think that even poverty causes so
much misery as sexual disease and sexual difficulties, in which the de-
gradation of secrecy and deceit is added to the other evils. However the
two subjects are so closely connected together, as we shall see afterwards,
that they cannot be separated.
There is no subject in which such difficulty is felt by a young man or
woman, especially among the upper classes, from puberty till marriage,
as the sexual one. They have no guide to a true knowledge of the new
organs and passions developed in them; and the promptings of nature are
so completely at variance with conventional rules, that youth is quite
bewildered. For a young man there are three ways open; abstinence,
abuse, or a mercenary love. Abstinence, besides the great moral evils of
the discontent and unhappiness resulting from constantly repressed
passions, exposes him to the most serious genital enfeeblement. Solitary
indulgences are still more dangerous, and lead to the greatest disorders
both of mind and body. Mercenary love, besides the fearful dangers of
venereal disease, is exceedingly degrading; and the amount of evil done
to men, as well as to women, by this general degradation of their first
sexual experiences, is little conceived. The young woman is in a much
worse sexual position than even the young man; for even mercenary love
is far better than total sexual abstinence. The latter gradually destroys
her balance of mind and body, making her hysterical aud chlorotic; and


this, with the still greater evil of solitary indulgence, is all that is open
to unmarried girls in the upper classes. In the poorer classes prostitution
is another alternative, which thousands are driven into.
Thus we see that the present sexual condition of society is such, as
necessarily to cause more or less disease and unhappiness to almost every
individual of either sex. How are we ever to escape from these enormous
evils, unless the subject become one of free and general discussion; and
unless an intimate knowledge of the various facts, physical and moral,
supply the materials of such discussion ? Are we to hide our head in the
sand, like the foolish bird, and hope that the destroyer will pass us by)
In the present state of general sexual ignorance, there is no possible escape
from these evils; their prevention and cure are equally impossible.
No man, who is not acquainted with the natural laws of the sexual
organs, and with the diseased states arising from their disobedience, is
capable of reasoning truly on sexual morality. And until within the
last twenty years, before the researches of M. Lallemand had laid bare
the sexual diseases in the male, and the introduction of the speculum had
thrown a similar light on female disease, it did not lie in human power
to erect a natural theory of sexual morality. The materials fox physical
demonstration were wanting; and without them, neither before nor since
the time of these eminent men, could mere moral dialectics have any satis-
factory result. Even yet our knowledge is excessively defective; we stand
merely on the threshold of an acquaintance with the true sexual morality;
but still I believe that with the materials afforded us by medical and
moral research, together with the conclusions of political economy, it is
possible to lay sure and natural foundations in this most important
matter.
Before proceeding to the consideration of this great question, I shall
give a short sketch of prostitution (of which, as of all other sexual sub-
jects, so little is generally known,) in order to render somewhat more com-
plete, the picture of the awful existing state of the sexual world. I shall
then examine into the great fundamental cause of these evils, and the
possibility of their prevention.-


PROSTITUTION.
The following description of this great social evil is in the main taken
from the celebrated work of M. Parent Duchatelet. Several English
works have been written on the same subject, but their authors have all
drawn largely from him; and their statements moreover, as far as I
am acquainted with them, are not so trustworthy, from the want of that
great caution and statistical accuracy, for which M. Duchatelet was so
remarkable. He was a man, who devoted his whole life to the prosecu-
tion of sanitary researches, and was among the first and the chief of
those eminent French physicians, whose statistical enquiries on medical
subjects, have given quite a new aspect to the knowledge of disease.
He spent the last eight years of his life in collecting and arranging the
materials for his work on prostitution; a work which for its accuracy, its
benevolent spirit, and its interesting details, is of surpassing value. It is
of prostitution in the city of Paris, that he treats : but as its character
is essentially the same in all places, except as far as regards the
peculiar surveillance of the Police in Paris, his description will give
us a very true idea of the subject in our own large towns.
The question first arises “what is a prostitute?” To this the law
answers, that it is one, who openly and with little or no distinction of
persons, sells her favors for money: and who with this object endea-
vours to make herself publicly known as a prostitute. On the contrary,
the woman, who does not court notoriety, but admits few lovers and in
secret, although she receive money, cannot, and dare not, under pen-
alty of damages for libel, be called a prostitute. This distinction is
in Paris of great importance, for the police of that city exercise a
surveillance over all the public prostitutes, who are obliged to enrol
themselves in a registry, to receive sanitary visits &c., while they have
no control over any other women. Hence the numbers, habits of life,
and destiny of the prostitutes are much better known in Paris, than in
any other city: and this gave M. Duchatelet facilities for gathering
information, which he could have had nowhere else.
The number of prostitutes in Paris can thus be readily calculated,
and is found to be much less, than the public opinion, ever prone to
exaggeration on such matters, computes it. In 1831 there were about
B


-3500 prostitutes in Paris. Very few of these, not more than 40 or 59,
were foreigners ; the rest were all Frenchwomen, of whom Paris alone
furnished about half. The great majority are the daughters of working
men, small tradesmen, and all the poorest classes of the community;
very few indeed are from the upper classes. In Paris the proportion of
illegitimate children and of foundlings among them, is estimated at
about one-fourth. Their numbers in the towns of this country are not
known ; but probably they are much greater in proportion to the in.
habitants than in France, where the moral code is not nearly so strictly
observed by the rest of the sex as in this country, and where therefore
they are not in such demand. The Bishop of Oxford estimated the
prostitutes in London at 80, 000 ; the magistrate Colquhoun at 60,000;
but probably these numbers are exaggerated. However there is no
doubt that in this respect as in almost all others, prostitution is a far
graver evil in this country than on the continent.
Prostitutes may be divided into two classes, viz, those who live to-
gether in an establishment under the superintendence of a mistress; and
those who live singly, whether in hired rooms of their own, or without
any fixed abodes; lodging by the night, wherever fortune or misfortune
may send them. Establishments of the former description are called
in France, Maisons publiques, or Maisons tolerees, (public, or tolerated
houses,) from the fact that the police administration grants them per-
mission to be opened in certain localities. It does so, because it has
found by long experience, that the presence of such houses is much more
favourable to the public tranquility, than that each girl should live
separately ; as these houses have a character to support, and their mis-
tresses are careful to avoid any disturbances whicn would damage their
interests; and moreover they are much more easily brought under the
inspection of the police. When any one wishes to set up a house of
this kind in Paris, she has to apply for permission to the Prefect of the
Police ; who grants it or not, according as the applicant is considered
a fit person, or the locality where she wishes to reside, a suitable one.
These houses are not permitted in any quiet part of the town, where the
inhabitants are all of the richer classes; nor close to a church, or
school, as they would there present too striking a contrast; but in the
populous streets they are confounded in the crowd. The police are
always willing to tolerate them in the lowest parts of the town, as they
purge, as it were, and collect into one focus, much of the vice and dis-
sipation of the locality; and are a much better guarantee for the public
tranquillity, than the private debauchery in the small taverns, &c.,
which leads to so much venereal disease and crime, and over which the
police have much less control.
These houses are kept by mistresses, (dames de maison) who carry
them on as a speculation, and sometimes make large fortunes by them.
These women have in many cases been themselves prostitutes, and
have, like many of that class, looked forward to this position as the
height of their ambition; others have been kept mistresses; others
again are married women, though the latter are found only in the poor-
est localities in Paris, where their husband probably keeps a neigh


bearing tavern, and they mutually share the profits. These house-
mistresses, having obtained permission to open such a house, receive
into it a certain number of girls, to whom they give board, lodging, and
clothes, all of the most sumptous kind. For this the girls give in
return all the money they receive from visitors, none of which they are
allowed to retain. This is the French agreement, but in this country
I believe they generally keep a share of their gains, while they pay for
their board, clothing, &c. In Paris the mistresses, who are for the
most part, indeed it may be said almost without exception, of the most
rapacious character, treating the girls worse than the most unfeeling
labourer does his beasts of burden, sending them away without the least
compunction the moment their charms have ceased to be productive,
and hence cordially detested by all—vie with each other in making the
living and clothing of their establishment, which is all the girls have
to look for, as alluring as possible. They have no pity on the unfor-
tunates, who are never permitted to refuse any suitor, however repug-
nant to them. All of them have this peculiar characteristic, that they
think their occupation as justifiable as any other mode of industry, are
very jealous of the dignity of their position, and enraged at any slight
shown towards them. They exact from their girls the greatest defe-
rence, which is often very useful in maintaining their influence, and
keeping order in the establishment. They live luxuriously, and thus
often become exceedingly fat. They use every means which flattery
and cajolery can suggest, to ingratiate themselves with those girls, who
by their beauty and attractions are a source of gain to them; but this
is generally solely for their own self-interest, and the deceit is rarely
successful.
But they have other and more shameful means of binding these un-
fortunates to themselves. They are always anxious to get the girls
some way into their debt, by lending them money to buy clothes, or
other luxuries; and as these debts are generally held sacred, they in
this manner hold them in their power. They frequently however sus-
tain great losses by the girls deserting them, and carrying off their
borrowed clothes, which are sometimes very valuable. There are
constant complaints at the police board of such thefts. At first the
complainants were advised to address themselves to the criminal tribu-
nal, for the police board does not adjudicate in crimes; but the house-
mistresses always shun anything which brings them before the public,
as this injures their establishment. Therefore the police are wont to
send for the culprits, and threaten them with prison, unless they restore
the stolen clothes; and if this fail, which seldom happens, they wait
till the girl is taken up for some public offence against decency, and
then increase the severity of the penalty.
It may seem strange that girls should be willing to expose them-
selves to infection, and to all the disagreeables of such a life, without
the prospect of any pecuniary gain; but this is owing to their, for the
most part, extremely destitute state, many not having even a rag of
their own to cover them. A large number of them are recruited from
the hospitals in Paris, to which the girls from the surrounding country
generally come, when suffering from venereal diseases; which, shame


fill to say, at the time when Duchatelet wrote, (viz., twentyyears ago;
I know not how it may be now,) were in many provincial places not
received into hospital. There are always several women in these large
hospitals in league with the house-mistresses, who are on the look out
for pretty country girls. They have also emissaries in many other
quarters; some in the country, as travelling agents, &c.; others in
town, such as the marchandes de toilettes, women who buy and sell
old and new articles of female dress, and having been for the most part
prostitutes themselves, tempt the servant girls, sempstresses, &c., to
follow the same course. The mistresses also frequently exchange their
girls with other establishments; although they generally bear towards
such establishments much ill-will and rivalry; and nothing so pro-
vokes these feelings, as if another have succeeded in luring away from
them a profitable inmate. To prevent the explosions of revenge, which
frequently followed such abductions by rivals in the neighbourhood,
the police thought it necessary to enact, that no girl should go to a
neighbouring house, in less than fifteen days after leaving her former
place.
Besides the gains which the girls earn by the ordinary exercise of
their calling, the mistresses often make large sums, by allowing them
to be taken out by the day or week, to pleasure parties in the country,
or elsewhere. For this they receive from one to four or five pounds,
according to the beauty, and still more the agreeability, of the girl.
They also make much money, by letting their apartments as receiving
rooms for an hour or two. In Paris they are obliged to take a whole
house for their establishment; and therefore they let those rooms, which
they do not require, to single prostitutes, who pay an exorbitant rent
for them, and also for clothes, &c.; or else give a certain proportion or
all their gains. These houses are in general very profitable to the pro-
prietors, for they let at a high rent, and as soon as one tenant quits,
another eagerly takes them; for when a house has once been used for
this purpose, it continues to be so ever afterwards. Numberless peti-
tions are sent in to the police by the residents in any locality, even the
very lowest, where a house has been established, against this nuisance;
but these are never listened to, and the police answer, that the same
objections might be made in every quarter.
The house-mistresses, if they be orderly and provident, sometimes
make large fortunes, with which they may withdraw to the country,
and purchase a property. If however they be disorderly and spend-
thrift, and especially if they have several lovers, whom they entertain,
and in whose society their attention to their establishment is distracted,
they infallibly become bankrupt. Some grow old and die in the
business, and bequeath it to their successors, perhaps an old servant
or confidant; one or two of whom are always found in these houses,
where they do the household work, help the mistress in her marketings,
stand at the door to indicate the nature of the establishment to the
passers by, &c.; having generally themselves grown old in a life of
prostitution.
The other class of prostitutes are those who live separately , each pro-
■naing for herself and being her own mistress. This life is much more


to the taste of the girls, for a lore of freedom and independence is one of
the most, marked characteristics of the class. In this mode of living,
their gains belong to themselves; they can if they please make some
choice among their suitors; and they can change their abode when they
please, and exercise their calling, now in one quarter of the town now in
another, and on holidays in the suburbs round Paris. Thus it was found
by the police that the number of girls in the tolerated houses, was very
small, nntil the enactment of several regulations, imposing restrictions on
some of the practices of the separate girls; such as their inviting men on
the public street, appearing in gaudy costumes, or stationing themselves
in the Palais Royal and other public places; but since these regulations,
the number of girls in the houses rose to one-third of the whole number
of prostitutes.
Some of the independent prostitutes live in furnished rooms of their
own, and in these a few of them receive their visitors; but more frequently
they take them to a receiving house (maison de passe), where rooms are
let by the hour or more, at a certain sum. These receiving houses are
resorted to by all, who either have no home, where they can receive a
lover, or wish to do so in secrecy, such as married women, maidservants,
&c.; the latter of whom find time when going a message, to spend half-
an-hour in these places, without losing their character. Some of them
are especially frequented by the actresses, who are so numerous a class in
Paris. Many endeavours have been made by the police to bring these
receiving houses, which Duchatelet says are far more dangerous to morals
and to health, than the tolerated houses, under their control; but no
practicable method could be found ; so they were contented with enforc-
ing the residence of at least two registered prostitutes in the house, which
acted as a check on the mistress, preventing her from aiding in the pros-
titution of children, and other offences ; and also necessitating frequent
sanitary visits to the house, which kept it under the eye of the police.
The isolated prostitutes frequent all the public places, the crowded
streets, theatres, and other places of amusement, where they attract their
visitors. They frequently become inmates of the tolerated houses for a
time; and the girls in these houses, on the other hand, are as constantly
changing to the separate mode of life; indeed nothing is more charac-
teristic of the class than their necessity of locomotion, and restless change
of place. At one time this was pushed to such an extreme in Paris, that
they used to change their abodes once a week ; and the police had to enact
that they should stay at least twenty-five days in any tolerated house
they might go to, in order to check the great confusion caused by this
restlessness.
While one division of the isolated girls live in a room of their own, there
is another very large class, who have no fixed lodgings; but live, as many
thousands of the poorest workmen and vagrants in Paris prefer to do,
from night to night in any place where chance may lead them. The
lodging houses (garnis) to which they resort, are of the most miserable,
squalid, tumble-down description, that imagination can conceive; the
stairs covered with filth and ordure, the beds full of vermin. Here quarters
are given at from one to three-pence a-night; and the poor prostitutes,


here as elsewhere, are treated as those who have no friends, and made to
pay more than others. These lodging houses have always been a thorn
in the side of the police, for in them the prostitutes hide themselves, and
carry on their calling without submitting to the sanitary visits : and as
the police have no hold upon them, unless they be taken in the flagrant
act of prostitution, they almost always escape free, and spread vene-
real infection on every side.
A peculiar class of girls are those, who are called the soldiers’ girls ,
(Clllks a soldats.) These, who are always to be found in the neighbour-
hood of any place where soldiers are quartered, have in general followed
their lovers from the country up to Paris;' and then have been obliged to
take to prostitution, as a means of subsistence, separated as they are from
all their friends. They sell their favours at the lowest price, one or two-
pence, and even, the unfortunate ones, for a morsel of bread, which
they are too often in want of, their soldier lovers having nothing to
give them; for the French soldier receives only one penny a-day in Paris,
and a half-penny in the country. The generous fellows have been known
to half-starve themselves to give to their mistresses: so that a colonel of
a regiment, having detected the cause of the emaciation of some of his
men, gave orders that all should be searched on leaving the barracks;
but it was to no purpose, for the girls used to come under the windows,
and receive the bread thrown out to them. They sleep at night in the
lodging houses, and spend the day in the taverns and eating houses in the
neighbourhood of the barracks; where they dance and romp with the
soldiers, and retire with them to dark closets, (cabinets noirs,) in which
venereal contagion spreads like wild-fire. This mode of prostitution sets
at defiance the police, who cannot succeed in obtaining control over these
rebels; for their escape is always favoured by the tavern-keepers, to
whom the girls bring many customers, and cause a much greater amount
of drinking and other expenditure. They try therefore to have as many
girls as possible about their premises. Quantity is more regarded than
quality, and indeed this class of girls are for the most part dreadfully ugly;
so much so, as'Dnchatelet says, that “it is only with drunken men and
in the dark, that they could hope to find favour.” In these low taverns,
all sorts of criminals, thieves, pickpockets, &c., join in the amusement;
and the soldiers by mingling with them must necessarily lose in their
order and discipline.
There are other prostitutes'of a still lower class, who go by the name
of pierreuses (girls of the stones) from the fact that, in consequence of their
abject destitution, they often pass the night in unfinished buildings, in
outhouses, or wherever they can find a place to lay their head. They hate
generally grown old in a life of prostitution, and are so hideously ugly,
that they seek dark, sombre, and deserted places to hide their appearance.
The name by which they call themselves, “ masturbaters,” (manuelles)
indicates that their usual method of exciting and satisfying the' sexual
appetites, is anything but the normal one. In fact they are ready to lend
themselves to all those artifices and degradations of licentiousness, which
go under the name of unnatural vices. It is true that their natures are
excessively degraded; fear and hatred have, it can readily be believed,


well-nigh extinguished in their breasts the natural feelings of love and
kindness. Knowing the opinion of the world towards them, knowing the
treatment they have received from it, hatred and secret oturages against
the feelings of society have become their chief strength and support
against despair. If society have cast them forth, they have their revenge
in doing what they can to degrade and outrage the morality which scorns
them.
I may take this opportunity of saying a few words on the subject of
unnatural vices. These are said to be very common in Paris, in London,
and other large cities; where every artifice that can whet a morbid and
sated sexual appetite, is in the crowd of human beings, not only devised,
but put in execution. A subject like this is generally held to be an un-
speakable one, as if it would soil both him who talks of it and those who
listen. Bat he who really loves truth, and his fellow creatures, has little
sympathy with this rose-water morality; which cannot bear to scrutinise
the deeds of our fellow-beings, nor even to hear of things which are daily
done and suffered. Such scruples are as alien to the heart of the true
moralist, as it would be for the true physician to shun the infectious dis-
ease, or to fly from the disagreeables of the dissecting room and dead-house.
The very dread of approaching such subjects shows an inherent weakness
and effeminacy in the mind, which all who desire really to aid their
fellow creatures, should endeavour to divest themselves of. It is not the
duty of the physician or moralist alone, to investigate the various phases
of disease and crime; every one should be so much of a physician as at
least to be willing to hear of, and seek to benefit all human ills, whatever
be their nature. One of the chief reasons, why the mind of woman is so
undeveloped, and her character so unreal and effeminate, is, that she is
debarred from studying the phases of vice or crime in the moral world, as
well as disease and decay in the physical; an error in her education,
which destroys her powers of usefulness in vast numbers of the most
serious evils of her fellow-beings. What can one do for others, if he or
she do not know their real lives and their real actions? if they shrink
back in dismay at every step, from the hideous forms of sin, which meet
them, when they approach the realities of human suffering ?
Sodomy, or the intercourse of two persons of the same sex, is common
enough, especially in the prisons, where the most uneducated and de-
graded of the community, being shut up together, and left in idleness,
take this mode of passing the listless hours. Instances now and then
occur in venereal hospitals, of gonorrhoea or chancre of the anus, which
the patients, when pressed hard, either confess, or tacitly admit to have
been contracte Iby these unnatural practices; although at first, they
always deny that the disease has sued an origin, and ascribe it to an
unclean water-closet, &c. The same diseases are much more frequently
seen in the female venereal hospitals, especially in the one annexed to the
prostitute prison; and Duchatelet remarks, that there are very few of the
older prostitutes, who do not lend themselves to these practices, as well
as many of the younger ones. However they always maintain an obsti-
nate silence, when questioned on this point. Voltaire,Rabelaisandother


writers (like Juvenal and Martial, under the Roman empire) mate
several allusions to these practices: showing thaf even monarchs (for
Instance Frederic the Great) were habitually guilty of them; and this
proves that they must exist to a considerable extent. Evils of such
gravity point to a serious want of reverence for nature; and demand a
much more earnest treatment, than either jesting allusions, or impotent
avoidance of the subject.
There is yet another unnatural sexual habit of much greater import-
ance from its great frequency, on which M. Duchatelet gives some most
interesting details. It is the mutual loves between prostitutes themselves;
which are so common that, he says, about one fourth of their number
engage in them, including almost all the older ones ; who are naturally
the most depraved. This class are called tribade% , and the singular sexual
relation they bear to each other, much resembles the unnatural custom
of lovers among the Greek youth ; who, like these prostitutes of the
present day, made it rather a boast to despise the other sex. In this
singular connection, two prostitutes enter into sexual relations with each
other, with all the ardour, impetuosity, and tenderness of passion,
that the most intense normal sexual love could inspire. They devote
themselves to each other, and practice together all devices of unnatural
voluptuousness. They feel for each ocher all the conflicting sexual pas-
sions, now burning with jealousy, now melting with tenderness; they
are distracted at separation, and follow each other every where. If the
one be committed to prison, the other gets herself also arrested, and they
seek to leave it together. They are much more jealous of desertion by
their female lover than by a male one ; and if one has proved false, her
companion will seek revenge in every way. It is chiefly in the prostitute
prisons, where they are confined for breaches of the public decorum, that
such connections are formed. Here young girls are shut up together, often
for several months at a time ; and thus it is not to be wondered at, that
they take to such practices, just as the male criminals do in the common
prisons. It is generally the older ones, who have been frequently in
prison, who cajole and entice the younger into such connections;
and the most ardent passion is generally found on the side of the younger.
“ Thus,” says Duchatelet, “ they become in their old age more dangerous
for their own sex, than they have been in their youth for the other.”
This class of unnatural lovers is generally recognised by the rest of the
prostitutes, who regard them with something of the general feeling of
disgust, and are not sparing in sarcasms, and sly allusions towards
them. They themselves veil all their practices in the greatest secrecy;
and, if ever questioned on the subject, answer indignantly, “Weave
for men, and not for women,” (nous sommes pour hommes, et non pas
pour femmes.) Many of the older prostitutes come at last to abhor all'
men, and take pleasure only in these unnatural relations; a singular and
significant fact in these unfortunates, whose sexual experiences with the
other sex have been so painful and degrading.
In reviewing the whole subject of unnatural vices, I feel a deep and
earnest conviction, that it, like all others connected with the sexual
desires, requires to be regarded in a very different light, from that, which


is usual at present. One of the greatest causes of all irregularities in the
sexual appetites is the destructive checks, obstacles, and degradations,
to which they are exposed in their normal course. This has been shown
to be the chief cause of masturbation, and so it is of these unnatural
practices. The present harsh views of sexual morality give, at the
outset, an underhand and degraded position to all unmarried inter-
course, which is very favourable to the growth of the unnatural propen-
sities. If even the normal sexual love be obliged to fly from the
eyes of men, to hide itself in cabinets noirs, or other shameful retreats,
what can we expect, that it will not degenerate into ?
Again, all these vices have met with an opprobrium, far greater than
they deserved; for the public mind loses all sense of justice, when it comes
to consider a sexual fault, and is always far too harsh in its judgments.
I should say, that of all acts none are viewed with such unjust severity,
as these unnatural vices. A sentence which is too severe, is always, like
Draco’s laws, a very evil one; not based on natural justice, it rather
provokes people into the commission of the acts it reprobates; which,
like all those that are forbidden with a harshness and mystery unsuited to
their gravity, have a kind of fascination for man. The moral guilt
ascribed to such acts, which many people regard with as much horror and
indignation as they do murder, incendiarism, or other crime of the first
magnitude, is quite out of proportion to the physical evil they really cause;
and this unsound physical basis shakes, as it will do in every case, the
moral superstructure.
The true mode of eradicating these unnatural vices, is not to regard
with horror and merciless disgust those who indulge in them; but with a
loving and reverential spirit to examine into their nature, and remove
their causes by the light of a true physical religion. Vice and crime are
not to be bullied, nor suppressed, by any amount of so-called virtuous
indignation; they depend on fixed and definite causes in our social
circumstances, and till these can be changed, all our indignation and
disgust are thrown to the winds. As long as the present obstacles continue
to the gratification of the normal desires; as long as all unmarried love
is regarded in a harsh and degrading light; so long will prostitution
and unnatural vices flourish, and it will be out of human power to sup-
press them.
These observations lead me to an allied subject, namely, clandestine
prostitution. By this is meant the prostitution of young girls before the
age of puberty; an offence which is in France a criminal one, cognisable,
and severely punishable, by the legal tribunals. Notwithstanding these
laws, it is practised to a great extent in Paris, but in the most secret way.
All kinds of devices are taken to hide it from the police. Thus the young
girls or children of from ten to fourteen years of age, having been enticed
into this life by some procuress, are either kept by a woman, who passes
for their mother; or they merely go to play in her rooms during
the day, by which artifice they can be said not to be kept on the premises;
or perhaps a woman leads them about asking charity, or with other pre-
texts, to the hotels or houses where they may be required. All kinds of
stratagems are resorted to, to escape the police, and thus they are very
rarely detected. When they are so, it is generally from information


given either by a house-mistress, jealous of her illicit rivals, or by some
one who has received venereal infection from the children ; for diseases
rage among these poor children with the greatest virulence, and they are
a focus of infection. The cause of this severity of the diseases among
them, is the dread of exposure, which prevents their mistresses from
applying for medical aid for them. The little girls of course acquire the
most dissipated habits ; and often, at the age of ten or twelve, are well-
versed in every kind of debauchery. Even when the police do get infor-
mation, they can scarcely ever succeed in convicting the offenders. In the
first place it is necessary to have a search warrant to enter the house and
then the girls must be caught in the flagrant act of prostitution ; so that
the parties almost always escape, as their character is generally supported
by their neighbours, so ingeniously is this prostitution concealed.
There is yet another class of prostitutes, who should be mentioned.
These are the thievish ones, a very numerous class. They are generally
in league with pickpockets and other thieves, among whom they have
their lovers and their bullies. Some of these girls are in the habit of
accosting old men, and those who are least likely to follow them. When
repulsed, they still persist; and when shaken off, they raise a tumult,
or else pick the pockets of their victims. Others will follow a raw and
inexperienced youth, and surround him fn a band ; and while he is defend-
ing himself from their pressing invitations, they treat him in the same
way. Others watch and dodge drunken people. Many of the compara-
tively honest class of prostitutes do not hesitate to take any stray article
from the pockets of their visitors ; but this they scarcely call stealing, it
is only “ minding their business.’’ Those of the higher classes however,
are generally above such actions, and the only thefts, which they are
often guilty of, consist in the clothes lent them by the house-mistresses.
Few of the above thefts meet with punishment; for in general those who
are robbed, do not like to prosecute, fearing the laughter or ridicule of
society, and are contented to take their losses as an experience.
Besides the above-mentioned varieties of professed prostitutes, there
• are other classes, who either follow similar courses in a private way, or
who in different modes aid prostitution. Those who go under the name
of femmes galantes (courtezans), are for the most part kept-mistresses, who
admit other lovers in order to increase their means of expenditure. Their
great solicitude is to conceal their amours from those who keep them;
and thus.they do not openly expose themselves, but allow themselves to
be followed to their houses or to a convenient place, by those who are on
the look-out for women of this class. They put a higher price on their
favours, than the others; and are often very attractive from the more
select society they keep. The actresses also form a class, who have their
peculiar manners and attractions. In Paris, where all modes of life
abound, there are some women, who receive their lovers only during cer-
tain hours in the day ; after which they shut their door, and spend the
evenings with their own favourite lovers at the balls and theatres. One
of them, (to give an idea of the various methods they adopt,) guaranteed
the health of all her visitors ; to secure which, she admitted only a select
company of some fifty married men. who were allowed to join the society only
with the consent of the rest, and were excluded if they became widowers.


The class of procuresses (proxenetes) is a large one, and plays ah impor-
tant part. They are for the most part women, who have been themselves
prostitutes; and when age or other causes have made them abandon this
mode of life, they make it their business to bring into it as many young
girls as possible. They are in league with the house-mistresses, who pay
them according to their success. Very many of them are marchandes de
toilettes, and buy and sell articles of dress and of the toilette to servants
and ladies-maids, whom they do all they can to seduce to prostitution.
Another set of women, called marcheuses (duennas) are the domestics
in tolerated houses, and are generally old prostitutes, who have acquired
great skill and tact in the exercise of that calling. Their business is to
stand at the door of the house to show its nature, and also to walk about
with the girls, and oiler them adroitly to the passengers. These women
are always in greater demand, when the police regulations are more
strict.
Having thus given a sketch of the various classes of prostitutes, let ns
now inquire into their mode of life. Nine-tenths of them, says Ducha-
telet, spend their leisure time in complete idleness; lounging on a sofa
or in bed, with scarcely the energy to go through the fatigue of dressing.
Those of the lower class spend the day in taverns, where they eat and
drink to excess, and talk with the idle characters who frequent these
places.. These excessive indulgences of the appetites are common to
almost all prostitutes; and the latter, namely drinking, forms the greatest
and most dangerous vice of the life they lead. Many of them eat as much
as would serve three or four ordinary women; and to this and to their
indolent life is to bo ascribed the excessive fatness, to which they frequent-
ly attain. The grand vice of drinking however, is their bane; almost all
of them drink to a greater or less degree. In the lower classes, drunken-
ness is almost habitual, and often plunges them into a slough of despond,
physically and morally hopeless. The unfortunates are led to this ruinous
habit at first, from the wish to banish care, and escape from thought and
the stings of conscience; and it grows rapidly upon them. There is
another reason which operates with this class, that the soldiers and work-
men with whom they consort, think that if a girl does not drink, it is
because she is diseased; knowing as they do the evil effects of drink upon ve-
nereal disease in themselves. Thus the unhappy girls are often forced to
drink even against their inclination ; and after several such orgies with
different parties, they may be seen reeling along the streets, lying down
in door-ways, or, if more sober, begging an asylum at the police-stations.
Another cause which leads to their drinking, especially in this country,
is to get over the feelings of shyness and bashfulness, felt by the girls
themselves on first taking to this mode of life; and frequently by those
also who are unused to the society of such girls.
The prostitutes of a higher class, rarely get drunk, as they know this
would alienate all their suitors ", but they drink large quantities of punch
and wine, and this in time often leads to the same calamitous results.
Few of them engage in sewing or other work in leisure hours, and still
fewer in reading, though of course there are exceptions; and among their
numbers there are some of considerable musical accomolishments.' ' From


the Kabit they have, of always trying to drown serious reflection, they
come generally to have a peculiarly unstable fickle character of miod. It
is very difficult to fix their attention for any time upon a subject, or to
make them follow a train of reasoning. They have an extraordinary
love of locomotion, change of scene, and of action ; tumult is a favourite
element, for tempests drown the still small voice within.
Children of impulse, there are yet many impulses to which they are
rarely false ; among others to a strong esprit du corps, which induces the
friendless sisterhood, never to desert each other in adversity. If one of
them be unwell, or in destitution, they haste to offer her aid, even if they
have to strip themselves in so doing. In leaving the prison or hospital, if
one have no clothes, the others will lend her parts of their own apparel, even
though they may have had previous experience of her ingratitude. Some
have been known to aid in the support of poor old men, or other helpless
beings ; and not a few enter on this mode of life, to support infirm parents
or starving orphans. They make common cause against the police,
whom they all regard as their sworn enemies; and rarely inculpate each
other.
Besides the peculiar instability of character, the class is distinguished
for its lying habits. Viewing all men as their enemies, trying at first to
deceive their parents and afterwards the police, being obliged constantly
to feign unreal feelings in their unnatural mode of life, their singleness
of nature becomes at last completely perverted, and it is as difficult to fix
them as the wind. The young ones are not well versed in this deceit,
and frequently contradict themselves, but the older ones are great adepts
in it: and hence those who busy themselves with the reformation of
prostitutes, such as the sisters of charity and other well-meaning persons,
have great distrust of the latter; and no girl above 25, or under 18 years
of age is admitted into the Magdalen asylums in Paris.
With regard to the feelings, which they entertain towards their visi-
tors, it may be said as a general rule, that when once the fresh appetite
for sexual gratification is over, they remain very indifferent to them;
although there are certainly many, in whom the sense of sexual enjoy-
ment remains keen for a long time, and who may continue this mode of life
with no other purpose than to gratify their insatiable desires. This gene-
ral apathy to the venereal pleasures is probably the reason why prostitutes
suffer so little from their sexual excesses. The evils of excess are, I
believe rarely seen in them; but rather in young married women, in whom
sexual intercourse is attended by the normal sensations.
If the heart of the prostitutes remains in general icy cold towards the
common crowd of those, with whom they consort, it is always warm
towards some favourite lover, who is really dear to them, and on whom
they lavish all their fondness. These, their real lovers, are not only ad-
mitted in general to their favours free of expense, but many receive
presents from their mistresses; and not a few young men in Paris are
maintained entirely by the gains of their prostitute mistresses. When a
girl enters a tolerated house in Paris, she always stipulates for her lover’s
admission, it may be three or four times a-week, free of expense; and
these and other privileges are granted,'Tor without them the girls would


uot remain. These lovers are the bane of the house-mistresses. They are
taken from all classes of society. The girls of a higher class generally
choose some of the better ranks, preferring generally the students of law,
medicine, or other branches. Those of the middle classes, take their
lovers from among the tradespeople and shopmen, such as the journeymen
tailors, jewellers &c. The lowest class choose theirs among the soldiers or
workmen, and often from among the thieves and vagabonds of all descrip-
tions, who are so rife in large capitals. The lowest class of sweethearts
go by the name of bullies or supporters (souteneurs.) Their part is, to
screen as mu' has possible, their mistresses from the police; if the girls
wish to do anything against the regulations, their friends keep guard, and
give warning, if any police inspector be seen approaching. If the girls
be apprehended, their lovers try to raise a tumult, and by crowding the
inspector, to rescue them. Sometimes they even come to blows. Again if
any one has brought to punishment a girl, by whom he has been robbed,
or who has given him a disease, the bullies, if they get hold of him, will
not fail to take revenge, by serving him some ill turn. Hence this class
of sweethearts is a thorn in the side of the police, who have often sought
to put them down, but without success. They often act most tyranically
towards the girls, over whom they have gained an ascendancy; they
learn whenever the latter have gained any money, and force them to
spend it with them in drinking; so that the bond, by which their unfor-
tunate mistresses are attached to them, is often one of fear rather than of
love.
Indeed, it is rare that a prostitute meets with a return of affection from
her favourite: on the contrary, this very tie, which the friendless one
clings to, to fill the void in her breast, often proves the crown of her
afflictions. The girls of the higher class are very often forsaken by their
lovers, and suffer all the pangs of jealousy ; a passion, of which all pros-
titutes are more susceptible than perhaps any other connected with love ;
while the lower classes often receive the most barbarous treatment from
their tyrants, which their love frequently induces them to endure to a
most incredible degree.
We can however conceive how this may be, when we reflect how
much greater charms has reality, however painful, than the most
splendid delusions; and what is nine-tenths of the life of a prostitute, but
a tissue of delusions and counterfeits—feigned love, feigned pleasures
everything feigned, but grief and embitterment; from which unrealities,
they turn with double eagerness to their own trueloves, the oases of their
desert, however many disappointments or real anguish they may bring.
With their lovers it is their delight to visit places of amusement, especially
the dancing parties and public balls, which in Paris are so numerous, and
afford so much happiness to youth; to exchange letters, burning with
protestations of the most fervent passion, in which no obscene expressions
are to be found; to share in fine “ the hope, the fear, the jealous care ”
of love, even though its pain should so often predominate over its
pleasures. If they ever become pregnant, they almost always ascribe this
state to their lovers; for they have the very general belief, which prevails
among women, that it is only when they love a man, and have an active


share in the enjoyment of the venereal act, that they can be impregnated;
a belief not warranted by science, (or besides the numberless instances,of
women having children by those, whom they disliked or resisted, it has
been shown, that even the introduction of semen into the vagina without
coition, has in the lower animats been followed by fecundation. Still,
very probably, there is some truth in the belief; and the subject certainly
requires more elucidation, like all others connected with the intricate
question of reproduction.
It is well known that pregnancies are comparatively very rare among
prostitutes; a fact which is admitted by Duchatelet, though ho shows
that they are considerably more frequent, than is generally supposed.
The reasons why they are so rare, arcchiefly, the very intemperate and un-
natural life which prostitutes lead, venereal diseases which often obstruct
the entrance of the semen into the womb, subacute ovaritis, or adhesions
between the fallopian tubes and peritoneum, brought on by venereal ex-
cesses ; especially, it may be supposed, when these are indulged in during
menstruation. Even during menstruation the work of prostitution suffers
no interruption ; for they make use of some means, by which they prevent
the discharge from being apparent. Duchatelet, who mentions this, does
not tell explicitly what these means are, from scruples which are very
unsatisfactory to the investigator of truth; but we may suppose, that it
is by some delicate membrane of similar materials with the sheath, with
which they cover the vagina so as to retain the discharge. This means
was also used to conceal disease from the sanitary examiners; but this
deceit is now too well known to the medical men to be available.
Such abnormal excesses interfere greatly with menstruation, which in
prostitutes is very often irregular, and absent for long periods. Several
of these cases of amenorrhoea are owing to pregnancy, and are terminated
by abortion; which is very common among prostitutes, and partly explains
the rarity of childbirth. These abortions frequently occur at an early
period of pregnancy, and are caused by their intemperate mode of life,
rarely by criminal practises. Cases however do sometimes occur, in whch
death has been inflicted on the young foetus by abortions, intentionally
produced by instrumental means; and others where girls have been nearly
killed by drugs taken by them for the same purpose. But these attempts
are rare, for in general pregnancy is not at all dreaded by prostitutes;
nay, it is often the object of their desires. Instead of diminishing, it
increases their gains in a town like Paris, where everything at all out of
the common renders a girl much sought after; such as, to give other
examples, very tall or extremely diminutive stature, or even deformi-
ties, such as a humpbacked or crippled person, &c. Besides, child-birth,
which to the modest unmarried girl is an object of the greatest dread,
bringing with it, as it does, degradation in the eyes of the world, is rather
ennobling to the prostitute, who takes a pride in fulfilling the maternal
duties in the most tender manner ; feeling that nothing raises her more
in the opinion of others, and of herself, than having something really to
love. Ilence they are very fond mothers, and are tended in child-bed
with the greatest attention and care by the other girls. The infant
when born, becomes the object of tho general care; and each vies


with the other in performing towards it all the necessary acts of
kindness.
As for the ultimate fate of these poor infants, everything proves that,
almost without exception, they soon die, much to the grief of their mothers.
Their premature deaths are to be ascribed to the intemperate lives of their
parents, amid whose frequent intoxication and exposure to the inclemen-
cies of the weather, they cannot long survive. The prostitutes rarely
send their children to the foundling hospital, at which so many children
are reared in Paris.
Having given this short sketch of the manners and morals of this class,
let us now direct our attention to their physical life; without a knowledge
of which, our materials for judging of any human being are always of
necessity most incomplete. Is prostitution injurious to the health ? is a
question which few moralists have taken the trouble of asking, in their
stormy denunciations of the subject; and yet it is one so vitally impor-
tant, that it may be called, like all other physical facts, the keystone of
the whole. Duchatelet, after enumerating the diseases to which prosti-
tutes are liable, for all of which be has statistical data, comes to the con-
clusion, which he says is a very striking and sad one, that their mode of
life with all its intemperance, and exposure to infection and inclemencies
of the weather, is a mnch healthier one on the whole, than that of the
needlewomen, sempstresses, and other females, whose occupations are of
a sedentary and nnrelaxing nature. Thus then, in one respect, the phy-
sico-moralist will acknowledge that the life of the latter classes is a more
sinful one than that of tho prostitutes; and for him who reverences the
physical equally with the moral laws of health and virtue, this is readily
intelligible; for certainly the lifeof motion, sexual exercise,leisure,plenty
of food, and variety of circumstance is much more healthy, and therefore
more physically religious, than the constraint, hard work, and animal
torpor, to which our unfortunate sempstresses are confined; a state of
sin against the natural laws, no less than of misery, which the physico-
moralist must blame, if blame is ever to find its way between the loving heart
andthe sorrows of humanity. It is true that the unhappy ones cannothelp
their own sedentary and ruinous pursuits, that thy are fixed into them
by the iron hand of necessity; butthat does not make them less unnatural,
and opposed to all the laws of moral and physical health.
The two greatest physical dangers to the prostitute are syphilis and
drinking. Of the former I shall speak hereafter, in inquiring into the
social question of its prevention. If it were not for the latter, namely
drinking, a great part of the destruction moral and physical, attendant
on their mode of life, would be taken away. It is true that the evil effects
of it are not so prominent, as on those who work bard, especially at
sedentary occupations, these banes of civilization, and drink at the same
time; a combination of exhausting causes, which no constitution can long
withstand, and which gives rise to the ghastly lives and early deaths of
our most wretched weavers, sweated tailors, and other unhappy classes,
for whose bloody sweat, and miserable lives-in-death the heart of
England is groaning. The impulse and excitement moreover caused by
the sexual gratifications, give a buoyancy to the constitution, which enable


it to bear much more deleterious liquors, than it otherwise could; which
reasons account for the robust health, which prostitutes so often enjoy;
and which makes some physicians ascribe to them “frames of iroa'i
(sanies de fer.) Mr. Acton says, “I shall be borne out by the concur-
rent testimony of all observers in the statement, that no class of females
is so free from general diseases as the prostitutes.’’ Still, drinking causes
the ultimate ruin of very many of them.
Besides the evils it produces, which tell on the constitution later in
life, causing diseases of the liver, kidneys, and blood-vessels, and making
them very subject to inflammatory diseases; the affections to which pros-
titutes are most subject are sexual ones, such as amenorrhcea, menorr-
hagia, &c., and also wonnds caused by violence. The uterine bleedings
are caused by the excesses of their life, which over-stimnlate the ovaries,
and doubtless are frequently consequent on the abortions, which are with
them so numerous.
Insanity is not uncommon among them; a fact which might have been
expected, from the very violent and unbridled passions, to which they are
subject; from the degraded, nuhappy, and therefore mentally unhealthy
condition in which they live; and from their extraordinary moral position;
so apt to cause perturbed and maddening reflections in these despised
pariahs of society. Ducbatelet was struck by the frequency of weakness
and imbecility of intellect, which he observed to be often urged, as a rea-
son for mitigating their punishment, by the police. This imbecility was
found, not among the young girls, but the old prostitutes, (among whom
are several from 40 to 50 nay even to 60 years of age,) who had sunk to'
the lowest degree of misery and degradation. The unfortunate creatures’ :
Let one but think of all their sufferings, the semi-consciousness of utter
degradation and the merciless contempt of their fellow-beings; the feel-
ings of revenge, hatred, and helplessness, ever growing feebler and feebler
within their labouring breasts, too weak to bear such inhuman burdens;
till at length reason, as if in pity, gives way ! Can we conceive how
much misery the growing sense of intellectual and moral decay in such
wretched circumstances brings with it ?
Every year many of these forlorn beings are sent, out of pity, to pass
the winter in prison, where at that season several idiotieal, mad, and
imbecile ones are always to be seen. M. Esquirol, the admirable phy-
sician of the great female lunatic asylum in Paris, shows by statistical
report that an average of twenty-one prostitutes annually, are received
into that establishment, which is a very large proportion. Their dis-
ease is chiefly due to excess in wine, or misery; the latter arising
from various causes, but principally from desertion by their sweet-
hearts. Erotomania (madness, whose distinguishing feature is, to
dwell on ideas of love and desire,) is almost unknown among these
patients; their thoughts are rather occupied by dreams of wealth,
power, and honours.
I now come to speak of the disease to which prostitutes are most of
all exposed, namely, syphilis, and of the social means which have been
taken in Paris to check its ravages. This disease, whose nature I have
described before, is, as Duchatelet justly remarks, perhaps the most


dreadful pestilence to which mankind is liable. Its effects are not,
like those of epidemic pestilences, limited to certain countries and
periods of time; but its extension is now universal over the surface of
the globe, and in all seasons it rages unabated. “If then," says Du-
chatelet, “ mankind have instituted quarantines and other methods of
preventing plague and cholera, should they not still more earnestly
endeavour to prevent a disease, so much more terribly and widely des-
tructive ; of which the chief victims are among the vigorous youth, the
most useful members of the state?”
Such praiseworthy motives have induced the Parisian authorities to
take sanitary measures for securing the health of prostitutes, who are
the centre point, whence syphilis is spread ; and their efforts have been
attended with signal success. These measures were first adopted with-
in the present century, and consist in the compulsory enregistration of
every prostitute in Paris, whose mode of life can be discovered by the
police; and periodical examinations of her state of health by medical
men appointed for the purpose. To secure these ends a great number
of regulations had to be made and methods adopted; all of which show
the consummate tact and management of the French police.
The city of Paris is divided into ten districts, for each of which there
is an inspector of police, whose duties are to attend solely to the sub-
ject of prostitution. These men have three duties entrusted to them.
Ist. the care of the public way; 2nd. the care of the houses of prosti-
tution ; 3rd. the search after those girls, who will not submit to the
enregistration, and also those who fail to appear at the sanitary visits.
In the first of these duties, they have to watch that no breach of public
decorum is made by a prostitute in the public street. ■ If any such
occur, they go up to the girl, make themselves known to her, and then
seek to prevail on her by persuasion, never by violence, to go with them
before the Police Board, or to follow them thither within a short time.
If this gentle intimation be not obeyed, they are instructed never to
use force, but to give information to the Board, who obtain constables
from the executive force, and send to apprehend the culprit. But it is
rarely necessary to have recourse to these means, as persuasion almost
always succeeds; the girls being aware that any resistance will aggra-
vate their punishment, while ready compliance and politeness to the
inspector will mitigate it. Again if an inspector see a girl, who is not
registered, either engaging in prostitution in a tolerated iiouse, or in-
viting people in the public street, or committing any offence against
public decorum, their duty is to apprehend her, and draw up a minute
account of all the circumstances under which she was taken, for the
police board, to which they bring her immediately. The girl will gen-
erally stoutly deny that she is engaged in prostitution ; and in such a
case the police, who must act with the utmost delicacy and caution,
dismiss her, and do not insist on registering her, till she has been
brought back three, oh sometimes four times, for similar offences,
which almost invariably happens. The inspectors have also to visit at
short intervals the tolerated houses, and see that all the police regula-
tions are there observed. Besides these duties, they have to seek out
s


the prostitutes, who fail to present themselves for sanitary exataina-
tion; a duty which is often very difficult. To be able to discharge
these various.functions, they require much intelligence and tact, to-
gether with an intimate knowledge of the appearance of all the prosti-
tutes in Paris; which they acquire from their presence at the registra-
tion, and frequent opportunities of seeing them.
The registration of prostitutes takes place in the three following
ways; the girls present themselves of their own accord to be enrolled;
or they are brought by the house-mistresses ; or by thejpolice inspect,
ors. In the first case, the girls, knowing the necessity of complying
with the police regulations, if they wish to follow such a calling, apply
spontaneously for registration; which is accorded to them, if, after a
minute examination into their past and present history, no sufficient
obstacle be found to their admission. In order to be certain of their
personal identity, they are obliged to produce their certificate of bap.
tism; and, as very few have it in their possession, the police send a
letter to the magistrate of the parish, of which the girl says she is a
native, asking for the certificate. If the girl have reached her majo-
rity, and thus be the mistress of her actions, the greatest delicacy is
observed in the wording of the letter, which does not mention for what
purpose, the certificate is required. But if she be a minor, this pur-
pose is expressly mentioned, and the magistrate is requested to com-
municate with her parents on the subject, so that they may, if they be
willing, take steps for her reformation; a thiug which however rarely
happens, as her family, in general, cast off the unfortunate one. After
receiving this certificate, assuring them of the real name of the appli-
cant; and having previously put a number of questions to her, whether
she be married or single, what are her reasons for adopting such a life,
and many other queries, meant to throw a light on her history and
character; the police give her a card, containing a declaration, to be
signed by the girl, of her willingness to submit to the police regula-
tions, and especially to the sanitary visits. The information received,
and observations subsequently made on the girl’s history, are preser-
ved in a special memorandum at the office. The tact which the officers
acquire, in judging of the character of the girls who come before them,
is rendered wonderfully acute by long experience; and it is very diffi-
cult for a girl to deceive them. If they find, after sending for the cer-
tificate, that a false name has been given, they try to induce the girl
by threats and various arguments to confess the truth; and if she will
not, they dismiss her, and keep her under observation, taking the
opportunity of adding to her punishment for any fault she may com-
mit; and by such means rarely fail to learn the truth. But it is
seldom that false names are given, for the girls know how much more
for their interest it is to comply willingly with the police regulations.
The age of sixteen is fixed upon as the lowest for registration, which,
in the case of minors, is conducted with great caution and delicacy; so
that it, is only when the parents are unwilling to receive them, or are
sunk in poverty or of bad character, that they are enrolled, though
they may have been often detected in the nractice of prostitution.


r: The next method of inscription is-when they are brought to the
office by the house-mistresses, who are directed under a penalty, to
bring every girl, who is received into their house, to the office, within
twenty-four hours after her arrival. Each house-mistress has a card
with the names of all her girls upon it, and the dates and results of
each sanitary visit. Duchatelet calculates that about one-third of the
whole number of prostitutes are thus enrolled, while one-sixteenth
.are brought by the inspectors, and nearly two-thirds come of their own
.accord.
After receiving their cards they are examined by a medical man,
who giy§» them a certificate of health or disease, according to which
they are either dismissed or sent to the hospital for treatment. They
.are thenceforth subjected to the police regulations, and obliged to sub-
mit to periodical examinations by medical men. The isolated girls
attend for this purpose once a fortnight at a dispensary, where they
are examined with the speculum, and dismissed or kept under treat-
ment accordingly, the day of their visit being marked on their card.
The girls in the houses are examined twice as frequently, namely once
a week, and if auy one be found diseased, the house-mistress is bound
to send her at once to the office, whence she is transferred to the vene-
real hospital; and if this be not attended to, and the girl be allowed
to have connection with any one in the meanwhile, a very severe
penalty is imposed on the house-mistress. If in any case the medical
man be not satisfied of the contagious nature of a disease, (which is
sometimes a most difficult question,) he consults with his colleagues ;
and if they be undecided, the girl is forbidden to exercise her calling
for a certain time, when another examination is made. All these exa-
minations are conducted with the utmost delicacy and propriety, so
that the prostitutes may be taught in all matters apart from their own
calling to behave with decorum; and by such means, together with
the attention of the police, the character of the prostitutes in Paris is
surprisingly improved in regard to propriety of behaviour.
Notwithstanding the more numerous examinations of the house-
girls than of the separate ones, the number of the former found dis-
eased is considerably greater than of the latter. Among the house-
girls in 1832 the average of disease was lin 2G; while among the
separate ones it was only lin GO. This may appear strange, but on
retlection the reasons for it will be evident. The single girls have it
in their power to choose their suitors, to examine them, and if they
please to make them adopt precautionary measures; while at the same
time they are not forced to receive nearly so many visitors as the un-
fortunate girls in the kept-houses, who are never permitted by their
inexorable mistresses to refuse any one, “even,” says Duchatelet,
“were he covered with ulcers.”
These preventive measures, as M. Duchatelet shows by statistical
tables, have been very effective in repressing disease. - Among the
lower orders of prostitutes, who will not submit to be enregistered,. or
to receive sanitary visits, and who sell their favours to crowds of the
poorer classes for very small suras, it is found on the contrary,


that when they are apprehended by the police, and examined,
they are discovered to be diseased in the immense proportion of l in
4. Their diseases are also of a much more severe character than those
to which the registered girls are subject, as the latter receive a timely
treatment. All physicians remark moreover, how very much milder
in form is the syphilis of the present day, than that with which they
were acquainted several years ago. This is probably to be ascribed,
not to any decrease of virulence in the syphilitic poison, (for, as Mr.
Acton says, “ the germ of the disease still lurks among us and in as
concentrated a form as ever”), but partly to the more rational medi.
cal treatment, particularly as regards the more sparing use of merit
cury; partly also to the care that is taken in Paris to attend in time
to the diseases of the prostitutes; and also in great measure, to the
very different provision that is now made in the hospitals and dispen-
saries, for the treatment of this disease.
Although the form of the disease may be on the whole milder than
formerly, it is still probably as frequent as ever; at least in this
country, where so little has been done to prevent it. Mr. Acton, whs
gives in his admirable work—probably the most complete we possess
on Venereal and Genital Diseases—many valuable statistics on this
subject, says, “ I doubt if venereal complaints were ever more common
than at present." Of the awful extent to which they have been peN
mitted to gain ground among us, the following facts will give us ah
idea. Mr. Acton shows, that in the Array i man in every sis annu.
ally attacked by venereal disease; in the Navy lin 7; and 2of every
7 sailors (in the merchant service) admitted into the Dreadnought.
In St. Bartholomew’s Hospital 1 in every 2 of the out-patients are
similarly affected, and in many other general hospitals and dispensa-
ries the case is nearly the same; while the Lock Hospitals are devoted
entirely to the treatment of these diseases. ; i' l
Syphilis is not to be regarded as a directly fatal disease; although
its effects are often so deplorable, especially in bad constitutions. In
London during the three years 1846—7 and —8, there were only 127
deaths (73 women and 54 men) caused by it. Infants and very young
children are those in whomit most frequently proves directly fatal. It
is indirectly that this disease, like gonorrhoea, is so very destructive to
life ; syphilis, by poisoning and debilitating the frame, and thus ex-
posing it to innumerable forms of disease; gonorrhoea, by inducing
affections of the genito-urinary organs, which are so very common and
dangerous. Indirectly there are probably lew diseases, which causes
greater amount of death, as well as of all forms of misery and destruc-
tion. In questioning patients in hospitals and dispensaries as to theit
previous history, how often is it found, that venereal disease has been
the first link of the chain, which is dragging them to the grave! '
Syphilis was first recognised in Paris in 1497; and in the subsequent
history of its treatment, we have one of the most fearful instances of
human barbarity to be found in the annals of history. For a long
time no hospital would receive syphilitic patients, and the poorer
classes of them were driven into the woods and fields, and left to di4


■without comfort and assistance even by medical ’men. ’ When at last
parliament passed a law, that they should be admitted into one of the
hospitals, every patient was well flogged before admission, which bar-
barism was rigorously carried into effect as late as 1700. But even
this inhuman treatment was only for the male sex ; unhappy woman,
as usual, was still more shamefully treated. Tor this sex no provi-
sion at all was made, as if they were unworthy of any feeling but con- 1
tempt; and we may picture to ourselves their miserable state as they
rotted gradually from the surface of the earth, unpitied and abandoned;
their hearts sickening with the bitterness of degradation, and racked
by that agony of indignation, with which even the dim sense of wrong
and injustice fills every human bosom. It was not till 1683 that a
small ward in an hospital was devoted to their treatment; and what a
ward 1 Imagination cannot call up a more hideous picture of filth and
neglect, than is presented by Duchatelet in his description of this place;
where the unhappy patients died in great numbers, or if they came out
alive, were reduced to walking skeletons. To obtain even this miser-
able treatment, it was necessary to wait for a period, not exceeding a
year, till it came to the patient’s turn to succeed to a vacant bed: for
there was provision for only one hundred patients, men and women
huddled together. This horrible state of things was still existing in
1787 ; soon after which time, through the noble exertions of a benevo-
lent physician, who was appointed to the hospital, better arrangements
were made.
Docs not our flesh creep on reading of such cruelties, as great proofs
of barbarism as the rack and the wheel ? and do we not feel what a
long score of ill-usage we have to efface by our future treatment of
Inch patients? And yet what is our treatment of them in the present
day of so-called enlightenment ? At the time when Duchatelet wrote,
in 1835, there were few hospitals throughout the provinces of France,
where venereal patients were received, and therefore the unhappy out-
casts were forced to drag their sores to Paris for treatment, which even
then they had often great difficulty in obtainingas any one will con-
ceive, who knows the imperfect provision made in respect of hospital
accommodation for the sick poor, and especially for those, against
whose complaints a narrow-minded physician may please to take a
prejudice. A few years ago syphilitic patients were not admitted into
the Middlesex hospital except by paying two pounds j and many
people refuse to subscribe to the Lock hospitals from conscientious
scruples. Hospital accommodation is much increased in Paris at the
present time, but in this country it is still a mere island in the ocean
of misery. How many hundreds are, of necessity, daily sent away
from our crowded hospitals, suffering from these and other diseases,
Whose tottering frames have scarcely strength to bear them from ; the
Place! . 1 , .
; :;But besides these deficiencies in hospital accommodation, which are
often perhaps unavoidable, are not the contemptuous and abhorrent
feelings, which so many still entertain towards the venereal diseases
sad their victims, but the remains of this miserable barbarism ? Who


ever at the present day is guilty of such feelings, would in a pass
generation have joined in the physical cruelties, which the better sense
of those physicians, the true apostles of physical religion, hive
laboured to overcome. It is the very essence of all religion, to do in
every case what is best and kindest to every human being. > ■ ■ it.
Since Duchatelet's time good hospital accommodation has been pro-
vided in Paris for venereal patients. The Hopital du Midi under the
care of it. Ricord, the Hopital du St. Lazare for prostitutes, of
L'Oursine for married women, &o. are all excellent institutions.
In speaking of this subject, I would say a few words on the Lock
H ospitals in' this country —for so the venereal hospitalsifor prostitutes
are repulsively termed. Of these 1 know nothing from personal ex-
perience, as medical students are not allowed to enter them; a privi-
lege confined to the physicians of the establishments. This exclusion
I earnestly protest against, as a part of the numerous exceptional
methods, in which venereal diseases are regarded in this country. On
the continent the venereal diseases of women are discussed, examined,
and explained to the students in the most open and satisfactory
manner; while here the mistaken feelings of a morbid delicacy are
allowed to stand in the way of the scientific progress of young phy-
sicians, and to prevent us from acquiring knowledge on a subject,
which is one of the most vitally important in our profession. Do not
those who wantonly deprive us of such valuable opportunities, expect,
that, when in future years our ignorance may cause to others the
greatest misery and to ourselves the keenest regret, we may exclaim,
“ the blood be upon their heads, who caused our ignorance.”
With regard also to the use of the speculum, which is now-a-days
so much talked of, the depreciating way in which it is often mentioned,'
is most painful to him who has physical religion at heart. The men
who have been most energetic in promoting the use of this instrument,
(whose value, like that of the stethoscope, cannot be too highly esti-
mated,) are spoken of with distrust and suspicion by many, whose
morbid notions of sexual delicacy are offended by this necessary means
of diagnosis. “It were better,” I have hoard it said, “ even that many
young girls should suffer for a time from genital diseases, than that
they should be virtually deflowered by such a means. Since its intro-
duction a morbid taste for such examinations has been spread abroad
among women, many cf whom even feign djsease in order to be sub-
jected to them ; which prurient feelings there are always plenty ot
quacks ready to gratify.” I cannot refrain from expressing the great-
est reprobation of such sentiments. The idea that any morbid feeling
of sexual delicacy should be allowed to interfere, one jot or one tittle,
with the adoption of every means in the least likely to remedy a dis-
ease, is diametrically opposed to all real virtue and duty. There is
nothing which more emasculates and denaturalises our society, than
the mystery and secrecy on these subjects ; than the morbid delicacy,
which forbids all open discussion of sexual matters, and thus gives an
unsound and superficial character to our various opinions, and to our
social intercourse; which proscribes all allusions to the sexual organs,


feeing careful even in our statues to cover them with the mystic fig-
leaf—the visible symbol of the want of nature, and of what may be
called the spiritual castration of our times.
, What wonder, that women have such distorted views on these' sub-
jects, when men—and even excellent men, utter such opinions as the
above ; and as the following observation of Duchatelet, which I take
to be the ne plus ultra of physical immorality. Speaking of some
prostitutes, who have adopted thpt mode of life, on account of blind-
ness preventing them from earning a livelihood in any other way, he
says, “ one could only reproach these unfortunates with not having
preferred to die!” Here an unhealthy spiritualism is thrown into
strong contrast with physical religion ; and the greatest of physical
sins, namely death, is thought preferable to a mode of life which is
by no means devoid of virtue, and of value to mankind.
When a prostitute wishes to relinquish her calling, and to return
again to society, as the vast majority do, (for Duchatelet takes great
pains to impress on us the fact, that prostitution is in most cases, only
a temporary interlude in life, lasting for from one to three years) her
name is erased from the register ; and in order to effect this, she must
apply to the office, stating her reasons for withdrawing, and the mode
of life she intends to adopt. The authorities decide, alter hearing her
account, whether she shall at once be struck off the list, or undergo a
term of probation; during which she is kept under the eye of the
police, who observe how she conducts herself in the new mode of life
she has adopted ; using the greatest delicacy and caution, so as not to
make known her past history. This measure has been found necessary-
in most cases: for otherwise girls would have made any specious
excuse, merely in order to be exempt from the police control and sani-
tary visits, and have secretly carried on their vocation. If it be found
that they conduct themselves well, their names are struck off the list.
Many never apply for their erasure, but leave Paris without giving
any notice ; and in these cases the police wait for three months, and if
no tidings of them be heard, their names are then expunged.
- I shall now speak of the prisons exclusively set apart for prostitutes,
■when they commit any offence acainst public decorum. The prison of
St. Lazare is devoted to this purpose, and its inmates average from
450 to 550. It is excellently appointed, the lower part of the build-
ing containing the working rooms, and the upper the bed-rooms; and
a spacious hall for promenading, in the midst of which is a water-
basin, with materials for washing clothes, is thrown open to the
■prisoners during several hours in the day. The prisoners are all em-
ployed in occupations of various kinds, adapted to their capacity and
previous habits; and this employment, which has only recently been
introduced, has been found to have admirable effect in promoting quiet
and order in the prison, which, prior to that, was the scene of the
greatest turbulence and indecency. They have wholesome food, and
are paid small sums for their work, with which they buy provisions at
a canteen in the prison. They cook their own meals at stoves in the
hall, and dine in pairs. It is often seen that a girl of a better .class.


Who receives money from her friends outside, as many do; shares her
dinner with a poorer girl. They are also fond of buying flowers, for
which the whole class have a great love; and distribute them among
their companions with much generosity. Sometimes one reads aloud
a novel or history, never an indecent work, and the others listen with
interest. They are frequently visited here, as well as in hospital, by
the benevolent sisters of charity, and always treat them with great re-
spect, nor are they ever known to ridicule them behind their back&
These well-meaning ladies talk with them and exhort them to choose
a better mode of life; but in general, says Duchatelet, the prostitutes
are not much influenced by their exhortations, as they think the ladies
are only discharging their duty, and they feel that the simple sister-
hood do not understand the circumstances of their lives. He who
knows the duty that man and woman owe to their sexual organs, will
pereceive that the life of voluntary celibacy led by these ladies, as by,
the priests, is, in a sexual point of view, quite as sinful a one, as that
of the prostitutes they endeavour to convert. i
Notwithstanding the improvements in prison discipline, consequent
on the introduction of work, there are still frequent disturbances and
quarrels ; besides other moral corruptions, which generally render a
girl more degraded at her dismissal, than at her incarceration. Such;
are the unnatural sexual relations, which girls enter into with each'
Other, when so suddenly deprived of their accustomed sexual gratifies-'
fions, and which are often cemented with their partner at meals. As-
for their physique, it is observed that they are usually fatter on quitting,
prison than on entering it. c
The offences for which they are incarcerated are all of a morah
nature, consisting of breaches of public decorum, and of the police;
regulations regarding prostitution; while for all legal crimes and ;
misdemeanours such as theft, they are tried, ike ordinary culprits,;
before the criminal court. Among the offences which are considered ;
of a less serious nature are, appearing in places where they are,for-;
bidden to go, as the Palais Royal, and some other parts of Paris; be-
coming intoxicated, and lying down in this state in the streets or arch-'
ways; walking slowly through the streets in the day time, and j
regarding fixedly the men whom they meet; tapping at their window;
frames; asking charity; going out of doors with the head and neck;
bare, &o. These and several other minor offences are punished by;
imprisonment for not less than a fortnight, and generally a month.;
Among the more serious delinquencies are reckoned the following-
insulting in an outrageous manner the physicians appointed by the
authorities; failing to appear at the sanitary visits, and continuing to.
pursue their vocation, knowing themselves to be diseased; uttering
obscene language iu public; presenting themselves at the window in
a state of nakedness; attacking men with importunity, and insisting-
on leading them away in spite of their resistance. For such offences;
the term of imprisonment is never less than three months, and some-
times five or six, according to the circumstances of the case, and the’
previous habit and repute of the offender, which influence greatly the,.:


{entente.’ There are many other offences for which: they are’ pnaishbd,
and of which Duchatelet gives instances; such as causing disturbances
Jn families by seducing the affections of a married man from his '!wife ;
insulting the mother who wishes to detach from them ■ her son, who' is
Squandering on them his affections and substance; receiving the embraces
of young boys, &c. '■■■'. . :
• tTh these and in many other cases, where the men, with whom-they
commit any public breach of decorum, are equally or more to blame than
they, still they alone are punished, as the administration has no authority
over the others. This fact, which is worthy of all attention, brings me
to the important question, as to the legality of this widely extended sys-
tem of control exercised by the Paris authorities over the prostitutes.
This question is fully discussed by Duchatelet, who admits that it is quite
illegal, and endeavors by numerous arguments to show the necessity of
its being legalised. •' Individual liberty,” says he, “is a right to which
prostitutes cannot pretend; they have abdicated their perogative to it,
and may be ruled by a different code of justice, from that to which any
other member of society, however mean his station, is subjected.” ■
. This opinion, which forms the basis of all the arbitrary laws, to which
prostitution, everywhere persecuted, is subject in Paris, and in many
other parts of the continent, I look upon as utterly subversive of ail jus-
tice, and a profanation of the sacred rights of the individual. Are then
the unfortunate women alone to be punished and blamed for prostitution,
when the men, who must share with them in it, commit the very same
deeds ? No wonder that to cloak such an enormous injustice, the polices
administration was obliged to do everything in secret; while the legisla-
ture dared not openly entrust to them powers, to justify which it would
require that a new code of the different rights of man and woman should
be devised. The French ministers have never ventured to speak openly
in Parliament; of the necessity for adopting such measures to repress
prostitution, but have merely connived at the efforts of the police board ;
efforts, well-meant it is true, but still most unjust, without any legal
authority either for the registration of prostitutes, or their punishment
for offences against public decorum. “ But,” says Duchatelet, “ society
is so generally convinced of the advantage of these coercive measures;
that but few advocates, and those of the meanest class, have ever veil--
tured to make any appeal against the arbitrary conduct of the autho-
rities.” Yes, there have been, alas ! too few in all ages, who have taken ;
up the cause of the weak and oppressed against the banded powers of-
society. It tells, I think, badly against the sense of justice of the French;
that such arbitrary and illegal measures were allowed to be taken against
any class of the community. If prostitutes are to be declared beyond the
pale of social rights, let it be done publicly, and before the eyes of the’
world, by a legal constitutional act; and not in the dark, by illegal
measures. Let us have so important a question discussed in the light of
day, and see then whether men will dare to sanction such injustices. ! -
It is considerations like these, which make me even on the threshold; [
object most stronglyto the French system of arbitrary control, and toahy-
coercive measures of a similar kind directed against, women only; and not!


against the men, -who are equally involved in the practice of
love. Such measures, which appear to me both unjust and unmauly are'
frequently resorted to in the towns in this country, against the persecuted'
class of prostitutes, while those who go with them are not interfered
with. We have not, it is true, the same systematic surveillance as ia
Paris; but neither have we that heartfelt desire to suppress, and if pos-‘
sible to eradicate venereal disease, which cannot be too much admired in
the French, and which in part sanctifies the unjustifiable means they have
taken to attain their object. It is the knowledge of the great benefits hi
the prevention of diseasfe, which aro so important to the prostitutes them-
selves, that has hitherto induced men to connive at the injustice of these
measures.
No wonder the persecuted girls look on the police, as their sworn foes,
and do everything in their power to thwart and evade them. It is very
right, that the authorities should be empowered to repress breaches
of public decorum, and to punish in a legal manner such offences ; but
both men and women should be equally subject to these penalties. If
unmarried love is to be controlled and repressed, let all of us, men and
women, from the throne to the hovel, who take part in it, bear our share
of the punishment; if any of us commit an offence against public deco-
rum, let a punishment be impartially applied; if social preventive
means are to bo taken against the venereal diseases, let them apply to both
sexes, and to all ranks alike; but let us be ashamed to see all the restric-
tions and all the punishments laid upon a poor, friendless, helpless class of
girls, whose destitution, whose miseries, and whose wrongs are an ample
excuse for any offence they may be guilty of. The illegality and flagrant
injustice of the Parisian system, and of any analogous measures iu this
country; together with the degradation which a subjection to the police
authorities necessarily entails, and the ill feeling it gives rise to ; far
more than counterbalance the benefit in the prevention of disease. Far
other than this is the mode in which, I hope, mankind will ultimately
contend with, and exterminate the destroyer; an infinitely important
subject of which I shall speak hereafter.
What is the ultimate fate of these unfortunate girls ? This is a ques-
tion on which very vague ideas are generally entertained; and while
those who know most of prostitutes, confess their ignorance, and are
anxious to have more information on the subject, others make the most
exaggerated statements regarding it, asserting that the life of a prostitute
does not average more than three or four years; all of which state-
ments, made at random, without statistical knowledge, and intended to
inspire horror and dread of such a life, are, like all untruths, most perni-
cious. Duchatelet took great pains to investigate this matter, and the
results of his valuable inquiries are the following. In the first place,
prostitution in most cases is merely a period of transition, or as he calls it,
“ a temporary disease, ” from which girls recover in from one to three
* years, and then enter again into social life as wives, domestics, needle-
women, &c.; and this fact, as he justly observes, is an additional reason
why every means should be taken to prevent their degradation, physical
or moral - whilst they follow such courses. Of those who continue for


looser periods to practice the vocation, a limited number amass small*
fortunes, sometimes amounting to £lO or £6O per annum. This success
is owing to naturally provident and economical habits, which here as else-
where will make their way. Several of them mate considerable sums by
lending money to their companions at usurious interest; which debts, like
those ofhonor, are almost always promptly paid. It is especially in the
prisons that this system is carried on, and among the prisoners there are
almost always several first-rate bankers. The savings-bank furnishes
the means, by which some few are enabled to extricate themselves from a
life of prostitution. Many who have been compelled by want to have re-
course to such a life, look eagerly forward to the time, when they shall be
able to escape from it.
It is rarely found that prostitutes leave' that particular grade where
they have made their first debut ; and this is often a reason for their
quitting the calling altogether. The girls, whose elegance and culti-
vation have gained them a place in the higher ranks of prostitution,
seldom descend to a lower, unless they be either very stupid, or
degraded by intemperate and careless habits; and on the other hand those
of the lower class seldom rise, for they acquire a coarseness of manner by
associating with rude and unpolished companions. There is a great
rivalry and jealousy between the different orders; the more elegant ones
looking down on the others with contempt, and feeling greatly insulted at
being confounded with them.
Some prostitutes change their mode of life by marriage; and Ducha-
telet tell us, that the dispensary physicians sometimes recognise, in the
wealthy and fashionable circles, ladies whose character would be destroyed,
were their past history made known. Several become for a time kept-mis-
tresses, and live with some one as man and wife; and it is very common
for those of the humbler class thus to attach themselves to some old
labourer or mechanic, whether widower or bachelor, whom they live with
and tend, and at whose death they are sometimes forced again to betake
themselves to their old calling. Others enter on a business of their own,
and become washerwomen, marchandes de toilettes, &c.; in the practice
of which they still continue to have intimacy with one or two favourite
lovers, and also aid prostitution by trying to win over to it as many
recruits as they can, for which they receive rewards from the house-
mistresses. Others become domestics and duennas in the tolerated
houses; while a few are enabled by the portion they have amassed, to
become mistresses in these establishments.
Duchatelet, besides the above details, endeavoured to obtain statistical
information, as to the proportion cut off by death, and at what periods of
life; but he could not get satisfactory information on this point. How-
ever he learned that several die in hospital from premature decay, brought
ou by excessive intemperance, and inveterate syphilitic diseases. We
have seen above that a considerable number, averaging 21 per annum,
are brought to the Salpetriere as insane. We may readily believe'that
where the causes of disease are so numerous, as in the life of the pros-
titutes, intemperate, reckless, passionate, improvident, and exposed to
contagion as they are many evils must result; but oven taken at'their


worst, they are not nearly so bad, as prejudiced writers would have! ns
believe: nay, when we compare the life of the prostitute with that of
almost any other class of women among us, it will be found, as Mr,
Acton says, probably quite as healthy.
The foregoing facts must be taken as drawn from Duchatelet’s descrip-
tion, and therefore applying chiefly to Paris. lam afraid that the lot
of prostitutes, or their chance of escaping from their mode of life, is not
nearly so good in this country, where they are viewed with so much
more harshness and contempt; and where the poverty and difficulty of
getting an honest livelihood, which of all secondary causes operates most
to drive women into, and to keep them in, prostitution, are so much
greater than in France. In our smaller towns especially, where pros-
titution is persecuted as much as possible; where its haunts are illegal;
and where a hard and puritanical morality bolds itself aloof from all
sympathy with these unfortunate girls, as if their very sight were a
pollution, there are far fewer avenues of hope for the friendless ones ; and
they, feeling their bitter degradation, drink to excess to drown their
misery; and so draw ruin on themselves, and on the rest of society, by
spreading throughout the land a taste for drunken pleasures, which is
the disgrace of our country, and especially of Scotland, the stronghold or
puritanism.
In London, however, from the size of the town and the minor austerity
of the sexual code compared with the provinces, the ultimate fate of these
girls seems very similar to what it is in Paris; and is for the most part
far more favourable than is generally supposed. Mr. Acton says “ I have
every reason to suppose that by far the majority of them soon cease to
have promiscuous intercourse, and return to a more or less regular course
of life.” He says again “ One thing is certain, that before a prostitute
has carried on her trade four years, she becomes thoroughly disgusted with
it. She then abandons it, settles, and is amalgamated with the poorer
classes of society; or becomes a married woman, after living in a state
of concubinage with her husband. The better class of prostitutes become
the wives of the mechanic, the clerk, and the petty tradesman; and as
they are frequently barren, or have only few children, there is reason to
believe they live in a comparative state of affluence, unknown to many
virtuous women burdened with families.”
What then are the views to be entertained, and the remedies to be
adopted for prostitution,—that mighty fact, which occupies so large and
important a place in the history of human society, spreading over all the
world, and flourishing from the remotest antiquity ? Is this a question,
from which either man or woman, who would be thought a moralist, or
a lover of their race, can submit to be held aloof by any effeminate scru-
ples, which divide the conventional heart from sympathy with its fellow-
beings? No; it is one, which claims the most earnest consideration from
us all; and as it includes one of the modes, in which the workings of the
mighty instinct of sexual love are manifested, it is full of the deepest
interest to those, who desire to attain to a satisfactory solution of the
great sexual problems ; which, at the present day, are by far the most
important oi all.


Prostitution is a singular phenomenon. The fact that women should
hake it a trade to sell their persons, and those delightful intimacies of
seii which in our poetical ideals have been hallowed by so lofty an enthu-
siasm, for a price other than love, and mutual happiness ; this fact is a
ray extraordinary one, and points to some fundamental difference in the
position of the sexes. Why should women be less willing than men to
taste of the joys of love, even although forbidden ? The answer is to be
found chiefly in the different sexual conditions of the two. Sexual inter-
course entails on man no momentous physical consequences ; a moderate
indulgence gives him pleasures unmixed with pains, gratifying his passions,
and giving new vigour to bis frame. But woman has a widely different
lot assigned to her; sexual intercourse has in her eyes a much more
serious import, seeing that thereby she becomes subject to bear a tedious
burden, and to undergo physical trials and sufferings, which the sus-
taining feelings of love, and the prospect of a happy and honored mother-
hood, can alone enable her to bear with peaceful mind. But when these
consolations are denied her, when the anxious period of pregnancy has to
be passed in fears and regrets, solaced only by stolen interviews with her
lover, to whom she clings as to her only support, and when the infant,
whose arrival should have been the end of her sufferings, seems but the
beginning of her greatest degradation ; then it is no wonder that women
should shrink from pleasures, which may entail on them so much misery;
while man, as long as he can himself escape scatheless, thinks little of
his companion’s future lot, and is content to leave all the shame and dis-
grace on her shoulders. He therefore pays her well for the risk she
runs; and as he has engrossed all the occupations by which a livelihood
can be made, while she has only her person wherewith to purchase
escape from want, the bargain is readily struck.
■ Then come the days of hollowness and deceit, of feigned delights and
counterfeited passions, of momentary transports, succeeded by the loath-
ing of satiety, or the gnawings of self-reproach, for love cannot be thus
insulted with impunity; the destructive vice of intoxication to drown care
and conscience, and the degradation in the eyes of the world, the crown
of their sorrows. This is a melancholy, but in many respects a true
picture of the life of the prostitute, a most unnatural and wretched
one. What then has made it so necessary a part of our society ? What
are the great causes, which lead to it ? For it is only by discovering and
removing these, not by wrathful denunciations, or impotent avoidance of
the subject, that we will be able to bring about a more natural state of
things. Duchatclet and other writers take pains to show us the different
ways,.in which girls are led to adopt such a mode of life; as for example,'
the vices, ignorance, and harshness of their parents, want of education,
wilfulness, and unbridled passions; the corruptions of large towns with
their bands of seducers, procuresses, &c ; and above all others, poverty;
but they do not advert to that great cause, which is at the root of all the
rest, and which will continue, throughout all ages, to bring men arid
women ever closer together, namely, the necessity of sexual interemirse
on which I have laid so much stress before. The sexual passions irinsti
always cause an immense amount of unmarried intercourse, arid I ‘where‘


the moral code is harsh, especially towards woman, and it is difficult for
a woman to support herself by honorable means, such intercourse will
assume the degraded character of prostitution. Thus the necessity of
sexual gratifications, and the difficulties opposing marriage, (which diffi-
culties, as will be shown presently, spring from the law of population) aided
by female poverty, and harsh moral views towards woman, are the great
cause of this evil. The natural passions, which irresistibly urge the
youth of both sexes to the pleasures of love, cannot be so restrained; and
every moral and social obstacle, which has been opposed to this primary
want of our being, must eventually yield, however much misery they may
still cause by blindly impeding the tide, which cannot be suppressed.
In what light then is prostitution to be regarded, when we take into
consideration the great primary necessity of sexual intercourse? It
should be regarded as a valuable temporary substitute for a better state
of things. It is greatly preferable to no sexual intercourse at all, with-
out which, as has been shown, every man and woman must lead a most
unnatural life. Therefore the deep gratitude of mankind, instead of their
scorn, is due, and will be given in future times, to those unfortunate
females, who have suffered in the cause of our sexual nature. It is trne
that by doing so they have become degraded, have in many cases lost all
love of mankind, by whom they were treated worse than dogs, have
ruined their constitutions by intemperance, have been consumed by
evil and unnatural passions; all of this, and more, have they done,
but whose is the blame? Not theirs, the unhappy victims of our natu-
ral sexual difficulties, and of a hollow and inconsiderate moral code ; but
rather of us, their fellow-beings, whose unjust harshness and neglect have
allowed them to sink so low. Surely, surely, we too have suffered, and
still shall suffer bitterly for their degradation.
The mode of preventing prostitution, is to use every endeavour by the
different training of the female sex, and.by the precautions against over-
population, to enable women to gain a livelihood readily for themselves,
and not be dependent on man for their support, or obliged to make a
barter of their love—the only marketable commodity, on which the poor-
est women among us have to rely; and also, and above all, to supply
the inevitable want of sexual intercourse, on which prostitution essentially
depends, in another and better manner. Unless this latter object can be
achieved, the prevention of prostitution is a mere delusion and imprac-
ticable dream, of those who know so little of nature, as to imagine that
her laws and her instincts can be forcibly suppressed. Sexual pleasures
must be had at any price; and if they be not obtainable honorably and
for love, they will be bought with money and degradation.
By these means (the fuller consideration of which, along with other
questions, I reserve to a subsequent page), I earnestly believe and hope,
prostitution with all its evils will ultimately be eradicated from our
society; though long will be the straggle, and patient and enduring
must those be, who seek to see such a reformation effected. But in the
mean time as long as it continues among us, another great part of oar
duty should be, to raise as much as possible the unfortunate girls, who
have suffered so deeply, as martyrs to the sexual passions. For this,


rtverence is the most essential means; reverence for them, as for all other
human beings; any of whom, in their wonder and mystery, as much
transcend any conception of the scorner, as his own real being does his
self-consciousness. Reverence should be paid to themselves, to their
actions, to their feelings ; instead of neglecting, or reviling them, as the
world has hitherto done, they should be made an object of the greatest
solicitude, as well to their own sex as to ours. The legal restrictions,
those flagrant injustices towards woman, should be removed'; and man
and woman should share alike in any verdict, moral or legal, passed upon
unmarried love. What this verdict should be, I will examine more fully
hereafter.
We shall find that if wo love and reverence these girls, (at the same
time that we endeavour, totally to remove from our society the fearful
evil of prostitution,) they will love and reverence us, and on no other
consideration. If society enfold them in her bosom, they will soon learn
gratefully to repay her love; but if she continue to spurn them, her
punishment and sufferings will be no less than theirs. Her unnatural
treatment has made them so degraded; and from that degradation, only
her repentant love and reverence will uplift them.


THE LAW OF POPULATION.
Having thus given a short description of the existing evils of the sex-
ual world, and endeavoured to convey some slight idea of the awful and
widely spread miseries arising from sexual abstinence and abuse, and from
venereal disease, in both sexes; I now proceed to the second great divi-
sion of this subject, namely, the great natural difficulty, that opposes the
normal and sufficient exercise of the genital organs, which we have seen
to be so indispensable to the health and virtue of mankind. This arises
from the Principle (or law) of population, so wonderfully explained by
Mr. Malthus; and after him by many of the first political economists,
among others by Mr. Stuart Mill. This is a subject whose extreme im-
portance cannot be over estimated. It may be called the question of the
age, for upon it, as Mr. Malthus and Mr. Mill have shown, depend the
grand problems which are at present convulsing society; the wages of
labour, poverty and wealth, &c. Upon it depends moreover, the greatest
proportion of the sexual diseases and miseries, of which I have spoken, and
which can neither be understood nor remedied except by reference to
their grand cause. The usual mode of treating of these evils, whether in
medical or moral works, where they are not traced to this cause, can have
no satisfactory result.
Notwithstanding the paramount importance of the law of population, it
is scarcely at all generally understood. In spite of the unanswerable rea-
sonings of Mr. Malthas (and they are as conclusive as a problem of
Euclid), in spite of the exertions of Mr. Mill and others, to show that at-
tention to this law can alone enable mankind to solve the social problems,
or to emerge from the miserable abyss of poverty, in which the greater
part of our race is at present sunk, the subject is practically ignored, and
there is notone man in thousands among those who reason on these
questions, who pays any heed to it. We have still organizations of indus-
try, socialism Christian or unchristian, change in the government, national
education, charitable institutions, &c., vaunted as the great remedies for
poverty, low wages, and social embarrasments; but there is not one of
these which has any real or direct power in the matter, or that when
tried by the principle of population, can bear a moment’s scrutiny as a
proposed cure for social evils.


Mr. Malthus’s great work was written fifty years ago, and his rea-
sonings still stand impregnable, for truth cannot be overthrown. What
then is the reason that these vital truths have made so little impression,
that a knowledge of them is confined to a few of the most enlightened
minds, and that they have had little practical effect on individual con-
duct?
There are two great reasons for this. The first is, that the subject is a
sexual one, and like all similar subjects, has been prevented from being
openly discussed by the feelings of morbid delicacy, to the inevitable ruin
of mankind.
The second is, that the remedies which Mr. Malthus suggested were,
I believe, as erroneous and unhealthy as his principle of population was
undeniable; and the impracticability of the former led to the neglect of the
latter. Most people know nothing of Mr. Malthus’s views, except from
some casual allusion to them by those, who probably have not read them,
. and certainly have not understood their paramount importance. But
without a knowledge of these views, and in fact without their being taken
as an axiom in ail our reasonings, it is utterly in vain to approach the
great social problems.
I do not know any work so important to the happiness of mankind at
present as that of Mr. Malthns. It alone explains the real cause of the
fearful evils both in the economical and sexual world: of poverty, hard
•work, and early death, on the one hand, and of sexual abstinence, self-
abuse, and prostitution on the other; of the mnltiform miseries, which are
breaking the hearts and paralysing the arms of so many myriads among
. us, and making the philanthropist despair. What can be done by any
effort to benefit mankind: how can disease be prevented or happiness
promoted, while poverty exists ? Poverty is the fountain-head ot evils
innumerable. Grime, disease, prostitution, ignorance, drunkenness, and
all imaginable miseries spring from it in endless exuberance: and while
poverty continues, every one must feel, that all efforts at social improve-
ment will be ot little avail.
Now what Laennec did for chest disease, what M. i.allemand did for
the diseases of the male generative organs, what Newton did for the law oi
gravitation—that has Mr. Malthus done for poverty. He has shown its
nature and its only important cause ; and in so doing, has conferred a boon
upon mankind, which cannot be sufficiently valued. To know the cause
of any evil is for man, but the preparatory step to devising a remedy: and
although, till Mr. Malthus showed the cause of poverty, it was not pos-
sible for society to escape from this, its greatest evil; I firmly believe
that, by the knowledge he has given us, the evil is no longer irremediable,
and that we will, by persevering and combined social efforts, ultimately be
freed from it. ; -
As Mr. Malthus’s celebrated essay is not very easily procurable by
every one, and as there are no truths, which deserve to be more univers-
ally known and deeply felt by all of us, than, those which he explains, I
shall give here a short sketch of his work, using in most places the
: author s own words. ■; .. , : :■ ; - '■: 1 ' i ,
I entreat the reader to study it carefully, and to make himself thoroughly
T


master of the great law which it explains. By doing so, he will obtain a
deeper insight into the complex problems of human society, the real dilii-
culties with which our race has to contend, and the true cause of the eyils
existing among us, than if he studied every other branch whatsoever, of
moral and political science, and omitted tills; as is so frequently done.
He will learn the profound errors on poverty and its remedies, which are
still so prevalent; will be enabled to see through the fallacies on these
subjects, which he will hear every day in conversation, from the pulpit, or
the platform, or read in the pages of our newspapers, and other publica-
tions, —the very same fallacies, which Mr. Malthus so unanswerably ex-
posed, but which are still widely, nay, almost universally spread, not only
in this country, but on the continent; and will perceive the utter useless-
ness and superficiality of the usual discussions on poverty and low wages,
and of the common routine practice of statesmanship, which tacitly
ignore the real law of population and wages, “ not," as Mr. Mill says,
“as if it could be refuted, but as if it did not exist.”


ESSAY
ON THE
PRINCIPLE OF POPULATION.
BY THE
REVEREND MR. MALTHUS.
“ In an inquiry concerning the improvement of society, the mode of
conducting the subject which naturally presents itself is
Ist.—To investigate the causes, that have hitherto impeded the pro-
gress of mankind towards happiness ;
2nd.—To examine the probability of the total or partial removal of
these causes in future.
To enter fully into this question, and to enumerate all the causes,
that have hitherto influenced human improvement, would be much be-
yond the power of an individual. The principal object of the present
essay is to examine the effects of one great cause, intimately united with
the very nature of man; which, though it has been constantly and power-
fully operating since the commencement of society, has been little noticed
by the writers, who have treated this subiect. The facts, which establish
the existence of this cause, have indeed been repeatedly stated and acknow-
ledged ; but its natural and necessary effects have been almost wholly over-
looked; though probably among its effects may be reckoned a very conside-
able portion of that vice and misery, and of that unequal distribution of
the bounties of nature, which it has been the unceasing object of the en-
lightened philanthropist in all ages to correct.
The cause to which I allude, is the constant tendency in all animated
life, to increase beyond the nourishment prepared for it.
It is observed by Dr. Franklin, that there is no bound to the prolific
nature of plants or animals, but what is made by their crowding and
interfering with each other’s means of subsistence. Were the face of the
earth, he says, vacant of other plants, it might be gradually sowed and
overspread with one kind only, as for instance, with fennel; and were it
empty of other inhabitants, it might, in a few ages, bo replenished from
one nation only, as for instance, with Englishmen.


This is incontrovertibly true. Through the animal and vegetable king-
doms, nature has scattered the seeds of life abroad, with the most profuse
and liberal hand; but has been comparatively sparing in tbs room and
nourishment necessary to rear them. The germs of existence contained in
this earth, if they could freely develops themselves, would fill millions of
worlds in the course of a few thousand years. Necessity, that imperious
all-pervading law of nature, restrains them within the prescribed bounds.
The races of plants and of animals shrink under this great reitrictive
law ; and man cannot by any efforts of reason escape from it.
In plants and irrational animals the view of the subject is simple.
They are all impelled by a powerful instinct to the increase of their
species ; and this instinct is interrupted by no doubts about providing
for their offspring. Wherever therefore there is liberty, the power of
increase is exerted; and the superabundant effects are repressed after-
wards, by want of room and nourishment.
The effects of this check upon man are more complicated. Impelled
to the increase of his species by an equally powerful instinct, reason inter-
rupts bis career, and asks him, whether he may not bring beings into the
world, for whom he cannot provide the means of support. If he attend
to this natural suggestion, the restriction too frequently produces vice. If
he hear it not, the human race will be constantly endeavouring to
increase beyond the means of subsistence. But as, by the law of our
nature, which makes food necessary to the life of man, population can
never actually increase beyond the lowest nourishment capable of sup-
porting it, a strong check on population, from the difficulty of acquiring
food, must be constantly in operation. This difficulty must fall some-
where, and must necessarily be felt severely in some or other of the
various forms of misery, or the fear of misery, by a large portion of
mankind.
That population has this constant tendency to increase beyond the
means of subsistence, and that it is kept to its necessary level by these
causes, will sufficiently appear from a review of the different states of
society, in which man has existed. But let us first endeavour to ascer-
tain, what would be the natural increase of population, if left to exert
itself with perfect freedom : and what might be expected to be the rate of
increase in the productions of the earth, under the most favourable cir-
cumtauces of human industry.
It will be allowed, that no country has hitherto been known, where
the manners were so pure and simple, and the means of subsistence so
abundant, that no checks whatever have existed to early marriages, from
the difficulty of providing for a family, and that no waste of the human
species has been occasioned by vicious customs, by towns, by unhealthy
occupations, or too severe labour. Consequently, in no state that we
have yet known, has the power of population been left to exert itself with
perfect freedom.
In the northern States of America, where the means of subsistence
have been more ample, the manners of the people more pure, and the
checks to early marriages fewer, than in any of the modern States of
Europe, the population has been found to double itself, for above a century


and a half successively, in less than in each period of twenty-five years.
Yet even during these periods, in some of the towns, the deaths exceeded
the births; a circumstance that clearly proves that in those parts of the
country which supplied this deficiency, the increase must have been much
more rapid than the general average.
In the back settlements, where the sole employment is agriculture, and
vicious customs and unwholesome occupations are little known, the popu-
lation has been found to double itself in fifteen years. Even this extra-
ordinary rate of increase is probably short of the utmost power of popula-
tion. Sir William Petty supposes a doubling possible in so short a time
as ten years.
But to be perfectly sure, that we are far within the truth, we will take
the slowest of these rates of increase—a rate, in which all concurring
testimonies agree, and which has been repeatedly ascertained to be from
procreation only.
It may safely be pronounced therefore, that population, when unchecked,
goes on doubling itself every twenty-five years, or increases in a geomet-
rical ratio.
The rate according to which the productions of the earth may be sup-
posed to increase, it will not be so easy to determine. Of this however,
we may be perfectly certain, that the ratio of their increase must be
totally of a different nature, from the ratio of the increase of population.
Man is necessarily confined in room. When all the fertile land has been
occupied, the yearly increase of food must depend upon the melioration of
the land already in possession. This is a stream, which from the nature
of all soils, instead of increasing, must be gradually diminishing. But
population, could it be supplied with food, would go on with unexhausted
vigour; and the increase of one period would furnish the power of a
greater increase the next, and this without any limit.
From the accounts we have of China and Japan, it may be fairly
doubted, whether the best directed efforts of human industry could double
the produce of these countries, even once, in any number of years. There
are many .parts of the globe, indeed, hitherto uncultivated, and almost
unoccupied; but the right of exterminating, or driving into a corner,
where they must starve, even the inhabitants of these thinly peopled re-
gions, will be questioned in a moral view. The process of improving
their minds, and directing their industry, would necessarily be slow; and
during this time, as population would regularly keep pace with the in-
creasing produce, it would rarely happen that a great degree, of knowledge
and industry would have to operate at once upon rich and unappro-
priated soil. Even when this might take place, as it does sometimes in
new colonies, a geometrical ratio increases with such extraordinary
rapidity, that the advantage could not last long. If America continue
increasing, which she certainly will do, though not with the same rapid-
ity as formerly, the Indians will be driven further and further back into
the country, till the whole race is ultimately exterminated.
Europe is by no means so fully peopled as it might be. In Europe
there is the fairest chance, that human industry may receive its best
direction. The science of agriculture has been much studied in England


and Scotland ; and there is still a great portion of uncultivated land in
these countries. Let us consider at what rate the produce of this island
might be supposed to increase, under circumstances the most favourable
to improvement.
If it be allowed, that by the best possible policy, and great encourage-
ments to agriculture, the average produce of the island could be doubled
in the first twenty-five years, it will be allowing probably a greater
increase than could with reason be expected.
In the next twenty-five years it is impossible to suppose, that the
produce could be quadrupled. It would be contrary to all our knowledge
of the properties of land. That we may be the better able to compare
the increase of population and food, let us make a supposition, which is
clearly more favourable to the power of production in the earth, than any
experience we have had of its qualities will warrant.
Let us suppose that the yearly additions which might be made to the
former average produce, instead of decreasing, which they certainly
would do, were to remain the same; and that the produce of this island
might be increased every twenty-five years, by a quantity equal to what
it at present produces. The most enthusiastic speculator cannot suppose
a greater increase than this. In a few centuries, it would make every
acre of land in the island like a garden.
It may be fairly pronounced therefore, that considering the present
average state of the earth, the means of subsistence, under circumstances
the most favourable to human industry, could not possibly be made to
increase faster than in an arithmetical ratio.
The necessary effects of these two different rates of increase, when
brought together, will be very striking. Taking the whole earth, emi-
gration would of course be excluded ; and while the human race would
increase as the numbers 1,2, 4,8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, subsistence
would only increase at the rate of 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7,8, 9.
In this supposition, no limits whatever are placed to the produce of the
earth. It may increase for.ever, and be greater than any assignable
quantity; yet still the power of population, being in every period so much
superior, the increase of the human species can only be kept down to the
le'-el of the means of subsistence, by the constant operation of the strong
law of necessity, acting as a check upon the greater power.
I shall now speak of the general checks to population, and the mode of
their operation.
The ultimate check to population, from the above considerations, ap-
pears to be a want of food, arising necessarily from the different ratios
according to which population and food increase. But this ultimate check
is never the immediate check, except in cases of actual famine.
The immediate-check may be stated to consist in all those customs, and
all those diseases, which seem to be generated by a scarcity of the means
of subsistence; and all those causes, independent of this scarcity, whether
of a. moral or physical nature, which tend prematurely to weaken and
destroy the human frame.
These checks to population, which are constantly operating with more
or less force in every society, and keep down the number to the level


of the means of subsistence, may he classed under two general heads, the
preventive and the positive checks.
The preventive check, as far as it is voluntary, is peculiar to man,
and arises from that distinctive superiority in his reasoning faculties
which enables him to calculate distant consequences. The checks to the
indefinite increase of plants and irrational animals, are all either posi-
tive, or, if preventive, involuntary. But man cannot look around him and
see the distress, which frequently presses on them, who have large
families; he cannot contemplate his present possessions or earnings,
which he now nearly consumes himself, and calculate the amount of each
share, when with very little addition, they must be divided, perhaps
among seven or eight, without feeling a doubt whether, if he follow the
bent of his inclinations, ho may be able to support the offspring, which
he will probably bring into the world.
In a state of equality, if such can exist, this would be the simple ques-
tion. In the present state of society other considerations occur. Will
he not lower his rank in life, and be obliged to give up in great measure
his former habits 7 Does any mode ot employment present itself by which
he may reasonably hope to maintain a family 7 Will he not at any rate
subject himself to greater difficulties, and more severe labour, than in his
single state 7 Will he not be unable to transmit to his children the same
advantages ot education, that he himself possessed 7 Does he even feel
secure that, should he have a large family, his utmost exertions can
save them from rags and squalid poverty; and may he not be reduced to
the grating necessity of forfeiting his independence, and of being obliged
to the sparing hand of charity for support 7
These considerations are calculated to prevent, and certainly do prevent
a great number ot persons in all civilized nations, from pursuing the dic-
tates of nature in an early attachment to one woman.
If this restraint do not produce vice, it is undoubtedly the least evil,
that can arise from the principleof population. Considered as a restraint
on a strong natural inclination, it must be allowed to produce a certain
degree of temporary unhappiness; hut evidently slight, compared with
the evils, which result from any of the other checks to population; and
merely of the same nature, as many other sacrifices of temporary to per-
manent gratification, which it is the business of a moral agent continually
to make.
When this restraint produces vice, the evils which follow, are but too
conspicuous. A promiscuous intercourse to such a degree as to prevent
the birth of children, seems to lower in a most marked manner the dig-
nity of the human character. It cannot be without its effect on men,
and nothing can be more obvious than its tendency to degrade the female
character. Add to which, that among those unfortunate females, with
which all great towns abound, more real distress and aggravated misery
are perhaps to be found, than in any other department of human life.
The positive checks to population are extremely various, and include
every cause, whether arising from vice or misery, which in any degree
contributes to shorten the natural duration of human life. Under this
head therefore may be enumerated all unwholesome occupations, severe


labour, and exposure to the seasons, extreme poverty, bad nursing of
children, great towns, excesses of all kinds, the whole, train of diseases
and epidemics, wars, plagues, and famines.
On examining these obstacles to the increase of population, which I
have classed under the heads of preventive and positive checks, it will
appear that they are all resolvable into moral restraint, vice, and misery.
Of the preventive checks, the restraint from marriage, which is not
followed by irregular gratifications, may properly be termed moral
restraint.
Promiscuous intercourse, unnatural passions, adultery, and improper
arts to conceal the consequences of irregular connections, are preventive
checks, that clearly come under the head of vice.
Of the positive checks, those which appear to arise unavoidably from
the laws of nature, may be called exclusively misery, and those which we
obviously bring upon ourselves, such as wars, excesses, and many others,
which it would be in our power to avoid, are of a mixed nature. They
are brought upon us by vice, and their consequence is misery.
The sum of all these preventive and positive checks taken together,
forms the immediate check to population; and it is evident that in every
country, where the whole of the procreative power cannot be called into
action, the preventive and the positive checks must vary inversely as
each other; that is, in countries naturally unhealthy, or subject to a great
mortality, from whatever cause it may arise, the preventive check will
prevail very little. In those countries on the contrary, which are natu-
rally healthy, and where the preventive check is found to prevail with
considerable force, the positive check will prevail very little, or the mor-
tality be very small.
In every country some of these checks are, with more or less force, in
constant operation; yet notwithstanding their general prevalence, there
are few states in which there is not a constant effort of the popu-
lation to increase beyond the means of subsistence. This constant effort
as constantly tends to subject the lower classes of society to distress ; and
to prevent any great permanent melioration of their condition.
These efforts, in the present state of society, seem to be produced in the
following manner. We will suppose the means of subsistence in any
country just equal to the easy support of its inhabitants. The constant
effort towards population, which is found to act even in the most vicious
societies, increases the number of people, before the means of subsistence
are increased. The food therefore, which before supported eleven
millions, must now be divided among eleven millions and a-half. The
poor consequently must live much worse, and many of them be reduced
to severe distress. The number of labourers also being above the pro-
portion of work in the market, the price of labour must tend to fall, while
the price of provisions would at the same time tend to rise. The labourer
therefore must do more work to earn the same as he did before. During
this season the discouragements to marriage, and the difficulties of
rearing a family are so great, that papulation is nearly at a stand. In
the meantime the cheapness of labour, the plenty of labourers, and the
necessity of an increased industry among them, encourage cultivators to


employ more labour upon their land, to turn up fresh soil, and to
manure and to improve more completely, what is already in tillage; till
ultimately the means of subsistence may become in the same proportion
to the population, as at the period from which we set out. The situation
of the labourer being then again tolerably comfortable, the restraints to
population are in some degree loosened; and after a short period, the
same retrograde and progressive movements with respect to happiness,
are repeated.
This sort of oscillation will not probably be obvious to common view:
and it may be difficult even for the most attentive observer to calculate
its periods. Yet that in the generality of old States some such vibration
does exist, though in a much less marked, and more irregular manner,
than I have described it, no reflecting man who considers the subject
deeply, can well doubt.
One principal reason why this oscillation has been less remarked than
might naturally have been expected, is, that the histories of mankind,
which we possess, are in general only histories of the higher classes*
The science of the history of the poorer orders may be said to be still in
its infancy, and many of the objects, on which it would be desirable to
have information, have been either omitted or not stated with sufficient
accuracy. Among these may be reckoned the proportion of the number
of adults to the number of marriages; the extent to which vicious
customs have prevailed in consequence of the restraints upon matrimony;
the comparative mortality among the children of the most distressed part
of the community, and of those who live rather more at their ease; the
variations in the real price of labour ; the observable differences in the
state of the lower classes of society, with respect to ease and happiness,
at different times during a certain period ; and very accurate register
of births, deaths, and marriages, which are of the utmost importance in
this subject.
A faithful history, including such particulars, would tend greatly to
elucidate the manner, in which the constant check upon population acts;
and would probably prove the existence of the oscillations that have been
mentioned; although their periods would necessarily be rendered irre-
gular from the operation of many interrupting causes; such as, the
introduction or failure of certain manufactures, a greater or less pre-
valent spirit of agricultural enterprise; years of plenty, or scarcity ; wars,
sickly seasons, poor laws, emigration, and other causes of a similar
nature.
A circumstance which has perhaps, more than any other, contributed
to conceal this oscillation from common view, is the difference between
the nominal and real price of labour. It very rarely happens that the
mominal price of labour universally falls, but we well know that it fre-
quently remains the same, while the price of provisions has been gradually
rising. This is in effect a real fall in the price of labour, and during
this period, the condition of the lower classes must be gradually growing
worse, while the farmers and capitalists are growing rich, from the real
cheapness of labour.
In savage life, where there is no regular nrice of labour, it is little


to be doubted, that similar oscillations take place. When population has
increased nearly to the utmost limits of the food, all the preventive and
positive checks .will naturaly operate with increased force. Vicious
habits with respect to the sex will be more general, the exposing of
children more frequent, and both the probability and fatality of wars
and epidemics considerably greater ; and these causes will probably con-
tinue their operation, till the population is sunk below the level of the
food; and then the return to comparative plenty will again produce an
increase, and after a certain period, its futher progress will again bo
choked by the same causes.
But without attempting to establish these oscillations in different
countries, which would evidently require more minute histories than we
possess, and which the progress of civilisation naturally tends to counter-
act, the following propositions are intended to be proved;
Ist.—Population is necessarily limited by the means of subsistence.
2nd.—Population invariably increases, when the means of subsistence
increase.
3rd.—The checks which repress the superior power of population, and
keep its effects on a level with the means of subsistence, are all resolvable
into moral restraint, vice, and misery.
The first of these propositions scarcely needs illustration. The second
and third will be sufficiently established by a review of the immediate
checks to population, in the past and present state of society.
This review will be the subject of the following chapters.’’
In this manner, after having explained the great Law of Increase,
inherent in the human species, as in all organised beings; having
shown as well by general reasoning, as by known facts, that the natu-
ral ratio of the increase of population is immeasurably greater than
the usual ratio of the produce of the earth—or, in other words, that
the increase of all plants and animals, including man, is of necessity
very greatly limited by the limited size of the earth; having shown
that it is only in the case of new colonies, such as America, where the
agricultural skill of civilised man is brought to bear upon fertile un-
cultivated territory (a case, which is a mere accident in human his-
tory, of temporary duration, and necessitating moreover, the dispos-
session and extermination of the native inhabitants) that food can be
increased at all quickly enough to keep up with the geometrical in-
crease of which population is naturally capable; having shown that
population does increase with extraordinary rapidity in such a case,
doubling itself twenty-five years for instance in the United States,
while in all old countries it increases very slowly—Hr. Malthus next
examines the question, in what way is population thus restrained in the


latter countries ? what are the checks which make it advance so slowly ?
population cannot be checked except in two ways, either there must be
fewer children born, or some must die; and it must be therefore by
cither or both of these two checks, called by Mr. Malthus the preventive
and the positive, that the slow increase of our race in all old countries
is effected. The modes in which these two checks operate may, he
says, all be included under the three heads of moral restraint, vice, or
misery; and these checks have been operating upon human society ever
since its origin, and have only been suspended for short intervals in
the case of new colonies &c.
This law of population is, it appears to me, by far the most import-
ant of all subjects for the consideration of mankind, and therefore
I entreat the reader’s earnest attention to it. It is not like the
vacillating institutions of man, but is one of the fixed and immutable
laws of Nature, which acts upon our race exactly as upon the
humblest plant; from which no effort of reason can enable the civil-
ized man any more than the savage to escape, and whose recognition
has been impeded by the spiritual theories of the supremacy of
mind over matter. Except in the accidental case of new colonies,
and other rare and temporary circumstances, where the usual ratio of
the increase of food is enormously increased, the law is, that if the pre-
ventive check do not operate, the positive must: if fewer children be
not born, the surplus must die prematurely: there must be a rapid suc-
cession of necessarily short-lived beings to keep up the numbers, one
generation being pushed out of existeuce before its time to make room
for the next. The less the repftductive powers are restrained, the
shorter must the general average of life be in the successive generations.
Their premature death is certain; it is only the mode of it which is
uncertain. It may be by famine or by war, by extreme [poverty and
slow starvation, or by quick disease; but in some shape or other it
must come. Thus it is an enormous error to suppose, as is commonly
done, that the wars, famines, pestilences, &c., which we read of in his-
tory, were occasioned mainly by man’s evil passions, or want of in-
dustrial skill; they were primarily the effect of the natural sexual
instincts, and were absolutely inevitable, as long as these were not re-
strained by foresight. More children having been born than the slow
increase of food could support, they had to be cut off prematurely in
some way; and thus, had war not operated, pestilence, famine, disease,
&c,, must have done so. If three or four times the number of children
were born that could be supported, (a thing which must very frequently
have taken place among uncivilised nations), either three-fourths
of them had necessarily to perish in infancy, or in some other way, the
general average of life had to be reduced to one-fourth of the natural one.
It is generally thought that abstaining from marriage, sexual vices which
prevent child-birth, such as prostitution, and premature death are ac-
cidental and avoidable evils; but this is the most radical of all errors.
In all old countries some one or more of these checks to population must
always operate with immense force; and they have thus operated in
all such countries ever since the birth of history. Man has, only a


choice between them; not independent of them. The more complete
the positive check, in other words the younger the age at which death
takes place, the less need is there for the preventive check. On the
other hand, wherever the positive check operates little, the preventive
one must operate greatly; a lomr average of life and few deaths can
only be procured in any old country by having few births.
Mr. Malthus next proceeds to examine in what manner the three
checks, moral restraint, vice, and misery, have operated on mankind in
the various conditions of human society. To do this he enters into a
detailed review of nearly all the nations of past and present times,
from the rudest savages up to ourselves, and points out how far each
of these three checks has operated upon them. This review occupies a
great part of his work, and is full of interest, both from the insight it
gives us into the workings of this mighty but unknown law on human
destiny, and also from its explanation of the complex problems of
society in its various stages ; problems which the principle of popula-
tion can alone render intelligible. I shall give a short sketch of this
part of Mr. Malthus’s work, begging the reader to supplement it by
reading the work itself.
Mr. Malthus first examines the checks to population among savages,
or those nations which subsist chiefly on the unassisted produce of
nature, as, for instance, the natives of Australia, Patagonia, the
North American Indians, &c. In these the main checks are similar to
those in the inferior animals ; namely the positive ones. The prevent-
ive check, or moral restraint, acts little upon them; they follow
blindly the promptings of the natural sexual instincts like the inferior
animals, and therefore the surplus population is cut off by starvation,
periodical famines, bloody warfares, &c. The condition of the women
among savages, moreover, is most miserable, and adverse to the bear-
ing and nurture of offspring. They are used almost like beasts of bur-
den ; and mothers among the American Indians, have been known to
destroy their female children to preserve them from such a life.
With regard to the checks to population in the Islands of the South
Sea, Mr. Malthus says, “ M. Raynal, speaking of the ancient state of
the British Isles, and of islanders in general, says, ‘ It is among these
people that we trace that multitude of singular institutions which
retard the progress of population. Anthropophagy, the castration of
males, the infibulation of females, late marriages, the consecration of
virginity, the approbation of celibacy, &c. These customs, caused by
a superabundance of population in islands, have been carried to the
continents, where philosophers of our days are still employed in inves-
tigating the reason of them.’ M. Raynal does not seem to be aware,
that a savage tribe in America surrounded by its enemies, or a civilized
and populous nation, hemmed in by others in the same state, is in
many respects circumstanced like the islander. Though the barriers
to a further increase of population be not so well defined, and so open
to common observation on continents, as on islands, yet they still pre-
sent obstacles which are nearly as insurmountable. There is probably
no island yet known, the produce of which could not be further in


creased. This is all that can be said of the whole earth. But ns the
bounds on population or small islands are so narrow, that every per-
son must see and acknowledge them, an inquiry into the checks to
population in them may tend considerably to illustrate the present
subject.
If we turn our eyes to the crowded shores of Otaheite and the
Society Islands, all apprehension of dearth seem at first sight to be
banished from a country, that is described to be fruitful as the garden
of the Hesperides. But this first impression would be immediately
corrected by a moment’s reflection. Happiness and plenty have always
been considered as the most powerful causes of increase. In a delight-
rul climate where few diseases are known, and the women are con-
demned to no severe fatigues, why should these causes not operate with
a force unparalleled in less favourable regions? Yet, if they did,
where could the population find room and food in such narrow limits ?
Effectual emigration or effectual importation would be utterly exclu-
ded, from the situation of the islands and the state of navigation among
the inhabitants.
The difficulty here is reduced to so narrow a compass, is so clear,
precise, and definite, that we cannot escape from it. It cannot be
answered in the usual vague and inconsiderate manner, by talking of
emigration and further cultivation. In the present instance we can-
not but acknowledge that the one is impossible and the other glaringly
inadequate. The fullest conviction must stare us in the face, that the
people on this group of islands could not continue to double their
numbers every twenty-five years; and before wo proceed to inquire
into the state of society among them, we must be perfectly certain, that
unless a perpetual miracle render the women barren, we shall be able
to trace some very powerful checks to population in the habits of the
people.”
These checks were promiscuous intercourse and infanticide, which
were exceedingly common in Otaheite, when first discovered; and were
universally practised by the members of the Arreoy societies, which
included most of the youth of the upper classes. The same vices were
very common among the lower classes also; and it was by these means
—the positive check—that population was mainly kept down to the
level of the food; although their action was not sufficient to prevent a
very considerable degree of poverty.
Mr. Malthus next proceeds to the checks to population among pas-
toral and semi-civilized peoples. The nations of the north of Europe,
who overthrew the Homan Empire, were of this description. It has
puzzled historians to account for the numerous and successive armies
which they poured down upon Italy and France, and which were so
often annihilated, before the final triumph; but this can be readily ac-
counted for by the great natural powers of multiplication. They must
have increased very rapidly, for their morals, as described by Tacitus,
were pure, and their life healthy; and thus their population was con-
stantly increasing beyond the means of subsistence, and numbers of
their youth were sent forth to gain new regions by the sword. The


loss of life in these wars was prodigious; and it was in this way that
their population was chiefly restrained.
The checks among the modern pastoral nations, as the Tartars and
Bedouins, are chiefly of a similar nature, except that there is more
poverty and famine, and less war. In many of the tribes the grinding
poverty always borders on starvation. (Poverty, famine, and fret
quently pestilence, are the inevitable alternatives to war in all nations,
where the preventive check to population does not operate. Therefore
as this check operates very little among uncivilized nations, war,
poverty, famine, or pestilence are constantly observed among them;
and are indeed perfectly unavoidable from the laws of nature.) Moral
restraint acts little among the Arabs, for ‘ a Mahometan is in some res-
pects obliged to polygamy, from a principle of obedience to his prophet,
who makes one of the great duties of man to consist in procreating child-
ren to glorify his Creator. Nothing can place in a more striking point
of view the futility and absurdity of such encouragements to marriage,
than the present state of these countries. It is universally agreed,
that if their population be not less than formerly, it is indubitably not
greater; and it follows as a direct consequence, that the great increase
of some families has actually pushed the rest out of existence. While
the Arabs retain their present manners, and the country remains in its
present state of cultivation, the promise of paradise to every man who
had ten children, would but little increase their numbers, though it
might greatly increase their misery. Direct encouragements to mar-
riage have no tendency whatever to change their manners, and pro-
mote cultivation.”
The wives are bought of their parents, and therefore the poorer
classes are sometimes unable to obtain them; so that the preventive
check, by compulsion, operates in some degree.
In the various countries of Africa, the checks are also mostly of a
positive nature; constant warfare, so that in some of the tribes Bruce
says, that an old man is never to be seen, as they all die by the lance
• young; also famine and pestilence, the exportation of slaves, &c.
The poorest classes are sunk in the most abject poverty.
In Hindostan, marriage is greatly encouraged by the religious
code, which makes the procreation of male children one of the greatest
merits. In the ordinances of Menu, it is said, ‘By a son a man obtains
victory over all people; by a son’s son he enjoys immortality; and
afterwards by the son of that grandson he reaches the solar abode.”
Thus marriage in India is considered a religious duty ; and therefore,
the preventive check operating little, the positive one must of neces-
sity supply its place. The people are so crowded that the most ex-
cessive poverty prevails, and periodical famines have been always very
frequent. Wars and pestilences have also at times carried off large
numbers.
In Thibet on the other hand, the preventive cheek operates very
strongly. “In almost every country in the globe, individuals are com-
pelled by considerations of private interest, to habits, which tend to
repress the natural increase of population; but Thibet is perhaps the


only country where these habits are universally encouraged by govern-
ment, and where torepress rather than encourage population, seems to
be a public object.”
In Thibet celibacy is deemed honourable, while marriage is almost
a certain bar to a man’s rising In the State; and the higher orders,
who are occupied as priests or statesmen, leave to the husbandmen
and labourers the business of populating the country. Even among
the latter, moreover, it is the common practice for all the brothers of
a family to have but one wife among them; so that here polygamy
consists in a plurality of husbands ; which of course is a great check
to population.
In China the population is enormous, being upwards of 300,000,000,
or about one-third of the human race. These vast numbers are owing
to the goodness of the soil and climate, the very great attention that
has always been paid to agriculture, and also the extraordinary en-
couragements to marriage, which here as in India is considered a
religious duty; to be childless being held a dishonour. The prevent-
ive chock therefore having operated but little, the positive has been
the chief one. The most grinding and abject poverty prevails among
the lower classes, together with an indefatigable industry and hard
work; (a combination which finds a parallel perhaps in England alone).
Periodical famines are very frequent, which sweep off vast numbers;
and infanticide is very general. It is in these modes rather than by
wars, (which, till lately, have not been so destructive in China), that
the positive check operates.
“ The cheek to population from a vicious sexual intercourse does not
appear to be very considerable in China. The women are said to be
modest and reserved, and adultery is rare.
The very great consumption of grain in making spirits has been
dwelt upon by several writers as one of the great causes of the fre-
quent famines among the Chinese; but this is a gross error." (The
very same error is frequently committed at present with regard to the
poverty in England). “In reality the whole tendency of this cause is
in a contrary direction. The consumption of corn in any other way
than necesssary food, checks the population before it arrives at the
utmost limits of subsistence; and as the grain may be withdrawn
from this particular use in the time of a scarcity, a public granary is
thus opened, richer probably than could have been formed by any
other means. When such a consumption has been once established,
and has become permanent, its effect is exactly as if a piece of land,
with all the people upon it, were removed from the country. The rest
of the people would certainly be in precisely the same state as they
were in before, in years of plenty; but in time of dearth the produce of
this land would be returned to them, without the mouths to help them
to eat it. China, without her distilllries, would certainly be more
populous; but on a failure of the seasons, would have still less
resource than she has at present; and as far as the magnitude of the
cause would operate, would in consequence be more subject to famines,
and these famines would be more severe.”


In ancient Greece “the philosophers and statesmen perceived the
tendency of population to increase beyond the means of subsistence ;
and did not, like those of modern times, overlook the consideration of a
question, which so deeply affects the happiness and tranquillity of society.
We must give them credit for seeing the difficulty, however we execrate
the barbarous expedients they adopted to remove it.” (In this case,
exactly as in that of the speculum and female disease, which were in
some degree known to the Greeks, attention to the all-important subject
of population was afterwards prevented by the morbid sexual delicacy of
the Hebrew-christian religion.)
Solon permitted infanticide by law; Plato in his Eepublie says,
that the magistrates should regulate the increase of citizens, and pre-
vent undue multiplication; also that men and women should be allowed
to procreate only when at their greatest vigour, and that all weakly chil-
dren should be destroyed. Aristotle proposed that the men should not
be allowed to marry till thirty-seven, and the women till eighteen ; and
also that each woman should be allowed to produce only a certain
number, and if she afterwards became pregnant, an abortion should be
induced. He said that if, as in most States, every one were allowed to
have as many children as they pleased, poverty, the mother of crime and
sedition, must result.
The preventive check therefore probably operated to a considerable ex-
tent among the Greeks; and its deficiencies were supplied by the positive
one in the shape of constant and bloody wars.
Among the Romans the positive check, namely the ceaseless wars, was
the chief one. Under the Empire the preventive check also pre-
vailed greatly, in the shape of all sorts of vicious sexual habits.
Juvenal complains of the arts used to produce abortion, saying that
scarcely any natural birth was permitted to take place. “In most
countries, it is the frequency of marriage that causes promiscuous inter-
course ; but in Rome during the later periods of its history, morals were
so depraved, as to cause people to hate marriage and avoid it.”
“ All the checks to population, which have been hitherto considered in
the course of this review of human society, are clearly resolvable into
moral restraint, vice, and misery.
Of these, moral restraint, among the nations considered, has been seen
to have operated but very feebly compared with the others. Vice also,
though its effects seem to have been very considerable in the later periods
of Roman history, and in some other countries, yet upon the whole, seems
to have had much less influence on population, than the positive checks.
A large portion of the procreative power appears to have been called into
action, and the redundant population cut off by violent causes. Among
these, war is the most prominent feature, and after this may be ranked
famines, and violent diseases. In most of the countries considered, the
population seems to have been seldom measured accurately, according to
the average and permanent means of subsistence, but generally to have
vibrated between the two extremes; and consequently the oscillations
between want and plenty are strongly marked, as we should naturally
expect among less civilized nations,”


Mr. Malthas next examines, how these cheeks operate on the nations
of modern Europe, our own included. “In reviewing the states of
modern Europe,” ho says, “we are assisted in our inquiries by the regis-
ters of births, deaths, and marriages; which, when they are complete
and correct, point out to us with some degree of precision, whether the
prevailing checks to population be of the positive or preventive kind; and
give us, in many important points, more information respecting these
states, than we could receive from the most observing traveller.
One of the most curious and instructive points of view in which wo can
consider these registers, is the dependence of the marriages upon the
deaths. It has been justly observed by Montesquieu, that wherever there
is a place for two persons to live comfortably, a marriage will certainly
ensue; but in most of the countries of Europe, in the present state of their
population, experience will not allow us to expect any sudden and great
increase in the means of supporting a family. The place therefore for
the new marriage must in general be made by the dissolution of an old
one; and we find in consequence that, except after some great mortality,
or some sudden change of policy, peculiarly favourable to cultivation and
trade, the number of marriages is principally regulated by the number of
deaths. They reciprocally influence each other. There are few coun-
tries, where the common people have so much foresight as to defer mar-
tiase, till they have a fair prospect of being able to support all their
children. Some of the mortality therefore, in almost every country, is
forced by the too great frequency of marriage: and in every country a
great mortality, whether arising chiefly from this cause or from the num-
ber of great towns and factories, and the natural unhealthiness of the
situation, will necessarily produce a great frequency of marriage.
The mean proportion of annual marriages in most countries is as 1 to
108. Wherever the average is much higher, it must arise from the
greater average of death ; as for instance, we find that in some Dutch
villages, very unhealthily situated, the marriages were as 1 in 64 and the
deaths as lin 22, while the births and deaths were nearly equal; or in
other words the population nearly stationary. Compare this with Norway
where Ihe deaths are as 1 to 48, and the marriages as 1 to 130. The diffe-
rence in both deaths and marriages is nearly double.’’ (These statistics are
to be understood as applicable to the time when Mr. Malthus wrote, but
they illustrate the principle he is explaining).
“Unless when some sudden start in the agriculture, or other means
of obtaining food, takes place, more marriages will only cause more
deaths.” ,
“The proportion of yearly births to the whole population must evidently
depend, principally on the number of people marrying annually; and
therefore in countries which will not admit of a great increase of popu-
lation, must, like the marriages, depend chiefly on the deaths. Where an
actual decrease of population is not taking place, the births will always
supply the vacancies made by death, and exactly so much more as the in-
creasing agriculture and trade of the country will admit. In almost
every part of Europe, during the intervals of the great plagues, epidemics,
or destructive wars, with which, it is occasionally visited, the births exceed
the deaths.
u


In thirty-nine villages of Holland, where the yearly deaths areas 1
in 23, the births are also as lin 23. In Sweden, where the mortality is
about lin 35, the births are lin 28. In Norway, where the mortality is
lin 48, the births are lin 34. In all these instances the births are
evidently measured by the deaths, after making a proper allowance for the
excess of births, which the state of each country will admit . In Russia
this allowance must be great, as, although the mortality may be taken as
only 1 in 48 or 50, the births are as high as 1 in 20, owing to the present
rapid increase of population, which arises from the rapid expansion of the
resources of the country."
Mr. Malthus then examines in detail, the checks which operate in these
countries. s
“Norway has been long free from war, has avery healthy climate, and
in common years the mortality is less than in any other country in Eu-
rope. The proportion of annual deaths to the whole population is only as
1 to 48. Yet the population of Norway never seems to have increased
with great rapidity.
Before we enter upon an examination of its internal economy, we
must feel assured that, as the positive checks to its population have been
so small, the preventive checks must nave been proportionally great;
and we accordingly find from the registers, that the proportion of yearly
marriages to the whole population is as 1 to 130, which is a smaller pro-
portion of marriages than appears in the registers of any other country
except Switzerland. The proportion of yearly marriages is one of the
most obvious criterions of the operation of the preventive check.’’
The chief cause of the fewness of marriages is the peculiar state of the
country. There are few manufactures or means of emigration ; and it is
the custom among the farmers to have under them several labourers, to
whom they give a house and some land, and a vacancy among these is
the only prospect of maintaining a family. Therefore the great part of
the agricultural population remain single till a late period of life. “ Under
such circumstances the lower classes cannot increase much, till the in-
crease of mercantile stock or the division and improvement of farms
furnishes a greater quantity of employment to married labourers. lu
countries more fully peopled, this subject is always involved in great
obscurity. Each man naturally thinks that he has as good a chance of
finding employment as his neighbour ; and that if he fail in one place,
he shall succeed in some other. He marries therefore, and trusts to
fortune; and the effect too frequently is, that the redundant population,
occasioned in this manner, is repressed by the positive checks of poverty
and disease.
■ Norway is perhaps the only country in Europe, where the traveller
will hear fears expressed of a redundant population; and where the dan-
ger to the happiness of the lower classes from this cause is in some
degree seen and understood. This obviously arises from the smallness of
the population altogether, and the consequent narrowness of the subject.
If our attention wore confined to one parish, and there were-no powers of
emigrating from it, the most careless observer could not fail to remora,
that if all married at twenty, it would be perfectly impossible for ihe


formers, however carefully they might improve their land, to 6nd em-
ployment and food for those that would grow up; but when a great
number of these parishes are added together in a populous kingdom, the
largeness of the subject, and the power of moving from place to place,
obscure and confuse our view. We lose sight of a truth which before
appeared completely obvious: and in a most unaccountable manner,
attribute to the aggregate quantity of land, a power of supporting people,
beyond comparison greater than the sum of all its parts.”
“In Sweden the preventive checdt has not operated so largely, and there-
fore the mortality has been greater. The average proportion of deaths
in Sweden is as 1 to 34 J, which is a very large one considering the num-
ber of peopla employed in agriculture. The inhabitants of the towns are
only as 1 to 13 to those of the country; while in well-peopled countries,
they are nearly as Ito 3. In Prussia and Pomerania, where there are
many large towns, and the proportion of townsmen to countrymen is as
1 to 4, the average of death is as 1 to 37.”
Seasons of severe scarcity have frequently occurred in Sweden, in
which great numbers of the people were swept off. Much of the misery
and mortality was doubtless caused by the mistaken efforts of the
Swedish Government to increase population; to effect which they erected
numerous lying-in and foundling hospitals. “ But these have no ten-
dency to increase population, but only to increase poverty and misery ;
the only true mode of increasing their population would have been to
improve the state of agriculture.”
“ Positive laws to encourage marriage, not combined with religious
feeling, as, in China, seldom produce the effect, and generally show
ignorance in the legislator ; but the apparent need of them shows a great
degree of moral and political depravity in a State ; as it is cither insti-
tutions unfavourable to industry, and therefore to population, or else
the prevalence of vicious customs, which seem to call for them.”
“ A good illustration of the law of population is afforded by the fact,
certainly ascertained by the returns of the population made in France,
since the great Revolution, that the population rather increased than
diminished during that long and bloody struggle, in which it is calculated
that France lost' two and a half million of lives.” The reason was that
the increase of deaths led, as it always does, to a great increase of mar-
riages, by which the vacancies were easily supplied,- The enormous
powers of multiplication, which had been repressed, were permitted to
expand for awhile; and thus “ France has not lost a single birth by the
revolution. She has just cause to mourn the two and a half millions of
individuals which she may have lost, but not their posterity ; because if
these individuals had remained in the country, a proportionate number
of children, born of other parents, would not have come into existence.’’
Mr. Malthus thus examines in succession the checks to population in
the other European countries ; but we may pass on to his description of
those which operate among ourselves in England. He says “ The most
cursory view of society in this country must convince us, tho.t, through-
out all ranks, the preventive check to population prevails in a considerable


degree. Those among the higher classes, who live principally in towns,
often want the inclination to marry, from the facility with which they
can indulge themselves in an illicit intercourse with the sex. And others
are deterred from marrying, by the ideas of the expenses they must
retrench, and the pleasures of which they must deprive themselves,
on the supposition of having a family. When a fortune is large, these
considerations are certainly trivial; but a preventive foresight of this
kind has objects of much greater weight for its contemplation, as wo go
lower.
A man of liberal education, with an income only just sufficient to
enable him to associate in the rank of gentlemen, must feel absolutely
certain, that if he marry and have a family, he will bo obliged to give
up all his former connections. The woman that a man of education
would naturally make the object of his choice, is one brought up in the
same habits and sentiments with himself, and used to the familiar inter-
course of a society totally different from that, to which she must be
reduced by marriage. Can a man easily consent to placo the object of
his affections in a situation, so discordant probably to her habits and
inclination t Two or three steps of descent in society, particularly at
this round of the ladder, where education ends, and ignorance begins,
will not be considered by the generality ,of people, as a chimerical evil.
If society be desirable, it surely must be free, equal, and reciprocal
society, where benefits are conferred' as well as received; and not such
as the dependent finds with his patron, or the poor with the rich.
These considerations certainly prevent many in this rank of life from
following the bent of their inclinations in an early attachment. Others,
influenced either by a stronger passion or a weaker judgment, disregard
these considerations; and it would be hard indeed, if the gratification of
so delightful a passion as virtuous love, did not sometimes more than
counterbalance all its attendant evils. But I fear it must be acknow-
ledged, that the more general consequences of such marriages are rather
calculated to justify, than to disappoint, the forebodings of the prudent.
The sons of tradesmen and farmers, are exhorted not to marry, and
generally find it necessary to comply with this advice, till they are
settled in some business or farm, which may enable them to support a
family. These events may not perhaps occur till they are advanced in
life. The scarcity of farms is a very general complaint; and the compe-
tition in every kind of business is so great, that it is not possible, that
all should be successful. Among the clerks in counting-houses, and the
competitors for all kinds of mercantile and professional employment, it is
probable that the preventive check to population prevails more, than in
any other department of society.
The labourer who earns eighteen-pence, or two shillings a day, and
lives at his ease as a single man, will hesitate a little before he divides
that pittance among four or five, which seems to bo not more than suffi-
cient for one. Harder fare and harder labour he would perhaps be
willing to submit to, for the sake of living with the woman that he loves;
but he must feel conscious, that should he have a largo family, and any


111-fortune whatever, no degree of frugality—no possible exertion of his
strength, would preserve him from the heart-rending sensation of seeing
his children starve, or of being obliged to the parish for their support.
The servants, who live in the families of the rich, have restraints yet
stronger to break through in venturing upon marriage. They possess the
necessaries and even the comforts of life, almost in as great plenty as
their masters. Their work is easy and their food luxurious, compared
with the work and food of the class of labourers. Thus comfortably situ-
ated at present, what are their prospects if they marry 1 Without
knowledge or capital, either for business or farming, and unused and
therefore unable to earn a subsistence by daily labour, their only refuge
seems to be a miserable ale-house, which certainly offers no very enchant-
ing prospect of a happy evening to their lives. The greater number of
them therefore, deterred by this uninviting view of their future situation,
content themselves with remaining single where they are.
If this sketch of the state of society in England be near the truth, it
will be allowed, that the preventive check to population operates with
considerable force throughout all classes. And this observation is further
confirmed by abstracts from the registers, returned in consequence of the
late Population Act. These show that the annual marriages in England
and Wales, are to the whole population as 1 to 123 i, a smaller proportion
of marriages than obtains in any of the countries examined, except
Norway and Switzerland.
In the earlier part of the last century, Dr. Short estimated this pro-
portion as about Ito 115. It is probable that this calculation was then
correct, and the present diminution in the proportion of marriages, not-
withstanding an increase of population more rapidly than formerly, ■
owing to the more rapid progress of commerce and agriculture, is partly
a cause and partly a consequence, of the diminished mortality, that has
been observed of late years.
1 Those who live singly, or marry late, do not by such conduct contribute
in any degree to lessen the actual population, but merely to lessen the
proportion of premature mortality, that would otherwise be excessive. ”
The annual deaths, like the marriages, bear a smaller proportion to the
population in England, than in any other European country, except
Norway and Switzerland. “ This is owing to the superior cleanliness
and healthiness of the people, and also in great degree to the prevalence
of the preventive check.”
The annual proportion of births moreover, is, like the deaths and
marriages, the smallest next to these two countries; which marry latest,
produce fewest children, and therefore have longest lives of the European
States. “It has been hitherto usual with political calculators, to
consider a great proportion of births, as the surest sign of a vigorous
and flourishing state. It is to be hoped however, that this prejudice will
not last long. In countries circumstanced like America, or in other
countries after any great mortality, a large proportion of births may be
a favourable symptom; but in the average state of a well-peopled terri-
tory, there cannot well be a worse sign than a large proportion of births,
nor can there well be a better sign tnan a small proportion. In despotic,


miserable, or naturally unhealthy countries, the proportion of births ■will
generally be found very great. The desire of immediate gratification of
the sexual passions, and the removal of the restraint to it from prudence,
will in such countries prompt universally to early marriages; but when
these habits have once reiuced the people to the lowest possible state of
poverty, they can evidently have no farther edict upon the population.
Their only effect must bo on the degree of mortality; aud there is no
doubt, that if we could obtain accurate bills of mortality, in those coun-
tries where very few women remain unmarried, and all marry young,
the proportion of the annual deaths would be lin 17, 18, or 2(1; instead
of 1 in 34, 30, or 40 as in European {states, where the preventive check
operates. *
“ It has been calculated that the half of the surplus ot births in Scot-
land is drawn off in emigration; and it cannot be doubted that this
tends greatly to improve the condition of those who remain. Scotland is
certainly still over-peopled, but not so much as it was half a century
ago, when it contained fewer inhabitants.
“With regard to the population of Ireland, 1 shall only observe that
the extended use of the potato has allowed of a very rapid increase of it
during the last century. But the cheapness of this nourishing root, and
the small piece of ground, whicii under this cultivation will produce the
food for a family, joined to the ignorance and imprudence of the people,
which have prompted them to follow their inclinations with no other
prospect than an immediate bare subsistence, have encouraged marriage
to such a degree that the population is pushed much beyond the industry
and present resources of the country; ami the consequence naturally is,
that the lower classes are in a most depressed and miserable state.”
Mr. Malthus, having thus examined in what proportion the two alter-
native checks to population, the positive and preventive, have acted, and
do act, on the different nations of ancient and modern times, proceeds to
some general deductions from this review. “ That the checks which
have been mentioned,” he says, “are the immediate causes of the slow
increase of population, and that these checks result principally from an
insufficiency of subsistence, will be evident from the comparatively rapid
increase, which has invariably taken place, whenever, by some sudden
enlargement in ths means of subsistence, these checks have been in any
considerable degree removed.
It has bten universally remarked, that all new colonies settled in
healthy countries, where room aud food were abundant, have constantly
made a rapid progress in population." He instances the Greek, Portu-
guese, and Spanish colonies, and above all others the United States.
“Prom the late census made in America it appears, that taking all


the States together, they have still continued to double their numbers
every twenty-live years ; and as the whole population is now so great as
not to be materially affected by the emigrations from Europe, and as it
is well known that in some of the towns and districts near the sea-coast,
the progress of population is comparatively slow; it is evident that in
the interior of the country in general, the period of doubling, from pro-
creation only, must have tern considerably less than twenty-five years.
We have no reason to believe that Great Britain is less populous at
present, for the era gration of the small parent stock, (which settled in
Aueiica in 1649, b mg in number 21,200), which produced the present
population. Whatever was the orig nal number of British emigrants
which increased so fast in North America, let us ask, why does not an
equal number produce an equal increase in the same time in Great Bri-
tain 1 The obvious reason to be assigned is the want of food ; and that
this want is the most efficient cause of the three immediate checks to
population, which have been observed to prevail in all societies, is evident
from the rapidity with which even old states recover the desolations of
war, pestilence, and famine. They are then for a short time placed a
little in the position of new colonies, and the effect is always what might
he exptcied. If the industry of ihe inhabitants be not destroyed, subsis-
tence wi'l soon increase beyond the wants of the reduced numbers ; and
the invariable consequence will be, that, population, which before perhaps
was nearly stationary, will begin immediately to increase, and will con-
tinue its progress till the former population is recovered.
The ntidiiuinished population of France after the revolution is a
striking iastanceof this. The traces of the most destructive famines in
China, ludostan, Egypt, and other countries, are by all accounts very
soon obliterated ; aud the most tremendous convulsions of nature, such
as volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, if they do not happen so fre-
quently ■as to drive away the inhabitants or destroy their spirit of
industry, have been found to produce but a trifling effect On the average
population of any state. ”
Tabbs which have been made of the number of great and wasting
pestibnccs and famines recorded in history, show how very frequent
these have been. It appears from them that four hundred and thirty-one
epidemics are known to have occurred, of which thirty-one were before the
Christian era. “Thus then the periodical returns of such epidemics to
some country that we are acquainted with, have been on an average at
the interval of ouly four and a-half years.”
“ Of the two hundred and fifty-four great famines enumerated in these
tables, fifteen were before the Christian era. Hence it appears that the
average interval between the visits of this dreadful scourge, in some part
of the world with whose history we are acquainted, has been only about
seven aud a half years.
How far these terrible correctives to the reuundancc of mankind have
been occasioned by the too rapid increase of population, is a point which
it would be very difficult to determine with any degree of precision. The
causes of most of our diseases appear so mysterious, and probably are so.
various, that it would be rashness to lay too much stress on any single


one; but it will not perhaps be too much to say, that among these causes
we ought certainly to rank crowded houses, and insufficient or unwhole-
some food, which are the natural consequences of an increase of popula-
tion, faster than the accomodations of a country with respect to habitations
and food, will allow.
Almost all the histories of epidemics confirm this supposition, by des-
cribing them in general as making their principal ravages among the
lower classes of people. Moreover a very considerable number of the
epidemic years either follow or are preceded by, seasons of dearth and
bad food.
Of the other great scourge of mankind —famine, it may be observed,
that it is not in the nature of things, that the increase of population
should absolutely produce one. This increase, though rapid, is neces-
sarily gradual: and as the human frame cannot be supported even for a
very short time, without food, it is evident, that no more human beings
can grow up than there is provision to maintain. But though the prin-
ciple of population cannot absolutely produce a famine, it prepares the
way for it in the most complete manner; and by obliging all the lower
classes to subsist nearly on the smallest quantity of food that will sup-
port life, turns even a slight deficiency from the failure of the seasons
into severe dearth; and may be fairly said, therefore, to be one of the
principal causes of famines."
“ The highest average proportion of births to deaths in England may
be considered as about 12 to 10 ;in France 11J to 10. We have reason
to believe that these proportions have not varied in any considerable
degree, during the last century; and it will appear therefore, that the
population of France and England has accommodated itself more nearly
to the average produce of each country, than many other states. The
operation of the preventive check, wars, the silent, though certain
destruction of life in large towns and manufactories, and the close habi-
tations and insufficient food of many of the poor, prevent population from
outrunning the means of subsistence; and, if I may use the expression,
which certainly at first appears strange, supersede the necessity of great
and ravaging epidemics to destroy what is redundant.
In one of the States of North America, the proportion of births to
deaths on an average of seven years, ending 17-43, was 30 to 10 or 3 to 1.
In France and England, the highest average proportion cannot be
reckoned at more than 12 to 10. Great and astonishing as this difference
is, we ought not to be so wonder-struck at it, as to attribute it to the
miraculous interposition of heaven. The causes of it are not remote,
latent, and mysterious, but near us, round about us, and open to the
investigation of every inquiring mind. Since the world began, the
causes of population and depopulation have been probably as constant,
as any of the laws of nature, with which we are acquainted.
The passion between the sexes has appeared in every age to be so
nearly the same, that it may always be considered, in algebraic language,
as a given quantity. The great law of necessity, which prevents popula-
tion from increasing in any country, beyond the food which it can either
produce or acquire, is a law so open to our view so obvious to our under


standings, that we cannot for a moment dotibt it. The different modes,
which nature takes to repress a redundant population, do not appear
indeed to us so certain and regular; but though we cannot always pre-
dict the mode, we may with certainty predict the fact. If the propor-
tion of the births to the deaths for a few years, indicates an increase of
numbers much beyond the proportional increased or acquired food of the
country, we may be perfectly certain, that unless an emigration take
place, the deaths will shortly exceed the births. If there were no other
depopulating causes, and if the preventive check did not operate very
strongly, every country would without doubt be subject to periodical
plagues and famines.
The only true criterion of a real and permanent increase in the popu-
lation of every country is the increase of the means of subsistence. But
even this criterion is subject to some slight variations, which however
are completely open to our observation. In some countries, population
seems to have been forced; that is, the people have been habituated by
degrees to live almost upon the smallest possible quantity of food. There
must have been periods in such countries, where population increased
permanently without an increase in the means of subsistence. China,
India, and the countries possessed by the Bedouin Arabs, appear to
answer to this description. The average produce of these countries seems
to be but barely sufficient to support the lives of the inhabitants, and of
course any deficiency from the badness of the seasons, must be fatal.
Nations in this state must necessarily be subject to famines.
In America, where the reward of labour is at present so liberal, the
lower classes might retrench very considerably in a year of scarcity, with-
out materially distressing themselves. A famine therefore, seems to be
almost impassible. It may be expected, that in the progress of the popu-
lation of America, the labourers will in time be much less liberally re-
warded. The numbers will in this case permanently increase, without a
proportional increase in the food.
Other circumstances being the same, it may be affirmed, that countries
are populous according to the quantity of human food, which they
produce, or can acquire; and happy, according to the liberality with
which this food is divided, or the quantity which a day’s labour will
purchase. Corn countries are more populous than pasture countries, and
rice countries than corn countries. But their happiness does not depend
either upon their being thinly or fully inhabited, upon their poverty or
their riches, their youth or their age ; but on the proportion which the
population and the food bear to each other. This proportion is generally
the most favourable in new colonies, where the knowledge and industry of
in old State operate on the fertile unappropriated land of a new one. In
other cases the youth or the age of a State is not, in this respect, of great
importance. It is probable that the food of Great Britain is divided in
more liberal shares to her inhabitant? ft the present period, than it was
two thousand, three thousand, or four thousand years ago. And it has
appeared, that the poor and thinly-inhabited tracts of the Scotch Highlands
are more distressed by a redundant population", than the most populous
parts of Europe.


If a country were never to be overrun by a people more advanced in
arts, but left to its own natural progress in civilization ; (rom the time
that its progress might be considered as a unit, to the time that it might
be considered as a million, during the lapse of many thousand years,
there would not be a single period, when the mass of people could he said to
bo tree from distress, either directly or indirectly, for want of food. Iu
every state of Europe, since we first have accounts of it, millions and
millions of human existences have been repressed from this simple cause,
though perhaps in some of these States an absolute famine may never
have been known.
Must it not then be acknowledged by an attentive examiner of the his-
tories of mankind, that in every age, and m every state, in which man has
existed or does now exist,
The increase of population is necessarily limited by the means of
subsistence;
Population invariably increases when the means of subsistence in-
crease, unless prevented by powerful and obvious checks;
These checks, and the checks which keep the population down to the
level of the means of subsistence, are moral restraint, vice, and misery ?
In regarding the state of society, which has been last considered, I
think it appears, that in modern Europe, the positive checks to population
prevail less, and the preventive checks more, than in past times, and in
the more uncivilized parts of the world.
War, the predominant check to the population of savage nations, has
certainly abated, even including the late unhappy revolutionary contests;
and since the prevalence of a greater degree of personal cleanliness, of
better modes of building and draining towns, and of a more equable dis-
tribution of the products of the soil from improving knowledge of political
economy, plagues, violent diseases, and famines have been certainly miti-
gated, and have become less frequent.
With regard to the preventive check to population, though it must be
acknowledged, that that branch of it, which comes under the head of
moral restraint, does not at present prevail much among the male part of
society; yet lam strongly disposed to believe, that it prevails more than
in those States which were first considered ; and it can scarcely be doubted
that in modern Europe a much larger proportion of women pass a con-
siderable part of their lives in the exercise of this virtue, than in past
times, and among uncivilized nations. But however this may be, if wo
consider only the general term, which implies principally an infrequency
of the marriage union from the fear of a family, without reference to
consequences, it may be considered in this light, as the most powerful of
the checks, which in modern Europe keep down the population to tbs
level of the means of subsistence.


Mr. Malthus then proceeds to consider many of the prevalent fallacies
on the subject of human progress, and the law of population; to which I
beg the reader’s particular attention,, as they are the very same, that are
still constantly repeated. The law of population is so no-‘ T el and start-
ling, so paroduxicalj and so thoroughly opposed to the ordinary modes of
reasoning on human affairs: and moreover by its unparalleled importance
so completely throws other subjects into the shade, be>ides presenting
such a gloomy picture of human destiny; that it is scarcely to be wondered
at, that men have refused to give it the attentive consideration which is
needed for its clear comprehension,and have clung with a desperate tena-
city to the old errors, however unanswerably they have been exposed. Bu r .
there is not within the whole range of human thought a single subject, m
•which ignorance or misconception is so inevitably ruinous; and therefore
core on which fallacies are so dangerous, and where more strenuous en-
deavours are required to extirpate them from every mind. The law of
population is as certainly true, and as clearly shown as that of gravitation ;
and it it had been openly discussed, instead of suppressed by the morbid
sexual delicacy, its truth would already have been universally recognised,
bet any man only really examine it, and not take it on hearsay from
those who have never examined it; let him openly state any doubter ob-
jection he may have, and he may be certain that they will be easily
answered, and that his conviction of the truth of the law, notwithstanding
i<s paradoxical appearance, will become absolute. How can a man ex-
pect to understand any truth if he do not disclose his doubts, and seek
more information on the subject ; in a word give it “ fair play ?”
All that the law of population needs, is open discussion , and its recog-
nition ia a few years would be as universal as that of the circulation of
the blood. It is because people misconceive the very meaning of the law,
and recklessly adopt any surface fallacy on the subject, that it is so little
attended to.
In the first place with regard to the systems of perfectibility* and the
idea that the evils of over-population are at a and belong rather to
futurity than to tho present and the past, (a mistake still very commonly
prevalent,) Mr. Malthus says “ To a person who views the past and present
states of mankind in the light in which they have appeared in the preceding
pages, it cannot but be a matter of astonishment, that all the writers on
the perfectibility of man and of society, who have noticed tho argument
of tho principle of population, treat it always very slightly, and invariably
represent the difficulties arising from it, as at a great and almost
immeasurable distance. They think that no difficulty from over-popu-
lation or the tendency to it would arise, till the whole earth had been
cultivated like a garden. But the truth is, that the difficulty, so far
from being remote, is imminent and immediate. At every period during
the progress of cultivation, from the present moment till the earth was
become like a garden, the difficulty from want of food would constantly
be pressing on mankind. Though the produce of the earth would be


increasing every year, population wotild be tending to increase much
faster, and the redundancy must necessarily be checked by the
periodical or constant action of moral restraint, vice, or misery.’’
Mr. Malthus applies the law of population to the schemes of human
perfectibility brought forward by Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and other
writers; and shows how this great natural difficulty, which had not been
taken into consideration, completely destroys all their bright anticipations
of the future destiny of mankind. “Mr. Godwin in one place, speaking
of population, says, ‘ There is a principle in human society, by which
population is perpetually kept down to the level of the means of subsis-
tence.’ This principle, which Mr. Godwin thus mentions as some mys-
terious and occult cause, and which he does not attempt to investigate,
has appeared to be the grinding law of necessity—misery, and the fear of
misery.”
“ The ereat error under which Mr. Godwin labours throughout his
whole work, is the attributing of almost all the vices and misery that
prevail in civil society to human institutions. Political regulations, and
the established administration of property, are with him the fruitful
sources of all evil, the hot-beds of all the crimes, that degrade mankind.
But the truth is, that though human institutions appear to be, and
indeed often are, the obvious and obtrusive causes of much mischief to
mankind, they are in reality light and superficial, in comparison with
those deeper-seated causes of evil which result from the laws of nature
and the passions of mank'nd.” (This error is the prevailing one among
the political and social reformers at the present day).
“ How little Mr. Godwin has turned his attention to the real state ot
human society, will sufficiently appear from the manner, in which he
endeavours to remove the difficulty of an over-charged population. He
says, ‘ The obvious answer to this objection is, that to reason thus is to
foresee difficulties at a great distance. Three-fourths of the habitable
globe are now uncultivated. The parts already cultivated are capable of
immeasurable improvement. Myriads of centuries of still increasing
population may pass away, and the earth be still found sufficient for the
subsistence of its inhabitants.’
“ To suppose,” says Mr. Malthus “ that, in speaking of these effects of
the principle of population, I look to certain periods in future, when
population will exceed the means of subsistence in a much greater degree
than at present, and that the evils arising from this principle are rather
in contemplation than in existence, is, I must again repeat, a total mis-
conception of the argument. Poverty, and not absolute famine, is the
specific effect of the principle of population, as I have endeavoured to
show. Many countries are now suffering all the evils which can ever be
expected to flow from this principle; and even if we were arrived at the
absolute limit to all further increase of produce, a point which wo shall
certainly never reach, I should by no means expect that these evils would
be in any marked manner aggravated. The increase of produce in most
European countries is so very slow, compared with what would be re-
quired to support an unrestricted increase of people, that the checks which
are constantly in action to repress the population to the level of a produce,


increasing so slowly,-would have very little more to do in wearing it down
to a produce absolutely stationary.”
Next of emigration, as a remedy for the effects of the law of population,
(the most prevalent of all fallacies on the subject, and also the one which
most naturally presents itself).
“ It may be said that in the case of a redundant population, the
natural and obvious remedy that presents itself is, emigration to those
parts that are uncultivated. As these parts are of great extent, and very
thinly peopled, this resource might appear on a first view of the subject
an adequate remedy, or at least of a nature to remove the evil to a
distant period; but when we advert to experience, and the actual state of
the uncivilized parts of the globe, instead of anything like an adequate
remedy, it will appear but a slight palliative.”
The obstacles which oppose the establishment of new colonies among
the uncivilized nations of Asia and Africa are great; possession of
these countries could not be obtained without a large armed force and
frequent warfare with the natives, who must moreover be eventually
exterminated with an immensity of misery. In Australia and America,
these preliminary steps have been taken, and a secure possession gained;
and “for many years before the American war and since, the facilities
for emigration to this new world, were unusually great; and it must be
considered undoubtedly as a very happy circumstance for any country, to
have so comfortable an asylum for its redundant population. But I
would ask whether, even during these periods, the distress among the
common people in this country was little ; and whether every man felt
secure before he ventured on marriage, that however large his family
might be, he should find no difficulty in supporting it without parish
assistance ? ”
The ties of family, and love to one’s native soil; the doubts and uncer-
tainties which ever attend distant emigrations, particularly in the appre-
hensions of the uneducated classes; the expense and difficulty of so
critical a step, and many other powerful obstacles, oppose emigration, and
prevent it from ever being used to such an extent, as even to palliate
materially for a short time the evils of poverty, far less to supersede
wholly the usual preventive and positive checks, namely—moral restraint,
prostitution, or premature death.
“ Every resource, however, from emigration, if used effectually, must
be of short duration. There is scarcely a State in Europe, except per-
haps Russia, whose inhabitants do not often endeavonr to better their
condition by removing to other countries. Let us suppose for a moment,
that in this more enlightened part of the globe, the internal economy of
each state were to be so admirably regulated, that no checks existed to
population, and that the different governments provided every facility for
emigration. Taking the population of Europe, excluding Russia, at one
hundred millions, and allowing a greater increase of produce thau is
probable, or even possible in the mother countries, the redundancy of
parent stock in a single century would be eleven hundred millions, which,
added to the natural increase of the colonies during the same time, would


more than double what has been supposed to be the present population of
the whole globe.
It is evident therefore, that the reason why the resource of emigration
has so long continued to be held out as a remedy for redundant popula-
non, is, because from the natural unwillingness of people to desert their
native country, and the difficulty and hardships of clearing and culti.
vating fresh sod, it never is or can be, adequately adopted. If this
remedy were indeed really effectual, and had power so far to relieve the
disorders of vice and misery in old states, as to place them in the condi-
tion of the most prosperous new colonies, we should soon see the phial
exhausted; and when the disorders returned with increased virulence,
every hope from this quarter would be for ever closed.
It is clear therefore, that with any view of making room for an unre-
stricted population, or superseding the necessity of powerful checks to it,
emigration is perfectly inadequate."
Next of the Poor Laws, or any artificial interference in the wages of
labour, as a remedy.
“To remedy the frequent distresses of the poor, laws to enforce their
relief have been instituted, and in the establishment of a general system
of this kind, England has particularly distinguished herself. But it is to
be feared that though it may have alleviated a little the intensity of
individual misfortune, it has spread the evil over a much larger surface."
“No possible sacrifices of the rich, particularly in money, could for any
time prevent the occurrence of distress among the lower members of society
whoever they were. Great changes might indeed be made. The rich
might become poor, and some of the poor rich; but while the present
proportion between the population and food continues, a part of the
society must necessarily find it difficult to support a family, and this
difficulty will naturally fall on the least fortunate members."
“The price of labour, when left to find its natural level, is a most im-
portant political barometer, expressing the relation between the supply of
provisions, and the demand for them: between the quantity to be consumed
and the number of consumers; and taken on the average, independently
of accidental circumstances, it further expresses clearly the wants of
society respecting population; that is, whatever may be the number of
children to a marriage, necessary to maintain exactly the present popu-
lation, the price of labour will be just sufficient to support this number,
or be above it, or below it, according to the real fund for the maintenance
of labour, whether stationary, progressive, or retrograde. Instead how-
ever, of considering it in this light, we consider it as something which we
may raise or depress at pleasure, something which depends principally
Upon His Majesty’s justices of the peace. When an advance in the price
of provisions already expresses, that the demand is too great for the
supply, in order to put the labourer in the same condition as before, we
raise the price of labour, that is, we increase the demand, and are then
much surprised that the price of provisions continues rising. In this we
act much in the same manner as if, when the quicksilver in the weather-
glass stood at storing, we were to raise it by some mechanical pressure to
set fair and then be greatly astonished that it continued raining. And yet


many men who would shrink at the proposal of a maximum in the price of
provisions, would propose themselves, that the price of labour should be
proportioned to the price of provisions, and do not seem to be aware that
the two proposals are almost the same, and that both tend directly to
famine.”
“ The poor laws tend to depress the condition of the poor in two ways.
Their first obvious tendency is to increase population without increasing
the food for its support. A poor man may marry, with little or no pros-
pect of being able to support a family without parish assistance. They
may be said therefore to create the poor which they maintain.
Secondly, the quantity of food consumed in workhouses, diminishes the
share which would otherwise belong to the other members of society,
raises the price of provisions, and thus in the same manner forces more
to become dependent.
If men be induced to marry from the mere prospect of parish assistance
they are not only unjustly tempted to bring unhappiness and dependence
upon themselves and their children, but also, without knowing it, to in-
jure all in the same class with themselves.”
“ If we examine some of our statutes strictly with reference to the
principle of population, we shall find that they attempt an absolute im-
possibility. The famous 43rd of Elizabeth, which has been so often
referred to and admired, enacts, that the overseers of the poor shall provide
work for all the children, whose parents are not able to support them:
and shall raise by taxation, from the inhabitants of the parish, materials
to set all the poor to work.
What is this but saying, that the funds for the maintenance of labour
may be increased at will and without limit, by a fiat ofgoverment?
Strictly speaking, this clause is as arrogant and absurd, as if it had en-
acted, that two ears of wheat should in future grow, where one only had
grown before. The execution of this famous clause is a physical impos-
sibility ; and it is only owing to its incomplete execution that it still
remains on our statute book."
“ The attempts to employ the poor on any great scale in manufactures,
have almost invariably failed, and the stock and materials have been
wasted. Wherever they have been partially successful, their effect has
been to throw out of employment many independent workmen engaged
in the same manufactures ; for these cannot contend with competitors,
supported by so great a bounty. It should be observed, in general, that
when a fund for the maintenauce of labour is raised by assessment, the
greatest part of it is not a new capital brought into trade, but an old one,
which before was much more profitably employed, turned into a new
channel; and this aggravates the absurdity of supposing, that it is in the
power of a government to find employment for all its subjects, however
fast they may increase.”
“ The poor laws, as a general system, are founded on a gross error ;
and the common declamations on the subject of the poor, which we see
so often in print, and hear continually in conversation, namely, that the
marker price of labour ought always to be sufficient decently to support
a family, and that employment ought to be found for all those that are


.'willing to work, is in effect to say—that the funds for the maintenance
of labour in this country are not only infinite, but might be made to
increase with such rapidity, that, supposing us at present to have six
millions of labourers, including their families, we might have ninety-six
millions in another century," &c. ;
Next of the fallacies of waste among the rich, and uncultivated lands,
(which, with emigration and government employment, are the most pre-
valent fallacies still existing on the subject of poverty ani its remedies).
“ Among the other prejudices which have prevailed on the subject of
population, it has been generally thought, that while there is either
waste among the rich, or land remaining uncultivated, in any country,
the complaints for want of food cannot be justly founded; or at least
that the pressure of distress among the poor is to be attributed to the ill
conduct of the higher classes of society and the bad management of the
land. The real effect however, of these two circumstances is merely to
narrow the limit of the actual population; but they have little or no
influence on what may be called the average pressure of distress on the
poorer members of society. If our ancestors had been so frugal and
industrious, and had transmitted such habits to their posterity, that
nothing superfluous was now consumed by the higher classes, no horses
were used for pleasure, and no land was left uncultivated, a striking
difference would appear, in the state of the actual population ; but pro-
bably nope whatever in the state of the lower classes, with respect to the
price of labour and the difficulty of supporting a family. The waste
among the rich, and the horses kept for pleasure, have indeed a little of
the effect of the consumption of grain in distilleries, noticed before with
regard to China. On the supposition that the food consumed in this
manner, may be withdrawn on the occasion of a scarcity, and be applied
to the relief of the poor, they operate certainly, as far as they go, like
granaries that are only opened at the time they are most needed; and
must tend therefore rather to benefit than to injure the lower classes of
society.
With regard to the uncultivated land, it is evident that its effect on the
poor is neither to injure nor to benefit them. The sudden cultivation of
it will indeed tend to improve their condition for a time, and the neglect
of lands before cultivated will certainly make their situation worse for a
certain period; but when no changes of this kind are going forward, the
effect of uncultivated land on the lower, classes operates merely like the
possession of a smaller territory.
We should not be too ready to make inferences against the internal
economy of a country from the appearance of uncultivated land, without
other evidence. The fact is, that as no country has ever reached, or pro-
bably ever will reach, its highest possible acme of produce, it appears
always as if the want of industry, or the ill-direction of that industry,
was the actual limit to the increase of produce and population, and not
the absolute refusal of nature to yield any more ; but it is never the
question with regard to the principle of population, whether a country
will produce any more, but whether it may be made to produce s
sufficiency to keep pace with an unchecked increase of people.


The allowing of the produce of the earth to be absolutely unlimited,
scarcely removes the weight of a hair from the argument, which depends
entirely on the differently increasing ratios of population and food ; and
all that the most enlightened government, and the most persevering and
best guided efforts of industry can do, is to make the necessary checks to
population operate more equally, and in a direction to produce the least
evil; but to remove them is a task absolutely hopeless.”
Mr. Maltbus next treats “of our future prospects regarding the
removal or mitigation of the evils, arising from the principle of popu-
lation ; and first, of moral restraint , and our duty to practice this
virtue.”
Moral restraint—that is, sexual abstinence —is in the eyes of Mr. Malthus
the only remedy for poverty and other evil effects of the principle of popu-
lation ; the preventive check being the only possible alternative to the
positive one.
He says, “As it appears that in every state of society we have con-
sidered, the natural progress of population has been constantly and
powerfully checked ; and as it seems evident, that no improved form of
government; no plans of emigration; no benevolent institutions; and no
degree or direction of industry can prevent the operation of some great
check to population ; it follows, that we must submit to it as an inevitable
law of nature : and the only inquiry that remains is, how it may take
place with the least possible prejudice to the virtue and happiness of
human society. All the immediate checks to population, which have
been observed to prevail in the same and different countries, seem to be
resolvable into moral restraint, vice, and misery; and if our choice be
confined to these, it is easy to decide which it would be most eligible to
encourage. It is better that the check should arise from foreseeing the
difficulties attending a family, than from the actual presence of these
difficulties.
The imprudent indulgence of all our appetites is followed by similar
bad effects. If we eat or drink inmoderately, we suffer; if we give way
to anger we injure ourselves or our neighbours ; if we multiply too fast, we
die miserably of poverty and contagious diseases. The evils attendant on
increasing too fast, are not so immediately or obviously dependent on the
conduct which leads to them, as in the other instances; and this in
great measure accounts for the inattention of mankind to the subject.”
“ The fecundity of the human species is a Jaw, exactly similar in its
great features, to all the other laws of nature. It is strong and general,
and the evils arising from it are incidental to these necessary qualities
of strength and generality, and are capable of being greatly mitigated
and rendered comparatively light, by human energy and virtue. We have
x


under our guidance a great power, capable of peopling a desert region in
a small number of years; and yet under other circumstances capable of
being confined to any limits, however narrow, by human energy and:
virtue, at the expense of a small comparative quantity of evil.”
“As moral restraint is the only virtuous mode of avoiding the
incidental evils, arising from the principle of population, our obligation
to practise it evidently rests on the same foundation as all the other
virtues—the foundation of utility.
Whatever indulgence we may be disposed to allow to occasional failures
in the discharge of a duty of acknowledged difficulty, yet of the strict
line of duty we cannot doubt. Our obligation not to marry, till we have
a fair prospect of being able to support our children, will appear to
deserve the attention of moralists, if it can be proved that an attention to
this obligation is of most powerful effect in the prevention of misery;
and that, if it were the general custom to follow the first impulse of
nature, and marry at the age of puberty, the universal prevalence of
every known virtue in the greatest conceivable degree, would fail to rescue
society from the most wretched and desperate state of want, with all
the diseases and famines, which usually accompany it.
One of the principal reasons, which have prevented an assent to the
doctrine of population, is a great unwillingness to believe that the Deity
would, by the laws of nature, bring beings into existence, which by the
laws of nature could not be supported. But if, in addition to the gene-
ral activity and direction of our industry, put in motion by these laws,
we find that by moral restraint, which both reason and revelation urge
upon ns, we can avoid these evils, then will this apparent imputation on
the goodness of the Deity be done away with.”
Mr. Malthus then draws a picture of what he conceives the state of
society would be, if all were to refrain from marrying till they could sup-
port a family. He says that if by this means, fewer children were born,
the wages of labour would be raised, and “ all squalid poverty would be
removed from society.
The interval between puberty and marriage must, according to this
.supposition, be passed in strict chastity, because the law of chastity can-
not be broken without producing evil. Promiscuous intercourse evi-
dently weakens the best feelings of the heart, and degrades in a marked
manner the female character ; and any other intercourse would, without
improper arts, bring as many children into society as marriage, with a
much greater probability of their becoming a burden on it.
These considerations show that the virtue of chastity is not, as some
have supposed, a forced produce of artificial society, but that it has a
real and solid foundation in nature and reason ; being apparently the
only virtuous means of avoiding the misery and vice, which so often
result from the principle of population.”
“There are perhaps few actions, which tend so directly to diminish
the general happiness, as to marry without the means of supporting
children.
If we feel convinced of the misery, arising from a redundant popula-
tion on the one hand, and of the evils and unhappiness, particularly to


the female sex, arising from promiscuous intercourse on the other, I do
not see how it is possible for any person, who acknowledges utility as the;
great foundation of morals, to escape the conclusion, that moral restraint
is the strict line of duty; and this is strengthened and confirmed by the
dictates of religion. At the same time, I believe that few of my readers
can be less sanguine in their expectation of any great change in the con-
duct of men than I am.”
“ The duty is intelligible to the meanest capacity. It is merely not to
bring beings into the world, for whom one cannot find means of support.
From conversations I have had with some of their number, I should by
no means say, that it would be a difficult task to make the common
people comprehend the principle of population, and its effect in producing
low wages and poverty.”
“ It does not seem visionary to suppose that if the true and permanent
cause of poverty were clearly explained, and forcibly brought home to each
man’s bosom, it would have some, and perhaps no slight influence on his
conduct; at least the experiment has never yet been fairly tried. Almost;
everything that has hitherto been done for the poor, has tended as if
with solicitous care, to throw a veil of obscurity over this subject, and to
hide from them the true cause of their poverty. When the wages ef
labour are hardly enough to maintain two children, a man marries, and
has five or six. He of course finds himself miserably distressed. He
accuses the low rate of wages; he accuses the parish for their tardy and
scanty assistance; he accuses the avarice of the rich; he accuses the
partial and unjust institutions of society; and perhaps, he accuses the
dispensations of Providence. But he never adverts to the real quarter
whence his distress arises. The last person he would think of accusing
is himself, on whom in fact, the principal blame rests, except in so far as
he has been deceived by the higher classes of society; who are however,
generally as ignorant of the matter as himself. He may perhaps wish that
he had not married, but it never enters into his head that he has done
anything wrong. He has always been told, that to raise up subjects for
his king and country, is a highly meritorious act. He naturally thinks
that he is suffering for righteousness’sake, and is indignant at the cruelty
and injustice of others, tor allowing him so to suffer.
Till these errors and prejudices have been corrected, it cannot be said
that any fair experiment has been made with the understandings of the
poor; and we cannot justly accuse them of imprudence, till they act, as
they now do, after it has been fully shown to them, that they themselves are
the cause of their own poverty; that the means of improving their condition
are in their own hands, and in the hands of no other persons whatever ;
that society and the government are without any direct power in this
matter, and cannot assist them, however they might desire to do so;
that when the wages of labour will not support a family, it is a certain
sign that the country cannot support more inhabitants: that if they
marry in this case, they are throwing a useless burden on society, plnng-
ing themselves into distress, and bringing upon themselves various mise-
ries and diseases, which might all have been avoided, had they attended
to the dictates of reason and the laws of nature.


The. object of those who really wish to better the condition of the
lower classes, must be, to raise the relative proportion between the jp’rice
oflabour, and the price of food. We have hitherto principally endeavour-
ed to attain this end by encouraging the married poor, and consequently
increasing the number of labourers, and overstocking the market with
that commodity, (labour), which we still say we wish to be dear. This
has been tried in many different countries, and for many hundred years,
and its success is just what might have been expected. It is really time
now to try something else.
In all old and fully peopled States it is by checking the supply of labourers
and by this means alone, that we can rationally expect any essential or
permanent amelioration in the condition of the poor. Finding that how-
ever fast we increase the quantity of food, the quantity of consumers
more than keeps pace with it, and that with all our efforts we are still as
far as ever behind, we should be convinced, that our efforts, directed in
this way only, will never succeed. We should then try to proportion the
population to the food, since it is impossible to proportion the food to
unrestricted population. Both objects indeed must be strenuously pur-
sued ; and thus wo might obtain the two grand desiderata, a great actual
population, and a state of society, in which all squalid poverty and
dependence would be comparatively little known.
A market overstocked with labourers and an ample remuneration to
each labourer are matters perfectly incompatible. In the annals of the
world they never existed together ; and to couple them even in imagina-
tion betrays a gross ignorance of the simplest principles of political
economy.” /
“ But let those, who are unconvinced by these arguments, attend to
»the consequence of pursuing the opposite mode. :
If we should wish all to marry young, and still hope to be able to
surmount the evils, diseases, and misery, that this will cause, be assured
all our efforts will be in vain. Nature will not, cannot be defeated in
her purposes. The necessary mortality must come iu some form or other;
and the extirpation of one disease by human skill, will only be the signal
for the birth of another, perhaps more fatal.
In a country which keeps its population at a certain standard, if the
average number of marriages and births be given, it is evident that the
average of deaths will also be given; and the diseases or channels of
death will always convey away a certain quantity. Now if we stop up
one of these channels, or in other words extirpate one form of disease,
others must become more fatal, so long as the same number of marriages
and births takes place. Thus it has often been remarked by physicians,
that diseases change their forms at different periods, from causes they
cannot account for. Thus, while some diseases, as the plague, dysentery,
&c., have become less frequent in England, others, as consumption,
gout, lunacy, &c., have become more frequent. Sanguine hopes have;
been .formed of the benefit which would accrue to the race, from the
citihetion of different forms of diseases; but these hopes are demon-'
strably vain, as long as the same proportion of births takes place.
: ft cannot be said, that we leave individuals free to follow their own


choice on the matter; for at present the Poor Laws give a direct and sys-
tematic encouragement to marriage, and our private benevolence has
often the same tendency, namely to facilitate the rearing of families, and
to equalise as much as possible the circumstances of married and single
men. Throughout all the ranks of society, moreover, the prevailing
feelings respecting the duty and obligation of marriage, cannot but have a
very powerful influence. A man who thinks that he will have failed in
an important duty to society by going out of the world without leaving
children, will be disposed rather to force than to restrain his inch
nation.
As to the effects of the knowledge of the principal cause of poverty
on civil liberty , I believe that nothing would so powerfully contribute to
a rational freedom, as a thorough knowledge of this subject; while igno-
rance of it, forms at present one of its chief obstacles. The pressure of dis-
tress on the poor, with the habit of attributing this distress to their rulers,
appears to me to be the rock of defence, the guardian spirit of despotism.
It affords to the tyrant the unanswerable plea of necessity. It is the
reason that all free goverments tend constantly to their own destruction,;
that so many noble efforts in the cause of freedom have failed; and that
almost every revolution, after a long and bloody struggle, has ended in a
military despotism. When an established government has been destroyed,
the poor, finding their evils not removed, turn their resentment against
the successors in power ; and so on without end, till the majority of the
well-disposed people, sick of anarchy, are ready to throw themselves into
the arms of the first sufficient power. A mob, which is generally the
growth ot a redundant population, goaded on by real sufferings, but igno-
rant whence they proceed, is ot all monsters the most fatal to freedom.’’
“ There is one right, which man has generally been thought to possess,
which 1 am confident he neither does nor can possess, a right to subsis-
tence, when his labour will not fairly purchase it. Our laws indeed say
that he has this right; but in so doing they attempt to reverse the laws
of nature. A man has just the same right to live a thousand years, if
he can; it is a matter of power not of right.
If men were only convinced of this truth, that they can have no right
of subsistence, all the mischievous declamations against the unjust
institutions of society, would fall powerless to the ground. If the real
causes of their distress were clearly pointed out to the poor, and they
were shown how small a part of their distress is attributable to govern-
ment, a great part of that discontent and irritation, which exist at pre-
sent among them, would cease, and when they did show themselves,
would not be so much to be dreaded. ”
Hr. Malthus having thus shown that it is only by having fewer chil-
dren, that it is possible for the poor to escape from poverty, and having
urged upon them sexual abstinence as the only virtuous mode of effec-
ting this, proceeds to some auxiliary and secondary means of promoting
this preventive check. In the first place he proposes the gradual abolition
of the Poor Laws, which had done so much harm to the poor, by tempt-
ing them to beget a family, without a prospect of being able to support
it by their own exertions. However, it has been shown since, that if


parish assistance is coupled with very irksome conditions, it does not
tend powerfully to weaken the feeling of prudential restraint: and thus
the right of subsistence is still acknowledged by the State as belonging to
every citizen, though, as Mr. Mill says, this cannot, without ruinous
consequences, be coupled with the right of begetting children to be sup.
ported by charity.
“It is not enough,” says Mr. Malthus, “to abolish all the positive
institutions that encourage population, we must endeavour to correct by
writing and conversation, the prevailing errors on the subject; to show
that it is not the duty of man simply to propagate his species, but to pro-
pagate virtue and happiness ; and that if he cannot do the one, he is by
no means called upon to do the other.
Among the higher classes we need not apprehend the too great fre-
quency of marriages. A proper pride and spirit of independence, in most
cases, prevents imprudent marriages among these classes : although even
among them, juster ideas might prevent many unhappy marriages. All
that a society can demand of its members is, that they do not have
families without being able to support them. This may be fairly en-
joined as a positive duty; all beyond it is a matter of choice; but from
what we know of the habits of the higher classes, we have reason to
think that all that is necessary to obtain the object required, is to give a
greater degree of respect and liberty to single women, and place them
more on a level with married ones: a change which indeed the plainest
principles of justice demand.
Among the lower classes, the way to effect our purpose is evidently to
infuse into their minds a part of that prudence and foresight, which ope-
rates in the higher classes. The best way of doing this, would be by an
extended system of education ; and in addition to the general subjects of
instruction, it would be well to explain the principle of population, and
its effect on the condition of the poor. The desirableness of marriage
should not be underrated; but it should be shown, that, like property, and
other blessings, marriage should be the reward of industry and other
good qualities.
It would be moreover of very great benefit to society, if the simplest
principles of political economy were also taught; for the common igno-
rance on these matters is very great, and exceedingly dangerous to a
- State.
We have lavished immense sums on the poor, which we have every
reason to believe have only tended to increase their misery. But in their
education, and in the circulation of these important political truths,
.which most nearly concern them, which are perhaps the only means in
our power of really raising their condition, and making them happier
men and more peaceful subjects, we have been miserably deficient.
It would add greatly to the advantages of a national system of educa-
tion, if the schools were made the means of instructing the people in the
real nature of their situation; if they were taught, what is really true,
tlmt without an increase of their own prudential restraint, no change of
government could essentially benefit their condition ; that, though they
might by such a change get rid of some particular grievances, yet in the


great point of supporting their families* they would be but little, or not
at all benefitted; that a revolution would not alter in their favour the
proportion of the supply of labour to the demand, or the quantity of food
to the number of consumers; and that, if the supply of labour were
greater than the demand, and the demand for food greater than the sup-
ply, they might suffer the most extreme want, under the freeest and most
perfect government, that the human imagination could conceive.
In most countries, among the lower classes, there seems to be something
like a standard of wretchedness; a point below which they will not marry
and propagate their species. This standard is different in different coun-
tries, and is formed by various concurring circumstances of soil, climate,
government, degree of knowledge and civilization &c. The principal
circumstances that contribute to raise it, are liberty, security of property
the spread of knowledge, and a taste for the conveniences and comforts of
life. Those which contribute chiefly to lower it are despotism snd
ignorance.
In our attempts to better the lower classes, our endeavours should be
to raise the standard as high as possible, by cultivating a spirit of inde-
pendence, a decent pride, and a taste for cleanliness and comfort. One
of the most powerful means of so doing, is a wide-spread national educa-
tion, and certainly no governmsnt does its duty towards its subjects,
which neglects this.”
He then speaks of charity as a mode of palliating the evils of poverty,
and shows how often it tends, like the Poor Laws, when exercised in a
thoughtless manner, to tempt people to become dependent, and to bring
children into the world only to beggary. Hence he says, “We lie under
a strong obligation to practise charily in a discriminating manner, for it
has invariably been found, that poverty and misery, have increased in
proportion to the quantity of indiscriminate charity.
Nothing can be clearer, than that it is in the power of money and the
exertions of the rich, to relieve a particular family, a particular parish,
or even a particular district. But it will be equally clear, that* it is
totally out of their power to relieve a whole country in the same way.
Even industry in this way is not very different from money. A man
who possesses more of it than his neighbours, is indeed almost sure of
getting a livelihood; but if his neighbours were equally industrious, his
industry would be no security against want. Hume fell into a very
great error, when he said that ‘Almost all the moral, as well as
natural, evils of human life arise from idleness.’ It is evident that if
the whole species possessed the greatest imaginable industry, if not com-
bined with another virtue of which he takes no notice, it would wholly
fail of rescuing society from want and misery, and would scarcely
remove a single moral or physical evil of all those to which he alludes.”
“ We cannot in the nature of things, |assist the poor in any way,
without enabling them to rear to manhood a greater number of their
children. But this is of all things the most desirable, both with regard
to individuals and the public. Every loss of a child from the effects of
poverty, must evidently be preceded and accompanied by great misery to
individuals; and in a public view, every child that dies under ten’years


of age, is a loss to the nation of all that had been expended in its sub-
sistence up to that period. Consequently, in every point of view, a de-
crease of mortality at all ages is what we ought to aim at.
It is impossible to do this : it is not in the nature of things, that any per-
manent and general improvement in the condition of the poor can be effected
without an increase in the preventive check to population ; and unless this
take place, either with or without our efforts, everything that is done for
the poor must be temporary and partial; a diminution of mortality at
present will be balanced by an increased mortality in future: and im-
provements of their condition in one place will proportionally depress it
in another. This is a truth so important and so little understood, that
it can scarcely be too often insisted on.’’
“ In taking a general and concluding view of our rational expectations
respecting the future improvement of society, and the mitigation of the
evils arising from the principle of population, it may be observed, that
though the increase of population in a geometrical ratio be incontrover-
tible, yet there are some natural results of the progress of society and
civilization, which necessarily repress its full effects. These are especially
great towns and manufactures, in which we can scarcely hope, and cer-
tainly not expect, to see any material change. These will probably
always continue much more unhealthy than country employments and
situations, and consequently, operating as positive checks, diminish the
neccessity for the preventive one.
In every old State, it is observed that a considerable number of adults
remain for a time unmarried. The duty of practising the common and
acknowledged rules of morality during this period, has never been con-
troverted in theory, however it may have been opposed in practice.
Knowing how incompletely this duty has hitherto been fulfilled, it would
be visionary to expect any material change for the better in future.
But it is by no means visionary to expect, that some favourable change
may take place in the extension of this period of celibacy, till we have
the prospect of being able to maintain our children; for it is found by ex-
perience, that tbe prevalence of this restraint is very different at different
times and in different countries. It cannot be doubted, that in Europe
generally, and more especially among the Northern nations, a decided
change has taken place in the operation of this prudential restraint since the
prevalence of those warlike habits, which destroyed so many people. In
this country it is not to be doubted, that the proportion of marriages has
become smaller, since the improvement of our towns, the less frequent
epidemics, and the adoption of more cleanly habits.
Universally the practice of men in this respect has been better than
their theories ; and however frequent may have been the declamations on
the duty of entering into the married state, and the advantage of early;
marriage to prevent vice, each individual has practically found it necessary
to consider of the means of supporting a family, before he ventured to
take so important a step. That great vis medicatrix reipublicee, the desire
of bettering our condition, and the fear of making it worse, has been con-
stantly" in action; and owing to this the prudential check to marriage has,
increased in Europe, and will probably make still further advances. If:


it do s’o without any marked increase of a vicious sexual intercourse, the
happiness of society will evidently be promoted by it ; and it is to be ob-;
served, that those European countries, where marriages are least frequent,
as Norway, Switzerland, England, and Scotland, are by no means the most
noted for their profligacy of manners, but rather the reverse.
It is less the object of the present work to propose new plans for im-
proving society, than to inculcate the necessity of resting contented with
that mode of improvement, which is dictated by the course of nature, and
of not obstructing the advances which would otherwise be made in this
way. The limited good, which it is sometimes in our power to effect, is
often lost by attempting too much, and by making the adoption of a
particular system, essentially necessary even to a partial degree of success.
I hope I have avoided this error. I wish the reader to remember, that
though I may have given some new views of old facts, and indulged in the
contemplation of a considerable degree of possible improvement, that I
might not absolutely shut out that prime cheerer—hope; yet in my expec-
tations of probable improvement, and the means of accomplishing it, I
have been very cautious. The gradual abolition of the Poor Laws,
and the extension of education, are the only means I have proposed, and
these would certainly benefit in some degree the condition of the poor;
but even though they be not adopted, I do not absolutely despair of some
partial good effect from the general tenor of the reasoning. :
If the principles I have endeavoured to establish be false, I most sin -
cerely hope to see them completely refuted; but if they be true, the sub-
ject is so important to human happiness, that it is impossible that they!
should not in time be more fully known and generally circulated,
whether any particular efforts be made for the purpose or not.
Among the higher and middle classes the effect of this knowledge would,
I hope, be to direct, without relaxing, their efforts for bettering the con-
dition of the poor ; to show them what they can, and what they cannot do
and that, though much may be done by instructing the poor, and in other
modes elevating their character, so as to produce a greater amount of the
preventive check, yet without the latter all the former efforts will be futile;
and that in any old and well-peopled State, so to assist the poor, as to
enable them to marry as soon as they like, and rear up large families, is
a physical impossibility.
Among the lower classes the effect of such knowledge would be, to make
them more peaceable and orderly, less inclined to tumultuous proceedings
in seasons of scarcity, and less influenced by inflammatory and seditious
publications, from knowing how little the price of labour, and the means of
supporting a family, depend upon a revolution. This would give to so-
ciety the power of gradually improving their government, without the
fear of those revolutionary excesses, which are the greatest foes to the-
progress of liberty.
From a review of the state of society in early times, compared with the
present, I should certainly say that the evils attendant on population'
have rather diminished than increased, notwithstanding an almosttqtal.
ignorance of their real cause. If we can indulge the hope that: this;igno-:
ranee will in time be dispelled, it may be rationally expected, that the*.


will be even further diminished. The increase of absolute population
which will of course take place, will not weaken this expectation, as
everything depends upon the relative proportion between population
and food, and not on the absolute population. In the former part of
this work it appeared, that the countries with fewest inhabitants often
suffered most from want of food; whereas in modern Europe, fewer
famines and diseases from want have prevailed in the last century,
than in those which preceded it.
On the whole therefore, though our future prospects respecting the
mitigation of the evils arising from the principle of population, may
not be so bright as we could wish, yet they are far from being entirely
disheartening, and by no means preclude that gradual and progressive
improvement in human society, which, before the late wild specula-
tions on the subject, was the object of rational expectation. A strict
inquiry into the principle of population obliges us to conclude, that we
shall never be able to throw down the ladder, by which we have risen
to our present height of civilization ; but it by no means proves that
we shall not rise higher through the same means.
It would indeed be a melancholy reflection, that while the views of
physical science are daily enlarging, so as scarcely to be bounded by
the most distant horizon, the science of moral and political economy
should be confined within such narrow limits, or at least be so feeble
in its influence, as to be unable to counteract the obstacles to human
happiness arising from a single cause. But however formidable these
obstacles may be, it is hoped that the general result of this enquiry is
such, as not to make us give up the improvement of human society in
despair. The partial good which seems attainable is worthy of all out
exertions; and though we cannot expect that the virtue and happiness
of mankind will keep pace with the brilliant career of physical dis-
covery ; yet if we are not wanting to ourselves, we may confidently
indulge the hope, that to no unimportant extent, they will be influ-
enced by its progress, and will partake in its success."


Thus finishes this wonderful Essay; the most important contribution
to human knowledge, it appears to me, that ever was made. On rising
from it, with a mind overpowered by the vastness of the subject, and
the incomparable way in which it has been treated, I cannot but con-
sider its author to have been the greatest benefactor of mankind, with-
out any exception , that ever existed on this earth. Ido not say that
Mr. Malthas possessed the greatest genius, or most exalted moral cha-
racter, that has appeared in history; but that the discovery of the law
of population, which he made, and the service he thus rendered to his
race, was of a higher nature than any other ever conferred upon man-
kind. It is a discovery, which, in fact, stands quite alone and unap-
proachable among discoveries, in its relation to human happiness.
Compared with it, the labours of poets, of a Shakspeare, a Voltaire, a
Gcctho, or a Byron; of the physical inquirers—as Newton, Laennec,
Humboldt, or Bacon, are utterly insignificant in their power over
human happiness. The law of population is beyond all comparison
the most important law ever discovered, and the most indispensable
contribution to moral, medical, and political science. It explains to
us the natural relation of the two very first essentials of human life
and happiness, namely. Food and Love; without a knowledge of which,
all other knowledge can avail us little. And yet the man, who im-
parted to his race this priceless knowledge, is little known, and men-
tioned, if at all, generally rather in terras of ridicule and contempt;
while the conventional heroes of the world, poets, moralists, or reli-
gious innovators, are worshipped and idolised by all. We will yet
learn better, to whom our chief thanks are due; and the incomparable
boon, given to us by Mr. Malthus, will yet be estimated at its true
value.
As it is of the utmost consequence that all of us should have a
thorough comprehension of the great law of population, and a convic-
tion of its paramount importance, I entreat the reader’s attention to
the description of it, given by Mr. John Stuart Mill, before I proceed
to consider further its bearings on the sexual and social problems of
the day. Mr. Mill is acknowledged to be the first existing writer on
political economy ; and his inimitable work on that subject, “ the Prin-
ciples of Political Economy,” which, for its depth and closeness of
reasoning; its iron logic, and brilliant eloquence of style; its wide
and comprehensive grasp of social questions; and also its manly,
liberal, and deeply sympathising spirit, ever taking the side of the
weak against the strong, with a real philanthropy, equalled only by


its profound enlightenment; for these and other matchless qualities',
stands unrivalled among the works of the age, and far above my
humble praise—this great work is built upon the principle of popula.
tion as its keystone. Hr. Mill shows, what every one, who deeply
considers the question, must see, that this principle lies at the very
first foundation of political economy, and also of moral science. Mr.
Mill’s work should be carefully studied by all, who wish to obtain,a
true insight into the great social and economical questions of our
times.
I should much prefer to give his views on the subject in his own
words; but as I cannot take the liberty of making so large an extract
from his work, I shall merely give the substance of his opinions, and
refer the reader for further satisfaction to the work itself.
Mr. Mill first explains the power of increase inherent in the human
species, as in all other living beings; showing, as Mr. Malthus did,
that it is immense, if unchecked; and that it is a very moderate calcu-
lation to assume that each generation, in a good sanitary condition of
the people, might be double that which preceded it, were the power of
multiplication not restrained by different causes.
“ Twenty or thirty years ago,” says Mr. Mill, “ these propositions
might still have required considerable enforcement and illustration,
but the evidence of them is so ample and incontestable, that they have
made their way against all kinds of opposition, and may now be
regarded as axiomatic; although the extreme reluctance felt to admit-
ing them, every now and then gives birth to some ephemeral theory,
speedily forgotten, of a different law of increase in different circum-
stances, through a providential adaptation of the fecundity of the
human species to the exigences of society. The obstacle to a just un-
derstanding of the subject does not arise from these theories ; but from
too confused a notion of the causes, which, at most times and places,
keep the actual increase of mankind so far behind the capacity.”
He then proceeds, like Mr. Malthus, to examine into these causes;
which, he says, are not at all difficult to discern. The increase of the
lower animals is checked by the death of the superabundant progeny,
whether from not having sufficient food, or from being killed by their
enemies. Such is the case also in the savage and uncultivated races
of mankind. But the foresight which forms the distinguishing feature
of civilized man, prevents him from bringing beings into the world,
which he sees cannot be provided fur. Therefore population is checked
rather by the dread of want, than by want itself; by the preventive
rather than the positive check; in proportion as man rises in civiliza-
tion. The fear of losing their social position, and of forfeiting their


accustomed comforts and luxuries, is the form, which this prudential
feeling takes in the upper parts of society.
i In a very uncivilized state of society, the population is kept under
1)T positive starvation, generally in the shape of periodical famines. •
Vln a higher state it is not by more deaths, but by fewer births, that
population is repressed. In different countries this, the preventive
check, operates in different ways. In some, especially Norway, and
parts of Switzerland, it arises from a prudent self-restraint. The
labouring classes see that by having large families, they will sink
below the condition of comfort to which they are^accustomed; and
therefore refrain from rash marriages and begetting too numerous off-
spring. In these countries the average of life is the longest in Europe;
both the births and the deaths bear the smallest proportion to the
population; and there are fewer children, and a greater number of
adults, than in any other part of the world.
In those countries of the continent which have Poor-laws, marriage
is everywhere forbidden among those who are in the receipt of relief;
and there are few countries which permit marriage, unless the man
can show that he can support a family. Such is the case in Bavaria
and Norway, in Lubeck, Frankfurt, and many other places. In other
countries, as Prussia, Saxony, &c., every man is forced to serve for a
time in the army, during which he is not allowed to marry. In some
parts of Italy, it is the practice in all classes of society, for only one of
the sons to marry, while the rest remain single.
But the enormous amount of reproductive power, which is repressed
by these or other preventive checks, is always ready to expand, when-
ever their pressure is removed. Hence any amelioration in the state
Of the working classes, in general merely gives room for its expansion
for a little; and the increased multiplication, which takes place, does
away with all the benefit, and brings back the same state of things as
before. Unless the habitual standard of comfort mentioned by Mr.
Malthus—by which is meant that down to which they will multiply,
but not lower—can be raised, the best endeavours for the elevation of
the labouring people end in our having a population, increased in
numbers truly, but not in happiness.
‘There are three elements of production, land, labour, and capital,
The first differs from the others in not being capable of indefinite in-
crease. It is limited in quantity, and also in productiveness; and it
is this fact which forms the real limit to the increase of production.; v
But, since there is much land still uncultivated, and as that; which
is already cultivated, could produce much more than it does ; since. jn
short we have not yet exhausted the resources of the earth ; it;is cpnir


monly thought, that this limit to population and production is at a
great distance.
“ 1 apprehend this,” says Mr. Mill, “ to be not only an error, hut
the most serious one to be found in the whole field of political eco.
nomy. The question is more important and fundamental than any
other; it involves the whole subject of the causes of poverty in a rich
and industrious community ; and unless this one matter be thoroughly
understood, it is to no purpose proceeding any further in our enquiry.”
He compares the resistance to production (and therefore to popula-
tion) from this cause, not to an immovable wall, which stands at a
distance from us; but to an elastic band, which is never so tightly
stretched, that it could not be more stretched, but which always con-
fines cs, and the more tightly the more we approach its limits.
It is the law in agricultural industry that after an early stage in its
progress, every increase of produce is obtained upon harder and harder
terms.
“ This general law of agricultural industry,” says Mr. Mill, “ is the
most important proposition in political economy. Were the law differ-
ent, nearly all the phenomena of production and distribution of wealth
would be other than they are. The most fundamental errors, which
still prevail on our subject, result from not perceiving this law at
work underneath the more superficial agencies on which attention fixes
itself.”
This law is shown by the fact that inferior lands are cultivated ; for
the very meaning of inferior land is that, which with equal labour
returns less produce. The elaborate cultivation, moreover, of the well
farmed districts in England and Scotland is a sign of this law; for
such high farming costs far more in proportion than the low. In
America, where plenty of good land is to be had, and where labour is
dear, such careful farming is not to be seen, as there it would not he
profitable.
It is this law, according to which the returns of labour tend always
to become less and less, that causes the increase of production to be
accompanied by a deterioration in the state of the producers.
Therefore the preventive check to population would have not only
to be maintained, but gradually to be increased to enable a society
merely to hold its ground, and to retain its comforts; were it not for
the progress of improvements, which facilitate production. The ratio
of the increase of population would need to be progressively dimin-
ished, small though it already might be, were it not for these improve-
ments ; which may perhaps at times be sufficient to counteract the law
of diminishing increase, and allow population to advance at its former
slow ratio; or even at times in a somewhat faster ratio, though never
assuredly in any old country at a ratio at all approaching to that, of
which the reproductive powers are capable. At other times, when the
improvements to production are not sufficient to counteract the law,
the check upon population must be increased, either in the preventive
or the positive mode.
The necessity for checking population is not peculiar, as is often


thought, to a state of society, where there is an unequal distribution of
property. This does not even increase the evil; which depends upon
the fact ttiat a larger body of men cannot in any case be provided for
so well as a smaller; at most it can only make it sooner felt.
Whether the state of a people at any given time is improving or de-
teriorating, depends upon whether improvement is advancing faster
than population, or population than improvement.
The rate of increase of the French is the smallest in Europe. In the
ten years from 1817 to 1827 the annual increase of that nation was
■w, while that of the English was 1 , and the Americans 3. It has
been calculated from the population returns of France, that during the
last fifty years, the annual increase has been only 1 in 200 ; and even
this small increase has been owing to the decrease of deaths, for the
number of births has remained nearly stationary. Now at no period
in her history has the produce of France increased faster than in these
fifty years; and hence there is a noticeable improvent in the condition
of the working classes.
Wages are regulated in general by competition; and therefore
depend upon the demand and supply of labour; in other words the
proportion between the labourers and the capital. They cannot be
affected by anything else. If they rise, it can only be because there is
more capital or fewer labourers ; if they fall, it can only be, because
there is less capital or more labourers.
There are several common opinions in apparent contradiction to this
fact, such as that wages are high when trade is good, that high prices
make high wages, that wages vary with the price of food, to.; but
these are only complications in the concrete phenomena, which obscure
and disguise the operation of the law of wages, and can be readily
shown to be perfectly consistent with this law.


The various plans, of which there are always some before the public
for making the working people a very little better off—such as the
repeal of the corn laws, &c.—are of very little importance to the wel.
fare of the labourers. Any slight temporary alleviation of the evils of
their condition by such means, is very soon obliterated by the increase
of population, which it generally gives rise to ; and the state of mat-
ters becomes as bad as before. It is only from some very great and
sudden improvement in their condition, which raises their habitual
standard of comfort in a striking and marked degree, so as to induce
them to check their procreative powers for fear of losing the advantages
they have got, that a permanent benefit is to be hoped. The best in.
stance of this is the case of France after the Revolution.
The condition of the labouring classes cannot be improved, but by
altering in their favour the proportion between the number of labour-
ers and the capital; and “ every scheme for their benefit, which does
not proceed on this as its foundation, is, for all permanent purposes,
a delusion.”
The rural population in many of the southern counties of England
have lately attracted much compassion from their extreme poverty.
In these districts they marry as early, and have as many children to a
family, as if they were in America.
But unfortunately it is sentimentality and not common sense, which
is applied to.these evils; and while there is an increasing sympathy
towards the poor, there is an almost universal unwillingness to recog-
nise the real cause of their sufferings; and a tacit agreement to ignore
completely the law of wages, or to dismiss it as “ hard-hearted Mal-
thusianism.” Is not the hard-heartedness on the side of those, who
misguide the poor as to the real cause of their poverty? Were it not
for the increasing enlightenment and self-restraint of the manufactur-
ing population, there is no reason', as far as regards the conduct of the
rural districts, why we should not in time sink into as squalid poverty
as Ireland; especially if our manufactures should cease to increase at
the extraordinary rate of the last fifty years.
It is not reason, however, but a strong dislike to the population
doctrines, which prevents their admission.
Many endeavours have been made, over and over again, to find out
a mode of increasing wages, without the necessity of an increased
check upon population, bat they are all radically fallacious. It has
been proposed, for instance, that there should be local boards of trade,
consisting of delegates from the men and the masters, to fix a reason-
able rate of wages ; the state being bound to provide work, for those
who cannot get it. Many believe that it is the duty of the rich or of
the state to provide work for all, &c.


.... In order to do this, the capital for the payment of increased wages
must be raised by taxation. But to ensure work to all the members of
the community would suspend all checks to population; and thus the
taxation would need to be increased every year, so as to be able to
support not only the first generation, but all whom they might call
into existence; thus the whole wealth of the country would gradually
be absorbed; and when that was done, the positive check to popula-
tion could no longer be postponed.
These consequences of artificial interference in the labour question,
have been so often pointed out by celebrated authors, that ignorance
of them is no longer pardonable in any educated man.
If a man cannot support himself without assistance, those who assist
him have a right to demand, that he shall not bring beings into the
world to be maintained by the charity of others. If the State were to
pledge itself to provide employment for all that are born, it must, if it
is not to be ruined, prevent any one from being born without its con-
sent ; for if it remove the natural checks to population, namely, want
and the dread of want, it must substitute others. If it take the feeding
of the people into its hands, it rimst also take the control of their in-
crease ; or, on the other hand, if it leave their increase free, it cannot
undertake to feed them.
If the natural checks to their increase be removed, neither charity nor
promised employment can do them any real good, but on the contrary
much evil; but if on the other hand they be put in such circum-
stances, as encourage their habits of foresight and independence, and
teach them to avoid undue multiplitcation, they will be really benefited.
No remedies for low wages have the least chance of success, which do
not act on the minds and habits of the people.
“By what means then,” says Mr. Mill, in an eloquent passage,
which I cannot refrain from quoting, as it shows how utterly delusive
are all the common views on the subject of poverty, (every remedy in
fact except that of restraining the reproductive powers,) in the eyes of
the profoundest social philosopher, the truest friend of the working
classes, of our day, “By what means is poverty to be contended
against ? How is the evil of low wages to be remedied ? If the expe-
dients usually recommended for the purpose are not adapted for it, can
no others be thought of? Is the problem incapable of solution? Can
political economy do nothing but only object to everything, and de-
monstrate that nothing can be done?
If this were so, political economy might have a needful, but would
have a melancholy and a thankless task. If the bulk of the human
race are always to remain as at present, slaves to toil in which they
have no interest, and therefore feel no interest—drudging from early
morning till late at night for bare necessaries, and with all the intel-
lectual and moral deficiencies which that implies—without resources
either in mind or feelings—untaught, for they cannot be better taught
than fed; selfish, for all their thoughts are required for themselves;
without interests or sentiments as citizens or members of society, and
with a sense of injustice rankling in their breasts, equally for, what
x


they have not, and for what others have; I know not what there is
which should make a person with any capacity for reason, concern
himself about the destinies of the human race. There would be no
wisdom for any one but in extracting from life with epicurean indiffer-
ence, as much personal satisfaction for himself and others with whom
he sympathises, as it can yield without injury to any one, and letting
the unmeaning bustle of so-called civilized existence roll by unheeded.
But there is no ground for such a view of human affairs.”
Mr. Mill then states that the only possible mode of raising wages and
benefiting the poor, is by inducing them to exercise a greater control
over their reproductive powers. He says that this has never yet been
seriously tried; but on the contrary, that almost all public men,
whether statesmen, moralists, or clergymen, have rather encouraged
marriage and multiplication, (provided it were sanctioned by the mar-
riagebond,) than otherwise; many having still a religious prejudice
against the true doctrines, and believing that it is opposed to the good-
ness of the Deity, or the usual bounty of nature, that the indulgence
in a natural passion should cause such miseries. The confusion of
ideas upon this subject, is, he says, in great measure owing to the spu-
rious delicacy, which prohibits the open discussion of sexual matters;
but “ the diseases of society can, no more than corporeal maladies, be
prevented or cured, without being spoken abont in plain language.”
The great object of statesmanship should be, to raise the habitual
standard of comfort among the working classes, and to bring them into
such a position as shows them most clearly, that their welfare depends
upon themselves, upon their control over their reproductive powers.
For this purpose he advises that there should be, first, an extended
scheme of national emigration, so as to produce a striking and sudden
improvement in the condition of the labourers left at home, and raise
their standard of comfort; also that the population truths should be
disseminated as widely as possible, so that a powerful public feeling
should be awakened among the working classes, against undue pro-
creation on the part of any individual among them—a feeling which
could not fail greatly to influence individual conduct; and also that
we should use every endeavour to get rid of the present system of
labour, namely, that of employers and employed, and adopt to a
great extent that of independent or associated industry. His reason
for this is, that a hired labourer, who has no personal interest in the
work he is engaged in, is generally reckless and without foresight,
living from hand to mouth, and exerting little control over his powers
of procreation; whereas the labourer who has a personal stake in his
work, and the feeling of independence and self-reliance which the pos-
session of property gives, as, for instance, the peasant proprietor, or
member of a co-partnership, has far stronger motives for self-restraint,
and can see much more clearly the evil effects of having a large
family.
But such measures, to'be availing, must be powerful and decided, for
“ when the object is to raise the permanent condition of a people, small
means do not merely produce small effects, they produce no effect at


all. Unless comfort can be made as habitual to a whole generation as
indigence is now, nothing is accomplished, and feeble half-measures do
but fritter away resources, far better reserved till the improvement of
public opinion, and of education, shall raise up politicians, who will
not think that because a scheme promises much, the part of statesman-
ship is to have nothing to do with it."
Such then, are the views of Mr. Mill and Mr. Mai thus on the
Labour question; and, as far as I know, they are held by most of the
scientific writers on political economy, including Dr. Whateiey, Mr.
McCulloch, and others. They show as this grand fundamental truth,
that it is only by checking still further the reproductive powers of our
species, that it is possible to remedy poverty and to raise wages; and
that all other means of effecting these objects, such as social or politi-
cal reform, the removal of taxation, the spread of education, the change
of religions beliefs, emigration, the advance of the various sciences and
arts, in short every other conceivable form of progress is utterly impo-
tent, and can have no direct influence in the matter.
These truths are absolutely incontrovertible; and would long since
have been universally admitted, not only by scientific men, but by the
general intelligence, had it not been for the hopelessness they inspired.
They have earned for Political Economy the name of the “dismal
science,” along with a general feeling of hostility and aversion; as
if the fault lay in the science, whose very highest merit is, that
it is a faithful interpreter of natural truth. It is not by shutting
oar eyes to these mighty evils, nor childishly venting our anger
on the science which explains them, and which thus gives to our
race by far the most important Revelation which was ever given to it,
that we may hope they.will be overcome; nature is never to be pro-
pitiated by such means, but, on the contrary, by an earnest considera-
tion of her laws, and a patient and persevering endeavour to reconcile
them with the interests of man, whatever difficulties this may cause us.
Before proceeding to examine more fully this question, I would wish
to say a few words on two subjects; viz. first, on a theory of popu-
lation which has lately been opposed to the Malthusian by Mr.
Doubleday and Mr. Herbert Spencer, (similar in substance to others
that had been already brought forward by Mr. Godwin, Mr. Sadler,
and other writers); and, secondly, on Socialism. I mention the first
theory, not from its intrinsic importance, but because I wish the reader
to see to what hopeless shifts men, and even talented men, are driven,
to escape from the great population difficulty; and also because I am
desirous, that every one of us should have the most absolute and


assured conviction, that there is no possible escape from this difficulty,
except by manfully accepting, and patiently endeavouring to overcome it.
Mr. Doubleday asserts that the checks to population do not consist, as
Mr. Malthus showed, in sexual abstinence, vice, and misery: but that
the principal check arises from a change produced in the human consti-
tution, by a luxurious mode of living; in fact, that the fertility of man-
kind depends chiefly upon what they eat. The poor, he says, are much
more prolific than the rich, because they live upon vegetables and fish ;
while those who live upon animal food, and are in good circumstances,
have comparatively feeble reproductive powers. Fertility is, he says,
increased by the depletkoric condition, but diminished by the plethoric.
As proofs of this, he instances the Islands of Scotland, whose over-
population he ascribes to their fish-diet; and also Ireland, where it
arises from the use of potatoes. In India and China the cause of the
great population is the living on rice. On the other hand, the small
population of Asiatic Russia and other pastoral countries, arises, he says,
from their living so much on animal food. In the large families and
swarms of children, which are seen in the poors’ districts of our towns
and country villages; and in the decay of our noble families, few of
which last for many centuries, without the necessity of perpetual new
creations, we have further signs of this, which Mr. Doubleday calls the
true law of population. As illustrations of these propositions, he men-
tions the fact, that plants, when too highly manured, tend to deve-
lope leaves instead of flowers; and that the latter are often double and
infertile.
Thus then, he says, population always increases rapidly among the
poor, remains pretty stationary in the middle, and decreases in the upper
classes of society, in an exact ratio with the kind and quantity of food
and other comforts of life enjoyed by each.
This view may be characterised as a mere baseless hypothesis, in
which the real meaning of the facts adduced is not understood, and the
cause mistaken for the effect. Mr. Malthus showed that people were
poor because they had too many children ; Mr. Doubleday asserts that
they have so many children because they are poor. -*
The fact that pastoral countries are poor in population, and grain
countries the reverse, is, as Mr. Malthus showed, easily accounted for
by the knowledge that the former do not produce nearly so much human
food as the latter. The belief that a fish or a vegetable diet is pecu-
liarly favourable, and animal food unfavourable, to reproduction, is an old
popular error, founded partly on the same mistake of cause for effect.
Mr. Doubleday has in these matters merely taken Mr. Malthus's facts,
and read them the wrong way.
As for the dying-out of the nhble families, and of any other commu-
nity or body of men, it is, as far as it is a fact, owing to the agency of
very many other forms of disease and destruction besides the deficiencies
of the reproductive powers, arising from unhealthy modes of life ; and,
in general, sterility forms but an insignificant part of these destructive
influences.
It is true that too great manuring and too high feeding, produce a


plethoric state in both plants and animals, which is adverse to the pro -
per performance of many of their healthy functions; but. this state of
plethora is a disease , and whenever it operates as a check to the repro-
ductive powers, it comes under the head of Mr. Malthus’s positive check
which includes all forms of death and disease. Mr. Doubleday admits
this himself; he says, “In the human animal luxuriousness and over-
feeding are generally admitted by physiologists and physicians to be the
root of most organic diseases.” Believing this, it is not exsy to see how
he remains satisfied with his theory ; seeing that the very check, which
be designates as a proof of the benevolence and goodness of the Deity,
could only be, even in the cases where it might operate, one of the forms
of disease and misery mentioned by Mr. Malthus.
Mr. Herbert Spencer's exposition of the same theory of population,
has a more scientific appearance, but is as completely fallacious. He
begins with stating that in all living beings, the powers of reproduction
are in an inverse ratio to those of individual preservation. Thus in the
humblest plants and animals, there are an enormous number of seeds
and eggs; while in the higher there are but few. In the elephant, and
man, the reproductive powers are smallest; because they have the
greatest power of self-preservation.
From this proposition, which may perhaps he granted, he proceeds to
the totally unwarrantable inference, that, as the reproductive powers
decrease in the different species in ascending the scale of being, so do
they decrease in the same species, namely in man, during his advance in
civilization. The evident want of analogy between these propositions
scarcely needs to be pointed out; and, as the author has not given any
illustrative proofs of this decrease of fertility in man, (probably thinking
the loose statistics of Mr. Doubleday sufficient on that point,) his argu-
ment is rendered valueless at the very beginning. To admit the astound-
ing proposition, that the progress of civilization tends so totally to alter
the nature of the human frame, as to diminish its reproductive powers
to the extent required to keep mankind at a just level with the increase
of food, would demand a very different kind of evidence from this ; which
is in fact, no evidence at all, bat merely the vaguest and most illogical
analogy.
“Every generative product’’says Mr. Spencer, “ is a deduction from
the parental life, and, as already pointed out, to diminish life is to
diminish the ability to preserve life. The portion thrown off is organ-
ised matter; vital force has been expended in the organization of it;
which vital force, had no such portion been made and thrown off, would
have been available for the preservation of the parent. Neither of these
forces, therefore, can increase, except at the expense of the other; in
other words, individuation and reproduction are antagonistic.’’
These assertions are perhaps as good examples as could be cited, of the
fatal errors into which men, whatever be their abilities in other matters,
constantly fall from want of physiological and medical knowledge. Had
Mr. Spencer been aware of the phenomena and causes of genital disease,
of the laws of the generative organs, or in fact of the most general prin-
ciples of health, he could scarcely have adopted such opinions. The


fact is, that instead of the powers of reproduction being in antagonism
with those of individual preservation, they are, like all other powers in
the body, in the closest harmony with them; that instead of it being
injurious to the vital powers of either man or woman to reproduce their
species, there is scarcely anything which is more indispensable to their
health. The seminal fluid and the menstrual discharge are secretions, and
are intended, like all other secretions in the body, to be cast off; in fact,
they are more or less poisonous to the system if they be retained, just as
all other secretions are ; and to suppose that the vital force which was
expended on their production is a loss to the powers of the economy, or
could have been applied elsewhere more profitably to the parent, betrays
a great ignorance of physiology. It would be just as reasonable to say,
that the vital force used in producing any other secretion, as, for instance,
the bile or the saliva, would have been better preserved to the individual.
The retention of the secretion of the germ-cells and menstrual discharge
in woman, which is always liable to take place unless the secreting
organs receive their due stimulus, has a most withering effect upon the
health; and probably many of the evil effects, which abstinence has on
the male system, and which are not so openly manifested as they are in
women, by the arrest or disorder of the reproductive secretion, depend
really on its non-elimination from the want of the natural stimulus, and
the consequent deterioration of the blood, and cnfeeblement of the nerves.
Want of energy of body and mind, despondency, weakness, and a benum-
bed and torpid state of the bodily and mental functions, are perhaps the
most characteristic effects of sexual abstinence in man; and correspond
to the hysterical and chlorotic affections of woman.
The truth is, that in this case as in others, the interests of all our dif-
ferent organs and functions are inseparably bound up together; and the
same influences which promote the true and healthy developemeut of any
one of them, will promote that of the others also. The powers of repro-
duction cannot, any more than those of digestion, respiration, or absorp-
tion, languish or decay without the whole organism suffering ; in other
words, disease or imperfection in these parts must be either the cause or
effect of the disease of the whole frame.
Therefore, wherever the reproductive powers have been checked by
luxurious living, or by modes of life in which too much attention is
paid to the cultivation of tho intellect and too little to that of the senses,
it is a certain sign of a diseased and morbid state; which, so far from
meriting the name of progressive civilization, is merely one of the forms
of disease and misery included under Mr. Malthus’ positive check. The
disproportionate size of the brain, which is found in highly intellect-
ualised nations, and which is generally mentioned with much satisfac-
tion, is in fact the physical expression of that diseased spiritualism, of
which I have formerly spoken, and is a prolific cause of the wide-spread
nervous maladies, which characterise our times. A luxurious mode of
life and sedentary and studious pursuits have evil effects on many other
organs, besides those of reproduction, and the brain; indeed they inter-
fere with every function of the body, and produce constipation, indigestion.
&c. It would bo just as reasonable to say, therefore, that the alvlne or


digestive secretions would decrease, or the power of these organs decay in
the progress of civilization, as that those of the organs of generation
should do so.
The fact is, that there are few, if any, bodily functions, over which
these injurious influences have less power than over those of reproduction.
It might have been expected, that when such sweeping assertions as to
the decrease of the fertility of the species were made, and visionary
theories of human perfectibility founded thereon, their authors would
have resorted to the only possible mode of satisfactorilyascertaining their
truth; namely, an investigation into the real nature and causes of
sterility, as shown by medical writers, who are the only men that have
the means of furnishing a knowledge on this subject. Now when we do
examine medical works, we find that the vague term plethora, ora luxuri-
ous or studious mode of life, is very rarely used to account for sterility.
The tendency of medicine, especially of late years, has been to assign
some more definite form of local disease as its cause, and to do away with
these vague and popular expressions, which were in general merely a
cover for ignorance ; and the real demonstrable causes of this disease,
(for sterility is always a disease,) have been in many cases made out,
and shown to be curable. Dr. Whitehead, in his able work on this sub-
ject, says, “ the cause of sterility is usually attributed, and correctl y so, to
the faulty condition of the female organs; the non-existence of the pro-
creative power in the other sex being, in reality, extremely rare.” Now,
if cither plethora or intellectual developement were a frequent cause of
sterility, why should it not operate still more on men than women ? and
yet sterility is a rare disease in the male, and occurs chiefly from the
worst forms of spermatorrhoea, or from malformation of the sexual
organs. The causes of barrenness on the female side, Dr. Whitehead
says, are rarely congenital malformations, for nature is so abundantly
liberal in her gifts, and so wonderfully correct in all she does ; “ the more
frequent causes consist in diseased states of the uterus and its organic
products; and are, generally speaking, susceptible both of demonstration
and cure.” Many of these causes of sterility have been already men-
tioned in the description of female diseases, and consist in the various
inflammations and painful affections, which interfere with the powers
of conception. Another cause, mentioned by Dr. Whitehead as fre-
quently occurring, is an acid, instead of the natural alkaline state, of the
mucus secreted from the womb, which kills the spermatozooids. When
sterility exists, it may generally be traced to some such tangible cause
operating in the individual; and in fact, the vague idea of a gradual and
progressive failure of the reproductive powers of our species, is wholly
without countenance from any thing observed in nature. Sterility,
except as far as it arises from prostitution, is one of the most insignifi-
cant of all the checks to population; for one child that remains unborn
from this cause, there are hundreds which are so from sexual abstinence;
and of the various causes of this insignificant check, plethora is one of
the least important, or rather, strictly speaking, scarcely deserves the
name of a direct cause at all.
As for tho analogy between the effects of high cultivation on the


human species and on plants, (that unlucky idea, which probably first
suggested this train of false reasoning), it is very unscientific. A most
important law of physiology is, that the humbler the organism, the more
is its form and original type susceptible of being modified by external
circumstances, and the higher it is, the less; and thus, to make a com-
parison "in this matter between man and the lower organisms, is a
fruitful source of error. The human constitution has a wonderful power
of adhering to its natural type, and of defending itself from external im-
pressions ; without which man would not be fitted for his many-sided and
omnivorous life.
But, in reality the very reverse of these theories is the truth. The
powers of reproduction, instead of being lessened by a true progress of
civilization, must necessarily, as well as the other vital powers, be greatly
increased; for no civilization is a true one, which does not include the
advancement of every faculty of the human constitution. Their increase
will take place in two ways; first, by the longer average of life, which
will give greater time .for their exercise; secondly, by the adoption of
more healthy modes of life, and the better prevention and cure of steri-
lity. Therefore, the difficulty from this cause, instead of diminishing, will
assuredly greatly increase, in the progress of civilization.
It may perhaps give us a clearer idea of the reproductive powers of
our species, than any statistics, to examine them by what we know of
the female constitution. The sexual life of woman lasts from its maturity
at fifteen, to its decline at about forty-five years of age ; that is,
during a period of about thirty years. Thus if we allow two years for
the production and nurture of each child, which is amply sufficient
if the woman live a healthy life, she could produce in all about fifteen
children. This is a moderate average of the reproductive powers of
woman, when these powers have their full scope, and are not checked
by different circumstances. The possible rate of increase of mankind,
is therefore much greater, than any actual rate which was ever known,
even in America; and we must remember, that it is this possible rate
which is to be considered, in any inquiry into the possible progress of
mankind: for progress, by increasing the average of life and health in
the female sex, must always tend to increase their reproductive powers.
But these powers at present in our country do not produce one-fourth
part of the children, of which they are actually capable, nor one-sixth of
those of which they are potentially capable. On looking round us in society
the causes are easily perceived. The great majority of women do not
marrytill several years after they are capable of reproduction, and very
many do not marry at all; while vast numbers die before their sexual life
is over, and the reproductive powers of others are quenched in the mire of
prostitution. We do not see one woman in thousands, who has fully exer-
cised her reproductive powers. And yet with all this restraint, these
powers are still so enormously over-exercised, that the most grinding
poverty prevails, and a large proportion of the poorest classes are
pushed out of existence, before the third of their natural term of life is past.
On analysing the various checks to the fertility of woman, with regard
to the proportional pffect of each, it may perhaps be said, that sexual ab


itinence, with its so frequent attendant—self-abuse, is by far the most
important of ail; that perhaps next comes premature death, before the
reproductive age is over ; next, prostitution ; next abortion; and perhaps
lastly, sterility, as far as it is not dependent on prostitution. These
checks to the fertility of woman, together with the corresponding checks
to that of man, and death at more advanced periods of life, form the sum
of the positive and preventive checks to population.
The fallacious theory of a change in the human constitution is an ad-
mirable instance of that short-sighted Optimism, in which so many
thinkers have indulged in the world's history. By optimism is meant the
belief, that there is some self-adjusting power in Nature, or some merci-
ful guiding Providence, by which human ills all work for good, and are
ultimately to be overcome. In this case we are to console ourselves with
the encouraging prospect, that the human constitution will gradually
undergo a change in our favour ; to wait helplessly till the stream of
misery has flowed past us, and then we shall enter the promised laud of
indefinite perfectibility. But we may sooner expect that the river will
return to its source, or the seas cover the mountain tops, than that the
fundamental character of the human frame will alter; for it is much less
changeable than they. These and similar delusive hopes, springing from
the want of perception of the mighty difficulty opposed by nature, are
extremely dangerous, and have led to an immensity of evil. By the dis-
covery of the law of population, Mr. Malthus gave the death-blow to all
such views, and to every theory of human progress, which had been
erected in ignorance of it. He showed to demonstration the real cause
which opposed the satisfactory advance of mankind; and also that the
indispensable condition of such advance was a great increase in the pre-
ventive check to population. He first, like M. Lallemand in sperma-
torrhoea, traced the surface evils of society, which had till his time been
mistaken for the radical ones, to their hidden source; he was the true
physician, who alone saw the real meaning of the appalling disease, under
which the human race has been labouring ever since it appeared on this
earth; the only true friend the poor ever had, the friend who had not only
the heart, but the head, to help them; and whose profound revelation,
gloomy and apparently almost hopeless as it showed their lot to be, was
yet infinitely more valuable to the poor, than the most splendid dreams of
visionary perfectibility ever conceived.
Socialism is one of these short-sighted schemes, and is built upon the
same false foundation as the rest; namely, that it is possible that man
should make satisfactory progress, without a great increase in the pre-
ventive check to population. Socialism, like other schemes, leaves this
matter out of the question, and confines its attention to various methods
of increasing the produce of human industry, and equalising its distribu-
tion ; which, whatever be their merits, are, without the other, not worth
a moment’s scrutiny. Put all the various human advantages, to the ac-
quisition of which Socialism and all the usual efforts of society are
directed, on one side, and diminished reproduction on the other ; and we
may be certain that every struggle for the former will be utterly vain
and futile, so far as the great, part of society is concerned, without the
latter. The one cannot be got without the other.


The peculiar error of Socialism is, that it attributes to the constitution
of society and to competition, (as political reformers do to forms c(
government, and theologians to man’s original sin,) the evils, which
really spring from the principle of population. It falls into the invete-
rate and almost universal error of ascribing the chief ills of mankind to
human institutions, instead of to Nature. It vehemently urges the
adoption of a complete change in our social fabric, but to what end!
After all this trouble, there would not be one of the great human
difficulties removed. It the preventive check to population be increased.
Socialism is not needed ; if not, it is useless.
I shall now proceed to the fuller examination of these momentous sex-
ual and social questions. This forms the subject of the following Essay,
which is the key-stone of this work.


POVERTY, ITS ONLY CAUSE AND ITS
ONLY CURE;
WITH
THE SOLUTION OF THE SOCIAL PROBLEM.
Poveutt is the most appalling of all the evils which oppress mankind.
Other great evils, such as war, or pestilence, are, when compared with
poverty, but of little importance. They are evanescent, occurring only
at rare intervals; and are but as the few drops, which make the deep
enp of human misery now and then overflow. They are, moreover, in
general, nothing but effects of the poverty, in which, with its inseparable
social misery, discontent, and angry passions, the majority of mankind
are plunged; and which is the main root of the most important trans-
itory evils that we are subject to at the present day. If there were no
poverty to give rise to squalid and unhealthy districts in our towns, pes-
tilence, (which has been shown by statistics to be very greatly more des-
tructive to life than war), would rarely appear among us, and would
have little power to affect human happiness. If social discontent, and
the angry and envious feelings that poverty engenders, were allayed by
its removal, the standing armies (which are in the usual circumstances
of modern States needed much more to keep in check the poorer classes,
than to guard against foreign hostilities,) could be reduced; and inter-
national wars, together with civil wars, would become in all probability
a thing of the past.
And yet mankind are by no means sufficiently alive to the enormous
and incomparable magnitude of the evils of poverty. If a war or a pes-
tilence threatens us, every one is excited at the prospect of the mis-
ery which may result; prayers are put up, and every solemn and mourn-
ful feeling called forth ; but these evils are to poverty, but as a grain of
sand in the dfsert, as the light waves that ruffle a dark sea of despair.
Wars come, and go, and perhaps their greatest evils consist in their
aggravation of poverty by the high prices they cause; pestilences last
their appointed season, and then leave us; but poverty, the grim tyrant
of our race, abides with us through all ages and in all circumstances.
For ono victim that war and pestilence have slain, for one heart that
hey have racked with suffering, poverty has slain its millions; and not
slain alone, but first condemned them to drag through a life of bondage
and degradation.


“ The poor ye have always with yon,” was said two thousand yeati
ago, and would have been as appalling a truth at any time before or since.
Let us mount to the remotest antiquity; let us regard the countless
myriads of China and Hindostan, of our own, or any other country of
the old world at the present day; and we shall find poverty, and her
sister Hard Work—the want of Food, and of Leisure, every where plane,
ing the great mass of our race in an abyss of misery and degradation. It
is this universal prevalence and constant continuance of poverty, which
have in a great measure accustomed men to its evils, and prevented them
from either sufficiently feeling, or conceiving any hope of ever escaping
from them. The ignorance of the great cause of poverty moreover, which
is even yet so prevalent, notwithstanding the writings of Mr. Maltha
and others, has made many people view it rather as a disgrace, and as
brought on by individual laziness, drunkenness, or misconduct; a belief
which interfered with their pity for it, and rendered totally abortive any
effort they might make to alleviate it. Unacquainted with its cause, men
think it an absolutely inevitable evil: and thus try to reconcile themselves
to it, and to avoid a subject, whose consideration would almost lead them
to despair of human society.
“It is easy to bear the ills of others with Christian fortitude." Yes;
although we, who look on, may reconcile ourselves to this horrible con*
dition of the majority of our fellows; although we may seek to dis-
guise it, by vain boasts, of the advance of civilization, the progress of
society, and the splendour of individual virtue, talent, and the other
bright spots in human life, which dazzle the superficial gaze, and prevent
it from seeing the dark shades of vice and suffering which hang around;
alas 1 the poor themselves can never be reconciled to poverty, their hu-
man flesh-and blood cannot stand its insufferable miseries, and to them
all big talk of the progress of mankind is a delusion and a lie.
The life of our working classes is worse than that of most of the
beasts of burden. They toil unremittingly for ten or twelve hours a-day
at a laborious, monotonous, and in many cases a deadly occupation;
without hope of advancement, or personal interest in the success of the
work they are engaged in. At night their jaded frames are too tired to
permit their enjoyment of the few leisure hours; and the morn wakens
them to the same dreary day of ceaseless toil. Even the seventh day,
their only holiday, brings them in this country little gaiety, little recrea-
tion ; a solemn sermon, and two hours of sedentary constraint is all that
is provided for them. The clergy and others, who are indignant that a
poor working man does not go to church on his only holiday, should
themselves try his life for six months, and see then what appetite they
will have for church; when their limbs are wasting with incessant
toil, their nerves beginning to give way, and their hearts embittered by
a life of constant drudgery and care.
Thus have the poor to toil on, as long as their strength permits. At
last some organ gives way, the stomach, the eyes, or the brain ; and the
unfortunate sufferer is thrown out of work, and sent to the hospital,
while his wife and family are reduced to the brink of starvation. Often
the man, rendered desperate by his hopeless position, plunges into drink


and gives himself over to ruin. At other times, the working classes
in a frenzy of rage at their infernal circumstances, determine that
they will have higher wages or perish. Hence result the disastrous
strikes, and the terrible social revolutions, that have in recent times so
often convulsed society. But they are vain; they are but the blind
effort of men to do something or die, the fruitless hearings of a man in a
nightmare. The mountain of misery invariably falls back again upon
their breasts, with only increased pressure ; and forces them, worn out by
impotent struggles, to bear it quietly for another little season.
Till within the last half century, it may be said that the evils of
poverty were very little either understood or sympathised in, by the richer
and better educated part of mankind. The richer classes took little more
interest in, and had little more communion with the poorest class, than if
they had been an inferior order of beings. Was it not the lot of the poor
to slave and toil for the pleasures of the rich, and were they not paid for
so doing? The unhappy class-feelings also,’which totally prevented and
still prevent, the richer among us from mingling freely with the poorer,
ind treating them with that equal mutual respect and politeness, which
should exist between all men, fostered the ignorance on the subject of
poverty. But of late years this subject has become one of the most engross-
ing and wide-spread interest; and there are few among us now-a-days,
who are not tolerably well aware of the inconceivable wretchedness of the
poorest classes among us, and of the fearful evils of hard work, unhealthy
occupations, and low wages, under which this country groans.* Writers
on political economy, and on medical and moral subjects, have almost'all
come to the conclusion, that the evils of poverty, and the wretched desti-
tution and ignorance of our poorer classes, are the most pressing subject
for the consideration of all men. Several admirable works of fiction,
pre-eminent among which stands Alton Locke, have made the life and
struggles of the poor the theme by which they awakened the deepest
sympathy in the minds of all; and now there are few novels or
poems of much merit, in which the sufferings of poverty do not throw a
shade over the brighter scenes, and cloud the heart of the writer and the
reader. We do not care now for the artificial glitter of court etiquette,
nor the hollow ceremonies of fashionable life; we have comparatively little
sympathy with the caprices of high-born lords and ladies, who have en-
grossed so unfair a share of man’s attention; we wish to know the inner
life of man, and most of all the thoughts and sufferings of those, who have
been the most neglected by their fellow creatures.
There is perhaps no work of the day, which gives so mournful y interest-
ing au insightinto the lives of the poorest classes, as Mr. Mayhew’s inimit-
table “ London Labour, and London Poor; ” and the truths which he
lays bare to us in that work, are such as to freeze our blood with horror and
anguish. It is the account of the manner, in which hundreds of thou-,
sands of our fellow beings are gradually ground and pressed to death and
multiform destruction by hard work, and want of food. It tells us of stay-,
ration, disease, prostitution, crime, and every conceivable moral and phy-,
sical degradation, to wnich these unhappy ones who are born at the foot of
our social scale, are inexorably doomed. No hope, no chance of rising^


in the mire they were born, and in the mire they must, sooner or later,
with greater or less misery, be engulphed. Education, religion, political
or social interests, are to them unknown ; the ceremonials of worship,
the solemnity of debate, the pomps and glorifications of science, and all tie
vaunted results of human enlightenment, are in their eyes a mummery
got up for the edification of the rich. What avails anything to a man it
he cannot, though he sweat to death for it, get enough to eat? To
attempt to cheat bis misery by anything else than food , is a vain and
heartless delusion. All other human blessings are to him a mere dream,
have for him no existence, if he cannot get food, the first essential of life;
or if he have to toil beyond human endurance to obtain it.
The fearful miseries of want of food, and of leisure, which the poor
among ns have to endure, are gradually pressing themselves more and
more on the attention of all men. We cannot walk through our streets,
though we avoid the poorest districts, and station policemen to keep the
poor within their purlieus, without witnessing enough of wretchedness to
wither our hearts within us; if we really took it earnestly to heart.
The miseries of the poor are gradually darkening our society; they ate
throwing a gloom over every heart, and intruding like a spectre upon the
brightest scenes of gaiety. Who can enjoy his life, can eat, drink, and be
merry, when he sees the ghastly faces, heart-broken despair, or envious
scowls of his unfortunate fellow-men, to whom fate has denied all those
blessings 1 We cannot if we would; and the cares and anxieties of the
poor, joined to our own insufferable evils, have so overshadowed out
society, that when we look around us among our friends and acquain-
tances, we can scarcely find a single individual, whose life we could call t
happy one. For my part, Ido not think that I know in this country a
single such case, and I have heard the same opinion from others. All
of ns are worn by anxiety, and depressed by the atmosphere of misery,
that overspreads our society. So true is this, that the saying is con-
stantly on our lips, “ man is born to trouble,” and the world is com-
monly termed the “vale of tears.’’ Let it not be for a moment supposed,
that such sorrow is man’s natural state; it is only a sign of the fearful
evils, with which our society has to contend, and of the gloom which the
wide-spread want of food, love, and leisure, has poured round the common
heart of man. It is an absolute impossibility that any class can long
enjoy happiness, if another is miserable; sooner or later sympathy must
unite them in a common lot of weal and woe.
Do not let us suppose either, that we escape from evils of an analogous
nature to those, by which the poor are ground to death. The cares and
anxieties of the business and professional men among us are proverbial;
it is so difficult to make a livelihood in the press of competition, that we
are driven into disease or insanity by the sweat and anxiety of the mind,
just as the working man is by that of the body. The great principle of
population moreover presses upon us in a different, but scarcely a less
fearful manner, than upon the poor. It produces among us the want
of love, just as it does the want of food among the poor ; and the former
is almost as blighting and withering an evil among the richer classes,
especially the young ladies, as the want of food and leisure among the


poor. It slowly undermines health and happiness, and has made our
lociety, our parties, balls, promenades, a hollow and artificial masque-
rade, where the joyless gaiety ill-disguises the aching hearts beneath.
The immense number of unmarried men and women, whose sexual hopes
here been blighted by the want of love, or by genital or venereal diseases,
test a gloom and constraint over all the sexual relations, like the spectre
of poverty at a banquet. Married people and fortunate lovers do not
like to reveal their happiness, when there is so much sexual misery and
disappointment around; and were it not for the utterly selfish views of
lore which prevail among us, this feeling would be more common. Do we
think that those who are suffering from the want of love, are not as real
objects of our sympathy, as those who suffer from want of food 1
But it is as vain for those who engross the love, as for those who en-
gross the food, to expect to be happy, while others are miserable from the
want of it. The sexual disappointments and anxieties darken the whole
sexual atmosphere, and have fostered the puritanism, which has of late
years increased among us, and has given a sombre and painful character
to all love. No one likes to make allusions to sexual matters, a subject
fraught with anguish to so many. Discontent is as infectious as happi-
ness, and the number of minds soured by a life of forced abstinence
embitter all social joys. Envy and jealousy pervade the general mind on
sexual subjects, and hence the harsh judgments passed on those, who have
dared to taste, except in the ordinary mode of marriage, which Jias been
made as unenviable and rigorous as possible, the pleasures for which so
many sigh in vain. It is from this terrible want of love, and not from
the direct want of food, that the richer classes among us suffer; but the
two wants represent each other, being the only two alternatives, as Mr.
Malthas has shown, which the law of population leaves ns. It is just
a choice between two modes of death; by poverty, or by sexual misery ;
by want of food and leisure, or by want of love. This terrible choice may
be called the Malthusian dilemma. Poverty, taken in its widest sense,
means the want of love as well as of food; and the ignorance or dis-
regard of this truth is the greatest of all errors in reasoning upon social
matters.
The want of love is indeed fearfully felt in every grade of our society,
but by no class so much as by young ladies. The young men among the
richer classes, palliate this insufferable evil, by having recourse to a mer-
cenary intercourse; from which arises all the misery and degradation of
prostitution. The poor in general, rather than want love, will want food
and leisure, and live only a small fraction of their term of life;
and marriages take place at an earlier age, and are proportionally more
numerous among them than the rich. In the last census the mean
average of life in England is stated as forty years; which is not, the
Report says, one-half of the possible average, which it estimates at one
hundred years. In Manchester and Liverpool, the average is only twenty-
live years.
To convey a slight idea of the state of poverty to which our working
classes are reduced, I shall give one or two facts, which are enough
to paralyse with dismay any heart that feels for its fellows; and to show


os the great troth, that unless this state of things can be altered, ve
cannot expect that our society will long hang together as it is. It was
lately found by the Government Commissioners of Inquiry, that the
average amount of food procured by country labourers for their families,
is 122 ounces per week. Hence the working man’s share may be calm,
lated as 140 ounces, —134 bread and 6 meat. Kow the gaol dietaries
(which Sir James Graham says were made from the advice of the most
eminent medical men,) allow 254 ounces of food per week to the prison,
ers on hard labour, which the medical men declared was the very small,
est amount which could safely be given. Hence the labourer gets only
about half as much food as the criminal, whose allowance is the smallest
held compatible with health and vigour. I quote this awful fact from
Mr. Mayhew’s work.
Thus the rural population of many parts of England are, as a general
rule, half-starved. They have to toil like bond-slaves, with no leisure
for amusement, education, or any other blessing, which elevates or
sweetens human life; and after all, they have only half enough of tit
very first essential of life. Better would it have been for the wretched
ones, if they had never been born.
The working classes in the towns, are also miserably paid, often half,
starved; and are sweated to death in unhealthy sedentary drudgery,suth
as tailoring, cotton-spinning, weaving, &c. Mr. Mayhew moreover
informs us by the concurrent testimony of all the poor street-sellers it
London whom he consulted, that poverty has greatly increased of late
years : that the working classes have now no pennies to spend on super-
fluities ; and hence that the gains of the street-folk have been diminished
nearly to a third of what they were some twenty years ago. This is
partly owing to the too rapid increase of our own people, and partly to the
immense immigration of the Irish ; that most unfortunate nation, whose
abyss of poverty is deeper than our imagination can conceive, and who
have flooded all the poorest occupations in this country, and reduced the
wages to the starvation point. “We don’t live,” said many of the street-
folk to Mr. Mayhew, " we starve.”
Low as are the wages of the men, they are still far above those of the
women. What are the pittances, on which our poor women manage to
bear starvation for a few years, before they are ground to death ? The
mantle-maker earns about 4s. Bd. a-week, when in work, the “slacks"
occurring twice in the year, each of three months duration. The em-
broideress, and upholsteress can make from 10s. to 12s. a-week, but on
an average they do not earn half that sum. The garter-maker works
from eight in the morning till nine at night, to earn about four shillings
a-week clear. The shirt-maker makes shirts for 2s. a dozen: her usual
time of work is from five in the morning till nine at night, winter and
summer ; and for all this she earns on an average 2s. lOJd. per week, or
2s. clear, after deducting cotton and candle. The waistcoat-maker's
earnings average from 3s. to 4s. a-week, out of which, all deductions
made, she has about Is. 10id. to live upon. Of the workers for the
Army Clothiers, the one working for the soldiers earns 2s. a week, and
finds her own thread; the other, working for the convicts earns 35.»


week when in fall work, but has to deduct thread and candles, “ which
is quite half.” The shoe-binder works about eighteen hours a-day, earn-
ing Is. Gd. per week, out of which she has to pay 6d. for candles. The
brace-maker earns from Is. to Is. 3}d. a week, working six days of
twelve hours, and finding cotton and candles ; she has three months
slack in the year, during which she gets about 4Jd. a-week, paying a
halfpenny for cotton.
These are but specimens which might be multiplied indefinitely; they
are selected from the report of the Morning Chronicle Commissioners
made in 1G49. These awful miseries, at which our imagination reels
and our hearts sicken with horror, arise from the fact, that the supply
of “ hands ’’ is so great, that the workers are totally in the power of the
employers: and dare not refuse, from fear of dismissal, the very lowest
wages.
Such are the means, on which these miserable women sustain their
life-in-death; such the penury which drives them so frequently to pros-
titution, —the only refuge, which our horrible social state has left them ;
and for having recourse to which they are despised and abhorred by the
well-fed and well-married moralists, who do not enter into the neces-
sities of their life. What is virtue or any other consideration to those
who cannot get food ? Words, heartless words, which only serve to
increase the misery and embitterment of the sufferer. Well may the
noble-minded Mr. Maurice, lately expelled from King’s College for his
rejection of the withering doctrine of everlasting damnation, write thus,
“ I think the inference of those who walk the streets of Christian London,
from their observation of what is passing there, might naturally be, that
it would bej good for ninety-nine hundreds of its people, and of all the
people in the world, if they had never been born. This natural opinion
is immensely strengthened by the current doctrine among religious men,
respecting the fixed doom, which is awaiting those hereafter, who are
sunk so low here.”
Alas! Ido not know, how we/an have the heart to blame any human
being, for any action he or she may commit in our present social state. Life
is far too difficult for all of us ; we cannot, if we would, be good and happy ;
and it is rather surprising how man can have any virtues at all, amid
our withering social evils. Let those who will, blame this man and that
woman for actions to which they have been inevitably driven by the iron
hand of our destinythe earnest, loving heart, has other things to do.
Instead of blaming, it eagerly seeks to save, and asks the question of
questions “ Can nothing be done to alter this horrible state of matters,
and to prevent these unspeakable evils ? ”
Before proceeding to consider this momentous question, I shall first
entreat the reader’s attention to the two following corollaries, which flow
trcm the principle of population; and which appear to me to be the
most awful subject for the consideration of mankind, of any that could
be mentioned. I believe moreover, that the more deeply the matter
be reflected on, the more will their truth be perceived.
The first is, that hitherto there has been no real progress among mankind
in old countries , and that every good has had its necessary counterbalancing
z


evil: This arises from the fact, as shown by Mr. Malthas, that the
positive check to population is only to be avoided by using the preventive
check ; in other words, that it is only by sacrificing a proportional amount
of love, that men can have an increased supply of food or of leisure. It
is only by an increasing preventive check upon population—in other
words by an increase of sexual abstinence, that the positive one can be
diminished, and that the comforts of the poor can be increased. But it
is not food alone, but every other advantage whatsoever, which must
inexorably be paid for by the same price. Is the average of life longer
now-a-days than formerly? are wars less frequent, are efforts being
made to shorten the working hours, to improve the .dwellings,' to render
more healthy the lives of the poor ? These blessings also have mentally
to be bought by a diminished amount of love; or else the longer lives
would only create greater misery, by still further crowding the population.
In like manner every virtue, moral and physical, (which all naturally
tend to the preservation of life and health, and therefore, by prolonging
life, necessitate a diminished number of births,) has to be bought with the
same fearful price.
But this price, namely, sexual abstinence, is itself an evil, and one of
the very greatest of evils. It leads, as has been abundantly shown above,
to the most miserable physical diseases, to unhappiness and discontent j
in so much, that it may be said, that a life without love is not worth
having, though there should be every other blessing. The two great
primary necessaries of life and happiness, namely. Food and Love, have
hitherto been antagonistic to each other; and under these circumstances
it was not in the nature of things, that man should be other than wretched.
The checks by which population has been hitherto kept down to the
level of the food—the most vitally important of all the influences which
have acted on human destiny—have been all of an evil nature, the pre-
ventive ns well as the positive. Thus for every virtue, for every blessing
that we see among us, we may be certain that there is an inevitable com-
pensating evil. All human efforts have led to increased sexual difficulties,
to an increase of sexual abstinence sexual disease, and prostitution;
and this not incidentally, but by an absolute and inexorable certainty.
We have partially escaped from the horrors of the positive check,
namely, wars, infant mortality, famine, &c.; but it has only been, and
could only be, to land in the equal horrors of the preventive check,
namely, the diseases of abstinence and abuse, prostitution, and the most
heart-rending poverty and hard work. Quick famine and destruction have
given place to slow starvation from want of food and of love. Hence
we see that there has been hitherto no such thing as real progress in
human society. This has been, and is a delusion ; and will ever remain so
while food and love are antagonistic.
The second great corollary, that may be deduced from the principle of
population, and which is enough to turn our hearts to stone, and to con-
found us with horror and bewilderment, is this ; that hitherto all happiness
has been built on the misery of others. No man at present can be happy
himself, without inevitably causing his neighbour’s misery. He cannot,
where all are struggling for food love, and other advantages, enjoy any


of these, without depriving others of them. Mankind are like a forest of
trees too thickly planted. All indeed suffer more or less, but the more
robust struggle upward, and in so doing destroy their weaker neighbours.
So do we ; any of us who have greater talents or virtues, more robust
bodies or minds, and who are born in more favourable circumstances,
struggle onwards to the possession of the hardly-contested blessings of
life ; and in so doing we destroy those who are weaker. This age, and
all past ages in old countries, have been ages of mutual destruction. We
eat the food of our fellow-beings, we breathe their air, we enjoy their loves,
we suck their life’s blood. Hence talents or virtues, instead of being a
blessing to those around, are rather a curse to them ; and thus talent
and virtue are unworthy of their name. Among the poor, this death-
struggle is seen for the first necessary of life, namely food ; among the
rich it is seen rather for other blessings of life, and especially for love.
Those whose talents enable them to succeed in life, marry and mono-
polise the blessings of love and offspring, and thus deprive others of
them. At present, when, on account of the large average of children to
each marriage, but a limited number of the community can marry,
every one who marries may know that he is preventing the marriage of some
one else, and thus plunging his neighbour into the misery and disease of
a life of celibacy.
Thus, the more deeply we consider this great subject, the more we
shall perceive, that virtue, talent, happiness, have hitherto been mere
delusions; mere names, which their possessor had no right to. It mat-
ters not what the virtues have been; Christian or unchristian all are
alike; hitherto every quality which tended to advance a man in life, and
to make him happy, has been inevitably exerted to the destruction of some of
his fellow-beings; and in this way may almost as well be called an evil
as a good quality. This confounds all commonly-received ideas on the
difference of good and evil; shows us that a deeply-rooted scepticism on
human allairs, for which so many thinkers have been blamed, is in reality
the only view warranted by the real state of matters ; and that morality
has been hitherto a radically false and unsound science. Do you wish to
lead a good life ? you may recognise, that in the present state of human
society, it is an absolute impossibility, and that perhaps the best thing
you can do on the whole for your fellow-creatures, would be, to cease
to live, and so leave them more room to enjoy their life. No man has
ever yet in any old country, where the checks to population are sexual ab-
stinence, prostitution, and poverty, lived a good or a virtuous life. What
avail the efforts of the wise, the struggles of the philanthropist, the
yearnings of the loving heart to benefit its fellows, while these things
are so ? They are all shattered to pieces on the principle of population
and its corollaries, as these have hitherto worked in human affairs.
Morality, medicine, religion, law, politics, are solemn farces played
before the eyes of men ; whose imposing pomps and dazzling ceremonies
serve but to divert the attention from the awful tragedies behind the
scenes. We may be absolutely certain of this, that unless we can attain
to some other solution of the social difficulties, our society must for ever
continue, as it ever has been, a chaos of confusion, of wrongs, and of
misery.


These reflections would not appear to usso strange, if we were not accnt-
tomed to regard the world from the more favourable point of view, occupied
by the better educated and morefortunate classes. Had we been born amid
rags and wretchedness, and forced by the pressure of circumstances into
crime or prostitution to avoid starvation; had we been ground to death
by toil, and found no friend to help us, but been driven from door to door
by police and parish officers; we would have had a very different idea of
the state of the world; and the increase of wealth and civilization among
our neighbours would only have added to our bitterness. We would then
have felt in our agony the awful truth, that to the poor the progress Of man-
kind is a hollow lie; that the very prosperity of others is built upon their
toil, their sufferings, and their ruin. The self-congratulations of the
more fortunate part of mankind on the vast progress of civilization, area
constant insult to the poor and the suffering, and are as foundationless
as they are unfeeling. The least we can do to those suffering from the
want of food, love, and leisure, is not to insult their misery by vain boasts
of the advance of human happiness.
I have dwelt on these considerations, because I wish to impress the
deep conviction, that our present state of society is one so horrible , when
we look beneath the surface, that it cannot possibly long continue as it is;
that human affairs, when tested by the population principles, are found
to be a hideous phantasmagoria, as if got up by some mocking fiend; and
that if a radical change cannot be effected in our society, by which the
destructive agency of the principle of population can be counteracted,
man's destiny is hopeless. All other questions are insignificant com-
pared to this; religion natural or supernatural, education, medicine,
politics, all are alike trivial beside it, and are indeed incapable of solution,
without the prior solution of this. The question is not, “ are we to have
improved morality, religion, or medicine;” but, “are we to have any at
all?” Hitherto we have had none; all efforts at improvement in these
matters have been totally neutralised by the principle of population,
which “ dragged at each remove a lengthening chain” of evils behind it
We have lived just like the inferior animals, in a state of mutual destruc-
tion ; the only difference being that the manner of the destruction has
been different, and that it has been to a great degree unconscious and
unintentional.
I come now to the great question, “ can anything be done to prevent these
evils.” There is but one possible mode of preventing any evil, namely, to
seek for and remove its cause. The cause of low wages, or in other words,
of Poverty, as has been so wonderfully explained to us by Mr. Malthus,
and following him, by Mr. Mill and others, is over-population; that is,
the existence of too many people in proportion to the food, of too many
labourers in proportion to the capital; a state of things, produced and
constantly kept up by the over-exercise of the reproductive powers. It
is of the very first importance, that the attention of all who seek to
remove poverty, should never be diverted from this great truth. .The
disproportion between the numbers and the food is the only real cause ol
social poverty. Individual cases of poverty may be produced by indi-
vidual misconduct, such as drunkenness, ignorance, laziness, or disease;


tut these and all other accidental influences must be wholly thrown out
of the question in considering the permanent cause, and aiming at the
prevention of poverty. Drunkenness and ignorance moreover, are far
more frequently the effect than the cause of poverty; and it is a most
serious error to overlook this. It is worse, it is an enormous injustice to
the poor; and has led many to talk and think harshly of poverty, as
being the result of such misconduct.
Hitherto all endeavours to alleviate poverty have been a mere vanity
and delusion, from the want of knowledge of, and unremitting attention
to, its only true cause. People have sought to remove it, by giving
charity, by trying to elevate the moral condition of the poor, by crusades
against drunkenness and other of its fearful effects, by the spread of
Christianity; or, it may be, by a scheme of national education, socialism,
or other means. Butin all these the real root of the evil is quite over-
looked, and it is not remembered, that none of them can have any per-
manent direct effect upon low wages; the only way it can possibly affect
them, is by instructing people to prevent excessive population. If the
proportion of the people to the food can be made a smaller one, poverty
will be benefited; but by no other conceivable means. The only possible
way to remove poverty is to have fewer children.
The coVnmon error which prevents the recognition of the population
truths, and which we hear repeated over and over again whenever
the subject is brought forward, is one which betrays a total ignorance
of the Malthusian law, and which men should by this time feel
ashamed of uttering, as it is has been so often exposed. I beg the reader
to remark it, when next he hears the subject spoken of. Men say, “ the
idea of over population is absurd ; is not the earth wide, and many parts
ot it uncultivated; and is not an immense quantity of the produce wasted
by idlers, who have more than they know what to do with?’* Can those
who utter such opinions, suppose that the ablest political economists who
have existed among us, have devoted their chief energies to the explana-
tion of a palpable absurdity—one which any child would laugh at? Mr.
Malthas did not say that the earth was absolutely over-peopled, or could
not support far more inhabitants than now exist; he said that it is rela-
tively over-peopled, and has been so to a greater or less degree ever since
the birth of history; and this arises from the fact, that the ratio of in-
crease of population is incomparably higher than that of the increase of
food; so that population not only easily keeps up with any increase of food,
that can possibly take place in an old country, but is always pushed
beyond it by the force of the great sexual instincts, so that very many of
the people (and those naturally who are in the poorest circumstances) are
fearfully straightened and over-worked to gain subsistence; nay, are
crushed out of existence by the others. Population and food, like two
runners of unequal swiftness chained together, advance side by
side; but the ratio ot increase of the former is so immensely supe-
rior to that of the latter, that it is necessarily greatly checked; and
the checks are of course either more deaths or fewer births,
that is, either positive or preventive. The preventive check, or
sexual abstinence, is so great an evil, that it is never adequately used,


and far more people are brought into the world than can lire in com-
fort on the existing produce ; and hence come poverty and early death.
It is only in new colonies like America and Australia, that food can be
increased at all in the same ratio as population, and hence that the latter
can advance with its natural rapidity. But in old countries, so many
unavoidable difficulties attend emigration, increased cultivation, or any
other conceivable modes of rapidly increasing the food, that they are quite
inadequate to enable it to keep up with unchecked population. If these re-
sources were readily available, they would very soon be exhausted, and would
long ere this have been exhausted. Any one by reflecting on the subject will
■ easily see, that they never can be made so available, as very materially to
lighten poverty, even for a few short years, as their effects are speedily
obliterated by increased procreation; and practically we know that they
never have had this effect, nor have they ever permitted population in an
old country to expand at anything approaching its natural ratio. Mr.
Malthus showed all these things incontrovertibly, and hence made it ap-
parent that population must be, and is, most powerfully checked in old
countries either by more deaths or fewer births; and therefore that the only
way of preventing poverty and early death is not by any conceivable means
of increasing the produce in this country or emigrating to another, but by
having fewer children. As for the rich, it is evident that although there
were no rich, poverty would be quite as bad or worse; and would only
differ in being universal, and in the absence of the glaring inequalities in
human conditions.
Among the lower animals we can easily observe the enormous destruc-
tion caused by the law of population. In fishes we see what countless
myriads of the young are destroyed; in the domestic animals, as dogs
and cats, we have ourselves to be the instruments of this destruction.
Poverty, or habitual difficulty of procuring food, together with incessant
toil, is a state peculiar to man; and it is by it, as well as sexual ab-
stinence and prostitution, that a similar destruction is effected, just as
certainly as in the case of the lower animals, though in a more compli-
cated manner. The average of life in man would be, proportionally, as
short as it is in all the inferior animals, were it not, firstly, for the ex-
istence of the preventive check, both branches of which, moral restraint
and vice, are peculiar to him; and secondly, his greater power of acquir-
ing increased food, which always obviates a part of the necessary
destruction.
Those who talk slightingly of the “supply and demand theory,” or
exercise their wit upon “ that bug-bear of over-population,’’ do not know
that they are laughing at the most awful and overwhelming laws, that
were ever apprehended by mankind; laws which are, and have been ever
since our race appeared on this earth, crushing and grinding us to pieces;
and which will continue throughout all time as silently, and as inexor-
ably to destroy us, unless we can find a mode of escaping from them.
The law of population forsooth is a paradoxical abstraction, and does not
act at present, if it ever did act, on human affairs! Alas! do we think that
it, acts the less, because we refuse to look at its action? Its action is
seen at present, exactly as in all past times in old countries, by the


necessary existence of the preventive and positive check to population ;of
poverty and early death on the one ha"d, and of sexual abstinence
or abuse, and prostitution, on the other. Our choice at this hour is
exactly the same, as was that of our forefathers; namely, between moral
restraint, vice, andmisery, not independent of them; and whichever of them
we seek to mitigate, we must necessarily by so doing aggravate the others.
Thus if we wish to avoid premature death, and to raise the average of
life, it cannot possibly be done (while food is increasing at its usual ratio)
except by increasing sexual abstinence, or a sexual interconrse which
hinders, like prostitution, the birth of children. A decrease in any one of
the three immediate checks, moral restraint, vice, or misery, is necessarily
attended with an increase in the others. In this way we see that pre-
mature death in former times obviated the necessity of sexual abstinence
or prostitution; while the longer average of life at present has necessitated
a great increase of these two evils.
The preventive check, in the shape of sexual abstinence, is operating
among us at this day with so tremendous a power as was probably never
before known in the world. In England and Wales the average age of
first marriages among the men is twenty-five years and eight months ;
among the women twenty-four years and six months. Do we know what
these numbers imply ? We have become so accustomed to the unnatural
sexual lives of our women, that twenty four years and a-half seem a tole-
rable average age for the first gratification of the powerlul passions, which
have awakened ten years previously. These numbers show that the re-
productive powers in women are restrained for nearly one-third of their
sexual life, even in that proportion of the sex who do marry. But im-
mense numbers never marry, nor exercise at all their reproductive powers.
In some parts of England and in many counties in Scotland the proportion
of spinsters is as high as forty-one per cent of the women, from the age of
twenty upwards. There are 1,407,225 women between the ages of twenty
and forty, who have never married; and 359,909 old maids of the age of
forty and upwards. Those who are at all aware of the misery and
disease of sexual abstinence, will be able to form a slight idea of the suf-
fering arising from this form of the preventive check. The ten years of
abstinence before the average age of marriage, cf themselves amply
account for the universal prevalence of hysteria, menstrual diseases, and
the other evils before mentioned.
Prostitution is the mode, which has been adopted in all old countries to
palliate in some measure the evils of want of love; and to treat of it,
without the knowledge of this, as is generally done, is totally useless.
Had it not been for the extraordinary, and still imperfectly explained, fact
that a promiscuous intercourse tends powerfully to hinder, if not wholly
to destroy, the reproductive powers in woman, mankind would long ere
this have been driven to utter desperation from the want of love, as well
as of food. It is not understood by those who treat of prostitution, that
its increase hitherto has lightened the other recessary checks to popula-
tion, moral restraint and misery; and therefore has been one great cause
of the longer average of life, and the comparative rarity of famine, &c.,
in modern times. On the other hand, those who seek to do away with
prostitution, are unaware of the immense natural difficulties opposing


them; namely, that thereby, if other things remain the same, sexual ab-
stinence or premature death must be increased. ::
Unless the necessity of the preventive or positive checks to population
be perceived; unless it be clearly seen, that they must operate in one’
form, if not in another; and that though individuals may escape them, the
race cannot; human society is a hopeless and insoluble riddle.
The difficulty of comprehending the principle of population arises from
the extraordinary peculiarity of the principle itself. It differs from all
truths hitherto discovered in this awful feature: that two great natural
laws of-our constitution' cross each other , and are in antagonism; or in
the words of Mr. Malthus, that “ human beings are brought into the
world by one law of nature, who by another law of nature cannot be sup-
ported." Between these two crushing laws our race has been, and
is, inexorably devoted to misery and grinding destruction ; and will ever
continue to be so, unles we can reconcile this antagonism. In all other
matters it is by obedience to the laws of nature that our safety is secured,
but in the case of the reproductive powers, to obey their natural laws is
certain destruction ; while on the other hand, to disobey them is no less
certain destruction. It was an unguarded, and incorrect comparison which
Mr. Malthus made, between the misery resulting from multiplying too
fast, and the effects of intemperance in drink; in the former case it is
the normal use, not the overuse or abuse of the appetites, which is destruc-
tive. Were it otherwise, and did the fault lie in human error, the difficulty
would be comparatively trivial; but the question is infinitely more awful
than this, indeed is totally different from any other which, as far as I
am aware, man has ever had to solve ; it is, “can we escape from the an-
tagonism of two laws of Nature V’ Had this antagonism not existed,
the whole past and present history of our race would have been radically
different.
“Millions and millions of existences” says Mr. Malthus “have been
destroyed by this simple cause.” This antagonism necessitates the con-
tinued existence of moral restraint, vice, and misery—iu other words of
the diseases of abstinence, self-abuse and prostitution, poverty and pre-
mature death—in all old countries : in short, of the great social, moral,
and physical evils, which exist among us. The ignorance of this anta-
gonism has rendered abortive all human efforts at improvement: in
seeking, with Sisyphean labour, to obey more fully one set of laws, men
have been forced into greater disobedience of another, no less important.
Those who vainly try to remedy poverty by the usual routine means
of education, emigration, charity, or political changes, do not reflect, that
the problem is not to remove the existing poverty only, but also the
sexual abstinence and prostitution ; for unless this is done, and not for
one generation only, but for all time, the same over-crowded state is
constantly kept up by the expansion of the reproductive powers. Such
efforts are exactly as delusive, as to seek to empty a cistern, while the
stream which supplies it, is suffered to run on unheeded. Poverty is a
sexuai question, not a political or a charity one; and cannot possibly be
remedied by any other than sexual means. It is one of the great sexual
problems, just as truly as abstinence or prostitution ; and depends like
them upon the restrictive sexual law, discovered by Mr. Malthus.


, Poverty and the present social difficulties' are a compromise made by
mankind in this and all proceeding ages, between the two fearful wants,
—the want of food and of love. Rather than resign love, rather
than practise increased sexual abstinence, and so check population,
they have been willing to submit to the smallest proportion of food
and leisure which the human frame could for a season endure. The
want of love is so miserable a state of constraint, and moreover so
destructive to the health of body and mind, that people who have a
choice in the matter will rather put up with any evils than endure it.
This it is, which roused the intense disgust against the inexorable pop-
ulation doctrines ; and has made men steadily refuse to look at them,
but rather madly cling to any fallacious hope, that might present
itself elsewhere, in socialism, emigration, education, &c. ’What, resign
more love? when .even at present our life is a constant drudgery and
monotony, when there is already not the sixth-part of these sexual
pleasures among us, which would be needed to make our society a
healthy or a happy one; resign the dearest solace of our life, the poor
man’s only enjoyment, and the poet’s brightest dream? there is mad-
ness in the thought. Instead of less love, we need infinitely more
love, to make this world other than a dreary desert, as it is at present
to the sexual sufferers, whose name is legion.
Hence we see, that the remedy which Mr. Malthus proposed for the
evils of over-population, was of itself such a frightful evil, that all men
recoiled from it; and loaded with invectives the man, the only man, who
had shewn them the true difficulties of their life. Rather than adopt
his remedy, rather than renounce, as he advised, all sexual intercourse
till a comparatively late age, they were content to remain sunk in the
mire of poverty and hard work; and to palliate their miseries by the
old routine of prostitution, masturbation, and other morbid sexual
outlets. The great error in Mr. Malthus’s reasoning was, that he,
like most of the moralists of his and our own age, was unaware of the
frightful evils, and fearlul natural sin of sexual abstinence. The
ignorance of the necessity of sexual intercourse to the health and virtue of
both man and teaman, is the most fundamental error in medical and mural
philosophy. However clearly Mr. Malthus saw the law of population
he by no means fully saw its awful nature; for he did not see the evil
of one of his three necessary checks, namely, sexual abstinence. The
want of medical knowledge, added to the erroneous austerity on sexual
matters, prevented him from recognising them; made him unhesita-
tingly advocate the increase of sexual abstinence, one of the most
terrible causes of disease and suffering in modern times; and thus
threw him into strong antagonism with all those, who had deeply seen
and felt this. He did not recognise the fact; that these evils are so
enormous as to render his proposed remedies totally impracticable and
visionary. They are impracticable, because they are worse, I firmly
believe, than the evils they propose to cure. A society in which ail
men and women should restrain their sexual desires till the age of
thirty or upwards, would be a scene of such horrible restraint, such
absence of manliness and nature, such wide-spread genital disease,
spermatorrhoea, chlorosis, hysteria, and all the allied signs of sexual


enfceblement and morbidity, that it would be next to impossible to
find a single healthy or natural individual. If wo are to dream of
Utopias, they should at least be of a somewhat more desirable charac-
ter. The difference between such a state of society and the present
one, would be, that the miseries would be more equally distributed, so
that no one would have a life worth the possessing.
No; if there be no other means of increasing the proportion of food
and leisure among mankind, than that of sacrificing the love, human
affairs are hopeless. It will not, it cannot be done; and all human
effort will be a mere oscillation, a mere higgling between these two
necessaries of life, as it has been hitherto in all old countries. To
resign either food or love is despair and death; and that is the only
choice which mankind has yet had. If we cannot have both , there is
no happiness or virtue for man; and human society must ever con-
tinue, as it ever has been, a scene of confusion, where the strong
strangle the weak, and where the only progress, if progress it is to be
called, has been in the changed form, and more equal distribution of
the miseries.
The real problem for solution is; to remove loth the alternative
evils, preventive and positive, of the law of population; to save our
society from the necessary existence of moral restraint, vice, or misery
—sexual abstinence, prostitution, and poverty —which are ingrained
into all old countries. The usual attempts at solution—emigration,
socialism, change in the government, pulling down the church, the
aristocracy, and the rich, the spread of religion or education —still
repeated in persistent ignorance or contempt of the law of population,
in the face of the unanswered and unanswerable demonstrations of Mr.
Malthus and the experience of the whole past history of our race, are
futile. The solution proposed by Mr. Malthus, although guided by
a profound knowledge of the true cause of the evils, (and therefore the
only one which had the slightest chance of being right), was in fact no
solution at all; it merely recommends, as a remedy for the difficul-
ties, the very thing, namely, sexual abstinence, which itself constitutes
the difficulty.
The hopes of man lie in a nutshell; they are all comprehended in
this question of questions—ls ix possiule to have both food and
love? Is it possible that each individual among us can have a due
share of food, love, and leisure ? in other words, is it possible to recon-
cile the antagonism of the two laws of nature, and to escape from'the
horrors of mutual destruction ?
I firmly believe that it is perfectly possible, and that this greatest of
human difficulties has only to be clearly perceived and determinedly
approached, to be ultimately overcome. But it is evident on the out-
set, that the means by which this is to be effected, must be very dif-
ferent from any that have been hitherto tried, since all these have
been so utterly inadequate. It is evident, that it can be by no slight
palliative measures, such as have been hitherto resorted to, and which
have been all rendered abortive by the principle of population, that
any real improvement can be effected; but that we must go to the
true root of the matter, which is a sexual one, and that some great


. radical change in the sexual life and opinions of mankind is required
before it is even possible to escape from these evils.
I earnestly entreat the reader not to prejudge this greatest of
questions, nor to allow commonly received opinions to divert him from
its steadfast consideration. If he be deeply penetrated by the convic-
tion of the horrible state of human affairs at present existing in old
countries; of the utter hollowness and worthlessness of our social
fabric; and of the delusive nature of all our schemes of morality,
religion, medicine, &c., neutralised as they are by the principle of
population; he will perceive that a change is to be sought at all
hazards, and if it cannot begot, that human society cannot be expected
long to hang together. When once the population truths and the
mutual destruction of mankind become generally known, (and they
must be before long), all will perceive, that a thorough reconsidera-
tion of the first principles of human society, and of sexual morality, is
absolutely necessary; for the present state- of things is incapable of
continuance.
There is a way, and but one possible way, of surmounting these
evils, and of securing for each individual among us a fair share of
food, love, and leisure: without which human society is a chaotic
scene of selfishness, injustice, and misery. I believe too, that this
means, however strange it may be to the common ideas upon sexual
matters, contains within itself little real evil, or at least the smallest
possible amount of evil, which the laws of population leave us the
choice of. lam absolutely certain that in time, however much oppo-
sition it may at first meet with, it will be universally adopted; for I
will defy human ingenuity to imagine the bare possibility of any other
escape from the economical and sexual evils of old States, when the
magnitude of the difficulties from the want of food on the one hand,
and of love on the other, is duly recognised.
The means I speak of, the only means by which the virtue and the
progress of mankind are rendered possible, is Preventive Sexual
Intercourse. By this is meant sexual intercourse, whore precautions
are used to prevent impregnation. In this way love would be ob-
tained, without entailing upon us the want of food and leisure, by
overcrowding the population.
Two questions arise here, first—ls this possible, and in what way?
second—Can it be done without causing moral and physical evil ? .
In answering the first question, I will give an account, as far as I am
acquainted with them, of the different modes in which preventive sex-
ual intercourse has been tried or proposed; for it must not be thought
that these means of checking population are new or unusual; they are
on the contrary I believe, very common, both in this country and still
more in some parts of the continent. People have been driven to
devise and adopt them in numberless instances, to prevent an increase
in their families, or to avoid having offspring in an unmarried inti-
macy. I shall first give the great method of preventive intercourse,
proposed by M. Eaciborski, of whose important contributions to the
physiology of the female sexual organs I have spoken above.: His


views are peculiarly interesting, as being expressly intended to counter-
act the population evils.
‘ He says, “In marrying girls in our climates at from twenty to
twenty-four years of age, we leave them from twenty-four to twenty,
six years for reproduction. Let not the length of this period terrify
the disciples of Malthus. Science has now the means of reassuring
them. She can offer them means capable of arresting in time a rapid
increase of the population, in each family which is menaced by it.
These means are but the consequence of the progress of the physiology
of the species. It is no longer with the destruction of living beings,
nor the forced abortions of beings ready to live, that we have to do.
Remedies of this kind are destined to remain for ever in the hands of
barbarous nations, inaccessible to the lights of the Christian religion
and of philosophy.” The mean she recommends is, “to adopt a certain
order in sexual intercourse. It results from ray investigations, that,
though there may not be periods, as M. Pouchet has lately asserted,
when conception Is physically impossible, there are nevertheless
periods, when it is infinitely less likely to happen than at others.
Thus I have found, that in one hundred women we cannot reckon more
than six or seven at the outside, who become pregnant at periods'con-
siderably distant from the menstrual epoch. In most women, concep-
tion dates from intercourse either during menstruation, or a few days
before or after it. Hence it results, that in abstaining from intercourse
from the second or third day before the menstrual epoch till the eighth
day after it, one may be certain to diminish considerably the chances
of reproduction.”
M. Bischoff, the celebrated German physiologist, is nearly of the
same opinion. He says that the egg escapes from the ovary in woman
when menstruation is just about to cease, and that, to be impregnated,
it must meet the semen in the oviduct; hence, ho says, sexual inter-
course, to bo fruitful, must take place within from eight or twelve days
after the menstrual period. Professor Naegele, who is acknowledged
to be perhaps the first living authority on midwifery, is accustomed to
reckon the duration of pregnancy at nine months and eight days since
the last menstrual period; and he says that in normal cases he has
never been wrong by this calculation. Very many other physiologists
and physicians have the same views, which indeed may be said to have
much the greatest weight of evidence on their side.
If these views be true, (and they have every appearance of truth,)
they almost of themselves surmount the population difficulty; and are
of an importance to mankind, which cannot be over-estimated. But I
do not know how far they are true. On account of the rigid and
ruinous secrecy, that is kept up on all sexual subjects, no individual
gives the result of his or her experience on these matters; and it
is almost impossible to ascertain, whether such means have been tried,
and whether they have been found efficacious or not. Unless this
secrecy and mystery be got rid of, and sexual subjects be discussed
freely among us, the greatest of all human difficulties must remain
buried in obscurity. Probably the chief reason that has opposed the


discussion of the question of preventive intercourse, has been the feel-
ing, that if such intercourse were shown to be of easy accomplishment,
it would lead to an immense amount of unmarried love. Women, if they
had not the fear of becoming pregnant before their eyes, would indulge
their sexual desires, just as men do. Hence the vehement prejudices in
favour of our present code of sexual morality, and of the institution of mar-
riage, together with the determined hostility to anything in the shape of
unmarried intercourse, at least on the part of women, are the chief obsta-
cles to the consideration of the most important of all subjects , preventive
sexual intercourse.
In accordance with the views of these distinguished men, it is only
necessary for woman to abstain from sexual intercourse during a certain
part of the month; and this would leave them about the half of each
month for the free indulgence of their sexual appetites, without the
danger of adding to an over-crowded population. This, if true, would be
a boon of incomparable value; and if even this amount of sexual inter-
course were available to all women, it would probably prevent in great
measure the evils of sexual morbidity, repressed sexual desires, and un-
exercised sexual organs, as they are seen in the numberless cases of
chlorosis, hysteria, and diseases of menstruation. Nothing could be of
greater value to mankind, than to know how far these views are true;
and this can only be brought about, by an ample experience of them,
freely laid before the public.
But besides these preventive means, which may be called the natural
ones, and which are as yet scarcely at all known to the mass of mankind,
there are others, which are much more widely known, and much more
generally adopted. Dr. Ashwell alludes to these, as we have seen above,
when he says that incomplete sexual intercourse is, he fears, not unfre-
frequently practised, to avoid adding to the cares of an already numerous
family. The means to which he refers, are the unnatural or mechanical
ones, which are of different kinds ; but have all the same object, namely,
to avoid impregnation, by preventing the seminal fluid from entering the
womb, and thus preventing the meeting of the sperm and germ cell, which
is the essential part of impregnation. In this way the accessory and
sensational part of the venereal act is obtained, while the essential and
unconscious part is avoided. This is done either by the withdrawal of
the penis immediately before ejaculation takes place, (which is very fre-
quently practised both by married and unmarried men); by the use of
the sheath, (which is also very frequent, but more so on the continent
-than in this country); by the introduction of a piece of sponge into the
vagina, so as to guard the mouth of the womb, which lies high up in the
vagina; or by the injection of tepid water into the vagina immediately
after coition.
The first of these modes is physically injurious, and is apt to produce
nervous disorder and sexual enfeebleraeut and congestion, from the sud-
den interruption it gives to the venereal act, whose pleasure moreover it
interferes with. The second, namely the sheath, dulls the enjoyment,
and frequently produces impotence in the man and disgust in both parties;
so that it also is injurious.


These objections however do not, I believe, apply to the third, namely,
the introduction of a sponge or some other substance, to guard the
mouth of the womb. This could be easily done by the woman, and would
scarcely, it appears to me, interfere at all in the sexual pleasures, nor
have any prejudicial effect on the health of either party. (Any preven-
tive means, to be satisfactory, must be used by the woman , as it spoils
the passion and impulsiveness of the venereal act, if the man have to
think of them.) Ido not know how far this preventive means has been
tried, or with what success, but I earnestly hope and believe, that
either it, or some analogous simple means, will prove to be satis-
factorily available for the grand object, the practical solution of the
greatest human difficulties, —a preventive sexual intercourse, of easy
adoption, and not of a physically injurious nature. The injection of
tepid water into the vagina, immediately after intercourse, would also
be a very effectual means of preventing impregnation; as it would
wash away the seminal fluid, and also, as Wagner asserts, destroy
the fecundating properties of the spermatozooids, whose movements
speedily cease in pure water.
By far the best of these mechanical means I should take -to be the
sponge, and it might be used during that part of the month, in which
fecundation can take place; or, if M. Eaciborski’s views prove erroneous,
might still, of itself, surmount the population difficulties. The sexual
desires in women are generally strongest just after menstruation, (a sign
that that is the time, when they are most liable to impregnation ;) and it
would be an enormous evil to the female sex, which would render their
life much more irksome than man's, if their strongest desires were to be
systematically denied, and they were only to have one half, and that the
least enjoyable half, of their sexual gratification. The law of population
has always pressed more heavily on woman than on man (except in
respect of the want of leisure) on account ot the different sexual conditions
of the two ; and it is most difficult to enable her to escape from its evils.
I believe that by the natural means proposed by M. Raciborski, and
the mechanical ones mentioned above, or others which may be discovered
to be more satisfactory, it is perfectly possible to have a preventive
sexual intercourse, which would enable mankind to surmount the great-
est of all their difficulties, and to obtain a sufficiency of food, without
the sacrifice of love. No greater boon could be conferred on mankind,
than to increase and disseminate the knowledge of these preventive
means; and every effort should be made to obtain this knowledge, by a
wide induction of individual experience. It is very possible that some
means superior to any of the above might be devised; and there is not
in the whole range of human thought a single subject, on which
ingenuity could be so valuably exercised.
The second question was, can these means be used without causing
physical and moral evils 1 I firmly believe that they can ;or at least
that the evils they may cause, would be totally insignificant when com-
pared with the present ones, arising from the principle of population. If by
these means, together with other changes in our sexual code of which I
shall speak hereafter, each woman in our society could have a due share
of the pleasures of love, and also of the blessings of motherhood, it appears


ti me that this could he done, ■with little, if any, necessary injury to the
health. The question is just this, could woman lire a healthy life, if she
permitted impregnation to take place only twice or thrice in her lifetime,
and prevented it in the modes mentioned above at all other times ? I
believe not only that the average of female health would be immeasurably
improved, if this were generally dona throughout our society, but that the
life of woman could be perfectly healthy in these circumstances ; that two
or three children are sufficient to maintain the health of her sexual or-
gans ; and that a due amount of preventive intercourse during the rest
of life, would have a purely beneficial effect upon her health, physically
and morally. Impregnation and child-birth are certainly of the very
greatest importance to the health and happiness of woman, and hence
every woman should produce her fair share of offspring; but it is pro-
bable that two or three children during life would be quite sufficient to
secure these advantages. If such be not the case, alas for woman!
for otherwise it is absolutely impossible to make the life of the sex a healthy
one.
As regards the moral side of the question of preventive sexual inter-
course, many people have an objection to it, because, they say, it is
unnatural. But sexual abstinence is infinitely more unnatural; in fact
it is so unnatural, and therefore sinful, that it is totally incompatible
with health and happiness, and produces the most wide-spread and
desolating diseases. It is granted that preventive intercourse is unnatural,
but the circumstances of our life leave us no alternative . If we were
to obey all the natural impulses, and follow our sexual desires like the
inferior anmals, which live a natural life, we would be forced to prey
upon and cheek the growth of each other, just as they do. We mast of
an absolute necessity act unnaturally; and the only choice left us is
to take the course from which the smallest amount of physical and
moral evil will result. It is not with nature that preventive intercourse
is to be compared, but with the other necessary checks to population,
sexual abstinence, prostitution, and poverty. We have to choose between
these checks, not independent of them.
Some people object to preventive intercourse, that it is a sort of mur-
der, and that by it a life is lost to the world. This is akin to the super-
stitious dread of the Hindoos, lest any child should remain unborn,
which makes them marry every girl immediately after her first men-
struation ; the consequence being, that the miserable people are sunk
in the most hopeless mire of poverty, and are decimated by the positive
check to population, in the shape of periodical famines, which are cer-
tain to bo of frequent occurrence, where the preventive check is not
attended to. Potential children are lost to the world every-day ; every
time that a woman menstruates, or a man’s seminal fluid is re-absorbed
or discharged without reproduction, a child is lost; in short exactly as
many children are lost to the world in this way, as form the difference
be'ween the number born in a country doubling its population, as the
United States do, in twenty-five years, and an old country whose popu-
lation is nearly stationary.
But it is a total confusion of ideas to connect preventive intercourse
with infanticide. The moment a human embryo is produced by the


union of tlis spermatozooid with tho egg, its life is as sacred as that of
the adult, and to take it away is murder; but to prevent impregnation
is a totally different matter. We do prevent impregnation every day,
when we refrain from sexual intercourse; and we do waste seminal
fluid and eggs every day, and the only alternative left us is not whether
or not they shall be wasted, but whether or not we ourselves shall be
wasted and destroyed along with them. “We must do no harm to any
one,” is the golden rule of morality, and therefore the young embryo,
when formed, is inviolable; but before it is formed, its elements are just
like the other secretions of the body, utterly destitute of an independent
vitality.
Those who make baseless accusations against preventive intercourse,
should rather look to their own actions ; which must before long rise up
in fearful judgment against many, whose sexual conduct has been
thought blameless. Instead of being murder, preventive intercourse is the
only possible mode of preventing murder , which, as has been already
shown in speaking of the mutual destruction of mankind, is taking place
around us in society every moment, in its most insidious and painful
forms. Instead of being immoral, preventive intercouse is the only possi-
ble way of introducing real morality into human society, where it has
hitherto been a mere name; and although I cannot tell what evils may
be found to be inseparable from it, yet I earnestly hope that they are
few and slight, and feel deeply convinced that, compared with the
present evils, they will be found to be totally insignificant.
Preventive sexual intercourse then, is the mode, and the only possible
mode, of reconciling the opposing difficulties of the population problem;
and is the only possible solution for the great social evils of this and other
old countries. I stake my life, I would stake a thousand lives, on the
truth of this. There is no subject on which I have thought so long, and
felt so deeply, as the sexual one. It has been ever present to me for many
years ; and long before I read the works of Mr. Malthus and Mr. Mill,
my mind was absorbed in the evils I saw and read of, from sexual absti-
nence, and other sexual difficulties and diseases. At that time I had
little idea of the iron-hand of necessity, which was causing all this
deprivation and misery, and blamed for it, as many have done, the tyranny
of our moral codes, and the monopoly of our sexual institutions; but Mr.
Malthus’s great work revealed to me the real source of the evil. I then
saw that the marriage monopoly was not the real cause of the sexual
abstinence, any more than the unequal distribution of wealth was the
cause of poverty; but that it arose from the inexorable necessity of
checking population, and keeping it down to the level of the food. Mar-
riage was a mere outpost, which screened from view the foe, which was
destroying us. The too great opposing difficulties then stood out in tho
clearest light; those from want of love on the one hand, which I had so
long lamented, and those'from want of food, which, as I learned from
Mr. Maltbus, were inseparably connected with the former. I saw then,
that the sexual evils and the evils of poverty were in fact merely two
different forms of the same grand evil, caused by the law of population:
that both sprang from the same source, and could be cured, if curable at


• all, only by tlio same remedy. Was this possible ? did their cure lie In the
•nature of things? could these difficulties be reconciled? for, if they could
not, the more deeply I considered the question, the morehopeless appeared
human affairs. J3y preventive sexual intercourse, and by this alone,
they can, 1 believe, be perfectly reconciled. It is not without a long and
anxious scrutiny from all the points of view within my reach, that I have
been led to this conclusion ; and I feel earnestly convinced, that it will
prove a true means of escape from the social evils. If it should not, alas
for our race! In that case this work, and every other work which has
ever been written on any subject, have been written in vain; and are
impotent to produce any real improvement in human destiny.
But even although preventive intercourse were universally adopted, and
found to be sufficient for its object, it would by no means thoroughly re-
medy the sexual evils, although it would greatly mitigate them: and
although it might wholly remove poverty. Many of the sexual evils
most widely spread among us, depend directly upon the errors of our
code of sexual morality. According to this code, all love except married
love, is considered sinful. Marriage, it is held moreover, should bind
people together for life, without leaving them the power of indulging in
any other sexual intimacy, or of divorce from each other, unless either
the husband or wife commits adultery. If this, which is the view of mar-
riage generally entertained in this country, were to continue, there are
very many fearful sexual evils which could not be removed.
In the first place, what is, or should be, the grand object of any social
institution for uniting the sexes ? It is, that each individual in society, every
man and woman, should have a fair share of the blessings of love and of off-
spring, and that the children should be duly provided for. But if marriage be
the only honorable way of obtaining sexual and parental pleasures, very
many must be excluded from them ; for, even supposing that there were
room for the exercise of all the reproductive powers, as in America, or
that by preventive intercourse the proportion of children in each family
were to be small, so as to allow of a great many marriages, still there
would be a large number of women, and even of men, who from plain-
ness and other unattractive qualities, would find no one, who would be
willing to be rigidly bound to them for life. Even in America there are,
I believe, not a few old maids. Were these inevitable cases still fewer,
they would be enough of themselves to show the insufficiency of marriage.
Iu this country, from the great preponderance of the female sex, very
many would necessarily remain single, though every man were to marry,
la Scotland, where the disproportion of the sexes is highest, the census of
1851 shows that there are 110 women to 100 men; a fact which
of itself, under our present sexual code, reveals an immensity of suffer-
ing.
But these are but drops in the ocean of miseries, which the rigorous in-
stitution of marriage inevitably causes. Marriage Is based npon the
idea, that constant and unvarying love is the only one, which is pure and
honourable, and which should be recognised as morally good. But there
could not be a greater error than this, hove is, like all other human
passions and appetites, subject to change, deriving a great part of its


force and continuance from variety in its objects; and to attempt to fix
it to an invariable channel is to try to alter the laws of its nature. Youth,
when the passsion is strongest, is especially prone to change, according
to the beautiful command of Nature, who intends that our experiences
should be varied, and our different faculties and emotions called forth.
To deplore this inconstancy in youth, or to call it an instance of perversity,
or original sin, is to think to set ourselves above the wisdom of Nature.
A. young man and woman at puberty, when their new senses are
awakened, fall in love with the first tolerably fair face they meet. It is
ten chances to one that were they to marry this first object, in a few years
they would bitterly repent. How can they tell, without experience of
love, how many objects of greater attraction and congeniality they may
yet encounter; they, who know as yet scarcely anything of character,
even of their own ?
Marriage thus tempts young people, blinded by the promptings of
their novel passion, and by their inexperience, to rush into a state which
will be the source of future years of grief. It denies all sufficient ex-
perience in the choice of a sexual companion; one of the most important
essentials of our happiness. Though the man and woman may know
a little of each other’s exterior, and of some of their surface qualities, yet
they have no idea how they shall sexually suit each other, before they
enter into this irrevocable contract ; so that the greatest miseries
have frequently arisen from the existence of some sexual malformation
on either side, from impotence in the husband, or even from total igno-
rance of all sexual matters on both sides—an ignorance worthy of the
childhood of our race, but an extraordinary anomaly in the nineteenth
century.
Many individuals in our society have a strong conscientious objection
to the marriage vow, which is in fact a satire upon all vows, promising
love til! death; a promise, which is evidently in many cases utterly beyond
the power of him or her who makes it, to fulfil. Again, the promise
of the wife to obey is a standing shame to the whole formulary, and has
tended to give a handle to those acts of domestic tyranny, which are, it
may I believe be said, the rule, and not the exception, in married life.
Marriage cannot, in general, be used in those innumerable cases,
where sexual intercourse is indispensable to the cure of genital diseases,
such as many forms of spermatorrhoea, chlorosis, hysteria, and the dis-
eases of menstruation. When a young man or woman has one of these
diseases, sexual intercourse cannot be obtained promptly through the cum-
brous machinery of marriage, (even were it morally advisable for an
invalid, whether man or woman, to link his uncertain fortunes indis-
solubly with another;) and the deeper the unhappy sufferer sinks into
the abyss of misery, the more hopeless does the prospect of marriage
become; for, if a young man, he has neither the will nor the power to
look about for a partner for life at such a time ; and, if a girl, the more
sickly she becomes, the less chance is there of her finding a husband.
Therefore marriage deserts us at our 1 greatest need; and if it should
continue to be the only attainable sexual intercouse, the cure of vast
numbers of genital diseases would be, as at present, impossible, and


might be given up in despair. But not only the cure, the prevention of
these diseases in any satisfactory degree would be impossible; for unless
ail young people were to marry about puberty, which would create the most
fearful subsequent repentances, an immense amount of genital disease
would be certain to arise, were no other honourable provision made for the
gratification of the first and most impetuous passions. It is very generally
about and shortly after the age of puberty, that masturbation begins to
be practised among both sexes; chlorosis is most frequent in girls still in
their teens; in short, it is an absolute impossibility to prevent the
developement of an immense amount of genital disease and morbidity, U
marriage be the only sexual provision for youth.
The irrevocable nature of the marriage contract, and the impossibility
of procuring divorce, lead to the most fearful evils. Mr. Hill shows
this in his work on Crime, telling us that the great majority of murders
and brutal assaults now-a-days, are committed by husbands upon their
wives; and showing that it is in the nature of all long and indissoluble
contracts to cause similar evils. All contracts, binding two human
beings together in an indissoluble manner for long periods, are the fruit-
ful source of crimes and miseries. So it was with the cumbrous machi-
nery of apprenticeships, formerly prevalent in the trades, which is now
being gradually abandoned. It is certainly a fearful and miserable ano-
maly that two persons who have ceased to care for—nay, who have coma
to hate each other, should be bound together with iron rigour, in what
should be the bonds of love. Surely it is a bitter satire upon love, and
on the dignity and freedom of man and woman. It is said, with tho
austerity that characterises ail the sexual opinions in this country, that
the happiness of the parents in such a case should bo sacrificed to the
interests of the children, and that therefore a divorce should not be per-
mitted ; but could anything be more adverse to the happiness or welfare
of the children themselves , than to dwell with a father and mother whose
temper is soured by mutual hatred ? For all parties it is infinitely de-
sirable that a divorce should take place. It is from such rational con-
siderations that in many parts of the continent, as for instance in
Germany, the unnatural indissolubility of marriage has been abandoned,
and divorce is permitted, if the parties find that they are unsuited to
each other. Many are already in favour of a similar alteration in the
marriage laws of this country.
Marriage is one of the chief instruments in the degradation of women.
It perpetuates the old inveterate error, that it is the province of the
female sex to depend upon man for support, and to attend merely to
household cares, and the rearing of children—a belief which is utterly
incompatible with the freedom or dignified developement of women on
the one hand, and with the economical interests of society on the other.
It is the emblem too of all those harsh and unjust views, which have
given to woman so much fewer privileges in love than man, and have
punished so much more severely a breach of the- moral code in her case.
For a man to indulge his sexual appetites illegitimately, either before or
after the marriage vow, is thought venial; but for a woman to do so, is the
most heinous crime. The wife has been held, in the true spirit of the


oriental harem, to be in a manner the sexual property of the husband,
whom no one hid a right to ton'h, and who had no right to have a thought
for any one but her own lord and master.
It is easy to compare monogamy, as it exists among us, with poly-
gamy, and to boast of its superior justice ; just as we hear Protestants
every day easily triumphing over the effete Roman Catholicism. It is not
with Roman Catholicism but with Natural Religion, that Protestantism
is to be compared ; and it is not with polygamy, but with nature, that
marriage is to be compared ; and it will be found infinitely further behind
the truly natural sexual justice, than it is superior to ploygamv. It has
been made the engine by which woman has been terrified into, and i rprison-
ed in, the most rigid rules of sexual discipline, while man has taken to him-
self all the sexual privileges. The husband, who himself would not scrnple
in the slightest to break his marriage vow, thinks his honour implicated in
his wife's rigid observance of it; and would be ready on the shortest
notice to shoot a man through the body, who should dare to approach his
wedded property, to whom he is perhaps totally indifferent. Are not
things like these a mockery? do they not mate fools and puppets of us,
and pour scorn upon our vaunted institutions? Marriage delivers
woman bound into the hands of man; it gives her moral and legal disad-
vantages, compared with him ; tempts her to become entirely dependent on
him for support, and do nothing but breed and rear children to overstock
the world: by its hopeless indissolubility, it takes away her spirit, and
makes her submit to hardships and indignities, which otherwise she
would never for a moment endure; it puts her in the power of man, and
tempts him to abuse his gift of superior strength; it is in short the
instrument, in numberless cases, of making the man a tyrant and the
wife a slave.
Marriage is a step so irrevocable and hazardous, that few would take
it, were they not driven to it, by the want of any other honourable out-
let for their sexual desires. Many men fee! that it would be to them a
great loss of freedom in various respects: and the number of those who
remain bachelors, not from want of means, but from dislike to the mar-
ried state, is very largo ; and is continually increasing, as the advance
in intelligence makes men less willing to take problematical and irrevo-
cable steps, in matters so closely connected with their happiness in life.
Marriage is like the gambler’s stake, all or nothing; and is fitted for
the early stages of human developeraent, but not for an advanced state of
society. There is nothing more degrading to the dignity of man and
woman, than such irrevocable contracts; they make children of us, con-
fining our affections and actions by rule and measure, as if we were
unfit to have any freedom, and to guide our own sexual conduct through-
out life.
The icy formality of the marriage ideas is a constant damper to
the enjoyments of youth; it spoils the social pleasures between the
young of both sexes, and casts a chill upon that intimacy and close sym-
pathy, which they should have for each other. No warm feelings are
countenanced between the sexes, unless marriage is in prospect; a young
man must not address a young woman except with a certain constraint,


for fear of exciting in her hopes of marriage, which he does not mean to
realise; neither a man nor woman must flirt (that miserable word) with
any of the opposite sex, for fear of entangling their hearts, and causing
their misery; in short, the only sexual conduct which is considered quite
conventionally honourable, is to look about for one suitable partner, and
keep at a due distance from all the rest of man or womankind, both before
and after marriage. This it is, which has frozen our society, given an
effeminate and unhealthy character to all love, as if young people could
not take care of their own feelings, and deadened the frauk gaiety and
impulsiveness of our youth ; converting the dignified intercourse of men
and women, into a scene of stiff and artificial marriage-hunting, where
the girls and their mothers are bent on looking out for good matches;
where the unmarried women are tormented by the miserable apprehension
of being left old maids, feelings destructive to the dignity of the female
character; and where the men are frequently hooked into marriage, by
arts and stratagems, or bullied into it by the fear of having “ gone too
far ”in attentions to the lady. This has had the effect of banishing true
and natural love as much as possible from our society, and substituting
for it interested calculations.
The romance and impetuosity of love are well-nigh extinguished among
us, and are to be met with chiefly in works of fiction ; where people in-
dulge in a day-dream of what should be the feelings between the sexes.
A great proportion of the marriages we see around us, did not take place
from love at all, but from some interested motive, such as wealth, social
position, or other advantages; and in fact it is rare to see a marriage in
which true love has been the predominating feeling on both sides. This
is especially the case as regards woman. It is comparatively rare, that
a woman marries the man whom she most loves; we see matches every
day in which a young girl marries an old man, or where the fear of re-
maining an old maid, or the wish to obtain the social advantages and
protection of marriage, is the real motive which influences the woman.
Such marriages are in reality cases of legalised prostitution , and are
utterly alien to the true spirit of love. It is not woman herself,
but her unfortunate social position, that is to be blamed for them.
From the dependent state of woman, which makes her think rather of a
protector and maintainer than a lover; from want of the power of
active selection on her side ; and from the great population difficulties,
which surround our society, and which have made marriage hitherto
attainable but to a limited number and at an advanced age; the influ-
ence of true love among us has been curtailed to an immense degree, and
all other feelings have as far as possible been substituted for it. But by
this, there is an incalculable loss to the happiness and virtue of mankind,
and especially of youth, for on no age does the rigour of the marriage
code press so suffocatingly as on youth; on youth, the season of ardent
passion, of impulse, of change; of generous spirit, as yet untamed by
the grinding difficulties of life, and beaming with that sexual halo, then
only to be seen, which displays the freshness and power of the newly
developed passions. . \
The complete exclusiveness of marriage, gives rise to very great evils.


Both mon and women, but especially the Utter, often fall desperately in
love with one object; and if they cannot have the full and sole posses-
sion of this, they resign themselves to despair. From hopeless love,
especially in woman, what fearful evils arise daily! The sufferer loses
all relish for the rest of life, pines away, and probably falls ultimately
into the hands of our great national destroyer. Consumption. The most
intense jealousy too is fostered among us, by the exclusiveness of mar-
riage. Lovers paying their addresses to the same girl, or girls who are
rivals for the affections of a man, are consumed with jealousies and
anxieties; for they know that it is a question of ail or nothing, and
their whole happiness in life seems bound up in the issue. The exclu-
siveness of marriage is thus one great cause of that intense anxiety of mind,
which is so conspicuous in our national character, and wears men down
as much as hard work.
The custom moreover of selecting one sole object of love, and steeling
one’s heart, as far as sexual desires are concerned, against all the rest
of man or womankind, has a very narrowing effect on our capacity for
affection, and appreciation of what is good and amiable in the different
characters we see around us. Hence, in great measure, has arisen that
fastidiousness in love, which is so marked among us, and is the sign of a
narrow and effeminate culture. There is perhaps no society, so full of
little trilling dislikes and repugnances ts ours; even the young, who'
should be averse to see any faults in the opposite sex, are full of the most
captious criticisms against them; instead of admiring each of their
neighbours for those good qualities which they possess, they must
have them suit exactly their narrow ideal, or, if not, they despise
them. These petty dislikes arise inevitably from a rigourous institution
like marriage ; and are the modes in which the heart of man or woman
instinctioeli/ steels itself against others, and devotes itself to one sole
object. Where a rigid puritauisra sternly forbids even the very feeling
of sexual desire towards any person save one’s married companion, or any
sexual intercourse except in a rigourous marriage, the heart is neces-
sarily driven, if it is not to become the prey of conflicting emotions, to
harden itself against the rest of the sex ; and these are some of the ways
in which this is done.
Another very common way is by the feelings becoming callous to the
passion of love altogether ; the husband turning his attention wholly to
the pursuit of wealth, fame, or ocher objects, and the wife to rearing
children, or, if she have none, to pietism. Thus constancy is secured by
the partial or total extinction of the passion of love; and this is the case
not in solitary instances, but I believe almost in the majority of married
lives. This is one of the most important seedhdary reasons of that
intense thirst for money-getting, which is so prominent a feature in the
English and American character. When love becomes extinguished,
from the influence of habit, of cold puritanical feelings, or other causes
iu marriage, some other passion must step in to supply its place in an
energetic mind; and that passion is generally in this country the love of
wealth. The effect of habit in dulling our passions is little understood
as yet; and I believe we are little aware of how much the sum of


gexual enjoyments is diminished, by the rigid monotony of our sexual
institutions. •
Marriage and the strictness of the sexual code is the chief secondary
cause of prostitution. It excludes any honourable provision for sexual
connections of a temporary kind; but these are so absolutely essential
that they must be obtained at any cost; and since they are stigmatised
as immoral, they assume the degraded and clandestine shape of prosti-
tution.
But all these evils of marriage, fearful though they be, are as nothing
compared with the miserable part it has played in the grinding popula-
tion-difficulties of our race. Marriage has been, and is, in fact, a mono-
voly of honourable love, and the blessings of offspring, by a limited
class; who have shut out all the rest from these blessings, and plunged
them into the awful gulph of sexual evils, prostitution, masturbation,
diseases of sexual abstinence, and venereal disease. It has been the rock
on which a certain number have savfd themselves from the sea of sexual
sufferings ; and whence they have looked, not in awe and pity, but rather
m scorn and hatred, on their unhappy fellow-beings, who were struggling
with the waves. But this is not ail. By the large families they have
bad on the average, they have perraiettd as few as possible to escape from
the evils of celibacy; and have overcrowded the population to such a
legree, that the most awful poverty, and hard work, and the greatest
difficulty of getting a livelihood have ensued.
It is difficult to conceive greater evils than have existed, and do exist,
under the present sexual code. Poverty could scarcely bo more wide-
spread and grinding than it is; and I think it would be difficult to
imagiue a state, where, on the whole, less sexual pleasures and more sex-
ual evils exist, than in our present one. It is customary to boast loudly
of the happiness of the married state, and to give the institution of mar-
riage credit for that sum of sexual happiness, which we witness around
us, and which is sure to be seen chequering the darker shadows of human
life, wherever the two sexes dwell together, and by whatever tie they are
united; but such boasts also are a vanity. Even among the richer
classes, I believe just as little sexual happiness exists, as could be at all
expected from any kind cf relations, by which man and woman are held
together in a civilized society ; there is about as little pleasure in beget-
ting the swarms of legitimate children, as could well be extracted from
venereal intercourse ; and when wo go beneath our little surface of soci-
ety, and look at married life among the poor, wc find it full to the brim
with miseries; cares, ill-usage, drunkenness, children a burden to their
parents, and especially to their hard-worked mother; the wife generally
sick of all sexual pleasures, which have loaded her with such cares, and
perhaps submitting to them only from fear of her husband. Alas! Do
not let us mock such fearful evils with the name of “ Holy and blessed
institution.” In what way does the institution of marriage, in which
such miseries can exist, deserve the thanks or the admiration of man-
kind? What has it done for us. Oh we unhappy: tnat we should bow
down and worship it so blindly?
Married people have made an awful use of the privileges entrusted to


them, namely, the monopoly of the loves, by -which our race is continued.
From ignorance or heedlessness, they have totally disregarded the great
sexual responsibility, which is incumbent upon every member of human
society, and should be regarded by all of us as the most sacred duty,
namely, not to bring into the world more than our fair share of children.
This great duty, which is one of such supreme importance, little though
it be yet recognised, that it is not only by far the most sacred of all in
regard to our sexual conduct, but probably is the most important of aU
possible duties , was not understood to be a duty at all until Mr. Malthas
wrote. He however showed clearly, that without attention to it, all
other virtues are in vain ; that the exercise of all the Christian, or any
other conceivable virtues, without this, would be totally unable to remove
a single one of the great evils which oppress our race.
I believe however, that Mr. Malthus, and even Mr. Mill (although
the latter says, that the population question is one in which not only the
labourers, bat all the richer classes, whose children are educated to any
profession, are concerned), have limited too ranch the incumbency of this
great duty. Mr. Malthus defined it thus, “ That no man should bring
into the world children whom he could not support." This has had the
effect of laying the whole burden of the duty upon the poor and working
classes ; and has been one great reason, why its sacreduess has been so little
recognised. These were exactly the classes, who, from their want of
education and developement, could least understand the question; and
even if they had understood it, could least be expected to exercise such
prudence. The rich were too well content that the irksome duty should
not be laid upon their shoulders; and as they did not clearly see how
their own interests were involved in it, they were content to avoid the
question.
While the duty is made incumbent only upon the poor, there is com-
paratively little hope of its incomparable importance being felt. But I
am firmly convinced, that it has an infinitely wider applicability; that it
is not a class duty, but a universal human duty. It is not a question of
poverty or the want of food merely, but also of the want of love. The
question is not—Can we support any number of children that we are able
to bring into the world ? but—How many children is each individual in
an old country morally justified in bringing into the world, when he has
consideration for the health, happiness, and virtue of others? The case
is, simply thus. There is room in old countries (and, in two or three cen-
turies more, which in the history of our race, are but as a day, even
America and Australia, will be old, or in other words well-peopled
countries,) for but a very small number of children, compared with
that which the reproductive powers of our species would admit of;
and the question is, how, and by whom, are these children to be pro-
duced? If the rule of morality is to be, that a man or woman may
produce as many of this limited number of children, as he or she can
support, it must result, that a limited class wilt, as at present, mono-
polise all the reproductive Junctions; and the rest be compelled either to
bring no children into the world, or, if they do, to overcrowd the popu-
lation, and thus produce poverty, hard work, and early deaths.


At present every man or woman who marries, prevents some one else
from marrying; every man or woman who gets a child, prevents some
one else from having one. In this way, to have a large family of child-
ren is the worst of all sexual sins a man or woman can he guilty of.
There is scarcely, anything which causes so much misery to others.
Suppose the circumstances of a society to admit of only from two to
three children on an average by each woman, (which is the case at
present in our own country), every married couple who have more than
this number, are inevitably plunging some of their fellow-creatures
either into sexual abstinence, whose horrors it is vain to disguise, or
into prostitution, masturbation, or sexual disease. Therefore large
families are the primary cause of the sexual evils, as well as of poverty; and
to bring a large family into the world is in reality much more morally
guilty, than prostitution or other sexual faults. Among the poor, the
large families operate by crowding the population, increasing poverty,
and causing hard-work and early death, (the poor in large towns only
live one-third of their natural term of life); among the rich, they pre-
vent other marriages, producing abstinence or masturbation among the
young women, with all the miseries of a blighted sexual life; and
mercenary love, abstinence, and other sexual evils among the young
men; besides crowding all the professions to a degree, which produces
the most destructive want of leisure and mental anxiety, makes the
weaker despair and the stronger work himself to death.
The whole blame for sexual misconduct is laid upon those, who are
the victims to the imprudence of married people. The poor prostitutes,
the masturbator, the unhappy sufferers from venereal disease, the
hysterical, the hypochondriacal, are either savagely despised or treated
with ridicule and disdain; but the real cause of their sufferings and
degradations, namely, to bring large families into the world, is thought
rather a virtue than a fault. Thus it can be seen that one interests are
just as much bound up in the great population question, as are those
of the poor; and that the duty of limited procreation is as incumbent upon
the rich as the poor.
To have offspring is not to bo regarded as a luxury, which the rich
man alone has a title to, as Mr. Malthus’s reasonings tend to show it
to be, but as a great jrrimary necessary of health and happiness, of which
every man and woman should have a fair share ; which no class should
bo allowed to appropriate to themselves, without incurring the re-
proaches of their neighbours; and which no individual should be so
selfish, as to wish to engross, without consideration for others. Child-
birth is one of the grand physical necessaries for the health of woman.
Without it her reproductive powers remain unoxerciscd, and her con-
stitution is almost sure to suffer in consequence. It is not enough to
have sexual intercourse; the pleasures of love alone are not sufficient
in woman to satisfy the wants of her organization, and to fulfil her
sexual life. The blessings of offspring moreover, are one of those
groat moral necessaries of happiness, which the heart of every man and
woman naturally yearns for. Both man and woman must feel, that
their life is incomplete without offspring. To be childless deprives, an


Individual of many of the most elevating experiences that belong to
humanity; leaves him solitary in old age, and excludes him from those
softening and purifying influences, which this great moral tie naturally
brings with it. Therefore, even although by the adoption of preventive
sexual intercourse, every individual could have a due share of love,
still it would be impossible to secure a healthy and a happy life to
the mass of mankind, and still more of womankind, unless each woman
should also have a fair share of offspring.
It is a matter of the very first importance for the welfare of society,
that the necessaries of life should bo distinguished from the luxuries;
and that society should be so arranged, that every individual should
have a due share of the necessaries. Society should regard as its very
highest principle and aim, that no single individual should bo forced
to live an unhealthy life; and it is a sacred duty, binding upon every
one of us, to act in such a manner, that we shall not render health and
happiness impossible to some of our fellow-creatures. Children stand
in a perfectly different category from the luxuries of life. These luxu-
ries, such as costly dresses, wines, handsome furniture, or other orna-
ments of life, are not naturally indispensable to the health and happi-
ness of mankind; and therefore it is not incumbent upon the different
members of society to see that all their neighbours, as well as them-
selves, are provided with them; but sexual intercourse and offspring
are absolutely indispensable, and therefore it is morally binding upon
every member of society, to take only such a share of them, as to
leave a sufficiency to his fellows.
Therefore, any man or woman, it matters not what be their station
in life, whether their destiny lo a palace or a hovel, who has more
than the small proportion of children which the circumstances of an
old country allow, as the fair average to each individual, is an irreli-
gious being ; and disregards one of the most sacred of all the moral
duties, thus inevitably causing disease and misery to some of his
fellow-creatures. This is the most important, of all the obligations of
sexual morality ; and ignorance of it, which was so universal until Mr.
Malthus wrote, although it may lead us to pardon, and view with
sorrow instead of blame, the faults of married people, does not in the
least alter the great natural sin of disregarding this duty. Large
families are the ] ruin of us all; they are the fountain-heads of the hard
work, low wages, starvation, and prostitution among the poor ; and of
the mercenary love, sexual abstinence, and all the train of sexual
horrors, together with the toils and anxieties of over-wrought profes-
sional life, among the rich. By them has the groat mass of the misery
we witness around us been caused; and it is only by concentrating
our attention upon this parent source of evils, and stemming it at its
origin, that it is even conceivably possible to remedy the miseries
arising from the want of food, love, and leisure.
It is the most awful of all reflections, and yet it is absolutely unde-
niable, that no class of human beings have been the cause to their
fellows of ruin or destruction, in the slightest degree comparable with
that which arises from the imprudent procreation of married people.


How is it to bo expected that our race should make real progress, or
human society should be other than a chaos, when from a morbid
delicacy the most important of all actions, namely, the giving life to
new beings, is left to the mercy of ignorance and recklessness?
All should view with a jealous eye those who have more than a
small number of children, so long as there remain any among us,
who are suffering from the want of food or of love. Every man or
woman who has a regard for his fellow-creatures, and a sense of the
sacredncss of moral duties, should refrain from bringing into the
world more than a very small number of offspring, until the evils of
poverty, and sexual abstinence, are removed. By thus refraining, he
will do more for his fellow-men, than if he lavished upon them his
whole wealth, and toiled for them in every other manner ; but on the
contrary, if he bring into the world a large family, while our socidty
is labouring with the awful population-difficulties, as at present, ail
other imaginable virtues and efforts cannot make him other than a
destroyer of his fellow-beings.
These reflections show us, that the great burden of the sexual sins
should be laid on the shoulders of the married people, who have
large families; and not, as is done at present, on the poor friendless
prostitutes, unmarried lovers, and other sexual sufferers, who are the
victims, not the causes, of our sexual sins. None of their faults are so
great or so destructive to the interests of society, as that of having a
largo family ; and moreover they are, in reality, mainly the effects of
this great primary fault.
It becomes manifest, moreover, from these reflections, that the
views commonly entertained as to the sexual duties are exceedingly
unnatural; and that it is absolutely necessary to remodel in many
respects our sexual code ; to form it upon the great natural foundation
of equal justice between man and woman; and in accordance with the
principles of morality, arising from the laws of the generative organs
and of population ; of which our forefathers, who framed the present
code, had no knowledge. The great natural sexual duties of man and
woman do not, as is commonly imagined, consist in being a constant
husband or wife, or in avoiding unmarried intercourse ; but are of a
very different nature.
In the first place, as has already been said, the most sacred of all the
sexual obligations should bo, net to have more than one’s fair share of
children. Th ; s share, in the present circumstances of our society, is a
very small one ; for wo are already so overcrowded, that the object of
every one should bo, to thin our numbers by avoiding all unnecessary
births, until poverty is completely removed, and the population is
brought to bear a due proportion to the food. In fact, the fewer child-
ren either a man or woman could have at present, the better for their
fellow-creatures; and no possible conduct could be so meritorious in
any individual, as to refrain from having children altogether, unless
they are necessary for the health of the mother, until the weight of
our social difficulties is somewhat lightened. The duty of limited pro-
creation may well be deemed the very first and highest of all duties,


foi if it be well performed, it makes all others comparatively easy; but
if it be neglected, it is absolutely impossible that any other duty can
be of avail to mankind, or that our race can make any real pro-
gress in virtue or happiness.
The next sexual duty, is to educate well those children whom we
bring into the world, It is a sacred obligation upon every man and
woman, to provide for their offspring to the best of their powers,
and to train them to become good members of society. Children at
present are exceedingly ill-provided for, from the squalid poverty in
which their parents are often plunged ; and from the frequency of
large families, in which the children are a drag upon their parents,
and are too numerous to be attended to. Another great reason of the
imperfect nurture, which many children receive, is the dependent and
degraded state of their mother. She cannot support herself, but trusts
for support to her husband, and of course the children share in her
helplessness. 'Were women as a general rule able to gain a livelihood
for themselves, not only would the character of the sex be greatly
raised, but the children would have a far surer guarantee for being
well cared for. A mother who could earn a good livelihood, would
rarely, if ever, desert her child, even although the father might do so.
There is no secondary cause of poverty more important, than the de-
pendent and helpless state of woman. To have to support his wife as
well as his children, is a heavy additional tax on the energies of man.
Therefore for all parties, for man, woman, and child, it is of the utmost
consequence that woman should cease to be dependent upon man for
support, as she has hitherto been; and that every woman in society,
just as every man, should be able to earn an independent livelihood for
herself. Nothing would have a greater effect in elevating the female
character, and in advancing the best interests of society.
There are two things requisite to enable woman to become indepen-
dent. In the first place, the wages of female labour must be greatly higher
than at present; and this can only be effected, exactly as in the case of
male wages, by diminishing the number of workers. This is to be
done only by checking population by means of preventive intercourse.
Thus the means, by which the wages of man are to be raised, will at
the same time raise those of woman. With regard to the exceedingly
small wages of woman, of which specimens have been given before, Mr.
Mill says, “ The explanation of the (act that the peculiar employments
of women are so ill-remunerated, must be that they are over-stocked;
that although so much smaller a number of women than of men sup-
port themselves by wages, the occupations which law and custom make
accessible to them are comparatively so few, that the field of their
employment is still more over-crowded.” He says also that from our
present domestic customs, competition may depress much lower the
wages of women than of men; for a man’s wage is calculated by what
is necessary to support a wife and small family, since it is the general
custom for the wife to depend on the husband; whereas a woman’s
wage is only for her own support.
From these remarks of Mr. Mill it is seen, that the great causes


which depress the wages of women are that there are so few occupa-
tions left open to them by law or custom ; while those which are open
to them, are immensely overstocked. This leads us to the second
requisite for the independence of woman, it is that the sphere of her
activity should be enlarged , and that all professions and occupations
in which, by her natural powers, she is fitted to engage, should be
thrown open to her. Nothing would more powerfully promote the
welfare of our race, than the developement of woman. It is to woman
that the reproduction of the species is peculiarly entrusted; and it is
she, on whom will specially devolve that most important of all duties,
the regulation of the number of offspring. It is therefore indispensable
to the interests of mankind, that the independence, and foresight of
woman, should be increased as much as possible, and nothing would
have a more powerful effect on this, than to enlarge her sphere of
action ; so that her pursuits might be as important and varied as those
of man, and that every woman might have the power of gaining an
honourable independence. On this subject I shall again quote Mr.
Mill’s words.
“ It appears to me impossible bnt that the increase of intelligence,
of education, and of the love of independence among the working
classes, must be attended with a corresponding growth of the good
sense, which manifests itself in provident habits of conduct, and that
population therefore will bear a constantly diminishing ratio to capital
and employment. This most desirable result would be much acceler-
ated, by another change, which lies in the direct line of the best ten-
dencies of the time, the opening of industrial occupations freely to both
sexes. The same reasons, which make it no longer necessary that the
poor should depend on the rich, make it equally unnecessary that
women should depend on men; and the least which justice requires is,
that law and custom should not enforce dependence, (where the cor-
relative protection becomes superfluous), by ordaining, that a woman
who does not happen to have a provision by inheritance shall have
scarcely any means open to her of gaining a livelihood, except as a
wife and a mother. Let women who prefer that occupation adopt it;
but that there should be no option, no other carriere possible for the
great majority of women except in the humbler departments of life, is
one of those social injustices which call loudest for remedy. Among
the salutary consequences of correcting it, one of the most probable
would be, a great diminution of the evil of over-population. It is by
devoting one-half of the human species to that exclusive function, by
making it fill the entire life of one sex, and interweave itself with
almost all the objects of the other, that the instinct in question is
nursed into the disproportionate preponderance, which it has hitherto
exercised in human life.”
The life of young ladies is most vapid and unnatural. They have
no substantial occupation, and their energies are frittered away upon
trivial accomplishments, which should form only the ornaments of
life. Very many of them feel this keenly, and desire nothing so eagerly
as a suitable occupation, to engage their often highly cultivated minds,
and give them an independent position; but our social arrangements


render this an impossibility. When they marry, the rearing of children
seems the only kind of real occupation, which can save them from ennui
and self-reproach for their uselessness; and thus they are tempted to
have large families, to the destruction of their fellow creatures.
These two great sexual duties, namely not to have more than our fair
share of children, and to provide carefully for them, are those which a
society has a right to demand from all its members. If a man or a
woman fulfil these great duties satisfactorily, they have fulfilled their
chief sexual duties to society. Whether the children have been born in
marriage or not, is a matter of comparatively very little importance; and
if these duties have been neglected—if an individual have brought into
the world a large family, or have not provided for them well—the empty
title of constant husband does not prevent him from having been one of
the destroyers of his race.
It is of the highest importance, that the attention of all of us should be
steadfastly concentrated upon the real sexual duties, and not dazzled by
mere names. Marriage diverts our attention from the real sexual duties ,
and this is one of its worst effects. It also conceals from the superficial
view the law of population. Those, who are not acquainted with this
law, believe that people remain unmarried either from their own choice,
or from their unattractive qualities. They do no not see the great re-
strictive principle which is operating beneath. This common error is
very similar to that of calling drunkenness or idleness the cause of poverty,
and is in reality a mockery of the evils of celibacy. The peculiar defects
of marriage itself, doubtless make many persons, especially men, unwilling
to enter into it, if freer sexual connections are at all obtainable, and this
helps still more to divert attention from the great natural obstacle; but
in countries like Australia where the latter is removed, and mercenary in-
tercourse comparatively little obtainable, almost all the women marry,
and at a very early age.
Besides these natural duties there are others, which each individual
owes to himself and his fellows. Every .individual, man or woman, is
bound to exercise duly his sexual organs, so that the integrity of his own
health shall not be impaired on the one hand : and so that he shall not,
on the other, interfere with the health and happiness of his neighbour.
Every individual should make it his conscientious aim, that he or she
should have a sufficiency of love to satisfy the sexual demands of his na-
ture, and that others around him should have the same. It is impossible,
as has been shown before, that each individual should have this in an old
country, unless by the use of preventive means. The use of these means
therefore comes to be incumbent upon all these, who seek to enjoy the natural
pleasures of love themselves, without depriving their neighbours of them.
Hitherto love, of whose disinterestedness and unselfishness so much
has been said by poets and others, has been, on the contrary, an utterly
selfish passion. Men and women have all been eagerly intent on secur-
ing it for themselves ; and provided they got it, they have thought little of
the anguish and misery of those, who were forced to go without it. Nay
more, as has been shown already, by the very act of taking it to themselves.


they have deprived others of it, and thus been the cause of their misery
and disease, often of their death, from sexual sufferings. Thus we see, that
the vaunted unselfishness of Jove has hitherto been, like all other human
virtues, a vanity. There never yet was a happy love, crowned with off-
spring, however exalted, tender, and self-sacrificing it apparently was,
which was not, by its very existence, grinding some other hearts to death.
The world has sternly shut its eyes against sexual miseries ; and happy
lovers and married people have ridiculed old maids and others, of whose
sexual sufferings they are themselves the cause. Love has been held to
be a subject, on which every one must look out for himself, and allow his
neighbours to find the road to ruin as best they can. Seldom has a
thought been wasted by the more fortunate, on the despair of those whom
they have deprived of some beloved object, or on the sorrows and loneli-
ness of a blighted sexual life. It is only within a few years, that the
hearts of the rich have been awakening to the miseries of the poor; but
to the 'sorrows of sexual sufferers mankind are not yet awakened.
Bat a true sexual conscience does not admit of such fearful disregard
of the interests of our fellow-beings, in love, anymore than in other pro-
vinces of morality. In love, it is our duty to consider our neighbours’
happiness as well as our own, and to see that they are not deprived of
sexual pleasures by our selfishness. It is in this way that unselfishness
and true morality are to be shown; by taking to ourselves only a fair share
of love, and by endeavouring to promote the sexual happiness of all
around us, as well as of ourselves.
Another great sexual duty is to be true and sincere in all our dealings
with the opposite sex, and to do nothing if possible in a clandestine way.
We should endeavour to act in an open and dignified manner towards
those, with whom we have any sexual relations; and never to
deceive them. It is the degradation of character by intrigues, trickery,
and deception, which makes the English mind revolt from the French and
Continental habits of sexual life. Neither man nor woman should ever
pretend to be constant, when they are not so, nor feign a passion which
they do not feel. Deceit or pretence in love, as in other actions of life,
degrades all who indulge in it, andspoils the honour, sincerity, and trust-
worthiness of the whole character. No man or woman should ever be
contented to indulge in love in an underhand manner. If the sexual code
forbid freedom and openness in unmarried love, as is at present the case
over the whole world, we may find an excuse for those who are thus
forced into sexual deceit, at present so universally prevalent in every
nation of the earth ; but their conduct is none the less undignified and
degraded. Sexual deceit arises mainly from two things ; first, the un
natural restrictions of the moral code, and secondly, the dependence of
woman ; and it is only by removing its causes, that we can hope to get
rid of this inveterate evil. The great safeguard for the purity of love is,
that it should be open and free from deceit; and whenever we see that
it is not so, we may bo certain that great miseries must result. Wo
should make it our aim, that the loves of each individual should fee
of a sincere, an open, a dignified, and a disinterested kind.


It is absolutely impossible to'have a free, sincere, and dignified sexual
morality in our society, as long as marriage continues to be the only
honourable provision for the union of the sexes, and as long as the mar-
riage bond is so indissoluble as at present. We might be certain of this,
even on the first view of the matter, from observing how very frequently
the common moral code, which has the institution of marriage for its
symbol, is disobeyed. It may be said as a general rule, that it is only
by women, and but by a limited number of that sex, that it is at all
strictly observed ; and the great mass of mankind break it every day.
The very fact of the code being so often disregarded, shows that there is
something fundamentally unnatural in it. The greatest disgrace is
theoretically attached to the breaking of these moral regulations, and
yet they are broken and set at naught daily. The reason of this is. that
the sexual code is not based upon the laws of Nature , and that it is totally
incompatible with human welfare, that it should be obeyed. There is no
natural law, moral or physical, which commands either man or woman
to limit their sexual affections to one object throughout life, and the
attempt to assert such a law must bo an utter failure; even although
people should be burned alive for breaking it, as was the custom among
the Jews. On the contrary, Nature expressly enjoins upon the young,
by her own unerring impulses, that change and variety in love to a certain
extent, is the most natural, and therefore the best, sexual conduct in them.
There is a great difference in this respect in different characters. Some
are born, or are moulded by circumstances, into a character, which is
fitted to draw its greatest happiness from constant and unvarying love;
others on the contrary are born to be changeable; and to attempt to fix
all down by the same rigid sexual bonds, is certain to render many of
them miserable; and to frustrate the happiness, which Nature intended
that each variety of character should spread around, if its natural
developement be not interfered with.
The rigour of the marriage theory does not prevent an immense
amount of unmarried intercourse in all countries, for that is impossible;
but it renders it clandestine, degraded, and miserable. It does not pre-
vent adultery, for that is impossible, (on the Continent, and even in
the large towns in this country, adultery is very common ;) but it ren-
ders it in like manner stealthy, degraded, and destructive to the morality
of all parties.
It is absolutely necessary therefore, before we can attain to a higher
state of sexual morality, that the unnatural rigour of the marriage
ideas be altered, and that other modes of sexual intercourse be considered
honourable and legitimate. If a man and woman conceive a passion
for each other, they should be morally entitled to indulge it, without
binding themselves together for life, upon these conditions—that they
do not bring into the world too many offspring, and take due care to rear
them. All parents should be legally forced to support their children, if
they be not willing to do so ; a thing which would very rarely happen, if
wages were higher, and women independent; and if the disgrace attaching
to illegitimate children were removed. It 75 often this disgrace which leads


the father to disown a child, whom otherwise he would have welcomed
with delight, and so terrifies the unhappy mother, that she destroys her
own offspring.
The true guarantee for the due maintenance of the children is not
the empty name of marriage, but the independence of both parents, and
especially of the mother. Marriage rather leads to the neglect of the
children, by tempting the wife to be dependent for support on her hus-
band. If every woman, not incapacitated by ill-health, were independent,
and if none had more than the small proportion of children, which the
circumstances of an old country admit of, there would be no fear of the
children being neglected. We would not see, as at present, the melancholy
spectacle of a troop of ragged spectres hanging about a helpless mother;
or the father, in a fit of desperation, deserting bis offspring and his wife
together, from inability to support them. Instead of being regarded as a
burden, children would be viewed by both parents as the dearest blessing
and solace of their lives; would be claimed as a privilege, instead of
abandoned, neglected, or frantically destroyed.
To make an honourable provision for married love, is the only possible
mode of preventing prostitution. If young people could have a due amount
of the sexual pleasures in an honourable and open way, without binding
themselves down for life, mercenary and prostituted love would soon
become extinct. This is a subject of enormous importance. There is no
other possible way of getting quit of the unspeakable evils of prostitution,
venereal disease, and all the social demoralisation, which springs from
these causes. Prostitution would indeed be greatly checked, if poverty
were removed, and if women could easily earn an independence ; but
even were that the case, there would still, as is seen in America, be a
great deal of prostitution, if there were no honourable provision for love,
except in marriage. If there were such a provision, prostitution would
inevitably cease; for no one would pay for a degraded and counterfeit
intercourse, if true and genuine love could be honourably obtained with-
out money, and without an indissoluble tie; and if sexual connections
without the risk of impregnation, could be had otherwise than by promis-
cuous intercourse. Therefore it is only by relaxing the rigour of the
marriage bond, and allowing greater sexual freedom, that it is possible
to eradicate prostitution, and with it venereal disease.
That love should be bought with money, is a standing shame to all of
us, both men and women ; and no society where such degrading com-
pacts are prevalent, deserves the name of a sexually moral society. In-
deed such a name, when applied to any existing state of human society,
is a mockery. Youth, whose interests are especially concerned in this
matter, should use every effort to get rid of the abomination and misery
of mercenary love. This is not to be done by sexual abstinence, (which
is even a greater natural sin than mercenary love); but first by removing
poverty, and making woman independent; and then by endeavouring
to promote a greater sexual freedom in society, and to obtain that
necessary of human welfare, unmarried and unfettered love, in an hon-
ourable manner.
It should be made a point of honour in the youth of both sexes, as soon
2 B


as women have been rendered capable of gaining their own livelihood by
honest work, and the burden of poverty has been lightened, never to buy
or'sell love for money; but on the contrary, to make every effort to show
ihe perfectly justifiable nature of their temporary sexual connections,
provided the great sexual duties, already spoken of, be fulfilled; and
thus be able to indulge in them in an open and dignified manner.
It is in this way, and in this alone, that it is possible to escape from
the awful miseries of prostitution ; miseries whose chief cause (of course
excepting the law of population, the primary cause of all the great sexual
evils, which, it must always be remembered, are only the secondary modes
in which its destructive agency is carried out, and therefore, though seem-
ingly accidental and avoidable, are essentially necessary in some form
or other, unless they are obviated by preventive intercourse) is the
austerity of our sexual code, and the absolute inapplicability of an indis-
soluble institution like marriage to the nature of man. In this way more ■
over, and in this only, would it be possible to extirpate venereal diseases;
an object whose importance in increasing the virtue and happiness of our
race cannot bo over-estimated. It is the existence of mercenary love, with
its callousness towards a society which scorns it, that keeps alive these
accursed diseases ; and if mercenary love were removed from among us,
it might be certainly anticipated, that the venereal diseases would not
long remain behind. This great end should be promoted by every effort,
social and individual. Syphilis and gonorrhoea should be uprooted
wherever they are found, not by harshness, but by kind and prompt at-
tention to every ease which occurs; and everything should be done to
effect their radical extinction. "
Such hopes may appear to us at present almost visionary, surrounded
as we are by the all-engrossing miseries of poverty, hard work, mutual
destruction, and every kind of social despair; but I feel convinced that
if once poverty and prostitution were overcome, and mankind were more '
united in mutual confidence, such plans as the total and final extirpation
of syphilis, would not seem so very difficult of accomplishment. Blessed
will be the generation, and honoured by all posterity, which shall effect
this great purpose. It is by such means, and not by partial and unjust
police measures, that I earnestly hope our race will one day annihilate
this dreadful disease. If unfettered love were obtainable in an honour-
able way and not for money, and if the great sin of communicating a
disease to a fellow-being were once openly recognised, there would be few
of either sex, who would be guilty of such a deed. It is not unmarried
love, but mercenary love, aud the communication of disease, which really
disgrace an individual; and to confound all these different actions
together in one sweeping conderanaticu, as is done at present, is to lose
all moral power over any of them, and to confuse the sense of right and
wrong.
I am aware of the difficulties which attend any alteration in our
sexual code; difficulties so great, that they have in general deterred
even the boldest thinkers from proposing any definite change in it, how-
ever deeply they felt, aud ably exposed its evils. But these difficulties
do not decrease by our avoidance of the subject: on the contrary, they


constantly accumulate, as man becomes more civilized; and the miseries
caused by the long continuance of this unnatural sexual institution,
nearly in its primeval Hebraic austerity, in the midst of modern society,
have become countless. On the Continent, they have sought to palliate
•hese evils, by resorting to all modes of intrigue and clandestine inter-
course. The rigour of the marriage contract is, as M. Balzac says, very
largely tempered by adultery iu French society; and the immense
evils of this in corrupting and sowing dissension among families, lie
eloquently exposes. Divorce has, moreover, in Germany, and for ought
I know, in other parts of the Continent, been rendered very easily
obtainable ; incompatibility of temper being considered a valid cause for
it. Now, in reality, facility of divorce does away with marriage; it
thoroughly alters the theory of the institution, and makes it in reality
nothing more, than an agreement between two people to live together as
man and wife, so long as they love each other. And such is the only
true mode of sexual union ; it is the one which Nature points out to us,
aad we may be certain, that any institution which defies the natural laws
of love, as marriage does, will be found to be the cause of immense evils ;
ever accumulating as the world rolls on, and mankind become more free,
and more enlightened in the physical and moral laws of their being.
The great difficulty that men have found in proposing any definite
change in our sexual code, is, that it is almost impossible to alter at all %
without totally overthrowing , the theory of marriage. Easily obtainable
divorce does virtually overthrow the theory of marriage; and yet there
is nothing more indispensable to the sexual welfare of married people,
than this. To make unmarried intercourse honourable and legitimate,
evidently overthrows the theory of marriage; and yet without this, it is
absolutely impossible to escape from the most fearful evils,—from pros-
titution, masturbation, genital and venereal disease, and innumerable
other miseries.
On the Continent, the theory and practice of love are very inconsistent.
The nominal theory of sexual union is marriage, as with us; and yet
this, by the facility of divorce, is virtually annulled , and put on a par with
any other kind of temporary sexual intercourse; so that it may be said
that marriage has ceased to exist in those countries, where divorce is
easily obtainable for such causes as incompatibility of temper. If divorce
be readily obtainable in marriage, what is the use of marriage at all ? AVhy
go through an empty and ostentatious ceremony, if the contract can be
dissolved at pleasure any day ? why make so much ado, and drag forward
love, which shrinks from observation, before the public eye? why not
deem a sexual union without this empty formulary equally honourable?
On the Continent moreover, prostitution, masturbation, veuereal disease,
together with all the degradation of intrigue, and stealthy undignified
intercourse, exist in abundance. Young people deride the austere rules
of morality, and set them at naught; and yet hominally the marriage
theory remains the same, however totally at variance with the general
practice. -
The existence of a rigourous sexual theory such as marriage, necessitates..
one of two things; either paritanism and sexual austerity with all theic


blighting influences, or a regular system of intrigue, deception, and dis.
obedience to the sexual code. The former of these, together with the
rrost wide-spread prostitution and self-abuse, is the effect of marriage in
-England, the hitter on the Continent: marriage, of course, acting as a
subordinate instrument of necessary destruction under the grinding law of
population.
There are three great reasons, why the institution of marriage has re-
mained so long unchanged among us, notwithstanding its innumerable
evils and injustices, deeply though these have been felt by many moralists.
The first and chief is the pressure of the great population- difficulties. These
difficulties are the parent souice of all the most important sexual evils j
and beside them the influence of any human institution sinks into total
insignificance. As long as the principle of population continues to exert
its destructive agency, as it has ever hitherto done, it matters little what
the sexual institutions are ; with or without marriage, or any other form
of sexual union, the misery of mankind is certain , while food and love are
antagonistic. If we must perish, it may as well be by the hands of mar-
riage, as any other sexual arrangement. This truth, although it may
not have been definitely perceived, has been dimly felt by most of the
thinkers, who have considered the imperfections of our sexual code.
They saw clearly its errors, but they felt, however dimly, that there was
some far more powerful principle behind, whose destructive action could
not be obviated by changing the marriage code; and thus, as they saw no
escape from these evils, they were content to leave it uninterfered with.
It is in vain to propose a great reconstruction of our social institutions,
unless it can be clearly shown, that such a course will lead to real advan-
tages ; and no sexual code which was not based upon the law of popula-
tion, and the sexual necessities of man, could have afforded any rational
hope of remedying the evils, existing under the present one. In this way
then, marriage has remained, not from its own merits, but from the lack
of anything better: and the grinding miseries of mankind, the want of
food, love, and leisure, have forced them to put up with all its evils, and
have been its main safeguard.
The second great cause of its long continuance is the profound ignorance
of moralists on sexual matters; and the morbid delicacy which forbids
the discussion of sexual questions. Our moral code bears in every line
the marks of having been framed by those who were ignorant of the fun-
damental laws of our sexual nature; who had neither a knowledge of
nor reverence for, the generative organs ; who were perfectly unacquainted
with theprincipleof population; and full of that childish mystery and disgust
in sexual matters, which characterises most nations in their infancy, and
is in none so conspicuous as in the Jews, from whom we have inherited
our sexual code. The ignorance of the nature and laws of the genital
organs, which obtains among moralists even to the present day, has de-
prived them of the materials necessary for forming a more natural
system of morality, even though they felt keenly the evils of the existing
one. Moreover, till Mr. Mailhus wrote, it was not possible to have a true
sexual code, for no” man knew the principle of population, on which alone
it could be based; and till M. Lallemand and M. Eecamier led the way


to the better knowledge of the sexual ortrars and their laws, a true phy-
siological foundation was wanting. When we add to this deeply rooted
ignorance the morbid delicacy which has hitherto veiled all such subjects
we have another very sufficient reason for the unmodified persistence of
marriage.
The third reason is, that the present sexual code has been supported by
the authority o! supernatural religion. It has been inseparably inter-
woven with the Christian and Hebraic beliefs, and is in fact one of the
grand Jewish institutions, which is considered to share in the perfection
and inspiration of the Bible. There is scarcely anything on which so
much stress is laid in the Old and New Testament, as the institution of
marriage. Fidelity and constancy to the marriage vow are regarded as
the very highest virtues ; and all unmarried connections, which are stig-
matised as fornications, and carnal lusts, are classed among the deadly
sins. Hence the institutions of marriage has been made a religious cere-
mony, and is believed in by great numbers as firmly as Christtwnoy
itself, of which it is considered a part. To doubt or to deny it would be
to deny the whole. It is this divine right of marriage which has ren-
dered most people blind to the evils of the institution, and has raised a
Storm of indignation against any one, who ventured to point them out.
The institution is guarded as jealously as Supernaturalism itself. In the
same manner the divine right of kings was long and furiously contended
for; but it has now become a name, which even despots themselves
are almost afraid to utter. But not for much longer will a divine right
avail ought to protect any earthly thing ; nor can any institution which
is based upon Supernaturalism, and not upon Nature, long continue
among us. Men will not much longer be content to take the laws cf their
actions from any other source than Nature, and all institutions will be
tested by this, and this only.
The assertions of the theologians, that “marriage suits the nature of
man,” is exactly analogous to the famous decree “ the sun moves round
the earth.” Both are taken from supernatural authority, and the one is
as false in the living, as the other in the lifeless world. Those among us
who are the most strenuous in the support of existing sexual institutions,
and most authoritative in laying down the laws of sexual morality, are
the very men, who, like the judges of Galileo, are most incompetent to
give an opinion on the matter. Have they studied the sexual organs 7
Are they well acquainted with the law of population ? Are they conver-
sant with the passion of love, as it is seen in all its various phases in our
society, with the true, the false, the mercenary, the morbid, the unnatural
forms of it, and their manifold and complicated causes and history? Have
they followed it through all its degradations and obscenities, with an
earnest perseverance and reverential sympathy, which nothing can dis-
gust or fatigue ? The very reverse ot this is the case. The loudest supporters
of our present system are in general the most deeply ignorant on sexual
matters, and on the nature and laws of the sexual organs; and are the
most filled with that morbid delicacy, which absolutely unfits any one from
handling these questions with any profit. They trust blindly to authority
for the rules they boldly lay down, perfectly unaware of the awful and


complicated nature of the subject they are dealing with so confidently,
and of the horrible evils their inconsiderate systems are attended with.
They themselves break through the most fundamentally important of all
the moral laws daily, in utter unconsciousness of the misery they are
causing to their fellows. The clergy among us are noted for the large
size of their families; whereas the Komau Catholic clergy err as much on
the other side, by the great natural sin of celibacy. Are tlie=e the men
who are to expound to us the natural laws of sexual morality? It is not
from the want of will, for the zeal and devotion of many of their members
in the service of mankind is beyond all praise ; but from want of know-
ledge. They may wish with their whole hearts to serve their fellows,
but they cannot possibly do so unless they study Nature. The immov-
aole laws of Nature are not to be softened by tears, nor overcome by the
emotions of the heart, however it may yearn for the sufferings of man-
kind.
It is by these props that our sexual code has hitherto been principally
supported ; but when they shall be removed, marriage will be tested by
its own real merits; and all of us will gradually learn to see its insuffi-
ciency, as the sole honourable provision for the union of the sexes.
In what way then are its defects to be remedied, and how should it be
modified, so as to prevent the innumerable sexual and economical evils,
which exist at present; and to secure for every human being at least
the possibility of having a happy and virtuous sexual life ?
The only way to do so, is to attend to the various modes, in which Katurc
points out to us the true path of sexual duty; and to endeavour to pre-
vent all those evils arising from disobedience to her laws, several of which
have been spoken of above. In order to obey the sexual laws, it is
first necessary to have a knowledge of them. It is therefore of primary
importance that Anatomy and Physiology should become a leading
branch of general education; that all educated people should have a
knowledge of the nature and laws of their body, and, more especially in
reference to our subject, those of the sexual organs. This knowledge
should be imparted to both sexes before the period of puberty, so that they
should not fall from ignorance into the lamentable practices of mastur-
bation, or other sexual errors, and should know how to guard against vene-
real disease. A knowledge of the great law of population should also be
extensively spread throughout society, so that every individual, man,
or woman, should understand it, and feel the sacred duty of limiting their
reproductive powers. Unless these great truths become generally known
and acted upon, science and art may progress, but man must remain sta-
tionary. It should be inculcated upon those who are about to enter on the
sexual period of lifej that the true path of virtue lies in moderation, and
in a due and healthy exercise of their new powers; abstinence on the one
hand, and excess or lasciviousness on the other, being alike shunned.
Openness and sincerity should above all be enjoined; all mercenary and
underhand dealings discountenanced; and the enormity of the crime of
spreading venereal disease exposed.
With minds prepared in this way, and not filled with that chaos of child-
ish ignorance and morbidity, with which our youths at present enter upon


the most critical period of life, they would be enabled to meet in a
genuine and manly way the real sexual difficulties, which surround all
of us ; to speak freely of those mighty sexual questions, without the open
discussion of which we are impotent as children in the hands of Fate, and
all our science and philosophy are an empty babble; and to show them-
selves worthy of that greater sexual freedom, which we may hope that
our posterity, more fortunate than we, shall enjoy. It would not be
desirable, even were it possible, that this increase of freedom should come
suddenly. On the contrary, it is by very gradual steps, that mankind
may be expected to modify their present sexual ideas, and to attain to a
higher moral state.
This will be brought about gradually by the course of things. When
the great primary duty of limiting offspring has come to be generally
acted upon, and preventive intercourse has been recognised as consistent,
and alone consistent, with the highest dictates of morality, and as the
only mode, by which the population-difficulty can be surmounted; when
in this way poverty shall have been removed, as I firmly believe that it
will, and women and men are alike independent, then will indissoluble
marriage gradually lose its hold upon mens’ minds, and appear an un-
necessary bond; fraught with numerous evils, without compensating
advantages. If a woman is to have only two, or at most, and in com-
paratively rare cases, three children; can easily gain a livelihood for
herself, and therefore requires no protection nor aid, beyond what the
laws afford to each of us; why should she tie herself indissolubly to one man
for life; or on the other hand, why should a man do so ? It is the large
families and the dependence of woman, which appear to make marriage
advisable. As woman advances in independence, as more occupations are
thrown open to her, and her wages are such as befit a human being, she
will become ever less willing to tie herself indissolubly down, and to put
herself in the power of one man. Why should either she or man bow
their heads to the old accustomed yoke, when even the apparent necessity
for it has passed?
All of us must reflect, that even though we adhere rigidly to the insti-
tution of marriage, and discountenance any change in its indissolubility,
the great duty of limited procreation is equally incumbent upon us.
Whether we marry or not, this supreme duty is equally to be observed.
If married people change their conduct in this way, as they are morally
bound to do, they must either adopt preventive means, or they will feel
how wretched and enfeebling for mind and body, is the state of sexual
abstinence; and thus be gradually weaned from their implicit faith in
our present system. A personal experience of the evils of abstinence
will gradually give them a sympathy with the unfortunate sexual
sufferers, whom they have so little comprehended; and a remorse for the
part they have played, however unconsciously, in causing their miseries
In this way they will be prepared gradually to accept of changes in their
long cherished institutions.
Another circumstance will greatly aid in this change. When once
the modes of preventive intercourse become universally known, and
their indispensability a matter of general discussion ; without which,


as has already been shown, not a single step can be made in human
progress, and our race must remain sunk in the population-horrors ; it
will be found to bo totally impossible to confine woman by the present
narrow sexual restrictions. In fact, preventive intercourse, if it be
found to bo really efficient and satisfactory, will put the two sexes
almost on a par in sexual freedom. A woman will be able to indulge
her sexual desires, with the same exemption from after consequences
as a man; and it will rest entirely with herself, whether she shall
have offspring or not. This cannot fail to make a signal alteration in
the habits of woman; for there is no natural reason except the fear of
getting children, which makes her less willing than man to gratify
her sexual desires. It is a rare exception, that a man passes through
life without indulging in unmarried love, even under the strictness of
our present sexual code; and it is certain that were the fear of getting
a child removed, woman, who is the natural counterpart of man in her
modes of feeling and action, would do the same; more especially when
the harshness of our sexual views becomes gradually relaxed, and the
divine right of marriage comes to be questioned.
When the universal applicability of the great law of exercise to all
our organs is understood, every one will perceive, that he is morally
bound to exercise duly his sexual organs throughout the period of sex-
ual life. Thus the young man on entering upon puberty, will feel that
Nature commands him to indulge to a moderate extent his sexual de-
sires ; and when once he is fully convinced of the natural rectitude of
this, he cannot fail to perceive the insufficiency and unnatural charac-
ter of our moral code. He will therefore assert, and gradually obtain,
a greater liberty of indulging honourably in unmarried love,
which is at that age most of all indispensable. When once the
commands of Nature are felt as they should be, and the dictates of
physical are equally attended to with those of spiritual religion, con-
science will give youth no peace till they be obeyed, and all obstacles to
an honourable and disinterested outlet for the sexual desires sur-
mounted. The sacred duty of the normal exercise of her generative
organs is equally incumbent upon woman; and, when once adequately
felt, will impel her to assert in like manner her title to a greater sex-
ual freedom in spite of all opposition. The cause of sexual liberty,
advocated not merely as a right but as a duty, will thus become the
most sacred in the eyes of the youth of both sexes. By advancing it,
they will gradually get rid of those sexual miseries, which now oppress
them like a nightmare. Sexual impotence, morbid bashfulness, hys-
teria, and the gloomy train of menstrual diseases ; spermatorrhoea and
masturbation, prostitution and venereal disease, will all gradually be
extirpated, if youth be only true to itself, and assert resolutely and
perseveringly its natural laws and duties; and if all mankind fulfil
conscientiously the great duty of limited procreation.
Let those who will, marry; but those who do not wish to enter upon
bo indissoluble a contract, either on account of their early age, or from
a disapproval of the whole ceremony, should deem it perfectly honour-
able and justifiable to form a temporary connection. If they refrain


from undue procreation, rear their children carefully, and act in an
open, sincere, and loving manner to their partner, they are fulfilling
the real sexual duties; and although the world may for a time frown
upon them, they will have the approval of their own consciences, the
test and noblest of rewards, and will be laying the foundation of a
truer sexual morality, than the world has yet known. It is sin-
gular, that among a large part of the poorest and most abject mem-
bers of society, the empty formulary of marriage is very frequently
dispensed with. Mr. Mayhew says, that not more than one in twenty
of the street folk in London, who live as man and wife, are married;
as they deem it a needless awl expensive ceremony. Among the work-
ing classes too, such partnerships are very common, and are on the in-
crease, even in this country, and still more on the Continent. It is
common for the rich to keep mistresses, with whom they often live
almost as man and wife ; and it is chiefly among ladies of the educated
classes, that such connections are rarely, if ever, met with. But when
educated women come to understand the real nature of the sexual
laws, and the sacredness of the duty of healthy exercise, they will feel
that if they have not the opportunity of marriage, or are averse to
cuter upon that indissoluble state, these temporary and unfettered
connections are the only resource for them. To remain an old maid is
a thing,, which no woman, who attends to the voice of natural morality,
can couscnt to. She must feel that by so doing she is not fulfilling the
laws of her being.
I do not speak of divorce, for it is a far more radical change than
divorce, however easily to be procured, that is requisite, before love can
be rendered sufficiently attainable by all human beings, to prevent the
miseries of prostitution, masturbation, and sexual debility. If love
be made too difficult of attainment, especially for youth, which has so
little experience, and knows so little how to guide itself amid the sex-
ual shoals, masturbation and prostitution are sure to be practised. On
the other hand it should not be made too easy of attainment, nor
should a moderate and invigorating indulgence be allowed to dege-
nerate into licentiousness, which is one of the most demoralising of all
influences.
No trust is to be put in the common modes of guarding against
licentiousness, viz. the rigourous puritanism, which throws as many
difficulties as possible in the path of love, and the austere and unna-
tural sexual code, which forbids any indulgences except within the
most irksome bonds. To enforce sexual abstinence except in marriage,
is about the worst possible way to guard against licentiousness. By
this austerity the intensity of the sexual desires is greatly and mor-
bidly increased, and exerts an undue sway over the whole mind. The
young people in our society think far too much of love, and in great
measure because they are so harshly debarred from it. At the same
time the existence of prostitution gives ample scope to the most un-
bridled licentiousness; over which the moralist, by his inconsiderate
austerity, has lost all controul. Prostitution or mercenary love in any
shape, is the true and certain sign of licentiousness, and is infinitely


. more demoralising to a society, than almost any conceivable amount of
sexual freedom could be. The true mode of checking licentiousness is to-
point out its great evils to youth ; to impress upon them, that the con-
duct which is alone really virtuous, and which moreover can alone lead
to real happiness, is to indulge only to a moderate degree in venereal
pleasures, and never permit themselves to become plunged in sensual
excesses, which ruin the health of body and mind; to exercise rather a
manly self-denial, and to think of the sexual happiness of others, as well
as of themselves. The evils which arise from excess, and which are
rather to be seen on the Continent than in this country, proceed chiefly
from the want of a true standard of sexual morality. Young people deride
the existing code, but they have no other guide to sexual virtue; and
thus they plauge into all sorts of excesses, and become heartless and
effeminate.
The true antagonist to licentiousness is the knowledge of the greatly
superior happiness and virtue, which lies in moderation; and also an
active engagement in other pursuits. No man or woman need hope for
happiness, who seeks it in love and sexual gratification alone; no one
who does not live a life of useful industry, need look for a contented
mind. It is not unnatural austere rules, but a due amount of healthy
employment in other matters, which can give either sex a '"’ell balanced
mind, and guard them from licentiousness. Do you wish to keep your
wife or your mistress constant? Give up bolts and bars, and conventional
restrictions, and give her instead an interesting occupation. If the sphere
of woman’s activity be enlarged, and every woman be educated to gain
for herself an independence, there will to an absolute certainty be much
less licentiousness in our society than there now is, however much the
sexual freedom be increased. Idlenesss, mercenary love, and a narrow
culture are tho chief causes of licentiousness; and the true way to guard
against the latter is to remove them. Youth should be taught to take an
equal pride and delight in the developement of all its faculties; and
especially of those physical powers, which have been so miserably neglected.
Athletic exercises and manly sports are the safeguards against effemi-
nacy and sexual debaucheries ; and if these be duly attended to, both man
and woman will gradually acquire a sense of what is truly noble and
lovahio in character; and will be unwilling to let their manhood de-
generate into a sickly licentiousness.
It is a very false, as well as degrading opinion to entertain of man,
that he is naturally prone to licentiousness or other vices. Nature has
taken far better means to promote our virtue than any imperfect codes,
by making ant happiness necessarily dependent on it; and therefore
fore the timid moralist need not be under any apprehensions for the pro-
gress of virtue, if the true obstacles to it can be removed . The general
estimates of human* character are taken from man, in a state of be-
wildered misery from the necessary destruction caused by the unseen law
of population, and a total confusion of ideas on sexual morality; and
consequently are full of fallacies. It is this law, operating beneath
the surface, that has made chastity , or sexual abstinence, be regarded as
a virtue; for men, even when ignorant of the law, still dimly felt, that


the reproductive powers could not be fully exercised, without destructive
consequences, and hence they considered sexual abstinence a virtue. The
error lay in not perceiving, that no exigencies of human society could alter
the laws of the generative organs, or make sexual abstinence, however
indispensable it might be, other thr.n a natural sin.
As a further safeguard against licentiousness, it is very desirable that a
more intimate friendship between the sexes should be promoted *, and
youth should feel that love, if not conjoined with mutual esteem, loses
half its charms. The sexes should mingle more freely, and share in each
others pursuits, so that there may be as many bonds of sympathy be-
tween them as possible; and that the sexual passion may not be, as
at present it so often is, almost the only common feeling which draws
them together.
The great aim of the moralist should be, not so much the intensifica-
tion, as the universal distribution of the pleasures of love among the whole
race. Hitherto this has been very little thought of; and yet it is as im-
portant as the more equal distribution of the food and other advantages,
which is now the chief aim of the political economist. It is not of so
much importance that some few individuals, poets or fortunate lovers,
should have their transports still more exalted and refined ; but that the
great mass of mankind, that every man and woman of us, should be able
to obtain a sufficient share of the pleasures of love, and to enjoy them in
their own way. Love, like power, wealth, and other blessings, has
hitherto been chiefly cherished for the rich, the refined, and the intellec-
tual ; while the loves of the mass of mankind, the poor, the ignorant, and
the uncultivated, have had little attention. It has been too much the
practise for the highly refined—the spiritual aristocracy, to look down
with contempt on the loves of others, and stigmatise them as gross and
sensual; but no one should ever permit himself to think in a degrading
or unsympathising way, of the joys of any of his fellows. It is true, all
are not equally refined or lofty minded; just as all are not born equally
rich or beautiful; but each of us has his own emotions, and his own
sources of pleasure, which should be sacred in the eyes of others. Let us
seek by our sympathy, and self-denial, to procure the means of sexual
happiness for even the humblest of our fellow-beings; and rather to ele-
vate by kind advice than to crush by disdain. Let us not rest contented,
while a single individual in society is excluded by avoidable circumstances
from the pleasures of love.
Before leaving the subject of marriage, I shall give a quotation from
the work “On the Sphere of Government ** by Baron Wilhelm von
Humboldt (elder brother of the great traveller), which has recently been
translated into English, and reviewed in an admirable periodical ; and
which conveys to us an idea of the mode in which many earnest thinkers,
especially on the continent, are beginning to approach the important sub-
ject of the union of the sexes. He says ** the effects which marriage
produces are as various as the characters of the persons concerned, and, as
a union so closely allied with the very nature of the respective individuals,
it must bo attended with the most hurtful consequences, when the
State attempts to regulate it by law, or, through the force of its institutions.


.to make it repose on anything save simple inclination. The radical error
of such a policy seems to he, that the law commands, whereas such a
relation cannot mould itself according to external circumstances, but
depends wholly on inclination; and whenever coercion or guidance come
mto collision with inclination, they divert it still more from the proper
/ath. Wherefore, it appears to me that the State should not only loosen
the bonds in this instance, and leave ampler freedom to the citizen, but
that it should entirely withdraw its active solicitude from the institution of
marriage , and both generally and in its particular modifications, should
rather leave it wholly to the free choice of the individuals, and the various
contracts they may enter into with respect to it. I should not be deterred
from the adoption of this principle, by the fear that all family relations
should be disturbed, or their manifestations in general impeded; for
although such an apprehension might be justified, by considerations of
peculiar circumstances and localities, it could not fairly he entertained in
an inquiry into the nature of men and States in general. For experience
frequently convinces us, that just where law has imposed no fetters,
morality most surely binds; the idea of external coercion is one entirely
foreign to an institution, which, like marriage, reposes only an inclina-
tion and the inward sense of duty; and the results of such coercive institu-
tions do not at all correspond to the designs in which they originate.”
By curing the sexual evils, we at the same time cure poverty. Poverty
exists because our sexual habits are erroneous; the want of food springs
from the same source as the want of love; they are inevitable alternative
products of all modes of sexual intercourse, except the preventive one; and
the means, which can alone cure the one, can alone cure the other also.
To remedy the want of love, and to enable every individual to have a due
amount of sexual pleasures and offspring, the only possible means is the
general practice ofpreventiveintercourse, andliir.itedprocreation: and these
are the only possible means, by which Poverty also can he cured. That
it can be perfectly cured by these, and by no other conceivable means, I
feel the profoundest conviction. It is with the want of love that the richer
classes have most directly to do, and therefore it is the yonng and un-
married people among them, that should chiefly concern themselves in
■ remedying this want; but the poor are most immediately interested in
the'want of food. It is to them therefore that the following observations
are principally addressed, in the spirit of the deepest sympathy and
reverence.
The working classes have their fate in their own hands. There is one
method and one only, by which they may escape from the great evils
which oppress them—the want of food and leisure; hard work and low
wages. This is, by reduemg their numbers by preventive intercourse, and
so lessening the supply of labour in proportion to the demand. All other
means, which have been held out for getting rid of Poverty, are a mere
delusion; socialism, emigration, national education, organisation of
industry, are all, if not purely visionary and incapable of realisation, at
best but slight palliatives, which lead ultimately to the no less formidable
evil of want of love. No remedy for poverty has been hitherto proposed,
which was not to be purchased by the sacrifice of an equivalent amount


of love, which in fact rendered it totally unavailing. While the repro-
ductive puwers are managed by mankind as they are at present, and
checked only by abstinence, prostitution, or death, it is a mere dream to
talk of remedying poverty. Therefore the attention of the working
classes should be steadily concentrated upon the only real remedy for their
evils; and they should refuse even to listen again to any schemes which
are not based upon the laws of population. All otheraare but will-o’-the-
wisps, over which time and effort are utterly wasted, and which can lead
only to a deeper slough of despond. They should use every endeavour to
test the efficiency of preventive sexual intercourse; and disseminate as
widely as possible, the knowledge of this means, and of the indispensable
duty of limited procreation. They should help themselves , nor wait for the
tardy help of others. If this great duty were to become widely known
and generally fulfilled, in a very short time the burden of poverty would
begin to be lightened, and eventually it would be wholly removed.
It would be desirable, that there should be as few children born as pos-
sible, until poverty be removed. Were no unnecessary offspring produced,
none that were not indispensable to the physical health of the mother, in
six years the evils of poverty would, I believe, be strikingly diminished;
and in twelve years the working classes might dictate their own terms,
and have wages and other advantages, to which at present they do not
aspire even in thought. The rate of wages, that important political
barometer as Mr. Malthus called it, is the index by which their efforts
should be guided. Their steadfast, indefatigable, and united aim should
be, to prevent by the means already mentioned, all unnecessary births,
until wages are so high, as to ensure the comfort and independence of
every man or woman ; to leave a broad margin for the casualties of sick-
ness, or other adverse circumstances, which may oppress any individual;
to make it easy to earn a livelihood, even for the weakest woman, or
dullest and slowest workman, for these should be cared and provided for
as well as the rest. Furthispurpo.se the customary wages, even those
which are called good wages, are miserably too low; and a much higher
standard of comfort should be aspired to. Another persevering aim
should be, that there should not be a single unhealthy occupation; and
that men should not be forced, as at present, by the pressure of want, to
engage in employments, which are certain death in a few years. They
should also secure to themselves a much greater share of leisure , than
they now have; less work with higher wages; and not be ground down by
constant toil, but have a sufficiency of time for enjoyment, and for
educating and developing their various faculties of body and mind. No
human being should work, I firmly believe, more than six or seven hoars
a-day, except it be for some temporary purpose ; and at many occupa-
tions even this length of work is far too much. In fact, the hours of
labour should be regulated according to the health and the real interests
of man. All these aims and innumerable others can, 1 feel convinced, be
accomplished by the general adoption of preventive intercourse, and by a
steady and undeviating attention to the true cause and only cure of
Poverty.
The working classes have it in their own power to attain all these


advantages; in fact to make almost any terms with the capitalists, if
they sufficiently reduce their own numbers. It is by these means, and not
by hopeless strikes or bloody revolutions, that any amelioration in their state
tan be effected; and the knowledge that the richer classes have their own
bitter difficulties to contend with ; that they are suffering from the des-
tructive action of the law of population, just as really, though not so
patently, as the poor; that the hearts of many among them are full of
anguish for the miseries of the poor, and eager to assist them by any
efforts, if they only knew how; and moreover that the poor are them-
selves as much to blame for the existence of poverty as the rich, seeing
that it depends chiefly on their own improvident procreation : all these
considerations may serve to assuage the unhappy class animosities, and
to draw us all nearer in mutual sympathy. Alas 1 we have all sinned,
consciously or unconsciously, against the most sacred social laws; we
have all enough of sorrows and evils to contend with, without warring
with each other!
Although preventive intercourse may appear strange to many, as the
means by which alone human progress is rendered possible, yet I feel con-
vinced that it is already far more generally practised, than we have any
idea of; nay more, that wherever there has been any real and perma-
nent progress in the condition of man made by an old country, it has been
by means of preventive intercourse. To take the example of France for
instance, we have seen from Mr. Mill’s statement, that the progress of
that country since the first revolution has been extraordinary ; that at
no time in French history have its resources increased so immensely;
and yet that the population is almost stationary, not on account of the
increase of deaths, but the diminution of births. In consequence of this,
the comforts of the whole French people have been greatly augmented.
Now, although I do not know it as a fact, I am perfectly certain that
this stationary state of population in France must be owing to the general
use of preventive sexual intercourse; for any one who is acquainted with
the habits of the French must be aware, that sexual abstinence is far
less practised among them than in this country. An old maid is as rare
a sight in France as common among us: and on the whole it is certain
that there is far more sexual intercourse in the former country. Prosti-
tution, also, or promiscuous intercourse to such an extent as to prevent
the birth of children, (which, with sexual abstinence and premature
death, are the only possible alternatives to preventive intercourse) is, I
believe, not nearly so common in France as in this country. Now it is
not possible to reconcile this with the very small proportion of births,
otherwise than by inferring it to be the effect of preventive intercourse;
for the fecundity of woman is nearly the same in all countries. Preven-
tive intercourse must therefore be very general in France, and probably
in the other continental countries; in none of which, not excepting even
Norway and Switzerland, is sexual abstinence nearly so prevalent, I
believe, as in this country. However, although it has produced con-
siderable real improvement, it has not been able to raise adequately the
condition of the working classes, nor to remove the sexual evils, because
it has not been recognised openly as a great social duty, but has merely


been adopted by individuals, and rather as a means of retaining' thaii ■
increasing their comforts; it is only when the law of population is well
understood, and preventive intercourse is not used furtively and by single
individuals, but is made the means of a great and op-n social effort ,
that it will enable us not only to avoid the lowest depths of poverty,
but to ekoate our whole society to a condition befitting the dignity of
man.
This effort, moreover, should be made by all old countries together, for
if any do not share in it, the wretched condinou of their poor will drag
down the others more or less; unless they be too uncivilized to compete
with them for the provisions. The continued, although diminished,
misery of the French poor, notwithstanding their adoption of the only
means of relief, depends partly, I believe, on the abject poverty in this
country and in Ireland ; for our wealthy capitalists and hungry popu-
lation become competitors for the products of French agriculture. In
this way it is seen how inseparably the economical interests of all countries
are bound up together. Each nation is in itself a society, but all form
part of the great society of mankind; and no nation can expect long to
llourish without the rest.
One blessed effect, which would result from the introduction of truer
views of sexual morality among ns, would be, to draw' us nearer in sym-
pathy with the French and the other Continental nations ; whom we
would then see to be suffering, just like ourselves, from the great sexual
difficulties, and from whom nothing has more estranged us than the differ-
ence of views on sexual matters. We will learn to feel, that all of us
have been in the wrong, and that along with much that is good, there is,
and in the existing state of our sexual knowledge could only be, more
that is evil, in the various codes of morality, which are at present preva-
lent in the different countries of the world; and the recognition of our
own errors and sufferings will make us more lenient than we have been,
to the errors and sufferings of others.
It is a mistake, moreover, to suppose that it is only in the old world,
that the law of population is causing misery, or preventive intercourse
needed. I believe that the extreme hard work, for which the Americans
are as remakable as the English, and which is assuredly incompatible
with the best interests, either moral or physical of man, essentially depends,
not, as is generally thought, on a love of money or spirit of rivalry,
(although doubtless these operate too as secondary motives), but on the
immense difficulty of increasing the food, even in America, in a geo-
metrical ratio, so as to keep up with a population doubling itself every
twenty-five years. If the working classes in America wish to have still
higher wages, with less work, they too can only do so by preventive inter-
course. It is not a feverish increase of wealth and cultivation, nor a'
boasted superiority over the old world, whose circumstances are so infinitely
worse, that is desirable in America; it is that every one should have
leisure as well as food and love; should have time for enjoyment and the
cultivation of their various faculties; and should have only so much
healthy work, as will ensure the comparatively slow progress of population


; and.food, which, even in America, is compatible with the satisfactory con-
dition of mankind.
In an old country, food and population cannot increase with rapidity,
except by an extraordinary succession of industrial or agricultural im.
provements, coupled with the most indefatigable labour. In Great Britain
during the last half-century, we hare the most remarkable of all instances
of this. The population of this country, as we learn from the census of
1851, has doubled itself in the last 53 years. The chief cause of this has
been the unexampled progress of. the physical sciences and arts dnringthat
time; the introduction of steam, railways, machinery, &c., which have
made this country the great workshop of the world, and have enabled her
to command a large share of the food of other countries ; and the appli-
cation of chemistry and other sciences to agriculture, which has so much
increased our own produce. Another essential cause, acting and re-
dacting on the increase of wealth, has been, as the Census says, the in-
crease of marriages and births, which, by constantly pressing the
population hard against the means of subsistence, has produced that
indefatigable and exhausting labour, for which the English are dis-
tinguished above all other old nations except the Chinese, and also the
heart rending poverty which we witness among us. A large number of
births in any old country must produce one of two things ; either a very
short average of life, as we see among the Chinese, Hindoos, and uncivilized
nations in general: or the most terrible and universal hard-work, along
with wide-spread poverty, as we see among ourselves. In this country
the rapid multiplication, falling on a people of higher civilization and
more-skilful energy, has given rise to such efforts and such sacrifices
to increase the food and stavo off destruction, as are wholly without
parallel in history. And yet, notwithstanding these efforts, which have
reduced the great majority of us to working machines, the mighty tide
of population so easily keeps up with any increase of food they can effect,
that the most awful poverty, bordering on chronic famine, prevails on the
one hand, and an amount of celibacy and sexual abstinence, probably
■ as unparalleled as our industrial efforts, on the other.
In every line of the Census, the action of the terrible Malthusian Law
is distinctly visible; this law alone can explain the continuance of unabated
poverty and misery among us, notwithstanding all our toil and progress
in wealth; it alone explains how our population so easily keeps pace
with, and passes beyond the immense increase of food, although the age of
marriage is Iso late, and celibacy and prostitution so prevalent; it alone
explains the miserably short average of life, notwithstanding all our sani-
tary efforts ; it alone explains the vast tide of emigration, which we have
sent forth: every one of us, who is suffering from the want of food, love,
•or leisure, (and how few in our society are not or have not been 1) is a
living proof of its action ; without it, in short, human society, and the
Census, are a totally unintelligible riddle; and yet the author of the
Census Report (namely, the Registrar-General aided by his coadjutors,)
openly denies the law, and attempts by the most surface fallacies, which
had already been clearly pointed out by Mr. Malthas, to refute it. I


would nofcalude 10 these fallacies, were it not for tbe incomparable impor-
tance of the subject, and the character of the Census Report, which by its
wide circulation, and valuable statistical facts, is so dangerous an organ
for spreading error.
Its author asserts that tbe unparalleled increase of production in tins
country, has been mainly owing to the improvements in the marriage
laws, and to the great increase of births; although he grants that tbe
industrial inventions and agricultural discoveries have had a good deal to do
with it. He says that the law of population, though it may apply to savages
and the inferior animals, cannot apply to civilized man ; for the latter
has such superior powers of increasing the produce. Thus he concludes,
that the large proportion of births and rapid increase of population, have
been the chief cause of the great progress of this country, and as such are
<7 signal advantage ; in short, that the great procreation of married people,
with their increased care of their children, has mainly produced our
national wealth, and that to them therefore our thanks are owing. In
support of this assertion, he appeals to a work published in I?C7. by Sir
James Steuart. On this joint Xshallgive a quotation from Mr. Malthas*
which I omitted in the review of his work; not having at that time read
the Census Report, and having therefore thought that the fallacy it
brings forward was obsolete.
Mr. Malthus says, “ I should be the last to deny that an increase of
population, when it follows in its natural order, is both a great positive
good in itself, and absolutely necessary to a further increase iu the an-
nual produce of the land and the labour. The only question is, which is
the natural order of its progress? On this point Sir James Steuart, who
has in general explained this subject so well, appears to me to have fallen
into an error. He determines that multiplication is the efficient cause
of agriculture, and not agriculture of multiplication. But though it may
be allowed that the increase of people beyond what could easily subsist on
the natural fruits of the earth, first prompted man to till the ground;
and that the view of maintaining a family, still operates as the principal
stimulus to cultivation; yet it is clear that these products in their
actual state, must be beyond the lowest wants of the existing population,
before any permanent increase can possibly be supported, We know that
a multiplication of births has in numberless instances taken place, which
has produced no effect on agriculture, and has merely been followed by an
increase of diseases; but perhaps there is no instance where a permanent
increase of agriculture has not effected a permanent increase of popula-
tion, somewhere or other. Consequently agriculture may more properly
be termed the efficient cause of population, than population of agriculture;
though they certainly react upon each other, and are mutually necessary
to each other’s support. This indeed seems to be the hinge on which the
subject turns, and all the prejudices respecting population have perhaps
arisen from a mistake about tbe order of .precedence. From a want of
attention to this most important distincticn, statesmen, in pursuit of the
desirable object of population, have been led to encourage early marriages,
to reward the fathers of families, and to disgrace celibacy; but this is to
2 c


: dress and water a piece of land without sowing it, and yet to expect a
-crop.”
-i Mr. Malthus here acknowledges, what in fact does not need to be
pointed out, that an increase of births tends most powerfully to increase
national wealth and population, by pushing the people to the last extre-
mities to gain subsistence, and therefore making them work like slaves;
exactly as we know that the more powerful the stream which flows
against a slowly yielding barrier, the more quickly will the barrier
recede; but this is at the expense of greater pressure upon all the par-
ticles of the water itself. In this manner, a country which is bent
upon attaining a hollow superiority over others in aggregate wealth
and population, and is reckless of human life, toil, and suffering, cannot
probably take a better course than by encouraging rapid multiplication;
at least if its inhabitants be at all civilized, energetic, and patient of toil,
for otherwise the increase of births would only cause increase of deaths.
The folly and inhumanity of the effort would be less, if the barrier
against which the hearts of the working classes were broken, were
ultimately surmountable; but it is totally insurmountable, nay, as Mr,
Mill has shown, its resistance even increases , in the progress of cultivation.
We are, forsooth, according to the Census-Reporter, to pride ourselves
on our feverish industrial achievements, our national wealth, our popula-
tion of 28 millions of half-lives, (by no means equal to 14, millions of
whole ones,) nay more, on the sexual morality of our married people, from
the throne downwards; we are gratefully to regard their virtuous and
overwhelming procreation, as the main source of our pre-eminence among
the nations, and forget the poverty, the squalor, the toil, the bloody
sweat, the crushed average of life, the celibacy, the masturbation, the
prostitution, the venereal diseases, it has also occasioned. We are to
thank, as the authors of our national greatness, the very people whose
reckless procreation has been the parent cause of our miseries. Alas!
we may forgive them, but thank them we cannot. The routine and short-
sighted boasts of the industrial glory of England, cemented as it has been
by the blood of millions ; of its splendid institutions, and above all its
superior sexual virtue, are most painful to any one, who feels for his
fellow creatures, and recognises the law of population. To boast of our
sexual institutions, and the rapid procreation of our married people, is,
in reality, the most thoughtless insult which could possibly be paid to the
miseries of this country. It is not an emulative increase of wealth and
population, without happiness, and at the expense of the most wide-spread
suffering, that is desirable in any country; but that both population and
food should increase only so fast, as to allow of the satisfactory state of
all mankind, and a natural term of life for each generation. This is the
only true aim for any country: the other is a foolish chase, which leads
only to misery.
The other arguments by which the author of the Report opposes the
Malthusian Law, are such as disclose a great ignorance of political
economy, and of the law itself. He says, “the products of industry
increase in proportion to the number of civilized men.” If this means that
a larger body of men require, and can produce, more food than a smaller;


it is a truism; if it means that the produce in this or any other old
country can keep up with unchecked population, or that men can marry
as early, and support a large family as easily in this country as in
America or Australia, we all know practically that it is false, - and Mr.
Malthus and Mr. Mill have demonstrated the reason of this. Again he
says, “ future generations of Britons, it they have genius, science, skill,
industry—and if they are more numerous—will necessarily produce more
than the country now yields.” Who ever denied this ? And again, “ the
share of the produce of every kind, that falls to a family in the mostpopii-
lous state of America, is incomparably greater than the share of the
Indian hunter’s family, when there was not one person to every square
mile of territory.” Mr. Malthus not only never denied these oracular
truisms, but himself specified them. He did not however make a state-
ment like this, “ the character of every race of men is thereal limit to its
numbers in the world, if allowance be made for its accidents of position
and time.” It was never doubted by anybody that national character is
one limit to production and therefore to population; but the main limit,
which no energy of character can remove, was shown by Mr. Malthus to
be the laws of Nature.
Can either the Registrar-General, or any other man in his senses,
believe that the populationof this country can continue to increase at the in-
sane rate of the last 50 years'? which rate after all is not half as fasti sis
that of the United States, nor probably much more than a quarter as
fast as the possible rate. Can he believe that in another fifty years we
may have 50 millions of inhabitants; in a century, 100 millions; in two
centuries, 400 millions; in four centuries, 6,400 millions 1 This is the
question which should be put to those who deny the law of population ;
and all who see the absurdity of supposing that population and food can
for any length of time be increased in such a ratio, thereby acknowledge the
truth of the law ; which indeed, no more admits of dispute, except on the
fallacious hypothesis of a change in the physical constitution of man,
than a problem of Euclid. The proofs of the law are so self-evident, that
it is probable that the great majority of those who deny or ignore it, have
in reality never paid any adequate attention to them, nor are at all con-
versant with the modern science of political economy ; which has, in fact,
undergone a complete revolution since the publication of Mr. Malthus’s
essay,—“the era," says Mr. Mill, “from which better views on this sub-
ject must be dated.” The old school of political economists, for instance
Adam Smith, virtually treated the increase of population as a constant
quantity; and, like most of the current writers of our own day, paid little
attention to this matter, in their inquiries into the elements of national
welfare. Thus, of the three main parts of which industrial progress con-
sists, namely, increase of capital, increase of population, and improvements
in production, they omitted attention to the second, which is incomparably
the most important of all; and hence their reasonings are fundamentally
vitiated. It is evidently of little avail to increase capital or to improve
the arts of production, if population be allowed to increase in an equal
proportion ; for in this case, although there is a greater aggregate pro-
duce, yet, as there are more people to share it, no one is better bffthan


before. Capital or produce might be increasing with immense rapidity,
and yet the condition of mankind getting worse, if population were allowed
to advance still more rapidly, as it could so easily do, if not checked. On
the contrary, even though capital were not increasing at all; in other
words, although a country had reached what political economists call the
stationary state; yet if due care were taken proportionally to repress popu-
lation, the condition of every one might be improving. It is not the
absolute amount of wealth which a nation possesses, but the relative
amount in proportion to the number of its inhabitants, and the satisfac-
tory distribution of that wealth, which constitutes it a truly prosperous
nation. A rapid increase of capital, to which the old political economists
attached such importance, is no proof of national prosperity.
In the ordinary.course of industrial progress, namely where as we see
among ourselves, the working classes remain pretty much as they were, Mr.
Mill shows, that, of the three great classes into which our society may be
divided—landlords, labourers, and capitalists—the landlords are -the
only sharers who are really benefited, while the capitalists are losers ;
for population, by increasing, raises the demand for, and therefore
the price of, food, more quickly than the improvements in production
can lower it. Thus the landlords gain, and the profits of the capi-
talists, unless the labourers submit to a reduction of their standard
of comfort, must fall. Hence the aim of the most eminent poli-
tical economists of our day, is no longer the delusive one of an increase
of capital and improvements in production merely, which tends only to
benefit the landlord, to injure the capitalist, and to leave the labourer
where he was, but that there should be a better distribution of the produce,
which is only obtainable by checking the increase of population, so that
there may be fewer people to share the increasing produce. Their aim
thus is twofold; to increase produce on the one hand, and to repress popu-
lation on the other; and the latter aim "is beyond all comparison the
more important of the two, for it is so little generally understood, and is
also so much more influential in human destiny. “It is only in the back-
ward countries of the world,” says Mr. Mill, “ that increase of production
is au important object; in those more advanced, what is economically
needed, is a better distribution, of which one indispensable means is a
stricter restraint on population.” “Only when, in addition to just insti-
tutions,” he says again, '“the increase of mankind shall be under the
deliberate guidance of a judicious foresight , can the conquests made from
the powers of Nature by the intellect and energy of scientific discoverers,
become the common property of-the species, and the means of improving
and elevating the universal lot.”
The discovery of the principle of population has thus made a thorough
revolution in the doctrines and aims of Political Economy:*and it must
before lonu make a similar revolution in Medical and Moral Science,
whoso efforts at present are exactly as delusive as were those of the eco-
nomists before Mr. Malthus wrote, namely, to increase the virtue and
health of mankind, without attending to the increase of the species.
Political Economy is as yet the only science concerning man and society,
which rests upon a sound basis, and whose aim is a true one; the others
are radically delusive, and attempt impossibilities.


How little the Census-Reporter has studied the science whose funda-
mental principles he so recklessly denies, is shown by the following com-
parison between the increase of capital and that of population. 44 Capital,”
he says, “increases, it is always assumed, when terms of years are
considered, in a geometrical progression, and, at compound interest, the
increase is much more rapid than the increase of population in any
European state. The interest of money, indicating the annual increase
of value, is the produce of property, and bears a rather close analogy to
the increase of the means of subsistence. At three per cent per annum,
compound interest, the value of capital is doubled in twenty-four years ;
and a population increasing at three per cent, which is near the natural
rate, doubles in the same time; while actually the British population
has increased at the rate of 1.3 per cent, annually for the fifty
-years, 1801-51, and has doubled in fifty-three years. Thus—if we take
this indication—the means of subsistence have increased faster thauthe
numbers of the people; for, while the population has doubled, the value
of capital under investment, at three per cent, compound interest, has
quadrupled.*’ These statements are full of the-greatest errors. In the
first place, it is not assumed by political economists that capital increases
in a georaetiical progression: on the contrary, Mr. Mill shows in the
most masterly manner, in the first chapters of his fourth book, that the
Law which governs Profits is that they are constantly tending to fall,
and to reach a minimum, in the progress of industry. The reason of
this, as has just been stated, is, that when population increases, (if the
labourer does not people down to a lower standard of comfort, and, as the
standard is already so low, this could have but little effect,) more food is
required, and this, according to the fundamental law of agricultural in-
dustry, is procurable only at a greater proportional cost: and therefore
profits must fall. The tendency of profits to fall in the course of indus-
trial progress was always noticed by political economists, for instance
Adam Smith; but it is only lately that the true reason of this has been
seen, namely, the want of fertile land, which makes food be produced at
a greater proportional cost. Thus then, the Lena of Profits , depending
on th e Law of Wages , and the Law o/ Agricultural Industry , is that they
tend to fail, in the progress of civilization. But when profits fall, the
increase of capital is much interfered with, because people have less
inducement to save from their annual income in the hope of growing
richer ;'and, were this fall of profits not counteracted by several circum-
stances, it would soon reach what Mr. Mill calls the minimum of profit .
namely, the smallest profit which would tempt people to save from their
incomes, and employ their savings productively, in order to grow richer;
and’when this minimum (which varies in each country, according to the
saving habits of the inhabitants and the security of industrial enterprizes)
was reached, no further increase of capital could for the time take place.
Therefore, instead of increasing naturally in a geometrical progression,
capital always tends to increase more and more slowly , and would ulti-
mately reaeh the point where it would not increase at all, (called by
political economists the stitionary state)< were the fall of profits rot re-
tarded by several circumstances. “ When a country,*’ says Mil Kill,* 4 has


long possessed a large production, and a largo net income to make savings
from, and when, therefore, the means have long existed of making a great
annual addition to capital; (the country not having, like America, a
large reserve of fertile land still unused); it is one of the characteristics
of such a country, that the rate of profits is always close to the minimum,
and therefore the country on the verge of the stationary state.” The
chief causes which check the fall of profits in such a case, and thus allow
pf further increase of capital are, he says, first, the waste of capital, by
over-trading and rash speculations. These constitute the commercial
crises, that so frequently occur among us, and are in a great measure
caused by this tendency of profits to fall: for this makes men engage in
rash speculations, to gain a larger profit. In the stagnation which fol-
lows these crises, moreover, much capital is consumed unproductively.
But this is not the principal cause which arrests the fall of profits,
otherwise capital would not increase; while it does increase, and very
rapidly. The second cause, is the introduction of agricultural or indus-
trial improvements , which cheapen corn, or other articles consumed by
the labourers, and thus raise profits ; for the labourer soon loses the ad-
vantage of the cheapness and transfers it to the capitalist, by peopling
down to his old standard of comfort again —the only use, which our
labourers ever make of any advantage, being, as Mr. Mill says, “ to con-
vert it into food for so many more children.” The third cause is in-
creased facilities of getting food or other necessaries from abroad , which
comes to the same thing as the preceding. But, as additional food is not
obtainable in the countries from which we get it, except by increase of
agricultural skill, which is of slow growth and diffusion, or by increase
of capital, which, in the corn-exporting countries of Europe, increases
slowly, and in America not more rapidly than their own population
—English capital must be sent abroad to procure it for our increasing
population ; and this, namely, the overflow of English capital into other
countries, where profits are still high, is the fourth great cause, which
retards the fall of profits, and therefore permits a further increase of capi-
tal. It is one of the chief causes which keep up profits in a country,
whose capital increases fasten than its neighbours’, and therefore whose
profits are nearest the minimum. “ This perpetual overflow of capital
into colonies and foreign countries to seek higher profits, than can be got
at home, I believe,” says Mr. Mill, “to have been for many years one of
the chief causes, by which the fall of profits in England has been checked."
Thus then, the chief causes, which check the fall of profits in England,
are these four—waste of capital, improvements in production, facilities
of importation, and overflow of capital into foreign countries. But by
the first of these, a large amount of capital is destroyed, or transferred to
. foreigners ; and by the last also, it is sent into other countries, so that it
supports their labourers, not ours, except in so far as their increased pro-
duction cheapens our food. Therefore the increased capital in this
country is only in part shared among our own labourers, and it is a
great error to compare it with our own population. Were the capital
indeed to be employed in this country and among our own people alone, its
increase would very soon be arrested, because profits would fall so low; or


at least it would slacken so much as no longer to outstrip the com-
?aratively slow march of agricultural improvements in our own country,
t is because a great part of the increasing capital is sent abroad , that
the rate of profits in all old and well-peopled countries, is prevented
from falling in a very few years, to the minimum point, at which
all increase of capital must for the time cease.
To say that “ the interest of money bears a rather close analogy to the
increase of the means of subsistence, ” is another great error. The rate
of interest depends upon many other elements, besides the profits of capi-
tal or increase of the means of subsistence; which moreover, as we have
just seen, is by no means divided among our own people alone. It depends
on the proportion between those who are ready to lend, and those who are
ready to borrow money, and thus is greatly influenced by the desire to
save, and to use savings productively, in each country. If the rate of
interest were a true index of the increase of capital, the latter would
increase most rapidly, where the interest is highest; and thus would be
increasing much faster in the Oriental countries, where money brings 20
or 30 per cent, than in England. In many European countries the rate
of interest is higher, I believe, than it is in England, and therefore a sum
would double much more rapidly at compound interest in them; but their
capital is not increasing nearly so fast.
As for some other misapprehensions of Mr. Malthus's writings, such
as that “ he attempts to reconcile us to the loss of lives by shipwreck,
small-pox, close habitations, or low sites;” that he made the assertion that
“ the disappearance of small-pox, cholera, or of other epidemics, must be
followed immediately by famine or other diseases and some vain wit on
“ the absurdity of applying the law of population to civilized man though
it may hold of rabbits,” they are scarcely worthy of notice. Had the
author of the Report been satisfied with arranging the statistical facts of
the Census in the admirable manner in which ho has done it, he would
have discharged a most valuable duty; but as he has gone out of his way
to deny the terrible law, which alone explains our society or the Census
itself, nay, has endeavoured to make it a subject of thoughtless ridicule,
his work must be regarded as one of the most dangerous to the sexual
morality and social welfare of this country. There is nothing which is so
inevitably destructive to the working classes, to the sexual sufferers—nay
to married people themselves, as to deny or ignore the law of population ;
and the statesman, who in ignorance or contempt of this law, encourages
rapid multiplication, deserves, as Mr. Maltbus said, the title of the
“ destroyer of his people. ’ Without its guidance, society is a chaos, and
poverty, celibacy, hard work, prostitution, are totally unintelligible, and
therefore irr mediable.
The time will come yet, when the law of population will be viewed in a
very different light: when it will be universally accepted as beyond all com-
parison the most important truth, which was ever revealed to our race;
as the solution, made for us by Mr. Malthas- of the sphynx-riddle or para-
dox o/ Nature, which mankind have had ever, since the birth of history, to
solve, or to die; the truth, which will form the boundary-line between
ancient and modern society; which, so far from being ignored or laughed


at, will be jealously guarded and steadily kept in mind by all, as the
bulwark of their liberty and happiness, the sacred principle of action'
on which alone a true social fabric can be based. .'
While preventive intercourse is the only direct means which will- 1
avail in the least to remedy poverty, there are many auxiliary
measures, which should be adopted, to enable the working classes to
escape from it as soon as possible. These are most admirably ex-
plained by Mr. Mill. The two measures which he lays most stress
upon are emigration and national education. lie proposes that an
extensive and liberal scheme of emigration should be undertaken by
the government, so as to carry off at once a large number of the sur-
plus population ; and thus raise in a sudden and striking manner the
wages of those left at home. By this means the working classes would
become accustomed to a higher standard of comfort, as was the case in
France after the Revolution, and would refuse to people down to a lower
standard again. Even though this should not be done, individual
emigration should be promoted as much as possible, so as to aid in
reducing the numbers. It is to be remarked, that means of relieving
poverty which are of little or no use without preventive intercourse,
may be of great service in accelerating its extinction, when its fountain
head is at the same time stopped up. Thus Charity, which does
almost more harm than good at present, would, if preventive inter-
course were once generally adopted, be a most useful auxiliury'm raising
as quickly as possible the condition of the poor; and might be freely
given, without the smkening consciousness, that it was perhaps rather
injuring than benefiting its unhappy objects, and could do the poor no
possible permanent good. Abroad scheme of national education would
also be of great service, both for the general enlightenment, and as
preparing the poor to understand the law of population, and the remedy
for the evils that surround them.
Besides these, there is another admirable auxiliary in the cure of
pover'y and the elevation of the working classes, on which Mr. Mill
lays great stress. It is the change from the presentsystem of Employers
and Employed to that of Independent and Associated Industry. Mr.
Mill (from whose great work i cannot refrain from quoting a few more
passages, in order to show more fully that the distinguished expoun-
ders of the law of population, instead of being, as they have been so
often represented, inimical to the interests of the working classes, are
in reality their truest friends') says, “I cannot think it possible, that
the labouring classes will be permanently contented with the condition
of labouring for wages as their ultimate state. To work at the bidding
and for the profit of another, without any interest in the work—the
price of their labour being adjusted by hostile competition, one side
demanding as much, and the other paying as little, as possible—is not,
even when wages are high, a satisfactory state to human beings of
educated intelligence, who h ive ceased to thins themselves naturally'
inferior to those whom they serve.” He says moreover, “as the gen-
eral status of the labouring people, the condition of a workman for
hire is almost peculiar to Great Britain.” In other parts of Europe


the number of day-labourers is very small. The chief part of the agri--
cultural population in Norway, Switzerland, France. &c., are peasant
proprietors , (namely, the possessors of small independent properties of
from five to twenty acres or thereabouts, which they till themselves);
af which class Mr. Mill says, (in the course of an analysis of the com-;
parative merits of the various systems of agricultural industry preva-
lent in different countries,) “It is not to the intelligence alone, that',
the situation of a peasant proprietor is full of improving influences.;
It is no less propitious to the moral virtues of prudence, temperance,
and self-control;” and again, “The French peasant is no simple
countryman, perhaps he is, if anything, only too calculating. That is ,
the stage which he has reached in the progressive developernent, which,
the constitution of things has imposed on human intelligence and.
human emancipation. But some excess in this direction is a small and
a passing evil, compared with recklessness and improvidence in the
labouring classes, and a cheap price to pay for the inestimable worth
of the virtue of self-dependence, as the general characteristic of a
people; a virtue, which is one of the first conditions ol excellence in a
human character—the stock, on which if the other virtues are not
grafted, they have seldom any firm root: a quality indispensable in the:
case of a labouring class, even to any tolerable degree of physical
comfort; and by which the peasantry of France and of most European
countries are distinguished beyond any other labouring population.”
In summing up the comparative merits of the various systems of
agricultural industry, Mr. Mill comes to the conclusion that the system
of peasant proprietors is quite as favourable as any other to the most
effective use of the powers of the soil; and that no system at present in i
use, has so good an effect on the morals of the peasantry, by promoting
the virtues of frugality, independence, and, what is most of all indis-
pensable to their happiness—prudence in begetting children.
Mr. Mill, although he states so clearly the many advantages of the
system of peasant proprietors over our own system of day-labourers,
under which the recklessness and improvidence of the rural population
are notorious, does not however advocate the adoption, at least to a.
large extent, of such a system in any part of the British empire, cx-
cept-Ireland; for which country he recommends it in the strongest
terras, as by far the most powerful means of raising the population
from the abject state of misery, in which they are sunk, and training-
them to those virtues in which they are most deficient, namely, the
spirit of independence, and prudence in begetting children ; the want
of which, fostered by the most miserable of all systems of agricultural ’
industry, namely, the Cottier system, has been the true cause of the)
ruin of Ireland. He says, “A people who have once adopted tlur
large system of production, either in manufactures or in agriculture,-
are not likely to recede from it; nor, when population is kept in ducr
proportion to the means of support, is there any sufficient reason why;
they should. Labour is unquestionably more productive on the sys-;
tem of large industrial enterprises; the produce, if not greater abso-i
lately, is greater in proportion to the labour employed; the 'Same


number of persons can be supported equally well with less toil and
greater leisure, which will be wholly an advantage, as soon as civilis-
ation and improvement have so far advanced, that what is a benefit to
the whole, shall be a benefit to each individual composing it. The pro-
blem is, to obtain the efficiency and economy of production on a large
scale, without dividing the producers into two parties with hostile in-
terests, Employers and Employed; the many who do the work being
mere servants under the command of those who supply the funds,
and having no interest of their own in the enterprise, except to fulfil
their contract and earn their wages.
A solution of this problem is afforded by the extension and develope-
raent of which the co-operative, or joint-stock principle, is susceptible.
That principle supplies means, by which every one who contributes to
the work, whether by labour or by pecuniary resources, may have a
partner’s interest in it, proportionally to the value of his contribution.
It is already a common practice to remunerate those, in whom particu-
lar trust is reposed, by means of a percentage on the profits; and
cases exist, iu which the principle is, with the most excellent success,
■carried down to the class of mere manual labourers.” And furthe;,
“ Under this system the labourers are in reality taken into partner-
ship with their employer. Bringing nothing into the common concern
but their labour, while he brings not only his labour of direction and
superintendance, but his capital also, they have justly a small share of
the profits ; this however is a matter of private arrangement in all
partnerships ; one partner has a large, another a small share, accord-
ing to their agreement, grounded on the equivalent which is given by
each. The essence however of a partnership is obtained, since each
benefits by all things that are beneficial to the concern, and loses by all
which are injurious. It is in the fullest sense the common concern of
all.”
“ The value of this organisation of industry,” he says again, “for
healing the widening and embittering feud between the class of labour-
ers and the class of capitalists, must, 1 think, impress itself by degrees
on all who habitually reflect on the condition and tendencies of modern
society. I cannot conceive how any such person can persuade himself,
that the majority of the working-classes will for ever, or even for
much longer, consent to hew wood and draw water all their lives, in
the service and for the benefit of others ; or can doubt, that they will
be less and less willing to co-operate as subordinate agents in any
work, when they have no interest in the result; and that it will be
more and more difficult to obtain the best work-people, or the best
Services of any work-people, except on conditions similar to those men-
tioned above. Although therefore arrangements of this sort are now
in their infancy, their multiplication and growth, when once they enter
into the general domain of popular discussion, are among the things
which may most confidently be expected.”
' This great organic change from the system of hired labour to that of
independent or associated industry, is of immense importance to the
welfare of the working classes. They should make it therefore one of


their steady and determined aims, to attain to this independence ; and
gradually to get rid of our present system of hired labour, with its
many degradations, and small prospect of rising to a higher position.
The chief obstacle to these associations is the poverty and dependence
of the working classes, together with the present stale of the law, which
makes each member of a partnership liable with his whole means, in
the event of the failure of the enterprise; and therefore renders one,
who has much to lose, unwilling to link himself with those who have
little or nothing. Were the law changed, so as to admit of partnershipt
mth limited liabilities , of which change Mr, Mill is much in favour;
and were the working classes better off, and able to make desirable
terms with the capitalists, there is no doubt that such associations would
become very common, as they are in some parts of America. As the
wages of labour rise by means of duly limiting procreation, the work-
ing class will have less difficulty in effecting this change; and they
should not rest satisfied till their condition has been recognised as
equally independent, and equally entitled to the respect and deference
of mankind, as that of any other members of society.
Let not the attention of the reader be diverted in the slightest by
these secondary and auxiliary means, from the only real remedy for the
social difficulties, namely, preventive intercourse. If it be so, they had
better not have been mentioned; for without that primary and radical
means, all the rest are not worth talking about, and can have no real
effect in advancing human happiness; for they, like all other schemes,
if tried alone, can lead only to the aggravation of the want of love, and
therefore are delusive. Preventive intercourse is of itself sufficient to
remove poverty, without any of these auxiliaries; and if poverty were
removed, the other parts of social progress would become compara-
tively easy, and the working classes would attain without an effort the
advantages, which they at present toil after in vain ; while on the con-
trary all those auxiliary means, or any other imaginable ones, are,
without preventive intercourse, utterly impotent, or could at most
only relieve poverty a little, at the expense of increased sexual absti-
nence and consequent miseries.
Without preventive intercourse and limited procreation, let us not
vainly imagine that we can cheat our doom ; or make any real im-
pression upon the appalling evils, moral and physical, which exist
among us, and two-thirds of which arise from the fatal antagonism of
food and love. If we ignore this antagonism, and shut our eyes as we
have hitherto done, to this and other sexual subjects, we may do what
else we like ; we may bully, we may bluster, we may rage, we may
toam at the mouth ; we may tear down heaven with our prayers, we
may exhaust ourselves in weeping over the sorrows of the poor; we
may narcotise ourselves and others with the opiate of Christian resig-
nation ; we may dissolve the realities of human woe in a delusive
mirage of poetry and ideal philosophy ; we may lavish our substance
in charity, and labour over possible or impossible Poor-laws; we
may form wild dreams of socialism, industrial regiments, universal
brotherhood, red republics, or unexampled revolutions; we may


strangle and mnrder each other, we may persecute and despise those
whose sexual necessities force them to break through our unnatural
moral codes, we may burn alive if we please the prostitutes and the
adulterers; we may break our own and our neighbours’ hearts against
the adamantine laws that surround ua, but not one step, not one shall
we advance, till we acknowledge these laws, and adopt the only possi-
ble mode in which they can be obeyed.
But if we do this, it is my earnest hope and belief that we shall
ultimately triumph over that mighty difficulty, that eemal dead-lock ,
which has hitherto laughed to scorn all the efforts of our race ; that anew
era will dawn upon the world, the only real era of improvement in the
whole of human history; a blessed era, which shall usher in the
golden age, when truth and virtue shall be no longer a mocking
phantom, and progress not a dream ; when every advance in science
and art shall bear its true fruit, unembittered by the necessary sacri-
fice of an equivalent amount of love ; when the poor friendless prosti-
tute shall no more be seen in our streets, the able-bodied pauper in
our workhouse, or the helpless beggar at our gate; when all of us
shall have a share in the blessings of independence and sexual love,
befitting the exalted position of the human race; when the poor-
houses shall be shut up, and the gaols nearly emptied of their tenants,
poverty, the chief cause of crime, having been removed; when the
various classes of our society, no longer separated from each other by
impassable difference of circumstances, shall fuse into one great and
united whole, and learn to look back, with mingled pity and amaze-
ment. on the dark ages of mutual destruction and delusive struggles,
in which their less fortunate ancestors were plunged. A true Sexual
Religion can alone save mankind from the mighty wants of Food, Love,
and Leisure.
IKO or PAST 11,




PART III.
NATURAL RELIGION.


PART III.
NATURAL RELIGION.
DIGNITY, LIBERTY, AND INDEPENDENCE.
“ Live and let live.”
Man stands at the head of the universe, and we can form but a very
inadequate conception of the wonderful majesty and glory of his being.
We admire the extraordinary energies and transcendent perfections of
the simplest organised substances; we can watch a humble plant con-
struct a huge complex fabric, by the magical powers inherent in a cell,
almost inconceivably minute; but when we come to reflect on the natural
powers inherent in man, which build up our wondrous being from a
cell no less minute, to a perfection of developement, which no imagina-
tion can reach, our astonishment can know no bounds. Man is beyond all
comparison the most powerful and elevated part of Nature, and the
majesty of his position cannot be too highly estimated. If a thing is to
be valued in proportion to the great time and care spent in its production,
in proportion to the grandeur of its construction and its purpose, and the
multiplicity of the energies it possesses, Man cannot be too highly valued.
It needed myriads and myriads of ages, for the working powers of life to
develope this their master-piece; and it is only by this patient and long
continued elaboration, that we could have been produced.
Of the boundless energies of Man how shall we obtain a conception ?
In every little cell within us reside occult powers of life and death, whose
study is worth a life-time. By their united agency an individual is for-
med, so perfect, and with such various endowments, as to deserve the
name of the microcosm; for his manifold being is an epitome of the
whole universe. Man is nature become self-conscious; the crowning
effort of Nature to understand, herself, to know, as well as to be. And


it would almost seem as if the scale of being, having been developed
far, need not go further; for man. unlike other animals, contains in
himself the powers of indefinite progress. It is probable, that there is
scarcely a secret in Xature, (who has, as it has been beautifully said, in
various [laces told all her secrets,) which man may not gradually learn,
and that to all legitimate questions he may obtain an answer. Another
reason for supposing that developement will not proceed higher than
Man. is that the inferior organisms, whether existing or extinct, seem to
prefigure man, who has thus been called the fulfilment of the geological
prophecies.
If we thus, forgetting that we belong to the human race, and viewing
it in an objective, not a subjective, light, consider man’s unapproachable
elevation in the universe, we must regard him as the greatest and most
glorious manifestation of nature; and if we look up to the heavens and
around us on this beautiful earth with wonder, and almost with awe, we
must still more look up to man, as a being far more incomprehensible,
and immeasurably further above our conception in his natural sublimity.
He who does no' profoundly feel the unutterable grandeur of humanity,
docs not feel that of nature; for man is nature incarnate. We may
give the reins to our imagination, and form the most extravagant ideal
of perfection ; nothing that we can conceive or express of power, virtue,
or sublimity, will give the least idea of the perfection of a human being,
who contains in himself the concentrated energies of the universe.
When we leflect on the elevation of man’s position, and observe the
wondrous products of his power; the sciences, the arts, the material
and mental wealth he has accumulated; the way in which lie has bent
to his purpose the various agencies in nature, and in which he is looked
up to by the other creatures as their lord and master; we would expect
that the possessor of such powers would have a due sense of his own dignity,
would he able easily to raise himself above the grosser wants of inferior
beings, and enjoy a much freer and more independent life. But alas!
when we look yipon the present state of mankind, we find this by no
means the case. We see the world’s Lord reduced to contend on every
side with the most degrading evils, which take away the sense of liberty
and dignity, that so lofty a bcingshould possess; and make him cringing
and timid, the slave instead of the master of fortune.
Dignity, lib'rty, and independence, are among the most valuable of
human possessions. Independence , or the capabi 1 ity of self-maintenance, is
indeed the very foundation of all other advantages ; and from it comes
the delightful tense of dignity and liberty, which is so essential to hap-
piness. The great aim in social economy should be, that evtry adult
should be independent ; that every one should be able to obtain for him-
self the necessaries of life; and that no one in this essential respect
should be more in the power of his neighbour, thau the latter is of him.
Of course there must exist a mutual dependence, which indeed is the
great bond and condition of society; but this should be reciprocal, and as
equal as possible, else there can be no satisfactory liberty. Upon individual
independence alone, possessed by every adult member of the community,
can social freedom or secure political institutions be based; for a state ut


dependence on others is so opposed to the welfare of man, that discontent
and disorder are sure to result, where it exists. No man, even if he had
the wish, could provide for another, as well as the latter could for himself;
and whenever one man has undue power over another, we know from
too sad experience, it is certain to be abused. Hence it is, that all insti-
tutions and systems, which have for their objects to make one part of
mankind'dependent on another, are radically erroneous ; and that the
patriarchal forms of government, and the feudal ideas of noble benefi-
cence surrounded by grateful dependents, are rapidly giving way to the
far truer and more ennobling principle of universal independence in the
essentials of life, which is, it may be said, the great leading idea of the
civilized nations of modern times. Even if charity and brotherly love
could be secured on the side of the more fortunate among us towards the
more destitute, charity is no proper support for man, and grateful depen-
dence no fit sphere for him. It is well that each of us should give and
receive mutually from each other, and where there is this feeling of
equality, there will be true gratitude and love; but where the favours
are all on one side, the natural feelings of independence revolt from them,
and gratitude or content, even under the best treatment, is not to be
expected. But a dependent need never look for good treatment; for the
only true foundation of this between man and man, is a mutual reverence,
arising from equal independence. The noble desire for independence is
one of the finest points in the English character, the main cause of
the country’s unrivalled progress in the industrial arts; and it has en-
abled her to struggle onward under the most overwhelming social diffi-
culties.
But notwithstanding all our struggles for these grand essentials of life—
liberty and independence —society is still very, very far, from having
attained such an aim. In fact, if we look around us on the various
individuals of whom cur society is composed, we will find very few, who
can be said to enjoy an adequately free or independent life.
In the first place there is a mass of paupers, to the humiliation of our
race, who are unable to find employment, and are utterly dependent for
their bare life on the charity of others. Helpless and dejected, covered
with shame and contumely, their lot is a constant wretchedness to them-
selves, and a misery and reproach to the rest of us, who cannot find the
means to prevent such awful calamities.
If we now regard the condition of the working classes, we shall find
that there are few, if any, among them, who can be said to enjoy much
freedom or independence. In the hot-press of competition, at present
existing among us, all their energies are enslaved to the gain of their
daily bread, and they are dependent on the least smile or frown of fortune.
The fear of destitution always hangs over them, and even their greatest
efforts are often insufficient to prevent them from sinking into the gulph
of pauperism or crime. Those cannot be said to be free men, who are
forced to toil from morning to night at a work, from which their jaded;
limbs revolt; and who, after all, are perhaps half-starved. It matters little
whether it be fortune or a tyrant that sets tho task; the state of slavery
n 2


is nearly the same. They can hare little sense of man’s dignity, who
are subject to so many hardships, and put to so many sordid shifts ; and
■who are besides exposed to the caprices of a master, on whose favour they
are dependent. The working classes are as a body dependent on the
richer classes, for the difficulty of procuring a livelihood is so great, that
to offend an employer is ruinous. Hence the marked subservience of the
poorer among us to the richer; a thing which should by no means exist,
as there should be an equal mutual reverence among all men. All have
an equal natural dignity and title to reverence, whatever be their occu-
pations, whether a prime minister or a costermonger; and it is most
pernicious that this reverence should be given to certain classes alone,
tor it is man himself, and not his accidental external condition, that
claims our reverence. Gut as long as the poorer classes, from an over-
crowded state of the population, are dependent for their livelihood on the
favour of the richer, there never can be either adequate mutual respect,
or a due feeling of independence and freedom in every bosom; and dis-
content and unhappiness must result.
Even among th o richer classes we find by no means a sufficient indepen-
dence. Even here, the struggle for a livelihood, or for the means of
marrying and supporting a family, is still very great; too greatoften for
the powers of the individual; and the man must toil like a slave, or if he
relax at all his efforts, sink to a dependent condition.
But the position of man with regard to independence, degraded though
it be, is still infinitely before that of woman. The latter.is so generally
dependent on man for her support, that this state is very frequently held
to be the one natural and fitted for the sex. But this is an immense
error, and the source of fallacies and miseries innumerable. If we regard
all the inferior animals, we will find, that the female is never depen-
dent on the male. The females are generally as powerful, and frequently
much more so than the males, and in all cases live just as independent lives.
There is no doubt that woman is perfectly fitted by nature to live in-
dependently, that is, to gain her livelihood by her own exertions; and
there is as little doubt that she is intended to do so. She is formed with
boundless powers and faculties of body and mind, just as man is,
with, however, marked differences in some respects ; and there are very few
operations in which he may engage, which she is not also fitted to per-
form, though with a different degree of power. Now the natural aptitude
for any thing, shows that it should be done; for all the inborn powers
demand their due exercise. It is true that the developement of woman
has of late made considerable progress, but it is still very far behind that
of man: and as a general rule, her lot may be regarded as one of com-
parative slavery and dependence.
If we review the condition of the female sex, from the most neglected
prostitute to the Queen of our land, we shall find but very few in any
class, who have a due share of independence, or that feeling of liberty or
dignity which befits the Queen of Nature. Single women of the poorer
classes, are still more dependent on fortune than men. There are so few
occupations in which women are employed, that the vast competition for


them among the hosts of poor women, reduces the wages to a mere trifle,
scarcely enough to keep breath in the living skeleton. If such wretched
means fail, the dreary workhouse, with its joyless abasement, opens to them.
We cannot wonder that so many are driven by these fearful hardships
into prostitution, that great house of refuge for destitute women. -
Forlorn and degraded as in the state of the very poor among our
women, that of the prostitutes is in some respects worse. There is no
class of society which stands in so degraded a position in the eyes of the
world, scarcely even the criminals: and although some of these ill-used
girls may not have much difficulty in gaining a livelihood, yet it is very
precarious, and gained in a way which is eventually destructive to their
happiness, sense of dignity, and self-respect.
The women among the richer classes have a lot, which I would be
tempted to call even more unhappy than that of the labouring poor;
except indeed of those, who are sunk in the lowest mire of poverty or
prostitution. There are still fewer employments open to them; in
fact, with the exception of the unpleasant situation of a governess, thereis
scarcely any employment fit for an educated woman. Hence they
are almost entirely dependent on man for their support, their noble
powers are allowed to lie dormant, and a few trivial accomplishments
brought into a forced existence in their stead; and thus they have
to wait till the arbiter of their destiny deigns to smile on them,
and relieve them from their unpleasant position by marriage, which has
been truly called, woman’s only profession. In this way, woman is made
dependent on man’s love for her main hopes in life; by which the sex is
unutterably degraded. Unhappy truly is the lot of those, who depend on
a thing so varying and so deceitful as sexual love, especially in the hollow
existing state of the sexual world. Such dependence on the affections of
man has spoiled woman's character ; has made her unreal, trifling,' and
weak, seeking rather what is pleasing and graceful in his eyes, than what
is true and noble in her own ; and this unnatural dependence could not
but result in the unhappiness of both. The anxiety about being married,
and the fear of remaining an old maid—feelings inseparable from the
existing sexual institutions and circumstances of our society—have broken
her spirit, and cowed her into a state of timidity, most destructive to happi-
ness and the sense of dignity.
There is perhaps no lot in life with less dignity, liberty,-or independence,
than that of a ycmng unmarried lady in the richer classes, especially alter
she has passed the first season of youth, and finds how completely her
happiness -.nd liberty in life depend on her chance of marrying. What
is open to me unfortunate in such a case ? She is sick of her frivolous
accomplishments, which should form the ornaments, not the substance of
life; she has no field for the exercise of those transcendent natural
powers, which, like the unruly spirits of old, are constantly crying outfox
“work, work” within her; she has no liberty of locomotion or of action,
and she is probably dependent for her subsistence on those around her;
and dependent too for love, that great essential of human happiness, on an
un propitious fortune. "
Marriage, although a great improvement upon such a state, ha® still


immense disadvantages. The wife is still wholly dependent on the hus-
band ; and he who Knows human nature could foresee, that, from this,
enormous evils must result. From this she is to a great degree in bis
power, and in the main must suit herself to his wishes. Her privileges
are few in comparison with his ; he takes the lion's share of liberty, and
expects deference and obedience, (which indeed hare even, to our shame,
been made part of the religious formula of marriage). It is true that in
many cases the inherent human nobility and devoted lore will in part
remove these inequalities; but it is not by exceptional cases that our
judgment should be guided. It is a certainty, in the case of woman as
of all others, that she who is dependent for the u.ain essentials of her
existence, for food and for love, upon others, cannot expect to have a free,
a dignified, or a happy lot. She may chance to attain it, but she is
always at the mercy of external circumstances. The charity which
supports woman, may be gilded over by the name of love; but in the
main it is charity still; and no class of beings who depend on this, can
look for a happy lot. No true sense of dignity or liberty can exist
without the feeling of independence.
But it is not woman alone, who is depressed by her state of dependence,
on mail also it presses very heavily. He must work to support two,
which is a great additional tax on his energies. In this way the wife or
the daughter is constantly put in the humiliating position, of being a
drag upon him whom she loves. It is often said that the wife contributes
her share to the business of the family in managing the house, and in
nursing and rearing the children. Hut this is a great fallacy, especially
with regard to the educated classes. It is by no means an adequate
sphere for an energetic and well-educated woman, to spend all her
thoughts on domestic economy, or to act chiefly as a head-nurse. Even
at the present day, when the propagation of the species is monopolised by
a limited number of women, and when the solecism of large families is
the general rule in married life, such duties ought by no means to absorb
her attention ; and in future ages, when it is to be hoped, there will be a
very different proportion of children in each household, much less atten-
tion will be needed.
It is a great mistake to suppose that a mother should devote herself so
completely to the children, as is generally seen among us. By this the
characters of both, instead of being improved, are injured. The great
secret of bringing'up children well and happy, is to let them be very much
in the society of other children, of their own age, with whom they can play,
and from whom they learn infinitely more than by constant contact with
aii adult, who is not their natural companion. However devoted a
mother may be to her child, she will generally seek in vain to make it
either happy or good, by all the pains she can lavish on it, unless she
provide it with play-mates of its own age, whose modes of feeling
aud' thought are so much more suited to its comprehension. It is
from this reason, that wo generally see the children of the poor,
who r are in'at all tolerable circumstances, much happier, and less
spoiled and perverse, than those of the rich. They have plenty of play-
mates of their own age; ; aud their motlic , who has, as all human beings


should have, some work of her own to mind, is not always looking after
them, and encumbering them with help, exhortation, and advice,, as
among the,rich. But tne mother, as well as the child, is spoiled by her
over-attention to it. An adult woman is not intended to be always in
the nursery, or to have children for her chief companions, any more than
a man is; and the strength of her mind, as well as that of the child’s, is
impaired by it. Although all ages should intermingle, yet it is certain,
that as a general rule, children are more suited to the society of children,
and adults to that of adults. Woman seeks the nursery, because she has
few pursuits in common with man, who often comes in this way to hold
but a secondary place in her affections.
The married women in the poorer classes have in some respects a more
dignified and independent life, than those of the richer. They sometimes
assist their husband at his work, or have washing, cooking, and other
employments, and are not so wholly absorbed in the children. But even
here, woman has a dependent condition; for as a general rule it is the man
only, who supports the family. The necessity of supporting these tells very
heavily upon the strength of the husband. He has to compete with young
unmarried men in the labour market, and by this his wages are lowered
to a degree insufficient for the wants of a family. It is no wonder in,this
case, that brutal usage of the wife by the husband is so frequent among the
poorer classes. The man does it, and the woman bears it, why ? because he
feels that she is a drag upon him, and in his power ; and she, knowing
her dependence on him, dares not resist. It is neither the inferiority of
physical force, nor love, which makes her endure it; but simply because
she would be reduced to destitution if she left him. Were woman in-
dependent of man, there would be an end of the ill-usage and tyranny of
the husband towards the wife; but not till then. It is easy for those in
less oppressive circumstances to blame husbands, to call them brutes and
monsters for abusing their wives; but it is utterly useless to do so, as
long as the present system lasts. 'We may be absolutely certain, that
so long as woman continues dependent on man for the necessaries of her
life, so long will she have the invariable usage of a dependent.
In this manner we see, that there are immense numbers of individuals
in society, who are dependent upon others, or enslaved by Necessity,
for the simple gain of the first essential of life, their daily food. In
this respect, man, the paragon of nature, is worse off than the in--
ferior animals, whose livelihood is in general obtained with much
greater ease and certainty ; at least by those which grow to the age ■
of maturity, and escape the destruction caused by the principle of
population. The want of food is the greatest of all wants, as food
is the very first essential of life, and of all its powers and virtues.
No. man who has undue difficulties in obtaining a plentiful supply of
food, can be said to possess a free, a dignified, or an independent
life. And no one who is dependent for this supply on the good will
of others, need hope to possess these advantages. . ' ■
But there are many other great obstacles to a free and dignified,
existence, besides the want of food. By far the most important of
these in the present state of our society, is the want of sezual lore. ■


This might be almost said to be at present a greater want than that of
food, ,but the two subjects are so intimately connected together that
they cannot be separated. It is from the want of food, that the want
of love arises; and from the improvident indulgence in love, that want
of food results.
Sexual love is a requirement of our being so essential, that it should
be included among the necessaries of life. By these is understood at
present only those things, such as food, fresh air, &0., which are abso-
lutely essential to the life of the individual; but it is a grand error,
and one which has pervaded and rendered utterly fallacious all theories
hitherto formed of human nature, and systems of human society, to
suppose that the exercise of the reproductive faculties is not also es-
sential, In the humblest organism, in the simple cells of the proto-
phytes, reproduction as well as nutrition is always one of their essential
vital characteristics; and in man too the exercise of this function is
absolutely essential to the health, happiness, and integrity of his
being. The appetites for food and love are the two grand conservative
powers of life. The one provides for the maintenance of the individual,
.and the other for that of the species; and man is dependant on a due
gratification of both, for a free, a healthy, or a happy life. The man
who cannot satisfy his hunger, and who has to toil from morning to
night to effect this, may be said to be enslaved to this appetite ; and
.he who cannot satisfy his sexual desires, and who suffers therefore
from the dissatisfaction of mind and debility of body, the penalty im-
posed by nature for the frustration of her great purpose, may in like
manner be said to be enslaved to this passion. Neither of them have
a free, a dignified, or an independent life. A due gratification of these
appetites for food and love is the foundation of our health and content;
and without this, our life must always be bound down to a state of
. dependence.
There is nothing in which the liberty and dignity of mankind are so
much impaired, as in sexual love. There is no subject which is so
full of humiliation for man; none in which there is so vast an amount
of secrecy, deceit, shame, compulsion, and all methods and forma of
-indignities ; so much so in fact, that it is generally avoided, no one
liking to open up this pest-house, or to disclose this greatest oppro-
brium of our society. It is the great principle of population, as has
been already shown, which is the parent source of these evils, and of
what may be called the tyranny of Love as well as Food; but, as it is
by secondary restrictions and impediments thrown in the path of love,
(which indeed generally divert attention from the primary one,) that
this limiting principle acts in our society, it is on these that I would
’wish to maka some further remarks.
The exceedingly strict rules of sexual morality, forbidding all sex-
,ual intercourse except in marriage, which state is attainable by the
oniyat a comparatively late age, have given rise to a regular
system of secret and mercenary intercourse, ingrained into all civilised
societies; in which human dignity and liberty are almost as much
degraded, as even by pauperism. Secrecy and deciet are the deadly


enemies of liberty and dignity; and as long as the present sexual sys-
tem lasts, there is no such thing as a dignified life for youth. Mer-
cenary love .in itself is an abomination, utterly abhorrent to nature,
and full of degradation to all concerned in it.
Both sexes have the dignity of their lives greatly lessened by the
sexual difficulties, but in a very different degree. In the first place
let us take the young man. If he abstain from forbidden intimacies he
has anything but a free and dignified life. If he have strong sexual
passions, which is almost always the case in early youth, and is the
sign of a healthy mind and body, he is the slave of them ; they tor-
ment him, fill his mind, and hinder the developement of his powers in
other directions; perhaps lead him to masturbation, than which there
is scarcely anything more destructive to the sense of dignity. Even if
ho is not driven to this, the unfortunate youth is constantly uneasy;
in the company of his comrades, who talk about their love affairs, he
feels awkward, and has by no means that glowing consciou-ness of
virtuous self-denial, which those who do not know human nature,
would wish to make us believe attendant on sexual abstinence; he carries
with him the “celled-up dishonour of boyhood,” the natural con-
sciousness of the imperfection of unexercised powers. The Christian
moralist may tell him he has acted virtuously; but almighty Nature,
although he may not understand her unerring voice, speaks a very
different language to his disquieted heart.
But this is not all—the sexual impulses are so strong in youth, that
it has been found impossible to restrain them, except by weakening
their force, and thus tampering with the main-springs of vital energy.
Hence sexual shame, sexual shyness and bashfulness, have been fos-
tered incur youth; and wherever sexual morality is very srict,
they are sure to be apparent. Such feelings are diametrically opposed
to the sense of a free and dignified existence; indeed shyness or awk-
wardness is the outward expression of an undignified and fettered
mind. But whenever the natural force of a passion is thus interfered
with, the powers of life are necessarily impaired. To weaken the
sexual passions by infusing shyness or sexual timidity into the mind,
as is the almost universal effect of the sexual puritanism, which per-
vades our country, especially in Scotland, is just as if we were to try to
appease healthy hunger by taking doses of a nauseating substance; wo
obtain our object, but at the expense of the happiness and integrity of
the frame. Thus it may be truly said, that it is not possible for a
young man to have a natural, dignified, and manly character, if all
sexual intercourse be denied him.
If the young man be not sexually abstinent, how many difficulties
must he encounter in his intercourse with the opposite sex. If he rest
contented with mercenary love, ns the great majority do, he prostitutes
and degrades his nature, and his ideal of love must become debased.
Love is a passion which elevates in proportion to its intensity, moral
and physical; in proportion to the feeling of reciprocal attachment,
esteem, and mutual reverence between the parties. But in mercenary
connections, in general, there is not this mutual reverence; and a love


which is given for money is either cold and apathetic, or purely lascivious.
Alas for the heart of youth, brought up amid such degrading intimacies.
Besides these degradations, and the secrecy too, which must accompany
them,and which iuevitablyproducesdeceit in the young man’s character,
he is exposed to the venereal diseases, which have ruinedso many thousands
of. our race—blasted their hopes, embittered their hearts —in a word
poisoned them. There is nothing more degrading to the- dignity of
character, than a protracted suffering from one of these diseases. The
secrecy they necessitate, the miserable way in which they prostrate the
powers, and take away from the enjoyment of life, and the fear which
ever afterwards pursues their victims, unspeakably degrade the human
character. They hang like a Damocles’ sword over the head of youth;
and so long as they exist, sexual intercourse will never have a truly free
and dignified character, for fear and suspicion are incompatible with
this.
,If the young man, unwilling to prostitute himself to mercenary love,
seek rather an unmarried intimacy of ahigher nature, indignities even
more formidable oppose him. The secrecythat such an intimacy involves,
and the fear of detection, are much greater, for, strange to say, society
is far more embittered against such an alliance, than any amount of mer-
cenary love; which is considered a very venial fault in a young man,
indeed, by many people, rather a point in his favour. Stolen interviews,
fear of discovery and of consequent loss of character, place the youth here
too in a most undignified position. In fact in all sexual intercourse,
except in marriage, the young man has to act and feel like a pickpocket;
shunning the light, and being for ever on his guard against discovery:
and it can readily be perceived, what an effect this must have in degrading
his character. For daring to indulge in one of the fundamental passions
of his nature, he is treated as if he were guilty of a great crime, such
as robbery, or a pernicious vice, such as drunkenness; and in fact
almost all of ns, (for how many men are there in society, who have
not had more or less sexual intercourse before marriage?) are
placed for a great part of our lives in the position of malefactors.
Is this to continue? How long will youth tolerate this shamsful position?
No ingenuous mind can bear, without the keenest suffering, the necessity
of secrecy and stealthy action. We must be able to justify our deeds, or
else renounce them ; and it is a standing reproach to youth to rest con-
tented with their present stealthy and undignified position. The great
ruleof dignified action is “ Never to do anything we are afraid to own;”
in fact, openness is the safeguard of probity. At present all sexual rela-
tions except that of marriage, and even this in very many cases, especially
on tho continent, are full of concealment, deceit, and indignities; and as long
as such a state of things continues, it is in vain to hope for happiness
from, sexual intercourse.
Thei want of freedom and'dignity in love overshadows all the rest of
life, and degrades the whole character. A man or woman, who has in
many of the most important relations in life, been put in the position of
a pickpocket, has his sense of honour vitally wounded, and cannot be ex-
pected to have so ingenuous a character. Clandestine love fills the whole


of society with deceit and suspicion ; every one suspects his neighbour,
and is in his turn the object of suspicion ; and even were there no other
obstacles to the elevation of the human character. 1 this alone, as long as
it continues to exist, must be fatal to the hopes of the moralist. - :
: But if man be placed in so humiliating a position in sexual matters,
unfortunate woman is infinitely more so. In the first place we have the
vast multitude of prostitutes , on whose awful degradation one cannot
think but with dismay and anguish. That there should be among us a
class of unfortunate women, who are treated worse than dogs; who are
hunted about by the police, despised and abhorred by their own sex, and
abused and neglected by man, to whose wants they minister, is a page
of human shame too dark for tears. It is the greatest disgrace of civi-
lized society ; a disgrace deeper even than negro slavery. And for what
are these poor girls hunted down in tliis merciless manner? In truth for
acting exactly in the same way as all of us ; as all young men, who go
with them, enjoy ourselves with them, and then desert them, and leave
them to their fate; for supplying a want- in our society, which man. by
the necessities of his nature, cannot do without, and which cnly they, who
know little of human nature, imagine may be withheld without the most
destructive consequences. Instead of contempt, these poor neglected girls
deserve the warmest thanks of society, for the heroic mode in whichthey
have borne the misery and the burden of our shame. Notwithstanding
the enormous evils which they aid in causing, they have been in the main
exceedingly serviceable to mankind, by palliating in some degree the other
alternative evils of the law of population, namely sexual abstinence or
premature death: and thus, as already mentioned, they should be re-
garded as sexual martyrs.
If youth is to be humiliated and disgraced for indulging in sexual in-
tercourse, at least let all of us bear our snare, and be ashamed to throw
the whole-burden on poor helpless woman. Whileso glaring an injustice
exists, how can we .talk of the nobility or dignity of man ? In truth no
one member of' the human family, no prostitute nor criminal, can be
degraded, without dragging down all the rest. In the case of prostitu-
tion the who'e of society is concerned in it. Men, it may be said, 1 are as
a general rule all prostitutes; for there are but an inconsiderable section
of them, who do not indulge more or less at some period of life in mer-
cenary loves, and it matters little in such a case whether the money bo
given or received. The general character of woman also is exceedingly
debased, and their dignity and freedom lessened, by the existence of such
a class among their sex. The coarse and irreverent.way, in which men
learn to speak and think of this part of womankind, is inevitably' extended
to all: and has a much more powerful influence than is generally
believed, in their views and treatment of the sex at large. 1 He who has
learned to despise or speak harshly of a prostitute, or’of any other'
human being, has taken the first lesson in general irreverence, 1 and will
not be slow to extend it to others. ■ ■ ■■ ra-i ket .dJ
It may also be observed, that the liberty of women of the richer classes 1
is very much impeded by the existence of the class of prostitutes' they cad-’
not walk about in the street in the evening, without the liability of being 1


taken for oneofthatc!ass;and hence either stayat home, according to the
inveterate sedentary habits of the sex, or require the encumbrance of a
conventional protector. But it is in vain for any of us, to hope for a free
and dignified life for ourselves, or for the social class to which we belong,
as long as any of onr fellow-beings are permitted to remain in such a
state of degradation ; we must assurdly pay the penalty for our irrever-
ence and neglect of them, nor can we rise to a more dignified life our-
selves, till we elevate them along with us.
Of the exceedingly undignified and constrained position of a young un-
married lady with regard to love, I have already spoken. One great evil
is, that she dare not express her feelings, and the want of freedom of
expression is one which is most opposed to human happiness. Shame
and concealment prey upon her in most of her loves, and eat into her
strength like a canker-worm. Sexual shyness moreover has been even
more fostered in girls than in young men, and with the same fatal effects;
weakening or rather making morbid, the natural sexual desires, but at
the same time vitally injuring the integrity of mind and body. Hence
comes hysteria, and its train of miseries, which overthrow the sense of
dignity.
If a young lady, on the other hand, dare to indulge in any forbidden
sexual intimacy, the whole of society is roused against her, and she is in
many respects ruined for life. Hence the greatest fear, difficulties, and
anguish attend any such step, and a series of endless degradations. The
injustice here committed by society, is as flagrant as in the case of the
prostitutes. A young man has very considerable liberty granted him,
and sexual indulgences are considered venial in him, but if a young
woman do the same and be discovered, her character is gone. This in-
justice is a crying shame to our society, and confuses all ideas of
morality. Man sets at naught the golden moral rule, “do to others as
you would have them do to you.” He indulges himself in sexual plea-
sures, but if a woman do the same, he at once joins in the cry against her.
Is this manly, is this just or righteous? No. If man expects woman,
either married or unmarried, to renounce all sexual indulgences except
the one prescribed by the present moral code, let him himself renounce
them ; but for a brother or a husband, who has, as it is called, sown his
wild oats, to expect perfect abstinence in his sister, or perfect constancy
in his wife, is an evident injustice. Unless the female sex be placed
. exactly on a par with the male in sexual freedom and dignity, there
cannot be either justice or happiness. Is man ready to renounce all
sexual intercourse except that of marriage ? then let him ask of woman
to do the same; but if he be resolved to have a freer and more dignified
state of sexual relations than at present exists, he can only do so by
giving to woman exactly an equal share of feedom.
,In married life the wile has far less freedom in love than the husband.
The latter, in the large towns in England, not infrequently keeps a mis-
tress, or goes with other women, and little is said about it: but if the wife
should be inconstant, the greatest scandal is caused. Thus all illicit inter-
course on her side is carried on at the expense of fears and indignities
innumerable. On the continent where wives are very frequently incou


slant to their husbands, many married women may bo said to lead a life
constantly suspected; and the restraint and disgrace of such a position
are easily understood.
In this way we see what very great indignities are suffered by the
different members of our society, from the want of greater liberty in love.
There is perhaps not a man or a woman among us, whose sense of
honour and dignity has not suffered deeply from this cause; not one
whose character is not more or less defaced by it. There is scarcely a
human breast, in which the love experiences are not the ones most
sedulously concealed from view, as being those which could least bear
scrutiny. There is no subject, in which the freedom and dignity of man
and woman are so vitally attainted.
Besides these two supreme tyrannies of food and love, which have their
primary origin in the laws of nature, there is another, of inferior in-
lluence and depending on human institutions, by which the freedom and
dignity of mankind are greatly diminished. This is the tyrannyof religious
belief. There are few countries in the world, in which this is not a most
powerful engine in the degradation of man. We all know to what an extent
the people of less civilized countries, such as Hindostan, China, &c., whose
vast population numbers the half of our race, and in whose welfare and
advancement we should feel a profound interest, are enslaved to idol
worship. But even among ourselves, notwithstanding our comparatively
advanced grade of enlightenment, when we consider the way in which
man's dignity and liberty are interfered with by this cause, we shall find
that we have little reason for self-congratulation. Although insignificant
when compared with the two causes already mentioned, for these are con-
stantly operating, being connected with the most fundamental wants of
our nature ; still the religious tyranny has a very powerful effect in les-
sening the liberty and dignity of each of us.
In the first plaee, there is a large and constantly increasing class in
this country, who have.no belief on the commonly received religious views.
The dignity and liberty of this class are very seriously affected by the re-
strictions placed on the free expression of their opinions, by the intolerance
of their neighbours. Instead of the opinions which they have conscien-
tiously adopted, being received with that reverence, which is due in every
case by one man to his fellow; instead of being met by free discussion
and by an open and respectful dissent, such beliefs are too often treated
with the bitterest animosity or contempt, and those known to entertain
them are regarded in the most irreverent manner. Hence they are
forced in most cases to conceal their opinions, and to adopt manners and
habits quite at variance with those which their conscience approves.
Their life is a constant succession of deceptions and false positions, most
destructive to the sense of freedom and dignity. Instead of openly ex-
pressing their beliefs on the great and elevating subjects of the destiny
and duties of man, they are afraid to disclose them, and must therefore
have a frequent sense of self-reproach and humiliation; save where this
is replaced by the still more unfortunate feeling of secret contempt for
the neighbour, whose intolerance is the cause ot the concealment. There
is scarcely a more fruitful cause ot mutual contempt among us than this:


the Christian' despises the Atheist and the Infidel, and the latter returns
the contempt, with the additional virulence of a forced secrecy. What is
to be said of religious beliefs on either side, that admit of such uncharitable
and irreverent feelings towards one’s fellow beings ?
The man who openly declares his disbelief in Christianity, is subject to
a host of inconveniences and indignities. He is looked upon with horror
dislike, or contempt, by a great mass of his fellows ; and besides the deep,
wound which this gives to one who truly loves his kind, it is constantly
humiliating to his sense of honour and dignity. He is put in the cate-
gory of the worst malefactors, his actions misconstrued, and his noblest
aspirations for the service of mankind treated with suspicion and igno-
miny. The free expression of the opinions, which he believes so essential
to human happiness and virtue, is very much restricted. His nearest
friends and relations look coldly on him, and lose no opportunity of de-
grading his cherished beliefs. Truly the man who resolves nobly to express
his independent religious convictions, has much to encounter; and the
service of truth is still a martyrdom.
But while those who dissent from the usual form of religious belief
have so undignified and fettered a position, those who adopt it have one
quite as much so. All the current religions, which assert the dominion
of the supernatural over man and nature, strike at the very foundation
of human dignity and liberty. They proclaim that man is under the
irresponsible rule of a sovereign master, over whom he has no power what-
soever ; whom he cannot comprehend, to whose will his own must be sub-
servient, whom he must endeavour to propitiate by humbling himself in
the dust before him, whose words and injunctions he must not even discuss
the justice of; in short to whose service he must consecrate his life,
under penalty of the most unheard-of vengeance. If this be so, the
dignity and liberty of man are but names, and have no existence. The
idea of an irresponsible sovereign is one so totally subversive of all liberty
and moral dignity, that, where it exists, there can be no true conception
of these virtues. An exact equality of mutual responsibility between all
thinking beings, is the bulwark, the grand aim of freedom and virtue; and
wherever the idea of unequal responsibility intrudes, it is fatal to both.
To be in the power of any one, over whom you have not an equal power,
is prostrating to the self-reverence. What are we, where is the dignity
of our lives, if we are subject constantly to the fiat of another, who can
do with us whatever he will, while he has to give us no account of his
actions 1
But in truth the idea of irrtsponsiblity is radically false, and one of the
monstrous aud impossible conceptions, of which the whole idea of the
supernatural is composed. It is utterly impossible for any being to be
irresponsible; all are indissolubly linked together, and all must render
an account for every action. Man need not suppose from his exalted
position, that the inferior animals and the rest of Nature are in his
power ; we are just as much in their’s, and for every injustice or error
we commit in our relations to them, we will surely have to pay the exact
Jiehalty, the happiness of all being mutually interdependent. If they sufl'er,
surely we shall suffer too, for no one being or class of beings can remain


happy,-if others suffer. It is a philosophical error, as well as a great
moral oversight, to believe in irresponsibility. To imagine a being whose
happiness is not inseparably bound upwith that of all others, or a scheme
of salvation, which permanently excludes any living beings, is an im-
mense error, and leads to endless immoralities. The only true scheme
of salvation, the only one which could satisfy the ideal of moral perfec-
tion, is that which includes every living being; and which has for its
first principle, that the permanent happiness of one is absolutely un-
attainable without that of all. It is owing to the neglect of this great
principle, that so many attempts have been made to secure happiness for
a limited class; that despots have sought happiness at the expense of.tbeir
slaves: that the rich have thought to be happy without the poor; that
men have dreamed of attaining to paradise, while their fellows were
doomed to eternal perdition; that supernatural existences have been
imagined, some of them infinitely happy, and others infinitely miserable:
but all such endeavours, all such conceptions, are alike futile and impos-
sible. The moral sense revolts from them, and our calm judgment tells
us their irrationality.
In reverencing God, man has forgotten to reverence Man. There is
perhaps nothing which has so frequently caused one man to despise or to
ill-use another as religiouszeal; as the preference, namely, of God to Man.
Since the days of Tamerlane, of Mahomet, ofthe Inquisition, down to our
own time, what hecatombs of victims have been sacrificed to this I
Reverence to God was thought by all these men to be the grand essential
of virtue ; reverence to man formed no part of their creed. These mon-
strous ideas are it is true fading away before our enlightenment, but
they still form the spirit of our religious beliefs. The chief end of Man it
is said, is to glorify God. It is from this cause that the various reli-
gious sects, while bending down in humiliation before deity, regard each
other often with the greatest irreverence ; that they look down on their
fellow-man with contempt and hatred for daring to disbelieve in the ob-
ject of their reverence; in short that they prefer God to Man. They dare
not think of God but with awe and adoration, they prostrate themselves
before him; but on turning to their fellow-beings, they fill their hearts
with scorn and irreverence. They turn with abhorrence from those who
deny their religious beliefs, and with contemptuous loathing from the pros-
titute ; and upon the most trifling provocation are ready to take , irre-
verent, degrading, and angry views of their fellow-mortals. John Knox,
whose religious character is much admired by many among us, was at
one time very desirous, indeed I believe petitioned the ruling powers, that
all the Roman Catholics in Scotland might be put to death. In what
respect do the religious feelings of such a man radically differ from those
of a Mahomet or a Tamerlane? '
But this is a certain truth, that any human being, any one : of us, no
matter how fallen or degraded, is an infinitely more glorious and adorable
being, than any God that ever was or will be conceived., Man js the true
object of man’s reverence and love, and it is to him that our.service.and
homage are due, however unhappy, however - degraded-: he .mayday®


become. Man, the consummation of Nature, is infinitely above any super- :
natural conception.
What is the meaning of reverence ? why is it a virtue and a duty ?
Because by it we can elevate and support; because by it we can benefit'
the object of our reverence. To bestow reverence on any being, who
cannot be benefited thereby, is merely to waste it; and even on the sup-
■ position that there Is a supernatural being, we could have no possible
duty to reverence him, as we could do him no good thereby. But the
idea of a deity is one which is passing from the world, and is so
totally at variance with what we now know of life and nature, that it
cannot long continue in any form. But man exists; man, our own real',
natural brother, bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh; man, bent down
so often with suffering, quivering with anguish, and steeped in degrada-
tion, on whom onr reverence and our love are never spent in vain. Oh !
let not the heart which truly loves its fellows, ever be beguiled from their
real weal and woe, by the imposing pomp of a visionary worship. ,
If we look back on the history of the world, we will find the vast differ-
ence in the result of lives spent in the service of God, and of those spent
in the service of Man. All acknowledge the comparative uselessness of
the lives of monks, nuns, and others, who have devoted themselves to
the service of God; and had it not been for the human element in the
Christian religion, which essentially consisted in love and reverence to
Man , it would never have stood a day. Had reverence and humanity to
one’s fellow-beings formed the religious creed of mankind, how infinitely
better would it have been for the world! The sword and the stake, the
anathema and the religious intolerance, would not then have been dis-
guised in the mask of holiness, but would have stood forth in all their
natural hideonsness. We would not now see men trusting to gain eternal
happiness by going to church and adoring Deity, while they hold
irreverent views of many of their fellow-creatures; and while the crim-
inals, the paupers, and the prostitutes, are permitted to wander in shame
and ignominy in the midst of us. Ah! the only true religion is that
which makes us reverence and love all our fellow-creatures; which leads
us to seek for and believe in no happiness for ourselves alone, while our
companions are suffering, but makes us resolve to die with, rather than
desert them; it is not the following of a cold idea, or allowing one’s heart
to be steeled against one's fellows, by a set of icy formulas, which pre-
tend to give us reasons for hardening ourselves against any human
being.
Another great cause which degrades the sense of liberty and dignity in
each individual, is the adoption of one standard of moral excellence for
all men. The character of Christ is taken as the perfection of all virtue,
and men are exhorted to imitate this, no matter what their peculiar
moral constitution maybe. By this every other kind of character is
degraded, and its liberty of self-developement interfered with. All of us,
in comparison with the Christian character, are thrown into the shade,
and urged, instead of freely developing ourselves according to our natural
tendencies, to imitate Christ, and to prefer his character to our own.
But this is an enormous error. The true rule of dignified morality is,


“Be thyself , imitate no one whomsoever; thou cans’tnot possibly be any-
thing so great as thy own true self.” Every individual differs naturally
from all others, and therefore every one has naturally a different standard
of excellence, to which he is fitted to attain. Comparisons between man
and man are always very liable to fallacy; it is with his own nature and'
bis own circumstances that each one should be compared. It is destruc-
tive to morality, to the sense of dignity and content, that all should be
struggling after the same standard. Hence arise jealousy and envy of
our neighbours, who are more fortunately consticuted than ourselves ;
endless mortifications and disappointments by striving for virtues and
powers beyond our reach ; and a discontent with those natural powers
which every man has in his own peculiar degree, and which in every
human being are transcendant beyond all power of conception. Men
strive after a moral shadow, and neglect the infinitely more glorious sub-
stance within themselves. They judge themselves and their neighbours
by the Christian standard, and adapt their scale of reverence according
to this ; and from this reason all those characters whose natural virtues
are of a different, although of an equally high order with the Christian
ones, are degraded, while the latter receive an undue share of reverence.
The physical virtues especially (whose omission is the most radical
defect in the Christian standard) have been degraded in comparison with
the moral ones ; and their consequent neglect has been the source of the
most deplorable evils, which it will need all the efforts of physical religion
for generations to remove.
The fundamental idea too in the doctrine of Redemption, is utterly de-
grading to human dignity. It is indeed acknowledged to be so, and
constantly used as an instrument of abasement, by those who delight to
humble themselves or their neighbours in the dust before the lieity.
This idea is, that the moral nature of man is essentially vicious and per-
verted, that he is born full of Original Sin. There could not be a
doctrine more fatal to human dignity and liberty than this. What are
we, how should we have any self-reverence or self-confidence, if we knew
that we were corrupt at the core, that our moral nature was radically
erroneous, and sought evil rather than good ? But such a conception is
a total error, as entirely unphilosopical, as it is dangerous to moral-
ity. Any one who has studied the nature of life, and of the various organs
and faculties which the human frame possesses, knows that one of the
laws, which must never be lost sight of in inquiries into the vital
phenomena, is this; that every organ or faculty in the body works
invariably, in all cases and at all times, for the good of the whole.
In health and disease this is alike true; every process in health and every
process ia disease is intended by nature for the preservation of the
individual; that is, every act of every organ is essentially good. This
law applies exactly in the same way to all the intellectual and moral
operations; every thought and feeling of the mind must by the neces-
sity of our being, tend to the preservation and not to the destruc-
tion of the organism, and therefore must be in like manner essentially
good. In this manner all those moral affections, which are generally
called the bad passions, and cited as instances of the natural, human


depravity, are found, when carefully studied, to have invariably for
their object the good of the being, so far as their powers go; exactly
as the processes of disease have been all shown to aim at the preservation
of life. This is a great philosophical truth, which has not yet been
sufficiently apprehended, from the want hitherto of any natural mental
science; and indeed it is only lately, that the real nature of the pro-
cesses ef bodily disease has been perceived. The want of perception of
this truth is a fundamental error pervading our moral and religious
philosophy and leads to the most lamentable mistakes as to the nature
and proper treatment of the human mind in health and disease; mis-
takes exactly analogous to those of the ancient physicians, who had no
trust or belief in the workings of nature, but were always trying to
thwart and counteract her mighty plan. It is now acknowledged by the
profoundest physicians, that the object of medicine should be to study care-
fully the efforts of nature, and aid them by every means in our power;
not to go blindly against them, calling them morbid, evil, or perverted, as
the moralists do at present, in the case of mental phenomena. As long
as moralists work as at present, looking down upon the transcendantly
beautiful moral constitution of man, and stigmatising as wholly vile,
those wondrous passions, by which our all-perfect nature shows its in-
tolerance of circumstances, injurious to its happiness or developement, we
can have little hope of a satisfactory advance of moral science; or of the
practical benefits, which it should have, in elevating and giving strength
and self-reverence to mankind.
This may be assumed as an axiom, that the mind of man is as glorious, as
wondrous, and as perfect in all its manifestations, as is his body; that
however little we as yet comprehend either of them, we know enough to
be assured, that in all their actions they are alike replete with that in-
finite perfection, which every part of Nature possesses; and that it is
only by reverently studying them in all their phases of health and disease,
that we can gain a true idea of moral or physical virtue; not by forming
to ourselves, out of our own imagination, any vain and distorted image of
these things. The ways of nature are not as our ways, her real virtues
are not like our shadowy preconceptions; and any one who knows the
infinite depth of her phenomena, must feel, that any theories we can yet
have of virtue or vice must be as far short of her infinity, as the few
shells which Newton gathered on the shore of her ocean. But we may
be assured, that, whatever we do, whatever we become —if we die of
cancer or syphilis, or fall into madness, idiocy, or crime, or any other
abyss of misery in which so many of our race are at all times sunk —the
wondrous natural powers of good continue equally at work within us to.
the last, and wo cannot, if we would, help being full of an ineffable virtue.
To him who despises any human action, the nature of man is a sealed
book ; but to the reverent eye, which strives to recognise the one grand
principle of action in all its varied forms, every human condition teems
with'unspeakable interest.
The mind of man, as his body, is set to virtue likethe needle to the pole,-
and cannot by any possibility swerve from it. In the body, this is now
recognised, and the chief reason that it is not so in the mind is, firstly.


the spell-bound state of morality from the influence of supernatural-
ism; and, secondly, the mode in which moral phenomena are obscured,
by the conflicting duties towards one’s self and others. , All the powers
in one individual tend to self-preservation, and in like manner all in-
dividuals tend towards the general preservation; but these tendencies
often cross each other, while all are constantly hindered and obscured
by external circumstances. However, there is no doubt that the same
Principle of Good, without which indeed life could not exist, prevails in
nil; and that by attentive study we shall be able in flrae to gain a
fuller and fuller knowledge of its workings. The radically unsound
doctrine of Original Sin has had a most pernicious effect on our general
habits of thought and feeling. It has degraded the general estimate of
human nature, and thus acted powerfully to make men despise their
fellow-beings. We all judge far too harshly of each other on all sub-
jects ; and this is most inimical to human dignity and self-reliance.
These harsh judgments and degrading criticisms are especially remark-
able, wherever, as in Scotland, the doctrine of Original Sin is most
prominently brought forward. Such views, together with the allied
sexual puritanism, are the causes of the marked national shyness, and
fear of the opinions of others, among the Scotch, which are so blighting
to the happiness, especially of young people. We cannot wonder that
where Nature, the all-perfect, is treated with so little reverence in the
person of Man, her living representative, ‘the greatest evils should
result.
Another class of the community, in whom the liberty and dignityof
man receive a vital wound, are the criminals. The position of these
unfortunates is full of shame and humiliation. They are viewed with
aversion and contempt, if not with horror, by their fellow-men; their
liberty is taken from them, and they are forced in many cases to per-
form the most degrading labour, and to observe the most galling rules
of prison discipline. When at liberty, they lead a life of constant fear
and degradation, skulking from the presence of their fellows, hunted
about by the police, the object of general suspicion and dislike. There
cannot be a life more fatal to all sense of dignity and freedom, and
therefore more repugnant to human nature. Few, if any, would adopt
such a life, unless forced into it by the most adverse circumstances.
But in this case, as in that of prostitution, and all other instances of
the degradation of a class, the whole of society must share in it. It
has been truly said, that the liberty of the thief is the bondage of the
honest man; and the more crime there exists in society the more is
the liberty and dignity of each individual curtailed. All of us have to
live a life more or less of fear and watchfulness, as long as crime
exists among us; and every crime which is committed, causes
suffering in the honest part of the community. Moreover where
crime is rife, as it is in all our large towns, every one is more or
less the object of suspicion to his neighbours, and has himself
to entertain the most harassing and degrading suspicions of others.
Besides this, the ignominious and too often barbarous punishments,
and the awful state of degradation of the unhappy criminals, throw a
2s


shade over the whole of society. No individual can suffer or be degra-
ded, without all the rest sharing, from that universal bond of sympathy
■and mutual interest, which links us all together.
.! The ignoble principle of revenge too, which so long formed the
spirit of our criminal code, and which is only now beginning to yield
to the true principle of punishment—that all punishment should have
for its aim the reformation of the offender—has greatly degraded man-
kind. i do not know a more miserable book than the Newgate
Calendar. The harsh and pitiless spirit that it shows towards the
criminals; the way in which it paints men as monsters of cruelly or
infamy, without any endeavour to trace the natural causes, which
brought their divine nature to this; and the want of any earnest de-
sire tor their reformation, with which the details of their barbarous
punishments are recounted; all form a volume which presses on the
heart of the reader like a nightmare. Who has read this work, and
not felt suffocated with horror and degradation! feelings which are
excited more powerfully by the want of a generous moral aim in this
dry catalogue of horrors, than by the crimes themselves. I remember
I could scarcely sleep while reading this book as a boy; and thus it
will ever be, while man consents to view any of his fellow-beings with
isuch unmingled hatred and contempt. These feelings are as ill-judged
as they are oppressive. What good does it do to hate and abuse a
criminal ? to hang him up like a dog, to put him on the treadmill, and
to treat him with scorn and ignominy ? Does it make crime loss rife
on the one hand, or do such feelings towards a fellow-creature give to
ourselves either satisfaction or moral elevation?
■ Their effect is quite the contrary. Nothing has so hardening an in-
fluence on criminals as degrading punishments ; they confirm them in
their evil habits, and give them in addition the burning desire of
revenge. The punishment of death, which still continues amongst us,
gives the lie direct to any moral principle of punishment, and by the
blood-thirsty and irreverential feelings it excites, lends an immense
impulse to deeds of violence. That feeling of horror and estrangement
too, felt towards criminals, is most pernicious to the best interests of
all. It debases the criminal, and prevents him from making any
efforts to reform himself; and it is no less hurtful to the mau who en-
tertains it, for there is nothing more prejudicial than to allow oneself
to feel an alienation from any human being in any circumstances.
Crime, lunacy, and prostitution are perhaps the three subjects, froin
which the human heart has allowed itself most to be alienated; and, in
all, this alienation has had the most disastrous effects. It is just as
if a physician were to fly in horror from disease, instead of devoting
his efforts to relieve and to prevent it. We all know how long the
unfortunate lunatics were treated by the scourge and fetters; and
even yet the feeling of fear and estrangement, which exists between
the sane and the insane, has most deplorable results; driving many
to .madness from pure fascination, and making it much more difficult
for .the mentally diseased to regain their health,
s i In.fact, there is nothing strange or extraordinary in either crime or


lunacy.' Both of them arise from fixed and definite causes, which arc
just as patent to our investigation as the laws of physics;' except in as
much as the human mind, from its great complexity, is more difficult
to comprehend. Nay more, crime, as well ns prostitution and almost
all the rest of the greatest evils in our society, is primarily caused hy
the law of population, which presses our race into the abyss of poverty
and ignorance; andthcreforeit is caused mainly, like these other evils,
by the undue procreation of married people, who, least of all, .have a
right to speak harshly of the sins ot any of their fellow-creatures.
Besides, it is a certain truth, that anyone of us would become criminal
or insane, if we were pat in circumstances favourable for it; and this
should give ua a binder and more reverential feeling towards those, who
are so unhappy as to have fallen victims to such circumstances. I
know the repugnance felt by many to allow of the influence of circum-
stances in moulding human character, and also how much opposed
such a doctrine is to the current religious ideas of the day ; which, by
the dogma of. infinite responsibility, virtually assert the unlimited
freewill of man, however this assertion may be disguised by the hope-
less paradox of predestination. Still, the more narrowly we examine
the matter, the more dq we perceive, that it is always by evil tx/ernal
ciicumtances, and by these alone, that the essentially good powers of
mind and body are prevented from developing themselves in a healthy
and virtuous manner; and without going further into the strange con-
nection of free-will and necessity, we have hero at once a reason for
never losing our reverence for our fellow-creatures however fallen, and
a key to their present condition and ultimate regeneration. Nothing
ever proved so clearly the radical error of the current doctrines of
human freewill and the power of man over circumstances, as the dis-
covery of the law of population; which shows that the great evils
among us are absolutely inevitable, while the antagonism of the natu-
ral laws continues, and also that the crimes and miseries of one part
of mankind have been forced, upon them, by the ignorance and impru-
dence of others. The man who entertains the fundamentally false
belief, that crime and other evils arise from an original sin in our con-
stitution, must have a hopeless, and therefore a most demoralising
view of society; but he who knows that every crime must arise ■ from
circumstances external and unnatural to the individual, is full of hope,
and fertile in expedients for its prevention and cure. ■ ,
Thus how delightful is it to turn from a work like the Newgate
Calendar, to one written in the reverential and humane spirit of Mr.
Hill’s work on Crime. Hero, instead of thebopolessfeelingsof dogged
aversion and implacable vengeance, which lead to nothing but accu-
mulated evil on all sides, we have the careful and philosophical ana-
lysis of crime by one, who has not turned away his heart from it;: who
has studied all its phases, and traced its various causes; and who
therefore is full of sympathy for the criminal, and of hope for the cute
and prevention of crime. Who would not sympathise with the crimi-
nal, who has traced his life and all its hard and degrading: circum-
stances, with which those of us who-are born among the richer'Classes


taye little to do? Nursed in poverty, with its endless indignities and
temptations; brought up perhaps by criminal parents, who enforce
crime as a duty on their child; beaten and abused, what wonder if the
unfortunate child of man becomes a wanderer and an outcast, his hand
against every man, for everyone’s hand is against him ? Even amid
all this, it is bard to extirpate the inherent human nobility; and in
the dreary walls of a prison, beautiful are the gleams of gratitude and
attachment, which kindness to these unfortunates so often awakens.
“The governor of the prison,” says Mr. Hill, “is often the first
friend that the prisoners have known in life; the first who has treated
them with kindness, given them good advice, and shown an interest in
their welfare; and the affection and gratitude, which a benevolent
governor excites among them, arc most striking." “ The first essen-
tial," he says, moreover, “in a good governor, and in good subordinate
officers, is that they take a warm interest in the prisoners and their
amendment, and treat them with kindness; this is more important
than even the best devised prison discipline, and without it nothing
can be done.” These truths have a more general application, for in
fact all members of society are the keepers of the criminals; and un-
less we bear towards them a spirit of brotherly love and reverence, and
show a heartfelt desire for their reformation, little can be done with
crime. But on the other hand, by carefully tracing all its causes, and
making use of every means for its prevention and the reformation of
• offenders, in the ways which Mr. Hill has so admirably pointed
out, we have, as he says, a right to expect, that “ in time, crime will
become so very rare, as not materially to affect the happiness of
society.” ,
I need not here dilate on the indignities and restrictions which man
suffers under a system of political oppression. These are too well
known by all; and in this country, human liberty and dignity are
fortunately not so much compromised by this cause. Still, even
among us, there is by no means a satisfactory political freedom, and
the number of political malcontents is very large. In the first place
we have the glaring indignity of a restricted suffrage. The great mass
Of our people are not even allowed a voice in political matters, and
where this is the case, one of the first essentials of political freedom
and dignity is wanting. It is impossible to satisfy the sense of justice
without universal suffrage. Every adult member of the community,'
who has not broken the laws, should have a voice in framing them.
This is the broad natural axiom of political justice, and until this be
Obtained the sense of political wrong must exist. It is a matter of
humiliation for a society, if a large portion of its members be in so
degraded and uneducated a state, that they are deemed unworthy of
having a voice in the affairs which interest all. The consciousness of
the possession of such a voice, like that of property, is a great instru-
ment of moral elevation, and tends to give a man a dignified position
in his own and his neighbour’s eyes; while the want of such advanta-
ges allows him to fall into the lowest depths of degradation. Had
there been universal suffrage iu this country and in Ireland, the poor


could scarcely have fallen into such an abject state of misery and cring-
ing abasement, as they have done;' especially in the latter country,
where human dignity is reduced to its lowest stage. The rich would then
have found, that they were dependent in some measure bn the voice of
the poor, and would have been forced to pay them more respect, and not
look down on them as utterly beneath their notice, as has so often been
done. All such inequalities loosen the bond, which should unite the
different classes, and operate to the ultimate ruin of both ; for the degra-
dation of the poor must sooner or later drag down the rich. .
In like manner the existence of an aristocracy tends very muc
to lessen the equal and mutual reverence, which each member of the
community should possess. The privileged few who are bora to a
title, are constantly prone to regard the rest of society as beneath them,
and to lose sight of the equal dignity which invests all men, as men.
Among the other classes, the aristocracy are either fawned upon and
toadied, in a manner most repugnant to the sense of dignity; or are
envied and hated for the possession of such extraordinary privileges. If
we look moreover to the foundations, on which a permanent aristocracy
is based, we shall see that they consist for the most part in rights
and privileges most destructive to the interests of society. Thus our
aristocracy derive their main support from the laws of primogeniture
'■ and entail ; without which it would probably be impossible for them to
retain their power, or continue for any length of time in their present
elevated position. If it were not for these laws, their fortunes would
very soon be broken down, and their immense power at the same time
- destroyed: so that it may be said, that a hereditary nobility necessitates
for its continued existence in a free country, the laws of primogeniture
and entail. But these laws are most destructive to the interests of society,
and are opposed to all natural feelings of justice. The law of entail has,
together with the Cottier system of land tenure, been one of the chief
causes of the ruin of Ireland; keeping the land constantly in a burdened
state, and preventing its transfer from the social drones, who would do'
nothing for it, to the industrious agriculturists, who could have done so
much. ■;
All titles tend to lead astray both their possessors, and the rest of
society; to make men bow down before the shadow and neglect the
substance; to make us forget, that it is man, and the real human
virtnes, that should claim our reverence, and not high-sounding names
or accidental distinctions. He who has a greater reverence for a
Queen on the throne, than for the forlorn and ragged sempstress
in a garret, has no true conception of natural human dignity. Rever-
ence ior reverence should be the principle of each of us: treat me with
respect, and I will so treat you, but do not expect that you, my
friend, are to have all the respect; and I all the contempt. Each man .has
ah exactly equal natural dignity and title to our reverence.,, Were t e
poorer classes independent of the rich ; were each man able to gain for
himself his livelihood, without thinking of the favour or the .custom.‘of
this gentleman or that lord, we should not see that one-sided subservience
and obsequiousness, that flunkeyism, as it has been termed,., so degrading


to all human dignity. The working classes at present are bitterly exas-
perated at tiiis servile position. In Loudon very many among them
regard the aristocracy and' the. richer classes with concealed hatred and
embitterment, but, knowing that they are in their power, they dare not
disclose those feelings. ' How long is this miserable state of things to.
last? It must last till the possession of general independence gives all
classes the power of asserting their equal title to the reverence of their
fellow-creatures. Till then, we shall not see these pernicious class-bar-
riers removed; and the class prejudices put an end to, which are so
dangerous to the happiness of all, and to the security of society. Till we
have an equal mutual reverence among all classes, it is in vain to hope
that the offended sense of justice and dignity will be satisfied. Our
nature is not made to exist in such circumstances without disordered and
diseased action.
I have thus given a short sketch of the four main influences which
impair the dignity, the liberty, and the independence of mankind: and
winch therefore we should seek to remove by steady and persevering efforts
in order to obtain these blessings. These four great tyrannies operate in
different degrees in different countries. Thus, among ourselves, there is
much less'political tyranny than upon the Continent; but on the other
hand the tyranny of food, love, and religion is in many respects much
greater than in many parts of Europe. In neither France nor Germany
do we see the abject and squalid poverty, that exists among us, nor are
the working classes so enslaved to their toil. In none is the difficulty of
gaining a livelihood so great, and the hot-press of competition so
exhausting. In neither of these countries again, is the tyranny of love
or religion nearly so oppressive as with us; and from these causes there
is perhaps a larger sura of happiness and real freedom in them than in
England, notwithstanding their unfortunate political subjection. It is a
great mistake to suppose, that the latter comprises the whole question of
liberty. As has been shown, there are many other matters, which affect
just as vitally the freedom of each individual: and from which all the
inherent nobility and independence of the British character have not been
able to defend us. Foreigners, who know nothing of England but by
hearsay, come to ns with the most glowing ideal of British liberty, but
by living among us they generally arrive at a totally different conclu-
sion ; and exclaim against the want of social and religious freedom, the
stiffness and exclusiveness of out richer classes, and the fearful degra-
dation of our poor.
It matters little in reality whether a man be enslaved by a tyran-
nical government, or by the necessities of his life. In fact the latter, as
for instance the necessity of gaining a livelihood, and of procuring the
sexual necessaries of health and happiness, are infinitely more important
’ causes of bondage and degradation, than perhaps any possible form of
government; much more than the government of this country, which in
many retpects is so admirable. The chief difference is, that men are more
embittered by the evils which they obviously suffer at the hands of other
tnenj jthatt by those which appear to come from necessity. But this
difference' is more apparent than real, tor, as has been shown in a former


essay, the difficulties of obtaining food and love, which, arc by far the,
most important evils in society, arise from the monopoly of loro and
an undue procreation by a limited number, who thus inevitably subject
their fellow-beings to these fearful wants; and are really, although uh-.
consciously, the cause of their sufferings, as truly as the political
oppressor. It is not necessity, but the imprudence of married people,
which forces the rest of mankind to a life of toil and sexual privation.
It has been beautifully said, “ Love thy neighbour as thyself,” but the
precept, “Reverence thy neighbour as thyself ,” is no less true, and is even
more needed among us. We all reverence ourselves; a man never en-
tirely loses his self-reverence. Upon his own actions he uniformly puts
the best construction; ami he does this from (he beautiful natural
instinct, which teaches him that he is innately noble and good. But in
our j udgment of our neighbours we act very differently; we are ready on
the most trivial pretexts to adopt coatemptuous views of them, to mis-,
construe their actions, to regard them with aversion or disgust. If we
attended to this great principle of morality, “ Reverence thy neighbour
as thyself,” should we judge them so very differently from ourselves ? ,
Reverence is even more needed among us than love, for it has been fat.
more neglected. The doctrines of universal love have been preached for
ages by the Christian moralists, while those of reverence for man have
been comparatively disregarded. Reverence implies belief that a man is
essentially good; and therefore is not compatible with the doctrines of
original sin or eternal punishment. Without reverence, love can do little,
and indeed never can continue long. The love ming'ed with pity, with
which it is the delight of the Christian moralist to regard mankind, the
fallen race as he terms us, can do at present but very little for man, for
it debases while it soothes. Pity is no natural sphere for so majestic a
being as man, and his powerful nature instinctively recoils from it. It
is not pity, however loving, that our paupers, our criminals, and, more
than all our prostitutes, require; it is reverence, the reverence that elevates
and infuses self-respect into the hearts of those neglected unfortunates,
which alone can become the basis of a real reformation.
And reverence is the only true feeling, with which one can regard so
wondrous a being as man, whatever state of accidental degradation he
may have fallen into. Can we understand a man, that we despise him ?
In all cases the invariable principle of good still rules his life; and this
all-perfect natural force demands our profoundest admiration. It is to
these unfortunates too, that they earning heart of the philanthropist in-
stinctively turns to pay its homage. Where should we rather bestow our
reverence, than there where it is most needed ? While others bow before
the shrine of riches, rank, and virtue, Oh, let the heart which truly loves
mankind, seek out the despised inmates of the workhouse, the gaol, and
the brothel, where his brotherly love and reverence can do so much more
for the elevation of his fellow-creatures! Let him prostrate ; himself
before the eclipsed majesty of these ill-fated sous and daughters of Imau ;
and register an inward vow, never to join in the general contempt, .npr
to desert them, till they hare been raised from their, present] abject Cun


ilitioo, and till there is no member of human society in the awful position
of an outcast from its bosom.
No man should ever allow himself to despise another. It is as fbolisb
as unfeeling; for it assumes that we may have an elevation over a fellow-
creature, which no man can possess. There is no part of nature, which is
so unutterably above our comprehension as a human being; and there-
fore nothing, where all is perfection, which we can so little pretend to
look down upon. He who despises another, degrades himself thereby,
for the irreverence inevitably recoils on our common humanity. It
is our duty to reverence all, for by reverencing we elevate and benefit
them; and it is our duty to do so, as far as lies in our power. A mutual
reverence is the basis of politeness, dignity, and good-will throughout
society, and is the bond of the social virtues. The reverence moreover
should be paid to man as man, and not veer like the wind from every
slight difference of fortune, talent, virtue, rank, or other accidental
advantage. At present every little difference in these circumstances; in
party feeling, in religious belief, in moral conduct, in tastes or pleasures,
in class, in manners or education; is held sufficient to justify the pro-
foundest contempt between man and man. The spiritualist looks down
on the sensualist, and the latter returns the compliment; the noble
despises the plebeian, and the intelligent radical despises the brainless
patrician; the clever man sneers at the stupid one, and the saint draws
back from the sinner; beauty looks down upon ugliness, which fortifies
itself in a contempt for a fair exterior with a shallow mind. In this
way there is scarcely one among us, who has not his pet objects of con-
tempt among his fellow-men, thinking to elevate himself at the expense
of his neighbour’s degradation; and who is not himself the object of the
contempt of some other. Alas ! is human life made to bo taken up by
such unworthy feelings as these? Life is difficult enough for the most of
us in any case, with all the evils, social, moral, and physical, which each
has to contend with; and to many it becomes hopeless indeed, when we
have also to struggle with the contempt and unkindness of our fellows.
Besides, all such errors of feeling and judgment invariably recoil on our
own head. No man is happy, as long as he consents to despise any human
being. Nature will not permit such a monstrous injustice; and torments,
by her own inimitable retributive evils, all who are guilty of such errors.
For every irreverence shewn to any one of her children, the rest have
invariably to pay the exact penalty ; and the Nemesis, which slumbers
not nor sleeps, pursues our race, till every indignity, every suffering in-
flicted on any individual, has been exactly avenged.
A reverence which depends on accidents, is unworthy of our attention.
Which of us can tell to what lot in life he might have been born, or re-
duced by circumstances? Whether he should inherit a noble fortune,
power, talents, virtues; or be born in a garret, amid rags and wretched-
ness, constitutionally prone to disease and crime, from being ill-suited to
contend with surrounding circumstances'? /As long as reverence is to be
given merely to fortune's favourites, to the rich, the powerful, the vir-
tuous, the intellectual, what is it worth ? who can tell that he will


possess it? Alas! those who are born without these advantages, need
our reverence, love, and assistance, most of all; so that we may in part
mate up to them for the niggardliness of fortune. And, after all, to
him who loots beneath the surface, the merit of all men is, in one
respect, equal; for all strive towards good in a measure exactly proper*
tional to their natural powers, and to the suitability of their external
circumstances. While this accidental reverence is the rule of our actions,
no man is safe, no man can depend upon his fellows ; do what wo may,
we are constantly exposed during life to the contempt of others, which
must always degrade us. As the true moral principle is not, “ love this
man and hate that one,” so it is not, “ reverence this one, and dispise
the other,” “but have an equal reverence for all,” no matter what
they are. While the philosophic mind should ever keep in view this
great principle, so should we strive in every way to make it generally
felt throughout society, by removing as far as possible those obstacles,
which oppose the dignity, the freedom, and the independence of mankind;
for it is upon the universal possession of these great advantages alone,'
that a state of satisfactory mutual reverence can be based. By the want
of them, by having to contend with a lot of dependence, slavery,
and indignity, however imposed, a man’s self-reverence is impaired,
together with his reverence for others. Until the destructive action of the
principle of population be obviated by the general adoption of preventive
intercourse, it is a mere dream to talk of human liberty. It is not till
every adult member of society shall possess an independent life: till
every man and woman has a duo share of sexual love; till all are able to
assert openly their conscientious beliefs, without incurring the contempt
or hatred of their neighbours; till secrecy and duplicity have become
rare, nnd men are able to speak freely their inner thoughts, and make
their outer life harmonise with the inner; it is not till then, that we shall
see a true measure of dignity, liberty, and independence existing among
us, and that Britain will truly deserve the name of a jrtt country.




NATURAL RELIGION.
In the present century there is being gradually accomplished the
greatest revolution, ■which has ever taken place, or which perhaps ever
will take place, in human Belief, This great change is, the progress
from a Supernatural to a Natural Religion. From the beginning of
human existence on this earth up to the present time, the idea of the
supernatural has accompanied man in all countries and in all circum-
stances. Ue has chosen as the chief object of his reverence and worship,
powers and virtues external to nature, and, as be imagined, superior. He
has formed to himslf conceptions of Beings, to whom those agencies
which he saw at work in himself and in the world around him, were sub-
servient ; from whom they took their origin and the laws of their action,
and from whom they were liable to constant interference.
This belief in the supernatural has existed in many different phases in
different nations, and in the course of time, has been gradually changed
from its original gross form to the more refined and exalted one, in which
it at present exists among ourselves. At first man, being unable to
account for any of the phenomena he saw around him, attributed every-
thing to a supernatural cause. Thus he made a God the immediate
cause of the storm and the calm, of the growth of the plant and animal,
of human happiness and misery, and the current of human events. In
short, whether he imagined a single supernatural being, or a plurality of
them, he supposed this being to be constantly interfering with the course
of things, aud the mightiest and most active power in the universe.
But by little and little through the ages, science has shown us that all
these phenomena, which we see around us, take place from natural causes;
and that if we search narrowly there is never any other power than
nature at work in all actions, no matter how mysterious they seem to us.
In this way the doctrine of immediate supernatural interference has
gradually yielded to the comparatively truer one of secondary causes, in
which many enlightened minds now believe. In this form of belief, the
idea of a supernatural being is still retained ; but instead of making him
the active agent in all the phenomena of nature, he is believed to have
only at first farmed nature, and imposed upon her laws, according to
which she could of herself do everything afterwards. This is very gene


rally the belief of men, who, while, from their knowledge of physical
'Science, they see that the natural laws are never departed from, that no
event ever occurs except according to such laws, and that there is never
the slightest sign of any interference with the course of nature, wish to
reconcile this absence of all appearance of the supernatural, with the
ordinary mode of religious belief.
But the ordinary form of belief admits very much more of supernatu-
ral agency than this. It asserts not only that all the universe, animate
and inanimate, has been originally created by a supernatural being, but
that this being constantly interferes in the affairs of man even in the
present day. Thus it is currently believed by the Christians, that God
gives to us health or disease, that he is the source of our happiness ami
misery. It is believed that his ’spirit operates upon our minds, so as
either to convert us to what is termed a holy state of mind, or to harden
ns to unbelief. If we analyse carefully the Christian doctrines, we shall
find that gradually, step by step, the idea of divine interference in the
course of nature has been forced to yield to that of natural causation,
throughout almost the whole domain of Physics. In Geology, Astronomy,
Chemistry, Natural Philosophy; and in the natural sciences, Botany,
Zoology, &c, no educated man ever thinks of introducing the idea of
eupematurul interference to account for any of the phenomena witnessed.
Even to minds unversed in science, the idea that a chemical change, thp
diurnal revolution of the earth, or the rising of the sap in a tree, is pro-
duced immediately by supernatural interference, would scarcely for a
moment occur. It has not been without a bard struggle, that super-
naturalism has yielded its cherished empire over these sciences : inch by
inch the ground was disputed, and’ many an astronomer or geologist
has been laid under the ban of the supernaturalists, for what they con-
ceived to be his impious theory of natural causation, before the truth was
clearly established.
;It is chiefly in the world of mind, that the immediate interference of
deity is still insisted on. Men at present scarcely believe, that God acts
on the material world to produce changes; that he turns aside the
natural course of a stream for instance, or alters the natural operation of
chemical affinities, for these things are too palpably untrue, and we see
that this is never done; but they believe that he produces changes in the
mind, that his spirit works upon mind, and produces joy or sorrow, belief
or unbelief.
It cannot be said however, that the belief that even material phenomena
are sometimes owing to immediate supernatural interference, is altogether
extinct. It has been forced to yield in all the natural phenomena, which
are now best understood, and whose invariable laws and definite chain of
causation have been tolerably made out. But in those provinces of
science where the chain of causation is not so well understood, the belief
that supernatural agency sometimes operates, still exists. For instance,
many people believe that the weather and the seasons are liable to super-
natural interference. A mysterious occurrence also, such as the potato
failure, 1 whose natural cause has not been discovered, is ascribed td
Supernatural agency. The diseases to which out bodies are liable, espe


eially such as are of a particularly terrible and mysterious nature, as the
Cholera, are very frequently set down as due to supernatural interference.
Accordingly prayers are offered to the Deity to sen d rainy or dry weather,
to avert the potato disease, and to restore a sick man to health. Those
who put up such prayers, do not consider, that it would be exactly as
reasonable to implore Deity to build a city, or to solve for them a mathe-
matical problem. Such prayers are founded on the radically false sup-
position, that any supernatural interference ever takes place in the
course of Nature; that her laws are being constantly broken, and then
patched-up again, by a supernatural hand. The laws that influence the
weather and the seasons, that rule over the health of the potato and of
the human body, are equally invariable and equally incapable of being
interfered with, as those of mathematics, or of house-building. If we
supplicate Deity to alter the course of nature in one thing, why should
we not in another? Every man would feel the utter fruitlessness of
asking for Divine interference to build a house for him, and would deem
such a petition childish and irrational; but the exactly equal fruitlessness
of a prayer for such interference in the natural operations of the frame
and turns of the seasons, is not considered.
But the laws of mind are not oue whit less definite and invariable than
those of matter. The more attentively we examine mental phenomena
in ourselves and others, the more clearly do we perceive, that they, just
as material phenomena, are absolutely and entirely dependent on natural
causation, invariably moving according to natural laws, and never in
any case subject to the shadow of supernatural interference. Mental and
moral science have been completely blighted by the neglect of this great
truth; and hence, while the physical sciences have of late made such
immense progress, the mental ones have remained spell-bound. Phy-
siology, the science of the actions of the living body, was long retarded in
a similar way by the dogmatic belief in a Vital Essence; some vague
supernatural force, which was supposed to rule over the functions of the
body, and to be totally beyond our comprehension. Hence every vital
action was ascribed to this vital essence, and it was thought.impious to
search farther for its cause. But we now know that all the vital actions
take place according to definite laws, which are just as truly natural as
the physical and just as comprehensible by ns, although they are more
complicated. In the same way moral and intellectual science are
still retarded by the belief, that mind is an essence of a peculiar incom-
prehensible nature, subject to constant supernatural interference; and
that it is not governed by laws just as fixed and definite, and just as truly
fitted for our investigation and comprehension, as those of the rest of the
Universe. But it is a certain truth, that the workings of the mind are just
as absolutely removed from all supernatural, from all spiritual inter-
ference, as those of matter. Its laws are never broken. There is not a
thought, not an emotion within us, that does not depend entirely on
natural causes, and may not be traced entirely to them. The laws of
the emotions and of the thoughts, the conditions on which happiness or
Sorrow, virtue or vice, depend, are as certain and invariable as those of
Chemistry; and arc just as capable of being discovered and comprehended


by cs, although’from the great complexity of mental phenomena, they'
are more difficult to determine. Still we bare this advantage in inveati*
gating the laws of the mind, that they operate within ourselves, and thus,
are brought more thoroughly within the sphere of our consciousness. . ’
■ The belief in the subjection of the mind to supernatural interference,
and the connection of the soul with supernatural essences, has com-
pletely paralysed all true moral science, and has closed the door upon
that path of investigation of mental processes, which could alone lead to
any valuable result. Hence we have at present no natural moral science.
The laws of the health of mind, on which its happiness and its virtue
depend, exactly as those of the body upon its laws, have not bedn made
out, or arranged in any scientific form. The effect of this is exactly as if
the laws of the body had not been investigated. Wherever the laws of
health, whether of body or mind, are not understood, or are disobeyed,
misery is certain to result; and every error we make in endeavouring to
comprehend the natural moral laws, which preside over our virtue and
happiness, has to be atoned for by our sorrow and degradation.
The science o f mental health may be said to be still quite rudimentary.
Its very first fundamental axioms are not admitted, but all is involved
in a paradoxical, mystic, supernatural obscurity. Thus, as has been
shown in a former essay, the two great natural guides to the under*
standing of mental health and disease are disregarded, namely, Joy and
Sorrow, which correspond to tie feelings of Pain and Pleasure in the
body: and hence there is the greatest confusion and misconception, as to
what constitutes a really healthy or virtuous state of mind. Our com-
mon standards of moral excellence are not healthy, and therefore cannot
be virtuous, or suitable objects for our aims. Many of the characters
most admired by the Christian moralist are in reality full of moral dis-
ease. From the want of a true natural standard by which to judge of
mental health and disease, we fall into constant errors in the conduct of
our own mind, and in the judgment we pass on others. We indulge
excessively in modes of feeling and thought, which we imagine to be good
but which in reality are very pernicious; and hence we become misera-
ble, perhaps go mad,quite unconscious that the reason of our unhappiness
lies in our infringement of the laws of mental health. Little as the laws
of physical health arc generally understood, those of mental health are
almost less so.
It is a certain truth, that all unhappiness arising from mental canscs,
invariably results from our disobedience to the laws of moral health; that
all insanity results in like manner from a greater degree of such
disobedience; and that the opposite states of joy, health, and strength of
mind can only arise from our obedience to these laws. All virtue arises
from' our observance of the natural conditions which lead to it, and all
vice from their neglect. A virtuous state of mind comes invariably from
natural causes: and to supplicate supernatural interference or assist-
ance, to make us virtuous, is just as unreasonable as to ask for bodily
strength or health, or to entreat Deity to build a house for us. Yet
prayers, are constantly put np to the Deity to give ns a contrite heart, or
a loving and pious spirit; all of which are as fundamentally erroneous.


and as full of danger to the suppliant, as the belief that supernatural
interference will restore a sick man to health, ' ’ 1 : ’ irs V J
' There is nothing more pernicious, than the belief that anything it to be ;
obtained by supernatural means, either in the mind or in the body. It;
prevents us from seeing clearly the only means -which can' possibly be-
availing, namely, the natural ones ; and paralyses our efforts, by leading
us to depend on a succour which never possibly can reach us, and never
has reached any human being, and thus to neglect the natural means,
which we might by diligent search attain to. In the treatment of
bodily disease also, it was common in former times to use prayers and
religious rites, instead of the natural means; but fortunately for man-
kind these have now all but disappeared from among ns, and prayers for
the restoration of the sick by an interruption to the natural laws, are
now only used as a form, which few men put any faith in. Who, when
he sees a man dying of cancer or consumption, ever lets the idea of super-
natural interference enter into his expectation of the inevitable issue ?
But in the mind these supernatural agencies are still constantly
resorted to. If a man become unhappy in mind, if his temper be spoiled,
in other words if his mind become diseased in any way, instead of invest-
igating narrowly, just as in the case of bodily disease, the natural causes
which have led to this unhappiness, and removing them by substituting
the natural conditions of mental health; the supernatural moralist, who
knows but of one cause of moral disease, namely original sin, and but one
cure, namely, spiritual conversion, prays over the sufferer, that a hea thy
State'of mind be given him by supernatural interference, and that thus, 1.0
may be restored to happiness and to virtue. Our body, if diseased,
is treated naturally; our mind supernaturally.
But nature knows of no such supernatural means; in her infinite
variety, there is no such thing as one cause or one cure of disease.
Every faculty of the mind has its own peculiar laws of health and hap-
piness, just as every organ of the body ; and this method of treating all
mental diseases by one supernatural panacea, leads to nothing but accu-
mulated error, confusion, and misery. It is partly owing to this unnatural
moral treatment, (of course acting, like all other evils at present, merely
as a subordinate to the law of population, which necessitates an immense
amount of misery in some shape or other), that there is so much unhap-
piness in this country, and that insanity is so common, and is, indeed,
even on the increase. In fact the spiritual panacea itself, that mental
state which is considered to be the highest form of human virtue, is most
assuredly, when analysed by the natural tests of moral health, quite the
reverse of a healthy or a virtuous moral state; so much so, that the
moral physician must regard the religious spiritualism.with its asceticism,
and proneness to gloomy and serious views, which is so wid ly prevalent
in our country, as one of the most fatal forms of moral disease now existing
among us. ■'■■■• ■■■'
We cannot expect a state of satisfactory virtue or happiness among
mankind, as long as the present supernatural views of mind .exist ; as
long as all conditions of happiness and unhappiness, all virtues and vices,
sanities and incipient insanities, are treated alike; while a moral panacea


taken frcm authority is applied to all, and the great book of Nature with
its iufinite variety, and beautiful and unerring chain of natural causation,
is unstudied. Look at'the fearful amount of misery and crime which
exists among us ! Our society in many of its grades is a moral pest-
house, which men are afraid even to look at. An immense deal of this
misery is directly owing to our ignoranceof the natural laws of happiness
and virtue, and to the constant substitution of the supernatural for the
natural efforts to remedy the evils. What avail the prayers that God
Will take pity on the poor, will remove poverty, or prevent drunkenness and
prostitution? All the prayers under heaven will not remove ono jot nor
one tittle of this misery or this vice; it is only by diligently studying the
natural causes which have led to it, and removing them, while we sub-
stitute the natural conditions of happiness, that so blessed a result is
conceivable. How much time has been wasted, how much human agony
and degradation has been allowed to continue, through persistence in
these delusive means!
The idea of the supernatural has ever acted to paralyse the exertions of
men in the removal of miseries. Poverty has been thought to be a sort
of necessary evil, sent upon mankind, possibly as a punishment for
human pride or sin. Disease was for ages viewed in the same erroneous
light, till advancing medical science showed it to be entirely dependent on
infringement of the physical laws. “ God has so willed it,” or “ the
finger of God is upon them,” has been a constant phrase in the mouth
of those, whose thoughts ever run upon supernatural interference; and
in this way are the supernatural moralists wont to depreciate schemes
for greatly elevating and ameliorating the condition of mankind. “ These
cannot succeed,” they say, “ for the main cause of poverty, and of all
other social evils is the natural inborn human depravity. ’ Thus they
arc contented to pray for supernatural interference to change men’s minds,
and take comparatively little interest in the hopes or schemes of the
natural investigator. But he, though full of sorrow at the present state
of human degradation, is no less full of hope, for he cannot forget the
great truth, that all these miseries arise from natural causes, from
natural laws which have been broken; that therefore there is no super-
natural bar to their removal: and that by studying reverentially the
various causes of happiness and misery, vice and virtue, poverty and
crime, as we see them exemplified in the infinite variety of human lives
around us, we will iu time bo able to remove these evils, at least in a
great degree. All of us will yet recognise the true comparative advantages
of these two diiferent modes of religions belief, and religious effort.
Thus the more insight we obtain into the phenomena of the whole
universe, into those of mind as well as of matter, the more does it
become assured to us, that every effect is owing to natural causes; and
that fixed and invariable natural laws prevail everywhere, which are
never in any instance departed from. There is never either in mind or
matter the shadow of a sign of supernatural interference. This great
fundamental truth lies at the bottom of all the sciences, and must before
long be universally conceded: in the mental and moral, as well as the
physical sciences. When it is clearly understood, all of us will see the


utter fruitlessness of ever looking beyond nature for the causes of good or
evil fortune, or of any event which takes place in the physical; or moral
world ; and the utter futility of any request for a supernatural interrup-
tion to these wondrous laws, in whose admirable precision and invaria-
bility their chief beauty, and our own safety, consist. . Before long, in
mind, as well as in physics, the doctrine of immediate interference must
be totally abandoned; and we must recognise that Deity, if existing, at
least never in any one instance interferes in the natural course of events.
In this way the supernatural moralist must inevitably soon be compelled
to adopt at most the doctrine of secondary causes, in mind as well as in
matter.
Let us now examine this doctrine of Secondary Causes. In it the idea
of a supremo supernatural being is still preserved, and it is believed that
this being at first originated the material universe, and impressed upon
matter its laws, which should never afterwards be interrupted, except in
the creation of the different species of animals and vegetables: which, it
is held, nature unaided could not have produced. The recorded supernatu-
ral interferences of the Biblical narrative are by some included in the
primary laws laid down for matter, special provision having been then made
for these miraculous occurrences. Thus, according to the doctrine of secon-
dary causes, supernatural agency has operated on the universe only at two
epochs; namely at its first origin, and again at the creation of the dif-
ferent races of living organisms. The laws once made, according to this
doctrine, have never been interfered with, and the agency of the super-
natural is never now apparent in the world ; and we are only to infer
that it exists as a sustaining or supporting force.
This doctrine is certainly greatly preferable to that of direct superna-
tural interference. It removes to a much greater distance the dis-
turbing idea of such interferences, veiling all direct operations of
the first cause in the primeval origin of things; and leaves it to mankind
to investigate those laws, which have been primarily laid down, and to
act according to them. It leaves them no hope of any supernatural aid;
uor does it countenance the idea, that it is the duty or the interest of man
to seek such aid, instead of trusting entirely to natural means. The
doctrine of secondary causes in physical phenomena is now the prevailing
one among men of science, who adopt Christian beliefs ; and it is
compatible with a very considerable freedom of research into nature.
Would that an equal degree of freedom, and an equally advanced mode of
belief had prevailed in moral science! But the doctrine of immediate
spiritual interference is so ingrained in the moral world, the whole
history of Christianity is so inseparably connected with this, that
such a belief as that of secondary causes, could find no place in it.
But even the doctrine of secondary causes is very far from being a true
or a satisfactory one. How are we warranted in saying that a super-
natural power sustains the operations of Nature, or even exists at all, if we
never in any case see the slightest sign of its presence or its action?
If there is never the slightest sign, in any of the operations of mind or
matter, of a force different from the.natural; forces, how can we say that
such a force exists ? The phrase that tiie universe is sustained by super-
-2 F


natural power, although such power never interferes in the minutest sen-
sible degree with the natural phenomena, is quite destitute of meaning.
To sustain anything requires the exercise of an active extraneous force,
and this force, it is allowed, we never have the slightest sensible sign of.
When we see Oxygen and Hydrogen unite to form water, or observe that
certain mental emotions excite within us the feelings of joy, we say that
such effects are produced by the natural properties in the chemical bodies
or the mental states. These natural properties or forces are sufficient in
themselves to produce the result: and it is a totally gratuitous assump-
tion, that there is any other force, any supernatural agency, acting
beneath, which enables them to produce the effect. It is against all true
philosophy to imagine such an additional force, of which there is not the
slightest sign in the phenomena before us.
But besides this negative sustaining force, the doctrine of Secondary
Causes asserts that supernatural agency was actively employed in the
creation of the vegetable and animal kingdom. Here it acted not merely
as a sustaining force to laws already invariably fixed, but actively inter-
fered, giving to matter new impulses, and new forms, which, unaided, it
could never have assumed. Men saw that the doctrine of supernatural
interference could not now be received, as it once was, in the phenomena
going on around us at present. No one now imagines that the develope-
ment and growth even of the highest animal, that the evolution even of
our most complex organs, takes place by immediate supernatural causa-
tion. However mysterious a process may be, and however little we may
yet understand it, we know with absolute certainty, that all is done by
the workings of the natural forces, never interfered with, never assisted;
and no physiologist would ever now think for a moment, of accounting
for any vital action, by any other than natural causes. The man who
would attribute the developement of an organ, which we could not yet
understand, to immediate supernatural agency, would be thought almost
insane.
But what right have we to assert that such supernatural agency was
used in the creation of living organisms, any more than in the develope-
ment and preservation of those at present existing? The only reason
that this is done, is because it is not yet understood, how such wonderful
organisms could first arise by natural forces. But they have little faith
in Nature, who thus presume to set bounds to her powers. What can
Nature not do ? To him who has studied the developement and growth
of a living organism; who has reflected on the phenomena, wondrous and
transcendant beyond all conception, which are there witnessed; any
reasoning based on an arbitrary limitation of the powers of Nature is
utterly valueless. The human being originates in a single cell, so small
that it cannot be seen by the naked eye. In this cell our infant powers
of mind and body lie first cradled, and by these powers, of which no one
attempts to deny the truly natural character, we develope ourselves; we
build up our body to its perfection of physical organisation, and we build
up no less our mind, by which we obtain so boundless an insight into every
part of the universe. In this way we in fact create ourselves; for it is a
radically false conception that any external supernatural force aids one


tittle in our developement. He who reflects on the concentration of
powers in this little primary cell, and on this display of natural forces, in-
cluding the evolution of mind equally with that of body—for the mind is
just as certainly built up by natural forces as the body—will be too much
lost in wonder at their infinity, to venture to imagine that he knows
their limits. What can be more wonderful or more inscrutable than
these phenomena? How could we ever have imagined that such powers
resided in us; in us as a part of Nature? Why should we believe that
nature who can do this unaided, could not also unaided give origin to the
various forms of vegetable and animal life at the beginning ? She, the
only power that we ever see at work, our mother, our preserver, our own
innermost essence ; she, who has powers and infinite sublimity, which no
tongue can utter, and no mind conceive; in what respect has she ever
failed to satisfy our most boundless yearnings for the infinite, that we
should dishonour her thus, and seek to substitute another power for her
too feeble energies ?
The more we reflect, the more we study the developement and succes-
sion of animated beings, the more assured will become our conviction,
that all those transcendent phenomena, however incomprehensible by us at
present, are owing entirely and absolutely to the natural forces; and
that there has been as little supernatural interference in the origin of
Life , as we now see in its continuance. Every thing leads us to this con-
clusion. We see in the history of the developement of living beings,
plants and animals, the same wondrous marks of constant adherence to
a fixed and definite plan, of the absolute obedience to invariable and
definite laws, which we find everywhere else in nature. Several of these
laws of organic structure have already been made out; such qs that of the
invariable developement of the more special from the more general, the
unity of type and of function, &c.: and it is to such researches as these,
and not to that mis-named piety, which contentsitselfwith vague wonder
over a first cause, that we are to look for a true and elevating conception
of the wondrous origin of Life. And yet it is deemed almost a sacrilege,
to attempt to divest the origin of life of its supernatural character, and
reduce it, as has been done with Astronomy, Geology, Vital Force, &c., to
a natural and conceivable form. Such an attempt on the contrary is most
admirable ; and the author of the “ Vestiges of the Natural History of
Creation ” deserves cur warm gratitude for his endeavour, however im-
perfect all such endeavours must yet be, to show how Life could possibly
have originated, and gradually ascended through the scale of being, with-
out supernatural interference. We may be perfectly certain that it did
do so, although it may lake centuries of the most patient research to tell
us how. The idea of supernatural interference paralyses all science;
unless we have natural phenomena to analyse, all our reasonings are a
vanity and a delusion: and the preconceived belief in such interference
has ever acted to satisfy the minds of men with an explanation which
is no explanation, and to oppose the progress of earnest and devout
enquiry.
How did we come here ? What is the nature and purpose of our being ?
What is Life, what Death ? Momentous questions, which it is as vain.


to attempt to satisfy by the routine answers of supernaturalism, as to
arrest the coarse of the spheres. The general answer to the question of
the Origin of Life, is, “we were created by supernatural interference.
An arbitrary will, by an interruption to the Laws of Nature, caused us to
come into existence, and to assume this form for certain purposes.” The
problem of Life were indeed a hopeless one, if such were the case. But
the natural answer to these questions is very different. “We came into
being according to fixed and definite laws, as truly natural and indepen-
dent in their actions, as those which make the two elements unite to
form water. We exist, because our existence was a necessary result of
the progressive tendency of Nature; there is nothing arbitrary, nothing
supernatural, in our life. We are not removed by any such impassable
gulph from the rest of the inanimate universe ; all beings and all things
are bound together in one chain of invariable natural causation, of which
we learn the links one by one with advancing knowledge. We do not in-
deed see all these links, nor can we yet conceive how it was possible for
the natural forces to give origin to life; but everything we observe around
us, all our progress in knowledge, clears up more and more of this
mystery, and we live in the earnest hope and belief, that the clue will yet
be found to the labyrinth; that some one will yet be able to unite together
the broken links of the chain of life, and to show the natural connection
which exists between all living beings.” That there are numberless in-
dications of such a connection, is undoubted; the unity of typo between
the organs of different animals ; the resemblance of the embryos of the
higher animals to permanent forms in the scale below them; the won-
derful manner in which the different sub-kingdoms of animals and plants
are connected together by their lowest forms, which are evidently of a
transitional character, passing over from one group into another; all
these wondrous and interesting indications are the keys given us by
Nature, to solve the problem of Life; and we may feel certain that such
keys will not be given in vain. The deeper insight a man has into these
phenomena, the stronger grows his conviction, that a natural chain binds
all together; and Cuvier asked “why should not organic life some day have
its Newton 7 ” This at least is absolutely certain, that he who attributes
them to supernatural interference, does nothing on earth to help us in the
matter. At what exact point was supernatural interference used 7to
what extent did it derange the natural forces 7 Unless he can also say
this, he in fact says nothing. Men like Owen, Oken, Goethe, Cuvier,
are the Galileos of the science of organic life; and the results of their dis-
coveries will as irresistibly banish the idea of supernatural interference
from that field of knowledge, as did those of Galileo in the case of the
movements of the spheres. All of us will yet feel to whom our thanks
are due, and what inquirers have pursued the true path to a nobler religious
conception of the mystery of our Life.
Thus it must ultimately be conceded, although it may take centuries
before we can conceive how it could take place, that the Origin and
Evolution of Life are as absolutely independent of supernatural interfer-
ence, as we now-a-days see its continuance to be. It is true that we have
no parallel at present to any such phenomena as the Origin of Life; that


all living beings spring from similar parents, and from such alone; and
this it is, that makes the problem so excessively difficult, and forms
at present an absolute bar to our imagination. But still less have we
any parallel to anything approaching to supernatural interference; of
that we have not the shadow of a sign in the present day; and were it
not for recorded examples of such interference, which are innumerable
among all nations in their infancy, we would never even think of
resorting to such an explanation. The question is just this; whether is
it more probable that supernatural agency has been used, a thing which
we have found in every other department of science to be an absolute
error, full of the most pernicious consequences to human progress; or
that, in this case, as in myriads of others, too low and degrading an esti-
mate has been taken of the powers of Nature, and we have arrogantly
presumed to settle the limits of her actions ? We cannot forsooth under-
stand how unaided Nature could give origin to life; and therefore we
take it upon ourselves dogmatically to assert that she could not. What
do we know of what she can, and what she cannot do 1 At the very
least any impartial mind would confess his own ignorance on this, as yet
inscrutable, subject; and reverentially enquire how much this almighty
Nature is capable of effecting, before he comes to so rash a conclusion.
Of what value on so difficult a question are the judgments of those, who
know so little of truth, that they do not see the invariability of the laws
that operate around us at present? Who do not perceive that the laws
of the seasons, of health and disease, of the body and the mind, are
exactly as fixed as those of Chemistry ? Who would desire a supernatural
interposition to send fine weather, and yet see the folly of imploring such
aid to build a house or to cleanse a city ? And yet these errors arejooked
upon as signs of a religious mind, and any one who would earnestly seek
to show how mistaken and dangerous they are, is treated as a enemy to
his race. Oh mother Nature, thou knowest a very different religion! thou
who invitest all enquiry and stillest none; whose great book, is ever open
to all our race alike, in all countries and in all times ; in whose mighty
bosom all thy children are impartially embraced, portions of thee, and
sharing in thy infinite sublimity; who workest ever onwards, evolving
in thy course endless worlds and forms of being, all bound together in thy
own perfect fashion, the subject for the research and adoration of all
ages.
From the conviction that 'all the phenomena we see around us at
present, are of an invariably natural character, to the conviction that the
Origin of Life, however incomprehensible it still is to ns, was also en-
tirely natural, is but a step; and it is but one step further, to exclude
entirely the idea of supernatural interference in the primeval Origin of
Matter. It is indeed not so difficult to understand the infinity of matter
as the natural origin of life. We see that matter exists at present per-
fectly independently ; it has its own invariable laws of action and of being,
and when we seek further, we find that it is absolutely indestructible ;
that, so far as we can see, it is infinite. And if we follow, here as else-
where, the only true guiding principle of inquiry, namely, to reason
Jrom what we see to what we do not see, we must conclude that matter is


infinite; that every particle we see around ns has existed and will exist
through all eternity. What conceivable reason, except blind authority,
have we for any other conclusion ? On the other hand, the idea that mind
created matter is a totally baseless hypothesis, not founded on a shadow
of reason. There is not the slightest analogy in its favour, and it was
merely conceived, when human reason was in its infancy ; when the
connection between the brain and the mind was not known ; and when
every new form given by the hand of man to matter was vaguely termed
a creation. We now know, that such a thing as creation never takes
place at present; that no new element is ever introduced by extraneous
power, nor do the laws of one part of the universe ever bend or alter one
iota, in obedience to any other part.
Why do we say that mind is more infinite, more noble, or more
powerful, than matter ? that it can create matter, give it laws and bend
it to its purpose? Alas! our race has paid, and still pays, but too
dearly, for this enormous injustice to the one great part of our being.
How is it one whit more conceivable that mind should be infinite, than
that matter should be so ? Nay, it is rather infinitely less conceivable ;
and while we can give no possible reason for matter not being infinite,
but are forced to come to that conclusion if we attend to nature; we can
on the other hand find no possible reason in nature why mind should be
infinite, but are forced by the study of nature to the conclusion that it is
not so. Mind is a living essence, and all life is, from the very first condi-
tions of its existence, subject to change, and therefore to death. Mind is
transient, being absolutely inseparable from transient forms of matter;
and is not a force alien from the rest of Nature, but an entirely natural
one, inseparably linked with the rest in mutual interdependence.
He who has studied the progress of Physiology, cannot but be struck
by the numerous instances in which phenomena in the living body,
which used to be considered as purely vital, and therefore of a kind
totally removed from physical analogy, and from our comprehension,
have of late years been successively shown to be purely physical. Thus
the process of Digestion was long thought to be strictly vital, whereas
now it is universally allowed to be entirely physical, taking place accor-
ding to the physical laws of Chemistry, heat, &c.; insomuch that the
food, when introduced into the stomach,must still be regarded as essen-
tially external to the body, that is, not yet forming a part of the tissues.
In like manner the essential part of Respiration, namely the taking in of
Oxygen and the giving out of Carbonic acid, is regulated by the.
entirely physical laws of the diffusion of gases, &c. Nutrition, also, or
the absorption of the food by the blood-vessels and lacteals, has been
shown to depend chiefly on the physical laws of endosmosis and exosmosis.
Animal Heat is produced by the chemical union of Oxygen and Carbon
throughout the frame, and is as entirely a physical process, as the burn-
ing of the fire in the grate. Many more instances could be given, but
these are sufficient to show the great and significant’ fact, that the pro-
gress of Physiology is tending in every direction to banish the old vague
idea of an unintelligible vital force, from the bodily economy, and to
substitute, intelligible physical laws. In fact the very phrase “ Vital


force’’ is now acknowledged to be merely provisional, to mean nothing,
except that we have not yet arrived at an explanation of the fact,
regarding which it is used. Gradually it is becoming apparent in num-
berless instances, that the so-called vital forces are merely physical ones
in disguise ; and this gives us another key to the great problem, the con-
nection of the organic with the inorganic world, and origin of life.
From what has been already done in this direction, and from what we may
infer from reflection, it appears extremely probable, that all vital pheno-
mena are really physical; that they are really produced by physical
forces, acting in certain new conditions. He who feels convinced of the
natural origin of life, would be led to this conclusion byo priori reasons.
If life originated entirely by means of the natural physical forces, as it
most indubitably did, all the vital forces must have sprung out of the
physical Ones; and must in fact be an evolution of properties and forces
always existing in matter, but lying dormant, until called forth by
suitable circumstances.
It is absolutely certain that there is not a movement of a muscle in
our frame, not a thought or feeling in our mind, which is not accom-
panied and inseparably connected with chemical, mechanical, and other
physical changes. Now what is the connection between this chemical
and mechanical change on the one hand, and thought and feeling on the
other? It is easy to brand all investigations into the connection of mind
and matter, such as those of Leibig and others, with the stigma of
materialism, and to rest contented with an explanation which is none ;
but such a course leads just to nothing, like the old doctrine of vital
essence. Do we consider it a degradation for mind, to link and compare
it with matter ? Do we think that there is anything one jot more ele-
vated, more transceudantly wonderful, in a mental phenomenon, that in
the extraordinary andinfinitely subtilised chemical change that accom-
panies it ? Here, as in all other speculations, there has been a constant
endeavour to vilify matter; but therein men have merely shown that
the divine beauty of one fundamental part of their nature is hid from
them. Their eves are shut, their hearts are closed to the wonder and
majesty of the material universe; they will not take Nature as she
presents herself to us, with her perfect natural harmony of elements, but
prefer forming to themselves a vain and distorted image. Forsooth, these
transcendent and inconceivable chemical actions ; that wondrous refine-
ment and exaltation of physical forces which goes on in the brain, is a
poor and contemptible set of phenomena, unworthy of our most lofty
thoughts, and utterly unfit to be put on a par with the manifestations of
mind. But he who is deeply imbued with physical religion, can make no
such invidious and baseless comparisons; he must claim for matter exactly
an equal share in our wonder; he recognises with devout admiration the
certain truth, that there is an inseparable connection and unity between the
physical and the mental phenomena; that instead of saying, for instance,
that an intricate problem was solved, or a deep feeling of love or devotion
manifested, through certain mental processes, it is exactly equally true,
to say that they were done by certain transcendent chemical actions, of
whose wondrous and subtle character we have as yet no conception.
There is a deep fallacy contained in the common expression, that the


animal and vegetable substance we feed on “ support life the fact is
that they “ become life,” in other words are converted into ourselves,
and their inherent vital and spiritual properties are called forth.
Everything leads us to the belief that the chemical, mechanical, and
other physical forces at work, are of one nature and inseparable from
the mental phenomena; and that the physical forces which we know
to be manifested in the actions of the brain, are in some inexplicable
manner endowed with self-consciousness. Matter, when in the form
of a muscle, can contract; when in the form of living nervous sub-
stance it can think. Thought is in some mysterious manner connected
with Phosphorus , and must in some way or other be an exaltation and
refinement of properties, naturally inherent in that substance, and in
the other elements of the brain ; but in what way is yet totally un-
known. On reflection we perceive that, as there is a chemical action
attending every mental process, just as there is one attending every act of
life, every change in the mind must be connected with an exactly corres-
ponding change in these chemical actions. There is not a greater differ-
ence between joy and despair, than there is between the chemical changes
which accompany them ; and there is an exactly equal beauty in the
chemical change and the mental emotion. The thought or the feeling
expresses the meaning of the chemical changes. Are we joyful ? the
chemical change which is taking place in our brain, is of an easy
nature, and favourable to the powers of life and health within us.
Are we sorrowful ? the chemical change is a difficult one, and opposed
to these powers. The infinite variety of thoughts and feelings are the
conscious expressions of the equal infinity of the processes of the or-
ganic chemistry within us. These considerations appear to me to be
the simplest corollaries from what we now know of the physiology of
nervous action; and they sound strange only from our mistaken pre-
ference for spiritual views of the nature of life.
When we examine into the history of the earth, we find every thing
leading us to the conviction, that matter existed long before mind; or in
other words, that the simpler chemical combinations existed long prior
to the more complex ones, which are a comparatively recent birth of
time. The evolution of mind is one of the latest triumphs of the natu-
ral forces ; and if we follow the true path of induction, we are led to
the conclusion, that so infinitely complex an essence could not possibly
have existed, except as the result of myriads of ages cf elaboration.
Slowly, slowly, on looking back through the interminable vistas of
Geology, we see Nature evolving this her most wondrous production ;
throughout the series of plants (whose lives are constructive) a founda-
tion for the mental existence (which is one of destruction ) is laid;
and in the animal series, mind rises by the most gradual steps,
each of which took probably millions of years to surmount to the
platform of humanity. We may be certain that these wondrous
and infinitely protracted efforts are not in vain; in fact, that with-
out this extraordinary elaboration, mind could not by any possi-
bility have come into being, and that nature must have remained
without self-consciousness. The principle of Progress (the same
with the principle of Good, of which mention has been made above, as


being the invariable guide of all living action) seems to form an inher-
ent part of nature ; and to make the most complex essence the origin
of all things is completely to reverse the natural order. The progress
of nature in the animated series, has been shown by Yon Baer to be
always from the more general to the more special; and thus the most
highly specialized and complex form of life, namely, that of man, came
last into existence.
But the Supernatural in any shape or form is absolutely inconceivable
by the human mind ; and every attempt to conceive it has resulted in
inextricable confusion and inconsistencies. A mind without a brain ;
spirit without a substance; life without change, beginning or end;
personality without limitation of extent or of consciousness, uninflu-
enced by changes of joy and sorrow, and yet full of love, mercy, and
tenderness; in short, every possible natural attribute has been applied
to the Supernatural, and yet every one has been, in the same breath,
denied. It is absolutely and inexorably impossible for us to form the
slightest shadow of an idea of a Supernatural being; we cannot really
conceive anything out of Nature; all we possibly can do, Is to form an
aggregation of natural incongruities.
Thus then everything leads us to the profound and earnest conviction,
that Nature is all in all; that there is nothing above, beneath, or be-
side her; and that to her should be transferred all the allegiance,
which has been hitherto paid to the Supernatural. This grand truth
is the foundation of modern thought, and is probably the most import-
ant conclusion (next to the knowledge of the law of population, com-
pared with which every other is insignificant), to which our race has
yet arrived. It is true that it is but partially and dimly seen as yet;
but gradually and gradually it is dawning upon the world, and every
new revelation of the book of Nature tends to engrave it deeper in our
hearts. It is the foundation 'of Natural Religion, that mighty faith,
which will sooner or later include the whole human family, and before
which scepticism and differences of creeds shall all alike disappear.
He who has once clearly seen the impassable gulph which divides the
Natural from the Supernatural, and the infinitely greater reality and
transcendant beauty of the former, possesses ever after a profound
reverence and absolute reliance in Nature, that nothing can shake.
She can do all, she can solve every mystery; and he who has faith in
her, shall never be deceived. \Ye, her loftiest children, are indeed full
of ignorance and weaknesses; but there is not a thought, not a sor-
row, not a perplexity among us, of which she does not hold the keys,
and for which there is not consolation in her mighty bosom. The life
of many of us may seem a hopeless riddle, may be fraught with sorrow,
disappointment, poverty or disease, doubt, imbecility, or degradation,
but she will clear up all at last; she who has an equal and impartial
love for all, and for whom nothing exists in vain.
Natural Religion is the one and only true religious belief, which has
ever existed on this earth. It is separated by a far broader line of
demarcation from all the various forms of Supernaturalism, than any
of these are from each other. The progress of religious belief has con


slsted in limiting more and more the influence of the Supernatural, and
admitting more and more that of Nature; so that the religion, which
contained least of the immediate agency of the Supernatural, and most
natural truth, was the best. But the very slightest shadow of a con-
ception of the supernatural spoils the harmony of Nature, mixes it-
self ineritably in all our views of life, and is absolutely inconsistent
with Natural Religion. In the latter, the very first and fundamental
belief is, that there is not, never was, and never can be, anything out
of Nature; anything which is not itself a part of the mighty whole;
subject like the others to the natural laws of existence, acting and
being acted upon by all the rest of Nature; and that the chief end of
our life is to study her laws and live according to them.
This is the great truth to which all modern thought has been tend-
ing ; which is now becoming widely spread over a great part of the
civilized world, and which has formed the leading idea of most of the
profound thinkers of late times both in this country, and still more on
the Continent; the truth which is embodied, under various shapes and
designations, in the Rationalism of Germany, the Secularism of this
country, and other sects, all of which are essentially the same, or at
least differ only on trifling points, are all moving in the same direction
and will ultimately fuse into one great and united whole ; the
truth, which is branded by the name of Atheism and Infidelity by the
advocates of the supernatural beliefs, who forget that the question is
no longer whether a man have or have not a deep and settled religious
belief , but whether he believe in supernatural religion or in Nature.
Those who believe in the supernatural, deny the adequacy of the powers
of Nature, and dethrone her from her sovereign sway over the universe
and our hearts; which Natural Religion, on the other hand, devoutly
acknowledges. Let us not deceive ourselves; we cannot serve two
masters. Belief in God is disbelief in Nature.
To no faith is the term “Infidelity” less applicable than to Natural
Religion; and those who are convinced of its certain truth, should re-
ject with a lofty indignation, the application of such a term to their
faith—the noblest, the sublimest, that the world has ever known. It
Is a faith whose foundations are broad and deep as Nature herself, and
which cannot be shaken. When once it becomes fairly established
among mankind, religious scepticism will disappear.
It is a striking anomaly, and one that of itself is sufficient to show
the unsoundness of supernaturalism, that its very first positions, even
now when it has existed so long, should be capable of absolute denial.
A great deal of misery is caused by the difference of religious opinions,
and the want of unanimity on the very first principles of belief. These
unhappy religious differences separate nation from nation, and stand
like a spectral barrier in the midst even of our social and family circles;
so that there is scarcely a single one of us, who has not suffered from
this cause. This arises from the fact, that the Supernatural is taken
for the standard of truth, instead of Nature. When Nature shall be-
come the universal standard, no one will bo able to object to it; for no
one can regard Nature, even in the most superficial manner, without


perceiving her infinite perfection. No man ever did, or ever will, find
tbe slightest flaw in Nature; and even those who seek most to exalt
the Supernatural, and to limit the powers of Nature, are lost in wonder
and admiration when they consider any of her phenomena. No man
can by any possibility utterly disbelieve in Nature; while on the other
hand there is not a single form of the supernatural, which is not utterly
disbelieved in by immense numbers of mankind; especially by those
whose powers of perceiving truth have been more cultivated by the
study of Nature, and who have been freed, in whatever manner, from
the fascinating influence of the supernatural, so as to be able to form
an impartial judgment.
It is of great importance that Natural Religion should be spread, as
widely, as universally, as possible; not in this country alone, but over
the whole globe. There is nothing which would have a more powerful
effect in drawing all of us nearer to each other, and awakening our
hearts to a common human sympathy, than having one universal form
of religion. Nothing at present more divides nations than the different
forms of supernatural faith; and there can never be a true reconcilia-
tion until these be laid aside, and we be united in one great Natural
Religion, whose infallibility all men will allow, for Nature is one and
the same over the whole globe.
This great consummation seems indeed far, very far, distant at pre-
sent, when Natural Religion is still in its infancy; when various forms
of Supernatural Belief are dominant in every country in the world.
Eat their supremacy is more in name than in reality; for already their
hold upon most of the civilized nations of the earth is very much
shaken. In France and Germany, the Christian religion cannot be
said to be generally prevalent; it is rare in these countries to see an
educated man, at least among the laity, who believes in it. Over the
whole continent it may be said, that Christian beliefs are, as a general
rule, chiefly confined to the least educated class, in whom they have
usually the form of a gross superstition. In our own country the num-
ber of those, who do not believe in Christianity, is very large, and con-
stantly increasing. The great majority of the mechanics and artizans
in our large towns are, I believe, of this number. A very large por-
tion also of the educated classes, especially of the generation which is
now springing up, either doubt or totally disbelieve in it. Many of
our greatest living writers and thinkers are diametrically opposed to
the Christian theory of life ; and there are comparatively few of them,
who can be called orthodox.
A large number of those various classes agree in rejecting the author-
ity of the Scriptures, but differ in several points with regard to their
limitation of the supernatural. Some admit the existence of a super-
natural being, and of a supernatural life for man, after the completion
of his natural one, while others deny this, and believe in nothing
beyond Nature. I feel deeply convinced that all will ultimately
come to the conclusion, that the idea of the supernatural must be
wholly and entirely laid aside; and that it is impossible for man to
rest contented in any other form of belief than a purely natural one.


We are parts of Nature, living in her and through her, and we cannot
go beyond her in the slightest degree, without falling into the greatest
inconsistencies, and forfeiting the happiness and virtue of our lives.
But although there are some differences in the opinions of those who
dissent from the Christian beliefs, all are agreed as to this great funda-
mental truth, namely, that it is from ourselves and from progressive
human enlightenment, that we are to derive our religious convictions,
and not from any past authority. Every man must form for himself
his own opinions on the great subjects of the meaning and end of life.
Whatever principles of moral conduct, or whatever views of life and
death may be advanced, must address themselves to the moral sense
and reason of each individual, and be tested by them ; and not urged
upon us as articles of blind faith, backed by the promises of infinite
rewards and punishments. Such promises and such threats corrupt all
impartiality of judgment, and are unworthy of the dignity of so lofty
a being as man. Every one of us is a judge, a legislator, as to
the truth or falsehood of the various theories of life, natural or super-
natural, brought before us; and should be addressed with befitting
deference, and not as if we were criminals at the bar, or slaves who had
to do nothing but listen and obey. The laws for our guidance are not
ready made to our hands, but are to be discovered only by our own
virtue and patient investigation. Each individual is responsible to the
rest of Nature for his opinions and actions, but to no other power
whatsoever; and the punishments or rewards consequent on these are
always purely natural, and exactly proportional to their deserts; and
moreover are open to our investigation and thorough comprehension.
Many who doubt or disbelieve in the supernatural views, are re-
strained from making known their opinions, on account of the intoler-
ance with which these are regarded; an intolerance which only twelve
years ago, threw Mr. Holyoake and others whose noble exertions and
self-devotion in the cause of Natural Religion will yet be gratefully
recognised by all, into prison for openly expressing their disbelief in
the current supernatural doctrines. So many of us are dependent on
the goodwill of others for our subsistence, so many are afraid of public
opinion, that the most deeply cherished convictions are often sup-
pressed; and thus it is difficult to estimate the number of those who
have laid aside the Christian theory of life. Religious intolerance is
the most vehement of all in this country, with the exception of sexual
intolerance; and both feelings cause a great deal of misery, and are
opposed to that true sympathy and mutual reverence which should exist
between all men. It is one of the very first principles of religion that
we should honour and love our fellows, and listen with reverence to all
their conscientious opinions, however imperfect they may appear in our
eyes. All real convictions are sacred, and must be rooted profoundly
in the life of the individual; and therefore should be dealt with as care-
fully and as reverentially as possible. Any form of belief, which allows
a man to regard with irreverence his fellow beings, or to think himself
entitled to look down upon them, either morally or intellectually, can-
not possibly be a true one.


Those who embrace the Religion of Nature should sedulously en-
deavour to avoid this intolerance and irreverence. Love and reverence
for man should form their first moral principle : and they should never
allow any difference of religious opinion to interefere with these feelings,
whatever others may do. Man is the most exalted manifestation of
Isature, and thus the highest object of reverence to him, whp is imbued
with natural religion. He stands infinitely higher than any of our
beliefs, and should command our deepest reverence.
But they, who adopt the natural faith, should not only reverence others*
but resolutely assert their own title to a like reverence in return.
Believing that their’s is the one and only true religion, and that the
most vital interests of us all are bound up in its universal diffusion, they
should claim for it a due reverence in the eyes of men. Every measure
should be taken to uplift Natural Religion and its adherents from their
still unacknowledged and degraded position ; and to enable every individual
who adopts these beliefs to avow them openly, and to defend and
endeavour to advance them, without being treated with intolerance by
his neighbours. The worshippers of Nature should demand, that their
faith be received by society in the same way as the various forms of
supernatural religion are at present —namely, as the conscientious
religious convictions of a large and powerful body of men, who have a
right to occupy an honourable place in the eyes of their fellows. There
is nothing that Natural Religion requires more in the present day than
to define its principles, and to unite its efforts ; and to gain for itself a
recognised plaee t and a name which shall be able to protect its followers
from oppression or religious intolerance. A Roman Catholic does not
hide his religious convictions, neither does a Jew, nor a Dissenter; and
their opinions, although disapproved of, are listened to and socially recog-
nised ; and Natural Religion should not rest till its tenets be equally
recognised, and all its adli erents he able to speak as openly and as proudly
of their cherished convictions. To effect this, they who have laid aside
the supernatural beliefs, should earnestly endeavour to combine as much
as possible their strength; to make common cause for mutual protection
and support, in the same way as other religious bodies. They should
endeavour to get one general name, which shall include all the different
sects; and unite under that, so as to form a powerful and recognised body
in the state, which could command the respect of society, and protect
from religious intolerance its adherents.
I believe that if this were done, and that if all those, who have laid
aside Christianity, were to disclose their beliefs, and to come forward as
the supporters of a new and natural faith, (in the noble manner in which
Mr. Holyoake, Mr. Francis Newman, Mr. Owen, Mr. Thomas Carlyle,
Miss Martineau, and many others have acted,) they would form the most
powerful of all existing religious bodies ; including the great majority of the
educated classes on the Continent, and a large portion of those in this
country. Not until an earnest religious movement of kind has
been made, can we expect that society will treat with becoming reverence
the opinions of those, who do not believe in the established religions, It
we do not speak openly, earnestly, and devoutly, of our own convictions,


we can scarcely hope that our neighbours will view them, with due
reverence.
With regard to the name by which these views should be designated, I
would humbly submit that the term “ Natural Religion” should be
adopted. There is something cold and uninviting in the words Ration-
alism and Secularism, which do not seem to me moreover to express so
well the peculiar character of the belief. The term Natural Religion
shows its real foundation, namely, on Nature, and Nature alone: and
throws it into strong contrast with all the various forms of supernatural
belief. Moreover the word “Religion” is inwardly dear to all of us ;it
is a name to which the noblest feelings of humanity have been con-
secrated ; which has been hallowed by the virtues, the pious lives, and
heroic deaths, of many of the most glorious characters in history; which
has filled men’s breasts with that heroic self-devotion that makes them
undergo all trials and privations, to do that which their conscience tells
them is right; which sends men to the wilderness to convert the heathen,
and to the death-bed, and the haunts of crime and pestilence, to succour
and console their suffering fellow-beings—oh may this name and all the
devout, earnest, and loving feelings it breathes, sink into the minds of all
of us, and may the followers of Natural Religion be animated by a no less
exalted enthusiasm! The name of Natural Religion expresses, that the
beliefs it represents, are but a continuation of the religious progress of the
race; a progress which has been going on ever since the birth of history,
and will advance till the end. It designates the continued aspirations of
mankind to the True, the Good, and the Beautiful; and their devout and
enthusiastic sense of their duty to follow and defend them, at all risks,
and with all sacrifices.
Whatever opinions we adopt, or whatever hopes we entertain of their
effect on human life, let us not fall into that fatal error, which is in-
grained into all the forms of supernatural belief; namely, that of attribu-
ting to human blindness or depravity, and not to their own imperfect
systems, the continued existence of evils, which these systems are impo-
tent to remedy. The proof of the truth of any system is its being found
really to cure human ills—not its asserting that it can cure them ; just
as the only sign of the real efficiency of the physician is the restoration
of his patient's health. Till the evils have been cured, in fact, nothing
whatever has been done; no suffering has been relieved, and there has
been nothing but an ostentatious talk, which to the physician, whose
whole and sole object is the happiness of his patient, not his own vain-
glory, is absolutely valueless. If he has produced a cure, he is content,
if not, he blames his own imperfect means, and want of skill; and is far,
very far, from mocking bis patient’s miseries by laying the blame on
him.
If we try by these tests the truth of any scheme for the satisfactory
increase of human virtue and happiness, we must recognise that hitherto
all such schemes have been a mere delusion; that hitherto there has
been no such thing as a “ saving faith,” as a religious or moral system,
which had the power adequately to contend with human evils ; and that
the persistence for so long a time in declaring the various religions systems


to be panaceas, and in laying the blame not npon them, but upon mankind,
has been perhaps the most miserable of all instances of the mockery of
human wretchedness.
Mr. Malthus was a clergyman ; but by his discovery of the principle of
population, he unconsciously gave the most fatal blow it had ever
received, to the religion of which he was a minister. By showing the
radical antagonism between food and love, he laid bare the real source of
the great mass of human woes, and introduced a new element, namely,
reproductive restraint, into the list of human duties ; an element
which had been omitted in all previous systems, including the Christian
but which is of such incomparable importance, that all the other vir-
tues are, without it, utterly delusive. From ignorance of the law of
population, and the great duty of limited procreation, the Christian scheme
is as fundamentally vitiated, as every other theory of virtue or progress ;
while its teachers, from want of attention to this subject, are rendered,
like our statesmen, thoroughly impotent, as far as the main interests of
mankind are concerned.
The great population difficulty has hitherto rather proved the safe-
guard of Christianity, as of marriage, by rendering abortive all schemes
for remedying human ills ; and has thus forced men rather to cling to a
religion of resignation than of hope and progress. But if, as I firmly
believe, this great difficulty is to be overcome by the means of which I
have spoken, nothing will then operate so powerfully in effecting a change
in our religious beliefs; for it will be found that the only possible way of
saving ourselves from these evils, is by thoroughly altering our sexual
and religious opinions. Without this, indeed, progress is totally im-
possible.
On looking back upon the past history of our race, with reference to
the action of the law of population, (without which, in fact, both past
and present history are an insoluble riddle,) it may be divided into two
tolerably well-marked epochs of necessary destruction. Ancient history
is pre-eminently the epoch of the positive check, in the shape of wars,
famines, and infant mortality. In it the average of life is very short,
as it is in all the inferior animals; but the average of health and
strength among those who are fortunate enough to escape the neces-
sary destruction, is very high, as it is in all undomesticated animals.
Modern history is the epoch of the preventive and positive checks, in the
shape of celibacy, prostitution, poverty, and over-work. Here-the
average of life is higher, chiefly on account of the prevalence of the
preventive check, and the increased power of producing food; but the
average of health and strength, irrespective of length of life, is much
lower, chiefly from the same causes, namely, the unnatural celibacy, and
the hard and unhealthy work. The Future, I earnestly hope and trust,
will be the epoch of preventive sexual intercourse, by which alone the
necessary destruction can possibly be obviated; and will be characterised
by universal independence in the essentials of life, and by an average
both of life and of health and strength, gradually approaching nearer
and nearer to the natural one. _ .
No man ever did so much, however unconsciously, for Natural Behgien


as Mr. Malthas. Nothing ever threw into such strong contrast the
power of Nature on the one hand, and the impotence of man and the
supernatural, when opposed to her, on the other, as the discovery of the
principle of population. What have availed all our efforts against the
overwhelming and unseen laws of Nature? In what way have our
great men, of whose achievements there has been so much vain-glorious
talk, deserved the homage, the hero-worship, which has been paid to them ;
and which has tended so powerfully to divert attention from the supremacy
of Nature, and the horrible condition of the masses of mankind? What
have they done for us, the poets, fine writers, sculptors, statesmen, orators,
moralists; in whose happiness and elevation forsooth, we are to find our
own ; with whose over-shadowing fame we are to console ourselves in our
miseries ; to worship whom is a sufficient privilege for the rest of us, the
vulgar herd of mankind ? We ask for bread, and they give us a stone:
for love, and they give us a poetical or religious shadow of it. Poetry,
painting, architecture, fine writing, oratory, religion, to a world plunged
in the population horrors, are like music in the ears of a drowning
man. They may dazzle our judgment; they may gild, but alas! they
cannot cheat, our misery. It is the necessaries of life, it is food, love,
and leisure that are at present chiefly needed among us; and till these
be secured for every human being, man or woman, it is oflittie avail to
talk of the luxuries.
It is alas ! not difficult for any writer, as far as his sexual conduct is
concerned, to win the short-sighted approbation of mankind. All that
is needed is to avoid the sexual subjects, and tacitly at least, if not ex-
pressly, to acquiesce in the Reign of sexual Terror and Ignorance, that
exists among us ; but to do so is only to throw another stone upon the
grave of human hopes. No real good can at present accrue to our race,
except by meeting in a straightforward and manly way, the great sexual
difficulties, and discussing them openly; and until this be done, although
men may applaud our actions, let us not hope that we shallcheat Nature.
Impotence and a radical delusiveness characterise all the current views on
man and society; and must characterise all views, which are not guided
by the Law of Population, and based upon Preventive Sexual Inter-
course.
In conclusion, I entreat the reader to take those views in the spirit
in which they are intended, namely, in that of brotherly kindness and
goodwill. If I have given offence by the manner in which they have
been brought forward, I sincerely ask forgiveness ; and hope that the
fault may be imputed rather to awkwardness of expression, than want
of humility. In speaking of the sexual and religious institutions,
which exist among us, it has been my earnest desire to wound as little
as possible, by the plain statement of my conscientious convictions,


those feelings in which all of us have been brought up; ami rather to
carry my own and the reader’s attention far beyond these surface in-
stitutions, into the presence of that mighty Sexual Difficulty, upon
which the hopes of our race have been shattered, and in whose awful
and solemnising contemplation, human systems and the contending
strife of human passions seem but as the helpless waves, which break
upon the iron rocks of Doom. It is against Nature, not against each
other, that we should contend; it is she, who is as omnipotent in the
weapons of death, as of life—who has been our grand destroyer; and
from her crushing grasp the most persevering and united efforts can
alone enable us to escape.
It is not for myself that I ask consideration ; it is for the unfortu-
nate sufferers to whom this work is devoted, and for whose benefit
I would readily submit to any amount of obloquy—even from those
I wish to serve. Alas! when I see around me the poor perishing
in their squalid homes, the forsaken prostitutes wandering in our
streets, the sexual victims pining in solitude and bitterness; when
1 look down into the fearful abyss of our social miseries and wrongs,
and think moreover of the mutual destruction by which all this
suffering is Attended, the reflection overpowers me—that it matters
little what becomes of myself. What am I better than they, that
I should be happy when so many are miserable? If I can help
my suffering fellow-men, it is the dearest wish of my heart—that
for which I live—that for which I would willingly die ; if not, I am
indifferent to my own fate. But I have a deep and abiding con-
viction that these evils are not insuperable ; that the future of our
race will be brighter than the past; and that what I have written,has
not been written in vain.
THU END.




ERRATA.
Page 39 line 18 for while read which
.. 45 .. 29 , andimind , and mind.
.. 47 .. 31 , equalities , qualities.
.. 99 .. 25 , organs , orgasm.
.. 104 .. 28 , disease , disuse.
.. 158 .. 17 insert we are before still.
.. 190 .. „ Atnenorrhoea as title.
.. 203 .. 12 for fiatulous read patulous.
.. 271 .. 14 , an , no.
.. 298 .. 43 insert inverted commas at end of paragraph.
.. 313 last line for the read they.
.. 352 line 43 , too , two.
.. 369 .. 18 , married , unmarried.
.. 403 .. 44 * , of , for.
.. 408 .. 25 , expect , except.
