



r.
r> ; ; •- «; •
f'-fyt' 1 '-:-
1 ’ / •
.
VJ-4'
:
5
■
..? ■ ’A
A’J
>.jy \;,
r '
v ;
v (V> n
•r- , «
r '
-U'. -, 51 5,
\'''v'--V
■'4x'“ X- St
-
% :
-
v '’ * v>s •> -w
y,' xJ i . _
:■ .::-Wx:f '■
,
-.' '-■/■ ~ ■■• n ••:/ - - ■-
-!K - ■ ‘ v ‘ *'
/.■y:
- ; xt. ■; X X’'jj ;v ;
pfcH;l
\ >
C 'M* *'-
l.; Ct^>
. 1 •■
r." \ 'j
4 ■ lltsS? 7 ' ~
X-J '• C“’
? 0 yi p
tpa** 5~\
.
■■ ■
„ \ ” , ;- ? '
‘
y * ;.• ■ J . |
;c-v. - ‘
J' l rf
-.' %. ,-V
gU
xxv'yfeV-', ■&•'■$■
k |%£
V C_- :
> {
■
■; • - -
,
. * -. • yV - v -, ' >;sUr^'* y • -sTy. ■ ■
-
|
,
■
’ % r ' < “■’&
/
W' ' S
/JX-XXy
7
- ' - x' V . ■
.' ' 5 >N —-- , -' ■' ,L;.' • •
_ «■ •. . ■ 3^
.,i ,5w>*
,
-
> -:■ -y r'A.j
-


Memorandum
AND
Articles of Association
Kiku Gumi
(Australasia) Limited
L. S. SMITH,
Solicitor,
36 Hunter Street, Sydney.
Callaway & Dodd, Printers, Sydney. \
4.'- -. m
y..


NEW SOUTH WALES.
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION.
No. 226415.
The Companies Act, 1 899.
I certify that the Company styled “KIKU GUMI
(AUSTRALASIA) LIMITED” is incorporated, and that the
said Company is a Limited Company.
The date of Incorporation of the said Company is the
Twenty-seventh day of September, One thousand nine hundred
and thirty-four.
GIVEN under my hand at Sydney this Twenty-seventh
day of September, One thousand nine hundred and thirty-four.
W. B. MEEHAN.
Exd.
Assistant Registrar of Joint Stock Companies.


THE COMPANIES ACTS, 1899-1918.
COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES.
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
KIKU GUMI (AUSTRALASIA) LIMITED.
1, The name of the Company is “Kiku Gumi
(Australasia) Limited.”
2. The registered office cf the Company will be situated
at Sydney in the State of New South Wales.
3. The objects for which the Company is established
are:—
(1 ) To acquire, purchase and take over as a going con-
cern the business now carried on by Yukichi
Yamashita at Sydney in the State of New South
Wales and elsewhere under the name of “Kiku
Gumi (Australasia)” and all or any of the assets
and liabilities of the proprietor of that business in
connection therewith.
(2) To carry on in any place or places within the State
of New South Wales or elsewhere the business of
general merchants and manufacturers indentors,
importers, exporters, buyers, sellers and general
dealers in merchandise of all descriptions and
generally to carry on all descriptions of business
connected with commercial and financial transac-
tions whatsoever.
(3) To carry on the business of general warehousemen
in all its branches.
(4) To carry on all or any of the businesses of manu-
facturers, importers and wholesale and retail


(10)
dealers of and in glassware, crockery, enamelware
toys, fancy goods and other articles and commodi-
ties of personal and household use, and generally
of and in all manufactured goods, materials, provi-
sions and produce.
To buy, sell, manufacture, repair, alter and ex-
change, let on hire, export and deal in all kinds
of articles and things which may be required for
the purposes of any of the said businesses or com-
monly supplied or dealt in by persons engaged in
any such business, or which may seem capable of
being profitably deal with in connection with any
of the said businesses.
To carry on any business, manufacturing or other-
wise, which may seem to the Company capable of
being conveniently carried on in connection with
any of the above specified businesses or calculated
directly or indirectly to enhance the value of or
render profitable any of the Company’s property
or rights.
To receive money, valuables, goods and materials
of all kinds on deposit or for safe custody.
To act as agents for any person firm or company
and to undertake and perform sub-contracts and
also to act in any of the businesses of the Company
through or by means of agents brokers sub-con-
tractors or otherwise.
To pay all or any the costs charges and expenses
preliminary and incidental to the formation estab-
lishment and registration of the Company and any
company or undertaking to be promoted by this
Company.
To procure the Company to be registered in the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland or in
any State of the Commonwealth of Australia or
in New Zealand or elsewhere and to do all things
necessary or expedient for compliance with the
laws and regulations of the Imperial or any
colonial or foreign Government or local authority
in places where the Company or its Directors may
be desirous of transacting its business.


(11)
(12)
(13)
i o appoint or authorise the Directors of the Com-
pany to appoint either witn or without remunera-
tion agents attorneys under the power directors or
other persons whether Directors of the Com-
pany or not or corporations under power of attor-
ney or otherwise within or outside the State of
New South Wales to carry out and complete all or
any of the objects oi the Lompany as mentioned in
this Memorandum of Association and to arrange
conduct or manage the business or businesses of the
Company or any matter or concern whatsoever in
which the Company is now or may from time to
time be or become or be about to become
interested or concerned with the same as or more
limited powers than the Directors of the Company
have and from time to time revoke or cancel such
appointments and to remove and if thought desir-
able re-appoint such agents attorneys Directors or
ether persons or corporations and determine their
powers and to appoint any person or persons com-
pany or corporation as the attorney or attorneys
agent or agents of the Company in any part of the
world with full powers to do all such acts matters
and things as may be thought necessary and ex-
pedient in the interests of the Company and to
delegate such powers and appoint to any person or
persons company or corporation and from time to
time to revoke such appointment.
1 o enter into and carry out arrangements for the
purpose of having any business which this Com-
pany is authorised to carry on, or in which it may
for the time being be interested, carried on by any
other person or company, on behalf of and for the
benefit of this Company, and in such name and
under such style as may be thought expedient, and
to enter into any arrangements for indemnifying
the person or company by whom any such business
may be so carried on against the debts, liabilities,
and expenses of such business.
T o purchase or take in exchange or on lease,
license, or any tenure, or otherwise acquire either
for shares, fully or partially paid up or otherwise,
for debentures or for cash or money, or in any
one or more of such ways or in any other way, and
to hold either in its own name or names of its


(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
nominees real and personal property and rights or
all kinds, and in particular lands of any tenure,
buildings, hereditaments, easements, business con-
cerns, and undertakings, mortgages, charges,
annuities, policies, book debts, produce conces-
sions, options, contracts, and any claim against
such property or against any person, or company
privileges and choses in action of all kinds, and to
carry on and develop any business concern or
undertaking so acquired.
To erect and build factories, workshops, ware-
houses, sheds, and other buildings necessary or ex-
pedient for the purpose of the Company.
To acquire and undertake the whole or any part of
the business, property and liabilities of any person
or company carrying on any business which the
Company is authorised to carry on or possessed of
property suitable for the purpose of this Company.
To apply for purchase or otherwise acquire any
patents, brevets d’invention, licenses, concessions,
and the like conferring any exclusive or non-exclu-
sive or limited right to use, or any secret or other
information as to any invention which may seem
capable of being used for any of the purposes of
the Company or the acquisition of which may seem
calculated directly or indirectly to benefit the Com-
pany, and to use develop exercise or grant licenses
in respect of or otherwise turn to account the pro-
perty rights or information so acquired.
To enter into any arrangement for sharing profits
union of interests, co-operation, joint adventure,
reciprocal concession, or otherwise, with any
person or company carrying on or engaged in or
about to carry on or engage in any business or tran-
saction which this Company is authorised to carry
on or engage in, or any business or transaction
capable of being conducted so as directly or
indirectly to benefit this Company, and to take or
otherwise acquire shares and securities of any such
company, and to sell, hold, re-issue with cr with-
out guarantee or otherwise deal with the same.
To take or otherwise acquire and hold shares in any
other company having objects altogether or in part


(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
similar io those or this Company or carrying on any
business capable of being conducted so as directly
or indirectly to benefit this Company.
To obtain any provisional order, concession, or Act
of Parliament in any State, Colony, or foreign
country for enabling the Company to carry any of
its objects into effect or for effecting any modifica-
cation of the Company’s constitution or for any
other purpose that may seem expedient. And to
oppose any proceedings or applications which may
seem calculated directly or indirectly to prejudxe
the Company’s interests.
To enter into any arrangement with any govern-
ments or authorities, licensing, municipal, shire,
local or otherwise that may seem conducive to the
Company’s objects or any of them and to obtain
from any such government or authority any rights,
privileges and concessions which the Company may
think it desirable to obtain and to carry out, exer-
cise and comply with any such arrangements,
rights, privileges and concessions.
To obtain and support or aid in the establishment
and support of associations, institutions, funds,
trusts, and conveniences calculated to benefit em-
ployees or ex-employees of the Company or the
dependents or connections of such persons, and
grant pensions and allowances and to make pay-
ment towards insurance and to subscribe or guar-
antee money for charitable or be: evolent objects or
for any exhibition or for any public, general or use-
ful object.
To undertake, carry on, execute all kinds of flnan
cial or trading operation cr business.
To construct, maintain, and alter any buildings or
works necessary or convenient for the purposes of
the Company.
To promote any company or companies for the
purpose of acquiring all or any of the property and
liabilities of this Company or for any other purpose
which may seem directly or indirectly calculated to
benefit this Company.


(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
To remunerate the Managing Director, Directors,
managers, servants and employees oi the Company
or any of them by way oi salary or commission or
participation in profits or by any or ail of those
modes.
1 o remunerate any person or company for services
rendered or to be rendered in placing or assisting
to place or guaranteeing the placing of any of the
shares in the Company s capital or any debentures,
debenture stock or other securities of the Company
or in or about the formation or promotion of the
Company or the conduct of its business.
To borrow or raise or secure the payment of money
in such manner as the Company shall think fit and
in particular by the issue of debentures or deben-
ture stock, perpetual or otherwise charged upon
all or any of the Company’s property, both present
and future, including its uncalled capital, and to
purchase, redeem or pay off any such securities.
To invest and deal with the moneys of the Com-
pany not immediately required in such manner as
may from time to time be determined.
To lend money to such persons, corporation, or
body of persons, and on such terms as may seem
expedient, and in particular to customers and
others having dealings with the Company, and to
guarantee the performance of contracts by any
such persons.
To sell, improve, manage, develop, exchange,
lease, mortgage, enfranchise, dispose of, turn to
account or otherwise deal with all or any part of
the property and rights of the Company.
To let out on hire all or any part of the property
of the Company including every description of
apparatus or appliances of the Company.
To draw, make, accept, endorse, discount, execute,
and issue promissory notes, bills of exchange, bills
of lading, warrants, debentures, and other negoti-
able or transferable instruments, and to enter into
any guarantee or undertaking.


(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
To undertake and execute any trusts the undertak-
ing whereof may seem desirable and either
gratuitously or otherwise.
1 o sell or dispose of the undertaking of the Com-
pany or any part thereof for such consideration as
the Company may think fit and in particular for
shares, debentures or securities of any other Com-
pany having objects altogether or in part similar
to those of this Company.
To adopt such means of making known the business
and products of the Company as may seem ex-
pedient, and in particular by advertising in the
press, by circulars, by purchase, and exhibition of
works of art, or interest by publication of books
and periodicals, and by granting prizes, rewards,
and donations.
1 o develop and turn to account any land acquired
by the Company or in which it is interested, and in
particular by laying out and preparing the same for
building purposes, constructing, altering, pulling
down, maintaining, fitting up, and improving
buildings and conveniences, and by subdividing,
planning, paving, draining, farming, cultivating,
letting on ‘building lease or building agreement,
or on share farming, and by advancing money to
enter into contracts of all kinds with builders,
tenants, and others.
To join any association of employers engaged in
any business or businesses similar to the business or
businesses which this Company is authorised to
carry on for the mutual protection and advantage
of such business or businesses, and for that purpose
to use the funds cf the Company for contributions
towards the costs, charges, or expenses which such
association may incur or be put to in relation to
any industrial matters and disputes.
To distribute any of the property of the Company
in specie amongst the members.
To amalgamate with any other company having
objects altogether or in part similar to those of this
Company.


(40) To effect insurances on the property of the Com-
pany and against the death or sickness of or
accident or injury to any Director, manager, ser-
vant, or employees of the Company, or any other
person or persons whose death, sickness, accident,
or injury would in the opinion of the Directors of
the Company be likely to prejudicially affect the
undertaking or profits of the Company, and
generally to insure against loss, disaster, or damage
of any and every description.
(41 ) To do all or any of the above things in any part of
the Commonwealth of Australia or in any part of
the world as principals, agents, contractors, or
otherwise, and by or through trustees, agents or
otherwise, and either alone or in conjunction with
others.
(42) To do all or any such things are are incidental or
conducive to the attainment of the above objects.
AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that the word “Com-
pany” in this clause shall be deemed to include any partner-
ship or other body of persons whether incorporated or not
incorporated with which this Company may be or become
amalgamated or associated for business purposes and whether
domiciled in the State of New South Wales or elsewhere, and
the intention is that the objects specified in each paragraph
of the clauses shall, except where otherwise explained in such
paragraphs, be in no wise restricted by reference to or infer-
ence from the terms of any other paragraph or the name of the
Company.
4.. The liability of the members is limited.
5 The capital of the Company is £5,000 divided into five
thousand shares of one pound each, with power to hold any
of such shares in reserve, and to issue the same from time to
time either at par or at a premium as the Directors of the
Company shall see fit, and to increase or reduce the capital
and to divide the shares into capital, whether original or
increased, for the time being of the Company into several
classes and to attach thereto respectively any preferential,
deferred, qualified, or special rights, privileges or conditions.


WE, the several persons whose names addresses and descrip-
tions are subscribed hereto are desirous of being formed
into a Company in pumance of this Memorandum of
Association and we respectively agree to take the number
of shares in the capital of the
respective names.
Company
set opposite our
Witness to
Signatures.
Names, Addresses and Des-
criptions of Subscribers.
Leonard Snowden Smith,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Solicitor.
Yukichi Yamashita,
283 Clarence Street,
Sydney.
Importer,
Kinuko Yamashita,
19 Courtenay Road,
Rose Bay, N.S.W.
Importer.
Stuart Cyril Quigg,
21 Rosemount Avenue,
Pennant Hills,
Commercial Traveller.
Marjorie Clare Hayes,
Warby Street,
Campbelltowh.
Secretary.
Kenneth Malcolm McCaw,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Solicitor.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Vera Cookson,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Clerk.
Noel Wemyss Baker,
255 a George Street,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Wool Buyer.
Vera Cooksou,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Clerk.
Dated this Twenty-fourth day of September, One
thousand nine hundr-ed and thirty-four.


THE COMPANIES ACTS, 1 899-1918.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES.
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
KIKU GUM! (AUSTRALASIA) LIMITED.
It is hereby agreed as follows:
1. All the Articles in Table “A” in the Second Schedule
to the Companies Act (No. 40 of 1899), except Articles 30,
37, 42, 43, 44, 52, 57, 63, 72 and 82, shall be deemed to be
incorporated with these presents.
2. The Company shall forthwith enter into such agree-
ments and do such things as are necessary to give effect to
Paragraph ( 1 ) of Clause 3 of the Company’s Memorandum
of Association and shall carry the same into effect with full
power nevertheless from time to time to agree to any modifica-
tion thereof either before or after execution.
3. A General Meeting of the Company shall be held at
least once in every year at such place as the Directors may
determine.
4. No business shall be transacted by any General Meet-
ing except the declaration of a dividend, unless a quorum of
members is present at the time when the meeting proceeds
to business, and such quorum shall consist of at least three
persons present, either in person or by proxy.
5. At any General Meeting, unless a poll is demanded by
at least two members, a declaration by the Chairman that a
resolution has been carried and an entry to that effect in the
book of proceedings of the Company shall be sufficient
evidence of the fact without proof of the number of propor-
tions of the votes recorded in favour of or against such resolu-
tion.


6. If a poll is demanded, as aforesaid, it shall be taken
in such manner and at such time and place as the Chairman of
the meeting directs, and either at once or after an adjourn-
ment, and the results of the poll shall be deemed to be the
resolution of the meeting at which the poll was demanded, and
in the case of an equality of votes at any General Meeting
the Chairman shall be entitled to a second or casting vote.
7. Every member shall have one vote for every share
held by him.
8. Until otherwise determined by General Meeting, the
number of Directors shall not be less than two nor more than
five.
9. The first Directors of the Company shall be Yukichi
Yamashita and Kinuko Yamashita.
10. (a) The directors may rrom time to time appoint any
person to be Managing Director of the Company,
either for a fixed term cr without any limitation as
to the period for which he is to hold such office,
and may from time to time remove or dismiss him
from office and appoint another in his place.
(b) A Managing Directr. • shall, subject to the provisions
of any contract between him and the company, be
subject to the same provisions as to resignation and
removal as the other directors of the company,
and if he, being a director, cease to hold the office
of director from any cause, he shall ipso facto and
immediately cease to be a Managing Director.
(c) The remuneration of any Managing Director shall
from time to time be fixed by the directors, and
may be by way of salary or commission or parti-
cipation in profits, or by all or any of those modes.
(d) The directors may from time to time entrust to and
confer upon a Managing Director for the time being
such of the powers exerciseable under these
presents by the Directors as they may think fit, and
may confer such powers for such time and to be
exercised for such objects and purposes and upon
such terms and conditions and with such restrictions
as they think expedient, and they may confer such
powers either collaterally with, or to the exclusion
of and in substitution for all or any of the powers
of the directors in that behalf, and may from time
to time revoke, withdraw, alter or vary all or any
of such powers.


11. The office of Director shall be vacated
If he become bankrupt or insolvent
12. The Directors may, with the sanction of the Com-
pany in General Meeting, declare a dividend to be paid to the
members in proportion to the capital paid up on the shares
held by them respectively.
13. The Directors may decline to register any transfer of
shares except a transfer of shares from one member of the
Company to another member of the Company without assign-
ing any reason therefor.
14. No Director shall be disqualified by his office from
contracting with the Company, either as an officer of the Com-
pany or as Vendor, purchaser or otherwise, nor shall any such
contract or any contract or arrangement entered into by or on
behalf of the Company in which any Director shall be in any
way interested be avoided, nor shall any Director so con-
tracting or being so interested be liable to account to the Com-
pany for any profit realised by any such contract or arrange-
ment by reason of any such Director holding that office or of
the fiduciary relation thereby established, but it is declared that
the nature of his interest must be disclosed by him at the meet-
ing of the Directors at which the contract or arrangement is
determined on if his interest then exists, or in any other case
at the first meeting of the Directors after the acquisition of his
interest.
1 5. The common seal of the Company shall be deposited
at the office of the Company, and shall never be affixed to any
document except in the presence of a Director, and in pur-
suance of a resolution of the Directors or a Committee of the
Directors duly au th orised by the Directors.
16. The Directors may from time to time, at their discre-
tion, raise or borrow any sum or sums of money for the pur-
pose of the Company.
1 7. The Directors may raise or secure the repayment of
such moneys in such manner upon such terms and conditions
in all respects as they think fit, and in particular by mortgage
of the whole or any part of the property or undertaking of
the Company, or by the issue of debentures or debenture stock
charged upon all or any part of the Company, both present
and future including its uncalled capital for the time being.


WE, the several persons whose names are subscribed here
under, being subscribers to the Memorandum of Associa
tion of Kiku Gumi (Australasia) Limited, hereby agree
to the foregoing Articles of Association.
Number of
Names, Addresses and Des-
criptions of Subscribers.
Shares.
taken by each
Subscriber.
Witness to
Signatures.
Leonard Snowden Smith,
3.6 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Solicitor.
Yukichi Yamashita,
283 Clarence Street,
Sydney.
Infborter.
Kinuko Yamashita,
19 Courtenay Road,
Rose Bay, N.S.W.
Importer.
Stuart Cyril Quigg,
21 Rosemount Avenue,
Pennant Hills,
Commercial Traveller.
Marjorie Clare Hayes,
Warby Street,
Campbelltown.
Secretary.
Kenneth Malcolm McCaw,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Solicitor.
Noel Wemyss Baker,
255 a George Street,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street
Drummoyne.
Ty piste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
‘Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
‘Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street,
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street;
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Olive Mary Purcell,
“Francisca,”
5 Alexandra Street
Drummoyne.
Typiste.
Vera Cookson,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Clerk.
Vera Cookson,
36 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
Wool Buyer.
Clerk.
Dated this Twenty-fourth day of September, One
thousand nine hundred and thirty-four.




*£****>< v ’ J > * 1 ' <
I
-
V* 'V > •'- •■> ■ ■ <■ . - f ; '\ -V ■•-■
- ■ t -*v , ' ..■
-
.-<*■. 4.-;> -" ■ sir ■ ■ ,■* •, -■ . r . "-'•F-i.' 4- 3*
jSx */; F-; -;.i _:■
,
,< VI ty ■ "■■ “■ *\- f * ' sj .yy \~-:.t: ' .V. ,:+■■ '. i
