

DIRECTIONS
FOR SAILING
In the NORTHERN PART
OF
The BAr of BENGAL.
BY
Capt. JOHN RITCHIE, and BARTH. PLAISTED,
Marine Surveyors to the Honorable EAST-INDIA COMPANY;
AND BY
BENJAMIN LACAM,
Proprietor of NEW-HARBOUR, in BENGAL.
Multi pertransibunt, & augebitur Scientia. BACON.
LONDON:
Printed for the AUTHOR.
M,DCC,LXXXV.


To the Honorable the Court of Directors
for the Affairs of the United Company
of Merchants of England trading to
the East-Indies.
Honorable Sirs,
H aving laid before you every
information, relative to the policy and
advantage of refitting His Majefty’s fhips
at Bengal, in time of war, and during the
change of the Monfoon j I beg leave to
add the following extraCts, remarks and
directions, for navigating capital fhips
into the River Hoogly : and I flatter
myfelf they may finally elucidate the
fubjeCt,


fubje&, to the perfect fatisfa&ion of your
Honorable Court.
I have the honor to be,
with the higheft refpes:,
Honorable Sirs,
Your faithful,
Moft obedient and
Moll humble fervant,
Benjamin Lac am,
Cecil-Jlreety London ,
fthe 22 d of Augufty 1785.
INTRO-


INTRODUCTION.
It is not the intention of the Author, to enlarge
on the beauties of the Ganges ; but to confine him-
felf to fuch points as immediately concern the fafety
of its navigation, for the advantage of commerce,
and the accommodation of the Britilh Fleet fta-
tioned in the Eaft-Indies, to protedl the territorial
acquifitions belonging to the Honorable Eaft-India
Company.
With this view three Charts were publilhed in
the year 1779, from which it appeared, that the
Eaftern Channel and Channel Creek, contained a
greater depth of water at low tide , than could be
had on the Eaftern Brace (up the Old Channel at
high water; and that during the North-Eaft Mon-
foon, upwards of one hundred miles would be faved
in the run of fhips bound to Bengal, by entering
the River through either of thefe Channels. As >
all fhips are obliged in the. North-Eaft Monfoon to
make the Eaftern fide of the Bay, and run down their
wefting in about 21 deg. they muft unavoidably
ftrike particular foundings in the Swatch, and on
a the.


the Eaftern Sea Reef, where, during the North-Eaft
Monfoon, the pilot-floops fhould be flationed.
To render this navigation immediately ufeful, the
Author’s former Charts have been revifed, and
materially improved from furveys of a much later
date, taken by himfelf, and combined with thofe
of ingenious men on the fjpot.
The Plan of New Harbour, as far as it relates to
the fhores, fands, channels, and foundings, was
taken by Captain John Ritchie, Marine Surveyor to
the Elonorable Eaft-India Company, who furveyed
the place, in confequence of public orders for that
purpofe, from the Governor-General and Council
of Bengal. This Gentleman, in his Report to that
Board, after enumerating the advantages to be
obtained by adopting the plan, writes as follows.
u Is it abfurd to think that Channel Creek might
“ become very valuable to Bengal ? Surely not; for
“ I believe that impartial enquiry would find it to
11 be the only place about Hoogly River where
“ docks, could be made, in which large Chips might
“ be readily cleaned or repaired at all times of the
<c year.”
In the third paragraph of his Report, Captain
Ritchie informed the Governor-General and Coun-
cil,


cil, that the fpring-tides, at New Harbour, rife and
fall at leaft "Three Fathoms , and therefore the change
is fufficient for repairing fhrps, either upon ways or
in docks; and in the feventh paragraph he takes
notice of the important advantages which His
Majefty’s fhips would derive from a refitting har-
bour fo fltuated ; becaufe they might preferve their
ftation on the Coaft of Coromandel, and be ready
to defend and protedl the moft valuable part of the
Company’s poflefllons.
In his tenth paragraph he aflerts, ct that thefe
<c are not matters of mere opinion , but abfolute faSisT
The Chart of Channel Creek, from George’s Point
to the Sea, includes the Pattern Channel, and will
render the Navigation ttmple and eafy. Each channel
has advantages in the different Monfoons. The
Eaftern Channel claims a preference for large Ships
in the Royal Navy, during the change of the Mon-
foon, which is the only time the fleet cannot remain
upon the Coaft of Coromandel.
The Chart of Balafore Road, with the courfe and
foundings of the River Hoogly, from Calcutta to
the Sea, will give a general idea of the ftate of that
navigation, which during the South-Weft Monfoon
is extremely dangerous, and requires the very beft
a 2 Guides,,


Guides, with every pofllble affiftance, to prevent the
annual lofs of fhips at the entrance of that River.
To this Chart is added a particular furvey of that
part of Hoogly River near Calcutta, which is called
fometimes Calcutta River; and the fcale was large
enough to exhibit, with fome detail, the fortifications
of Fort William.
The Chart of the Northern part of the Bay of
Bengal will prefent at one view the whole of that
Coaft, with the foundings acrofs the Bay, the fitua-
tion of the Swatch of no ground, and the entrance
of all the Rivers which form the feveral mouths of
the Ganges.
The Chart with the comparative tracks of fhips
in the different Monfoons, Brewing the connexion
and refpe&ive diftances by fea, between the principal
Harbours and Settlements in the Fall-Indies, will
explain itfelf. This Chart exhibits alfo, in a parti-
cular Plan, the precife fituation of the Englilh and
French Fleets, in nine different engagements ; which,
with the taking of Gheriah and Chandernagore, by
Admiral Watfon and Sir George Pocock, includes
the important fervices of the Britifh Fleet in that
part of the Globe.
It


It may be neceflary to obferve, that the rock called
Bah of Cotton Rocky and laid down near the track
from Trincomale to Pondicherry, in the North-
Eaft Monfoon, has been feen by a Gentleman of
veracity, with whom the Author has converted on
the fubjedt, and who has given a letter under his
hand, attefting the particulars. The {hip pafled it
at low water : —But as the extract from the letter
may be more fatisfaflory, the Author of thefe
remarks gives it to the Public.
<c We left Bengal on the 28th of March 1767,
ct bound to Bombay : we had little wind, chiefly
“ Northerly, down the Bay of Bengal. On the
“ sth of May, about eleven o’clock in the forenoon,
<c we then fleering South-Eafterly, wind at North,
tc a light breeze, and the weather very clear, faw
“ fomething right a-head of the fhip, and not unlike
“ a bale of cotton : upon our nearer approach we
<c clearly perceived it to be a rock, in length from
<c 30 to 40 feet, and about 20 feet broad, two feet
“ above the furface of the water, of a light-brown
“ colour, like a new fpunge. It being noon, the
ct medium of three obfervations gave us 5 deg.
“ 22 min. North; we founded at the fame time, but
<c no ground at 120 fathoms. It bore from us E.S.E.
diftance


<£ diftance about a mile. The fea being very fmooth,
<c we had a perfetft view of it, not going at more
<£ than two knots an hour; and by our account we
££ were in the longitude from Point Palmiras oo deg.
lt 31 min. Eaft. Going to the Southward until
<£ fun-fet, we found the variation of the compafs to
“ be 00 deg. 14 mm. Eaft, by the medium of three
££ azimuth?, carefully taken. At four in the after-
<{ noon we faw a fhip, which we fpoke with foon
tc after fun-fet; fhe proved to be a Portuguefe, and
<c informed us that fhe was about 100 leagues to
££ the Eaft ward of Point De Gaul, in the Iftand of
<£ Ceylon, and had left that port only feven days*
u having a fair wind all the time. Upon comparing
££ our accounts of longitude we were 2 deg. 38 min.
££ Eaft of her, allowing Point De Gaul to be in the
££ longitude from the Meridian of London 81 deg.
££ 13 min. Eaft.*
* It muft be obferved Here, that Capt. Ritchie has taken notice of this rock
fevefal years ago; and we fhall quote his own words: “ The Rock laid down in
“my Chart of the Bay of Bengal (conftru&ed in 1772) in latitude 5 deg.
“ 25 min. N. (our Account fays, 5 deg. 22 min.) 5 deg. Eaft from Point de
“ Gaul, or 84 deg. 42 min. Eaft from London, was feen by a Macao fhip, and
“ a!fo by Capt. Widgeon, of the fhip London, in April 1767. It is only two
“ feet above the furface of the Tea, 20 feet long and 12 broad; and no ground
“at 100 yards diftance from it. The Portuguefe fhip,” adds Mr. Ritchie,
“ having juft before taken her departure from-Ceylon, it is prefumed that there
“ cannot be any great miftake in the longitude of the Rock.”
CONTENTS.


CONTENTS.
P A R T I.
Page
Survey of the Coajl from Point Palmiras to the Braces ;
of the Out-lets of the Ganges, and of the interjacent
Rivers from Hughly, or Hoogly River, to Roymongul.
By Capt. Ritchie. ------ i
PART 11.
-Directions for Sailing from the Aracan Shore, along the
Coaf of Chittigong. By Capt. Ritchie. - - - 23
Sailing Directions for the Coaf of Chittigong. By Mr.
Plaifted -- - ----29
Inf ruCtions for Chittigong River. By ditto. - "35
Directions for Crofing the Head of the Bay of Bengal. By
Capt. Ritchie. - - - - - ~39
Of the Tides in the Bay of Bengal. By ditto. - - 42
PART


P A R T 111.
Page
InfruElions for Piloting Ships to Sea in the North-Eaji
Monfoon, by the way of New Harbour. By Mr. Lacam. 44
DireSiions for Piloting large Ships from Sea, into the Hoogly
River, during the South-Wef Monfoon. By ditto. - 46
DireSiions for Piloting Ships up the Eaftern Channel, during
the South-Weft Monfoon. By ditto. - - - 49
DireSiions for Piloting Ships from Sea, up the Eaftern
Channel, in the Nortb-Eaf Monfoon. By ditto. - - 49
Healthinefs of New Harbour. - - - 51
Tide Table for the Wef Part of the Bay of Bengal. By
Mr. Lacam. - --- _ _ “54
A Letter to Major Rennell. - - - - - 57
DIREC-
CONTENTS.


DIRECTIONS
FOR SAILING
In the NORTHERN PART
OF
The BAr of BENGAL.
PART I.
Survey of the Goaft from Point Palmiras to the Braces ; of
the Outlets of the Ganges, and of the interjacent Rivers from
Hughly River to Roymongul.
By Capt. JOHN RITCHIE, Marine Surveyor to the
East-India Company.
Point Palmiras, becaufe of its fituation, muft be the firft
article in thefe remarks, although it was not the firft ohjeCl of
the furveys: for to thofe who have the charge of Ihips bound to
Bengal, it is of the utmofl importance to be well informed about
this place; and although there are directions publilhed in the
Neptune Oriental, which, when attended to, have ferved to con-
duct ihips clear of the Point, yet, as it is the bufinefs of a Sur-
veyor to defcribe a place of danger, as well as the means of
avoiding it, and alfo any improvement that might be made for
the benefit of navigation, my account of this, and all other
places which I have furveyed, will be fuch rs if nothing had
before been publilhed concerning them : for I muft confefs that
I examined every place, even in the moll common tracks, as if
it had never been feen before, and have only drawn, and
remarked, what I faw and obferved. It was necefiary to fay
B this


this much, becaufe the Bay of Bengal will have altered its-
form very confiderably in my Plans, from what it appears to-
have in the old charts j and it is not my intention to give any
other reafon for it, nor to condemn or approve what others
have done or faid. Every work of this kind muft carry the
marks of truth along with it, otherwife it will not be believed:
and after all, where different men have defcribed, or given
direction about the fame place, it ought always to be left to the
judgment of the navigator, to determine which he will follow ;
becaufe often his life and fortune, as well as thofe of others,
depend upon it.. Befides, in a branch like this, where one half
of a Surveyor’s bufinefs lies hid under water, fome things will
at times efcape his moft careful fearch.
Point Palmiras is (to fea-ward) encompafled by a bank of
rocks, and fand, on which the depth* of water is very various,
between one and four fathoms ; it is in fome places very fteep-
to, there being ten fathoms clofe to the edge of the bank,
and not more than three upon it: the N. E. edge is the fleepeft ;
to the eaflward it is flat a little, and the South fide is flatted; of
all. Perhaps it will be better for feamen, to mention the man-
ner in which it was examined, nearly as it is remarked in the
Journal., I traced the Bank of Palmiras in the Mercury Pilot
fchooner, attended by two Hoops; and the account then given of
it runs thus. We weighed anchor from Churinga Road, about
noon, the wind South-wefterly; and fleered along fliore towards-
Point Palmiras, in a depth from two to three fathoms, the ground
varioufly hard and foft. To tire Northward of Kannaka or Ran-
naka river there is a flat, which reaches- off from the fliore, a,
league or more; it is all very flioal, and great part of it dries,
at low water. We pafled along the edge of this flioal, in two
fathoms water, the courfe S. E. 6c S-E. by S, When Kannaka,
river-


river bore W. S. W. the depth upon the fame courfe increafed
from three to nine fathoms, in little more than a mile diHance.
Being now about four miles off fhore, and the wind coming
fuddenly round to S. E. a fine working breeze. We tacked,
flood into two fathoms water, and for the remainder of the
days plied along the edge of the Palmira bank. E. N. E.
from Point Palmiras, about a league diflance, there is a dry
fand, or ifland, extending Eaft and Weft, about two miles in
length, and half as broad; it lies upon the N. E. edge of the
bank, and is detached from the Point, by a channel with a
fand in the middle of it, which dries at low water.
I know not what depth of water there is in this channel ; but
while we were here, feveral coafling Paddy-boats, which came
from the Northward, went through it. All along the N. E.
edge of the Palmira Bank, the depth decreafes very regularly in
approaching it. This is to be underflood, in the wake of, or
abreafl of the ifland only j for to the Eaflward of the ifland it
is otherwife, as will be mentioned prefently after: and we flood
on to within a cable’s length, or little more, of the ifland, and
tacked in three fathoms water : the bottom without this depth
is foft, and here it is fand mixed with mud. When we had
worked to the Eaflward of the ifland, about two miles, and
were Handing on to the bank (about fun-fet) the water fhoaled
fuddenly from ten to feven, and then to four fathoms. As fall
as the lead could be thrown at the lafl-mentioned depth, the
veffel was immediately thrown into flays ■, and although fhe
came about very quickly, yet we had not more than three
fathoms, when the fails were trimmed. The wind by this time
had drawn round to South, and on Handing off E. S. E. the
water fhoaled to two and a half fathoms, which obliged us to
bear up to N, E. and upon this courfe the water deepened to five,
ten, and fifteen fathoms, in four minutes of time. Here we
B 2 anchored


anchored for the night; and I doubt not but every feaman will*
by this account, perceive the danger of bordering too clofe upon,
the bank, with ftfips of great burden, efpecially at this part of
it, where a fliip in feven fathoms water might , take the ground,
before the next call of the lead could be thrown. In the morn-
ing we weighed at fix o’clock, the wind variable from S. S. W.
to S. S. E. and played along the Eaftern part of the bank: here
alfo it is pretty fteep, being from twelve to feven, and then to
four fathoms, in about half a mile difiance. As we got round
to the Southward, we found the edge of the bank much flatter y
and when Point Palmiras bore Weft, we had five fathoms upon
the rocky ground; and in fianding on toward the Point, about
a mile farther, there were four fathoms ; the bottom rocky, and
covered with fand and fiiells. Here we anchored, in order to
obferve the latitude of the Point, the refult of which obfervations
I have already remarked*. In the afternoon, when we had made
a firetch or two to the Southward, we found the bank flat
off regularly to fea-ward; and indeed its limits to the Southward
can only be known, by the change of ground, from foft mud to
a mixture of coarfe fand and mud, with rotten fiones, and
broken fliells. The land of Point Palmiras is covered with
palmira-trees, from which, I believe, it got the name : it is
much indented about the Point, there being the mouth of a
river, at a fmall diftance, on each fide of it; that to the South-
ward is a pretty large inlet, and mufi be navigable for fmall
veffels, as the Paddy-boats which paffed between the Point and
the Ifland went into it. From this inlet the courfe of the
fhore is- S. W. for three leagues,, and then makes an elbow, falling
off W. S. W. for ten miles farther; which brings us to the
bottom of Falfe Bay: here it turns fliort round to South, and
S. byE..
• Mr. Ritchie found the Latitude of Point Palmiras to be 20 deg. 43 min.. N..
and its Longitude from Greenwich, 87 deg. 5 min,


S. by E. for feven miles, to the Falfe Point of Palmiras.
There are two rivers’ mouths juft to the Northward of this
point; which are fome of the outlets of the river Congo,
which runs through almoft the whole Maharattar country,
and which has the large town of Cuttack fituated upon an
ifland in it: but the principal outlet of this river is feventeen
miles N. E. of the Black Pagoda, at an elbow of the land; and
there is a hard flat, extending a confiderable way to fea-ward
from it, occafioned by land thrown out of the river. All over
Falfe Bay, the bottom is exceeding foft; the lead buries in it,
and brings up a greenifh mud. There is a dry bank which runs
off Falfe Point, nearly in the form of a horfeflioe: it turns fhort
round into the bay, and has fome Ihrubs growing upon it.
There is water within fide of it, but I cannot fay of what depth,
as this place has never been carefully examined; but, if there
be fufiicient depth of water, it is an excellent harbour for fmall
veffels.
Before we quit Point Palmiras, it may be ufeful to remark,
that, if a Light-houfe were ereCted upon the ifland, it would be
of the greateft ufe to ftlipping, in their coming round the bank,
to enter the Bay or Road of Balafore: and in ftrong South-
wefterly gales, when there is no certainty of meeting with a
pilot in the roads, and it is dangerous to truft to a ftiip’s ground-
tackle, they could haul clofe round the bank, and bringing the
Light-houfe to windward, might anchor, and ride in fmooth
water, in a depth of about ten fathoms, until the gale abated.
This fcheme is very practicable, and nothing can hinder Chips
from praCtifing it, but the uncertainty of knowing the fitua-
tion of the bank; which the ereCting a Light-houfe would
entirely remove, if proper directions were given concerning it.
The expence of building would not be great, if, as I conceive,
the bricks could be made, and lime burnt, at the Point; for it,
is.


is not to be doubted but there is earth, and {hells enough,
fit for the purpofc ; and a trifle- of money, impofed upon
{hipping, would foon reimburfc the expence. I {hall only
obferve farther, that a Light at this place ought not to be lefs
than ioo feet above the furface of the water: it would then be
feen from a {hip’s deck, where the eye was fixteen feet above
the furface of the water, at above five leagues diftance ; and this
far exceeds the extent of the bank in any direction : indeed it
would be feen from a large {hip’s mail-head, fliortly after the
came pail the Falfe Point.
The courfe of the ftiore, from Palmira Point to Churinga
River, is N. N. W. and the diftance, twenty-five nautical miles.
Kannaka River is about two leagues within the Point, and the
flat along ftiore to the Northward of this river has been already
mentioned. The Bight or Bay of Churinga has commonly been
called Kannaka Bay : it is a good road for veftels in the S. W.
monfoon ; but there is not more than three fathoms water, a
league from the land: befides, it is quite out of the track of {hips
bound into Hughly or Hoogly River ; and this is one good reafon
for recommending the anchorage under Palmira Ifland. About
Churinga Creek the land bends round to the E aft ward ; for
the courfe of the ftiore, from thence to Bulramgurry, at the
entrance of Balafore River, is N. E. by N. diftance twenty-
feven nautic miles. This part of the coaft is very flat, there
being little more than two and a half fathoms, above a league
from the land ; and in fome places, the banks dry at low water,
half a mile from the ftiore. There are feveral creeks here, which
are marked in the Plan of this place ; but I could not get their
names, although I had people with me who had frequented
thefe parts for twenty years : and this too is the cafe between
Balafore and Peply River j fuch unintelligent mortals we fome-
times


times meet with. From Balafore River, to the Eaft edge of
the Eaftern Brace, the courfe of the fhore is N. 76 deg. E. and
the diftance 76 nautical miles j that is to fay, from Balafore
River to Peply River, nineteen miles; from Peply to Beercool
Creek, feventeen miles; and from Beercole Creek, to the Eafl
edge of the Brace, nineteen miles. The whole of this laft di-
ftance has a much bolder fhore than the Bay of Churinga;
there being three fathoms at a fmall diftance from the land,
except where it is interrupted by the flat of Peply and a
fmall fand which lies along fhore at the head of the Brace.
But I muft drop the fubjedt a little, as the land which forms
the Bay or Road of Balafore has been defcribed, and try to con-
duct a fhip into it. When a fhip has made the Pagodas, upon
the coaft of Orifla, and is in depth of water from fifteen to
feventeen fathoms, it muft be obferved, that the courfe along
fhore to the Falfe Point, is N. 55 deg. E. and the diftance
feventeen leagues; I mean, from the Black Pagoda: and it muft
not be forgot, that between five and fix leagues, to the Eaft-
ward of it, is the fiat occafioned by the outlet of the River
Congo, which has been mentioned already. The water will be
fhoaler upon it, in the trail here propofed, and the ground
hard; but there is no danger, but that of miftaking the elbow
of the land, at this place, for Falfe Point; which can never
happen, if any attention is paid to the diftance before men-
tioned. 'There have , however, fever al mijiakes of this kind been
committed, by reafon of the hollow, or bight, in the fhore between
this place and Falfe Point, being mifiaken for Falfe Bay.
When Falfe Point bears W. N. W. which will happen at
the above diftance from the Black Pagoda, the courfe, to clear
Palmira Bank, is N. E. and the diftance thirty-one nautic
miles. This will bring Point Palmiras to bear W. N. W. after
which,.


which, the courfe jfhould be N. by E. until the water deepens j
for this track, you fhould keep 15 or 16 fathoms in rounding
Palmira Bank-; and foon afterwards, 18, 20, and 22 fathoms.
To prevent any miftake here, I muft obferve, that the above
is juft the courfe and diftance which the land and banks require,
without any regard to. the tides : but Navigators muft give
attention to the ebbs and floods here; for the latter preffes
ftrongly upon the land,, every where to the Northward of Falfe
Point, occafioned by the indraught of the rivers and creeks,
together with the natural flowing into the Bay of Churinga;
and the former has juft a-contrary .effefl: fo that the apparent
courfe fleered from Falfe Point, ,to round the Bank pf Palmiras,
will fometimes be E. N. E. and at others N. E. by N.. will be
fufficient. The guide to order this matter at prefent is, not to
increafe the depth of water too much, until round the bank ;
hut if a light-houfe were eredled, as I have mentioned, /hips
could then come round the bank, with an abfolute certainty of
their fituation, by night or.by day; and without danger of being
driven off upon the fea-reefs, as has been too often the .cafe.
If there were no tides to affeft a /hip’s motion; and it were
wanted to fteer direftly from the aboye fituation at Point Palmx-
ras, to the edge of the Weftern Brace, at the ufual crofting track,
the courfe would be N. 40 deg. E. and diftance 52 nautical
miles; for fuch is the fituation of thefe places, with reipedl to
each other : but, as the pilot-veffels generally ride in about 17
fathoms water in the Southern monfoon, and in about 11 fathoms
in the Northern, it is therefore neceffary, when round the Bank
pf Palmiras, to fteer N. W. or N. N, W. ,to the Road of Bala-
fore, in order to get a pilot for the river, and in this cafe too the
courfe muft be regulated by the tides, if there be no pilot -
v.efiels in the roads.
A /hip


A fhip fhould never go into lefs than 15 fathoms water,
during the Southern monfoon 3 nor into lefs than nine fathoms,
in the Northern : for if there be no pUot-veflels in fight, in
thefe depths fhe has nothing to depend upon but anchors and
cables: I muft therefore leave here, and fee what is in the
way, before fhe gets into Hughly river 3 only it may be necef-
fary firft to remark, that all the bay generally called JBalafore
Road, is very good anchoring ground 3 and the depth may be
any thing lefs than 20 fathoms, according as (hips go far into
it: in fhort, the depth at low water is nearly equal to the di-
ftance from the land, in miles, until we are very near the fhore 3
where, in Churingah Bay, the depth is lefs, and to the E aft ward
of Balafore it is more. .
The Plan fhews the foundings, better than all I could fay here
about it. There is indeed a patch of broken ground, off the Bay
of Churinga 3 it lies in about 11 fathoms water, which may
be feen difcoloured upon it, and its fituation and extent are marked
in the Plan. I have heard people mention feveral patches of
this kind, to be found in the Bay; but I could never find any
other than this 3 and am apt to believe, that all have feen the
fame patch, but have miftaken the fituation of their fhips.
Diredlly South from Peply River, lies the Flat of Peply, as it
is called, extending about three leagues from the land, and is
a league broad, or more ; the whole of it is hard ground, but at
the South end there is little lefs water upon it than there is upon
the foft ground on each fide : the fhoaleft part is between three
and four miles from the fhore, where there is not quite a fathom
at low water 3 this part is detached from the fhore by a fmall
channel, through which the country pilots of Balafore often
conduct fmall veflels, in the coafting way, to Hidgellee, com-
monly called Ingellee Road. The Braces are two hard fiats,
C lying


lying to the Southward of the Beercool ill ore, and extending
a great way to fea-wards: they are detached from the land by a
very tolerable channel, of three fathoms water, or more; and.
they feparatc Balafore Road from, the entrance of Hughly River.
The Weftern Brace is five miles broad at the North end, where
it begins, about two miles from the land : it lies N. by E. and,
S. by W. being feven leagues long; but, from,the middle to the-
South end; it is little more than two miles broad : in the depth
of ten fathoms it lofes itfelf infenfibly; and in the latitude
2 1 deg. 20 min. N. a part of it is to be found. The depth at low
water, upon this Brace, is at the North end, two fathoms ; at
the Crofling Track, three fathoms, on common tides ; and from
thence to the Southward it gradually increafes to eight fathoms 3,
after which, there is no more hard ground.
The Kell is a fwatch. of foft ground between the Braces,,
which entirely feparates. them : it is four miles broad, and from
it there is a paflage for fhips of moderate burthen, between ,
the head of the Eaftern Brace, and the land, to Ingellee., In
the eroding track of fhips, there is feven fathoms water, at the
Eaft fide,* there is fix at the Weft fide; and, indeed, no where
in the Kell is there lefs than five fathoms at low water.
The Eaftern Brace is four miles broad, from the North end
down to the eroding track; and from thence,to the South end,
it tapers away to a point, and bends round in a circle to S. E.
The whole length of this Brace is 12 leagues; and the hard
ground at the Southern extremity of it, is called the Eaftern
Sea Reef: on the North end of the Brace ? there is fomething
lefs than one fathom, at low water; and the depth increafes :
gradually to the Southward; there being two fathoms on the
Crofiing Track, and from three, to three and a half, at the
Southern extremity of it: this mull be underftood of the lowed:,
fpring tides.
The


The depth of water at the Eaftern part of the Kell will always
point out the depth upon the Eaftern Brace, there being juft
five fathoms difference, at the Crofling Track of fhips ; fo that,
when there is nine fathoms in the Kell, there is full four fa-
thoms on the Eaftern Brace, and about five on the Weftern.
As I have frequently mentioned the Crofling Track, it may be
neceflary to obferve, that it means a fpace athwart the Brace,
about two miles broad, in the direction E. by N. and between
the latitudes 21 deg. 21 min. and 21 deg. 23 min. North : how
it is found in coming from Balafore Road, I fhall have occafion
to fhew afterwards ; and fhall now proceed to give an account
of the fands and channels at the entrance of Hughly River.
Barrabulla is a fand which forms the Weft fide of the Fair
Way ; I mean the Little Fair Way here, dr common track. It
begins about three leagues S. by W. from the Pagoda of In-
gellee, and extends S. S. W. about ten miles : the North end
is called the Head, and the South end the Tail, of the Barra-
bulla j the firft is very fhoal, having only half a fathom, or fo,
at low water : it is very dangerous, there being five fathoms in
the Fair Way, clofe by it. The tail of this fand has not much
lefs water upon it than there is in the Fair Way ; only it is
broken ground, and over falls of about half a fathom every caft
of the lead.
Long-Sand begins at Kedgeree Point, and extends to the
Southward, to latitude 21 deg. 18 min. N. which is two leagues
to the Southward of where the buoy of the Fair Way is ufually
laid; it is, in all, 35 miles long; its width is various, but
generally it is narrow, having many patches, which dry at low
water: the directions which it lies in are S. by W. and N. by E.
At the South end it opens to a broad flat, having a greater depth
of water upon it than the Eaftern Brace has, in the fame lati-
C 2 tude.


lude. It muft be obferved,. that the paflages, called Cocker lees,
are no other than fwatches through the Long Sand. Of thefe
there are three ; one juft by Kidgeree Point, (ufed at this
prefent time , 1775);. another, between four and five miles more
Southerly, ( which is the old pajfage) ; and the third is diredlly
Eaft from where the Buoy of Ingellee is ufually laid. This laft
is not known to the. Pilots.,
Fair Way is a track, or paflage, between the . Long-Sand and
Barrabulla, lying nearly N. N. E. and S. S. W. the upper part
of it, or that between Barrabulla Head,, and Ingellee Road,
is called Broken Ground,, on account of the uneven bottom in
that fpace. The buoy is.laid down in this track,.for conducting
fhips through it. There are, firft,. the Buoy of Ingellee;
this is laid four miles diredtly South from the Pagoda of that
place : fecondly, the Buoy of the. Broken’ Ground; this lies
S. W. or thereabout, from the Buoy of Ingellee;. and this
diftance is between a league and four miles S. by W. A.large
league from this, lies the Buoy of Barrabulla Head; it is placed
clofe to the Eaft fide,of the fand of that name,, in not lefs than
five fathoms at low water: indeed there is here the deepeft
water of the whole Fair Way. The lower Buoy of Barrabulla
is ten miles diftant from that of Barrabulla Head, bearing
S. by W.. % W. neareft; and when there is a middle Buoy,
it fliould lie in the fame line, and half way between them.
The laft Buoy is. called that of the Fair Way; it is generally
placed S. W. by S. from the lower Buoy, of Barrabulla, and
between four and five miles diftant. from it.: but this, is not
always certain ;, for I have feen it lying fo much to the Eaft-
ward, as to be in lefs than three fathoms, at low water, upon
the hard ground of the Eaftern Brace; and in that, fituation it
could be feen from a fmall veflel’s maft-head,. in the Kell. The
Fair-


Fair-Way Soundings are, in general, 4 f fathoms at low water,
common tides; except at the Broken Ground, where there is
little more than three : but the Eaft fide pf this part is deepeft.
I jfhall juft remark, that the Fair-Way Buoy ftiould be in
the latitude 21 deg. 25 min. or between it and 26 N.
and muft quit this matter, by obferving, that there is a very
good paflage, between the Weftern Brace and Barabulla, for
veflels of moderate burthen ; but for the depth- in this I refer
to the Plan.
Gafper Sand is the greateft of all thofe in the Hughly en-
trance : it begins a little to the South Weftward of Mud Point,
in latitude 21 deg. 57 min. North, and goes S. by W. 20 miles,
where it bends round near Sagor Ifland, South Eaftward,
and extends as far as the latitude 21 deg. North. The North
end of this Sand is called the Mizen : it is very broad, and
fills up the whole entrance, leaving only a channel on each
fide; of which, one is the Road of Kidgeree, where the fhips
now ride (1775). The'middle part is called Gafper, which,
to the Northward of Sagor, is narrow, and to the Southward,
broad.: the South end is called the Eaftern Sea-Reef: but the
whole Mizen, Gafper, and Sea-Reef, is one continued fand,
with various depths of water upon it; and many patches, which
dry at low water. This fand is detached from the Eaftern
fhore, and Sagor Ifland, by a very good channel; only it is
fomewhat narrow at the North end, which, together with the
tides, would make the pilotage, going down, very difficult juft
at the Mizen Head.
Sagor or Sauger Ifland is the Eaft point of the great entrance of
Hughly River; Ifay great, to diftinguifh it from Channel Creek,
which is the little entrance: it is fituated between the latitudes
21 deg. 34 mm. and 21 deg. 4i» min. North, lying,N. N. W^
, and.


and S. S. E. being in length eight miles, and about half as broad;
it is detached from the land by a creek, the North end of which
dries at low water: and what is remarkable of this place, is,
that there is here the greatefl rife and fall of tides, of any
place about the Head of the Bay; for, on fpring-tides, the water
rifes and falls four fathoms.
Upon the Eaft fide of Sagor Ifland, is a Hindoo Pagoda, and
a large Tank of frefii water; it is a place of worfhip, to which
numbers of the Hindoos refort once a year; and the Bramins
fubfift upon the prefents given them of grain, roots, and dried
fruit. The Bramins call the Ifland Congo Sagor; but the
natives, in general, underftand Congo Sagor -to be the whole
land which feparates Channel Creek from the Weftern branch of
Hughly River ; except the little Ifland Coxes, which lies to the
Northward of Sagor Ifland ; and is no more than a league in
length, and two miles broad.
The country name of Channel Creek, is Barratulla; and
its courfe is S. by E, 30 miles : there are fome very quick turn-
ings in it, near the North end, which makes the Channel diffi-
cult ; otherwife it would be an excellentpajfage for fnps : but, at
,any rate, the North end of it is much the befi: place about
Hughly entrance, to moor {hips in, during the S. W. monfoon ;
and might be occupied that way, with very little trouble.
Upon the Eafi: fide of this Creek, in latitude 21 deg. 45 min.
N. is the Creek Dooagra, which gives a pafiage into the
Sundrybunds , or Sunderbunds. The whole land upon the
Coafi; of Bengal has this name, from a kind of timber,
called by the natives, Sundry-, although there are many
other kinds produced there ; for the whole woods are called by
this name. The Channel into Barratulla', at its mouth, is
flofe to the Eaftcrn land; it is narrow and deep, and from
thence


thence to fea-ward, a fhip might fleer S. E. by S. without fear..
The bottom here is foft black mud, with flars, or fhining
fpots,
. The Channel, to fea-ward, from Barratulla, is detached from
thofe to the-Weflward, by a flat, generally called Sagor Sand :
it is as hard as a terrafs, and extends to the Southward, as far
as the latitude 21 deg. 10 min. Near the land there are many
patches, which dry at low water ; and, for a long way to the.
Southward, there is not more than fix feet water upon it. Vef-
fcls going out of Channel Creek mufl be aware of this ; for the laf
of the ebb, and firfi of the flood tides, fet flrong to the Weflward
here. If in any time coming, there Jhould be a neceflity of making
Channel Creek the pafage for flnps into Hughly River, it would
be necefary to erect a light-houfe upon the Eafl point of the
entrance: this woidd be an excelleiit guide, both going out and
coming in.
Subtermooky is the next river Eafl of Barratulla: it is a
confiderable river, and has within its mouth an Ifland, called
Co]a Deep. By the Creek Dooagra, it has' a communication
with Barratulla, and one reach farther up, it divides into
branches, of which the Eaflern one is part of the lower paf-
fage through the woods, and is called Naukcherah. There is a
good depth of water in the channel of the lower part of this
river, and excellent anchorage for fhips, in the Southern mon-
foon: but it is mofl remarkable for having the little Ifland, Coja
Deep, near its mouth, between which and the land is the
befl harbour upon the Coafl of Bengal.
Coja Deep lies in the latitude 21 deg. 28 min. North,
18 miles to the Eafhvard of Sagar : it is about four miles from
the fhore, and its extent is fcarcely a mile over, either way: there
is, however, a charcoal manufactory upon if, N. N. W. from
this


this Ifland is the entrance of Subtermooky; and N. N. E. is
that of 'Jummerah , the next river between the Ifland and the
land which feparates thefe rivers : there is no where lefs than
five fathoms water ; and near the channels of the river, fix,
feven, or eight fathoms; it is, therefore, a very good anchorage
for fliips, when compared with any other place upon this Coaft.
The Ifland breaks the great fwell from the Southward, and the
flats and fands do the fame from .the E aft ward, or Weft ward.
The heft channel, .leading to this place, (fince called Hicks’s
Bafon ) and .confequently to both the rivers within it, runs
clofe by ;the Weft fide of Coja Deep: it is there two miles
broad, and has depth of ten fathoms at the Ifland: to fea-
ward the depth decreafes gradually to four, and three and
a half fathoms, which is the leaft. The Channel lies North
and South, and is bounded to the weftward by a flat, which
feparates it from the Channel of Barrabulla ; and to the Eaft-
ward, by another which ftretches off to the South Eaftward
of Coja Deep. There is a fand upon the Weftern flat,
a little to the Northward of the Ifland, which dries at low
water: and, at other times of tide, the fea breaks very high
over it, in ftrong Southerly gales. I need only fay farther,
that, if a fliip brings the Ifland to bear North Eaftwardly a
little, and fteers diredtly in, clear of the Weft fide of the Ifland,
the cannot mifs the Channel. This would be a place of great
importance, were it a little more conveniently fituated for
Calcutta.
When we go up Jummerah River about nine leagues, we
find its name changed to Nullaoah upon the banks of which,
and in the creeks about it, are the great fait Tuffals, of the fame
name: thefe, we are told, were formerly employed for the
benefit of the Nabob’s houfliold. The country to the N.W.
here, had once been well cultivated, but is now totally deferted.
The


The fields and inclofures are yet to be feen j and there is a rich-
nets of foil, and flrength of vegetation, feldom exceeded in
any country. There is an old Hindoo Pagoda upon a creek at
the Weft fide of this river: it is about 6o> feet high : the plan
is fquare ; and, from about two thirds of the whole height,
it is gathered into a point at the top: it is yet entire; and
each fide is exadlly in the form of a lancet. There has
been nothing of this form built lately by the Hindoos;
and I have feen' only one other in Bengal, of the kind. The
Jungle is very clofe and thick about the Pagoda; and it Hands
in latitude 22 deg. North, 20 miles eaft from the North end
=of Channel Creek. It is a few miles to the fouthward of this
that the creek Juggy Gaflah gives a paffage through to the
Muttwall, and has falt-works upon its banks on both fides.
Roy-Mattlah, or Muttwall, is the next river Eafhvard, the
channel of which is to fea, clofe to the Eaflern point of the
entrance: it is 32 miles to the Eaflward of Sagor, and is
feparated from the channel of Jummerah by a fhoal broken
flat. There is a creek which cuts off the point of land between
thefe rivers, into an ifland which the country people call Bull-
cherry ; and upon the Eaflern part of this, there are feveral
pits dug for frefh water; and a little to the N. E. of the Ifland
there are the mouths of two creeks. I muft obferve, that
there is no mark to know one part of the land from another,
along this coaft. The whole is low, and covered -thick with
trees: therefore the form of the land, in my Plans, is the
befl guide for the entrance of every river : and where-ever the
meridian diftance from Point Palmiras, or from Sagor, can be
tolerably afcertained, no great miftake needs be made. The lower
part of Muttwall is very large, being above a league broad;
and between the latitudes 21 'deg, 47 min. and 22 deg.
North, it forms feveral Blands, and divides into two branches, of
D which


that to the Weft ward is called Bogybogie j and it has this name
as far to the Northward as the latitude 22 deg. 20 min. where
it again feparates into three branches, the Wefternmoft of which
leads diredlly into the fait lake of Calcutta ; and until it is clofe
to the lake, there is no where lefs than three fathoms water, and
in many places much more ; fo that a fhip of confiderable bur-
then might come into the Muttwall, and having only a boat to
found before her, proceed diredtly up to Taida, a village jujl
beyond the lake. The Eafterri branch of Muttwall retains its own
name •, but it runs no great way up ; for, by dividing into many
little branches, it may be faid to lofe itfelf in the woods.. The
Southern extremity of the land, to the Eaftward of Muttwall,
is in latitude 21 deg. 29 min. North j and the bank to the South-
ward of this, is very fhoal for . a long way to fea-ward. The
channel at the river’s mouth is large, and fair, lying N. by W.
and S. by E. About ten miles from the land, the depth is
three fathoms at low water, and. gradually increafes to nine or
ten fathoms at the entrance.
Every feaman who may by accident be driven, or who may
have bufinefs upon the Coaft at the end of Bengal Bay, ought
to obferve what I am juft about to remark.
Conceive the whole of this coaft, when it is hr ft feen from a
fhip at fea, to have the appearance of a range of Ibw iflands
covered with trees and that the ground between the fhip and
them is a Hoping bank, with very little water in it, near the
land. Conceive the bank to be cut through by a channel from
between each illand; that thefe channels are varioufly fituated,
and have a different courfe ; but that they are all foft ground,
with an increafmg depth of water towards the land. When
the coaft can be feen from the deck, the depth of water is ih
general about three fathoms; and very few places have much
2 moire.


■more or lefs; I mean, at low-water. The bottom, at this
diflance off, is fluff ground. If a fliip, as flie draws nearer the
land, be in a channel, the ground will foon become quite foft,
and the depth increafe; but if flie be not in a channel, the
ground will fuddenly be found hard as a terrace, and the depth
will decreafe : if this lad: be the cafe, there is an immediate
neceflity of Handing athwart to the Eaftward, or Wefhvard, as
the wind will bed: permit, until the ground foften; and there
is no doubt but the depth will increafe at the fame time. When-
ever the ground is found, to be quite foft, a fliip fliould bear up
for-the opening without fear.; and as (he goes in, it will foon
-be perceived, that what appeared to be an opening between
;iflands, is in reality the entrance of a river: and, except about
.Sun Deep, this will be the cafe all over the head'of the Bay.
I am here fuppofing the cafe of a fliip being driven upon this
coaft by a Southerly tempefl:. It was a misfortune of this kind
which occafioned the coafl: to befurveyed; and it is with intent
;to render the furvey as ufeful as poflible, that I am fo particular
in deferibing the various lituations of the channels with refpeCl
;to the land, and the directions which they take upon the bank ;
and if ever it happens to contribute to the fafety of fliips, or
men, my labour , will not be lofl:.
It is from the fait-works that thofe who may be driven upon
this coafl: in tempeftuous weather,'are to expeCt the earliefl:
relief, either of-boats, or of men, to pilot them to the inhabited
country. ' The people employed upon this bufinefs, have the
general name of Mollingaho: they are a quiet, harmlefs call
of men; and not a little obliging, when not ill treated, or
frightened by the rough manners of European feamen. A fmall
fupply of frefli water may be had of them, and a little rice;
-that being the only provifion thefe people have; it is true that
D z fometimes


fometimes a few fowls may be had, but rather unwillingly,
becaufe they are brought as a prefent, or rather facrifice, to
Gaugie Sahib, (or the god of the woods) for protecting them
from tigers and wild beafts. It is by this means, that we every
where in the woods hear crowing of cocks, whether there be
people near the place or not ; for thefe birds flray away from the
Salt Churrs, and at laft become quite wild, and fometimes fly
over the rivers. I mention this, to prevent thofe who may
be unacquainted, from going into the woods, in fearch of peo-
ple, when they hear cocks crowing: and I fhall take notice of
the principal falt-works at the rivers and'creeks as I go on.
One caution is very neceffary, which is to beware of going
afhore at Salt Churrs in the night; for both the royal tiger
and leopard are always waiting about thefe places, and often
cover all the ground over at night, as may be feen by the prints
of their feet.
Bangadoony Is the next river to the Eaftward of theMutwall ;■
it is but fmall, being only a colledtion of the water of feveral
creeks or drains from the Jungles: there is however tolerable
deep water at its mouth ; and the courfe of the channel to fea-
wards is S. S. E. The river has its name from an ifland which
feparates its entrance from Gooa-Suba river. A veflel of tole-
rable burthen may pafs to the Northward of Bangadoony Ifland;
and between this, and a fmall ifland which lies in the paflage,
a fhip might moor fafe from every wind. There were formerly
falt-works at this place; but they have not been occupied of
late years.
Gooa-Suba comes next: it is a tolerably large river, but the
mofl difficult to enter of any upon the coaft. The channel
at its mouth takes over to the Eaftern land, and then bends
round in a circle to South: therefore whoever would go in here,
rauft


mull bring the middle of the land Eafl of . the river to-bear
North, and fleer diredtly in for it, until pretty clofe to the
£horej after which Hand over .to the. Bail ward, dole to Banga-
doony Ifland; and then the channel leads fair up the river. The
Plan will make this very clear, if attention be paid to it. The
firll reach of Gooa-Suba goes up about,N. W. at the .end .of
which there is,-upon the Baftern fhore, .a creek, with very
confiderable falt-works upon, its, banks. .Beyond this creek,
the courfe of the river, is North a confiderable way : it then
turns Ihort round to W. S. W. r and afterwards ,N. N. E. ...The
point of this laft Ihort bending is cut off by a creek, which
makes it an ifland.a About the latitude 21 deg. 58 min.- North,
in this river, -we again come to,the Sunderbund paflage : this is
at a very~ ihort .turning, of .the river,., from N. W. to E.
Southerly ; and the point is remarkable by being cut off into
a.fmall :round.ifland. .There are ; two creeks in the Weflern
Bight, which lead-through .to-, the Muttwall river; but the
Northern, one is.much the bed, rand is called ‘Terabanka
(thirteen.reaches). From this creek* if we would go to the
Eaflward, the paflage is one reach farther up Gooa-Suba; where
we come to . the creek Noabanka (nine; reaches) which leads
through to Harribanga , the next river Eaflward. It may
feem trifling, to be fo particular about the creeks which give-
paflage to boats through the woods: but I mufl obferve, that
in-cafes of fhipwreck, upon the coafl, flrangers here would never
of themfelves get out of the Sunderbunds, fuppofing they had
laved their lives in a boat. .
We come now to the Ball fide of the entrance, at which is
the great channel for the united waters of Roymungul and
Jebboonah. The point of land is in latitude 21 deg. 37 min.
North; and by it, the-depth in , the channel is 10 fathoms;
and


And within the mouth, 12 or 14 fathoms r out to fea-ward, the
depth leffens gradually to four fathoms. - The next entrance-is
one of the mod; important upon,the,coaft of Bengal, whether
we confider it as a place where fhips might find fhelter in a
ftorm, or as an inlet to an .enemy. It is called Roymungul
Entrance, from the river of that name; but there are two other
rivers, which difehargetheir waters by it; that to the Weft-
ward is Harribanga, And the Eaftern one is Jebboonah. Harri-
banga is feparated from Roymungul by a- tongue of land,
about, four, miles within the, entrance.
The valuable extracts above given, rivers which
run from the Delta, of .the Ganges into the Bay of Bengal,
are only ..a part of "Mr. Ritchie s Work. i.The Compiler,
lamenting that he is not in poftefllon of any more information
upon , that interefting fubjedt, is obliged to. leave a chafra,
.and-proceed to the Inftruftions. for the Coaft of Ghittigong,
given by that great and accurate Marine Surveyor, .as well .as
b/. his PredecelTor-Mr. Flaljlsd ,
PART


PART II.
Directions for Sailing from the Aracan Shore, along the
Coast of Chittigong.
By Capt. JOHN RITCHIE, Marine Surveyor to the
East-India Company.
Between the latitudes of 21 deg. 10 min. and 21 deg. 24mm-.
are fituated the White Cliffs of Aracan : they are feparated from
the Chittigong Coaft by the opening of Sangrial, of Cruzcool,
In - the offing near; the White Cliffs there is good anchoring
ground; it being ftiff a little below the furface, and foft on the
top; the depths gradually decreafing from 20 fathoms at 11
leagues off fhore, to 5 fathoms clofe in ;fo that a veffel, with
good ground-tackle, may ride a ftrong gale out.. The latitude
of 21 deg. and between that and the White Cliffs, is the bed;
landfall on this part of the coaft for veffels that are driven to the
Eaftward, by ftrefs of weather, or other accidents, it being
perfectly clear of fhoals, and ftcep-to. After making the land-
it is neceffary to haul off to the Weftward, to avoid the Banks,
of Kuttupdeah and Mafcall, which extend to the Southward
as far as 21 deg. 23 min. and off fhore 9 or 10 miles in fome
places ; fome of them being detached from the fhore, and
having wide and deep channels within; which channels, how-
ever, it would not be prudent to attempt, for want Of proper
marks. The outermoft bank is fteep-to on all lides, and has
from 15. to 20 fathoms clofe to it, and only 6 or 8 feet water
on it at low water. There is alfo a ftrong indraught of the
flood-tide towards the opening of Cruzcool, and the creeks
between


“between the Mafcall-Blands ; which makes it Hill more necef-
fary to keep a good offing, after having made the White Cliffs.
Should it happen, that by'mea'ns of hazy weather, or other
accidents, a ffiip ffiould be clofe in with the White Cliffs,
before difeovering them,' and the wind too far Wefterly to
clear the ffioals, and- too ftrong to attempt riding it out, a
place of ffielter may be found, by failing within the Wellern
Ihoal, or even within Kuttupdeah, if neceffaty, by attending
to the following directions. The Reef of Cruzcool extends
from the Point of Cruzcool to about 7 or 8 miles W. N. W.
On the Weflernpart of this reef, fmall fandyilland, called
Red Crab Illand, it being about' two miles S. S. W. from the.
South point of the Mafcall Illands. Leave Red Crab Illand a
league to the Eaflward.; and-from this Ration, which will be
in about 8 fathoms, fleer N. by W. in 10 to 15 fathoms, till
the paffage between Kuttupdeah and Mafcall is quite open ; then
lleer on- the- direction of the opening (which will be about
N. E? by N. in 7 to 10 fathoms water;) and having got within
•'the Point of Kuttupdeah, you may anchor fecurely in 10
fathoms, foft ground.- Note, That a fpit extends off the
Point of Kuttupdeah upwards of two miles, S. W. by S. and
that a bank projects from the Mafcall Ihore, to the dillance of
a mile and quarter. Both of thefe will be avoided by keeping
the aforefaid paffage quite open. It would be improper, and
indeed unneceffary, to run above a mile within the Point of
Kuttupdeah, by reafon of a bank that projects from it to more
than half way acrofs the channel, at two miles within the
entrance.
If the wind is fair* after making the White Cliffs, and the
Ihip bound to Chittigong, a North courfe from 18 fathoms
(when abreall of the cliffs in latitude 21 deg. 10 min.) will
carry the Ihip four miles clear of all the ffioals, palling them in
10 and


30 and 12 with an offing of 4 to 4I leagues from the
Mafcall Illands. When the South end of Kuttupdeah bears
W. by N. you are paft the North end -of the outer ffioal, and
may haul in more towards the ffiore, keeping in 9 or 10
fathoms, with an offing of full two leagues from Kuttupdeah.
When paft Kuttupdeah, haul ftill more in towards the ffiore,
till you get in fix fathoms, at a league off fhore, and coaft
along at that diftance till you difeover the mouth of Chitti-
gong River. The diftance from Kuttupdeah to the river’s
mouth is abput fix leagues ; the courfe N. |W. The coaft be-
tween thefe two places is low and flat near the fea, but hilly two
leagues in. Seven miles to the Southward of Chittigong River,
is the Sunkar River, or AngarCally : this, having a large open-
ing, may at firft be miftaken for Chittigong River.
If the weather is clear, it is not eafy to mifs the mouth of
Chittigong River. The chain of hills above mentioned, between
Kuttupdeah and the River, fituated at fix miles in land, end in’
a point abput three miles South of the parallel of the river’s
mouth. Four or five miles N. W. from the end of this chain
of hills, are two finall detached clufters of hills, within three
miles of the ffiore, the Northernmoft of which lies clofe
behind the Bunder, or anchoring-place, in the river. Should
the weather be hazy, there may yet be feen a tall flag-ftaff, and a
.remarkable tree, both clofe to the ffiore. The flag-ftaff ftands
•a mile and quarter to the Southward of Noman’s (or Norman’s)
Point, which is the South point of the entrance of the river:
the tree, which is thick and buftiy, and called the Fakeers tree,
ftands three miles South of Noman’s Point, and four North
■of the Sunkar River.
In very clear weather, the hill called Shahbroage, with two
around trees and a flag-ftaff on it, will be feen when a-breaft of
E the


the Fakeers tree, bearing N. |E. diftant 10 or 11 miles. This
hill terminates on the South a chain of low hills, that run
parallel to the Chittigong Coaft, and in which the Seetacoon
hill is the higheft, and moft remarkable.
Thofe that wait for a pilot for Chittigong River, Ihould
anchor abreaff of the Fakeer’s tree, from whence a gun may
be heard at Iflambad. The proper depth for anchoring, is in
fix fathoms, at a mile and a half from the fhore. The bottom
here, as well as all along the coaft from Kuttupdeah, is ftiffi
and excellent for holding ; but in ftrong gales the lea runs very
Ihort, and commonly breaks all over a fmall velfel.
I would not by any means advife a perfon to attempt entering
the river without a pilot ; but, Ihould neceffity oblige them to
pulh for it, I refer them to the directions given at the end.
If the Ihip draws too much water for the Bar, and a fcarcity
or badnefs of -ground tackle renders dangerous any attempt to
ride out the ftrong gales that blow on the fhore, at certain
feafons, Ihe may bear away for Bominy Harbour ; which is a
place of Ihelter, formed by the Iflands of Bominy and Sun-
deep, and the main land-. This Harbour lies about 12 {leagues
to the Northward of Chittigong River ; and, in order to reach
it, you mull coaft along the fhore, keeping- in fix fathoms, at
lefs than two miles off Ihore : the courfe is from N. by W. fW.
N. W. by W. the land embaying. When you begin to open
the pafiage between. Sundeep and Bominy,' haul clofer in with
the main land, fo that by the time you have brought the North
end of Sundeep to bear Weft (or Seetacoon Hill nearly Eaft)
you may be, within a mile of the, fhore., Coaft along, at that
diftance. keeping in feven and eight fathoms water, to avoid a
reef that projects near five miles from the South-Eaft end of
Bominy. After having run about eight miles in this manner,
you


you will open the Eaft point of the Fenny River, diftant eight
miles, which was before fhut up in the low round point that
forms the Eaftern entrance of Bominy Harbour. You muii
now haul over towards Bominy Ifland, and being got in five
fathoms (at low water) within a mile and half of the ihore,
may anchor fecurely. When at anchor, the South-Eaft point
of Bominy will be very little open with the North-Eaft point
of Sundeep; and Seetacoon Hill (which has a fmall Pagoda
on the top of it) will bear E. S. E. the latitude is 22 deg.
39 min. North. It is proper to anchor nearer to the Ifland
than the main, in order to avoid the dream of tide of the
great Fenny; the flood of which comes in with great rapidity
at fprings, and caufes a bore in the narrow parts of the river.'
It is high water in Bominy Harbour at 2 i hours, full and
change.
As the whole fpace between the Meridians of Rabnabad
Ifland, and the Eafl end of Sundeep, has not been founded
farther South than about 21 deg. 30 min. it would be imprudent
for fhips to come to the Northward of that Parallel between
thefc meridians. I have been informed by the Chittigong Pilots,
that there are two banks in latitude 22 deg. one of them 51, the
other 9 leagues from the fliore: the fea, in rough weather,
breaks over both. Both on acount of thefe banks, and of the
unexplored track above mentioned, a fhip leaving Chittigong
Road fhould run to the Southward as far as 21 deg. 20 min.
before flie Hands acrofs the Bay.
The South point of the entrance (called Neman’s or Nor-
man’s Point) has a flat projecting from it to the South-Weft ,•
but is fleep towards the River, the channel of which runs
clofe by the Southern bank, and then out to fea in a South-
Weft direction: therefore to enter the River, bring the fteep
E 2 or


or the North fide of Nomads- Point to the Eafiward of N. E.
fo as to open the bank of the River within it, and ileer di-
redlly in N. E. and along the Southern ihore at 30 or 40 fathoms
diftance; and when pail two little creeks in the Bunder Green,
drop an anchor under foot: for there is not room to throw a
velfel to there, if it blows freih, the channel being hot above a
cable's length over j and for this reafon they mull moor imme-
diately. There is a clump of trees at the foot of Bunder Hill,
and clofe to the River : the anchoring-place is half a mile below
this clump, and oppofite to it the channel of the River runs
towards the oppofite bank. From the anchoring-place, Shah-
“broage bears North.
In the S. W. Monfoon the Bar of the River looks frightful,,
as the Tea breaks over it in moil places j and on the North fide
of the entrance there is a duller of fands, which dry at half-ebb..
It is high water on the Bar' at one o’clock, full and change;
and the beil time to enter the River is at high-water flack.
The flood fweeps fo rapidly athwart the entrance of the River,
that it is dangerous to attempt going in while it is making,
efpecially if the veflel ileer the leail wild. Next to high-water
flack, the beil time is when the ebb has begun to make j but
then there is a rifle of being driven on the flat of Noman’s.
Point. The beil track over the Bar has more than four fathoms
at high water; and in drawing near the River bank it deepens,
•to five,, fix, and feven fathoms.
Sailing


SAILING DIRECTIONS for the Coast of Chittagong,
or Chittigong.
By Mr. BARTHOLOMEW PLAISTED,
Marine Surveyor to the East-India Company.
All fhips in the South-Weft Monfbon, coming from the
feaward, ought to make the Coaft to the Southward of Red-
Crab Ifland, about the latitude of 21 deg. 15 min. or 21 deg.
20 min. N. but nothing farther to the Northward. This I
recommend on two accounts: Firft, it appears to me to be a
bold fhore, clear of any ftioals, for any thing I have obferved,
and gradual foundings to three fathoms at the diftance of half
a mile from the fhore. Secondly, clofe to the beach is a range
of rocks and fandy cliffs,* that make it very remarkable, but
more efpecially when the fun is to the Weftward, when they
will appear very white ; but, in the morning, the fhade gives
them a different complexion ;■ and in the Country is high land,
and a remarkable hill, like a fugar-loaf. Add to this, that in
the months of June, July, Auguft and September, the conti-
nual rains for days together make obfervations of the latitude
more rare, and the danger greater of falling in with the Coaft,
which is then a lee fhore. There will be lefs rifk in falling in
here, than further to the Northward; but if a fhip has already
got foundings to the Northward, and wants to bear away for
Chittagong, there is no neceffity to run to the Southward, in
the months of October and November, but endeavour to make-
the land between Norman’s Point and Angor Colley.
All-
Between the third and fourth of the Sandy Cliffs, counting from the
Northward, is a fmall run of frefli water. A hint of this kind may be deemed:
neceffary, as (hips have been three months in their paffage from Madras to the
Bayand this Eaftern fhore is the proper track.


All veffels from Bengal fhould follow thefe rules if pofilble;
but if driven to the Southward, muft work along fhore, for the
benefit of the floods.
Coafting this fhore in feven fathoms, to the Northward of the
Cliffs appears a large bay, which is called Cruzcool ; and there is
a confiderable river which falls into it, called Mufh Colley.
J ..took extraordinary pains in examining this place, in hopes of
finding a harbour, j but at laftmufl; conclude there is no entrance
for any veffel of burthen. The foundings I found here, are juftly
.laid down in the Draught, and the chain of breakers that inclofe
it, makes me apt to think that none would venture in, even
fhould a channel hereafter be found amongfl: them* for the
.long-boats, on the Survey, were obliged to go in, to the
Northward of Red-Crab Ifland.
Before .the Northernmofl of the Cliffs is about E. by N.
from the maft-head, you ought to look out well for Red-Crab
Ifland, and the Breakers off it, which are eafily to be perceived
in day-light, and confequently avoided; but the foundings
about them are fo irregular, that in the night it is better to
keep out into 15 fathoms, and on any fudden fhoaling fland
off again; for here are five and fix fathoms almofl clofe to the
Breakers.
Red-Crab Ifland is eafily known, by its bearing from Cruz-
cool, and it being a white fand, with a few green fhrubs
on it.
Being pafl; Red-Crab Ifland, it behoves you to keep a look-
out for a very dangerous fhoal, which, at high water and little
wind, may not be perceived otherwife than by the lead. Its
fituation with the South end of Kuttubdea and Curria River
I have carefully laid down, and they are the chief marks by
.which to avoid it: the foundings about it in the Draught
ihow


fhow what depth of water there is near it j but the above bear-
ings may be relied on.
From hence to the Northward, there appears to be no
danger along Kuttubdea, provided you keep about four or five
miles off fhore: nearer in there is a fand, and within it is feven
fathoms.
Kuttubdea is a woody Ifland, and has no people living on it,
but a few fifhermen : from Pilotte Cotta to the. South end,
there is frefh water where I have, expreffed ; and here are the
moll fifhermen..
The Inner Paflage, called* by the natives Uckoia, is a very
fafe paflage;, but, I believe, will be. hardly ventured on by
Grangers, though I would undertake to carry the biggeft fhip
in the navy through: and, as it affords good fhelter in the South-
Weft monfoon,, I fhall give the beft inftrudlions my own expe-
rience has furnifhed, leaving others to make ufe of them as*
their own prudence may dire<st them.
Red-Crab Ifland is the beft to take your departure from; and
coming from the fea, ftand in between the fhoal and the Ifland,
but near eft to Red-Crab Ifland, at the diftance of about two
miles, keeping a look-out for the Point, a little above Curria
River, which may be known by fome trees refembling Bamboo
bufhes; fleer in for it, but do not approach the Eaftern fhore
too much, on account of the fhoal that is off it. As foori as
you perceive the South end of Kuttubdea, which is known
by the fame kind of trees exaftly, keep it due North 1 till you
have the Paffage fairly open: then you may fleer in without
fear, taking care to keep two-thirds of the Paflage to the Eafl-
ward; and thence forward range along Kuttubdea, in between
four and five fathoms ; and all along is good anchorage in foft
ground, and no flioals: but to the oppofite of Sunwa and Uran-
tania.


■tania, the fhoals run very far out, and without them deep
water. I have marked three Creeks on Kuttubdea the firft
called
Kukera Hanfera (that is, a dog fwimming) Creek. I have
been up as far as I have traced it; and fmall veffels, drawing not
.above ten feet water, may find a fafe harbour in it.
The next Creek, called Pilot Cotta Creek, (from a pilot mur-
dered here by the Muggs) runs through the Ifland, and has
various foundings, from one to feven fathoms, juft within the
Eaftern mouth. A fhip may lie fafe in feven fathoms; and with
the proper time of tide, a veflel drawing only i o feet water
may go quite through it. I had five feet on the Bar at the Wef-
tern mouth.
The other Creek, to the Northward of Pilot Cotta, I have
been up as far as it is traced in the Draught; but it is not
worth further notice.
Being paft Chutta Sanway, you may venture over to that
fhore, if you chufe it,- but mid-channel is now the beft. At
the upper end is a fmall river, not above a cable’s length
over, called Kentlaw, which about half a mile in divides itfelf
one part runs up to Julkuddar j and the other, called Khaut
Colley, turning away to the N. W. .comes out again to the
fea. The firft entrance at Kentlaw is a very fafe harbour, but
there is jio entering at the other end. I worked through it,
hank for hank, with the two long-boats, and did not find
one fhoal in it, the S. W. fide having generally four fathoms,
the N. E. fhore feven fathoms, and about a cable’s length
.throughout.
As a hundred fhips may lye in it fafely, it is neceffary to
fay fomething more of a place that may be of more general
life hereafter.


At the mouth of Kentlaw is a ftioal on each fide, that at
low water, both together, almoft take up half the width ; and
yet at low water I would prefer to enter it, becaufe they then
difcover themfelves, and make the opening dear before your
eyes. Having brought the river open N. E. by E. look out for
the point, at the upper end, that divides the two rivers; and
juft keep it open, one third of the river, with the ftarboard
fide; and you may fteer in without fear. Juft in the middle
between the two fhoalsis 9 and 10 fathoms, but being entered
is iix fathoms: then haul up for the larboard (bore diredtly.
Afterwards you may anchor where you pleafe; but the further
in, is the fafeft in the South-Weft Monfoon; but anchoring
where I have marked it, will give you a fine vifto of Jul-
kuddar River, which yields a pleafant appearance. Up at
Julkuddar Kella is water; and the fituatioh of this harbour is
fuch, that it communicates with Choicoria and Ramoo , without
the boats going to fea,, or entering Uckoia Paffage.
•Ships coming from the Northward will, of confequence,
enter the Uckoia Paffage to the Northward; and being turned
Cuckold’s Point, after bringing it N, W. may venture to keep
up the ftiore, clofe on board: they will have feven fathoms.
At Jow water, or half tide, the bank will guide them; but
on fpring-tides it is overflowed; and then it will be neceflary
to have a care left you get on it.
In coming from the Northward to, enter the Uckoia Paftage,
.the Serrole Coaft muft not be approached too near, for it is
fhoal; and you muft give a birth to Cuckold’s Point, till you
bave brought it N. W, but not too much, for fear of the-
fand to the Weftward, and that off the North end of Kut-
tubdea. Ships likewife, who from the Southward have gone
without Kuttubdea, muft be on their guard, and keep the lead
F going


going, for fear of this fhbal, which bears from Cuckold’s Point
,W. N. W. 2 W. but notwithflanding I have laid down the
fhoals with proper caution and exadlnefs, prudence will
that while you are entering the North end of Uckoia Paffage, it
is .better to have a boat on each bow, till you have rounded the
Point, and brought it to bear N, W. and then there is nothing
to fear.
Having given the Serrole fhore a proper birth, it is neceffary
to look out for the fhoals of Angor or Anghor Colley, which are
dry at low water, and no way dangerous, with your eyes open
and the lead kept going.
From Anghor Colley to Norman’s Point there is no danger
in the leafl, but regular foundings. Two miles to the North-
ward of Anghor Colley, are fome filhermen’s huts, where
thofe who are unacquainted with Chittagong River may get a
pilot: but after all, it will not be prudent to let him bring you
higher than the Bunder -
Coming from the Southward, Chittagong River may be eafily
known from the following marks.
Between Kuttubdea and Anghor Colley, is moftly woody.
Being pafl Anghor Colley,, between it and Norman’s Point
(called alfo Noman’s Point) it is a white fandy foil, and few
trees near the fhore. Next, between Kuttubdea and Anghor
Colley, guide your eyes along the Coail, to the Northward; and
you will fee on a hill, near Norman’s Point, but more inland,
a remarkable fprcading tree, which for that reafon is called*
Kittafol Tree in the Draught: at a diftance you may fee the tree,,
as rifing out of the. water, before the hill is perceived.
Another mark is, that at Norman’s Point the colours are
hoifted, and may be feen with a glafs two or three leagues off;;
butt


■but as this is a mark that may be changed, or not hoifted, and
the Kittafol tree farther feen, the laft is the moft to be
relied on.
But as it may happen that a veflel may overfhoot the River’s
mouth, and get up between Chittagong and Sundeep, it will
be neceflary to fay fomething how to redlify fuch a miftake when
committed.
Firfl, If you are high up, a man from the main top may
eafily fee Sundeep, which alone may guide you, by referring
to the Draught: and Satticone, (Sette-Khone, or Settacaon,)
in a clear day, may be feen as far to the Southward as Anghor
Colley ; for it is the largefl hill of all that range, to the North-
ward of Chittagong ; and the whole range is continued to Shaw
Brufh, (Shah Brooge) in appearance. Having found out your
error, you may venture to coaft it, by your lead, back ; only
keeping fomething farther off as you approach to the River’s
mouth; and being come oppofite Kautwallea, which is known
by a fmall point to the Northward, look in for the range of
hills inland, and you will fee a hill, when in one with Kaut-
wallea Creek, bearing E.by S. on which is a tree, fomething
like the Kittafol tree: and, not to confound things, we fhall
call this Umbrella Tree} to the Southward of which you will
fee Shaw Brufh, which appears to have three trees on it.
The one really hands on another hill near it,
Inftruclions for Chittagong River.
To enter the River of Chittagong, being out in the offing,
keep Kittafol Tree, by Norman’s Point, E. by N. | N. and fleer
right in for it, taking care that the flood does not hoifl you to
the Northward, which the bearings of the above tree will
inform you of. Being come near Norman’s Point, give it a
F 2 fmall


final! birth; and when you have entered in, and come up with?
the High Banks (for Norman’s Point is a Low Beach) you:
have .nothing to fear; for. you will have deep water all along the
ftarboard fhore, within two thirds of a cable’s lengthy and by
this you will avoid the Middle Ground: but be fure you anchor
before you come to the Kella, half a- mile ihort, if you intend
to go no higher; for to go higher requires fome further confi-
deration.
If I was to carry a fhip, in the South-Weft Monfoon, I
would hardly venture to crofs with a flood tide, but rather chufe
the latter part of the ebb; taking care to have-enough of it till
over; for till you are arrived over, and ftiut in the other part,
aS.W.or W. S. W.wind, with a flood tide, muft naturally,
horfe you on the fand to the Northward of the Channel, or
CroJJing Place; and it will be neceffaryv to keep the North Point,
of the Middle. Ground as clofe on board as the depth your fliip
draws will admit: and if you were to range the Middle Ground,
which has regular foundings, inftead. of keeping the ihore fo
clofe on board, it will be ftill better,, as you will have the lefs
diftance to crofs over y and you may depend on nine fathoms in.
eroding: if you have a lefs caft, it will be by bordering too near
the North Point of the Middle Ground'. Having got over to
the other fide, keep it clofe on board, never venturing above;
half a cable ! s length; off ; and you will have fix,, feven, and:
eight fathoms, till you. are up with the Firft Creek: after-
wards you are to expedl no more than three, with a flowing
tide. Being come up with Koufnagar, half a mile further
a-head, is the proper place for you to anchor as clofe in
ihore as. you can conveniently; for by this you: will be more
out of the way of the tide, that runs here with great force.
Here commences the firft part of Chittagong Town, which is
called.


called Frmg&ey-Buzar, being inhabited moftly by the Chriftians;-
and as this is the place we have chofe for the building of Craft,
it is here that affiftance is mod: at hand ; though if a veflfel is
defirous of going higher up, die may : but Bail from Shaw-
Brufh Hill, in the narrow, is a very ftrong eddy, and fome
uneven ground, hard. At the upper end is afmall Creek, that
a fhip may be laid on fhore in> to repair, being more out of the
way of the wind and tide than below.
Sundeep is an ifland’ of large extent, and, with a good
government, might be made a place of confequence':' it is fertile,
abounding with cattle, and has this advantage of the neigh-
bouring Continent, that there is no confiderable wild bead of
deftru&ion,, as elephants* rhinoceros, or tigers. Of jackalls
and wild hogs*, indeed, there are enough. Its lituation with the'
Coaft of Chittagong; and being at the mouth of the Great
River, that goes to Dacca, givesita preference, in my opinion,,
for a trade bjr flapping. I have coafted it all round * and,
excepting the North part, facing Babnee (or Bomtny) found no’
danger, but what by adverting to the Draught may be avoided :
but cannot fay much in favour of the paflage between Babnee
and Sundeep;- for there are many fmall fands yet undifeovered,
for want of time. On the Weft fide, a remarkable tree;,
called Dolio Gofs (or tree) by the natives, is a very diftinguifhing
mark to know where the City ftands, which is further known
by a large grove of palm trees ; for it ftands a mile in land.
To the Southward of the City, is a creek or river, called
Sittall, that a fhip of any burthen may go into* and have four
fathoms at low water, about a mile in, which is the proper
place to anchor; where you may lie fafe in any Monfoon : but
there is fome difficulty in getting in, becaufe the flood fets
ftrong.


ftroag to the Northward without; -and before you can haul
up, in the South-Weft Monfoon, round the ftioal, you will
be fet on the other Point, the Reach, in entering, lying S. E.
making the wind fcant: you muft therefore be obliged to wait
the proper time of tide, which is the laft of the ebb; and then
the flood will fet you wholly in.
All along .the Weft fide of Sundeep, which I have coafted
up and down, I have yet difcovered no other danger than
what I have laid down: and indeed it has been a general
obfervation of mine, that where the courfe of the tide has run
North and South, the Channel has been the cleared: of
fhoals j but the reverfe when they begin to run E. and W. I
except out of this obfervation the creek that connects two
great rivers, which generally are clearer of fhoals -than any.
One thing I have to add is, that Weft from Kuttubdea is laid
to be a bank of fand of a quarter -of a mile broad; which
information I have from a Dutch Captain that was forced in
here and therefore I believed it beft to put it in my Draught,
(though I hay,e not yet been on it) .that people may be on their
guard. Between it and the North-Weft point of Kuttubdea, he
fays, he had from 15 to 17 fathoms, foft ground. Its diftance
from Kuttubdea, by his account, is 16 Englifh miles,, Jfe
Jiad on it five fathoms.
Directions


DIRECTIONS for crossing the Head of the Bay of Bengal.
By Captain RITCHIE.
The navigation acrofs the head of the Bay is very eafy
during the North-Eaft Monfoon 3 for by keeping in a proper
track, anchoring ground may be had in almoft any depth, at
pleafure. The ufual practice of leaving the land at I
do not approve of, efpecially in the latter end of the feafon, or in
February and March 3 which times are fubjedl to light winds
and frequent calms for feveral days together: for, as the
foundings
“ When you are got the height of Cheduba I/land” fays the Neptune
Oriental , “ and about eight or nine leagues to the Weflward of it, you fhould
“ fleer N. W. till you get into 50 fathoms, mud, which is generally met with
in 40 or 45 leagues, on that point of the compafs. Thence fleer W, N.W,
“ and W. by N. to get foundings on the Tail of the Ganges Banks (the Sea-
“ Reefs.) You may near them in 12 fathoms, and they are eafily known by
M the foundings, which are hard fand. You findno mud, but at the entrance
tc of the feveral channels which are formed by thofe Banks.-
“ Keep in the depth above mentioned, not exceeding. 15 fathoms; this will
tc carry you to Balafore Road.
“ There can be nodiredl courfe pointed out from the Tail of the Sea-Reefs
<c to this Road, on account of the Tides off the different mouths of the Ganges
“ (Hoogly River.) The befl method is to keep the lead-conllantly going,
“ It is not always fufficient, to fail to the height of Cheduba Ifland, ta
ic crofs from the Eaflern coaft of the Bay, to Balafore Road ; for you fome-
“ times, in this feafon, meet with variable winds from N. E, to N.N.W. and
<{ with thefe winds you cannot make the courfe above mentioned. In this
“ cafe, to fecure your paffage, you mufl work to the Northward, till you are
“ in fight of the Broken Iflands, which form the South Point of Aracan River,.
“ from whence, with more certainty, you may crofs the Bay, and get found-
“ ings off the mouth of Hoogly River, as above; only obferve, that after
w palling Cheduba. the Tides of Aracan River have an effedl.


foundings in this track are from 50 to 100 fathoms, there is a
rifque of being carried off the Bank by the Southwardly
currents, as there is fcarcely any poflibility of anchoring. The
track I recommend, is to coaft up the Aracan fhore, as high
as latitude 21 deg. or in fight of the White Cliffs, which may
be feen in clear weather 13 leagues : taking a departure from the
White Cliffs, fleer W. I N. or between the latitudes of 21 deg.
and 21 deg. 20 min. till you arrive at the Swatch, which is
a hole or chafm in the Bank, of which more will be faid here-
after. The foundings in this track are various, as the banks
.formed by the Channel of the .Ganges projedl more or lefs into
thefea. The depths arefeldpm more than 30, or lefs than 12
fathoms, except in and about the meridian of the Weft Point
of the Ganges; where, in latitude 21 deg. 19 min. the depth
is only fix fathoms. It does not appear that there is any
danger below the parallel of 21 deg. 30 min. between Chitti-
gong and the Swatch. It mull be obferved, that in
the ftreams of the ebb tides from the rivers run farther out to
fea, than the flood tides run in ; fo that, in cafe of a long calm,
a fhip may be driven -too -far out, unlefs fhe takes the precaution
,to anchor in time.
The Swatch, or chafm in the Bank, is fituated between the
latitudes of 21 deg. and 21 deg. 22 min. N. and the middle of
it lies about 50 leagues Weft of the meridian of the White
Cliffs. The edges of it are not every where afcertained ;
but by the knowledge we have of its extent, it appears to be
nine leagues in length, from S. by W. to N. by E. and five
.leagues over. During the furvey, only one track .was made
acrofs it.: l oy that, and the obfervations of other fhips, there
is no ground at the depths of 130 to 50 fathoms all
over it. The north edge of it is only five leagues diftant from
the


the land, between which and it the depths are from 13 to 7,
and 3 fathoms. Round the other parts, .the depths are from
40 to 20 fathoms. It is much to be wilhed that the fiiape
of the Swatch was fully afcertained, as well as the depths of
water to fome distance on every fide of it, to the intent that
ihips might know their exadt difiance from the tails of the
fands and Balafore Road ; however, the general knowledge
that we have of it, will ferve to corredl the reckoning in a
degree fufficient to preferve fhips from any danger that might
happen from a miftake in the longitude, fince the whole
breadth of the chafm is fcarcely more than five leagues.
Leaving the Wefiern edge of the Swatch in latitude 21 deg.
12 min. the courfe is W. by S. iS. 15 leagues to the Tail of the
■Eafiern fea-Reef, on which is fix fathoms at low water. From
hence the common anchoring-place in Balafore Road bears
W. by N. iN.22 i leagues. But firfi it is neceftary to fteer
Weft, till you have crofted the tail of the Wefiern Reef, which
you will do in feven fathoms. The channel between the two
Reefs, in this flant direction acrofs it, is three leagues over, the
ground foft, and the depth nine fathoms. The Reefs are hard
ground, and may be known by this circumfiance only: from
the Wefiern Reef, the water firfi gradually deepens from 7,
to 14 fathoms; and afterwards as gradually fiioals, till you
arrive at the anchoring place in Balafore Road. The latitude
of the Bankfliall Flag-fiafF I make 21 deg. 30 min. and the
anchoring place in five fathoms in 21 deg. 23 min.* The tail
G of
* The Peak of the Neelgur (vulgarly Nellygrlne) Hills bears W. N. W.
from Balafore Road, diftant 19 miles. It is fituated with refpedl to Bulram-
jurry (or the Baukfhallj W. 4 deg. 30 min. N. diftant 14 nautic miles
it is evident that by the bearing of this Peak, and the depth of water, the
fhip’s place in Balafore Bay may always be ascertained in clear weather.


of the Weftern Reef is in 20. deg, 57 min. and-the Eafterm
one in 20 deg. 59 min. In eroding the Reefs, a flaip fliould
come no higher to the Northward than the latitude of 21 deg,,
which is the track pointed out in the above directions.
Of the TIDES.
u PON full and change days eleven o’clock makes Highs
water, in latitude 21 deg. 30 min. almoft the whole breadth of
the Bay of Bengal.. The motion.of the high-water point is at-
the rate of 20 miles per hour in the open fea ; and the general'
direction of the flood is Northwardly.. By attending to thefe-
circumftances, fliips may always know the j time of tide, any
where within foundings..
Within 15 or 20 miles of the coaft, the fetting of the - Tide'
is influenced by the fliape of the coaft, and the openings of
the rivers. About midway between Point Palmiras and-
Chittigong, that is, at the mouth of the. Murjattah River,,
the flood tide fets due North,, during the whole flood j but
between that, and the mouths of the Ganges and Megna
Rivers, the farther Bail ward you go, the more- the tide:
inclines-to the Eaftward of North, efpecially during the laft 1 .
quarter of the flood. In like manner, between the Murjattah and.
Hoogly Rivers the tide inclines to-the Weft ward of North,
and in the latter part of the flood fets almoft Weft. Neither here,
nor on the Baft lide of the Murjattah does the tide ever quite:
flack y but at low water, by looking at the Chart, the above
account of the fetting of the tides will appear very conformable,
to reafon and experience, both on account of the fliape of the
coaft, and the indraught of the Ganges, Megna and Hoogly
Rivers,


TABLE of the Himes of High Water , at Full and Change ,
bet'wen Balafore and Chittigong.
Places Hours
Min.
Latitude 21 deg. 30 min. in the Bay — 11
00
Balafore Road —— — — 9
48
Balafore Bar —- —• — —- 10
55
Weftern Brace — — - 10
35
Eaftern Brace — — 10
48
Ingellee • —— — — 12
3
Kedgeree «—• •— •— —— 12
48
Entrance of the Roymongul River — 11
3°
-Ditto of the Hooringottah — •— 12
00
Bar of Chittigong — — 1 ,
00
Bominy Harbour 2
3°
Mamabad — —* — . 1
3°
Rivers, whofe courfes, being much longer than the intermediate
ones, require a greater portion of tide, and a greater length of
to fill them.
In Balafore Bay, and as high as Ingellee, the tides arC
influenced by the bearing of the coafl;. In the middle of
.the River’s mouth they fet North. Off Point Palmiras eight
or nine leagues, the courfe of the flood is E. N. E, to N. E. by E.
'but nearer the land the tide follows more the direction
of the coafl: ; fo that near the Point a fliip will be fet in towards
JKannaka Bay, and with a large offing will be fet to the
Eaftward.
Along the coafl: of Chittigong the tide fets moftly North-
ward,; that is, parallel to the coafl:.
Cz PART


PART III.
SAILING DIRECTIONS for Channel Creek, the
Eastern Channel, &c.
By BENJAMIN LACAM.
Instruction for Piloting Ships to Sea, in the North-East Monsoon,
by the Way of New Harbour.
Channel Reach mull be entered clofe to the South-Wed: 1
Bank; called Frederick’s-Pofnt, which’may be done with the
wind at South-Weft, on the ebb-tide ; but in the North-Eaft'
Monfoon the bed; way is, to run in againft the dood. The-
foundings in the Chart; which may be depended on, are laid"
down at low-water and Ipring-tides.
From New Harbour to the Pool, keep the Weftern diore,'.
and continue it till abreaft of Codally Creek; then keep the ■
Eaftern diore to the lower end of Long Reach. Fronr Johnfon’s -
Point hawl over to Newte’s Point, keeping the • Eaftern diore'
down Pattabunny Reach. From Preftbn’s Point hawl over to
the Weftern diore ; and if'the veflel has not’the whole of
her cargo on board, come to an anchor a-b'reaft of- Chocolly
Creek.
While the diip is preparing fbriea, the Boats may be employed
in filling up fredi water, from a very good tank near the Gentoo ■
Buildings on Sauger Idand. Therbeft pafiage is up Chocolly .
Creek, and through the Creek oppofite Wood’s Point.
From the lower end of Sauger Harbour, the courie-out is-
S.S. E. and after you are over the Mud Flat of four fathoms
at low water, you will deepen your water very faft.
Direc-


DIRECTIONS for failing from Sauger Harbour, or the Eastern
Channel, to Sea, in the South-West Monsoon.
Although it is cuftomary for fhips to fail from Bengal;
during the beginning, and at the latter end of this Monfbon,
yet it is attended with infinite difficulty and danger. All that is
propofed in thefe direftions; is' to accommodate flapping with
fecure fituations (at New Harbour if they go down the Eaftern.
Channel, or in Sauger Harbour if they go through Channel
Creek) when they may complete their cargoes, and prepare for
running out to fea.
The difficulties and delays to which the flation off the Bara-
bulla expofes outward-bound fhips, has been fufficiently proved,
andds. obvious by a reference to the Charts; while both the
North and South ends of Ghannel Creek afford the moft fecure
harbours in the Hoogly River. It is very common, during
the beginning of this Monfoon, for the wind to fhift from
South Weft, to Weft, and Weft .and by South : this frequently
Happens the day aftera hard. North-Wefter; and a fhip lying
in Sauger Harbour, by taking this opportunity, may in a few
Hours get clear of the Sand Heads, by making, her courfe
S.S.E.
From the North end of Channel Creek, it is not eafy. The
paffage through the Narrows requires a leading wind, or a calm
which will admit of hedging down with the ebb-tide. It is
about 16 miles from the Narrows to Cox’s, or Cock’s Illand,
where there is very good anchorage; but in this fituation a fhip
lies quite expofed to the violence of the South Weft winds,
while in Sauger Harbour fhe is fecure from every wind : never-
thelefs for capital fhips the Eaftern Channel is certainly the beft;
out-let w


out-let; and from Middleton’s Point, the courfe out being
S. S. E. a Ihip may get to fea with very little difficulty. The
only danger in the way is Sauger Middle Ground, which requires
great attention ; the paffage between it and the Gafper, is one
mile and a half broad. The flood-tide, particularly the firft
part, iets North-Wefterly, and the ebb juft the reverfe: this
is mentioned to .caution Pilots from bordering on the Gafper
with the flood-tide, or upon Sauger Middle Ground on the ebb.
The fame rule holds good with Sauger Sand ; and a large Ihip
going to fea, in the South-Weft Monfoon, may fafely border
upon the Gafper, or Eaftern Sea-Reef, all the way out; but uo.t
iupon Sauger Sand.
.Ships going to fea in the South-Weft Monfoon, from either
,of thefe Channels, may always return the fame way, if, by a
gale of wind right a-head, they cannot get to fea; but in the
v Old Channel they are obliged to return by the way of the Braces.
DIRECTIONS for Piloting large Ships from Sea, into the
Hoogly River, during the South-West Monsoon,
It is particularly recommended 'during this MonfoonJ that all
■veflels bound to Bengal, ftiould, in the way, run ; into
Balafore Road for their Pilot, who, being well acquainted with
the fet of the tides, will know what part of the Reefs to crofs,
and what courfe to fleer to attain it. As this muft depend on
the fituation of the Ihip, in Balafore Road, it is impoffible tp
flx the courie ; but it is recommended tp crofs the Reefs in about
2i degrees, where the foundings on each Reef, at low- water
ipring-tides, will be fix fathoms, hard fand; and in the South
.Channel between them, abpiit nine fathoms, loft mud. The
Wefteru


Weftern Sea-Reef has black fpecks mixed with the land ; the
Eaftern Sea-Reefs have white fpecks like filver filings.
If the pilot is taken on board the veffel off Point Palmiras,
and declares himfelf well acquainted with the New Track
over the reefs, there is no occalion to go into the-Road, at all;
for in the courfe of a little practice,- the pilots will he as ready
in finding their way to the Sea-Reefs, as they are nowin eroding
the Braces, the lead and line being the guide to both places.
The Braces are frequently eroded in hazy weather, without
getting fight of land ; and fhips are often detained in the Kil for
feveral days, by ftrong, Eafterly winds which prevail on the
Coaft of Bengal towards the latter part of the South-Weft
Monfoon : but in eroding the Reefs, thefe Eafterly winds will
admit of a fhip’s working to Eaftward on the ebb-tides> which
cannot be done over the Braces; and when the fhip is to the
Eaftward of the Eaftern Sea-Reef, the fame wind is fair to run
her up the Eaftern Channel, with this additional advantage,
that the fhip may be got out to fea, if there is a neceflity,,
without the danger of driving on the fands off Point Palmiras
as in the cafe of the fhip Ceres. Her Journal fays, that the
gale came on the 21 ft of September, 1777, while the fhip was*
at anchor in the Fairway; that there was only four fathoms-at-
low water; that upon the Captain’s afking the pilot if he could-
carry the diip to any part of the River where fhe might ride
with fafety, the pilot declared he could not, but thought it
mod: eligible to go to fea. The Captain, was fully convinced
that it was the only thing which could be done for the fafety
of the fhip, as they had too little water to heave up the anchor,
without running the rifk of ftriking upon it. The cable was
cut,, and the fhip was put to fea with all the fail fhe could
carry. They fleered S. S. E. with the wind from N. E. to E..
and.


and afterwards could not lay up S. S. W. At eleven at
night they were obliged to anchor, and afterwards difcovcred
that the Ihip was upon the fand off Point Palmiras. Her
prefervation was attributed to the cutting away the main and
fore-top-mafts, and the mizen-maft, together with her riding
a weather-tide.
This is mentioned to fhow that there is no place in the
prefent track from the Fairway, for a large fhip to ride out a
gale j but in the Eaftern Channel there is not only a great
depth of water, but alfo a great fcope for a -fleet to ride.
In the year 1770, a large French fhip came into Balafore
Road, where fhelofl: all her anchors and cables. The pilot got
on board juft before fhe parted the laft, and having formerly
been to the Eaflward of the Sea-Reefs, and into Hicks’s Bafon,
he refolved to carry the fhip there, and run her afhore in the
mud : this he accomplifhed without any difiiculty, during a
very hard gale of wind at S.W. The foundings on the Sea-Reefs
were fo diredt a guide, that, though entirely out of fight of
land, the pilot found no difficulty in fhaping his courfe to enter
Howe’s channel: the fhip was run afhore on the Eaff: fide
of the Bafon, where the Author faw her in December, 1770.
This inftance will prove what has been done already under
every difadvantage, and of courfe the benefits which may be
derived to this navigation by the help of Light-houfes, properly
eredled.
Direc-


DIRECTIONS for Piloting Ships up the Eastern Channel, during
the South-West Monsoon.
After eroding the Wettern and Eattern Sea-Reefs, and
being in feven fathoms water in the Eattern Channel, the
Courfe is North and hy Wejl half Weft. * The top of the high
trees on Middleton’s Point is vilible at a confiderable diftance >
but a good look-out mutt be kept for the South Buoy of
Sauger middle-ground. The leatt: water at the lowed: of the
ebb, between that and the Gafper, is 4 1 fathoms. You
mutt pafs to the Weft ward of the firft Buoy, and to the
Eaftward of the Middle Buoy, which lies on the edge of the'
Gafper; alfo to the Eaftward of the North, or upper Buoy;
to the Northward of which, a fhip may anchor with fafety,
in good holding ground.
The Soundings, as laid down in the Chart, are the bed:
guide through this Channel j but line-of-battle-fhips, or
others requiring a large draught of water, can only anchor
near the Buoy, Eaft of Cowcally or Cockerlee; or at that,
end of the Channel near the Narrows. The bed: place for
them to anchor fhould be about Brett’s Point, in order to
fecure a whole flood-tide, when there is not wind fufficient.
to carry them through.
DIRECTIONS for Piloting Ships from Sea up the Eastern
Channel, in the North-East Monsoon.
The cuttom generally followed, of taking a departure from
Aracan River, and working as the wind will belt admit, to
get to the Northward of zi deg, has been mod: approved of
H by


by commanders of veflels bound to Bengal in the Norths
Ball Monfoon. The foundings in the Swatch, and afterwards
on the Eaftern Sea-Reef, will give the fituation of the Ihip; but
in this Monfoon, it & propofed that the Pilot Sloops Ihould be
ilationed a little to the Eaftward of the Reef, in feven fathoms
water. The lame rule mult be obferved’ in palling up the’
Eaftern Channel, which is mentioned in former
with regard to the fet of the tides, viz. that the floods fet
North-Wefterly, and the ebbs the reverie; therefore, in light
airs of windy veflels ihould not border on the Galper with
the flood, nor on Sauger land with the ebb. The paffage
5s between the Gafper and* Sauger middle-ground ; and in cafe
of bad' weather, the b'dft anchorage is between Brett’s and
Middleton’s Points.
The navigation up the South end of Channel Creek, depends
upon the eredtion of a Light-house on Ibore, and a- Float-
ing Light being anchored on the extremity of Saugef fend;
without thefe, the Channel cannot' with fafety be entered bjr
Ibips coming from fca: we muft therefore poftpone the remarks
and directions relative to that entrance;
Thfc Pilots are fferfodt niafters of the 6ld entrance over the
Braces; but the French Flat, riot laid dowri hi any of the
other Charts in ufe, prefents a new difficulty; for it muft be
pafled with the flood-tide, the fame as the Braces. Veflels
©f a fmall draught of water may be fafely navigated up the Old
Track; and the directions now offered to Navigators, are chiefly
intended for heavy Ihips, requiring deep water.


HEALTHINESS OF NEW HARBOUR, proved by Evidence at the
Bar of the Committee of the House of Commons, —Vide Report.
Captain Bromfield,
tc 'That 'New is as healthy a place as any other,
tc and more to than Culpee.”
Commodore Richardson
** Confirmed the evidence of Captain Hicks , refpedling
** the comparative healthinefs of the two Rations of New
“ Harbour and Culpee."
It appears that the clerk had omitted to enter Captain
Hicks's evidence upon this head ; but Captain Bromfield having
fpent fome time at New Harbour, where he faw fbme hundreds
of people in the moft perfedt health, had the belt oppor-
tunity of fatisiying the Committee.
Major Rennele,
Being afked rc Whether the climate of Bengal is healthy in
** the months of November, December, and January f”
He faid, tx It is more fo during thofe months than it is in the wet
** feafbn; but that, on a comparifon with many other countries,
“ he held it to be unwholefome for European conftitutions.”
The Petitioner (Mr. Lacam) did not attempt to prove to the
Houto of Commons, that Bengal was as health y as England,
only that it was moft fo during thofe months that the fleet would
be there to refit •, and that the toa coaft was retorted to by people
from the inland parts of the country, who wanted health.
H 2 Robert


Robert Sanderson, Efq.
Being alked “ If he knew any thing refpedting the health of:
u the Place ?”
He laid “ He had known Mr. Lacamgo there himfelf when
*■* he was very ill, and return very well ; that he apprehended
“ it is like all other woody countries in a hot climate, unwhole-
“ fome till it is cleared; but that the land round New Harbour
“ is cleared to the extent; as-he has been repeatedly informed,
“of about two hundred acres; and that he. apprehended it
“ to be perfectly habitable, and was certain of its being fo;
“ in a degree quite fufficient for Ihips to repair at.
And being alked- “ Whether he believed, , if the lands were
“ cleared to a confiderable extent all round it; the place
“ might not be rendered yet more.wholefome ; and that during
“ the months of November, December, and January, the
“ crews of Rups might remain there without prejudice.to their
“ health ?”
He faid ** He certainly thought fo; and that they might.
“ now ; and that the clearing of the adjacent country muft
“ neceifarily go on by veflels reforting to the Harbour, if only
“ for the purpofes of getting water and fire-wood.”
Captain Martin. Wag horn,.
Being afked “ Whether he Ihould give the preference to
“ New Harbour or Bombay,. as a refitting Ration ?”
He faid, “ to be early in the feafon at his Ration on the
“ Coaß,. he fliould prefer. New Harbour which, during
the months of November,,December, and January,, in which
** months only it would be that Riips (meaning His Majeßy’s)
4< would have occafion to go there, that .place would be healthy.
Warren


Warren Haßings, Efq . Edward Wheeler, Efq. John Mac-
pherfon, Efq, 'and John Stables, Efq. the Governor-General
and Supreme Council of Bengal, Jn a Letter to Admiral
Sir Edward Hughes, dated the 2sth of September , 1782",
(Vide Report)
Write as follows : “ That they had the greateß fatisfadtion
“ in telling him, that their Marine Surveyor, Mr. Ritchie,
“ had lately afcertained a Channel in the entrance of their
“ River (meaning the Hoogly River) which a Squadron of the
“ largeß fhips might enter, with the greateß fafety, and through
“ which they might proceed to a Ration near Channel Creek,
“ where they might pafs the Monfoon, with the moR perfedt
“ fecurity: That the feafon is there healthy, and every advantage - -
“ that any harbour in India can afford, except that of a dock, -
** could be obtained there.
Would the Governor-General and Supreme Council of Ben- -
gal have made an affertion fo bold, if they were not well con-
vinced of the fadl, which fo perfectly agrees with the other
teflimonies delivered upon the fubjedt ?
The Riores about Channel Creek are chiefly Reep banks,.
with deep water very near fo that in working, it is no uncom-
mon thing for the veffels flying jibb-boom, or yard-arms, to
touch the branches of the trees on Riore ; confequently it is not
fubjedt to thofe fickly exhalations, which arife from large beds-
of mud, at Culpee, Kedgeree, and Ingerlee..
T'LD E


Point Pal-miras-
Kannaka Bay.
?^ of Honrs.
•Min.
Days.
Hours.
Min.
4he moon.
I -
9
3
i
9
OO
2 -
9
5 1
2
9
48
3 -
—— .10
•39
3
— io
3 6
Ar
— .11
27
- — 11
24
*T
5
— 12
*5
>5
1,2
12
6
1
3
6
I
00
7
I
48 .
7 r 1
8
— — 2
5 1
39
S
■ ■■ — 2
3 6
9
— 3
27
r\ •
2
24
15
V
4
IO
4
12
11 -
5
3
II
.00
5 1
48
5
12
,5
13
6
39
*3
— 6
3 6
14
~ 7
27
14
24
1 5 -
8
*5
8
12
N.W. by W. & S.E. by E.
Balasore Road-
Balasore Bar.
J)ays.
Honrs.
Min.
Days.
Hours.
Min.
I
9
48
I -
IO
55
2
— io
36
2 -
II
43
3
— 11
24
3
— 12
3i
4
12
.— I
*9
4 '
5
i
OO
5
2
7
6
48
6
..... /■%
55
36
A
43
7
7
3
S
24
8 -
4
3i
_
12
J 9
9
... .. . 4
g ■ ■
5
IO
—■ 5
OO
IO -
6
7
ii
48
1 c 6
55
1 X
12
6
3 6
12 —
— 7
43
13
7
24
*3
8
3i
14
g
12
19
*4
9
J 5
g
OO
15 — ““
IO
7
N-W-&S. E.
N, N. W.
& S.S.E.
TIDE TABLE for the West Part of the Bay of Bengal,
and for the Hoogly River.


Days.
Western Brace.
Hours.
Min.
33
Days.
Eastern. Reef*
Hours.
Min.
18
A
I
X
z
X 1
z
•
O
54
42
3°
18
A.
3
9
57
5
33
21
9
57
45
33
3
4
4
5
A
5
A
' ” “ '* *4
u
' 3
7
8
■ J
7
8
4
54
42
3*
18
6
.1 4
9
TA
..... 4
9
T A
5
X
ir
12
*3
" 5
11
12
13
14
15
8
/
a
A
9
34
42
3?
8
9
57
—
y
N.W.byN.&S.E.byS.
N.NvW. & S. S. E.
Days.
I
Ingerlee Road.
Hours.
Min
3
5 1
39
27
15
3
5 1
39
27
15
3
5 1
39
27
J 5
Days.
1
Kedgeree.
Hours.
- " 12
Minv
4$'
3 6
24
3
z
3
4
— — — 4
4
5
6
- ■ ■ 3
1 Z
5
6
•t
48
3 6
24
I
o
— ~ |
S
I
y
JO
11
12
IJ
14
15
Z ~ " I
y
10
ir
—
I
S'
00
48
36
24
12
O Qr.
N.byW.&S.byE,
*3 ’
14
1 5
1 r 9
—
■ 12
N. and S,


"New Harbour.
CULPEE
•
IDays
•
Hours.
Min.
Days
Hours.
Min.
I
-
.12.
33
I
33
1
2.
—
I
21
2
— ~
2
21
3
—
-r- .
2 .
9
3
— — . —
3
9
4
2
57
4
.
3
57
5
—
3
45
.5
— ■- •
4
45
,6
4--
33
35
'
5
, 7
-
5 -
21
A
2 3
'/
8
■
7
— . .
—-
. 6
9
: 8
*— — .
7
11
9
—
6
57
59
9
7
IO
7
45
10
■ — .
8
47
35
11
8
33
'
9
12
-MM
-MM
9
21
12
■ —■
10
2 3
——
— —
IO
9
13
«■ ■■ «—
11
n
14
-
30
57
14
11
59
1.5
—
II
45
15
■ . ..
12
47
%
Anchoring Place between Walfli’s
Point and Dacres’s Point.
N. by.E. & S.
by W
N.W. by W
& s.
E. by E
•
Fulta.
*
Calcutta.
J2ays.
Hours.
Min.
Days.
Hours.
Min.
'
o
18
I
-M-MM- MM-MM
3
48
X
6
54
3 6
24
2
■M—MM .MM
3
3
4
3
’ 1 mm
3
5
42
3 d
A
12
00
.4
4
T
c
7
5
'
5
J
_
1 . MM
6
18
6
— — —
7
48
.6
*7
8
36
7
•MM
7
Z
3
58
8
-MMM^
9
24
7
„
8
42
6
I O
12
9
y
JO
3°
10
- ■
11
00
9
ji
10
18
T T
‘
]J
48
12
ii
6
T 9
!
T *>
36
—
J3
—
ii
54
13
1 ■ 1
1
24
14
12
42
14
2
12
MH
*5
3°
15
3
00
‘
I
N. N.E.
&s
.s.w.
N.E. & S.W.
During


During the time a Committee of the Houfe of Commons was fit mg
upon the bufncfs of New Harbour, a Pamphlet was handed
about, with a fmall Chart pafied to it; infilled “ Thoughts
** on a late Proposal for Piloting Ships, at all Seatons*
<c through Channel Creek its motto, “ Suivez raifon.”—-
Major Rennel having declared himfelf the Author, it produced
the following Letter , which explains the fubjecl.
TO
MAJOR JAMES RENNELL.
SIR,
Jj[avi n g perufed the Pamphlet which you avow to be your
own, and that it was written to give information, at the Weft
End of the Town, againft my Plan for Piloting capital Ships
into the Ganges at all feafons of the year •> I am called upon to
anfwer fuch parts of it as may otherwife miflead my Friends
and the Public, merely for want of an explanation.
The Eaftern and Weftern Sea-Reefs, alluded to in your Book,
are the fixed rules and principles of my navigation : inftead of
being dangers, they are the guides to fafety, and of the very
firft confequence to the fuccefs of my Plan ; and, ihould the
Revolutions of Nature, on fome future day, remove thofe Sand-
Banks, I fhall then give up the idea of the New Channel into
the Ganges; but as thefe marks have never been known to alter
their fituation, or vary in their Soundings, fince the earlieft
'European knowledge of the Hoogly River, X confider them as
I the


the keys to the New Channel, becaufe they are the fame by
night or by day, hazy weather or clear; and the Pilots will in
time be as certain of their foundings and fituation, by the lead
and line, in eroding the Reefs, as they are now in eroding the
Braces ; therefore, if the lead and line be the given rule, furely
it is better to pafs capital fhips in deep water, than to run them
among Shallows.
You have. Sir, entirely miftaken the principles on which this
Pilotage is to be eftablifhed : for you fuppofe, the Pilot Veffels
are to anchor out on the Tails of the Sea Reefs, in the South-
Weft Monfoon; inftead of which they are only to lie there
during the North-Eaft Monfoon.
I have taken infinite pains to colledl the very beft information
on this fubjedl ; and during all feafons of the year I have,
myfelf, explored the Navigation which is now offered to the
Public : but in doing this. Sir, the Faji Lidia Company have
been put to no expence whatever; nor was I fupported by any
lalary from them, but condudled the bufinefs of the Harbour,
and furveying the different Channels, entirely at my own riftc
and charge.
The adl of crofting the Reefs in a large fliip, during the
violence of the South-Weft Monfoon, in the month of July %
has been effedted, to my certain knowledge, with great fuccefs.
I faw the flip, and converfed with the Pilot, who took that
meafure to fave the lives of fome hundreds of people. I have. Sir,
myfelf condudled three veffels into Channel Creek from Sea : I
had no land-marks, for it was done in the courfe of a very dark
night; but the foundings were fo very particular, that no man
of the leaft obfervation could be miftaken.
The Sand, which you mention to be Three Leagues Eaft of
Sauger Sand, I examined fo late as February 1780 ; it lies nearly
Five


Five leagues from Sauger Sand ; and the lead: water I could
get on it was Three fathoms and a Half at low water, confe-
quently Five fathoms and a Half at high water but I fhould
not care to trull a man with a long-boat, much lefs with a fhip,
who, in running Four leagues North, with a leading wind at
South-Weft, could not keep within Three leagues of his courle.
The principal objedl of my Plan, was to prepare a Channel
and Harbour for refitting his Majefy’s fhips, during the change
of the Monfoon from South-Weft to North-Eaft: the Fleet
would probably not arrive at the Tails of the Sea-Reefs before
the firft week in November t when the climate of Bengal is
healthy, and the navigation fimple and eafy. Provilions of all
kinds are there in great abundance, and a certain palfage of
eight days would have returned the Fleet to its ftation on the
Coaft; whereas,, from the nature of the Monfoon, the month
of March , will be nearly over before that happy event.*
The recent advices from the Governments of Bengal and-
Madras , with a reference to the Admiral’s Letter to the Right;
Honorable the Lords Commiflioners of the Admiralty, with the-
concurrent opinions of Sir Edward Hughes , Sir George Pocock ,
Sir Hyde Parker, Sir Richard Bickerton, Sir John Clayering,.
Sir Eyre Coote, and Sir William James; fupported by the fen-
timents of Three of the Elder Brethren of the Trinity
Houfe; and of feveral Commanders, in the Royal Navy,.and.
in the Company’s Service ; have given fo decided an opinion
upon the fubjedt, that it is totally unneceftary for me to add
any thing in its defence.
As I have fpent much of my time in furveying the Channels
of the Hoogly River, and have acquired my knowledge from,
long.
• The Britilh Fleet, by going round to Bombay,, was not .ready to face the;
Enemy before the 20th of June, 1783.


long experience, give me leave. Sir, to obferve, that you arc
wrong in many particulars of your Publication. -
In treating of the Braces you fay, there is fo little as Two
Fathoms and One Quarter; but I can allure you, from the bell
authority, that at low water Ipring-tides, there is only the
Depth of Ten Feet. The Flood-tides on the Braces fet North-
erly, and not Eallerly, as reprefented in your .Pamphlet. You
have omitted to take notice of the French Flat] another very
dangerous Bar to crofs, in palling up the Hoogly River.
At the Barabulla, you have placed Five Fathoms; but it
appears on the bell evidence, that there is only Quarter lefs Four,
At Ingellee (or Ingerke) you give Five Fathoms, inllead of
Three: and you have in your Plan alfo choaked up the entrance
of Channel Creek by a fand, nearly acrofs the River, inllead of
defcribing the line Channel in Sea-Reach, Three Quarters of a
Mile broad, and with Ten Fathoms in it, at low water.
I am, SIR,
Your moll obedient Servant,
BENJAMIN LACAM.
Cecil-Street , Strand,
i(tlb of June, 1783.
