

CORRESPONDENCE
WITH THE
UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR
RESPECTING THE
Execution of Miss Cavell
at Brussels.
LONDON:
DARLING & SON, LIMITED.
1915.




CORRESPONDENCE
WITH THE
UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR
RESPECTING THE
Execution of Miss Cavell
at Brussels.
LONDON:
DARLING & SON, LIGHTED.
1915.




No.
Name.
Date.
Subject.
Page.
1915.
1
Sir E, Grey to Mr. Page
Aug. 26
Asks that the United States
Minister at Brussels may be
requested to enquire as to the
reported arrest of Miss Cavell
5
2
ff ft
Sept. 22
Asks for answer to No. 1
5
3
Mr. Page to Sir E. Grey
„ 28
Transmits letter from the
United States Minister at
Brussels enclosing Baron von
der Lancken’s reply as to the
reasons for Miss Cavell’s
arrest. No interview with
her can be allowed ...
6
4
5
ft tf
ft ft
Oct. 13
.. 15
Informs of telegram received
from the United States
Minister at Brussels report-
ing execution of Miss Cavell
Transmits two letters from the
United States Minister at
Brussels of October 9 and 1 1
respectively reporting how
the case stands
7
8
6
ft ff
» 18
Transmits despatch from
United States Minister at
Brussels enclosing copies of
all correspondence with the
German authorities, as well
as reports by Mr. Gibson and
M. de Leval in regard to the
case
9
7
Sir E. Grey to Mr. Page
„ 20
Expresses confidence that news
of Miss Cavell’s execution
will be received with horror
and disgust throughout the
civilised world. Ask that
the grateful thanks of His
Majesty’s Government may
be conveyed to Mr. Whitlock
and his staff for their untir-
ing efforts on Miss Cavell’s
behalf...
20
«
Sir E. Grey to Senor
Merry del Val.
„ 20
Asks that the Spanish Govern-
ment may be informed how
much His Majesty’s Govern-
ment appreciate the efforts
made by the Spanish Minister
in Brussels on behalf of Miss
Cavell
21
Mr. Page to Sir E. Grey
„ 22
Transmits despatch from
United States Minister at
Brussels enclosing an account
of the British chaplain’s last
interview with Miss Cavell
21
10
ft tf
» 2 2
Transmits despatch from
United States Minister at
Brussels respecting the
burial of Miss Cavell
23
(6530—8.)
A
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS.




CORRESPONDENCE
WITH THE
UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR
RESPECTING THE
EXECUTION OF MISS CAVELL
AT BRUSSELS.
No. 1.
Sir EDWARD GREY to Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in
London.
The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his com-
pliments to the United States Ambassador, and has the honour
to state that it is reported that Miss Edith Cavell, who is the
head of a large training-school for nurses in the Rue de la Culture
at Brussels, has been arrested at that place.
Sir E. Grey would be grateful if Mr. Page would kindly
enquire of the United States Minister at Brussels, by telegraph,
whether the report is correct and, if so, the reason for Miss
Cavell’s arrest. In the latter event Sir E, Grey would be grate-
ful if his Excellency would request Mr. Whitlock to render her
any assistance he properly can.
Foreign Office,
August 26, 1915.
No. 2.
Sir EDWARD GREY to Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in
London.
The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his com-
pliments to the United States Ambassador, and, with reference to
his note of the 26th ultimo, in which he requested Mr. Page to
be good enough to endeavour to obtain, by telegraph, trom the
United States Minister at Brussels information in regard to
the reported arrest by the German military authorities of Miss


Edith Cavell, head of a training-school for nurses at that place,
has the honour to state that he will be greatly obliged if his
Excellency will again communicate with Mr. Whitlock, with
a view to ascertaining whether it is probable that any confirma-
tion, or denial, of the report is forthcoming.
Foreign Office,
September 22, 1915.
No. 3.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to
Sir EDWARD GREY.
(Received September 30.)
The American Ambassador presents his compliments to His
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, with
reference to the note Sir Edward Grey was good enough to
address to him on the 26th August respecting the case of Miss
Edith Cavell, has the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a
letter he has just received from the Minister of Brussels in the
premises.
American Embassy, London,
September 28, 1915.
Enclosure 1 in No. 3.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
Sir, September 21, 1915.
Referring to your telegram of the 27th August in regard
to the case of Miss Edith Cavell, who was arrested on the sth
August, and is now in the military prison at St.-Gilles, I beg
to enclose herewith,’for your information, copy of a communica-
tion which I have just received from Baron von der Lancken in
regard to the matter.
The legal adviser appointed to defend Miss Cavell has informed
the Legation that she has indeed admitted having hidden in her
house English and French soldiers, and has facilitated the
departure of Belgian subjects for the front, furnishing them
money and guides to enable them to cross the Dutch frontier.
The Legation will of course keep this case in view, and
endeavour to see that a fair trial is given Miss Cavell, and will
not fail to let you know’ of any developments.
I have, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.


Enclosure 2 in No. 3.
Baron von dee Lancken to Mr. Whitlock.
(Translation.)
Political Department
of the
Governor-General in Belgium.
I. 6940.
Brussels,
g IR September 12, 1915.
In reply to your Excellency’s note of the 31st ultimo, I haxe
the honour to inform you that Miss Edith Cavell was arrested
on the sth August, and that she is at present in the military
prison of St.-Gilles.
She has herself admitted that she concealed in her house
French and English soldiers, as well as Belgians of military
age, all desirous of proceeding to the front. Sh© has also
admitted having furnished these soldiers with the money neces-
sary for their journey to France, and having facilitated their
departure from Belgium by providing them with guides, who
enabled them to cross the Dutch frontier secretly.
Miss Cavell’s defence is in the hands of the advocate Braun,
who, I may add, is already in touch with the competent German
authorities.
In view of the fact that the Department of the trovernor-
General as a matter of principle does not allow accused persons
to have any interviews whatever, I much regret my inability to.
procure for M. de Eeval permission to visit Mass Cavell as long
as she is in solitary confinement.
I avail, &c.,
LANCKEN.
No. 4.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to
Sir EDWARD GREY.
(Received October 14.)
The American Ambassador presents his compliments to His
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, witu refer-
ence to the note Sir Edward Grey was good enough to address
to him on the 26th August last,* and subsequent correspondence
respecting the arrest of Miss Edith Cavell, has the honour to
quote the following telegram just received from the Minister
at Brussels:
* See No. I


Miss Cavell sentenced yesterday, and executed at 2 o’clock
this morning, despite our best efforts continued until the last
moment. Full report follows by mail.”
American Embassy, London,
October 13, 1915.
No. 5.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to
Sir EDWARD GREY.
ihe American Ambassador presents bis compliments to His
Majesty s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, with
reference to Sir Edward Grey’s note of the 22nd September
respecting the case of Miss Edith Cavell, a British subject in
ilelgium, who was arrested on a charge of espionage, has the
honour to enclose herewith copies of two letters just received
from the Minister at Brussels in the premises.
Mr. Page ventures to point out that these letters were written
I^ 10r w° l . t^ e , deSp 1 a * ch of the tele S ram of the I2th instant from
Mr. Whitiock, which was communicated to Sir Edward Grey on
the 13th instant.
American Embassy, London,
October 15, 1915.
Enclosure 1 in No. 5.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
October 9, 1915.
I BEG to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd
September in regard to the arrest by the German military autho-
rities of Miss Edith Cavell, head of a training-school for nurses.
Upon receipt of your telegram of the 27th August, I took
the matter up with the German authorities, and learned that
Miss Cavell has indeed been arrested upon a charge of
“ espionage.” The Belgian attorney appointed to defend her
before the court-martial called several times at the Legation,
and will continue to keep me well posted in regard to the case!
It seems that Miss Cavell has ma-de several very damaging
admissions, and there appeared to be no ground upon which I
could ask for her release before the trial.
The case will come up for trial next week, and I will write you
as soon as there is any further development.
I am, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.


Enclosure 2 in No. 5.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
g IR? October 11, 1915.
Referring to my letter of the 9th October in regard to the
case of Miss Edith Cavell, I hasten to send you word that her
trial has been completed, and that the German prosecutor has
asked for sentence of death against her and eight other persons
implicated by her testimony. Sentence has not as yet been
nronounced, and I have some hope that the court-martial maj
decline to pass the rigorous sentence proposed.
I have thus far done everything that has been possible to secure
a fair trial for Miss Cavell, and am assured by her attorney that
no complaint can be made on this score.
I feel that it would be useless to take any action until sentence
is pronounced. I shall then, of course, neglect no effort tc
prevent an unduly severe penalty being inflicted upon her. I
shall immediately telegraph you upon the pronouncement of
sentence.
I have, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.
No. G.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to
Sir EDWARD GREY.
The American Ambassador presents his compliments to His
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, with lefer-
ence to his note of the 13th instant, has the honour to enclose
herewith a copy of a letter, dated the 13th October, just received
from the Legation at Brussels, together with a report upon the
-case of Miss' Edith Cavell, a British subject, who was recently
executed at that capital.
American Embassy, London,
October 18, 1915.
Enclosure 1 in No. 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
£ jh October 13, 1915.
Referring to previous correspondence in regard to the case of
Miss Edith Cavell, I regret to be obliged to inform you, m con-
firmation of my telegram of yesterday morning, that the death
sentence recommended by the prosecuting attorney was imposed
* See No. 4.
A 3
6530


try the court-martial and that Miss Cavell was executed early
yesterday morning.
I enclose herewith for your information copies of all the corre-
spondence which I have had w T ith the German authorities in
regard to this case, together with copies of previous letters
addressed to you on the subject.
I know that you will understand without my telling you that
we exhausted every possible effort to prevent the infliction of the
death penalty, and that our failure has been felt by us as a very
severe blow. lam convinced, however, that no step was neglected
which could have had any effect. From the date w*e first learned
of Miss Cavell’s imprisonment, we made frequent enquiries of the
German authorities and reminded them of their promise that we
should be fully informed as to developments.
They were under no misapprehension as to our interest in the
matter. Although the German authorities did not inform me
when the sentence Jiad actually been passed, I learned, through
an unofficial source, that judgment had been delivered, and that
Miss Cavell was to be executed during the night. I immediately
sent Mr. Gibson, the Secretary of Legation, to present to Baron
von der Lancken my appeal that execution of the sentence should
be deferred until the Governor could consider my plea for
clemency. Mr. Gibson was accompanied by Maitre de Leva!,
Legal Counsellor of the Legation, who had worked from the
beginning upon the legal aspect of the case. Mr. Gibson was
fortunate enough to find the Spanish Minister, and got him to
accompany him on his visit to Baron von der Lancken. The
details of the visit you will find in Mr. Gibson’s report to me.
The other papers which are attached speak for themselves and
require no further comment from me.
I have, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.
Enclosure 2 in No. G.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Baron
VON DER LaNCKEN,
Brussels,
Your Excellency, August 31, 1915.
My Legation lias just been informed that Miss Edith Cavell,
a British subject residing in the Rue de la Culture, Brussels, is
said to have been arrested.
I should be greatly obliged if your Excellency would be good
enough to let me know whether this report is true, and, if so, the
reasons for her arrest. I should also be grateful in that case if
your Excellency would furnish this Legation with the necessary
authorisation from the German judicial authorities, so that
M. de Leva! may consult with Miss Cavell, and eventually entrust
someone with her defence.
I avail, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.


Enclosure 3 in No, 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Baron
VON DEE, LaNCKEN,
(Translation.)
The United States Minister presents his compliments to Baron
von der Lancken and has the honour to draw his Excellency s
attention to his letter of the 31st August, respecting the arrest
of Miss Cavell, to which no reply has yet been received.
As the Minister has been requested hy telegraph to take charge
of Miss Cavell’s defence without delay, he would he greatly
obliged if Baron von der Lancken would enable him to take
forthwith such steps as may be necessary for this defence, and
to answer by telegraph to the despatch which he has received.
Brussels, September 10, 1915,
Enclosure 4 in No, 6.
Mr. Hugh Gibson, Secretary of United States Legation,
Brussels, to Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in
Brussels.
Report for the Minister.
American Legation, Brussels,
g IRj October 12, 1915.
Upon learning early yesterday morning through unofficial
sources that the trial of Miss Edith Cavell had been finished on
Saturday afternoon, and that the prosecuting attorney
(“ Kriegsgerichtsrat ”) had asked for a sentence of death against
her, telephonic enquiry was immediately made at the Politische
Abteilung as to the facts. It was stated that no sentence had as
yet been pronounced and that there would probably be delay of a
day or two before a decision was reached. Mr. Conrad gave
positive assurances that the Legation would be fully informed as
to developments in this case. Despite these assurances, we made
repeated enquiries in the course of the day, the last one being at
6.20 p.m. Belgian time. Mr. Conrad then stated that sentence
had not yet been pronounced, and specifically renewed his previous
assurances that he would not fail to inform us as soon as there
was any news.
At 8.30 it was learned from an outside source that sentence had
been passed in the course of the afternoon (before the last con-
versation with Mr. Conrad), and that the execution would take
place during the night. In conformity with your instructions, I
went (accompanied by Mr. de Leval) to look for the Spanish
Minister and found him dining at the home of Baron Lambert.
I explained the circumstances to his Excellency and asked that
(as you were ill and unable to go yourself) he go with us to sec


Baron von der Lancken and support as strongly as possible the
plea, which I was to make in your name, that execution of the
death penalty should be deferred until the Governor could consider
your appeal for clemency.
We took with us a note addressed to Baron von der Lancken,
and a plea for clemency (“ requete en grace ”) addressed to the
Governor-General.* The Spanish Minister willingly agreed to
accompany us, and we went together to the Politische Abteilung.
Baron von der Lancken and all the members of his staff were
absent for the evening. We sent a messenger to ask that he
return at once to see us in regard to a matter of utmost urgency.
A little after 10 o’clock he arrived, followed shortly after by Count
Harrach and Herr von Falkenhausen, members of his staff. The
circumstances of the case were explained to him and your note
presented, and he read it aloud in our presence. He expressed
disbelief in the report that sentence had actually been passed, and
manifested some surprise that we should give credence to any
report not emanating from official sources. He was quite insistent
on knowing the exact source of our information, but this I did
not feel at liberty to communicate to him. Baron von der
Lancken stated that it was quite improbable that sentence had
been pronounced, that even if so, it would not be executed within
so short a time, and that in any event it would be quite impossible
to take any action before morning. It was, of course, pointed
out to him that if the facts were as we believed them to be, action
would be useless unless taken at once. We urged him to ascertain
the facts immediately, and this, after some hesitancy, he agreed
to do. He telephoned to the presiding judge of the court-martial
and returned in a short time to say that the facts were as we had
represented them, and that it was intended to carry out the
sentence before morning. We then presented, as earnestly as
possible, your plea for delay. So far as lam able to judge, we
neglected to present no phase of the matter which might have had
any effect, emphasising the horror of executing a woman, no
matter what her offence, pointing out that the death sentence had
heretofore been imposed only for actual cases of espionage, and
that Miss Cavell was not even accused by the German authorities
of anything so serious. I further called attention to the failure to
comply with Mr. Conrad’s promise to inform the Legation of the
sentence. I urged that inasmuch as the offences charged against
Miss Cavell were long since accomplished, and that as she had been
for some weeks in prison, a delay in carrying out the sentence
could entail no danger to the German cause, I even went so far
as to point out the fearful effect of a summary execution of this
sort upon public opinion, both here and abroad, and, although
I had no authority for doing so, called attention to the possibility
that it might bring about reprisals.
The Spanish Minister forcibly supported all our representations
and made an earnest plea for clemency.
Baron von der Lancken stated that the Military Governor was
the supreme authority (“ Gerichtsherr ”) in matters of this sort;
* See Enclosures 5,6, and 7.


that appeal from his decision could be carried only to the
Emperor, the Governor-General having no authority to intervene
in such cases. He added that under the provisions of German
martial law the Military Governor had discretionary power to
accept or refuse acceptance of an appeal for clemency. After
some discussion he agreed to call the Military Governor on to the
telephone and learn whether he had already ratified the sentence,
and whether there was any chance for clemency. He returned
in about half an hour, and stated that he had been to confer
personally with the Military Governor, who said that he had
acted in the case of Miss Cavell only after mature deliberation;
that the circumstances in her case were of such a character that
he considered the infliction of the death penalty imperative ; and
that in view of the circumstances of this case he must decline to
accept your plea for clemency or any representation in regard to
the matter.
Baron von der Lancken then asked me to take back the note
which I had presented to him. To this I demurred, pointing out
that it was not a “ requete en grace ” but merely a note to him
transmitting a communication to the Governor, which was itself
to be considered as the “ requete en grace.” I pointed out that
this was expressly stated in your note to him, and tried to pre-
vail upon him to keep it; he was very insistent, however, and I
finally reached the conclusion that inasmuch as he had read it
aloud to us, and we knew that he was aware of its contents, there
was nothing to be gained by refusing to accept the note and
accordingly took it back.
Even after Baron von der Lancken’s very positive and definite
statement that there was no hope, and that under the circum-
stances “ even the Emperor himself could not intervene,” we
continued to appeal to every sentiment to secure delay, and the
Spanish Minister even led Baron von der Lancken aside in order
to say very forcibly a number of things which he would have
felt hesitancy in saying in the presence of the younger officers
and of Mr. de Leval, a Belgian subject.
His Excellency talked very earnestly with Baron von der
Lancken for about a quarter of an hour. During this time
Mr. de Leval and I presented to the younger officers every argu-
ment we could think of. I reminded them of our untiring efforts
on behalf of German subjects at the outbreak of war and during
the siege of Antwerp. I pointed out that, while our services had
been rendered gladly and without any thought of future favours,
they should certainly entitle you to some consideration for the
only request of this sort you had made since the beginning of the
war. Unfortunately, our efforts were unavailing. We perse-
vered until it was only too clear that there was no hope of
securing any consideration for the case.
We left the Politische Abteilung shortly after midnight and I
immediately returned to the Legation to report to you.
HUGH GIBSON.


Enclosure 5 in No. 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to
Baron von dee, Lancken.
My dear Baron,
I am too ill to present my request to you in person, but I
appeal to the generosity of your heart to support it and save
this unfortunate woman from death. Have pity on her!
Yours sincerely,
Brand Whitlock.
[Written by hand by the Minister.]
Enclosure 6 in No. 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to
Baron von der Lancken.
(Translation.)
Brussels,
Your Excellency, October 11, 1915.
I have just heard that Miss Cavell, a British subject, and
consequently under the protection of my Legation, was this
morning condemned to death by court-martial.
If my information is correct, the sentence in the present case
is more severe than all the others that have been passed in
similar cases which have been tried by the same court, and,
without going into the reasons for such a drastic sentence, I feel
that I have the right to appeal to his Excellency the Governor-
General’s feelings of humanity and generosity in Miss Cavell’s
favour, and to ask that the death penalty passed on Miss Cavell
may be commuted, and that this unfortunate woman shall not
be executed.
Miss Cavell is the head of the Brussels Surgical Institute.
She has spent her life in alleviating the suffering of others, and
her school has turned out many nurses who have watched at the
bedside of the sick all the world over, in Germany as in Belgium.
At the beginning of the war Miss Cavell bestowed her care as
freelv on the German soldiers as on others. Even in default of
all other reasons, her career as a servant of humanity is such as
to inspire the greatest sympathy and to call for pardon. If the
information in my possession is correct, Miss Cavell, far from
shielding herself, has, with commendable straight-forwardness
admitted the truth of all the charges against her, and it is the
very information which she herself has furnished, and which she
alone was in a position to furnish, that has aggravated the
severity of the sentence passed on her.
It is then with confidence, and in the hope of its favourable
reception, that I beg your Excellency to submit to the Governor-
General my request for pardon on Miss Cavell’s behalf.
I avail, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.


Enclosure T in No. 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to
Baron von Bissing, Governor-General in Belgium.
(Translation.)
Brussels,
Your Excellency, October 11, 1915.
I have just heard that Miss Cavell, a British subject, and
consequently under the protection of my Legation, was this
morning condemned to death by court-martial.
If my information is correct, the sentence in the present case
is more severe than all the others that have been passed in
similar cases which have been tried by the same Court, and,
without going into the reasons for such a drastic sentence, I
feel that I have the right to appeal to your Excellency’s feelings
of humanity and generosity in Miss Cavell’s favour, and to ask
that the death penalty passed on Miss Cavell may be commuted
and that this unfortunate woman shall not be executed.
Miss Cavell is the head of the Brussels Surgical Institute. She
has spent her life in alleviating tlie sufferings of others, and
her school has turned out many nurses who have watched at the
bedside of the sick all the world over, in Germany as in Belgium.
At the beginning of the war Miss Cavell bestowed her care as
freely on the German soldiers as on others. Even in default
of all other reasons her career as a servant of humanity is such
as to inspire the greatest sympathy and to call for pardon. If
the information in my possession is correct, Miss Cavell, far
from shielding herself, has, with commendable straight-forward-
ness, admitted the truth of all the charges against her, and it is
the very information which she herself has furnished, and which
she alone was in a position to furnish, which has aggravated
the severity of the sentence passed on her.
It is then with confidence, and in the hope of its favourable
reception, that I have the honour to present to your Excellency
my request for pardon on Miss Cavell’s behalf.
I avail, &c.
BRAND WHITLOCK.
Enclosure 8 in No. 6.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
(Telegraphic.)
American Legation, Brussels,
October 12, 1915.
Your letter of the 23rd September and my replies of the
9th and 11th October. Miss Cavell sentenced yesterday and
executed at 2 o’clock this morning, despite our best efforts con-
tinued until the last moment. Full report follows by mail.
Whitlock, American Minister.


Enclosure 9 in No. 6.
M. de Leval to Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister
in Brussels,
Report for the Minister.
Silt, October 12, 1915.
As soon as the Legation received an intimation that Miss
Cavell was arrested, your letter of the 31st August* was sent
to Baron von der Lancken. Tlfe German authorities were by
that letter requested, inter alia, to allow me to see Miss Cavell,
so as to have all necessary steps taken for her defence. No reply
being received, the Legation, on the 10th September,! reminded
the German authorities of your letter.
The German reply, sent on the 12th September,! ‘was that I
would not be allowed to see Miss Cavell, but that Mr, Braun,
lawyer at the Brussels Court, was defending her and was already
seeing the German authorities about the case.
I immediately asked Mr. Braun to come to see me at the
Legation, which he did a few days later. He informed me that
personal friends of Miss Cavell had asked him to defend her
before the German Court, that he agreed to do so, but that owing
to some unforeseen circumstances he was prevented from pleading
before that Court, adding that he had asked Mr. Kirschen, a
member of the Brussels Bar and his friend, to take up the case
and plead for Miss Cavell, and that Mr. Kirschen had agreed
to do so.
I, therefore, at once put myself in communication with
Mr. Kirschen, who told me that Miss Cavell was prosecuted for
having helped soldiers to cross the frontier. I asked him whether
lie had seen Miss Cavell and whether she had made any state-
ment to him, and to my surprise found that the lawyers defending
prisoners before the German Military Court were not allowed
to see their clients before the trial, and were not shown any
document of the prosecution. This, Mr. Kirschen said, was in
accordance with the German military rules. He added that
the hearing of the trial of such cases was carried out very care-
fully, and that in his opinion, although it was not possible to
see the client before the trial, in fact the trial itself developed
so carefully and so slowly, that it was generally possible to have
a fair knowledge of all the facts and to present a good defence for
the prisoner. This would specially be the case for Miss Cavell,
because the trial would be rather long as she was prosecuted with
thirty-four other prisoners.
I informed Mr. Kirschen of my intention to be present at
the trial so as to watch the case. He immediately dissuaded me
from taking such attitude, which lie said would cause a great
prejudice to the prisoner, because the German judges would
resent it and feel it almost as an affront if I was appearing to
exercise a kind of supervision on the trial. He thought that if
* See Enclosure 2 in No. 6. f See Enclosure 3 in No. 6.
f See Enclosure 2 in No. 3.


the Germans would admit my presence, which was very doubtful,
it would in any case cause prejudice to Miss Cavell.
Mr. Kirschen assured me over and over again that the Military
Court of Brussels was always perfectly fair and that there was
not the slightest danger of any miscarriage of justice. He
promised that he would keep me posted on all the developments
which the case would take and would report to me the exact
charges that w T ere brought against Miss Cavell and the facts con-
cerning her that would be disclosed at the trial, so as to allow
me to judge by myself about the merits of the case. He insisted
that, of course, he would do all that was humanly possible to
defend Miss Cavell to the best of his ability.
Three days before the trial took place, Mr. Kirschen wrote to
me a few lines saying that the trial would be on the next
Thursday, the 7th October. The Legation at once sent him, on
the sth October, a letter* confirming in writing in the name of
the Legation the arrangement that had been made between him
and me. This letter was delivered to Mr. Kirschen by a messenger
of the Legation.
The trial took two days, ending Friday the Bth.
On Saturday I was informed by an outsider that the trial had
taken place, but that no judgment would be reached till a few
days later.
Receiving no report from Mr. Kirschen, I tried to find him,
but failed. I then sent him a note on Sunday, asking him to
send his report to the Legation or call there on Monday morning
at 8.30. At the same time I obtained from some other person
present at the trial some information about what had occurred,
and the following facts were disclosed to me:
Miss Cavell was prosecuted for having helped English and
French soldiers, as well as Belgian young men, to cross the
frontier and to go over to England. She had admitted by signing
a statement before the day of the trial, and by public acknowledg-
ment in Court, in the presence of all the other prisoners and the
lawyers, that she was guilty of the charges brought against her,
and she had acknowdedged not only that she had helped these
soldiers to cross the frontier, but also that some of them had
thanked her in writing when arriving in England. This last
admission made her case so much the more serious, because if
it only had been proved against her that she had helped the
soldiers to traverse the Hutch frontier, and no proof was pro-
duced that these soldiers had reached a country at war with
Germany, she could only have been sentenced for an attempt
to commit the “crime” and not for the “crime” being duly
accomplished. As the case stood, the sentence fixed by the
German military law was a sentence of death.
Paragraph 58 of the German Military Code says:
“Will be sentenced to death for treason any person who,
with the intention of helping the hostile Power, or of causing
* See Enclosure 10 in No. 6.


harm to the German or allied troops, is guilty of one of the
crimes of paragraph 90 of the German Penal Code.”
The case referred to in above said paragraph 90 consists in :
“ . . . . conducting soldiers to the enemy
(viz.: “ dem Feinde Mannschaften zufuhrt”).
The penalties above set forth apply, according to paragraph
160 of the German Code, in case of war, to foreigners as well
as to Germans.
In her oral statement before the Court Miss Cavell disclosed
almost all the facts of the whole prosecution. She was questioned
in German, an interpreter translating all the questions in French,
with which language Miss Cavell was well acquainted. She
spoke without trembling and showed a clear mind. Often she
added some greater precision to her previous depositions.
When she was asked why she helped these soldiers to go to
England, she replied that she thought that if she had not done
so they would have been shot by the Germans, and that therefore
she thought she only did her duty to her country in saving their
lives.
Ihe Military Public Prosecutor said that argument might be
good for English soldiers, but did not apply to Belgian young
men whom she induced to cross the frontier and who would
have been perfectly free to remain in the country without danger
to their lives.
Mr. Kirschen made a very good plea for Miss Cavell, using
all arguments that could be brought in her favour before the
Court.
The Military Public Prosecutor, however, asked the Court to
pass a death sentence on Miss Cavell and eight other prisoners
amongst the thirty-five. The Court did not seem to agree, and
the judgment was postponed. The person informing me said he
thought that the Court would not go to the extreme limit.
Anyhow, after I had found out these facts (viz., Sunday
evening), I called at the Political Division of the German Govern-
ment in Belgium and asked whether, now that the trial had
taken place, permission would be granted to me to see Miss
Cavell in jail, as surely there was no longer any object in re-
fusing that permission. The German official, Mr. Conrad, said
he would make the necessary enquiry at the Court and let me
know later on.
I also asked him that permission be granted to Mr. Gahan,
the English clergyman, to see Miss Cavell.
At the same time we prepared at the Legation, to be ready
for every eventuality, a petition for pardon, addressed to the
Governor-General in Belgium and a transmitting note addressed
to Baron von der Lancken.
Monday morning at 11 I called up Mr, Conrad on the telephone
from the Legation (as I already had done previously on several
occasions when making enquiries about the case), asking what


the Military Court had decided about Mr. Gahan and myself
seeing- Miss Cavell. He replied that Mr. Gahan could not see
her, but that she could see any of the three Protestant clergy-
men attached to the prison; and that I could not see her till the
judgment was pronounced and signed, but that this would pro-
bably only take place in a day or two. I asked the German
official to inform the Legation immediately after the passing of
said judgment, so that I might see Miss Cavell at once, thinking,
of course, that the Legation might, according to your intentions,
take immediate steps for Miss Cavell’s pardon if the judgment
really was a sentence of death.
Very surprised to still receive no news from Mr. Kirschen, I
then called at his house at 12.30 and was informed that he would
not be there till about the end of the afternoon. I then called,
at 12.40, at the house of another lawyer interested in the case
of a fellow-prisoner, and found that he was also out. In the
afternoon, however, the latter lawyer called at my house, saying
that in the morning he had heard from the German 'Kommand-
antur that judgment would be passed only the next morning,
viz., Tuesday morning. He said that he feared that the Court
would be very severe for all the prisoners.
Shortly after, this lawyer left me, and while I was preparing
a note about the case, at 8 p.m. I was privately and reliably
informed that the judgment had been delivered at 5 o’clock in
the afternoon, that Miss Cavell had been sentenced to death,
and that she would be shot at 2 o’clock the next morning. I
told my informer that I was extremely surprised at this, because
the Legation had received no information yet, neither from the
German authorities nor from Mr. Xirschen, but that the matter
was too serious to run the smallest chance, and that therefore
I would proceed immediately to the Legation to confer with
your Excellency and take all possible steps to save Miss Cavell s
life.
According to your Excellency’s decision, Mr. Gibson and my-
self went, with the Spanish Minister, to see Baron von der
Lancken, and the report of our interview and of our efforts to
save Miss Cavell is given to you by Mr. Gibson.
This morning, Mr. Gahan, the English clergyman, called to
see me and told me that he had seen Miss Cavell in her cell
yesterday night at 10 o’clock, that he had given her the Holy
Communion and had found her admirably strong and calm. I
asked Mr. Gahan whether she had made any remarks about any-
thing concerning the legal side* of her case, and whether the
confession which she made before the trial and in Court was,
in his opinion, perfectly free and sincere. Mr. Gahan says that
she told him she perfectly well knew what she had done; that
according to the law, of course, she was guilty and had admitted
her guilt, but that she was happy to die for her country.
G. de LEVAT.


Enclosure 10 in No. 6.
M. de Leval to M. Kirschen.
Brussels,
October 5, 1915.
I thank you for the letter you were so good as to address
to M. de Leval, in which you informed him that Miss Caveil’s
case would come before the court-martial at 8 a.m. next Thurs-
day. In pursuance of the arrangement already come to, I
should be most grateful if you will be so good as to send me,
after the hearing, a memorandum setting forth the acts for
which Miss Cavell is being prosecuted, and stating the charges
which are brought against her at the hearing, and also the
sentence passed.
I am, &c.
(For the Minister),
G. DE LEVAL,
Legal Adviser to the Legation.
No. 7.
Sir E. GREY to Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London.
Ihe Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs presents his com-
pliments to the United States Ambassador, and has the honour
to acknowledge the receipt of his Excellency’s note of the 18th
instant,* enclosing a copy of a despatch from the United States
Minister at Brussels respecting the execution of Miss Edith
Cavell at that place.
Sir E. Grey is confident that the news of the execution of this
noble Englishwoman will be received with horror and disgust,
not only in the Allied States, but throughout the civilised world.
Miss Cavell was not even charged with espionage, and the fact
that she had nursed numbers of wounded German soldiers might
have been regarded as a complete reason in itself for treating her
with leniency.
The attitude of the German authorities is, if possible, rendered
worse by the discreditable efforts successfully made by the officials
of the German civil administration at Brussels to conceal the
fact that sentence had been passed and would be carried out
immediately. These efforts were no doubt prompted by the
determination to carry out the sentence before an appeal from
the finding of the court-martial could be made to a higher
authority, and show in the clearest manner that the German
authorities concerned were well aw T are that the carrying out of
the sentence was not warranted by any consideration.
Further comment on their proceedings would be superfluous.
In conclusion, Sir E. Grey would request Mr. Page to express
to Mr. Whitlock and the staff of the United States Legation at
* See No. 6.


Brussels the grateful thanks of His Majesty’s Government for
their untiring efforts on Miss Cavell’s behalf. He is fully satis-
fied that no stone was left unturned to secure for Miss Cavell a
fair trial, and, when sentence had been pronounced, a mitigation
thereof.
Sir E. Grey realises that Mr. Whitlock was placed in a very
embarrassing position by the failure of the German authorities
to inform him that the sentence had been passed and would be
carried out at once. In order therefore to forestall any unjust
criticism which might be made in this country, he is publishing
Mr. Whitlock’s despatch to Mr. Page without delay.
Foreign Office,
October 20, 1915.
No. 8.
Sir E. GREY to Señor DON ALFONSO MERRY DEL VAL, Spanish
Ambassador in London.
Your Excellency,
I have the honour to inform your Excellency that I have
received, through the United States Ambassador at this Court, a
copy of a despatch from the United States Minister at Brussels
respecting the execution at that place of Miss Edith Cavell, a
British subject.
It appears from Mr. Whitlock’s report that the Spanish
Minister at Brussels accompanied Mr. Hugh Gibson, Secretary to
the United States Legation at Brussels, on his visit to the German
civil authorities at Brussels after the sentence passed on Miss
Cavell became known, and did all he could to secure a commuta-
tion of the capital sentence.
His Majesty’s Government much appreciate the efforts made by
the Marquis de Yillalobar on this occasion, and the sentiments of
humanity and chivalry which animated him, and they would be
grateful if your Excellency would be good enough to so inform the
Spanish Government.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) E. Grey.
No. 9.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to Sir
EDWARD GREY.
The American Ambassador presents his compliments to His
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, with refer-
ence to previous correspondence respecting the execution by the
German authorities of Miss Edith Cavell, a British subject at


Brussels, has the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a communi-
cation from the Minister at Brussels, together with a copy of a
report made by the Rev. H. S. T. Gahan, British chaplain at that
capital, touching his last interview with Miss Cavell.
American Embassy, London,
October 22, 1915.
Enclosure 1 in No. 9.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
My dear Colleague, October 18, 1915.
I beg to transmit herewith, for your information and such
action as you may consider desirable, copy of a memorandum pre-
pared at my request by the Rev. H. S. T. Gahan, British chaplain
at Brussels, in regard to his last interview with Miss Edith Cavell
on the night she was executed.
I am, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.
Enclosure 2 in No. 9.
Eeport by Mr. Gaiiax, British Chaplain in Brussels.
On Monday evening, the 11th October, I was admitted by
special passport from the German authorities to the prison of
St. Gilles, where Miss Edith Cavell had been confined for ten
weeks. The final sentence had been given early that afternoon.
To my astonishment and relief I found my friend perfectly calm
and resigned. But this could not lessen the tenderness and in-
tensity of feeling on either part during that last interview of
almost an hour.
Her first words to me were upon a matter concerning herself
personally but the solemn asseveration which accompanied them
was made expressly in the light of God and eternity.
She then added that she wished all her friends to know that she
willingly gave her life for her country, and said: “I have no
fear nor shrinking; I have seen death so often that it is not
strange or fearful to me.”
She further said : “ I thank God for this ten weeks’ quiet before
the end.” “ Life has always been hurried and full of difficulty.”
“This time of rest has been a great mercy.” “They have all
been very kind to me here.”
33ut this I would say, standing as I do in view of God and
eternity, I realise that patriotism is not enough. I must have no
hatred or bitterness towards anyone.”
We partook of the Holy Communion together, and she received
the Gospel message of consolation with all her heart.
4t 9 lose of the little service I began to repeat the words
Abide with me,” and she joined softly in the end.


We sat quietly talking until it was time for me to go. She gave
me parting messages for relations and friends. She spoke of her
soul’s needs at the moment and she received the assurance of
God’s Word as only the Christian can do.
Then I said “ Good-bye,” and she smiled and said, “ We shall
meet again.”
The German military chaplain was ‘with her at the end and
afterwards gave her Christian burial.
He told me; “ She was brave and bright to the last. She pro-
fessed her Christian faith and that she was glad to die for her
country.” “ She died like a heroine,”
H. STIRLING T. GAHAN,
British Chaplain, Brussels.
No. 10.
Mr. PAGE, United States Ambassador in London, to Sir
EDWARD GREY.
The American Ambassador presents his compliments to His
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and, with refer-
ence to his note of the 18th instant, has the honour to enclose here-
with a copy of a letter from the Minister at Brussels respecting
the burial of Miss Edith Cavell.
American Embassy, London,
October 22, 1915.
Enclosure 1 in No. 10.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to
Mr. Page.
American Legation, Brussels,
My dear Colleague, October 14, 1915.
Referring to my letter of yesterday in regard to the case of
Miss Cavell, I beg to enclose herewith further correspondence in
regard to my request that her body be delivered to the School for
Nurses of which she was the directress.
I have not received a written reply to my note to Baron von der
Lancken on the subject, but he came to see me yesterday after-
noon and stated that the body had been interred near the prison
of St. Gilles, where the execution took place; that under the regu-
lations governing such cases it was impossible to exhume the body
without written permission from the Minister of War in Berlin.
He added that he had no authority to ask permission to exhume
the body, but that immediately upon the return of the Governor-
General he would request him to take the matter up.
I shall hope to be able to tell you that we have at least been
able to accomplish this small service.
I am, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.


Enclosure 2 in No. 10.
Mr. Whitlock, United States Minister in Brussels, to
Baron von der Lancken.
(Translation.)
Brussels,
Your Excellency, October 12, 1915.
M. Faider, First President of the Brussels Court of Appeal
and President of the Belgian School of Certificated Nurses, begs
me to ask, on behalf of this institution, for the body of Miss
Cavell, its directress, who was executed this morning.
The Committee undertakes, in the removal of the body and its
burial in a cemetery in the Brussels district, to conform to all
regulations that the German authorities may see fit to make.
I feel sure that no objection will be made to this request, and
that the institution, to which Miss Cavell has so generously
devoted a part of her life, will not be denied the performance
of this pious duty.
I venture, therefore, to commend to your Excellency the
request of the Belgian School of Certificated Nurses, and, await-
ing your reply.
I am, &c.,
BRAND WHITLOCK.
