

WASTE PAPER
APPEAL
“Save your Waste Paper
for the Men in Green.”




TO THE EMPLOYEES OF AUSTRALIAN
PAPER MANUFACTURERS LTD., AT
BOTANY AND PYRMONT.
As you know, we are very short of waste paper at a time
when there is a national call for more production of more
hoard and more paper. Further, we are finding it difficult to
maintain the machines in full production on account of the
shortage of waste paper.
A mass meeting convened hy representatives of the
Unions employed hy the Company was held on Sunday after-
noon, the 11th May, 1941, at the Botany Town Hall. The
chair was taken hy Mr. L. Watts, President, Factory Depart-
ment, Australian Workers’ Union.
Addresses were given hy the Managing Director of the
Company, Sir Herbert Gepp ; Mr. W. B. Dale, Secretary,
Factory Department, Australian Workers’ Union ; Mr. E.
Round, President, Sydney District Committee, Amalgamated
Engineering Union ; and Mr. C. K. Tannock, Secretary, Iron-
workers’ Association.
A resolution, moved by Mr. H. Doel and seconded hy
Mr. J. Hart, was carried unanimously. The resolution read :
We, members of the Australian Workers’ Union, the Amalga-
mated Engineering Union, the Ironworkers’ Association, and the
Electrical Trades and other Unions, employed at the Botany Mill,
having in mind the serious shortage of waste paper and waste card-
board, and the possibility of members being thrown out of employ-
ment, join with the Company in trying to increase the supplies of
waste paper, by making known as widely as possible amongst our
families and friends the great and vital necessity of saving all avail-
able waste paper for the Company’s collectors.
As this matter is of such importance to all of the employees
of the Company, the Committee of Employees which is co-
operating with the Committee of the Staff, have issued this
pamphlet for the information of all employees, and urges them
all to assist in increasing the supply of waste paper for the
Mill.
L. Watts, President, Factory Department,
Australian Workers’ Union.


SIR HERBERT GEPP’S ADDRESS.
The Address by Sir Herbert Gepp was as follows :
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
1 thank you for the opportunity of allowing me to address
you briefly this afternoon. 1 want to tell you the story of this
Company, of which I am Managing Director ; the endeavours
that it has made during the past ten years to carry out its
duties and responsibilities as one of the larger industrial com-
panies of Australia ; to explain to you the responsibilities
which lie upon this Company under war conditions ; the
problems it is facing in obtaining sufficient raw materials, and
the importance of your co-operation and help.
Throughout the Company we employ over 3,000 bread-
winners directly. Of these, including the men and boys
engaged in gathering the waste papers and waste cardboards
in New South Wales, and particularly in the metropolitan
area of Sydney, we employ at Botany about 1400 bread-
winners, and the wages and salaries paid every week are
nearly £7,000. As you may know, we have a strawpaper
mill at Broadford in Victoria, an old but useful mill at Mel-
bourne, near the centre of the city, a modern mill at Fairfield,
six miles from the centre of the city of Melbourne, and a new
large pulp and paper mill at Maryvale, 100 miles from
Melbourne, on the Prince s Highway.
We make annually 65,000 tons of cardboards, from the
cheapest to the more expensive grades, and 55,000 tons of
wrapping papers brown, semi-bleached and bleached.
To make these products we use nearly 70,000 tons of
waste papers and waste cardboards, 75,000 tons of chemical
pulps, bleached and unbleached, over 150,000 tons of coal,
and large quantities of chemicals, colours and rosin. For-
tunately for us all, we decided several years before the war
broke out to erect a pulp mill in Victoria, where the mountain
timbers are suitable to make chemical pulp, and so replace a
considerable quantity of our importations. You will be glad
to know that this mill is running steadily, and that, including
the pulp we are making at Botany Mill, we are supplying
from Australian sources more than one-half of the chemical
pulps that we require at all our Mills.


It is becoming increasingly difficult and more expensive
to obtain these extra pulps from overseas, and we shall require
to rely more and more upon intensive collection of waste
papers throughout Australia, and so supplement our own
sources of chemical pulps and thereby reduce our dependence
upon supplies from overseas. As you hnow, the difficulty
of getting ships to transport goods long distances by sea is
increasing owing to the demands on ships for war purposes,
and to serious losses of ships owing to the submarine and
aerial campaigns being carried out by our enemy.
Wrapping papers and cardboards are always used in
large quantities for packaging goods. Under present circum-
stances there is a growing shortage of tin-plate and of soft-
wood case timbers from overseas. The Commonwealth
Government departments responsible for the essential supplies
to maintain the troops overseas and in Australia, and also for
the Navy and the Air Force, and further, to maintain the Aus-
tralian people in good health, have been urging my Company to
increase its output to the greatest possible extent. We have
been ashed to do our best to see that our available supplies
go to the people who need them most fbr essential war and
civil purposes.
Increasing Production.
It has been no easy job. We have had to take all sorts
of special steps ; we have had to erect new plants in a hurry ;
we have had to transfer raw material for making pulps and
other products from one State to another. All these steps
have had to be taken in times when difficulties of transport
and increased costs are prevailing. For instance, such pulps
as we get from overseas, in the earlier part of the war from
Sweden and Norway, and later from North America only, are
costing us over three times as much as they cost before the
war.
In response to the appeal from the Commonwealth
Government we have done our best, with your help and the
help of our employees in other States, to increase output, to
help to supply the boards and papers which are used to make
munitions, to pack munitions, and, what is just as important,
to pack concentrated foodstuffs for shipment overseas for the


troops of ourselves and our allies in Malaya, in the Pacific,
Egypt, Libya and Palestine, and in Great Britain.
Further than this, we have been suddenly called upon by
the Commonwealth Government to make more essential raw
materials for the manufacture of munitions for the Navy,
Army and Air Force because these raw materials are no
longer available from Great Britain. You will see, therefore,
that we are rapidly increasing the supply of our products for
war purposes, and, in addition, we must do our best to keep
the people of Australia from having to go too short of wrap-
ping papers and cardboards of all kinds which are used in
ordinary everyday life for innumerable purposes.
Do you realise that every man, woman and child in
Australia uses every day one or more of our products ?
So this is the first point I want to make to you, namely,
that this industry of ours is an essential national industry, and
that there is an insistent call upon all of us to meet the demand
to increase our production.
The second point is that, if we do not have the raw
materials from which we can make these products, we cannot
keep our Mills running, and that means that we would have
to shut down the Mills for a week at a time at intervals.
Let us look at this unhappy possibility for a few minutes,
and let us take Botany Mill as an example. The wages at
Botany are approximately £I,OOO per day, and these wages
come from the money received from the sale of our products.
There is no bottomless pit from which I, as Managing
Director, can draw huge sums of money every day, or every
week, to pay wages and to buy coal and other essential
materials. These moneys for coal and to pay wages come
from the regular flow of moneys received for the products we
sell. If we cannot sell because we have not the raw material
to make the product, then we have to stop and put men off
because there is nothing for them to do and no money with
which to pay them their wages.
Vital Raw Materials.
For months past my colleagues and 1 on the Board of
Directors of this Company, and the senior staff working under


my direction, have been sitting up at nights working out
methods whereby we could ensure and increase the supply of
the raw materials to keep our Mills running. We have
realised the increasing dangers and difficulties of obtaining
materials from overseas. We have increased considerably
our plants to make these raw materials in Australia ; we have
organised for increased collection of this important item
of waste papers and waste cardboards, not only in the cities
but in the country districts of Australia. We are bringing
waste naper from Fiji, New Zealand, and from every area of
this Commonwealth. We have received great help in many
directions. For instance, our friends in the pulp and paper
mill at Burnie, in Tasmania, where they are making 20,000
tons a year of writing and printing papers for Australian use,
have organised an intensive collecting system for waste papers,
and have improved previous collections so much that the
supplies are a real help. If the metropolitan area of Sydney
did as well per head of population as the little town of Burnie,
in Tasmania, in the saving and supply to us of waste paper,
we would be well towards getting out of our present trouble.
Now, as many of you know, paper is made mainly from
chemical pulps, and to a small extent from waste papers sorted
out for the purpose ; whilst cardboards are made mainly from
waste papers with a small percentage of chemical pulp.
The point I want to make to you is that with the growing
difficulty of getting chemical pulps from overseas we want more
waste paper, not only to enable us to maintain and increase
our output of cardboards, but also so that we can maintain,
and, if possible, increase the output of our paper products.
We want several hundred tons per week more of waste
paper and waste cardboards from New South Wales, and
particularly from the City of Sydney.
Australia to-day is still using, in one way or another,
several hundreds of thousands of tons a year of paper and
cardboards. We are getting back only about 60,000 tons a
year. We are aiming to increase these collections by about
40,000 tons a year <— that is, we want to get back for our
national purposes, and to keep all our mills in full production
and all our men in full employment, a higher percentage of


what is being used. This includes newspapers, cardboards
and wrapping papers, tissue papers, old books and magazines,
and all the other materials which are covered by the phrase
papers and cardboards.
Now, one word about the Company which I represent.
For years it has striven to be worthy of its job. It has
publicly declared, and has followed strictly its declaration,
that it restricts its dividends to 8% on its Ordinary Shares
and 6% on its Preference Shares, and, after providing for
reserves against troubles and difficulties, it will increase its
production and thereby give more employment and reduce its
prices so as to increase consumption, and assist in keeping down
the price-level in Australia.
As representing the Company, I say that the Company
has carried out these undertakings loyally and thoroughly, and
that no stones can be thrown at it from the point of view of
its national policy.
As the Chairman has told you in his opening address,
the Company’s selling prices for its products are strictly con-
trolled by the Commonwealth Prices Commissioner.
The financial results of the Company’s operations are
examined regularly by the Prices Commissioner and his staff,
and no increase in the price of any of the Company s products
can be made without the permission of the Prices Com-
missioner.
If the cost of the Company’s raw materials rises, then
the final cost of making its products will rise correspondingly,
and, in due course, it would be necessary for the Prices Com-
missioner to authorise an increase in the selling prices of the
Company’s products so that the Company can continue to
operate.
Quite apart from the control of profits exercised by the
Prices Commissioner, the Company desires to keep the prices
of its products as low as is reasonably possible, firstly, because
everybody in Australia uses its products ; and secondly, be-
cause an ever-increasing price-level in a country should be
avoided as far as practicable.
You all are as interested as my shareholders, and as any
consumer of the products, in keeping the Company’s produc


tion at full output. We want your Kelp ;we want you to
act as missionaries amongst your friends, and in your own
districts ; we want you to Ke satisfied that wKat we tell you
is true and tKat wKat we want you to do is in tKe national
interest as well as in yours and ours.
An Essential National Industry.
Times are critical ; the war Kas Keen going against us ;
our tacks are against tKe wall. We will win only if. we
are united. We must drop personal views in tKe interest of
tKe common weal ; we must all work and tKink in tKe joint
interests. must do wKatever lies at our Kands to do to
Kelp to support tKe men of our figKting services overseas and
in Australia. We must support tKe efforts of our leaders to
increase tKe output of guns and tanks and explosives and
sKips, as well as men for tKe figKting services. And remember
tKat tKese men in tKe figKting services Kave to Ke supplied witK
food and munitions, all of tKe best type and quality. Re-
member also tKat our Company’s products are an essential
portion of tKe materials required to ensure tKose supplies.
Let not our epitapK be, **Too little and too late 1” Let
us so act and work tKat we will be satisfied tKat we Kave done
our job, and Kave done it in time.
Just as drops of water make an ocean, so individual
efforts build a national effort. AltKougK it may seem a small
thing to save one extra pound of waste paper per week and
deliver it to our collectors, yet remember tKat there are 1 ,400,000
men, women and children in the metropolitan area of Sydney.
Remember also that 1,400,000 pounds of paper is over 600
tons.
WitK the aid and the blessing of the hospitals we are
endeavouring to increase the collection of waste papers in the
suburbs. During the past twelve months we Kave paid over
£lO,OOO to charities in connection with these collections. We
pay all cost of collection, including supervision, and in addi-
tion we contribute to this charity fund £1 per ton for all the
paper that is contributed by householders. TKe charities
directly connected with our effort now are the Royal North
Shore, the Royal Prince Alfred, the Sydney, and the St.


George District Hospitals. In addition, the Lord Mayor s
Fund, and the Royal Australian Air Force Comforts Fund are
associated.
We have in preparation a description of the purpose of
this effort in pamphlet form. We are printing 200,000 of these
pamphlets, and we hope that they will be available to-morrow
or Tuesday. We would ash you to distribute these amongst
your friends and in your districts, as portion of the campaign
of increasing the knowledge regarding our necessities, and
thereby increasing the collecting of waste papers.
1 thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity of allow-
ing me to address this mass meeting, and I know everybody
will do their best to help.
D. S. Ford. 44-50 Reservoir Street, Sydney.
