

* . • -r-
■ uawMm
ij.i:iU ■v/ ,'ii iia,)./.1.. w
p
I
V
i
.t
X
I
f
}
4
. /
v J\ j * ’ t
8 . DilQ i ¥ lOS So. 10 ?
{
*■*o THE \
' •S* a n£> ■"*' o> in n Rlopr rv r* q 4
vjU Loi Oi U .11 LI o /
tJ >
• - <
' pW ’• • • S
hit Rfi c 011 n I’’ C> V * r i' I 5
*V' -i. i V—' *W' ■*•. wv/ J* •* V- • -.'j *
■ /
>
s
.■-,’*•■■■ c.
i
r, \/ ij * )
J .» **\ .. *-v>v-‘ V *.-.<•• A-v. *• / /W' i '% w
* >
> A TTT ■.-; T- .. 'V a PPU. ' CC; • -1, V ;
.• rrom 3 a, in. £-3 7 ,p.m. /
\■ ■ I
5 MO.ONL.iO-H N IGf-IT.
.... ... JS- -W*.—: , •--- -•■••- - - -- ' /


W\a
* 'V Wt
AJrtiiinfr Print
KING' O’MALLEY.


Wed., April 12 ... Currency Creek
... 7.30 p.m.
Thurs., April 13 ... Nangkita
... 2.30 p.m.
Thurs., April 13 ... (Mount Compass
7.30 p.m.
Friday, April 14- ... (Vlyponga
... 7.30 p.m.
Sat., April 15 ... Hog Bay
3 p.m.
Sat,, April 15 ... Queenscliffe
... 7.30 p.m.
Mon., April 17 ... Cape Jervis
... 2.30 p.m.
(Ylon., April 17 ... Bullaparinga
... 7.30 p.m.
Tues., April 18 ... Second Valley
... 7.30 p.m.
Wed., April 19 ... Inman Valley"
... 7.30 p.m.
Thur., April 20 ... Torrens Vale
... 7.30 p.m.
Friday, April 21... Victor Harbor
... 7.30 p.m.
Sat., April 22 ... (Middleton
... 7.30 p.m.
Mon., April 24 ... Port Elliot ...
... 7.30 p.m.
Tues., April 25 ... Hindmarsh Island
, 2,30 p.m.
Tues., April 25 ... Goolv/a
.. 7.30 p.m.
Wed., April 26 ... Yankalilla
.. 7.30 p.m.
KING O’MALLEY
AND
V/. H. CARPENTER
WILL
Address the Electors as follows
(This is the last night that any of the Candidates can address you legally)
I —Wo ask that the whole of the Electors in the various districts
y of the Electorate of Encounter Bay will attend our meetings,
whether friends or'foes.


King O’Malley’s 2nd Message
To the Sooereign Electors of
Encounter Bay
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Three years ago I addressed my first message to you
soliciting your suffrages, and owing to its democratic contents you
did me the supreme honor of believing in the sincerity of the promi-
ses therein contained, consequently electing me as your representative
at the top of the poll —although I was at that time a comparative
stranger to many of you. That message committed me to a dc-finite
policy, among which was the accomplishment of the abolition of the
debasing and dehumanising barmaid system, with the exception of
members of the publican’s family, which no law can interfere with.
This promise I have faithfully fulfilled by having carried through
the House of Assembly a clause abolishing it by a majority of
o votes, but it was defeated in the Slaughtering 33rancli of the
Legislature by 3 votes. The success attending my efforts raised
the ire and boiling venom of the Adelaide drunkard manufacturers.
Their diabolical endeavors to wreck this just, moral and humane
reform, failing, they immediately began through secret emissaries an
attack on my commercial and moral character. These heroic artistic
nose-painters, th'e orphan makers, the gaol-tillers, the lunatic-genera-
tors, and the blight of the colony sunk even lower than their railing
in trying to drive me out of Parliament. Thanks to an associa-
tion of lofty and noble guardians of Parliamentary purity,
my character is now open to the inspection of nil Australasia.
Firmly believing that no tattooed charactered man should stand for
Parliament, I here append the vindication of my character procured
from America by those whose only aim was my eternal ruination. A
careful perusal of it will show no slandering of innocent people ;
no drinking while professing to be a fofal abstainer’, no sending
fathers, husbands, brothers, and sons home drunk to abuse their female
relatives ; and no shady connection with any mining syndicates


MY VINDICATION.
DELIVERED IN PARLIAMENT HOUSE. ADELAIDE.
• HaitMi d, July 27, I*o7’. 3
Mr. O'MALLEY, before making a personal
explanation, desired to perform a little
peasant duty t<> the Treasurer by giving him
. bit of treacle in return for the amount of
abuse which that hon. gentleman had received
from Mr. Grainger. During his travels in
Western Australia he was commissioned by
several large cities at immense meetings to
pre-ent a resolution to the Treasurer on his
prap-oeal t<* build a railway to Western
Australia, and that resolution was carried by
acclamation at Ooolgardie, Menzies, Kal-
goor’ie, and Southern Cross. The resolution
was as follows:—“That we deeply sympathise
with the Hon. Mr. Holder, Acting Premier of
South Australia, and tlie Government of that
co’onv, in their effort to bring about a com-
bination with them for the purpose of building
an intercolonial railway from Port Augusta,
South Australia, to the nearest point in
Vv estern Australia; and that this meeting
cctutnis-iou Mr. King O'Malley, M.P. fur
Encounter Bay, to convey to the Parliament
and people of South Australia the
thank* of the people of C'oolgardie.”
He had great pleasure In presenting the
unanimous wishes of that great progressive
golddeid-—the best the world had ever seen.
(Mr. Morris —“Is that signed by the chair-
man of the meetings .' ") It was signed by A.
I‘. Matheson, M.L.C. for North-east C >ol-
frardie ; by A. E. Morgans, M.P., Ooolgardie,
i ne of the hest and cleverest men Australia
had ever seen; and by several other bonour-
at’e gentlemen in that country. He had
nothing to gain personally by presenting the
resolution, and be had simply performed his
duty as a good citizen of Australasia. Hon.
members were well aware that last year
several accusations were levelled against him
as a member of this House. He had lived in
tv>uth Australia for three years previous to
-entering Parliament, and iio accusations or
charges had ever been made against him, so
it could easily be seen that those charges were
levelled against him as a member of this
H>.u>e. As a man of honour he believed that
the fountain-head of justice should be kept
pure, acd Parliament was the fountain-head
of justice for South Australia.
CHARGED WITH BEING AN EM-
BEZZLEB.
He would not ba an honourable man were
he to occupy his seat in Parliament if he
were guilty of the charges brought against
hiin by a great Association in South Aus-
tralia last year through Mr. William
Morehead, a blackmailer. He intended
if be had been unable to secure the
requisite evidence to clear himself before this
House and this country to resign his eeat in
Parliament, and he should never have come
back from Western Australia if he had not
had tho evidence. He was elected to this
Parliament on April 2J, IS%. On May 25
he was met by and asked to assist a
■man named William Morehead, whom
he bad known in Portland, Oregon,
United States, and who had ►imply come
into the office and begged him to give
him a quarter or half a dollar, which he
gave. On the 28th he persuaded his friend
to give this man a position, and he was sent to
Broken Hill. On July 14 he gave notice in
this House that he would move u* abolish the
barmaid system in South Australia. On Julv
21, by his (Mr. O'Malley's) instructions, thfs
man Morehead was dismissed from the service of
the Society which employed him,and brought
back. On July 29 he received tae following
letter:—
MOREHEAD’3 LETTER TO ME.
“ Adelaide, July 2!>, ISOC.
“ King O’Malley, Esq., M.P.
“ Dear Sir —If you are ia a position
to fulfil your promise to send me to
New Zealand I am ready to start at once.
It will be better for me to be out of this. I
am hunted by your enemies seeking for in-
formation, which I hesitate to give, but a
hungry man will almost dare do anything. A
re2>ly at once will oblige yours, VV.Morkhkai*.”
THE BLACKENER’S TRICK.
He never promised to send him to New Zea-
land or anywhere else, unless it was to death.
Who were his enemies ? Were the Churches?
Were the Christian people of South Aus-
tralia? Were the moral people? Then why
was a certain man hunted for information about
his career in America? Ho never replied to this
letter because ho decided that those things
went for nothing. One day ia the street in
front of the Post-office this man asked him —
“ Did you get my letter?’’ He replied, “How-
dare yon speak to me, sir?’’ He (Mr.
O’Malley) aimed at him, bnt he dodged.
“ Well,” he said, “ I will go straight to tho
publicans. Mr. Chittleborough, Secretary of
the Licensed Victuallers’ Association, has
been after me for the last week. I don't
want to pat yon out of Parliament, but oat
of Parliament you will go.” In November ho
entered an action in the Supreme Court against
this man, and on December 5, after a trial of
two days, the verdict was given—a verdict of
40s. He conld easily see that His Honor must
have misunderstood the case by Ins summing
up. His Honor, it seemed, thought that he
was the defendant on his triad, and that Dir.
Morehead was an angel of light from another
country prosecuting in the interests of mora-
lity, (Mr. Solomon—” Did not the Judge say
you yourself should have gone into tho witness-
box?’) The Judge said he would not believe
either. The point on which the case rested
was, did Morehead say he was an embezzler
or not? Mr. Haaip, his solicitor, after
he had tried several times to get into the
box, advised him not to do so. His
solicitor said to him —“ When Mr. Price,
M.P., was summoned by Mr. Cave did Mr.
Cave go into the box? when Mr. Price was
summoned by Mr. Parsons did Mr. Parsons go


into the box? and when Mr. Ash was sum-
moned bv Mr. Hutchison did he go into the
box No: not one of those gentlemen did.
B-;t this whitewashed, common Yankee mnst
j-o into the hex, they said Those other persons
were gentlemen, he supposed : Mr. O’Malley
was not. He should imagine it was his place
to follow the instructions of his solicitor, and
well did Mr. Hauip conduct the case.
Morehead had to prove his statement that he
was an embezzler ; that was the case. There
were many of looking at the decision of
His Honor the presiding Judge. He would
be the last man in the world to question the
decision of a Judge of the Supreme Coart.
for he had the profoundest respect for the
fountains of justice, but perhaps His Honor,
after years of service as a politician in South
Australia, was able to judge the value of a
politician’s character far better than himself.
He would have to live many years before he
had the profound experience in the intricacies
of politics that His Honor bad, and the conso-
lation he had was that the decision of the Court
was founded upon His Honor’s past experience
as a politician rather than on the real judgment
of a Judge.
MY LETTER TO AMERICA.
On December S ho wrote a letter to
Mr. William Dunphy, Manager of the
Home Insurance Company of New York,
the Company that this man Morehead de-
clared all over South Australia that he had
embezzled the fnnds from. He wrote to the
very man who Morehead swore had placar-
ded him (Mr. O'Malley) over the States as
an embez.zler, though ha denied it on oath.
Morehead said he never said ho was an embez-
zler, but that he had been placarded, implying
that he was an embezzler. He received this let-
ter from Mr. Dunphy;—
LETTER FROM AMERICA,
“January 25,159 G.
“ My dear King.” Fancy now -! Here was a
man whose Society's money ho was said to
have stolen quoting him as ‘‘my dear King.”
Ho wanted to tell the truth. The reason
people did not know about his record in the
past was this —his father told him, “ King,
whatever you do stand upon your own
responsibility, and never quote your friends
and relatives." Ho had tried to fight on
that principle. He had not come to A us-
tralia and said the Duke of Ourangoutang
was his uncle, or that he was the son of
this one or that one: ho had simply said —
“ I am King O’Malley,” and stood upon his
own. That was why ho never told who his
relations were, although if he were to they
would find just as many wealthy ones among
them as of those who talked of their social
and moral position. He simply stood upon
himself, and did not want to be the ghost of
the wisdom of the departed O’Malley family.
The letter went on:—-“Your letter of the
Bth nit. was a pleasant Surprise to me,
and I am indeed glad to hear from you,
and to know that you are prosperous in
your present location. Yes, I am still
with the old * Home,* and now have quite
a nice little business in force on the Pacific
Slope. Kellogg is one of the officers of the
lowa Life Insurance Company, and I believe
is doing well. As to this man Morehead,
whom you refer to, well, I have no know-
ledge of ever having met him. I certainly
never branded you as an embezzler or issued
any dodgers warning people against yon, and
anyone saying that I did is grossly mis-
representing matters. There has never been
any occasion for me to make any charges of
dishonesty against you, and I have no know-
ledge of your ever having committed any dis-
honest act, and I will take pleasure at any
time in certifying to the fact that you are La
no way indebted to mo. and that I always con-
sidered jou entirely trustworthy and reliable.
I received a letter from Mr. J. Chittleborough.
Secretary of the Licensed Victuallers’ Asso-
ciation, Lome Chamber?, Adelaide, South
Australia. I enclose herewith copy of same ;
also of my reply to him. I wish you would
accept my most hearty congratulations in yonr
having been elected a member of Parliament,
and should like to be honored with your
application in the 1 Homo ’ for at least lU,f*'o
dollars. Hoping that I will hear from you
often, and with best wishes, in which I
am joined by Mrs. Dunphy, I beg to remain,
yours respectfully,\V. H. bcspinr, Manager.” -
CHITTLEBOROUGH’S LETTER TO
AMERICA.
Now he wanted to read Mr. Chittleborongh's
letter. Mark the dates. On December Bth,
after the trial had taken place and the verdict
had been given, he had written, and the reply
was on January fi.jth. The letter from the
Secretary of the Licensed Victuallers’ Associa-
tion was dated October 10. That was two
months before he had taken action against
William Morehead, and daring that time the
Christian Progressive and Exalted Associa-
tion repudiated any connection with More-
head. During that time he was being stigma-
tised as a thief as he went through the streets.
Members might say that they did not want to
hear about it, but none of them would like to
hear people saying as theywentalongthe streets
“That is King O’Malley : ho is an embezzler
and has escaped from America; he is
in our Parliament, but will be out in
a few days.” The letter was as follows :
“ Licensed Victuallers’ Association. J. Chittle-
borough, Secretary, Lome Chambers, Ade-
laide, October ll», ihl'i). To Wm. H. Dunphy,
Esq., ’207, Parrott Building, San Francisco,
U.S.A. Dear Sir A person named King
O'Malley, who lately came to Australia and
has been employed *!is an insurance agent, is
now elected a member of Parliament in this
colony to represent one of our country dis-
tricts. We are anxious to learn something of
his antecedents, he being a comparative
stranger here. Having been informed that he
was at one time connected with your Com-
pany, I take the liberty of applying to you
for any information you can give us as to his
past life, what he has been employed at, and
if with credit to himself or otherwise. We
should bo pleased to receive any information
you can supply, and also whether he is a
native of the United States or not. Apologis-
ing for thus troubling you, I am, yours truly,
J. CHiTTi.EBonorGH, Secretary.” It was
not signed privately, but was signed as the
Secretary of the Licensed Victuallers’ Associa-
tion. The to Mr. Chittleborough was
dated Dec. 9, He called attention to the fact
that Mr. Dunphy had answered Mr. Chittle-
borough’s letter on December 9, ten years from
the time ho had seen him and that Mr.
Dunphy’s letter left San Francisco the day
after his letter to him left Adelaide, so that
there could be no collusion. Ho knew what
the drunkery manufacturers would say. He
wanted some one responsible the next time,
because although he had had the judgment
against Morehead it bad never been paid.
There was .£lO 10s. that the drunkery people
owed him, and they had not paid it.
Mr. Duuphy’s reply was as follows:
AMERICAN LETTER TO CFIITTLE-
BOROUGH.
“ San Francisco, December 9, lS9d. Mr. J.
Chittleborough, Secretary Licensed Victual-
lers’ Association, Lome Chambers, Adelaide,


South Australia. Dear Sir—Your favour of
October It) is at band, and in reply would beg
to lit lb at Mr. O’Malley was associated with
t;# in the life insurance business in 18S7, and
i». 1 believe, a Canadian by birth. I have no
knowledge of his antecedents or family con.
sections, but am under the impression that
tier are good. He is an energetic worker of
market! ability, and was quite successful in
this business. In my dealings with him he
was strictly honest, and I have had no
occasion to consider him other than entirely
reliable and trustworthy.— Vours respectfully,
\V. H. DCNI'Ht, .Manager,’’
SUPPRESSION OF MY VINDICATION.
Supposing that any commercial organisation
or anjOhristian organisation had levied charges
in which his character and reputation were
blackened for ever and they had written away to
the land wht-ncehe came did they imagine that
they would have suppressed the reply? Why
was it, however, that Mr. Chittleborough
•oppressed the information that wonld be
beneficial to his standing as a member of the
community > Why was not the information
given to the public like any honourable insti-
tution would haye done? Simply because
they did not get the information they were
told they wonld get. If they had got the in-
formation that t’.ny were told they would get
it would have been published, and he would
have been damned and hunted out of the
town. It was the duty of the House to pro-
tect its members, and the House should bring
Mr. Chittloborough before the Bar and get an
explanation of his conduct. He had suffered
in the country as an honourable man, and he
felt strong on it. lie thanked God that
the wilful, malignant, heartless, prostituting,
cold-blooded, social institution called drunk-
cries was not strong enough to kill him.
Every dog had its day, and the cats had the
nights, and it was now his day.
MY TRADUCEKV VILLAINOUS
METHODS.
The above is in itself the most convincing
proof that could be afforded that the Adelaide
s toggeries did not try to show that my
arguments against the perpetuation of the
barmaid system wore bad, but that they en-
deavored by deception and an execrable form
cf snaky cunning to show that my character
was bad. Having failed in their devilish design,
as is plainly evident from the documents they
thems-slves received from America, the} - are
now seeking by unscrupulous means and secret
contrivances to bring Encounter Bay under
the baneful influence of their stupefying
methods of political demoralisation and stulti-
fication.
The debauching drunkcry business, when
unable to meet its opponent face to face owing
to its own immorality, turns on its slander-
mill, and through its wretched dependents,
without fear of prosecution, owing to their
being creatures of financial straw, tries to be-
smirch and blacken his character by means of
evil rumours circulated under the breath from
honso to house. This is what hired slander-
mongers are doing in order to affect my stand-
ing with the decent people of Encounter Bay.
One tolls you that my language on certain
Occasions shocked him to such an extent that
he turned red in the toes, tho’ this same indi-
vidual may continually reply to a civil request
from his wife with a growling oath. Another
low drunkery-paid scoundrel represents that
my morals are as black as his boots, though in
all probability his boots have never been
blackened except through the perspiration of
his unfortunate wife. I ask the honorable
ladies and gentlemen of Encounter Bay, with
whom I have associated, to judge mo by tho
language they themselves have heard me use
among them, and not by what the drunkcry-
slander-mill employes, whose words are value-
less where they are known, repeat at the behest
of my cowardly blackguard foes. Wheu the
veiled foal-mouthed hireling cowardly charac-
ter assassins secretly inform you tkat at such
and such a place on some remote occasion so
and so said King O'Malley did some awful
thing, ask these slanderous smut-mill feeders to
put their charges in writing, have them penned
to paper with ink and their names signed and
dated. Thou I promise to take legal proceed-
ings, and if unable to bowl these -wiping falsi-
fiers out, will resign, if elected. Perhaps
they realise that their champion’s public career
will not stand very much criticism, and in
order to divert attention from him they attack
mine like the thief who has stolen your watch,
joins with the crowd and screams the loudest,
“ Stop thief,” thereby fooling the police and
effecting his own escape, bat I am certain the
justice-loving electors of Arcadia will not be
fooled by any such blackguardly tactics. This
same gang two years ago secretly declared
that I was an embezzler in America; time
enabled me to cru->h their lying tongues, and
now my brother Walter is the member of
Parliament for the district where I was sup-
posed to have stolen the money.
Having heard of some of the fraudulent
forms of deception, I was forced to insert the
following address in the two weekly papers,
and which has been copied by the Sydney
Bulletin :—
TO THE SOVEREIGN* ELECTORS OF
ENCOUNTER BAY.
Ladies and Gentlemen —
I believe that the hired Canvassers of some
of the Candidates are endeavoring to advance
the interests of their masters by assuring the
Electors that I have no weight in Parliament.
I know too much of the motives of hireling can-
vassers in general to readily assume that they
use the word weight in tho sense which I con-
fess I do lack it, namely, immoral or dead
weight, acquired where solid character is lack-
ing by such contemptible methods as drunkcry,
shouting, and other sources of sewer-rat
popularity. Were it not for tho fact that these
mercenary purveyors of paid for perfections of
which they always keep a stock in bond to let
to the highest bidder can easily put on a plaus-
ible expression that, as the poet says. “Sugars
o’er the devil himself,” I would not insult the
intelligent electors of this district by caution-
ing them against attempts to m’slead their
judgment. Besides, as the sovereign electors
of my district know, weight depends upon,
achievements, and my Parliamentary record
is an ample refutation of the slanders of
degenerate professional canvassers, whose con-
sciences are usually equal to the advocacy of
any cause, whether it be that of a Judas
Iscariot or Pontius Pilate. But perhaps those
gentlemen of accommodating morals ana hyper-
trophied capacities of making the ebon of n
black conscience assume the lustre of Arctic
snow may meet the Nemesis that eventually
overtakes such tactics, by having the measure
of their character taken sooner than they
expected. I have confidence enough in tho
good sense of tho moral, temperate, honest,
and clean-lived portion of this electorate, upon
whoso valued opinions I again place my
reliance, to feel that they will not allow their
reason to be clouded by calumnies coming from
men whoso facial recommendation would
scarcely secure them the loan of a sixpenny
scrubbing brush. These irresponsible, hungry,
parasitic bloodhounds want my political gore
purely for their master’s money.
KING O'MALLEY.


A SHAM.
Paring the progress of the election some
extraordinary things win oc<*nr. The Adelaide
con ■‘piracy of rice is deeply and •cunningly laid.
Don't be surprised if it is proven, by paid for
sworn evidence, that I am Deeming resur-
rected, the Gatton murderer, or Jackthe-
Ripper. It is rumored that newly-made
drunkery fallen women, whose hopeless con-
dition should excite more pity than reprobation,
are to be sent through the district to tell the
voters I caused their fall and other unfortunate
women in South Australia were led to rain by
me. A sham law-suit is to bo smarted for an
assault case either against myself or someone
else, and J am to ho summoned as a witness to
enable their lawyer by insinuations to blacken
my character. Voters, bo not deceived by
those insidious law-breakers.
ANOTHER INFAMOUS LIE NAILED.
A scurrilous and mean report has been
circulated by my opponents and used as a
canvassing medium, that I said in the smoking-
room in Parliament House in the presence of
two members that I could do as I liked with
the electors of Encounter Bay or any portion
thereof. The man who started this wrote across
his character “ infamous liar.’* Every person
who has since repeated the slander is an acces-
sory liar after the lie. If the originator will
get the two members to make an affidavit that
they heard me say so, I will give .£5O to the
Gooltva Institute.
SLAVERY* OR FREEDOM?
If Encounter Bay fall? a victim to this plan of
campaign, it will no longer be represented by
independent men laboring only to advance the
interests of the people of South Australia in
general, and Encounter Bay in particular;
but, on the contrary, it will become the de-
formed and helpless vassal of the Adelaide
crippling monopolies. Is the representa-
tion of Encounter Buy to be decided by
what the highest Judges in our English-
speaking countries have sadly described
a? the principal gorminator of the seeds
of degeneration and brutalisation? Aro
you to be dictated to by interests which
stand self-condemned as the wrockorsof homes,
the trarnplers on virtue, and the rewarders of
profligacy ?
MY BATTLE.
The following paragraph from the Sydney
Bulletin of November sth, 1S1)8, reveals the
entrenchments of the forces arrayed against
me:—
“The hottest contest of next S.A. general
election will bo at Encounter Bay, now repre-
sented by King O’Malley and a Labor member.
Mayor 7 ncher is poina there erpreeshj to op-
pose O'lfalley, and a brother of Opposition
leader Downer is also in the field. O’Malley
has the -support of the W.C.T.U. and the
“moral" element, while Tucker is handicap-
ped by the help of Buna. O’Malley and
Tucker are looked upon as the handsomest
men in Adelaide, nnd as the women’s vote pre-
dominates at Encounter Bay a good opportu-
nity will be given for deciding whether it was
King’s beauty or his politics which won him
success before. He is a fluent, florid pl.atfonn-
ist, whereas Tucker halts in his always con-
ventional and commonplace talk. Each man
cordially hates the other, and each is willing
to spend freely to secure the defeat of his
antagonist/’
If there is any evidence needed to corroborate
th« declaration of the Bulletin, it is contained
in the appended letter which I received early
in December from one of the principal com-
mercial men of Australasia, Mr. A. W. Feme,
Managing Director of the London and Ameri-
can Supply Stores, Bourke St.,,Melboarno :
204-20 G Bourke Street, Melbourne,
11th December. ISDB.
My dear King—Lately while discussing poli-
tics with a gentleman of position from Adelaide
I learned that yon have mortally offended all
the best people connected with the spirit trade
through interfering with barmaids and con-
tinually taking advantage of your Parliament-
ary position by insisting on the Government
enforcing the Sunday-closing laws, and refer-
ring to the publicans as drunkeries. stagger
juicerics.nose painters.and other odious terms,
thereby causing the loss of profitable Sunday
business daring the blowing over of the .storm,
and at the same time bringing the dealers into
contempt by lowering the standard of an
honorable calling, nnd that LT,<X'O would be
contributed toirarde the encompngeiu: of your
defeat at the ne<i election, and that you would
certainly bo defeated, because money could
elect either a btackfcllow or a Chinaman in
that district. Many of the people being poor,
a few shillings went a long way. Surely yon
should know, King, that nearly all the bar-
maids are the daughters of farmers, and they
will not vote for a man who wants to destroy
their living. lam convinced that unless you
are prepared to spend two pounds to their one
in the district, yon have no chance, and had
better retire with your honors than risk a
defeat. Never mind what yon have done for
the electors, they soon forget that in the pre-
sence of shining sovereigns, and vote for the
man that scatters them. Von know. King, my
dear fellow, gold speaks all language? and yon
have no hope against a powerful organisation.
Bear this in mind There is a sound
Spanish proverb which says you cannot hind
sand with rope, and all one’s efforts in that
direction are futile With kind regards—Yours
faithfully, A. W. FEKNE.
ENCOUNTER BAY BLACK-BALLED.
Thinking electors, you may jndge fo<- your-
selves the reputation in which your intelligence
and morality are regarded by the clogging-
brain interest, when the report is circulated
even throughout other colonics, doubtless by
men deeply concerned in its success, that the
standard of politics in Encounter Bay is so
lamentably low that '‘gold speaks all langu-
ages” to you, and gentlemen like Mr. Feme
arc led to believe that the wages of pollution
could elect in your district a blackfellow or a
Chinaman, irrespective of moral character
or intellectual qualifications, and a far-seeing
and able financial authority should be so im-
pressed with the shameful calumny as to urge
mo to retire from this contest in order to avoid
certain defeat. f
VENOM ON TOAST.
The bitter opposition of which he speaks is
engendered, as yon will see, by my faithfulness
to pledges upon which I secured your confi-
dence. Am I to be bounded down because I
insist upon the Government enforcing the
Sunday Closing Law, placed upon the statute
book by your Parliament? Do you believe
that a law solemnly assented to by the Queen's
representative should be broken with impunity
Sunday after Sunday by the hell’s broth dis-
pensers ? If yon do, by all moans vote against
me, as I do not desire to mirror your disloyalty.
In regard to Mr. Feme’s impression that bar-
maids are the daughters of farmers, I am sure
ho has been grossly misinformed. The farmers
of Encounter Bay aro too regardful for their
girls’ welfare to consent to their engaging in a
calling which too often involves their final
degradation.


In the majority of the public houses of Adel-
aide the coin ion is universally expressed that
a* the forthcoming general elections Lam to be
defeated, not on account of my faults, bat on
xc-ract of mv virtues—because I have reso-
ln*ely and in'no mincing language described
jUd fought a great vested interest which fattens
(jo -v * poverty and degradation of its miserable
and fii-gut Ic'd victims, which is the deadly
enemy of all true home-life, and particularly
of those fairest gifts of the Divine bounty,
c >,d wives and innocent children. Had I been
■b« •’-end of brewers and the retailers of their
decoctions—had I been a hanger-on of liquor
bars r.n-1 a worshipper of whisky—had I tried
to enlarge tho drunkard manufacturing busi-
ness and to increase the number of unhappy
home- and neglected aud ragged children,
the*** licensed mAiinewot the body politic would
have been my champions instead of my virulent
and malicious enemies. Let them deny it if
they will. They may say, f cannot prove it.
Neither could I prove at the time that they
were supoortiug Moreliead, although the letters
were in their own hands,obtained at Moreliead s
instance, containing to their infinite disappoint-
ment aud disgust a vindic stion of my character.
Like Salaam with the Israelites of old, they
struggled hard to curse me, but all their efforts
could elicit nothing bat blessings ; and the re-
newed and equally underhanded and insidious
attack that is now being made will, doubtless,
utterly fail.
IS IT TRUE ?
If, through some unforeseen circumstances,
I should be defeated, it is currently rumored
that the druakerios will run a special train to
entry the greasy chivalrous Knights of Booze,
with all the yellow-headed barmaids, to Port
Elliot on tho day of the declaration of the poll
to enable them to grin and sneer at the moral
women of Encounter Bay.
THE VITAL ISSUE.
Tho Electors of Encounter Bay will clearly
understand that the issue before them to-day
is not simply whether they will be represented
by King O’Malley, the American, or by some
one else. It is, whether they shall be known
throughout Australasia as belonging to tho
degenerate district, which prostituted itself to
the drunkard maker’s gold, or whether it shall
hold the proud position it has occupied for tho
past three years as an electorate of honesty,
sobriety, morality, and political purity and
independence. That is the distinctly defined
issue.
THE LINE OF DEMARCATION.
1 have determined in this campaign to have
no compromise with vice or its concomitants
in any form, and shall draw a liuo of demar-
cation across tho electorate of Encounter Bay,
calling upon all tho citizens to array them-
selves either on tho one side or tho other, either
in the camp of tho lovers of homo, of family,
social purity, free education, the Chnrch and
Sunday school, tho Divine law of marriage,
and the chivalrous defenceof tho sacred claims
of women to every tight possessed by man,
supplemented by one more, tho protection of
man ; or in tho camp of tho foe, which treats
these subjects with indill'eronce, if*not with
scorn and contempt, and regards politics
merely as stepping stones to the mercenary
advantage obtained by means of occupations
which all right-thinking persons acknowledge
to be sources of unending wretchedness to the
human race, and whoso main object in life,
judged by the results, appears to be to take
your brave country boys when they come to
tho city, entice them into infamous dens, fill
them with whisky, blear their eyes, dirty their
clothes, inflate their cheek- - , blacken their
characters, get the last shilling out of their
pockets through the smiles of a scented an.l
painted barmaid, and then, late at night. ki.-k
them oat into the gutter and call them “ dis-
graceful loafers.’’
The history of the stagger jaice business
shows that the drunkery is a brutalising bins,
terer, a brazen-faced outlaw, which murders
business character or life, if more accessible,
in order to prohibit investigation of its secret
destructive methods. Its existence depends on
defiance and kraggadocia, and when these
crumble, the method is private sneaking,
cowardly blackening of the opponent’s
character by engaged blackmailers.
SACItEDNESS OF HOME.
The foundation of Australian civilisation Is
the homo where fructifies all the nobler im-
pulses of human nature. lx is the political
and moral fulcrum of the Commonwealth. Into
this rose-bed of human hope the foul breath of
the drunkery comes like the stench of a slaugh
ter yard embruiting the husband and father,
inflaming his evil passions and transforming
him into a tyrant, and the money that should
be expended on the wife and family to make
home delightful is thrown away to degrade
himself and impoverish them. ‘I ho drunkard’s
homo I what a mocker}' and insult it would bo
if men producing such homes were entrusted
with the guardianship of the happiness and
prosperity of the Encounter Bay Electorate,
An eminent author, dealing with this question,
says :
“ From the day the liquor traffic was allowed
to come into this country from the despoti-ms
of Europe it has descended asabitter blighting
damning curse on everything decent, virtuous,
and pure. Its history proves it the enemy of
law, order, morality, Christianity and civili-
sation.
“ The tippling shop is the can»o of more than
six sevenths of the pauperism and f >nr fifths
of the crime in tho colouies It is the hot b«*«l
where outlaws germinate ; the cradle whom
vice is rocked.
“Liquor drinking makes the slums of great
cities ; and is responsible for the horrible con-
dition of peojde in tho slums.”
THE STAGGER-JUICE BLIGHT.
When the city spieler wants to rob the un-
sophisticated countryman, what does he first
do? Oet him drunk. When the city syndicate
monger desires to float his swindle, what d'e-s.
he do with the green customer? Get a /■»<//
drinks into him. When the city sharper is
after the good young man from the country,
docs ho invite him to a prayer meeting? No *,
but to a’ drunkery, and wheu he is full of
stagger juice ho empties his pockets and clears.
When the unscrupulous hired canvasser desires
to pledge an elector to vote for his candid**.",
without having heard his policy or lesrr.'- l
anything about his moral character, what does
he do? I’riiiie< him with cheap heer pn»d i'.r
h>j the candidate’s masters, in whose infer**?*
he is standing. When the assassin star's
out to murder his unsuspecting victim. w.-..5.*.
docs hefirstdo? Fills hit n self Kith the dr-o :■.*
ard'spoison, in order to acquire the neccssv/
hellish courage to commit his infamous eri-r."-
Nearly every murderer on the gallows i« a
witness to tho awful truth of tHs declaration..
When the sensualist sets himself to ruin a
young woman, what does he do? Fersm-’f
her to drink. Who reveals the secrets of
commercial institutions ? The confident ti
clerk after twa Honing a feu: whiskies. W
lets tho public into tho family disputes ? f'-.v
husband while under the influence of d!::.,-
water. The drunk traffic is the chief s-vv-e
of al! crime,and is fast being held up to oh 100 v /
by every decent thinking man and woman.


HONORABLE PUBLICANS.
TV;* ,’av, I trust, is near at hand when only
honorable and clean handed men and women
a fe«r of whom I am delighted to know are to
be found in the bn«ine-s in Encounter Bay—
w.ll receive licenses to keep hotels. Them,
„v r . E the barmaid system has been abolished,
and the public-house is no longer a man-
tra? and pitfall for the unwary, but a
place of public accommodation, the legitimate
hotel-keepers will bare the same social stand-
ing that other honorable business people now
hate. At present the decent licensees who
obey the law and work with other people for
the* welfare of humanity, are terribly handi-
capped by the vile, vicious lawbreakers in the
trade.
MORALITY IN POLITICS,
Sometimes I am astounded when Christian
people tell me that you must separate politics
from morals, as they are irrelevant terms.
Polities is the science of government. Govern-
ment is political economy. Political economy
is rational housekeeping. The housekeeping
of Mrs. Jones, Mrs. Robinson, Mrs. Brown,
Mrs. Smith, and others multiplied by the whole
of South Australia. Good Government. like
homes must then be founded on morality;
it •is national ethics, consequently politics
are purely national morals, the moral* of
William, Tom, John, and James, multiplied
by all the people of South Australia. In-
evitably then morals and politics are as
inseparable as force and matter.
The only security for the permanency of
democratic government is the morality and
intelligence of the individual citizen. The
conscience, and in public might is thought
more of than right. People become bankrupt,
pay a few pence in the pound and secure their
certificate. If they afterwards grow wealthy,
few will pay tho balance of their old debts.
The majority regard the law as their only
standard of righteousness. People even
attempt to justify vice in the name of the
Nazareno Carpenter, and many virtuous
women do not conceal their readiness to
admire and to receive flattery from base,
wicked men, if they but have an oily tongne
and suave manners..
MR. FACING - BOTH . WAYS IN
POLITICS.
Many people are undecided as to whether
honesty is the best policy for a politician ; they
concede that the best policy is honesty, at
least as near an approach to it as possible.
Many politicians for lack of convictions diplo-
matically sit on a rail between honesty and dis-
honesty. Mr. Facing Both Ways is at present a
very popular politician in S. A. Ho perches on a
wall, blandly smiling alik* at the Capitation
Grant and the State Schools, and reminds us of
the blank leaf between the Old and the New
Testaments, belonging to neither dispensation.
It is certainly amusing to hear that a man is fit
for Parliament because ho flies no political
colors, possesses a supple spirit of opportun-
ism, and has promised that he will make a
present of his Parliamentary salary to the
beggars of tho district.
MORAL THERMOMETERS.
There was once a man who declared that be
only told the truth when a lie did not suit. It
obj-ct of good living people is to banish every is a pity ho died as he seemed born to be
th;cg out o; p'.iblio lile which tends to debauch i a South Australian politician, but he left
the unit of government—tho voter, thereby
jeopardising the stability of government by
corrupting and polluting tho source of oxir
freedom.
THE GREAT TEACHER.
The Great Teacher of morality and Master of
human nature said —*' Lead us not into temp-
tation, but deliver us from evil.” If morals
nave nothing to do with politics you should
not hesitate to invite libertines to your homos,
and believe that your daughters, by associ-
ating with them and listening to their blandish-
ments, will be certain to grow up virtuous
■women. The highest type of manhood is de-
veloped when the passions are subordinated to
the intellect; the low brutal type, when tho
intellect becomes the slave of animalism. The
associations of youth develop one or tho other
of these traits of character. “ Evil communica-
tions corrupt good manners ” is a Scriptural
aphorism whose truth is undisputed. Virtuous
womanhood and moral manhood cannot de-
velop in the noxious atmosphere of crime and
many converts, now busy canvassing for hira
in Encounter Bay. Everyone knows the char-
acter of the candidates by tho canvassers
representing them. “Like master, like man,”
is a true proverb in good old England. “ Like
member, like constituents,” is a proverb in
South Australia. Did honest people who love
God and humanity ever choose representatives
that craved for neither truth nor justice r Tho
constituents are always fairly represented, and
often in more ways than they know. Parlia-
ment and Government are only two thermome-
ters which show the degrees of temperature of
the constituents’ morals. Everywhere the
political pumpers love their party better than
their country, and themselves bettor than their
party.
WHO IS QUALIFIED ?
When thoughtless people urge you to vote
for a man because he has been selected for
honors in a city they discredit your experience
and common-sense. History demonstrates
velop in the noxious atmosphere of crime and that the cities, besides containing many
knavery. Compromise on a question of prin- good people, generate vice, crime, and all
ciple leads invariably to a triumph for evil. ! kinds of preventible diseases, that in cities
THE SONS OF CHRISTIANS.
The sons of Christian men and women reared
in a puritanic atmospherearesentto Parliament
to be bulwarks of right and justice, but alas !
many become corrupted by evil associations
and turn out putty-faced politicians, betraying
the trust imposed in them. The greatest demor-
alisation comes from the want of being grounded
in first principles in morals, whereby our two
eyes are sealed so that wc are unable to see
the awful social evils around us, degrading
Parliamentary as well as other institutions.
In this lack of first principles there is no poli-
tical consciousness of such a thing as absolute
right—a supreme law of God, which wo are to
keep, come what will; so the colony generally
is not upright but moves along with stooping
roguery is rampant, and cunning scoundrels
live in luxury on their wits by practising
forms of legalised plunder at tho expense of
the country people. Every farmer is taxed to
a-sist in maintaining a police force to control
villany and protect life and property
from tho attacks of the off-scourings
of the great centres of population. In
the cities hundreds of drunkcries exist,
nurseries for the breeding of crime, and
rapid degeneration would be the order were it
not that virtuous country people migrate
there to live. The tact that cities
composed of such a heterogeneous mass of
humanity are satisfied with certain individuals
for presiding over the performance of such
highly important duties as impounding stray
dogs and nocturnal sheep, and inflicting drastic
shoulders and a shuffling mien. Hence in [ punishment on wicked cyclists, who°trandle
private transactions law takes tho place of their machines on footpaths whoa no 020 is


• ‘oil bat the constable. is no guarantee that
\i.t r »avdle deal qualifications are such as
#nab’« thvnx to win success in the
kar.-F'e o*cnp»liori of msking laws for the
cf the highest ’welfare and happiness
ei coaotry residents, and of the general
coesassi'.f.
•“NO WEIGHT IN PARLIAMENT.”
IV-V‘* a South Australia sufferiog from
•6ft** eg of the brain and ossification of the
a.-> continually declaring that I have no
vns fht :z Parliament, and on that account
have not been able to accomplish anything
• .sc* 1 have been there. They frequently ask
f.y fru-nds and supporters, " What have the
two members done I*’’ and themselves reply to
their tdiolo question. “ Nothing.” In order to
confound these sillyites I am driven to publish
• few cuttings from prominent newspapers,
*ai also spend much time in extracting from
** Hansard *’ particulars of what we have
actual!/ done in Parliament.—
■ fro -i i-\< S-j Uij Ereaing Nfirs, Soe. 10, I*9?.]
The subject of the Law Reform Bill, which
i» at present being carried through the House
oJ A*«emb’y in Adelaide, has given Mr. King
O'Mail*-/ an excellent opportunity for placing
the tr. modt-rn and up-to-date views before
that Hoc-e. Indeed many of Mr. Kin l * O’Mai-
lev's views may be considered as much in
advance of the period ; but, nevertheless, that
geutleir.au, by a rare combination of circum-
stances that these colonies alone could pro-
vide. has been able to impress on a House
w r.vre he U by no means persona grata ideas
wKirh. at first, were received with scorn and
ridicule. Mr. O Malley, with his powerful
American accent - and magnificent beard, is
more or less of a draw ia the Adelaide House
ot A- v mbly. Ho does not bother himself with
trmeasures-—he evidently believes that it
is the small details of life that require improv-
ing. He has helped to legislate the barmaid
out of existence in South Australia, ho has
Clipped the wings of the licensed victualler,
and is the great protector of widows. He has
1 np a host of enemies, and complains
t! at he has suffered martyrdom, but it is not in
t.’.e spirit of the martyr that he promises to
dc». pnysically with his foes. His latest idea
vs that juries should fix the punishments of
these whom, they find guilty, and ho would
authorise women to sit on juries in cases
w here charges were heard against women. It
may seem strange, but it looks as if Mr. O’Mal-
ley s ideas were going to bo realised, for the
Attorney-General of .South Australia has pro-
mi«e<. to assist in drafting a bill to carry’ them
in.o effect. Mr O’Malley is rich in an Ameri-
c a vocabulary of an exceedingly unique kind,
and his enemies and opponents don't care to
have its resources directed against them.
('MI rOJ.I CCS” «#«. Barker Courier.']
. K;n " has improved very much
in hvs speaking since he entered the House,
and the quaint way ho has of putting his ideas
always _ ensures him an attentive audience,
tiome ot the legislators who sneer at him could
sot emulate his oratorical performances to
e souls. They empty the House
fill 011 IC!r legs, whereas he always
‘‘A 9 his utterances are always followed
with .Jehght by the auditors in tho galleries.
Uu Wednesday of last week ho excelled himself
'y tee manner in which he wiped the floor with
a member who, to the astonishment of many of
is .r.ends, revealed himself in the guise of an
apostle of ignorance. He gave the O’Malley a
p.endid text for a florid harangue, and tho
DCs* use was made of the opportunity.
In the other colonies the “ King” is known
almost as well as he is here. His name has
run through all the West Australian papers,
and Just at present his actions are the subject
of heated controversy in New South Wales
owing to the fact that ha sent X'-Io to Mr.
Barton to help in forwarding the Federal
fight. It is really amusing to see what a
groat fuss is being made over this incident by
the Sydney papers, and if Mr. O'Malloy sent
the money for the purpose of advertising him-
self, which his enemies affirm to be the case, he
has certainly obtained full value for his
cheque. He assures me, however, that he did
not want the donation made public and that it
was Mr. Barton who gave the news to the
Press.
The Sydney Bulletin of September 12, IS'JtJ
contained a powerml Leader entitled “The
Sooth Australian Widow,” a few extracts (rom
which will suffice :
A measure now before the South Australian
Parliament for re-adjlisting certain relations
between the old man and the new woman pro-
mises to raise much sociil and political dust
before it is finally disposed of. It was intro-
duced by King O’Malley. M.P., the glorified
American bagman. The proposal aits down
hard on several legal traditions of great an-
tiquity, and the lawyers of the South
Australian Assembly, Premier Kingston
included, are mostly hostile. As a natural
consequence it badly infringes the liberty of
the male subject, to dispose of his property as
he pleases, and to a great extent dispose of bis
wife also. It prohibits him absolutely tnrow-
ing *hor out when he has done with her. It
also prohibits his condemning her to celi-
bacy for the remainder of her life by making
all her property forfeitable if she remarries. Hy
doing these things it even raises a serious
doubt as to whether he really owns the lady
ami whether she doesn't to some exteut own
herself. The Bulletin votes for King
O’Malley on the present occasion.
Is there any other private member in the
Legislative Assembly of South Australia who
has ever introduced anything that the Bulletin
thought worth devoting a Leader to ?
PRIVATE MEMBERS.
Besides supporting all the principal demo-
cratic measures introduced by the Government
and others, and helping to defeat tho Angastoa
Railway Bill, which would have increased the
burdens of the already crushed taxpayer, we
have ourselves originated and fought for
various important reforms. As private mem-
bors have only each Wednesday afternoon to
discuss motions and introduce iJills, it will be
easily soon that one member cannot occupy
the whole time with his business. Should ho
attempt such a selfish disregard of other
members’ legitimate rights his future pros-
pects of successfully carrying any’ measures
through Parliament would be of small valne.
There are .54 members ia the Assembly, and
as each of thorn wants a bit of Wednesday
afternoon, voters will be able to understand
why I have not boon able to carry out the
whole of the policy outlined in the 13?t>
message. At the same time I can claim to
have accomplished at least as much as any
other private member in tho House.
OUR WORK FOR ARCADIA.
On entering Parliament I immediately
moved for a Local Court at Kangaroo Island,
which we have since induced the Attorney-
General to establish, thereby saving the resi-
dents of the island heavy expense.


I l.owever. to carry a motion to ‘jet
K»%w> Island declared a separate Assembly
The mails on the idaud have been improved
i.n tr.-ir.y places. The island has received a
rrrat advertisement, and is cow more talked
c 4 cn the mairdand than ever before in its
h.st-irv. My mi geest ion that the island should
t* made the Federal Capital has not. I regret,
been adopted.
HOG BAY JKTTY.
Through my persistent questioning of the
Treasurer in reference to the Hog Bay jetty,
that usdertiikiEg will be an accomplished fact
in the near future. We are hoping shortly to
get a telephone to Hog Bay, and with fair
pro»pect«.
Doubtless, through our efforts, some Govern-
ment money will soon be spent on mining de-
velopment in the island.
•PROMISES KEPT.
Wo have kept onr promise, and made annual
trips to the electorate, and addressed the con-
stituents on the island. My speeches may
sot always have been acceptable to everybody,
bat no one can charge mo wuh having been
“all things to all men ’* in order to selfishly
gain rotes, or with having shirked a full and
frank expression of opinion on any question
that has arisen for discussion. No one can
accn j » mo of ever having tried to secure
votes on Kangaroo Island by dispensing beer
from a public-house bar.
MINISTERIAL VISITATION.
Without delay we persuaded the Premier,
the Right Hon. i’. C. Kingston, and the Minis-
ter of Education, Hon. Dr. Coekbnr.n, to visit
some of the principal place* in the district.
They received deputations, which placed be-
fore them particulars of various requirements.
We were delighted with the hospitality exten-
ded by electors to the Ministers.
STATION PLATFORMS.
Through the Ministers having seen the dilapi-
dated condition of the railway-station plat-
forms at Victor Harbor. Port Elliot, and Gool-
wa, wo have succeeded in getting sufficient
money from the Government to erect beautiful
commodious platforms commensurate with the
growing importance of the places named.
Persons who represent that the money had
been voted for these three stations prior to
onr election, and that it would have been ex-
pended there even had we not brought influ-
ence to bear on the Government, are, as they
themselves must know, telling deliberate wil-
ful lies. Not one shilling had been voted for
those platforms prior to our agitation. If it
had, why did deputations wait on the Premier
when in the district r
A FORM OF BRIBERY.
Currency Creek and Gilbert Crossing station
platforms are certainly not spacious enough
for the services required of the;: , but owing
to the largeness of the amount tl at had to be
expended ou the other three platforms speci-
fied, it was impossible to persuade tlre Govern-
ment to do am - more at the time. However,
these platforms must bo enlarged, and the
Government understand that the work cannot
be long delayed. I will not promise to erect
platforms at my own expense. Such a course
would be transparent bribery, and no honor-
able Government could countenance it, or, in
any case, allow a member of Parliament to
construct platforms along its permanent
■ways.
RAILWAY CONCESSIONS.
The Railway Department, in consequence of
our unwearying pressure, has been running
special cheap excursion trains to A ictor Har-
bor and intermediate stations, and though the
accommodation has increased enormously at
the leading watering places since onr advent,
yet in 1807 they were unable to accommodate
many hundreds.
GROWTH OF STATISTICS.
The following statistics from the Commis-
sioner of Railways. Mr, Pendleton, speak
for themselves; —Total tickets issued to
Goolwa during the three years 1893-5, 5,934;
total tickets to Port. Elliot, 10,41*1; total to
Victor Harbor, 19,093. These tickets repre-
sented the number of visitors to each place
dnring the throe years immediately prior to
our entering Parliament. Now let ns see to
wbat extent our presence among the electors
of Encounter Bay has entailed upon them
financial loss: Total nnmbe,r of tickets issued
to Goolwa daring the throe years 1*96-8, 7.240;
total to Port Elliot, 16,231: total to Victor
Harbor, 26.785. Summary for three years be-
fore our advent. 35.519 visitors to the three
places; during our advertising of the district,
50,265; majority in onr favor, 14.740. Yet the
population of South Australia during the six
years has virtually remained stationary: in
fact, if anything, the adult population has
diminished dnring the last three years owing
to the exodus to Western Australia. In the
face of these figures friends are told by loose
lunatics that the members have done nothing
for the district.
TELEPHONES.
A telephone has been established at onr
reqne-t between Second Valley, Ya nkah’U.a, and
Capo Jervis, which has dispensed with the
services of a telegraph operator- -thus saving
expense to the State—and given the residents
of the Valley a valuable convenience.
OVERHEAD SHELTER?.
I have impressed upon the District Councils
of Port Elliot and Encounter Bay the advis-
ablencss of erecting overhead shelter at Port
Elliot and Victor Harbor, thus enabling ladies
and children to remain on the seashore dnring
the hottest days, and enjoy the glorious
breezes from the Southern Ocean.
GOOLWA FERRY.
Wo secured from the Treasury early in 1890
i*3o a year for the Goolwa Ferry, but through
the wrangling over the part taken by two of
the members of the Upper House, the offer
was withdrawn ; but lately the Treasurer has
renewed it, on condition that the municipal
council and the district council interested
reduce the fares proportionately. The result
will bo a decided benefit to the residents of
Hindmarsh Island.
SCHOOLS AND ROADS.
A school has been promised for Mount Com-
pass. and soon those honest heroic blockers
will bo able to see their children growing up,
like the Puritan fathers of Massachusetts, in
intelligent righteousness.
Many of the public buildings have been
renovated and painted.
For many places in the district v/o have i
secured large road grants, and the Government
has always been rtady, as far as funds would «
allow, to do what they could for the advance-
ment of Arcadia.
If these results to the district from our
efforts do not satisfy onr enemies, in tbe name ;
of reason lot them tell us what they want and >
expect.


ACHIEVEMENTS FOR
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
LAVATORIES ON RAILWAY
CARRIAGES.
SpV. 'I.M light* and lavatories are now being
placed in the railway carriages of both the Ist
and tlr.d classes, as the result of a motion car-
ried, at my instance, in ISl*6.
HELPS TO FREE EDUCATION,
One of my first aots in Parliament was to
seek to perfect the system of free education.
What I did is fairly indicated by the following
extract from 44 Hansard ” of Aug. tlO, 131*0 :
The TreAsurer while delivering the Budget
apee<-h •aid — 44 Tlie education department is
the text to which I shall call attention. Books
and •'■tools materials are shown last year at
Jit,o4s, bat this year the revenue is put down
at JH.tKKI only. Members may ask what this
means, and the reason is not far to seek.
Early in the session Mr. King O'Malley asked
whether the Government would be prepared to
afford the privilege of free books to the
children of the State schools, and the Govern-
ment have decided that after January Ist the
children shall be permitted to have books free
of charge which, of course, means a reduction
in the income from J!4,040 to JLT,OOO. It will
be a great concession, especially to those who
have large families and to whom every conces-
sion ie important.”
SHIVERING LEGISLATORS.
Shortly after this announcement by the
Treasurer, the Rev. Dr. Byrne wrote a letter
to the papers denouncing the Government for
Mr. Holder's assurance, uad tha rev. father’s
epistle had such a paralysing effect on the
majority of the legislators that for a week
they did not know whether were on the crest of
an active volcano or the heated roof of Hades.
Many of them looked like melting snow on the
east peaks of the Rocky Mountains, and in
sheer compassion I assured them that it was
not the venerable Pope of Romo who had any-
thing to do with this matter, but the Pope of
Kapnnda, who had frightened them nearly to
death ; and the Government, in trembling and
fear, made a compromise by giving the books
at co»t price, which I was forced to accept,
thereby reducing the old charges by about oO
per cent, and restoring the pale and prostrat-
ed members to convalescence.
It is gratifying to know, however, that, in
order to compensate the public for having
failed to supply fro* books to the schools, the
Government has made the fifth classes free.
- WI DOWS’ RIGHTS.
'ln ISpfi I introduced -•» Bill to enable
widows where not properly provided for
in the wills of their deceased husbands to
obtain similar benefits as are conferred bv
The law of intestate intestacy, which
gives a widow a third of the es-
tate. The IB ill .was negatived an
the second reading. The following
year 1 again introduced a measure enabl-
ing a widow to ask a judge of rhe Supreme
Court to nuke an order on the estate for
what he considered a reasonable living for
her. This -was also defeated. On Octo-
ber ’.M, ISPS, I moved the following motion:
—"Tii,*,: in the opinion of this 'House a
Bill should be introduced by the Govern-
ment ro amend the law relating to the
testamentary disposition of .property by
providing that tiie widow and children of
a testator, for whose benefit a sufficient
provision has not been made by the testa-
mentary dispositions of an estate, may ap-
ply 'for an order from a judge of the Su-
preme Court directing what is a reasonable
provision for them out of such estate, pro-
vided tha't no .siren order shall be issued
for 't'he benefit of a widow who has. before
the testator’s death, been guilty of con-
duct which would have entitled him
to obtain a divorce, and which conduct has
not been condoned.” 1 delivered the
speech in favor of the motion, and tibe
Right Ron. C. King.-con led the opposi-
tion ro it. iMr. Hamburg afforiled me
great Bidlp. I divided the ’House on t'he
question with die following result: —Ayes,
32: noes, t>. The Premier .w.is the teller
for idie '■noes,’' anil I the teller, for 'the
,4 aycs”—a majority of tlti right
hon. gentleman. 'Roes -this look like “no
weight in Parliament I” The powerful in-
fluence of the Sydney rendered
me valuable assistance.
THE LEGITIM CATION OF CHILDREN
BORN OUT OF WEDLOCK.
In ISD7 I -brought in a Bill to legitima-
tize children born out of wedlock in cases
where the .parents subsequently married.
After ‘a fierce struggle, in which the Pre-
mier Jed 'the opposition, I suffered detea*.
In ISOS I reintroduced 'the measure, and
through the marvellous conversion of the
Premier from rhe error of his ways, in-
stead of being my uncompromising enemy
*s in the previous year, lie became a cham-
pion of 'the Bill, and was ably seconded
by Sir John 'Downer. The Bill is now the
Viw of South Australia, and is proving one
of tlie greatest blessings ever conferred on
many innocent children, who would other-
wise have remained under a cruel stigma.
The new law is an encouragement, to
morality, in so far as it inducts certain
'men to marry the girls theyjod astray, for
the sake of making the children legiu-
mate.
THE TSARIMA.W) SYSTEM.
In the Blouse of Assembly in ISOG I
moved a motion, which was carried by a
majority of live. aUdishing the barmaid
system. The Legislative Council throw
out the proposal by a majority of three.
BOARDS OF ARBITRATION.
I gave tiofiCo of a motion 'to establish
boards of arbitration throughout the elec-
toral districts of South Australia for the
purpose of enabling people to settle -all dis-
putes without the interference «>: lawyers.
Discovering by private whipping that
it would be defeated by a large majority, I
allowed the motion to lapse.
WOMAN’S PROTECTION AND
AFFi'LTATi ON BILLS.
These important and humane measures
bad my best and most earnest support, and
they will prove of lasting benefit to abused
and long-suffering women.
EQUAL PAY TO THE SEXES.
I gave notice of a motion to establish a
minimum wage and to provide that women
should have equal pay with men for work
of 'the same character, but owing to the
notice-piper being so full for 'Wednesday
afternoons the dfou-c did nor reach it.
STATE AUDIT FOR PUBLIC
COMPANIES.
In ISOG I gave notice of a motion in the
House insmie'ting the Government to bring


in a B.il establishing a system of State
i«i c for life insurance companies doing
in the colony, but owing to the
f:>rm it was about to create among some
sirmVr*, and being anxious not to alien-
ate rite-;r sympathy from assisting me to
carry more urgent leg.slat ion. . I allowed
the matter to lapse for the time facing.
CRIMINAL CODE -REPORTS!.
l>a*t year I endeavored to insert in the
Law Reform Bill a clause reforming tiie
criminal code, whereby juries would be en-
abled ;o intimate to the judge the maxi-
mum sentence .which Should be imposed
• a each case, the judge haying the power
:o inflict a lower penalty it lie so desired;
also to empower women -to fit on juries
when women were on trial. Tire Pre-
mier promised that gins vear iie would as-
k;-: me in drafting a Bid. embodying a
complete reform of the criminal code, so
that oil crimes w : ” be brought under the
category o: ilrst, second, .third, and ‘fourth
degrees.
WOMEN* AS COUQfCTLLORS.
Near the close of last session I intro-
duced a Municipal -Councils’ Amend-
ment ‘Bill, which would afford women an.
opportunity of sitting as members of our
local governing 'bodies, which they cannot
now do; but rate did not permit of the
measure ’being proceeded with, and the
Premier promised -that this aeg of justice
will i!*e included in :the new Local Govern-
ment Bill.
OLD AGE PENSIONS.
Thanks to the energy of my colleague,
•Mr. Carpenter, a Royal Commission was
appointed to enquire into the feasibleness
Of establishing an Old Age Pension Fund.
1 Living brought the subject forward in
!mv published ISO*3 message, 1. of course,
feel rejoiced at the advance it has made,
a-d hope .that shortly there mill not be
any aged persons iu .South Australia com-
pelled through no fault of their own to
go to the Destitute Asylum.
THE GAP RENTER AND THE KING.
•Mr. Carpenter and d have worked in har-
mony. and ho has been a loyal supporter
of every democratic measure 1 have
brought forward, a course of action I have
reciprocated. Democrat* care very little
who introduces a measure, provided it Las
the right ring about it. when their alle-
giance is ineradicably pledged to its suc-
cess.
MY FUTURE POLICY.
I was the 'first candidate to incur the ex-
pense of issuing and posting to every elec-
tor in Arcadia a message containing a full
and definite policy. Prior to the last elec-
tion, in IS%. candidates simply declared
their views in speeches on the hustings,
which the electors forgot as soon ns they
did.i
PAYMENT OF MEMBERS.
Being a rigid believer in the prin-
ciple of payment of members o'f Par-
liament, if again elected. I shall draw my
salary every month, and refuse to belittle
myself, or insult your intelligence and
commendable pride a« independent respect-
able people, by holding out as a bribe a
promise that 1 will donate the £2OO a year
to the aristocracy of beggary.
•EQUAL WORK—EQUAL PAY*.
It is my intention to persevere with the
righteous movement for the recognition of
woman's claim to the same wages as men
when railed upon to perform similar ser-
vice. In many cities of Australia, to my
personal knowledge. Indy accountants re-
ceive one-third the pay 'that gentlemen
doing like work obtain. Tivs i?
grossly unjust, especially in view of the
fact that the cost of living is about equal
in both cases.
OLD AGE PENSION'S.
This 'lhjnCficent proposal, 'which the
Hon. -I. }[. Howe succeeded in engrafting
in the constitution of the Commonwealth,
must not be allowed to sleep. Whatever
rive difficulties ahead may 'be they must be
overcome. In Xcw Zealand an interesting
advance has been made, and Federated
Australia must not lag behind.
ASIATIC LMMIGRATION,
I shall continue to do my best :■> pre-
serve Australia for the white man. believ-
ing that a commingling of whites and
blacks or whites and yellows would be
detrimental to the best interests of moral-
ity and democratic progress, as also of the
colored races themselves. A Eurasian ele-
ment in Australia would be a most unfor-
tunate calamity.
LOCAL OPTION*.
Me have far too many drunker:??, and
the organised efforts o'f the monopolists
who own them tend to the degradation of
public life. I have considerable sympathy
for many of the retailers of viper fluid,
for they are simply the tools o: the
monopolistic distillers and brewers. But
the weltare of society—that constant im-
provement in the condition of 'humanity,
ami especially of its weak and help!?*-* por-
tions, which every true democrat and
every true lover of his fellow men must
seek to bring about —demands that the
legalised (Tipplers s'iiouM be shorn of their
powers, and that the people shall have the
right to protect themselves against the en-
croachments of what we well know -■> be
the b'aue of youth, the blight of manhood,
and rhe degradation of old ago,
THE BAHAI AH) SYSTEM.
This system has made me the rao-t bated
in a n in South Australia by the viola ters
of lanv and revellers in vice, but, all the
same, even though I 'were a victim to these
death-adders, the evil must go. 3ts de-
struction has been affirmed by a majority
of the direct representatives of the whole
of the people of South Australia, and as
democracy never retrogrades, but advances
from the last stopping-place, the evolu-
tionary progress of woman’s emancipation
from the thraldom of the slave-holder will
certainly ensure the early abolition of this
disreputable calling, which alike defiles the
customer*? and the maids. If any of the
electors should conscientious!?- believe that
they would be willing to see their sisters
or daughters serving whisky in bar-rooms,
and being compelled to listen to the foul
and filthy language 'frequently used by
drunken gentlemen, I strongly advise them
not to vote for me. because I can in no
way reflect their obliquity of moral vision
hnd their destitution of the higher feeling*,
o'f the human heart, possessing, as they
must do, the intellects of sharks, and the
conscience of a black snake. Wha tan honor-
able m'an Would not allow his sifters and
daughters to do, he would also endeavor to
protect other men’s sisters and daughters
from.
POLICE SUPERANNUATION FUND.
I strongly favor the institution of such a


s i ♦.. and bi-b, for a -plemlid body
<•“ :?ra t» arv tne iu-'-t u-cxul ot oil Ciyil
»cr.'ia;s j * the.r prc-euce alone _ enables
rr«v^-;able oeoplc :o Jive in comfort and
*3.v\y m the city; but I nope ti>e Govern-
tr.ea; a.l! no; trifle -.vita any more abor-
tx-r.s, nhivj are brought in merely as
railcdHvevc* when thcymve no real merit
in them.
LAW REFORM.
Tlii« subject is receiving my careful at-
tention. <>ae df my chief de-fires is to re-
i rm the criminal code, so that jur.es may
*r-ide ;3if prisoners they convict, as offen-
ders of the tirst, second, third, or fourth
degree. cavil decree having a maximum
penalty stipulated by law. by which the
pudge's sentence will be limited. My ob-
ject is to make punishment reclamatory in
character, as far as possible, so that the
idea os society as embodied in the law
courts will be ‘‘Reformation off the crimi-
nal." nor, as now, revenue. Our present
svc.cm is certainly inhuman and barbarous.
Three per-uiis tor the «ame crime are sent
for It* years to the Stockade. One is tho-
roughly reformed in three years, another
in live, and jhe other never reforms at all.
Yet Vae reformed men must serve seven
and five veers more respectively to appease
the wrath o: societv. At the end of the
10 years the third man is as bad a's the day
he was sentenced, but, all the same, he is
discharged with the other two. only to be
re-arrested, retried, and reincarcerated at
heavy expen-e to the general community.
The gaols an<l institutions of detention
must be made hospitals tor the curing of
cr.inmal diseases, and when the cures are
effected, the patients should be discharg-
ed, im>-ptvtlve ot the mint her of yearn the
sentence had to run; and the uncured
should ik? retained in the hospital till the
•day of their death.
rnrr.TC-vxs and their progeny.
Publican- who sell liquor to habitual
drunkard* should be held liable bv law to
the r families lor the support of which they
deprive them, and any damage to property
or life done by men when under the in-
fluence ox drink should be compensated for
hy the liquor sellers from -whom the drink
was obtained.
GOVERNMENT GRAIN STORES.
The Government should erect elevators
for forage purposes in the grain-growing
districts, where farmers might store their
■grain at little expense until the market im-
proved, and receive from the Government
advances on the security of the grain at a
low rate of interest, enabling them to
carry on their _ farming, and preventing
them from making great sacrifices in being
xorced to sell rheir wheat very often when
Ai! e market was at the minimum price.
•VVf l^e :Jn . nor does all the work ’the
middle-man grain Quiver too often receives
au fine profit. Tne jhistory of the grain
market for flic past oO years demonstrates
-nat though the -price may be very low
sisome time in the 'year it generally
end-' in an equalised market, and the Go-
vernment might then sell the grain, re-
taln tae amount they advanced, and re-
turn the balance to the fanner. Tf grain-
raising is to be carried on with any profit
*o me growers 'die Government must
■come to their rescue.
HOARDS OF ARBITRATION.
• ai V -Mill powerfully impressed with 'the
that tae * ,ov crnmc'n: must inevitably
■csrabli-h boards of arbitration for the
■settlement or disputes wiihwit the inter-
vention ot lawyers. The decrees of tnese
boards should be final and irrevocable. The
offender and offended should each =<tate
his case, the 'boards to meet whenever
neces-ary, and both sides to jv.iv the little
expense involved. If either party de-ired
then to pa to law the one parting the law
in motion would 'he rcspon-;"*»;e f„r ail the
expenses incurred 'by the otoer, wuelher
he won or lost the suit.
ct)v«nx»i'BXT audit.
'The State, I believe, should appoint an
auditor or Controller of Finance, who
would be empowered to examine at any
hour or day ox the week the books of
hanks, building societies, tire and life in-
surance societies, and all institutions which
receive money from the people on trust,
and if he discovers -the inability of any in-
stitution to meet its liabilities he should
be able to order its doors to be closed
before it is able to issue balance sheets
often deceitful to the credulous. Its assets
should be written up nr down according
to the valuations; -if depreciated, down;
if appreciated, up. Then the depositors
would know -where they were; now no one
knows anything but the saintly directors,
and if the pa-*: is any criterion by which
to judge the future much reliance cannot
be placed in many balance-sheets. One
director admitted under oath a few years
ago in Melbourne that'he helped insolvent
banks to present solvent balance-
sheets to their unsuspecting share-
holders by transferring money from
some other institution to the insolvent
hank the day before, and refunding it the
day after the balancing. Directors of
financial institutions have been known to
declare a dividend, congratulate their
shareholders on their sound condition,
and within a few days close their doors. I
wish to stop this game of commercial
strangulation, and only a Government
auditor can do it.
MIXING SYNDICATE FLOTATIONS.
After the awful experience attendant
upon the West Australian boom, which
has filled the land with misery, the time
has come for tho Government to place a
law on the Statute-book __ prohibiting
Cabinet Ministers,members of Parliament,
and mayors of cities, from utili.-ing their
public honors, conferred on them by the
suffrages of the people, for the purpose of
in the promotion of gigantic
speculations at the expense of the thrifty
classes, and often to the ruin of aged
people and widows, who are duped by
cleverly concocted prospectuses, contain-
ing influential names in their lists of pro-
visional directors, in’tovainlvimaginicg that
the men they trusted have found “a good
thing*’ tor them. Every min and woman
who has a proper regard for truth and
upright dealing must blush for shame at
the revelations which have from time to
time been made public in Australia, of un-
conscionable, wicked lies—hough worded
so as to avoid -the clutches of the law—
published and circulated for the express
purpose of fleecing a confiding public. I
nave read prospectuses in fs>u:h Australia
of mines in the Wes: so worded that each
letter was made to appear like a gold slug.
IN WEST AUSTRALIA—LOOKING
FOR GOLD.
Oa my visit to the West, having invested
si>me of my money here on the strength
of the names appearing on the prospec-
tuses, and die maps thereon -bowing that


n»,n»-« *vr«* "cn tiie Hou.der line ot
rrx-..” I procured horses ami started oat
to .<•< the K 1 Dorado*. %vhich were going
t>» make me a million lire. To my utter
<Ru;.-tnr.’.t I >l.-covered that 1 would have
I > traiel many miles across a wild desert
country, where there was nothing but a
carnet pad. I scat the horses track, en-
gaged -« camel and started, and after a day
*r,d a hilt’s journey I reached one of these
mountains of gold. Out want did I find? A
Ik-ndigo shoemaker managing the ‘‘mine,"
and a shaft down a few feet filled with
ram water, which lie had accumulated
from little gutters. His occupation con
•Uted in selling the water to anyone un-
fortunate enough to pass that way. When
Tasked "Where is my hope—the (told
Chunks Receptacle?” he said that as
*oon as he had sold the water lie would
begin sinking: as he was certain, after
reading the prospectus sent over from
Adelaide by the directors, that there must
be heaps of gold "at depth.” He is, I
believe, still sinking, but when the gold
will begin to rise I am •unable to say.
GOLD SHfiX THROUGH ITUTSFitCTUS
AX I) RUM.
At another "prospect,” where there was
a hole about 7 ft. deep, the manager show-
ed great and affectionate interest in a tive-
Ealloii keg of rum which the directors
ad sent him from Adelaide, along with a
copy ot the prospectus, to share his soli-
tude. So well did he appreciate this
kindly attention that he lay down beside
it, and never left it day or night until it
rolled awav from him, when lie struggled
ou his hands and knees to reach it again.
M’heu I asked him where was the latest
Great Boulder, by a superhuman effort
he raked him-elf an.! sat on his friend,
the keg; asked me to hand him the
prospectus, which lav on the ground,
and sit down beside him. Then
m a voice which indicated that
he was suffering from strangulated
Aeima tbe head and throat,
f? me that al! was well, an’d that
awii.e /or some week* he 'had been very
Ciiar> a bon: tne future of the mine, 'he bad.
since lire arrival of the keg and -the
prospectus containing the names of so
many o.d gold-minors, u-'z that the pro-
perry must be exceedingly rich. -Look
in Adelaide, an.l iho 100-guinei expert
shoemaker sent out to bolster up the de-
ception. This evil of unscrupulous wm-
pany-promoting bids lair wreck our
commercial reputation. In Kngland Lord
Russell, tiie Chief Justice, Iras introduced
a Bill into the House of lanxie. <«« cheek
ilooleyisrn, and a similar measure i* im-
peratively needed here, and 1 will do my
best to place it on the Htatutc-book.
KJ-XORANT (J UINFA-RltkS.
Tiie following extract from the Sydney
“Bulletin” is suggestive of what is con-
stantly going on: —Major-General Tulloeli,
late of Victoria, cut a poor figure in the
witness-box in the W.A. Gold District
Trading Corporation case (Goodman pro-
moter), Said lie had joined the Trading
crowd at the start, gut 100 founder’s shares
from Goodman for nothing, never saw or
enquired for the articles of association of
the company idhich In? was to direct, never
taw the secretary, found himself in the
chair at a meeting, did not know how or
why he got there, had no idea of the num-
ber of shares allotted to himself or in the
concern altogether, remembered seconding
a resolution for the declaration of l'*> per
cent, dividend without knowing whether it
had ever been tin ned. Also, admitted that
lie had 'been a director of a good ’many
other companies —"all of which had come
to grief.” At this probably much of
the ‘British public will express sur-
prise and consternation, as well
as a determination nor to follow the
General if he goes in again. The mili-
tary guinea-pig ‘business lias been going
on for vears, and carried on in the hroaJ
light of day. The Mar Olliee has never
forbidden it. But when poor Riper kind-
liter attempted to earn a living at London
Alhambra in a representation of tiie storm-
ing of Dargai Heights tJiat office consulted
its dignity, and brought pressure on the
management to cancel Findlater’s engage-
ment on the ground that "his appearance
on the musical stage was not in accordance
with the ‘best traditions of tiie army.”
A STA'L'K FARM.
A State Farm, where men reduced to the
verge of starvation, but too proud to beg.
may go and obtain work temporarily,
would, I believe, prove of great benefit to
hi these names!’'’ he exclaimed, {holding up many honest but friendless people. 1
rue prospectus. "Do yon clunk Mr, So and- J would have the farm not too far from
ss -name, and [Mr. Sci-and-So’s. and Mr. ! Adelaide, and I would not use it to com-
Ho-lo s would be on it if there wasn’t gold j pete against private industry in the
here? T)o you think gentlemen of their ! slightest form, hut solely as a reproduo-
stariding in Adelaide would lend their live resort for men thrown out of em-
naines to a swindle?” Then, pointing to ployment.
"WwLra rt hi £l»y he said. PROVIDING MFIANhS OF LIVING.
u-kx uiic, here u'i- tacre s a vein or tel- ti
lurides going right through from east to
' v °'g, and cross lodes branching out in
various directions. There again,” said he.
stiff pointing to statements in the pros-
pectus, can’t you see that .there are heavy
our vrops, all assaying from 1 to 100 oz. per
ton’. •! endeavored to attract Oiis otten-
tion to the -actual appearance of things
around—that I could see no outcroppings,
neither signs of gold in the “shaft.” hat
he consistently refused r<> see anything hut
the "These 'Ailelaide gentle-
men, who are the directors,” he angrily ex-
claimed, "ought to know more about whe-
ther there’s gold in this mine than
a bally fool like you." (So in desperation I
retraced my steps, returned to Kalgoorlie. j
and resolved to go to see no more "mines,”
recognising that the whole thing was a
fraud, and that the gold only existed in i
the imagination of the prospectus-writer !
Through the introduction of machinery
to perform the work formerly done by
skilled human hands thousands of able-
bodied men are annually thrown out of
employment in Australia. They have
wives and families to maintain and clothe,
and "out of work” means out of
bread. It is the solemn and
pressing duty of statesmen to solve this,
the profoundest question of political eco-
nomy now facing the -world. It cannot be
relegated to silence; it must he dealt with
boldly and bravely. Then what is to be
done with these unhappy people ? If
some of them open little stores they do not
create new industries, but simple divide an
already existing trade with other people,
who even now find it difficult to pay their
way. They are not in a financial position
to purchase land for themselves. If they
take t'lie few pounds they have and go


,s • ; ;ii-y uuy -u.>-.•»; o»r .1 year.
F:; t-c *ad ; :;»v.r resources mu>; come,
• #.; :na-: c..u-r *:<«rve in the scrub
v: u.'jn :o ; >.• 4# pauper*. In the
, , |he«e f 1 .: if the unavoidable
»*■ -a v< :V» Government to purchase
► the o'id.d lands mar Adelaide,
ij ;.«r the purpose of maintain-
■ - % j fie %hecp and tattcUiCg a lew billy-
f a;., acd of rutting these lands up into
f<U’ c j /r-I b.o.'sts* and p*.icing
s:> r t.-g-Lsd men ou them on perpetual
U h;: is to become of tag young
,-n. 1 *a.< country ? Fiiere are no open-
rsf» a rnv »aops, and tiie Railway De-
isi.-tn eo: and the Civil Service are over*
«t it■ i, ll.nv.are we to enable them to
c% n 4 p-»* to marry the young women
* a • are ♦ving trained to become awes ?
1» tiie (k'vtninii'iit to #r.uul idly ny and
v-iifM them Itciune loafer# and gamblers,
.no good to themselves and a nuisance to
everyone t'*e, eventually having to end by
the S ;A ;e keeping them in the Stockade ?
It 4 :ew acre* of good land, under the pro-
per kind of fruit trees, will keep a good-
»ttJ family, way -hould not the Govern*
men; offer inducements to youn~ men to
on the >o;l, and create independent
homes ? In our own district, at Currency
K’ttxk, and elsewhere, we may see -what
can <w done by men possessing scientific
k'c.sv ledge of tmit culture. ’Mr. Porter,
who garnet! his great knowledge of this
subject in old England, where it has
reached an ideal state, has
through Ins genius, transformed a virtu-
- Uv non-productive orchard into a verit-
able Eden, which will pay him handsomely
t? :* yi.ir owing to the scarcity of apples.
V> i y should not the OovVnment secure
t*,» *• 1 vires of <n<.h men as Mr. Porter
■ i.’iT that they may teach others how
ml the sime results as he has secured
‘■•r him-clf? Every fruit garden, properly
managed. i< an additional source of wealth
to {he colony .
THE FARMERS’ POSITION'.
Agriculture i# the foundation of all
material prosperity. Every Government
that pas-e# laws to encourage the tilling
of the soil increases the wealth of the
nation. Fanners should he proud of
their avocation, and not think it bemeans
them to follow agricultural pursuits for a
hviug. Diocletian, the Emperor of Rome,
!*;x the throne to go farming. Cincinna-
ti's weary and worn with State cares,
abandoned public life for the peaceful and
solitary career of a farmer. Washington,
•’ :r 't in peace, first in war. first in the
heart# of his countrymen, left tire White
lfou-e to return to’his farm at Mount
V ernon. The great Elisha was following
tie plough when Elijah, by Divine in-
spiration, selected him to be his
in enlightening the Israelites. Was not
the Great Teacher himself a humble
toiler? Farmer#, honor your calling.
>Oll have n supreme advantage over the
mechanic#. The colony is full of
mechanics, but no real trades-people. In
the subdivision of labor we have
thousands of persons working on different
part# of the same thing. In a hoot
factory there arc hundred# of men, but
not one shoemaker. In a tailor’s shop
lucre are numbers of persons at work,
but not one who can make a suit of
■clothes. It takes them all. assisted by a
'variety of machines, to make a boot or a
pl!1 * ot clothe#. Each doc# a particular
part, and no one individual know# the en-
I tire trade. What’s the result? When the
j factory puts uptheshuttersthtoei-eoplcare
out of employment. This mean-tout of food,
j The mechanic has no independence. His
j all often depends on the goodwill
1 of one person. He is liable to he dismissed
at any time, lie accumulates nothing for
old age. In fact, he is only the shackled
slave of capital. I regret tlut so many
young men are so destitute of real pluck
that for fear of the future they willingly
grab the crusts anti paltry salary of the
present if they can hut secure an ap-
|K>intment in any department of the Civil
Service, however humiliating. I would
rather be the lessee of a small firm and be
independent, than be the Governor-
General of Federated Australia, with
trammels on my liberty of speech and
thought. To a free man it is abhorrent
to he always on guard, fearing that the
least mistake may involve him in the loss
of his broad and butter. He feel# as
though he is losing his self-respect with-
out gaining that of others. It is only by
honest labor that people can maintain the
true spirit of freedom, widen produces
happiness—the only real weaki.
WHERE LABOR PRODUCES.
Where labor produces and justice pro
lefts, prosperity prevails. Farmers should
not always be in teres t-Vurdcn-l> car-
ers. Interest is a starving pig that
eats day and night, and the more
it swallows the hungrier it be-
comes. The farmer mortgaged in his
dreams at night cun hear tin- pig grind-
ing. If he is free from debt his dteaius
are of his crops growing. Lift the fly-
blister off your farms as soon a# po-dbl'e.
You have maintained luxurious idleness
and indolent interest-drawer* long enough.
Every farmer should erect shelter for his
machinery, and not allow them to ru-t in
the rain and sun.
.SPECULATORS.
Speculators cannot accumulate unless
somebody loses. In the field of speculation
every success has its victim. The harvest
garnered by the farmer benefits aii. and
injures none. His success doc# not mean
someone else’.# destruction. This i# true
of all products of honest vork. The
thought must be buried tiat there is
something mentally debasing in eultivat-
mg the grqund. Nothing can be grander
than to he useful. Loafing should not he
respectable, and men should only be es-
teemed for their manhood, which is the
substance, while money is but the acci-
dent of life. I know of no lovelier way to
live than in the calm solitude of the
country away from the insane rush utter
wealth, society, and power—away from the
dirty streets, where fools struggle and
fight for the empty praise of bigger fool#
than themselves.
THE WIPE’S RIGHTS TO THE HOME.
I am opposed to any man possessing the
power to mortgage, transfer, or sell the
home without the wife's signature. They
are unable to do so in Texas, and I am
certain the intelligence of the Australian
women is not inferior to tbit of their
American sisters. Any man can now enter
Adelaide, become the victim of a con-
spiracy of syndicate-promoter*, and while
“under the influence.” sign hi# name for
shares. All the other# may i-e insolvent,
and the result may be that in a short time
Ids innocent wife and children would be


cvh ted from their home. For the safety
of* the Lu-band. a* well a* of tho.-e for
Tvho-e maintenance he is responsible, the
home should be inalienable without his
wife’s written conr-cnt.
EQUAL DIVORCE LAWS.
mn-t !-» enacted. Habitual drunkenness
j,v either hu-band or wife for seven years
>hf>nl<) Ik? sulluient ground lor a dissolu-
tion of marriage.
TAXATION*.
I am opposed to any increase in the
land tax. because the burden of taxation
is already too heavy on the farmers, and
the many bad seasons they have had en-
titles them to greater consideration than
they now receive—in fact, a reduction of
their present taxation.
FREE EDUCATION*.
Free, secular, and compulsory education,
free secondary schools, and a free Uni-
versity, are boons which the State should
lose no ’time in conferring upon its youth.
South Australia must not iag behind in
the all-important matter of instructing
and training the minds and the physical
faculties of her sons and daughters.
As a lover of religious liberty and
a foe to ail sectarian bigotry —as
an Atuerican-Australian patriot, who
desires to promote a truly national
spirit that- 'shall know no narrow
creeds and dividing lines —I must resist
any scheme which tends to the segregation
of the children who in a few years must
take our place in controlling the destiny
of this great southern continent. My ex-
perience in Mexico during cite denomina-
tional school regime has made me for ever
the unceasing enemy of that system. The
vast multitude of the people were every-
where steeped in ignorance and supersti-
tion. The clergy ami aristocracy alone
were educated. Any system which edu-
cates the few at the expense of the many,
while the many arc allowed to grow up
like wild animals, is destructive of the
basal principle of “’Government of all, by
all. for all.” 'Dr. Dillon, in a famous
mingle at, school and form ties of friend-
ship, which may last their lifetime, apart
altogether from tine religion into winch
they were born. When the Protestant boy
is out o’t work lie does not trouble as to the
religion the man professes who offers him
employment. The same applies to the
Catholic. The denominational schools turn
out youths, owing to their isolation from
other boys, who are aliens in their o%vn
land, not knowing where to go for a situa-
tion outside of members of their own de-
nomination. The following paragraph from
a recent “'Bulletin*’ forcibly illustrates ray
argument:
The bays of All Saints’ 'Anglican school
and of Sc. Stanislaus’ R.C. school, Bath-
urst, have taken up in their own way the
newspaper feud lately waged B>y Cardinal
Morau and Bishop Camidge. Cricket and
footiball 'between die two schools have had
to be suspended, as tiie youngsters cannot
be trusted to meet without lighting.
This is what denominational schools would
firoduce in free Australia, even in this en-
ightened age !
OUR LOCAL PARLIAMENT.
As wo ‘are on the eve of Federation, I
pledge myself, when the Commonwealth
Parliament is formed, to move for a re-
duction of the Lower IHoum? to 30 mem-
(bers, and the total “abolition of the Legis-
lative Council, as a useless excrescence on
the taxpayers. We could then effect an
immense saving. Ontario, the wealthiest
province in the Dominion of Canada, hiv-
ing a population of only lit? one
House.
TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITIONS.
Having succeeded last session in carrying a
motion, by a majority of CO. forcing the
Government to bring in a Bill to secure to
widows their just rights, I will seo that the
Government conform to the mandate of the
House.
The following extract from “Autolycus.*’ in
the Mount Barker Courier shows how essential
it is that tha accessary legislation should ba
passed without delay :
a,l. tor all. 'Dr. Dillon, :n a lamous Tho will of the late Mr. Crotty, who cuts off
arucie m a recent _ Contemporary Re- : his wife with JLTOO a year, while charities and
• f j . % ‘
view, on the cause ot t.ie defeat of Spain
by America, affirmed that 17,000,000 Span-
iards can _ neither read nor write,
and ye: .Spain lias been under the denomi-
national school system for centuries. WJwt
is Italy to-day? The denominational
school system has made i; famous as the
nation of ignorant monkey organ-grinders.
'I am opposed to the Capitation Grant,
because ic will place a futrher hurden of
taxation on the farmers without in any
way benefiting them. It will increase the
religious institutions arc enriched to the
extent of over ATOb.OOO, will probably form a
text for Mr. King O’Malley when he next brings
his Testamentary Dispositions Bill before the
Assembly. Last session he was challenged by
tho stern supporters of husband’s rights to
quote a modern case where a widow had been
unjustly treated by her spouse. This appears
to moot the case,for nothing has been said
which suggests that Mrs. Crotty is not deserv-
ing of a fair provision out of tho estate. It is
refreshing to read that Archbishoo Carr,
i. . —; T . . . ‘“'■‘V', , retrcsmng to reaa mat Arcnmsiioo carr,
, e ‘ ; er-con transition mom ay hunt the ■ recognising the unfairness of tho will, is in-
i .on\ i» -siiucniig. Doing to Inc small clined to make a compromise which shall be
Ulll ool Ot >C-atiered Catuoitcs 111 the coun- mnw Vimllvnnd Mention of a
try their children there must continue to
attend the State schools, and wherever
any particular denomination would have
the greatest number of children in the
State school they could apply for tho capi-
tation grant, withdraw t.ieir children, open
tn-.-ir own building, and owing to the num-
ber then remaining in the 'State school
being below the statutory number, the
Government school would have to he
dosed, and the children or the other dif-
ferent denominations would be forced to
either grow up in ignorance or else to at-
tend the particular denominational school
that had been opened.
•Besides, I ‘believe the children ought to
more kindlj'and equitable. Mention of tho
O'Malley reminds me that he has been con-
ducting a Federal campaign in the South and
South-East and that at Nbrracoorto he told
the wondering people that his mother had lii
children. He was the only King, however.
Just as I write he is in Sydney, probably
squaring Reid and Want. Ha has determined
to be in the Federal Parliament when it comes
and is doing all in his power to hasten the
dawning of the national birthday.
NATIONAL FINANCE.
The Bulletin of March 4, ISO?, puts tho
cause of the mountainous Australian debt in a
nutshell: —
The old Australian politician—the one that


At* i • Ijtii back oa with reverence be-
r*« n, » d**i. aai when most of it woulda t
‘ *; prvre if be were aiive—went
jv-iii . te carar/iag circle. Hie Idea* were:
.Jit* t>3cra« a cr» »t deal of money and build
at. cu ;*r ni things with it so as to open up
taw *sttrjr aai a.-Vo land saleable; (2) to
t * . ; pf-p'.o to the country, paying
tie r wilts borrowed money, so that
U»r ttf v .t -:<xa py the land ; (31 to sell the
it. a« (»; ti possible; (4) to borrow more
*?,•: a.r.4. trudd more public works, so as to
i *-. ■•-. p-et-aa fir the superduoo* immigrants
ha-i bn-a brought out with borrowed
*>->;■*/. a.r.4 th«a to bring oat more immigrant.*
♦? ** to keep up the demand for land ; and
Li*-- to **li e-ore land ; and thou to build more
w -* «. *o at to make another lot of land sale-
*o-* at i ao on ad in/ And incidentally
lie "projr»*t;ve policy" included borrowing
lb* »>s*y to brin? more people out so that
low/ es.gi.£ help to buy the things the previous
crvw on the land ; borrowing the money
K> bu..i t.*« railways and other works so that
U *<♦ p*»>pl* might earn wages to buy the
Lb.-ag* si'.d ; borrowing money to make a tern-
jk. -a.-y artificial abundance so that the banks
«n*ht bare plenty of money to lend on the
•♦entity of the land, and doinsr the same thing
over »ga. s so that the boom thus created might
k*ap v,' land values when the securities began
tok'oV » 'lc. And if they still insisted on looking
• itV, thea. the invariable panacea was to bring
■>«: more people at the public expense in order
to br *;-Mea op the demand again.
SEATING IN’ SHOPS.
For three *oi«ioas I fought for a law to com-
p-»l *> ‘ip keepers to provide proper seating
xo-'t-.r..-: 'ivtioa for their young ladies during
i‘ . V b hoars, and though I was defeat*
#■! v * y firm* have since conformed with the
jn ■» . • >-, thus recognising the reasonable-
and humanity of my proposal. My Bill
♦ 1 '•■*'l mud: ridicule and professed contempt,
but ;i: «pde of the sneers and hoots of callous
yn .-,.e.-s I shall reintroduce the measure, and
’■**' * *° the d3 * ditch, where death
*1 jr.s n stop me.
FEDERATION.
cr claimed that I am the originator of
try F« ieralisation Scheme of the Capital.
'• *' hug’on was built on federal territory one
her. ,;c ! years before I saw the light of day.
Ccu-vn-ueatly, the idea is old and not new. I
o. cem that when all the federal delegates
w;» _e . to relegate the question to the Federal
i rr.utiv'Kt, I was instrumental in keeping the
dw-vsion Qr dil ali were convinced of
t.,e - ivi-ablene-'s of not leaving the question
to -e -ettled by the Federal Parliament, but
p. .r.g i; Ln the Constitution. It was only
*r cr * n ® A.N.A. took the matter up,
t..rough the inspiration of my letters, that Sir
Ueorg- Turner, on March 3. ISM, moved, and
ha., inserted in the Constitution, clause 124,
p. '.e.ing that the Federal Capital should be
vre. on federal territory. Had the clause
t°. 11 e'-n inserted in the Constitution Svdney
w°u.d have secured the Capital, and all the
* Australia would have been saddled
T. ! "l’ at least, five millions more debt, which
*ce raw .and would cost before one stone had
‘ U 'l rr . l , o ;! - X°w that amount will erect
-■>e buildings, lay out beautiful parks,
ae9 * and boulevards, artificial rivers and
if the fee simple of the land is
i " 1;c , by the government, the land only
,. tor building purposes under strict
-u.aaoa, the expenditure of that amount
r ‘‘* . e Capital the greatest asset ever
Possessed oy a free people.
I append some newspaper extract* oa th»-
Cederal question;—
[The Daily Tel-jraph, Shtusuay, J&pl.tl. ]
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir—l read with devouring interest the valu-
able letters written to your great journal by
Sir Joseph Abbott and Mr. Heycon on the
national and commercial capitals of the world.
I think each believes that he is right and the
other is wrong, while both appear to me to be
going very strong. Experience, tbs unerring
standard of every earthly undertaking, should
convince thinking Australians of tie absolute
undesirablenesa of an evolutionary develop-
ing commonwealth, having its capital in a huge
commercial seaport city within easy range of
the guns on hostile warships lying out in the
ocean. Especially does it app'y ia the ca-e of
Federated Australia. Millions of money mast
be expended in the erection of buildings de-
signed for national purposes, such as the
national Parliament, the national treasury, lib-
rary, vaults, arsenal and other institutions of
similar magnitude too numerous to enumerate.
With oar accumulated knowledge through the
light of history in the ransacking and burning
of Washington by the English army and navy
under General Ross and Admiral Ceckburn ia
ISI4, owing to its close proximity to the eastern
seaboard. Are we not justified by the Ameri-
can capital’s awful fate in 1814 to build Aus-
tralia’s somewhere in the interior on the
Murray River, remote from the populous
centres, making it impossible for as invading
army, if successful ia the Sr.-t skirmish, to
loot and plunder the national trea-nry before
the people have time to concentrate them-
selves in order to unitedly plant the invading
desecrators with blood-stained hands in Chris-
tian soil. By the erection of the national
capital on the banks of the Murray River the
navigation of that majestic stream to the
broad bosom of the ocean will fur ever be
guaranteed. Peace will reign between Kiel
bourne and Sydney; both will be satisfied
without either being injured. Tito had where
the capital is to bo built should bo held ia fee-
aiiuplo by the Federal Government and only
let to those desiring to erect buildings. If this
system had been adopted in Washington the
ground rental would materially contribute
towards keeping the national Government.
T\ e should not hurry in selecting the Federal
capital site, but patiently wait and allow
the Federal Parliament to secure the be.-t
possible location from a strategical stand-
point, for the national capital of s> mighty
a democratic nation as Australia must in-
evitably be- —Vonrs, &c..
KING OM ALLEY.
Federal Convention, Sept. 15.
f The JfiK«niiii' Soti'rJajr, Fch. s.ls£*r, j
TO TOE EDITOR OF THE HER4LD.
Sir—Believing from the genuine bn-iness-
like way the Federal delegates are reasoning
out and endeavoring to solve the various com-
plicated vital issues at stake between the seve-
ral eolouiSs, federation is on the eve of being
consummated, I desire through the medium
of your great truth disseminator to direct the
attention of the Australian democracy to the
imperative need of making no mistake in the
selection of the Federal capital sit-* or the
mode of its formation and erection. All think-
ing people must recognise that the basis of
the capital of a Federal Union is as dissimilar
from that of a colony as the orb of Jcpitor is
from the light of a farthing dip. This beina's
national question it should be approached
with national and not provincial minds.and by
national giants and not parochial pygmies.
The prosperity of a colonial capital is bene-


t V* ♦ ;-* people of that colony, but the
-—; ».* :>■ of the Federal cvpital is beneficial
. ef all the colonies. Ml being
t-H-d f f tts maintenance ail are financially
. vr»«vl in sts progress, and have aright to
i- ••* »» st no one colony gains at the expense
frf ti eot • cr< Fnch would I" the conditions if
*■ rof tH* ri?:e« were selected. Ihe Federal
eajvta! K ing for all the people of all the colo-
ni#». the ground constituting 1 it should belong
•a all *rd rot the few favored with wealth.
ran only be accomplished by the Federal
i.» jwrsarst sectsrirg the fee-simple of 15 or
Jrt njiif* square of territory and letting the
lr-l* on lorg leases to those wishing to con-
struct buildings. The adoption of some such
last »r-tcm will prohibi* the rich from acquir-
ing the principal business and residential
ari as, tying them up for the benefit of pos-
terity’s jumpered few whose only mission in
life will be to swell on the unearned increment
produced by the sweat of the toiling, strugg-
ling millions. A generation hence the capital
ground rent will be of sufficient magnitude to
materially assist in defraying the expenses of
the National Government. The keystone of
the arch of federation should be economic jus-
tice. The best thinkers of America admit
that the National Government irreparably
blundered in selling a single lot in the city of
Washington. Let Australia profit by Ameri-
ca’s mi«takc- The history of the world con-
c’rr«it i-!y shows that the capital cities of the
different nations have been founded on the
principal rivers of those nations. London on
the Thames, Paris on the Seine, Vienna on the
Danube, Koine on the Tiber, and Washington
cn the Potomac. Australia has one great
continental river, and the exciting debate
which Vas raged along the line for days over
the -waters j reclaims it to be the silver thread
whivh' the Federal capital, the pearl of Aus-
tralian civilisation, should adorn. By the
building of the capital on the Murray River,
remote irom sea coast.it will bo placcu beyond
the po.-ibility of being cither plundered or de-
stroyed by tito temporary success of an invad-
ing 100. Ihe destruction of Washington in
IMI by a Kuropean army owing to its close
proximity to the Atlantic ocean should be a
warning beacon to Australia in choosing the
hon-.e ct this nation. The erection of the capi-
lal wih furnish work to thousands for years to
come. ’I he granite required for the buildings
is deposited on the banks of the Murray
Liver. The founding of a big city on the
Murray will immensely assist in attracting
population to the interior, and thousands of
acres of those arid lands will bloom with
•Jerusalem corn. In fact a country where a
few short years ago the r«bbit. wild, dog, and
bandycoot r.eld undisputed sway may soon be-
come the great food producer for the swarm-
ing hungry multitudes of Asia and Europe.
I am, Ac.,
KING O’M ALL EV, M.P., S.A.
FTG 11,'.-ill, li V.ln,-J iv, y,l. Pi. n?rs.]
At the meeting of the Fitzroy branch of the
A.N.A. Jgst night, at the instance of Air.
Puzzi the question of the Federal capital was
discussed. The suggestion of Mr. King
Halley, ALP. for iS.A.. which appeared a
few d»ys ago in the f/ernW, was approved of.
It is to the effect that a vacant site should be
bought by the Federal Government sufficiently
extensive for the building of a large city, and
that none of this should be alienated in fee-
simple, but that a!) lands within a radius of 10
or 1- l , m ‘ es s^ol, ld bo federalised territory, and
only let on long building leases, and the
revenues >o derived devoted to the expenses
passed that the board of directors be informed
that the branch approved of this idea.
A CITY OF CITIES.
I'fhe Leader from the Kaljoo.lic Aftiier.J
Mr. King O’Malley, the well-known South
Australian M P., sounded the first real battle-
cry in this province in favor of Federation at
Kanowna on Saturday evening, and was most
enthusiastically received. Some of onr own
leading men will doubtless follow in due
course, for even some of the delegates who
went to represent Western Australia are well
up on the question. Combinations, for and
against, are being found in New South Wales;
and many politicians there, who see ia the
comparatively small number of members that
will make up the Parliaments of the Dominion
a foresight of many of themselves having to
go back to their former occupations, affect to
see also that Federation in the propo>ed con-
ditions will be a very bad thing—for some, and
will oppose the movement with all their puny
strength With such large-minded men, how-
ever, as Air. Edmund Barton and -Mr. K. K.
O’Connor to employ all their energies in favor
of the cause, and with the probable counten-
ance of Premier Reid, who is himself a host, it
will be more than likely that the existing dis-
membered atoms will soon bo joined together
in one mighty whole. Should all go well what
a splendid opportunity will shortly occur to
build up as the Federal Capital a Ci'v of
Cities, one that will bo a model to the world,
all of its immense revenue to go to that unac-
customed end these days the State itself and
not to private individuals! 'lho Convention
has finally determined, much to the disappoint-
ment of many who hoped for a fine opportun-
ity to bleed the land of their adoption, that
t,he Capital shall ho Federal property, meaning
thereby that a new situ shall ho chosen, apart
from existing cities, and whore land can be
secured at a moderate price, to bo aimost
immediately enhanced tenfold in value. The
new city can bo built somewhere—probably
near the Victorian or Siouth Australian boun-
daries of New South Wales—where the climate
is good, the rainfall reliable, and water conse-
quently plentiful. There are many such
suitable spots to be found. Fertility of the
soil will be also a necessary condition so
that _ tree - planting and horticulture can
flourish. All the modern discoveries as to
sanitation can be utilised, provision made to
prevent the spread of fire, and in every way a
model city can be designed. It is desirable
that the land should not be alienated but let
on building leases, some uniformity of struc-
ture being stipulated. Not very long leases,
for the possibilities of values in the future will
bo enormous and the State should make no
mistake and so risk that too much of the
advantages should go elsewhere. Wide streets,
well laid out, with rows of trees outside the
footways. Too wide streets are said to be bad
for business since it is a journey across them,
but this is made np in the extra security
against fire, and in the better health provisions j
resulting. A very large area should be secured
as all contiguous land will soon become valu-
able, and outside areas could be leased for the
time for agricultural purposes. In the event
of attack from a hostile power—and such might
well be looked for some day—the Federal Capi-
tal would from its distance from the seaboard
be fairly safe. It can be foreseen that it will ho
a burning question of the day to find a fit
name for this coming finery, and those who
elect to enter into the controversy will have a
suitable field for all their energies. All tin*
may seem to be but a dream of the future, bat
T Vy :x '' t J devoted to the expenses it is one that all patriotic residents of Australia
i the tcueral Parliament. A resolution was I should like to see realised.


! f.'niii s..t. n<jL'Uf.'
A NATIONAL HOLIDAY.
TO TUK EdITOH.
S;r—A* we are almost withirv reach of
achieving our noblest aspirations, that of
b**:cg one of the brightest constellations in the
British firmament, the Australian Common*
wealth, rising out of a segregation of
wrangling nonentities, I would humbly sug-
gest that the 4th of July be sot apart as the
Australian Commonwealth national holiday,
thereby selecting the same natal day that our
American cousins celebrate on. It might be
the forerunner of making the whole English
speaking peoples commemorate their mighty
achievements ou the same day, thereby becom-
ing rfhe great American-British-Australian
national holiday.—l am. &c..
KING O'MALLEY.
Parliament House, Jnne 6,13'J3.
[Sydiiry Morning Ht.-a M).
SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND FEDERATION.
A TALK WITH MR. KING O'MALLEY,
M.L.A.
■‘TheSouth Australian Legislative Assembly
does not view with favor Mr. Reid's propose*!
conference of Premiers,' 1 said Mr. King
O'Malley, M.L.A.. to a “ Herald'’ reporter
yesterday. Mr. King O’Malley ia a member
of the South Australian Legislative Assembly,
and is at present on a visit to Sydney. “I am
myself an ardent federationalist,” he continued,
"and have striven to help forward the cause
and have delivered addresses, not only in
South Australia but ia Western Australia
also. But as a follower cf Mr. Kingston, and
one of his supporters, I, as well as many
other members of the House, will never again,
if we possess the power to prevent it, enter
into any negotiations or conference in which
Mr. Reid is the leading spirit. The people of
South Australia arc greatly disappointed at the
afitnda he has taken up ia regard to
federation. They had believed that Mr. Reid
was a supporter of federation : they arc now
convinced that ho is really an opponent. They
do not therefore care to enter into any con-
ference in which ho would be the prime
mover.”
\\ hen asked if he thought that South
Australia would enter into a federation with-
out New South Wales, Mr. O’Malley said that
he was not prepared to answer that question
until after the general election. Mr. Reid had
however, said that it might be perhaps desirable
for New South Wales to federate with Queens-
land and leave out the other States. South
Australia might therefore find it to her
advantage to relinquish the thought of federa-
tion with New South Wales and accept
federation with those States that had already
accepted the Convention Bill. Western Aus-
tralia might perhaps be induced to join if it
were agreed to make some slight concessions
in. the tariff The three colonies of
Victoria, South Australia, and Western
Australia jvould have a combined population
of nearly 2,000,000, while the two northern
colonies. New Sonth Wales and Queensland,
would only have a population of 1,850,000.
. 'putting the matter in this way,” Mr.
O Malloy added “ I am merely expressing
what I consider to be the attitude taken np by'
-i.o majority of the Sonth Australian legis-
lators at the present time. South Australia
desires federation, not for the purpose of
pinrulering New Sonth Wales, but for mutual
benefit.”
[“ AVTOLYCVS" in the Ho mil Rr.-tyr 00-iV.O
Sydney, September 20.
. Australians have been very plentiful
»n their attendance at the Federal Convention
meeting, an<l Mr. King O'Malley especially
lias been very regular in his patronage. On
Saturday there was a letter in the Doily
'lkleyrnph front his pen, recommending the
selection of a site for a Federal capital on the
Murray, This would Le a tine thing for the
people of the sovereign electorate of
Encounter Bay, in whose interests the King is
always working. Marked with blue pencil the
paper containing the letter has been sent to
many parts of the world, for the advocate of
the abolition of barmaids does not like to
waste his sweetness on the desert air.
MV FEDERAL KNOWLEDGE.
I maintain I was the first man to ex-
pound in tin; electorate of Encounter Bty
the principles of lederalisation and in-
alienution of the national capital, and if
by chicanery, trickery, and the infamous
devices of which cunning, unscrupulous-
ness, and black snakcry venom are cap-
able I should lie defeated. Encounter Bay,
on the eve of Federation, will lo>e the
services of one of the few men in Austral-
asia who has had any practical Federal
experience. Owing to being at the mouth
of the Murray River, tlie drainer of all
Australia, Encounter Bay has more t>>
gain than any other district in being re-
presented by a man possessing practical
knowledge of the scientific working of
Federation, and more to lose than any
oilier district by selecting men who know
no more about the working of Federation,
than a magpie does about astronomy.
What would you think of the crew and
passengers of a big ocean steamer if, when
in the most dangerous channel, filled with
projecting rocks, at the dead of night,
they should throw over tlie pilot and trust
to inexperienced boys? What would you
think of t lie army which do-cited its gene-
ral on the eve of a prospective victory?
■During my residence in the United
States and Canada .ill the great questions
of riparian rights, irrigation versus n.«v\gi-
tion, the (political relations of one
with another, the powers of the National
Constitution, riie powers of the States Con-
stitutions, and tiie conflicting problems
arising between them, were settled in
the Supreme Courts ; and as the Aus-
tralian Constitution declares that a colony
shall have the right to the reasonable u-e
of river water for irrigation, should any
of the colonies attempt to lower the
volume of the River .Murray, so as to
interfere with navigation, this question
will have to he decided by the Federal
Supreme Court, whoso judgment will no
doubt be influenced by the American
precedents. 1 have seen the Eads Jetty
system put into the Mississippi River, the
improvement of the navigation of the •Mis-
souri, the Ohio, the Red River, and the
Courdaline, and many other great streams
in America. Many of the important
Federal questions which will have to
be solved in Australia, have al.eadv
been settled by the two great American na-
tions. If mu* colonial Government- con-
sider r: wise, as we know they -!•>. to send
experts to America to study railways, the
latest improvements in machinery and
agricultural methods (as seen in the
articles contributed by Mr. T. K. Dow
"The Advertiser”), surely a mm with
Federal exjwrience like myself ought to be
deemed capable of rendering u-efn! service
at this crisis in the history of our j-d and
continent.


rh i id>< * n 11ca r, mea xdk r i xg*s.
yv*r\"n h«*re there nrc to to tound
nL>» have Itfii born out ol
}<-q>io belonging to bygone ages,
•■rnsrs’t r> of former gent-rations who
ought to have K-eu horn before (’axton
jhro.;gh: ;h.» printing press into England ;
or, ; u»m t--ug ago. hive ueen iraudu-
b-ntly un<! illegally concealed by their
u-tther*. am! are now for the first time
brought to light. They arc old-fashioned
Ld*; their ignorant dictatorial authority
!■* u’lo! in qite>tio»i, and their traditions,
hobg-Miu*. old women’s tables, and local
ifnp*rt.uice are buighed at by investigat-
ing young demo-racy; they are continually
getting profanely elbowed in the crowd, *
5-eople not knowing their tremendous age
and consequent venerableness; and their
ideas of progress and justice, though ap-
|mrendy stamps! on. their nose, are
treated with disrespect. Thinking
young i-eople laugh in their
face when they talk of what
cbeir fathers used to do. and even old
democrats can scarce forbear a viuile,
though it be a smile of pity. The age
affords such people a place, for it is a
■universal age. large-minded and tolerant,
and though allowed go roam at large, in-
stead of being confined -:o such a place
as is given jo ancient armor, Indian mir-
•teles, relic-*, and fossil bones of 'the ntega-
ther.um, occasionally they meet in some
room seldom used, with other old furni-
ture. and there mumble their inanities by
them-elves. Democracy now and 'then
•rakt* off its hat while passing, looks in
char;tab.}* to keep me mediaeval relics in
good heart, and pretends to listen as they
discourse on the glory of Conservatism,
tne old methods, and the success of the
co.ony before _ payment of members, but
in matters aviiuu the are cares much for—
commerce, nianutacturc*. politics, and even
education, which it cares far too little
a ?-' u: T no smb advisors. We
*'i n ‘- lc ir those people declare that they
co J.e.g to William foe Conqueror. Ido
?'loiiu; ihac mere were as great fools
in n;> now. A fool or a folly is
r ‘,°. -] < ’ :rer because it is an old folly or
o.d tool. i nere are tools enough mow in
a.i conscience without proving they are the
iegiiiDUiC descendant? or William the Con-
queror.
Noting men inheriting wealth very rarely
tm n to anything noble. Thcv eitlicr con-
vert their talents into gold, or their gold
into tunature, wines, and racehorses. They
*.o not know what to do with themselves,
i-ich young women seem to have no re-
source but marriage. Manliness is ignor-
ed and riches preferred. “What a
line house is this!’’ people often say;
’what lurniture: what feasting.” But the
s i ." ''•'’• every bit of furniture laughs
at Inin. He is the emblematic coffin at
a° feast % The thinker wonders
wn\ he did not lurnish himself with a
uund, a conscience, a heart, and a soul,
Vv-\ re * ne jvcuinulation of so much gilt.
mtn our oliensive disregard of refinement
"o copy the vices of feudal aristocracy
•i 1 : 0 i* ,na K**»S our vulgarity still more
ridnulous. We are proud of wealth, which
is labor preserved, and at the same time
aio a'hunted of labor, which is wealth in
process of evolution. With all our talk *
about democracy, labor is thought less
honorable ni Adelaide than in London.
• iKvc'Siul men are frightened their chil-
oren will be mechanics. Yet little pains
aie ta-.cn to elevate the condition or im-
prove the morals and manners of those
who do all the manual work of society, ,
the strong take care that their children -
escape that condition, but a few genera- .
tiotw hence they reach the parents’ start. ;
W’c do not think that all stations are alike
honorable, if honorably filled. We do not
try to equalise the burdens of life, so that
there shall be no degraded class, none
rnr.-ed with too much work, none with
idleness. It is popular to endow a univer-
sity and vulgar to be interested in common
schools. Liberty is a fact, equality simply
a word, and fraternity may some day be
thought of.
It is amusing for a democrat like myself
to watch the shifting of the scenes—the
social aspirations of one and the scorn
•wirh which another rebuffs the aspirant.
It does not require a very old per-on to
remember when the most exclusive, and
the most goidon society i»cople of Adelaide
now, had scarcely a penny in their pocket,
and growled at not finding a job which
would enable them to get food. Xow
those successful people are ashamed of the
ladder-rungs by which they mounted. The
people who came to Adelaide 50 years ago
with all their worldly possessions tied up
in a red cotton rag, and that not very
clean, are ashamed to recollect that their
fathers were curriers, blacksmiths, and
navvies, or some other honorable occupa-
tion. They are also ashamed of their 50
or 00 country cousins, remarkable for
nothing but their large hard-working
hands and their splendid memories. These
great people are now ashamed of their ;
humble beginning and sneer at people _
starting as they once started. The gene-
ration of English snobbish cads—desoon- ‘
dants of the Conqueror—migrated to I*oth 1
America and Australia at an early day,
where they continue to thrive marvellous-
ly, They constitute the chief Conservative
party in both countries.
Is it any wonder vulgar people who
travel here and cat our dinners laugh at
this formal vulgarity? Others see it- cause
and hope for its speedy decay. Every
country h'as its aristocracy or control-
ling class. In some it is nu aristocracy of
blood, people descended from distinguish-
ed warriors, from the pirates and murder-
ers of a barbarous crude age. The English
nobility are proud of their ancestor'* deeds
and emblazon ‘.the symbols thereof in their
family arms, emblems of savagery. Ours /
is an aristocracy of money, not secured by
plunder, but by laborious cunning, thrift,
enterprise. It is a movable aristocracy.
The first families of a few years ago are
now forgotten, and their successor.* will
give place to new* names. Now
accumulating is nobler than rob-
bing, and work is before war, f
but we are ashamed of both, , and , r‘
seek to conceal the honorable source of our
wealth. 'An aristocracy of gold is far pre- 'f
ferable to the old and immovable nobility , |
o’f blood, but it h'as also it’s peculiar vices.
It has the effrontery of an upstart.despises
its own ladder, is heartless, and lacks •
noble principle, vulgar, and cursing. This
lust of ’wealth, however, performs a service j
and supplies the whole world with a srimu- p
jus which it needs, and low as the motive
Is drives us to continual advancement.
Only when wealth becomes an idol and
material abundance is made the end. not
the means, does the love of it become an t:
evil. Many people have lost their souls
by living wholly for the material senses.
Owing to this scorn for labor a certain
affectation runs through a good deal of


\ .A .* S”. ! v .-vid make- our aris-
i ivntempt ” •*{
H .. , m Mtd Uorn» had been ashamed
v>tdi i and benjamin
. Imu! blunted hi* memory to the
-r, ■it S ! the cvml’o-tng stick,
jn* * v I-ii get u cal thy to-day, imi-
Ul(« Mi. !HU|in) who r*t rich yt-terday;
NtsiUr iwrintute, gives the
li-r-.r i fvj ei entertainments, and believes
is,*': i* <-■! a man as Suiis's any day.
lb %!.bnc* him a little by putting his
«*■»»•«?», relatives, in livery, with
ttr arm* on the buttons, but the
£*» ; ! family arm« are not descriptive
r J tkr «h-»rs, ter of the Hags or of tlieir,
j-ft »nd history, only of their folly.
TiAio Mr Swipes looks down on Mr.
ind b< tail- bis bps with scorn, de-
«Uir* be t« a parvenu, an upstart, a
j »{*erks of him as “that kind of
pesspkr. one of your ordinary men, thrifty
Jtmi well off m the world, but a little
suSi-ar.'* All the while Mr. Swipes looks
w.,» wjtb a lubration to Mr. Hung, who got
wealthy the day before yesterday, as a
{tttlrnini of old family, and quite -dis-
t»&ni«*brsl, and receives from Hung the
«stose trearm*nt he be-tows on Kags.
The real gentleman is the same night
or day all the world over. Such are by
ns mean- lacking in South Australia,
*hi> the pi et ended gentlemen swarm
e»rrj where. To me there is but one
r.-rturr in alt man or woman, rich or poor,
s i th t is human nature: the most
**• red thing on earth. Kach child has
ir .u ,a..;!>!e right*. and though a beggar or
a roH. >nair,*. rigiits which all the power
in the world cannot de-troy.
* 1 :: of death comes life,
V ' th.- traitor who is blindly executed
" ■ 1 l 'c immortal in the cause,
hr humanity sweeps onward.
Where to-day the martyr stands,
tifi the umrrow crouches Judas,
M;'b ?!,<- -liver in his hands;
M h ie the hooting mub of yesterday
In »def.t awe return.
To gb-an up the scattered ashes
loJm dii-tory's golden urn.
MY ADVICE TO YOUNG (MEN.
1: you want to be a success in life make
your-v’ves trustworriiv by being total an-
•iumor*. \ou will then always 'nave full
faisvcis on of vour God-given faculties, to
:i* c honorable advantage of the oppor-
tunities presented to you, and not waste
*-Cf your time in di/zy-water-soaking stu-
p.U.y, always possessing a breath like the
r or_a mortifying pig’s sty. The great
Men of Australia -to-day are abstemious
taea—many o: them never touch or taste
iwioxiCjints, The ablest all-round man in
A.i-:rv;a—lsaacs, the Attorney-General of
* .c-crji, scholar, student, lawyer, -linguist,
and statesman —assured me chat lie was a
-hoeause he desired itfha’tr the
talents f.od had bestowed on him should
a.-iavH be clear unclouded for the
- neat or tne clients rha-t favored him with
.ae.r business. On account of his extra-
s-r-uiaarv success at tJie (Melbourne -bar
:t o .s oecome a legal proverb in Victoria.
•V > o! ' v-aiit to win, get Isaacs.” Nearly
*" e barristerial lights of Victoria are
—Deukin, Higgins, and
* n 'nmab]e Dr. Mclncrnev.
, °1- H V lO , rcal "hoss” of the South
. *‘A. i a lr lc £ al sl,ow ? Symon—virtually
y. °biller, a man of masterly intellect
_ ir^ ,nen dous industry. You know when
put a case m In* bands that his head is
dear ami his judgment sound. The drink-
ing lawyer* who meet him in the courts
are like helpless children in their swad-
dling clothes.
Why is Kingston the leading statesman
in .Soiith Australia? because he keeps the
fiery fluid at a safe distance, and everts
bis energy without the aid of stimulants.
Why is Holder, delicate though he is in
hcaltli, one of Australasia’s cleverest and
most hard-working .statesmen? Ih-cau-e he
is a rigid abstainer and His brains are
always in the pink of condition.
Why is Paddy Glynn one of the fore-
most general and constitutional lawyers in
the province? Uecausc he wastes no brain
tissue in the booze-fountain, and spends
his spare time in study, and preparing
himself for the services of his client-.
What enabled Dr. Cockburn to i«coiue
the greatest thinker in Acstruia-ia ?
Temperance principles deeply grounded.
I cite these few names to show you the
utter absurdity of supposing that “the
genial drinker’’ can command success bet-
ter than the man who eschews the drun-
kard’s potion.
OITA' GAMMON.
The foolislilr ignorant may think the
man clever who enquires of the publican
the names of tire different fanners enter-
ing the village, where he may happen
to be in order to discover *their particular
weaknesses —good cigars, colonial beer,
whisky, dogs. horses, sheep, or what not,
and then calls each by name and begins
discussing the likings of the fanner, end-
ing with bestowing the particular drink or
cigar on him. Doubtless this drunker;." cun-
ning will catch a few greenies, but th" re-
spectable and thoughtful elector -v;!! re:<e!
such tricky overtures as insolence.
PREJUDICE AND REASON.
It makes my blood boil when I hear
that the drunkard factory’s choice i- a
certainty because Mr. So-and-so of such
and such a place is for him, and all the
people of that place are indebted to Mr.
So-and-so and must vote as he tell®
them. Mr. So-and-so is the leading man
I there-—the others being simply sheep. If
I this is not a more degrading form of
i human slavery than that of the Southern
States of America before the war of
emancipation, what is it ? Remember,
the ballot is* secret. Election promises
made to hired Imring canvassers, in re-
sponse to iheir misrepresentations, v* get
rid of them before knowledge of the
candidate's moral or intellectual fitne-ss,
are not obligatory, as opinions ere the re-
sult of reflection —all else is prejudice.
No man i> wrong, knowing that he is
wrong; he is wrong because he is incap-
able of becoming right through reason.
Ignorance js the foundation of prejudice,
and prejudice is the midnight of day and
the slimy crawling foe of investigation.
Reflective reason is the basis of progres-
sive enlightenment.
LAST WORDS OK WARNING.
During the campaign of ISOd I r-:-:'u
i to personally solicit the vote of any elec-
tor. I regard trie ballot-box as -acred.
I regard the even i-c of the suffrage as i
solemn duty. Imbued with these view*, I
cannot lower my standard of politic* by
driving from house to house and tearfully
your vote*. With me principles
count for more than devices, however
clever. Read this me*-age carefuliv. re


. n it in your *{1110; moments, aud if
vo.ir »wn matured reason, after [Kinder-
-sng m < u my [>er-«‘vntion ami vindication,
w • tmd hv my vitriolic foes, assures you
that I have kept the pledges I made
three years ago. that I • have
it: :••> way done aught c'hat would
brine you or the district into disrepute,
;h it I aave a sou! of honor, not withstand*
try the -landers of my enemies, that my
pn it e.:l views are sueii ns are in keeping
nit'i tie nrogre-s and welfare of your-
„fv(« and of your -•hiMren, and of the
y?or*<as nation -that we are about, under
the -tide of the Almighty, <to create--then,
ia justice *0 yourselves, your loved ones,
and your professions of good citizenship
and A;i-:ra!ian patriotism, yon are bound
by the highest ties of conscience to use
the whole of your franchise and vote <>n
April the 2Dth for King O’Malley and W.
11. t'arpenter.
IJf'/otol/fOiit S.l. R&j'fltt', IVtri'dr*# Sn, IStH.I
On Friday evening a complimentary
social was tendered to Messrs. O’Malley
aud Carpenter, M.P.'s, by the people of
GooUu, and waa in every way a brilliant
success.
As at Ports Elliot aud Victor there wa-
rm overcrowded house. The Mayor of
<iootwa, Mr. A. Howland, occupied the
chair, and the Hon. (!. McGregor, M.L.f.'.,
and .Messrs. F. W. Coueylwer, M.P., and
M. Richards accompanied the members to
the platform.
Jit the course of ids remarks Mr. O'Mal-
ley criticised the action of Sir K. T. Smith
and the-Hon. .1. H. Gordon in introduc-
ing the subject of the Goolwu ferry into
the l-pper House while the parties most
interested wore so divided. That interfe-
rence had meant delay in settling the mat-
ter with any satisfaction, but his colleague
would be able to read them a letter from
the Treasurer definitely promising a grant
of .'Job a year towards the maintenance
of the ferry. (Cheers.)
Mr. Carpenter based bis remarks mainly
on some of the items mentioned on the
unauthorised' programme distributed the
evening before, and combated the sugges-
tion- made there respecting himself and
the Labor Party. Commenting on the
line. "We’ll have a High School for our
City Hoys," he said he was proud to feel
that the action of the leader of the Labor
Party had the effect of forcing the Go-
vernment at the close of last year to ex-
tern! the exhibitions and bursaries offered
to the most promising scholars in their
schools, and which until recently, with
few exceptions, had fallen to boys and girls
of city and suburban schools. That ex-
tension had doubled the number of chances
for the country children, and one of the
first to take advantage of them was a boy
from the district. That was a complete re- ,
filiation of the hostile criticism upon his
action and that of his colleague in extend-
ing education to those who would make
the W-t use of it. fC'heers.)
Roth members bad a flattering re-
ception. ns well as the Hon. O. McGregor.
APPENDICES.
SOCIAL AT GOOLWA
In conclusion, bo not led astrav In- the
the hi rod c invi-sers viivulite. TIu-
l».«lv working against me ire bringing mi;
at least two candidates, the latter of whom
is to he run as tiie direct representative of
a certain organisation to divert your urten-
tion from the fact -that they are rcallyJight-
inat for tin* nun they hope -to triumph over
me with. This enables his canvassers to
declare that he has nothing to «Io with
the body alluded to as the second man
is their candidate. The trick is ton trans-
parent ami aught not to deceive intelligent
voters.
I trust all will vote in the affirmative on the
Federal Referendum taken on f lection Day.
Yours in the cause of human deliverance
from the clawed, beaked, and hungry vul-
tures of vice.
K'FN'G 01M.VTj7.KY.
March 20, ISf’P
who also defended the Labor Party against
siu-h statements a- tho-e made on the
bogus programme-:. Mr. Goneyboer, M l’,,
sang five songs, iiu-lmliug encores, during
the evening, and read the following original
verse, which he thought would entertain
them. It was a printed yellow dodger, and
ran as follows:—"District of Kncounter
Day.—At the Ladie.-’ Complimentary Social
to Messrs. King O’Malley and Carpenter,
M.P.’s. at Port Victor Institute Hall on
Thursday, February lb. a number of bogus
printed programmes were circulated by
the opposition. A lady suggests the fol-
lowing lines as a sequel:—
There was ones' a silly fellow.
Who I-era me so jolly yellow,
Ju-t liecnn-o tlio ladies wouldn’t look at him at
all;
That he sent some other fellow,
•Win) was also feeling yellow.
T» scatter Itogus Programmes
In another fellow’s Hall.
Now this first big silly fellow.
Though his sovs. may he yellow,
Need not come to see us ladies here at all:
Why? Hi'cattsc we’ve things that stain
fellow
With streaks of white and yellow.
And the ladies here tan throw them like
So if that silly fellow.
Who, IKS-ait.se he felt so yellow.
Sent the Dummy Programmes hroadeast through
the Hall.
Meets a lady and would tell her
How he hates the other fellow
He laid better mind his eye—that’s all.
And tliat selfsame silly fellow
Need not buy another “bretta,”
For a lady whose support ho wants at all:
Since he felt so jolly yellow.
With that charming other fellow.
As to scatter IHimmv Programmes through
the Hall.
Hut should that silly fellow
With his sovereigns bright and yelh.w
Try his “palm oil" on our gentlemen at all.
They'll just say. "Are you the fellow
Who fell so jolly yellow
That you sent the Dummy Programmes
To that other fellow’s Hall?’*
Supper and a dance followed.


SPEECHES DELIVERED IN HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
(Extract from '* Hansard,” August if, 1*95.1
TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITION OF
PROPERTY.
Mr. O’MALLEY moved—“ That, in tha
opinion of this House, a Bill should be intro-
duced by the Government to amend the law
relating to the testamentary disposition of
property by providing that tha widow and
children of a testator for whose benefit a
sufficient provision has not been made by the
testamentary disposition of an estate may
apply for an order from a judge of the
Supreme Court directing what is a reasonable
provision for them out of such estate; Pro-
vided that no such order shall be issued for
the benefit of a widow who has, before the
testator’s death, been guilty of conduct which
would have entitled him to obtain a divorce,
and which conduct has not boon condoned.”
Before entering fully into this question ho
desired to thank Mr. Coneybcer for having
postponed in his favor an important motion on
anti-tO\in, and also Mr. Wood who had post-
poned his important motion relating to the
wages of laborers in the Government service.
As this was a domestic as well as a political
question he would endeavor to discuss it from
a different standpoint from that which he
took in ISltij and 18!>7. He deeply regretted
that his Bill on the subject was not carried two
years ago, as then South Australia would have
been the first colony to do a great act of
justice to women. Now they had car-
ried the second reading of a similar
measure in New Zealand, as the fol-
lowing extract from the Melbourne “Even-
Herald ’ of August 12 would show:—
•‘The dreadful colony of New Zealand is going
to try another ‘experiment.’ One, wo doubt
not, which will ‘drive away capital,* ‘ruin
the country, ’ and all that, but will probably
still permit the Treasurer to announce a hand-
some surplus in the national accounts every
year. What is now intended is an alteration
of the law which sutlers a man to will away his
whole sustenance from his wife and family.
A private member’s Bill, which has passed its
second reading in the House of Repre-
sentatives, aims at endowing an ag-
grieved party —i.e., the widow or mem-
bers of a testator’s family—with a right
to apjieal to the .Supreme Court against
an unjust will, and, without having to prove
insanity or undue influence, when the grounds
are proved to be sufficient, obtain an order to
sot aside a portion of the willed-away estate for
the maintenance of the ill-used family. Our
fervent hope is that this particular ‘attack
upon property’ will be speedily successful, and
that wo Victorians will have the courage to
follow the example of the New Zealanders.
L.en then, wo should only catch up the
spirit of the law as, we fancy it is
,n Austria and other old-world countries,
supposed to be intensely conservative but
claiming to know what it is to bo just.”
ale lost the Bill two years ago through the
buckjumping of the Premier, on whose
shoulders he threw the whole responsibility.
(The Attorney-General—“l think I voted for
it,”) The Premier voted for it last ye»r, when
he knew the numl»ers wero against it:at least
he was pn-tty certain it would be defeated.
Uethankcd Mr. Holder, who was a progressive
democrat, and ho thanked the great mm who
now represented this colony in Englasd ; who
had always encouraged him. and who re-sse-std
imagination, which meant foresight The
Premier saw things after ho had pa>.~td them,
like a man in a railway train with his back to
the engine, but Dr. Cockbum -aw
things before he came to them. This
was one of the most inqiortant resolutions
ever discussed in this Chamber, as its adoption
meant nothing less than a political revolution
through constitutional evolution. The funda-
mental principles underlying it were la-ed on
simple justice. Its adoption l.y this- House
simply requested the people's servants—the
Government—to place on the Statute-book a
humane measure enlarging the scope of the
present law and limiting the power cc-tferr-d
. on men by the present infamous Act v. Inch
enabled vicious husbands on dcath-K-ds to
pauperise pood wives. (The Attorney General
—“ Why don't you introduce the Bill your-
self 7”) Introduce it and have the hon. mem-
ber kick it out again 7 In I sin J he intn-duced
a Bill dealing with this vital question, and
after a titanic struggle with the Premier
in this Parliamentary arena his only
reward was a humiliating defeat. Again,
in 181)", notwithstanding the previous
pulverising a new Bill was brought «je only-
enabling a destitute widow to ask a judge of
the Supreme Court to make an order on the
estate for an annuity which would keep her,
and that was also defeated. During the pro-
cress of the debate a majority of hon. mem-
bers pledged themselves to support a Poll
which made a provision for children aka. Be-
lieving in the sincerity of hon. menl-ers*
pledges, and Realising his own intellectual
inability to construct a measure which would
attract sufficient supjxirt to make it operative,
at the suggestion of his friend, Mr. Hoiabnrg,
he decided to throw on the Government, by
way of this motion, the responsibility of
framing a Bill of such a character as would
enable non. members of all shades of political
opinion to adopt it. As a framer of democratic
measures the Premier had few equals and no
superiors. The principles embodied iu this
motion must eventually become the law of
every jrortion of the Empire. If iO3 the
people were good no laws would b»* required.
Laws were enacted to protect the rights of
the good from the wrongs of the bad;
to safeguard the liberty of the many just from
the encroachment of the unjust few. Every-
where society was organised in to Government.! 1
states of justice for the utilisation of the col-
lective strength of the community fee the
benefit cf its individual units. Wivva must be
given by law a legal status, thus Decerning


in.«t*-ad of. as now, nonentities. The
r*. tx‘n» must be mada to assume the
Ititng r**pon-ibi!ites of the dead bus-
baalv f-.tr the maintenance of the widows.
Tf-» 1-vU respotuihilitf of husbands for the
•UT'p ft of wives should not end when they
were much more helpless by being made
w Jo* s. Would the Premier explain the legal
between a disinherited Australian
w.do-v and a Turkish concubine, neither poa-
any legal status: (The Attorney-
Geo-ra' —“ I’m sorry to hear you make such a
cumfcirii- >n.") He wanted to see women by
hw placed on a par of equality with men.
Wtro men intellectually unqualified to copo
with women, or did they realise, owing to their
immoral maaaceraent of the political affairs of
the country, they were unfit to mingle with
twa] w amen : Were they afraid that women
would outstrip them in the intellectual race?
He sympathised with women who had to
carry a handicap equal to Carbine’s top
weight of 10 st. 5 lb. when they should
only have allotted to them 5 st. 10 lb., as
compared with the men who seemed to
fear their couijietition. The laws must be
•o scientifically adjusted as to enable
women to look after themselves where
sinister men have been too sordid to do
»o for them. The time would arrive when
thinking au-n would have as much respect for
the wooten who toiled, pinched, and saved to
honestly rear their fatherless children as they
now had for the women who dressed m silks
anJ satin-*, and did nothing but cat themselves
into vulgar frights. Equality of opportunity
mu-t always bo the rallying cry of democracy.
Since the enfranchisement of women in South
Australia the drunkard, profligate, and
sensualist had been silently retired from
Parliamentary life and been relegated to
the cool shade of oblivion. Tho his-
tory of 'the world showed them that
at one time the women did all the hard
outdoor work while the master bully
slept and snored. They were the only pro-
ducers. Men regarded work as dishonorable,
and only followed soldiering and fighting for
an avocation. Even the Bible, the Hook of
lute, did not do justice to women, though
they were the mainstay of religion, “i.et
women Irani in silence with all submis-
sion,” appeared in Timothy, xi, chap. 11 v.
He was giving these Scriptural quotations
without any levity; he wanted to seriously show
how men regarded these things to-day. Again
Holv Writ had it, “If a woman would know
any.lung let her ask her husband.” Could
anyone imagine the awful stupiditv of the
Somfli Australian wife, who entirely depended
on her husband for information'/ “Hut I
sutler not a woman to teach nor usurp autho-
rity over the man, but to be in silence.” “ For
Adam was first formed, then Eve,” said the
Scripture. He sympathised with Eve, she had
no mother-in-law or fhther-in-law. Again
they wvre told “and Adam was not deceived
out the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression.” “For the man is not of the
woman, but tho woman is of the man,” said
the Bible. It was the man’s cutlet that was
extracted, not tho woman’s. He would also
givethesoquotutionsfrom Scripture, “Neither
was the man created for the woman, but the
woman was created for tho man. Wives submit
yourselves untoyour husbands asunto the Lord.”
According to Timothy, “ Tho husband is the
head of the wife even as Christ is the head of
thochiuch. and He is the saviour of the body.
J hcrefore, as tho church is subject unto Christ
so let the wives bo to their own husbands in
everything.” In Deuteronomy they found
j! 3 ** hen thou goest forth to war against
Vr'f caeu, * es the Lon! thy God hath
delivered unto thine hands and thou bast taken
them captives and secst among them a beauti-
ful woman and hast a desire unto her that
thou would have her to be thy wife*
then thou shall bring her home to thine
house and she shall shave her head and
pare her nails.” Because that happened to bo
the condition of women thousands of
years ago, it certainly was not incum-
bent upon us to refuse to believe that
tho Scriptural writers themselves would
have advanced in thought by this time. No
country ever materially or morally pro-
gressed that clung to the infamous systems
founded by ignorance. Just in proportion as
men had elevated women, women’s influence
had reacted for the moral elevation of men.
The human race had advanced. Governments
became more humane, and superstition
vanished from the land. In all transactions
with our fellow creatures even-handed justice
should seal every deal. He was sorry lie had
to go outside the usual lines adopted by mem-
bers in their speeches. Ho had to be King
O’Malley—he could not be anything else. All
wives endeavored to discover the most practical
method of keeping th*-ir husband’s stomachs
filled, ijorne husbands thought only of th©
way to keep their wives’ empty. Were they
just to themselves and posterity to solely
vest tho power in men to make or
mar the future of women on whom the
continuity of the human race depended T
He could not believe pulsating flesh in the pas-
sionate form of woman should be forced to
suffer the pangs of deprivation, while the de-
composing cause of her misery wore a crown
of glory fluttering around the lit-gilt moun-
’ taiusof immortality. Surcly.no member believed
that laws made by “ontological” legislators for
tho benefit of living lx.-ings should have more
respect for tho will of a dead man than
the rights of a living woman. The pre-
sent law governing the testamentary dispo-
sitions of property regarded dead husbands
as living entities; and living women as
dead non entitles, otherwise why were
the dead safe-guarded while the living
were trampled on 7 Tho law which
made men during life provide for the
supiKirt of their wives, while relieving
their estates from all responsibility for the
maintenance of these same women as widows,
was a positive, puzzling sham, and its up-
holders could only be counted with the rest of
the world’s canting, hypocritical humbugs.
M by had not all those cruel Draconian laws
been repealedßecause custom opposed it.
Custom was a huge boulder in the middle of
every navigable river. Reformation swept by .
it. Custom pigmies continually screamed to
reformation giants. “ Faddist, halt 1” Custom
was the ignorant dead of the past, riding on
the back of the enlightened living present.
No man was empowered by law to alienate his
estate from the just debts of his creditors, but
he could alienate it from tho wife who assisted
in its accumulation. No people ever yet
surrendered their reason to the keeping of
faith blindmongers without losing honor and
self respect. Faith was the human virtue
whereby peculiar people were enabled to
believe what their reason told them was false
and certain people to disbelieve what they
knew to be true. They were approaching a
sublime evolutionary crisis when good
Christian people would not assure their
servants that they hope to meet them in
heaven while filling their lives with
melancholia and despair here below; in fact,
making this a perfect hell for them.
He did not wane to meet anyone in.
heaven whom he refused to associate with
here. “ Men’s rights ” was fast becom-
ing another name for “wives’ wrongs,”
and “Parliamentary toleration” another
name for “passive participation.” Ignorance
was a rotten column on which to rest


virtue, and sham modesty ought not to
be permitted to blind jx-ople to a knowledge of
themselves. All children were inalienably en-
titled to bo healthily born. Intelligence should
not guarantee ignorance the sole right of
peopling the world saturated with hereditary
contagious diseases. When intelligence com-
menced to recognise its responsible obligations
to the living and vet unborn a portion
of this habitable globe would begin to
be worth residing in. Women were ad-
vancing from that epoch when all were
simply slaves, because they were actually
depending on men for their subsistence.
They were progressing from hojioless depen-
dency to where they would not be subordinated
to men, but the two co-ordinated together, lie
believed in the statutory justice that removed
causes in preference to the sympathetic charity
which palliated effects. Where was the sense
of neighbors taking up a subscription for a
cast-off destitute widow while opposing the re-
moval of tho causa of her destitution 7 Dy
mature women had the same political rights as
men—to vote, hold office, to make and ad-
minister laws—these they possessed as
a matter of right, and were only
jockeyed out of them by the strong
bands of swelled-headed men. Up to
a few years ago the best women had no
voice in the State. Variegated charactered
men made the laws for them, disposed of their
property, persons, and children, and they had
to suffer it with a patient shrug until de-
mocracy in seven-leagued hobnailed boots
went to their rescue, and those hobnailed
boots would kick the stuffing out of the blood-
less-veined bullies who at-
tempted to sit on their rights. If men ad-
mitted that women were human beings they
must eoncedo that they had tho nature of
human being?, the'duty of human beings, and
the lawful rights of all other human beings, not
as an act of charity bat as an inherent right.
Women are hero to develop and enjoy their
human nature, bask in tho sunshine of their
human rights, and perform their human obli-
gation.?. They must do this for themselves as
much as men for themselves. Women pos-
sessed the same right to determine their aim
•in life and follow it, tho same physical rights,
the same intellectual, moral, atfectional, and
■political rights that men had. Every
person —man or woman—was an integer,
an individual, a whole person, and also a portion
•of the human race and so a fraction of human
kind. The rights of individualism were not to
be possessed, developed, and enjoyed by a life
in solitude, but by joint action. Accordingly
to complete and perfect the individual man or
woman and afford each an opportunity to de-
velop and enjoy these rights there must be a
concerted and joint action, else individuality
raided that women were not equal to men, and
he was discussing it from a political stand-
point.
The SPEAKER—The hon. member will see
that is not on the notice-paper.
Mr. O’MALLEY —It had to do with
testamentary disposition of proi>erty. He
wanted to show that women were quite
capable of managing their property, and lie
had to take it from a basis of political economy.
Government was political morality: it was
national ethics. Could there be found an in-
telligent woman on the Australian continent
who ruled her household as sinfully and ex-
travagantly as the colonies are ruled 7 Was
there a woman who would have encouraged the
colonies in the expenditure of large sums for
the accomplishment of federation while
secretly endeavoring to assassinate it by the
administration of slow poison 7 Yet that
was what George Retd, the Premier of New-
South Wales, who got his Right Honorable
title from a woman, had done. He knew of
no woman wdto would have done such a thing.
He thought men presented a very raggedy
appearance when they alleged that women
could not have bungled tho State finances as
well as they had. He was not indulging in
visions when he said that doubtless aoraen
would never taka as keen an interest in politics
as men, but that was for the women themselves
to decide, not for men. No doubt
men would continue to lead in the
realms of imagination, intellectual reasoning,
and understanding, because they posstved tho
bigger brain, but women would always be first
in events of impulsive emotions, moral, affec-
cional, and religious enthusiasm. They had
the better hearts, the truer intuition a? to the
rights of others, and tire* loftier conception of
the lieautiful and lovely. He could not think
that affluence and misery as antagonist-would
always be clutched in tho grasp of death, or
thatintelligenceand culture would interminably
sit on the chest of ignorance and crudeness,
and that feminine virtue would be defended by
the degradation of swarming multitudes of
inhumanly-treated unfortunate women. Phil-
anthropic enterprise and heathen darkness
floated side by side in augmenting to swell
the wild ocean of prostitution that rolls,
breaks, and dashes against the bulwarks of
society, every wave ox which was once a
virtuous girl. As th« subliracst purpose of
human life was the development of each in-
dividual into a rational being, so the supreme
object of society was to contribute the where-
with for its accomplishment. Individuals were
the microscopic animalcules, the cciginal
atoms of which society is constituted. Its
strength and its perfection defended
originally on tho power and goodness of th*
individuals, as the weight of the dome de-
was only a possibility, not a reality. So the j pended on the soundness and durability of
individual rights of women entailed tho same
social, domestic, and political rights as those of
men. The smell and swallow aristocracy declared
■that mentally women are unqualified to
manage tho finances of tho colonics. Let
them examine that question. Government
was political economy. State and national
housekeeping. Was there in South Australia
a capable woman who kept house as badly as
the financial affairs of the various Australian
•colonies had been kept during tho last
thirty years with so much blustering, blow-
ing, and brawling in the family council.
Was there an intelligent woman in South
Australia who would have squandered
thousands of pounds in building a railway
and then thousands more on a breakwater
when the railway destroyed the object ot its
•construction.
The SPEAKER—The hon. member must
•not reflect on past acts of the Parliament.
Hr. O’HALLEY—-The question was always
each brick in the superstructure. Destroy the
individuality of the atoms, human or material,
and all was chaos. To contaminate the atoms
was to contaminate tho mass. To en-
dure itself therefore-, society must main-
tain the individuality of the indi-
vidual woman as well as man. Eor
the last two or three years he had
approached this question from the standpoint
of sentiment, and had cited case after case of
wrong doing, but they had no impres-
sion on the House, and it was right
now that he should go into it from
another standpoint—that of domestic principle.
The complicated construction of society with
its statical and dynamical laws was tLr most,
astonishing of all phenomena. Which c-f the
human faculties were to dominate and take
precedency, the loftier over the louer, tho
lasting over the perishing, tho moral t*»er the
immoral, and the immortal over the mortal?
They hurt the band to prelect the


Ktv?, th’i* sut.orl mating the less to the
••■•Vsvt. The «.)•;« tof human life was not
live, but u live justly and cheerfully.
H-* o»nfe*wd he w.-*» ucable to offer a complete
*->!u".ion for the domestic problem of unh.ippi-
It i* more or less deeply rooted in ail
communities. He thought. he was safe ii»
saving that seven-eighths of the world s
d-rW-ttic nnsefv was directly attributable to
jij,j temper, the source of ail matrimonial
ir kjW-.hl ltad-te:uixn.d people should con-
tinually n-d-ct in tiie direction of restraining
influences. Hecau-o- the dinner was not cooked
to she m vst-r bully's taste that did not justify
hua in smashing the furniture and cursing
his wife in tlie presence of the children, dhat
would not improve the cooking of the dinner.
Men never ought to forget that their wives are
tinman and have human feelings, and that any
display of bad temper only exhibited bad
breeding. The unity of the two simply pro-
duce! bad result.-. Hood temper was the
priceless jewel of life, and all might possess it
by ch-'erfuily indulging in philosophical medi-
tations. The blight of brightness everywhere
was the number of serious, sour, dignified non-
entities living in the community, who origi-
nated no idea*, thought only of gormandising
and immorality, and assuring young
people that dignity never laughs. Young
men should not tell their sweethearts that
their little-hands would only have to produce
*weet melody from a piano : because after the
wedding they often discovered tiiat the real
piano w.vs a clothes mangle trie women thought
that they bad been taken in. No man or
woman in the world could bo happy unless
they made others happy. Happiness was tho
product of reciprocal justice. Sincere affection
was the only unsecured investment on earth
which not only returned the interest and
principal to the lender but also the borrower.
Of all the contemptible creeping tilings the
family master was the most despicable, .Master
was an infamous word, a souvenir of tho con-
cubinage slavery days of bygone dark-
ness. The weak family must be silent when
tho strong brutal master spoke, as though a
sujv-rnatural revelation was to be given from
his ponderous mind. Me leaned back in
perhaps the only easy chair in the house,
shat his eyes, folded his arms, opened
his mouth and swore that he was the master.
These masters invariably transformed
their wives and children into hypocrites and
liars. I>y what authority did such ill-bred
jumbucks raar the joy of their homes ? The
darkness of night should be illuminated by the
father’s presence in the house; It was as
cheap to enter one’s house in the guise of
a t.iy of gladness as like a human billy-goat.
Some of these dignified long-headed masters
had allowed their gigantic brains to become
entangled in a wilderness*of complicated
jumbles. They had been devoting altogether
too much time to the deep consideration of
political issues. Stupendous questions had
been engaging their mighty intellects. They
had become sleeping partners in the cold
mountain syndicate on the nod : wore kept
busy advising their friends to buy immediately
"Sure to see £.V f —and as the friends
bought they unloaded. The human mind
was unable to comprehend the mighty mental
strain involved by such momentous trans-
actions, and consequently the family must be
kept miserable for fear of disturbing these
gentlemen. Women who did all the house-
work and looked after seven or eight children,
some teething, crying, and kicking, ponder-
ing all tho time how to clothe eight children
•'■it!* only material enough for three, as well
vs endeavoring 15 increase the purchasing power
of one shilling to ton, were always supposed to
be fresh, vigorous, and nimble-footed to
attend to the wants of the sublime master.
Every community was polluted by tho prs- '•
sence of men and women who disgraced and
blackened the name of husband and wife.
Such men would not trust their wives with a
single sovereign. When asked for money the
masters invariably wanted to know what the
wives did with the (sovereign given them last
Queen’s birthday, and the poor wives,
frightened, desisted and resorted to the more \
humiliating method of emptying their hus-
band’s pockets while sleeping under the in-
fluence. On awakening the “master" thought
his favorite “Flossie" had got it. Cculd
wives respect and love men who made sneaks,
liars, beggars, towards, and hypocrites of them.
He thought not; deep in their hearts they
must execrate them as human monsters.
Could such mothers populate Australia with
honest, loving, intelligent children? _ Men
should make confidantes of their wives—
women loved the men who trusted them—
telling them their exact income and expend!- ;
tore, and the amount which could be devoted
to housekeeping, that sum to be paid as
regularly on the day agreed as though she ( ;
were an outside creditor. Extravagant wives ■ j
became economical .when made familiar with the !
source of income. Men should always procure !
the best possible for the family. The man
who spent his money on himself for drink
and dressed his family in reconstructed rags
was an infamous scoundrel. Men should
always dress well, and look as spick
and span as they did when promising
the earth and all things thereon to their
wives as sweetheart.-:. < >nlv insufferably con-
ceited coxcomb- believed their \vi\v» would
always love them looking as slovenly as an
unwashed distempered mongrel and scat-
tering around them the aroma of a polecat.
The uic-n who did all they possibly could
themselves would retain the affection of their
wives all their lives. If the wives bo jealous
the husband- should reason with them, as
jealousy was the blinding of reason and
reasoning was the restoration of a little
sight. Ttiere ought to be far more
love in the cabins of the poor than
in tlie mansions of the wealthy, because the
former suffered no pangs of disappointment
through social precedency bickerings. The
dismal cabin of the poorest where affection
reigned Was an earthly heaven, while the -
palace destitute of affection was only a hell fit
for writhing, coiling, hissing snakes. Every
person in this world could help some other
jiersou to rise. Many people had false notions
of what constituted real happiness. It was
not necessary to be cither rich or great to be
happy, but only to be in love with some one
they could love. Men ought to regard their v
wives as sublime human beings, and treat
them with loving consideration. No man had
keen a failure in life even if he never saved a :
sovereign who had succeeded in gaining, retain-
ing, and returning the love of a good wife. ;
Too many young men belonging to the smell-
and-swallow aristocracy thought only of
becoming great through securing billets as F
sons-in-law to wealthy families, their ambition
being to shine by the reflected glory of their
keeper’s money under the mask of wives. The :
man who married for money invariably j
forged fetters for his own enslavement.
After the wedding, as a rule, the
wife discovered the * fraudulent imposi-
tion, and its cogitation intensified her
seim-cuncoaled contempt for the crawler who
under tho guise of husband became her pen-
sioner. The man who married for tho Jove of ■
loving tho woman he wedded —rich or poor,
big or little mentally or physically, handsome
or ugly, crude or cultured —erected for himself
an enchanting bower where the flowers of
affection blossomed and bloomed for ever.
Man was strength, woman beauty ; man was i


courage, woman love. When the one man
loved the one woman and the one woman
loved the one man the very angels leave heaven
and come and sit in that house and sing for
joy. Love was not of any country, nobility
did not belong exclusively here, and through
all the ages there had been a few great and
tender souls lifted far above their fellows.
It was not his intention, as time was limited,
and they were not afforded theopportunity they
should have for private members’ business, to
discuss this matter at further length, and ho
simply asked the House to carry the motion,
and instruct tho Attorney-General to draft this
democratic Bill, and bring it in so that South
Australia might take the second place, and
at least follow in the footsteps of New Zealand
in this reform.
(Extract from *• Haa-unl," October i>, ISt’S.!
LEGITIMATION BILL.
Second reading.
Mr. O'MALLEY, in moving the second read-
ingofthe Bill, saiditshould really be called “The
Undesigning Democratic Standard of Justice
Bill.” It w'as of such a humane character as
to commend itself to the favorable considera-
tion of all members who loved justice more
than fleeting popularity. It would completely
restore the alienated rights of unconsulted in-
nocence-rights lost through no transgression
of the sufferers, but through the act of the
parents, who caused them to suffer grave
wrongs. This Bill would enable them to
rectify these w rongs by subsequent nianiage.
The following were the provisions of the Code
Napoleon on the subject:—“Children born
out of wedlock, other than such as are the
fruit of an incestuous or adulterous intercourse,
may lie legitimated by the subsequent marriage
of their father and mother, whenever the
latter shall have legally acknowledged thfem
before their marriage, or shall have recognised
them in the act itself of celebration. The
legitimation may take place in favor even of
deceased children who have left descendants,
and in such case tho benefit thereof accrues to
such descendants. Children legitimated by
subsequent marriage shall enjoy the same
•rights as if they were born in wedlock.” As a
specimen of United States legislation on tho
subject ho would give the Massachusetts
statute. This was the law in Massa-
chusetts, the first state in the Union,
for the individual and collective intelli-
gence of its people:—“An illegitimate
child whose parents have intermarried,
and whose father has acknowledged him as
his child, shall bo considered legitimate.”
An incontestable and non-political Bill of this
character should command the unanimous sup.
port of the House, independent of partisan
blindness engendered by social environment.
■ Spurious vulgar fossildora secretly urged hon.
members to oppose his measures irrespective of
their meritorious nature and pressing necessity.
The history of past ages clearly showed that
the same kind of ruptured brained vultures sat
owl-like on the dying limb of the tree of
■reason, and by hooting and screeching
attempted to impede tho progress of every
great democratic army of reform that climbed
•out of the flats of mental darkness on to the
high mountains of intelligence, planting
on their topmost peaks the imperishable
tree of indestructible democratic knowledge,
lion. members during the debate last year
thought tho Bill might injure marriage. He
thought marriage to be the noblest and best in-
stitution ever devised. It was the sacred re-
pository of civilisation’s highest development.
It was the chief fulcrum by which women had
• risen from slavery to social freedom. Fossess-
,°o« then, as he did a supreme admiration for
-the sublime institution of marriage he was not
the man who would bo instrumental in bring-
ing it into reproach or in any way impairing
its efficacy for the advancement of tho human
race. His only object in endeavoring to per-
suade members to make this Bill the statutory
law of South Australia was to_ afford parent*
an opportunity of Icgitimatising children
born before marriage by subsequently
registering them under oath. The- Bill
would provide the means of rich ting
insufferable wrongs wbicli the superstitious
dead had for Centuries indicted on the living
innocent. While ho had the profound-->t re-
gard for tho moral grandeur and far-rei' hing
benevolent justiceof this sympathetic mea-nre.
no man more than he deplored tho Cause that
existed for its enactment. If, now. a young
and honorable woman in a weak moment auc-
cumbed to the violent cravings of passion and
in due course gave birth to a child, the father
of the child could do justice to the motl.'-r by
marrying her. but owing to the Draconian law
he was unable to do justice to the child that
had no voice in the transaction, but must live
all its life under the stigma of being a bastard,
though its parents were married. And if any
children were born after tho marriage they
were legitimate and succeeded to his e.-tate.
The politicians of one epoch became famous
for wisdom through ridiculing the men-urea of
the statesmen as fads, and the politicians of
the next epoch became great statesmen by
adopting those fads as their own original gem*
of wisdom. The people of each *-|Kxb
smiled on the ridiculous ignorance of the past.
The history of tho rise and development of
the human race demonstrated that while thero
were few living originators there were millions
of dying imitators in die world. Everywhere
politicians were l>eing mtix/.led, shackled, and
blinded by the fear of otfonding gli*.t-r:ng
power, while misery stalked abroad in the land.
In every age many sincere suffering people
looked forward for a supreme man to:«p|<earat
God’s command to deliver them from their: ght-
fnl evils under which they ween and groan.
Indeed the bulk of humanity existed only with
its mouth in the mud moaning from the
effects of some hereditary disease or ancient
indignity. All admitted that there were time-*
when the powers of the human race, though
operating with their wonted activity. Were so
wrongfully directed by baulky blind leaders
that very little permanent good resulted from
the supremest efforts of tho noole-t re-
formers. Times when all over the world
frowardly rei>oseful Governments _ thought
little and cared less for the rights of
the weak, helpless, and forlorn, they being
powerless \o reciprocate favors bestowed ;
times when popular political quackery under
the disguise of beneficent ameliorating legisla-
tion lost its grasp on the minds of the people
and self-consecrated ministers, while j-trfqim-
ing their accustomed theatrical evolutions,
dared not look each other in the face lest they
burst into loud laughter in public, thereby for-
feiting the respect of their simple-minded
followers, their own having departed long
before; times when intellectual energy and
tireless devotion to principle seemed waste
except to chronicle and reveal the deplorable
condition of the many stragglers and the sad-
ness of the times, no monumental v/oiks of
deep and wide utility being undertaken for
the benefit of existing and future generations.
Original works of art were not carved out of
now ideas. The artists springing as they
did from the struggling multitude, where
all genius germinated, followed the
example of the aristocracy who boasted
of their ancestors and fell back c-n the
achievements of their predecessors, mu-
tated and reproduced them, but attempted
no higher flights in any direction, though
adored wealth and selfishness piled up stone--,


K. rtar, and brick as never before. How was
,i pc-oMblf for him to carry anr reforms for the
t -.if the helpless in a House constituted
*, rj.is vtfas cf wordly men, influenced more or
by iV.r rich boss-soutside the House, who
su «pa it-mo.- ti r* in the lawof self-preservation,
m the study of some abortive science
»<vl •v'.rav.vr mt gam-*, while the poor sutler
l vr bread and the weak Imre the burdens of tho
strong, Gang pre--od down into the dust,
fhove who did all tno work, spun, weaved,
ddv--d. and drudged, who erected the
Vtajves and palaces, supplied the feast,
t*cr« the only jvortions of the human
rv?<* which went shelterless and hungry,
living oa atmospherical suction. _ Nature
with that exquisite irony humanity ad-
t»;r—J but was uuaule to imitate utilised the
Virgin lustre of the gem to exhibit more
plainly and painfully the moral ugliness of
the politicians whose opportunities were
mtd conserving the unnatural privileges of
lhi> strong who were able to help themselves,
wlido opposing all measures for tho benefit
of th-; weak. The strong had always
known how to guard their own in-
terests and so have packed heavy loads
oa the shoulders of the weak. If the
history of tho strong was ever written it would
t>j the record of rapine, selfishness, cruelty,
aoJ murd.r from Cain to Cush and Nimrod to
Napoleon, which could only be paralleled by
the avaricious greed of the strong, out of
which grew the trusts combines, and rings for
the exploitation cf money and the enslavement
of the weak. No genius, no talent, no sin-
cerity, however great, was to be trusted,
respected, or praised, unless utilised to con-
duce to the welfare of the weak. Port pre-
judice in the kingdom of selfishness was the
last stronghold i: f’hehood and superstition
that would surrender to reason. The dominion
of politic®, like society, was under the sway of
ant-dilnvian tyranny, reason seldom showing
itshono.-t face. Doctrines in philosophy were
abandoned when proved false. People when
known to bo dead wete buried, but tho art of
tho ombalrner preserved iu politics the decay-
ing skulls of effete laws to encumber the earth
raid damn the aspirations of tho weak, and dis-
gust tme reformers. As it was only the living
that^ buried the dead, surely it was time
all those Gripping, crushing, and killing laws
which the jjeople bugged iu the dark
night of their ignorance were abolished.
Ho would read what one of the greatest
women who ever appeared on this earth had
written. Ihat was Miss Frances Willard, an
American lady, who wove her crown in the
loom of her own genius. She said:—
‘•Another phrase that we must chase out of the
dictionary of common speech with a scourge
of -mall cords is the phrase ‘an illegitimate
child.’ There never was one born. Every
child_ that has appeared on this sphere came
here in the direct line of those natural laws
which are Jaws of God, and are perfectly
legitimate. I even dare to hope that
the mother of one of these poor little
waifs, as we are wont to call them,
is made legitimate by tho awful sacra-
nv-vivt, of pain and shame that she endures.
The only illegitimate factor in the problem is
the father who endures nothing, who is pil-
lowed in peace and comfort, while she, who by
the laws of nature and of God, in this hour of
her immeasurable need, should have been sur-
roundod by h:s love and sentinelled by his pro-
tection, is left iu thd night of her agony with
no eyo to pity and no arm to save.”
unfortunately for the weak many politicians
began their Parliamentary careers with their
faces turned to vard some popular prejudice of
the time, and walked backward as it were,
the movement being retrograde as often as
direct. Then there were others who were
simply time-serving political weather-vanes,
J turning on a greasy spindle in front of each
j popular gust of wind, absolutely unrertec-
t>vt» and opiniauless. but always enjoy-
l ing the contempt of strangers, pity of friends,
and respect of fools. t>uch men were not en-
dowed with minds and courage that produced
sovereign remedies for the curing of the poli-
tical wronsrs of humanity through the solving
of the great problem of life by ascertaining
the cause of the imprisonment of the weak for
stealing bread from the strong, while the strong
were not imprisoned for stealing opportunities
from the weak. Surely for every disease there
must somewhere be » sure euro had
wa but the intelligence to discover it.
A great English scholar . who lived
in America for five years returned
to England and visited his old academy,
! whore be found the professors discussing
the same old questions, blowing similar
bubbles, and splitting hairs anew, and when
he got buck he was asked what the pro-
fessors were doing, fie said “ I found one
milking the barren heifer and the other hold-
ing the sieve.” That was what the legislators
of the world wore doing : some were milking
the Governments and the rest were holding
i the sieve. God had endowed the human race
with but little inventive genius, so in .
times of great atllictiou and disappointment it
turned hack to the last fwriod, and hoj>ed for
a leader like Him that lived before —greater it
might lx*, hut always of the same kind. This
poverty of invention and custom of thinking
that the future must reproduce the past ap-
peared in all human calculations. There was
hardly anything in nature more bewildering
to a reflective mind than the influence of
one person's thought and feeling over another,
and on thousands of intelligent beings.
Doubtless it arose from the fact that while the
world was full of echoes there were very few
voices, so the history of the universe was prin-
cipally the rise and progress of the ideas and
feelings of a few supremely great riven.
Adelaide, like all other cities, contained many
silly well-to-do fools who looked like wise men,
and many hard-up wise men who looked like
fools. lie know a family where there were
two beautiful children, and owing to the stern
fact they lost all legitimate rights if any more
should bo born after marriage : the parents had
determined never to marry unless they
could legitimatize those two children. L’nder
the beneficent operation of this Hill that
woman would become a wife and those two
children have justice meted out to them.
The law which forced children to grow up
bastards when their parents wero married is a
blood-red reminder that we are living in an age r
of brutalising savagery, worthy only of men-
eatingcannibals. This Pill wouldenableparents f‘‘
through registration under oath to restore t
children born before marriage to all the rights
and privileges children subsequently born are
entitled to. It would afford many young women, t
an opportunity of persuading tho fathers of k.
their illegitimate children to assure their ’
future by making them legitimate
through marriage and registration. If iu ‘
committee this Fill could be so enlarged
and amended as to embrace within its scope
sufficient power to enable those who wished
after marriage to legitimatize a child for ►
which either parent was responsible—both
being agreeable—it would become the real
friend of humanity. He felt doubly assured c
that the sympathetic portion of society began
to see it could not progress by piling crushing
weights on the shoulders of weaklings when
they were unable to keep pace in the race of
life under the weight of a porous plaster. A few
years ago according to the laws of England the
maintenance of illegitimate children devolved
on the mothers, while for years Scotland had


held tho fathers jointly responsible with
the mothers. Could ono think of a more
infamous thing than n.en going scot-free
while weak women, guilty of no crime except
being mothers, through pare ignorance, having
to assume all tin; caro for which both were
responsible? Coder the laws of Scotland a
bastard became legitimate by the inter-
marriage of the parents subsequently. Hut
by the Laws of England a child to bo legitimate
must bo born after marriage. It is not neces-
sary that tiio child gotten in wedlock, nor
that the husband bo the father, but it
was indispensable that it should be
bora after marriage, and no matter
how short the time the law presumed
it to bs the child of the married man
This Bill embodied the two gnat speculative
maxims of original Christianity—love of God
and love of humanity. It put into legislative
operation the principles underlying the two
great practical maxims rising out of the specu-
lative—that the strong must boar the burdens
of the weak and the rich feed the poor, but
not as practised by the commercial Christians
of to day, which made the weak bear the
burdens of the strong and the rich sit on the
chest of the poor. He would like to
quote for the benefit of the Attorney-
General tho story of Orpheus and Eurydice.
*“ Ei 1 rydice was stolen and carried away by
the pod of hell. Orpheus, her lover, with tear-
fillsd eyes went in search of her, taking with
him his lyre.' He played such exquisite music
that all hull was amazed with delight. Ixion
forgot his frightful Labor at the flaming wheel.
The daughters of Danaus ceased from theirhope-
less task. Tantalus became oblivious to his
awful thirst. Even Plutosmilcd. and for the first
time within the memory of the oldest inhabi-
tant the eyes of the blazing Furies wore filled
with sympathetic tears.” As it was with the
lyre of Orpheus so it should be with the sub-
lime harmonies of science, rescuing from the
clutches o? the merciless monsters of power
tho lacerated, bleeding heart of humanity.
He hoped tho Attorney-General would not
pitch into him as he did on a former occasion,
but give him a hand, so that when the
Premier’s hour of trial came he could re-
ciprocate.
{Extract from The .•Miavfi.-er, August 2.">, ISOs.]
Mr. o‘Mctlley was received with loud
cheers whoa he rose to move that *‘a Bill
should be introduced by the Government
to amend <the law relating to the testa-
mentary disposition of property by pro-
viding that the widow and children of a
testator for whose benefit a sufiicient pro-
vision has not -been made by the testa-
riKiutavy ’disposition of an estate may apply
for an oixlor from a judge of the Supreme
Court directing what is a reasonable pro-
vision it'or 'them out of such estate; pro-
vided that no sudh order shall be issued
for the benefit of a widow who has, be-
fore the testator’s death, been guilty 0:
conduct which would have entitled him to
obtain a divorce, and which conduct has
not been condoned.” Ole began by thank-
ing Air. Coneybeer and ‘Mr. Wood for
standing aside for him. The matter, he
would have been settled two years
ago but for trie buckjumping of the Pre-
uhe latter sees -thinga chat are cornier,
wiierea-t cMr. Kingston 'does n*»i ob-wrve
them till triey arc past. The propy.ztoa.
he affirms is based on the principles o:
absolute justice, and .ho prqte*:ed om e
more against 'the l.r.v which abuws a w.ck-
ctl iiusbaml on his deathbed to piup-r'.-e
a good wire. "Why don’t you brim; in a.
Bill yourself?"’ asked the Premier. n.d Mr.
O'tVfalley retoKed. "For you to ki«-U it to
pieces as you did las: year." He then
related bow Mr. Price's boy had a—erred,
not knowing anything of law, but hav.n4
a strong sense of justice, that hi' father
could not leave everythin* from Id-mother.
".How old is the boy? ’asked Alijor C i*:;ne.
thinking to be smart, and the reply -was,
"He is old enough -to know more of the re-
quirements of justice than the majority of the
Conservative members of this Hou-e.’ ’ Mr.
OTMalley quoted the Scriptures on the sub-
ject of women, and •incidentally >; was
made apparent that many members know
very little of the iDble. He considered
it anomalous chat while a man ova* pro*
vented from willing money away from
his creditors, lie could leave his widow
destitute, and be affirmed that no woman
would keep her household accounts .n the
manner that the -Australian Governments
had Hnanced their respective colonies dar-
ing one last 30 years. Seven-cigbr’i' of the
world s misery, be affirmed, is the result
of bad temper, which is ’the source of all
matrimonial 'troubles, anVl he philosophi-
cally remarked nhat no Int.-bani or wife
can be happy unless be or she nukes the
partner in life happy also. He ended
somewhat abruptly, owing to the fact tin:
•Mr. Copley had thouglKlessly mixed up
his notes. (Mr. OVMalley. who spoke
throughout with great earnestacos and
force, appealed to the llou.'c to i:istruct
the Premier to draft this mea-
sure so that <?outh Australia might at
least take second place on the subject.
[Extract from “ Hansard,’* December I-j, Ir 's.J
THE ESTIMATES.
Mr. O’MALLEY complimented Mr. Glynn
on his excellent and moderate spech. He
would like to compliment Mr. Wood also, but
that hon. member wanted to increase public
works without giving the Government a chance
to find the money. Work could not be found
i for the 1,700 men out of work without money,
! and he hoped Mr. Wood would at least
j get down tb the basis of consistency,
j Mr. Giles reminded him forcibly of an Indian
buck that was suffering from a snake blister on
his back. The iion. member came down year
after year and whined about free education.
He wanted us to be like Spain or like Italy,
where he believed i'i millions of the 25 mil-
lions of people could not read or write.
Thank goodness, democracy would not allow
1 that. Let Mr. Giles remember tie story of
the kittens, which were described as conserva-
tives when first they were born, and demo-
j crats as soon as they got their eyes open. No!
j democracy would not allow it. Do away with
| the schools and more gaols would be required.
Every extra school was an additional asset to
1 the country, and each teacher tl-re was a
i preacher of tho gospel of intelligence. Each
niier, who, although progressive and -do.no- | schoolhouse shut increased the ignorance of
cratic in the main, sometimes goes off on the community, which was the deficit of
the wrong -track. Thus 'New Zealand lias a country. It was all very well for
got ahead, and be cast the whole responsi- j Mr. Giles to talk to his constituents,
oibty for -that on the Premier. 'T voted 1 but he would prefer to go to the
for you last year,” interjected Mr. King-
ston, and the replywas/’Ycs,but.vouknew
1 would bo boa-ten.” 1 Air. OW Talley then
praised iMr. Holder and Dr. Cook burn for
the help they (had given him, adding that
bottomless pit of Hades and remain un-
heard of than try to interfere with cir State-
school system in such a way. Even tbatereat
man whom all Conservatives worshipped, the
lion. Joseph Chamberlain, had declared that


England was going for free secondary educa-
tion. How could members hope then tfiat
South Australia should go back. He would
always right for increasing educational labili-
ties and op|Kntunities. so that the youth of
the colony might bless the land that gave them
birth. The greatness of a country depended
not on its wealth and mountains of gold,
but on the kind of men and women it
produced. And in this connection let him i
once more say that it was an infamous shame
that little children must be branded aspau]*ers
because books were not supplied free in the |
schools. The present system had been tried i
iu America ami it had failed. But now to the j
mining question. It seemed to him that the !
Government had neglected their duty in not
having spent money iu prospecting that great
range of hills skirting Rapid Bay. Near the
Taliskcr mine millions of pounds would (
yet be dug out of tho bowels of the j
earth. Why did not the Government
adopt the Arizona system, supplementing any
amount the jieople raised fur the puqiose ot
putting down a shaft. Then the sum spent :
by the State could be made a first charge on
the gold obtained. If the Government did j
that South Australia would in 10 years become
one of the best mining countries in the world.
The prospects here were better than they wi.ro
in Arizona when ho first went there, yet
that bad become one of the be-t mining
states in tho American Union. He
would like also to direct the attention
of the Government to the necessity of a jetty
at Hog Bay. The settlers were at present
unable to get their produce away, because no
jetty had been provided there. Hi* could not
help advising the Government to exercise their
strung power and purchase land at a reason-
able rate on which to settle and provide homes
for those who were out of work. It was.a
sad sight to see so many unemployed
about the streets, and the provision
of work for them in the style now
followed only temporarily relieved their
distress. It was time the Government cave
place to better democrats on the Treasury
benches if they did not s> e that the Sunday- j
closing law was observed. The law was violated j
by stagger juiceries and b.-o-eries in an open ,
way. While the small shopkeepers could only |
keep open on six days during tho week many |
hotelkeepers did so on seven. What also wero |
the Government doing to encourage our !
fisheries and those engaged in them. It would
be a grateful thing if this democratic
Ministry would do something for tho bard- j
working fishermen of VictorJlarborandGoolwa,
who went out in the dark of night in storm and
tempest to fish near the mouth of tho Murray. !
Then there wore our post-offices in the
country. Many of them were worked at a ,i
loss. He knew of one which cost £*2GG per
annum and only brought in i’-Sa. There was
many a young lady who would successfully j
manage it for the receipts. Why, too, were j
the toilers taxed to pay the cost of an engine
running from W olseley to Bordertown and i
back iu order that it might turn round,
when for a small sum a turntable could be con-
structed. In order to produce the requi- j
sites to keep the Government going it was j
necessary that the people of South Australia
should be healthy and sound. Time after
time lie had asked the Government to make
the Adelaide Hospital free and wipe out the
charges which made the democrats of the
colony fee! paupers. The hospital had one of
the best medical staffs in the world, but it
should be open to all. and iu order to ensure
that it would even be desirable to in-
crease the income tax or levy a stamp
or some other tax to defray the cost.
He asked the Government to assist tho
district councils of Encounter Bay and
Port Elliot in erecting a shelter on the
beach at tho only watering-place in South
Australia so that in warm weather the
visitors could ait beneath its shade anti read
Goethe, Dante, and Shakespeare instead of
being driven into their boarding-houses to get
out of the heat. Ho would support the pre-
sent democratic Government as the be-it to be
had under the circumstances.
1 Extract from “ Hansard,” Decernl>«r 10, Is'S 1
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION BILL.
Second reading.
Mr. O’MALLEY said under the present
Municipal Corporations Act the persons pro-
hibited from serving in corporations were
females, minors, and uncertificated insolvents,
and he protested against the intellectual
women of South Australia being cla-sed
with the latter.
Mr. HOUKIGAN, on a point of order,
asked if Bills took precedence of notices ot
motion on Fridays?
The SPEAKER—Yes.
Mr. HOMBUKG said the resolution parsed
by the House referred to Wednesdays only,
and the memorandum on the notice-papei read
thus:—“By resolutions respectively of llth
August and ‘doth September Government busi-
ness takes precedence of all other business on
Wednesdays after half-past <> o’clock, and pri-
vate members’ business relating to Bills takes
precedence of all other private business.”
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL said tho
resolution was that “ During the remainder of
tho session private DicmUis Bills take pre-
cedence of other private members' business.”
Tho SPEAKER —The lion, member for En-
counter Bay may proceed.
Mr. O’MALLEY said the short Bill, of
which he had the. honor of moving the second
reading, was of such a righteous character,
being the real keystone of the arch of demo-
cracy, that In* felt confident no hon. member
with a spark of manhood and a crumb of jus-
tice in his soul would oppose its enactment.
Its object was to enable women to occupy
seats as councillors if elected by the rate-
payers. Its enactment would abolish
the present pernicious system which rested
on a falso basis—taxation without tlio
right of occupation. Women being weak j
all manner of indignities wore piled on them I
by strong men calling themselves gentlemen.
Surely on the eve of the 20th century and in •
the very zenith of our boasted Christian ‘
civilisation there wore other functions for >„
women as well as housekeeping wives and s'
mothers. He did not believe that the domestic |
was the only function. It was not function v
enough for tho mother, for the human
being, any more than it would be func- ■
tion enough for the father, for the man, k
Women had other functions in life as Well as j>
child-bearing and domestic drudgery. Tho y
Government should impart sufficient informa-
tion to tho women of South Australia as to y
enable them to limit their families to the desired j
number of children and the sex. They cow had If
daughters when the} - wanted sons, and Ikjvs y
when they wished for girls. Science had made f
it possible for all to have the gender required, f
In tho progress of human development and the T
application of science to what was once only
woman’s work, whereby so much time- was
saved from the wheel and the loom, tho
oven and the spit, with the increase ■:
of wealth, the saving of time, and the intel-
lectual advancement of women. How were
their reserved energies and superfluous power
to be utilised to the Dost advantage for the
supreme welfare of the whole community? ' ,
Only by the abolition of every barriei which
prevents women from the full and complete y
exercise of all the privileges enjoyed by men J


politically. Not tunny rears bad passed
amc-J a member of the aristocracy of
privilege and dictation declared that the
shoemaker should stick to his ta-t, but
every thinking shoemaker regards that
declaration with lofty contempt. He is
a shoemaker, but bo was a man before
be became a shoemaker. Shoemaking was
simply an accident of his manhood, not
manho*>d ati accident of his shoornaking'.
Wo all know that tin; aristocratic writer of tho
apocryphal book of Kcch-si.isticus showered
down the venom of his scorn on the head of
every farmer: —“ Who glorieth in the goad,
every carpenter and blacksmith, every jewel-
ler and potter. They shall not be sought for,”
says this writer, ‘‘in tho public councils, they
shall not sit high in the congregation, they
shall not sit in the judge’s seat, nor under-
stand the sentence of judgment, they cannot
declare justice.”
The S Phi AKER—I would direct the hon.
member’s attention to the bill.
Mr. O’MALLEY said it was necessary to
his subject to go into ancient history. (The
Treasurer —“ You will lose your Hill.”) Ho
was told that already. (Mr. Goode —“And
your seat too.”) That had nothing to do with
the hon. member. He advised him to mind
his own business. (The Attorney-General—
“ If you will let it go to tho vote you will
carry it.”) If the Attorney-General would
whip up the, momUTs and give him a pledge
to that effect he would sit down, but he was
not going to lose both his speech and the Dill.
Aristotle and Cicero had no higher opinion of
t’ne merchants. They were only busy in
trading, “miserable people,” quoth these
great men. ** What have they to do with tho
affairs of State? merchants, mechanics,
and farmers. It is only for kings, nobles, and
famous rich men who do no business, but keep
slaves.” Ho was grieved to have to admit
that there are thousands of petrified brained
men iu Australia of great social position and
local importance who had no higher esteem
for women than those proud ancients had for
merchant*, mechanic' l , and farmers. All those
old sour proverbial expressions of the citric-
minded philosophers, longsinoe numbered with
the shimf*«.Tle.-.s millions of bygone ages, should
be buried with the memory of their authors.
The domestic function did not occupy all a
woman’s lime. She was tho housekeeping
head, ami after she has kept house as wife and
mother and had done her duty she still has
energies and talents to spare. Why should
the community be deprived of tho experience,
knowledge, and judgment of that wise woman
in tho municipal corporation? The com-
munity was entitled to tho benefit of her
wisdom. Humanity must utilise woman’s
reserved energies to palliate tho con-
sequences of man’s injustice. Thousands
of women wore employed behind counters in
stores, and good, loyal, honest, trustworthy
servants they made. Thsy held foremost posi-
tions as public and private teachers, inculcat-
ing tho principles of truth, virtue, and honor
into tho placid minds of tho rising generation.
Ho was pleased that the real hard outdoor
work was not performed by women in Aus-
tralia. It brutalised tho women of Ger-
many, France, England, Ireland, Scotland,
Spain, and other European countries,
lie know a town in America called Osealoosie,
which, before a lady mayor was elected, was
going to the dogs. Houses were empty, tho
grass was growing in the streets, and tho ‘2\
miles tramcar was hitched up, and the mule
dead. A lady called Mrs. Todd was elected
mayor, anil sho changed tho whole state of
affairs; thehouses were painted, schools ojvened,
and everything done up, and the tramcar
began to run again. (Mr. Goode —“ And the
mulo was resurrected?”) No; but they got
lots of human mules to take ni* pi ice.
How few women in responsible positions w*ro
guilty of embezzlement in comparison with
men. Tho reason for this vendition of affairs
was to be found in the fact that as a rule
women do not drink, gamble, am] live
above their income, while many young men did.
It was deplorable that nothing remained in
Australia for wealthy women bat marriage
[fQiu tho time they leave sehooi until that
ceremony occurs. JTheir occupation wav
principally that of listeners. while
intellectual dignified nonentities of. social
importance takl them of their supreme
greatness, a greatness which only appeared
just in time to save the world from chaos. Ac-
cordingly they had tuchoosu between husbands
and nothing, and very often in theselection that
was choosing between two absolute nothings.
There were spare energies which sought
employment both before and after marriage.
Women and men had the same human nature,
and. of course, tho same natural human rights.
Women’s natural human rights reseed on the
unrepeatable law of nature, and did not depend
on bodily or intellectual power to assert
and maintain them. They rested only on
the law of human nature itself, which God
made the same in the weakest woman as
the strongest man. Many men imagined that
women were great cowards. He did not.
During the American revolutionary war
several regiments of British soldiers landed at
Stonington Harbor, and started to march to the
city. All the able-bodied Americans were at
the front fighting when the news of the ap-
proach of tho British soldiers reached the city.
The young women gathered from every quarter
with whatever kind of arms were procurable,
and over 300 started to give battle to the fast
approaching enemy. On their march through
the forest which lay between the city and har-
bor they talked so much and made such an
awful noise that the British general thought
thousands were coming to annihilate him. so
lie retreated, embarked his men aboard the
transports, and put to sea, declaring that
while he was not afraid to fight men
ho was not prepared to attack wom-n.
At the battle of Beningtoii Mrs. Pitcher, tho
wife of one of the American gunners, took her
husband’s place when he was shot, and fought
all day like a Trojan, for which gallant service
Washington made her a captain, and ever
afterwards she was known as Captain Molly
Pitcher. Under the most excruciating pain
women displayed the most sublime patience,
patience ot which males are incapable with
perhaps the exception of medical m--n. Their
patients excel even women, because, a? a rule,
the doctors, never lose them except for tho
purpose of letting them go to a better
land. The tilth century civilisation
seemed to have developed the element
of force to an extraordinary degree in
all human atfairs. Force of body and torce
of brain in gigantic combination for the con-
trolling and directing of human energies,
thereby enriching the few at the expense ot the
many. There was really very little justice,
very little philanthropy, and less religion.
Sycophancy and selfishness preponderated
everywhere*!!! the world. Individual, domestic,
social, ecclesiastical, national selfishness. It
was preached as gospel from the pulpit and
enacted as just law from tho throne. It was
declared good political righteousness for the
strong nations to swallow the weak ;
for the Christian nations to plunder the
heathen and annex their landtor the
vigorous and healthy to ruin tr.e feeble and
sicklv; for the capitalists to enslave the
workers because they are poor ; for weak
to alwavs he beasts of burden for tne strong ;
for the human sharks to buy labor too cheap
and seh its production too dear, and so grow


rich by impoverishing many. Hence nations
were arrayed against nations, classes
against classes, men against women. It
was universally believed that humanity was
arrayed against God and God against
humanity; that the world was an everlasting
discord; that there was no solidarity of
women and men with men and women,
of humanity with God. He was con-
vinced that we should never rise beyond this
theory and this practice until women had
secured their natural rights as the equal of
men, and had taken their natural place
in regulating the affairs of the com-
nity and the .State, as they now did
tiie family and church. Whether the Bill
passed or not it was based on right, and must
become the law of South Australia, Every
man who brought forth a reform suffered for it.
Ho had suffered over the Legitimation Bill.
The faddist of last year was recognised as the
statesman of this year. His groat friend, Dr.
Cockburn, hadsuffered, and had oncebeencalled
a great fool and faddist, just as he was now.
He was utterly independent of the dignified
nonentities. It was a question of how ho liked
them, not how they liked him. (Mr. Goode—
Authorised by King O’Malley. Adelaide, and
Prime! by J. 1., Bouython & Co., Advertiser Office, King William Street, Adelaide.
“ You like their policies.”) Xo; lie was Inde-
pendent of them. He had not asked any man
in the House for a policy, and he had not
used his position for the purpose of doing
business. Ho could live without working in
South Australia, and ho hoped he would
live to see this Bill law in South
Australia, for women had every right
to be members of district councils, corpora-
tions, and members of Parliament. Several
members of the Legislature in Colorado were
women, and its legislation would compare
with that of any other country. When this
Bill became law the good effects of it would
be felt here also. At no distant day the
musical sound of the advancing feet of free-
born women will echo and re-echo in the land.
They will come numerous as the wave of the
ocean, and with the justice of the law that
regulates its action. They will come murmur-
ing little of the past, but moving forward with
the glittering brightness of a noble idea that
casts its sunshine far on to other lands and
distant countries. Women will address them-
selves to the world’s grandest work which is
to organise the rights of humanity.


AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP.
THE FORTHCOMING ELECTIONS.
(From The S.A. Ile-jhUr, March J7lh, 1 SO!).|
God’s will in heaven was
supreme over all life; so it would be on
earth when the kingdom had come. Hence
the absurdity of saying that religion had
nothing to do with business or politics or
amusements. Let them consider the questions
with which politics had to do, such as crime,
education, and administration of charity,
marriage and devorce, Sunday observance,
the control of the drink traffic, and the licen-
sing of the totalizator. If religion had not to
do with such matters as those it was not easy
to see what place there was for it in this
world at all. When Licensed victuallers and
jockey clubs raised the cry “ Lot us .alone
and confine your attention to year services
and sacraments” they must remember that
the cry was not now. This was exactly
what the devil said to Christ when Ho was
here, and we must pay as little heed to it as
He did. It was sometimes said that when
Christ was appealed to about the tribute
money and replied “Bender onto Caesar the
things that are Caesar’s and to God the things
that are God’s " he declined to interfere in
politics. That was true; but why? The
people to whom He spoke bad no politics!
rights. They were under the heel of despotic
Rome. They had no voice in the making of
the laws nuder which they suffered. To
have talked to them of political duties would
have been a- absurd as it would have been to
address cripple? on dancing or deaf mutes on
elocution. Suppose Christ had stood before
Caesar himself, would He then have had
nothing to say about political duties? When
we stood before an audience of adults we
stood before Caesar. They made the laws,
and wore responsible to God for their char-
acters. When centuries before Israel was a
free people bad the prophets nothing to say
about politics ? If they took from Isaiah and
Jeremiah. Ezra and Amos, Daniel and Kings,
Esther and Chronicles all that concerned
political duties there would bo but little left.
•he Pentateuch contained almost nothing
but politics. Everybody admitted that
religion had to do with relieving the destitute
and reclaiming the fallen, and with every
form of philanthropy. But the highest form
of philanthropy was to saturate their social
and political life with Christian principles.
If, e.g., the Good Samaritan could have cleared
the Jericho road of thieves that would have
been even better work than relieving one
poor follow who was their victim. Legislation
which made it harder for scoundrels to ruin
young cirls was better work than tho reclama-
tion of a fallen girl here and there. Let them
help the drunkard back to sobriety by all
means; letter still strike through politics at
the trade which tempted men to ruin for gain.
The elections were at hand, and the preacher
addressed some advice to young citizens.
Their vote was a saered trust. They would
have to give account 10 God first for using it,
and then for the nso to which it was put.
They felt and said on polling day :
The prcnilc-t now is but my peer.
The bivbfst not more high
To-Jav of all the weary year
A King of men am I.
To-day alike are great, and small,
The uanieDsi and the known,
My palace i« the people's ball.
The ballot-box my throne.
Exactly. They were Kings : they ruled.
Then they had the responsibility of rulers.
Let them think abont that. In tho exercise of
thk right let them accept no man’s dictation.
• . . They must vote only for men of high
Extract from Sebmos by the Kev. J. Beery in the Pirie Street Chcrcii.
character. If they allowed thec: s elve* to be
dragooned by political parties to vote for
noodles or rakes simply because they were
plastic or willing tools of their party—they
were disloyal to Christ. They mast not be in-
different to the character of their candidates.
“Candidate” was a beautiful word. It meant
“ white.” In old Rome when a man sought
public office he walked about ia a white gar-
ment—a sign that his character was open to
challenge. Hence our use of the word. Let
them keep to its true meaning. If they would
not employ drunkards and rakes behind their
counter or ia the office, if such men by common
consent were unfit to be policem a or engine-
drivers, it was monstrous to think that we
conld commit to them the sacred task of
shaping and administering our laws in a
Christian land. If character was at the root
of prosperity in the career of an individual' or
the building up of a family, was it not still
more imperative in those who were the builders
of a nation? Let them put some soul into
political duty, and work and fight, and suffer
if need bo, for the men who stood for the best
welfare of humanity, which was the glory of
God. Many a good man failed at the poll
because the wen to whom he had a right to
look for support put no heart into their politic?.
They were afraid to lose a customer or to
grieve a friend. Grave moral issues were at
stake in the coming elections, issues that would
help or hinder the coming of the kingdom. If
in any constituency the Lord's battle were lost
through the indifference or lukewarmness of
his Church, that Church or Christian would
have to give account for his failure of duty
when ho stood before the Judge at the last
great assize. In order to make them feel the
tremendous responsibility that rested upon a
single vote the preacher would suppose a case
that was quite possible, if not probable. The
return of a candidate might hinge upon a
single vote, he might secure over his opponent
a majority of one. The member thus returned
might by his vote carry a Hill that would
further legalize the totalizator or abolish it,
. . . or he might carry a Local-option Bill,
and thus diminish the temptations to strong
drink, and save thousands of precion* live?.
The voter whose single influence secured such
itnmea c nrab!,e results might be sitting some-
where in that Church, and thinking that he had
no influence. There were many “cries ”in the
air. “ Australia for the Australians ” was the
cry of some. “ Australia for the capitalist" or
“the Labor Parly” was the cry of other?.
. . . Let it be theirs to raise the cry,
“ Australia for Christ,” —“ to seek first the
Kingdom of God.”
For some time in my quiet moments I have
thought that the spirit of investigation and de-
nunciation of evil in hieh places ras dead ia
the Church, and that the preacher, instead of
being a philosophical guide and a le»con-!ight
of righteousness; had become a long-faced,
solemn, time-serving sovereign-grabber; but I
am thankful that there is an intekvtuai minis-
ter of the Gospel in Adelaide vvhoi- c * to bo
frightened by the power rising out of accumu-
lations of ill-gotten wealth, n<>t caririr whether
the rich pew-fcoldere may refuse to give their
support any longer to a m an poss-e-«ft g his in-
domitable pluck, and ready to incur the hatred
and malignity of the oppressors of the weak, in
order to stand up for clean charactered men ia
Parliament. The Kev. Joseph Berry, Wes-
leyan, has preached a sermon which should Ist
printed in letters of gold and from*-! and Lung
up iu every house in South Australia.


THE MEMBERS FOR “ARCADIA.”
[From The Rejistrr, February Is, IS9!).j
The women of South Australia are al-
ready begin ui mg to exorcise a strong in- j
■fiuence in politics, ami tliero is no know-
ing what the next elections will bring |
forth. But if there is ona place more than j
another where ths fair sex have become j
infatuated with politics or with the mem- I
bers for the district it is in Arcadia, other-
wise Encounter Bay. They arranged three j
complimentary socials, held respectively at j
Port Elliot, Port Victor, and Goolwa, to
Messrs. O’Malley ami Carpenter, and the j
enthusiastic and novel character of the
gatherings are almost unprecedented in the
history of South Australia. At Port Elliot
the flatter in the dovecote of Arcadia was
something to he remembered. He walked
on to the platform, bowed serenely, and re-
sumed his seat. The men at the back
shouted ** Good old King.” The Chairman
explained to the gentlemen who had seats
that there were a number of ladies stand-
ing, and as he did not think they were new
women he hoped the gentlemen would make
way for them. One man after another rose
and gave up his seat, each sou of Adam
being warmly applauded by Mr. O’Malley
for his solf-sacritico. One elector from the
stringy-bark country, who was in-
cluded amongst the gallants, ambled
tip to the platform, shook hand’
with the two members, and then
the ladies were in great force, and the advent ! Wlth th< ? two “embers, and then
of their “King” was the signal for I fat °a the carpet, to the immense de-
a wonderful waving cf pocket-hamlker- light of those present. The King was,
chiefs. Many men were frightened away by ! the hero of the h . o .' lr ' } * 9 b,o, f b,a
the great assemblage of women, and went ‘ trumpet pretty well, and preached a doc-
home and smoked their nines and i trine that found great favour. No gentle-
home and smoked their pipes and
rocked the cradles. One gentleman
was heard to remark that the reason
why King* O’Malley was so popular was that
there were fifty widows living at Port
■Elliot. But at Port Victor the excitement
was even greater. The Institute Hull was
crowded to the doors, and here again the
fair sex- predominated. People were hang-
ing in at the windows and standing all
round the stage. The ** King” arrived dressed
in a russott apple-coloured suit, and as ho
marched’ down the hall tall hat in hand
man,” he said, " should stand for Parlia-
ment unless lie lived such a decent, respec-
table life that the most modest lady in
the Electorate of Adelaide could walk down the
street with Him without having her character
assailed, or honor compromised.” The
audience cheered this to the echo, and I
when the Canadian followed it up by saying
ho would not flow into Parliament on a
tankard of beer the ladies could not make
enough noise. Mr. Carpenter likewise had
a great reception.
WHY BRITAIN LOST HER AMERICAN COLONIES.
A MORAL
[By Sir George Trevelyan in the “ Review of
Reviews” of March 15, IS'dH.J
Those unfortunate, stupid Ignoramuses who
would have you believe that morality has no-
thing to do with polities, and that loose-living
licentious men, it they but possess a form of
knavish cunning which may pass for clever-
ness, and who silence all opposition by a lavish
expenditure of money, the product of vice, are •
tilted to govern a free and enlightened people,
should read an article in the ” Review of Re-
views” for March, containing a summary of
Sir George Trevelyan's latest book, entitled
“The American Revolution.” I was so greatly
impressed with the article that I arn compelled
to reprint the following extract: —
“There is probably no s‘rions minded Eng-
lishman, of whatever party he, may be, who
will read the story so eloquently told by Sir
George Trevelyan, without feeling that the
whole of his sympathies must co out to the
men who fought against England anil humbled
her fa'se pride to the dust. In a general Sort
of way it is universally admitted that the men
who framed the I.V*chiration of Independence
r/era »u the right, and that George 111. arid
his advisers were in the wrong. But what is
not generally realised is the fact that apart
from all question of taxation or of Imperial
authority over independent colonies, there was
a moral issue that went to the very root of the
QUESTION.
question and dictated both the nature of the
revolt and its ultimate issue. It is hardly too
much to say that the reader of Sir George
Trevelyan's narrative rises from its perusal
wi*h the feeling that the English governing
classes possessed hardly one redeeming virtue,
while the Americans who successfully defied
their power were the embodiment of all the
principles which make for the welfare and the
strength and the prosperity of States. If
iras this fitful habit of self-indulgence, thy
habitual and apparently almost universal
custom of beiii'!/ drinking, high gaming, and
the absolute absence of amj moral sense as to
the relations of the seres vhich produced the
race of men who allowed Gorge HI. to wreck <
his empire. As usual, sin when it is conceived
bringeth forth death, and the wine-cup, and
the harlot, and the dice-box were the original t
causes which cost us America. The habit of
self-indulgence, the absence of any restraining
principle," of the obligation to live a sober,
righteous and g< dly life, gave George 111. his y
opportunity. What undid our people was sin.
Vice in the thou allied forms of drunkenness,
gaining, and harlotry sapped the moral man-
hood of our rulers.”
What a remarkable commentary there is In
the above on the proverb of Solomon —** W hen
the righteous are in authority, the people re-
joice ; but when the wicked beareth rule, the
people mourn."
