

INDUSTRIAL
PEACE
The Way to Secure
Industrial Efficiency,
Unity, and
National Prosperity
Frederick Gascoyne Williams


INDUSTRIAL
PEACE
The Way to Secure Industrial
Efficiency, Unity, and
National Prosperity
By
Frederick Gascoyne Williams




CONTENTS.
Pages
Preface 4
Chapter
I.—Capital and Labor 5
ll.—Australian Industrial Warfare 16
111. —Are Trades Unionism and Co-partnership Incom-
patible? 20
IV. —Profit-Sharing from the Employers’ Point of View 33
V.—Co-partnership and Profit-Sharing as successfully
practised, with Chronological Notes on British
Profit-Sharing and Co-partnership for the years
1895 to 1914 37
VI.—Co-partnership and Industrial Efficiency 70
Conclusion 79


PREFACE.
In bringing this book under the notice of the public, and
particularly of Employers, it may be as well to give one or
two reasons for its publication.
When interviewing Employers on the subject of Co-partner-
ship, I have invariably met with a reluctance on their part
to deviate from the beaten track, due solely to certain mis-
givings. It is in order to try to dissipate these doubts that
this work has been published. My sincerest hopes are, that
with the up-to-date evidence obtained from the Old World,
and in Australia, a clearer and greater conception of all that
Profit Sharing involves may be elucidated.
Special attention is directed to the article, “Are Trades
Unionism and Co-partnership Incompatible?” by Dr. C. Car-
penter, D.Sc.M., Inst. C.E., Chairman of the South Metropoli-
tan Gas Company, London.
The Industrial Warfare and troublous times ahead are too
serious and acute to be treated with indifference. The first and
great essential is to bring Capital and Labor together. The em-
ployer is the one necessarily looked to for making the first
advance. We have a huge continent to build up and develop,
and this cannot be accomplished amidst incessant industrial
strife. Under the Profit Sharing System strikes are rarely
known, due to the fact that labor settles down contentedly
when, in addition to the standard wage, it participates in
profits.
Having studied the principles of Co-partnership and Profit
Sharing for many years, I am prepared to afford information
relative to the various successful systems now in operation,
and the ones most adaptable for any particular business.
I am greatly indebted to those who have so kindly assisted
in supplying data.
F.G.W.
17 Malop Street, Geelong, Victoria,
February, 1916.


Chapter I.
Capital and Labor.
IT is my purpose to bring into wider notice in the present
time of industrial unrest, the advantages of Co-partner-
ship and Profit Sharing as between Employer and Em-
ployee in Australia.
At the outset it is perhaps as well to emphasise the distinc-
tion between Co-partnership and Profit Sharing. The latter
is a necessary element in the former, but only one of two, the
other being Capital owning. The payment by a Capitalist
to his workers of a share of the profit they help to produce
may be an excellent thing according to the object sought by
it and the system on which it is done; but many regard facili-
ties for Capital-owning by the Employee in addition to par-
ticipation in profits as being essential.
Capital and Labor must have realised ere this the utter
futility of the present methods of settling grievances. Other
means than those of having recourse to Wages Boards, Fac-
tories Acts, and Arbitration Courts, should be tried. These
methods of Conciliation have been operating in our midst since
the year 1897, with anything but satisfactory results. They
are supposed to do away with strikes, but so far have proved
ineffective, and act merely as a temporary expedient.
The Arbitration Court is staggering under its burden. It
is a nice commentary upon all the efforts to build up this
Arbitration Court system (to deal with industrial disputes)
to find that the Court in October, 1914, was two years in
arrears with its work, and that its awards are being continually
flouted.
Man is essentially selfish and acquisitive. The Capitalist
in the past has not had much consideration for his fellow-men,
hence the present state of industrial unrest. ' The world is
getting more humanitarian.


Professor Herman Merivale, some time Professor of Political
Economy at Oxford, in a report to the Royal Commission on
Trades Unions, stated:—“When a business is thriving, a sur-
plus is earned above the ordinary rate of profit and wages in
that business. It is this surplus which is occasional, and not
determined by fixed laws, which is the fundamental reason
of the existence and power of Trades Unions. The habitual
code of sentiment which prevailed between Employers and
workmen in the times when the former were regarded by both
law and usage as the governing class has passed, and cannot be
revived. ’ ’
A substitute has, therefore, to be found based upon equity
and enlightened self-interest, and a mutual forbearance which
should exist between contracting parties who can best promote
their several chances of advantage by aiding and accommodat-
ing each other.
Mankind will not be forced into any one line of action, but
may be led by the closer ties of fellowship, creating thereby
a better feeling.
Employers generally have failed to note the evolution of
labor, which has been steadily in progress for the past 50
years; apt to forget that the other fellow wants to enjoy more
of the comforts of life. Education has taught the workman
to appreciate his position in the Industrial World as an im-
portant factor.
Every diligent employee should have placed within his
reach the means and opportunity whereby he can secure a
home of his own and ensure against old age. Consider what
this would mean to Australia as a whole. For the year
ending April, 1915, £2,758,509 was paid away in Old-age and
Invalid Pensions, and for the year ending 31st December,
1914, in Maternity Allowances £695,795. What these figures
will reach in a few years it is difficult to estimate, when in
addition War Pensions and Compensations swell the list. Is
there not something radically wrong in the Industrial System
of a young country when it has to grant Maternity Bonuses —
a continent such as Australia, which could contain within its
borders Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Belgium,
Austria-Hungary, Turkey, Servia, Bulgaria, Spain, and Rou-


mania, and then have space to spare? It cannot be said that
all those in receipt of Old-age Pensions, etc., have been im-
provident. It has been due in a great measure to the conditions
under which they have lived.
My contention is that the bulk of employees under exist-
ing circumstances, cannot hope to be independent in their old
age.
I will endeavour to prove. Is the general worker any better
off to-day than he was 10 years ago? Decidedly not. You
will ask why, considering the rise in wages all round. That
very statement helps to prove my contention. Let me quote
our able Statistician, G. 11. Knibbs, Esq. He states: —
‘ ‘ When wages form an appreciable fraction in the cost of
production then if wages are made automatically and in-
stantaneously to correspond to the price of commodities, the
effect would be to advance them to an enormous figure, as
any mathematician can establish. For with every rise in
wages, commodities must also rise in their due proportion,
that depending'upon the fraction which wages form in the cost
of the production of the commodities in question, and if this
principle be put into force at all it must be made to apply
to the production of all commodities. The fact is that the
scheme is impossible in perpetuity, other economic factors
would inevitably come in. A similar remark would, of course,
apply to the reduction of the amount of labor given for a given
wage. It would have an analogous effect.”
This is the statement of one who has made a study of the sub-
ject. Just one simple illustration: —
Take the case of building a house. Why is it so costly to-
day compared to a few years back? Every portion of the
material, be it wood or brick, that goes to make that structure
naturally costs more than previous to the all-round rise in
artisans’ wages. Could it possibly be otherwise? Rest
assured that wherever increased wages are paid (and there
is no industry, trade, or business that you can point to that
is not affected) so assuredly will the employer pass it on. It
makes little or no difference to him; he is not the loser, nor
does he intend to be. He merely has to adjust his prices.


The following monthly summary of Australian Statistics
—May, 1915—show the Purchasing Power of Money as from
1901/1914, prior to the war:—
PURCHASING-POWER OF MONEY.
Amounts necessary on the Average in each Year from 1901 to 1914 to
purchase in each Capital Town what would have cost on the Average £\ in
1911 in the Australian Capitals regarded as a whole.
Year
Sydney
Melb’rne
Brisbane
Adelaide
Perth
Hobart
Weighted
Average
of six
Capital
Towns
S.
d.
S.
d.
S.
d.
S.
d.
S.
d.
S.
d.
S.
d.
1901
17
10
17
5
15
5
17
3
20
6
17
5
17
7
1902
19
7
18
1
16
0
17
3
21
7
17
10
18
7
1903
19
2
17
7
15
9
16
9
21
8
17
11
18
2
1904
17
5
17
1
14
8
16
3
20
10
17
1
17
2
1905
18
9
17
7
15
5
17
6
20
11
17
9
18
0
1906
18
8
17
7
15
7
17
10
20
5
18
0
18
0
1907
18
6
17
6
15
11
17
11
19
9
17
9
17
11
1908
19
9
18
6
17
1
19
1
20
0
18
5
19
0
1909
19
9
18
1
17
0
19
10
19
9
19
0
19
0
1910
19
11
18
10
17
6
20
2
20
6
19
0
19
5
1911
20
7
19
0
18
4
21
2
22
6
19
1
20
0
1912
22
11
21
1
19
7
23
2
23
1
20
10
22
0
1913
23
7
21
0
19
5
22
5
22
6
21
1
22
1
1914
24
1
22
1
19
11
22
10
22
10
21
10
22
10
The foregoing statistics clearly demonstrate that from the
year 1901 to 1914 the purchasing power of £1 has greatly de-
creased. What could he purchased in 1901 for 17s. 7d. costs
in 1914 no less than 225. 10d., that is an increase of ss. 3d.,
or nearly 30 per cent.
In other words, Labor was actually better off in the year
1901 with lower wages, than in 1914 when wages were higher.
For example: Say that the weekly wage of an artisan in 1901
was £3/10/-, the equivalent wage in 1914 would be £4/8/4
(which he is not getting) allowing 26*4 per cent, for the
decreased purchasing power of £l.
According to statistics, and the experience of most people,
wages have not kept pace with the increased cost of living,
hence strikes, and the general unrest. The whole industrial
system is at fault, and can only be rectified by Labor producing
more and Capital sharing profits with Labor. This passing on
business is simply a huge farce, and must come to an end,
sooner or later, that is, if we are to become a prosperous nation.


Though Labor can produce but little without Capital,
Capital can produce nothing at all without Labor, and apart
from Labor and Capital management is unemployed. Profit
is produced by the three factors, it should in consequence be
shared by all three. The Capitalist must invest his Capital, or
it is useless to him. Labor is demanding a share of this profit
Capital hitherto has solely retained for itself, and that demand
is the cause of the present industrial trouble.
The Transformation of Capital.
Those people who have nothing but scorn for any reform
which is a modification of Capitalism, and who demand
Nationalisation, should remember that such a transformation
has never occurred in the world’s history. Profit Sharing has
been tried, and found to be a success. Nothing is more sure
than that the Social System of the future is latent in the
present social system, and that the new conditions to prevail
will evolve therefrom.
But Labor, it is contended, gets its share (wages). Even
so Capital gets its share (interest), and Management its
share (salary). There remains a surplus profit. Why should
not Labor, which has helped to produce, participate in the pro-
duct? The usual answer is, “Labor will not share losses.”
Why then should it share profits? Labor does not cause loss,
why then should it contribute? It is the owner of the Capital
who is responsible for the manner in which it is managed. If
there is a profit, labor has contributed, and should have some
share. Lord Rutland, who shared profits with his laborers on
an English agricultural estate, was asked if his men shared
losses in bad years, to which he answered, “Yes, they worked all
the same and got no profit, and if they had not worked as here-
tofore my losses would have been greater.”
There is one thing which must be conceded for our present
organisation of Industry, it sorts out the good executive. This
is a most valuable and important service, -and one often lost
sight of. There is strong ground for the contention that of
the three elements in wealth production—Management, Labor,
and Capital, the first is the most vital, as it is' the most rare.
Co-partnership would transform Capitalism into more humane
B


and brotherly semblance, and yet leave the present sorting
process at work, and the man of executive capacity where
that sorting puts him, where he can direct unhampered the
forces of Capital and Labor to their greatest economic effec-
tiveness. That is to say, the proprietor of a business remains
proprietor and master, but he calls his employees to share the
profits, and sometimes in an advisory and consulting capacity
to assist him in the management.
The Socialist will tell you to Nationalise everything, have,
in other words, a Socialistic Government. Try and realise
what this would mean. Tammany would be a fool to it.
Corruption rampant. Business enterprise would be killed.
That which has made our great Empire would cease entirely,
and we should be a nation of Government officials. The
very thought of it all is obnoxious and certainly would be
unworkable. We all know what the Government stroke means,
and the disregard of business methods in its undertakings.
How different all this is when Employers have their own
Capital at stake. The proportion of Capital lost (that is.
wasted) is only kept down to a minimum by the present
system of private ownership, which keeps Capital in the hands
and under the control of the successful man and takes it away
(by loss) from him who has not the skill to administer it
wisely. If trained business men hesitate to venture very far
into the difficult realm of nationalisation, what likelihood is
there that a man who has been pitchforked by political
accident into a Minister’s chair will be competent to administer
it, in its entire length and breadth. Entire nationalisation
would put the ultimate control of the nation’s Capital into the
hands of Cabinet Ministers. Is it possible by legislation to redis-
tribute the wealth of the world? You may redistribute wealth,
but how to keep it in a state of equilibrium.
Profit Sharing is the only likely remedy.
Railways and Tramways could be better managed and more
profitably by private enterprise, on a profit-sharing basis. We
have only to take our Railways as an example. Who can deny
but that the Political element largely enters into the manage-
ment of most Government concerns? State enterprises by the
various Governments throughout the Commonwealth, are, with
few exceptions, a rank failure.


We know that there are those who profit by Industrial War.
It is their business to oppose Industrial Peace, to thrive upon
the cupidity and at the expense of others. Labor is the most
interested. It is for them to decide. They must not be turned
aside by those whose interests it is to mislead, but use their every
reasoning power and he very critical of all arguments against
this proposal for peace. Industrial Strife falls most heavily
on the Wage-Earner; in every case he is the ultimate sufferer.
Ruskin said to the wage-earners of England:—“l beg you
most solemnly to convince yourselves of the partly comfort-
able, partly formidable fact that your prosperity is in your
own hands, an effectual advancement towards true felicity
must he by individual, not public effort. Certain great mea-
sures may aid, certain revised laws guide such advancement,
but the measure and law which first have to be determined
are those of each man’s own house.”
Strikes.
Strike, it mattered not the reason. It mattered not the
worker’s condition. If wages were ample, then strike for less
work. If the work was insufficient, then strike for a minimum
wage. If no grievance could be found, then strike because
there was none. The demagogues (belonging to neither side),
did not toil in the mills nor did they employ labor. Theirs
it was to feed upon the carcass of the worker and wrest power
from the hands of those who possessed it. Whatever happened
they must be the winners in the game they played, nor did it
matter one iota to them who might be the sufferers by their
juggling.
Their one marketable commodity is their power of stirring
strife. They belong to a class of their own, an unscrupulous,
ambitious, self-seeking race of intelligent creatures whose sole
aim is publicity and power, which in the end must yield them
that position and plenty which they decried in others. It
mattered little to them what they preached, vituperating from
the summit of an upturned tub or hurling invective from the
benches of the Legislature, anything they undertook must be
paid for at their own market price. These were the microbes
of industrial unrest.


The Thinker.
Every man is entitled to a fair share of the profits of his
toil. He is entitled to a life of comfort and happiness in
proportion to the service he gives in the world’s work. Labor
forget, or they seem to, the fundamental principle of a
civilization. They seem to forget that to which civilization
owes its every existence (and to whom civilization owes its
existence), to the few, not the many; civilization owes its pro-
gress to the Thinkers, not the mere toilers. Battles are won
by organization which is the work of the Thinker, not the mad
uncontrolled rush of a rabble army.
The mill owner is the Thinker who must find a market for
the wares produced in his mills, or there is no work for the
laborer. He must found that mill or it does not exist. He must
spend a life of anxious thought and ceaseless effort, exhaust-
ing his nervous forces till he often becomes a mental wreck,
which no mere privations could reduce him to, and such as
the mere toiler could never have to endure. The Thinker will
harness nature’s forces in a manner which will ultimately
provide work for millions. But until he harnesses that power
that work is not possible. And so it would be quite easy to
go on indefinitely illustrating the fact that Labor owes its
well-being, almost its existence, to the Thinker. Has the
Thinker no right to reap the reward of his efforts ?
Deny the right to profits. Deny the right to a luxury
which others less endowed by Nature in their attainments
can enjoy, all mankind being made alike, with powers of enjoy-
ment alike, with a life that is one and the same, deny
the right for one to be privileged over another in the creature
comforts, deny the right to a power in the individual which
can he dishonestly used to the detriment of his fellows. If
labor denies all these things then appeal to the Creator to make
all men of equal capacity in thought, morals, and muscle.
Equality cannot be forced upon a world where the Divine
Creator has seen fit to make all things unequal. The principles
of life cannot be changed. Let the sledge hammer of Socialism
he turned loose, let it crush the Employers of Labor as it will.
Life will remain the same. It will go on as before. The
thinkers will continue to live in the same luxury. All that


can be done is to better the lot of the worker within given limits.
Make the limit such as to leave him with incentive sufficient to
lift him from the ranks in which he is enlisted, should his capa-
city prove adequate for promotion. The man who tells them
they have a right to more than the market value of their daily
toil is a liar, committing a crime against both Society and Labor
itself.
Co-partnership.
It is not a shilling or two more per week, it’s a share in
the direct product of their labor.
What in the course of three or four generations produces
men of different mental and physical calibre? The circum-
stances of their bringing up, the life they have to lead, their
education, their environment. What chance has Labor under
present conditions ? None. As the years pass on they will be
better paid. What will it amount to ? A few shillings a week
more, the same life, the same anxieties, the same daily grinding
toil, machine-like, leading them nowhere, because there isn’t a
way out.
Education, clean living, freedom from sordid anxieties
would be telling on the workers as their physical condi-
tion improved, so would their minds, as the conditions under
which men live become more equal, so will their brains become
more equal to their power of acquiring wealth. It may be
the work of fifty years, perhaps more; it is the end at which we
should aim, absolute partnership between Capital and Labor,
a partnership which would be eternal because in the course of
time the two would become one.
It isn’t only a few shillings more per week that are owing
to Labor; it’s another Social system—a rearrangement of the
whole scheme of life under which they and their children’s
children may live with the dignity and freedom due to them.
History for the last 1,000 years has shown us the slow emancipa-
tion of the peoples of the world. There are many rungs in the
ladder yet to be climbed. Recollect that the Employer would
pay the same standard wage; but, by giving extra attention to
his work and in keeping down expenses, Labor would have a
share in the profits. Say that to-day, under the present con-


ditions, Labor is giving 75 per cent, of its whole energy (putting
on one side the keeping down of expenses), under the new con-
ditions it would give 100 per cent. Is not the Employer able
to give that extra 25 per cent, by way of a bonus, and something
further? The incentive to work would necessarily be greater.
Now, the point I wish to bring home is that, under the Profit-
Sharing System, it does not entail any extra cost in the produc-
tion of commodities, like a rise in wages; it is made up of
mutual concessions. See the marked difference—a direct and
substantial benefit.
How few devote any time or attention to the great ques-
tion of how we may arrive at a better distribution of wealth!
Shall we rest satisfied with anything short of the wholesome
comforts and refinements of life being within the reach of
all? There cannot be industrial peace or the highest national
prosperity with anything less.
Co-partnership provides a vehicle for the expression in
modem industrial life of the pripciple acted upon by our
Lord, that power should be regarded as a trust for others.
It gives opportunity for industry, it counteracts the monotony
of modem specialisation of work by giving every workman
the wider outlet of a personal interest in the entire enterprise.
These aspects of the movement are infinitely more im-
portant than the fact that it really does give the employee
a fairer share of the wealth he hopes to produce. It means
giving to the Employer and Employee alike an interest and
a meaning in and for themselves, which will help to make
the hours we all devote to them times of true living, not
periods of mere existence. A peculiarity in human nature
is how it “fights back” its own uplift. Every movement which
germinates from the inspiration and hope of benefiting man-
kind finds its greatest obstacles in the very ones whom it
hopes to benefit.
Profit Sharing increases the gross product of industry.
Surely the bigger the gross product the bigger Labor’s share
is likely to be. Nothing is more certain than that Labor’s
share cannot be increased by decreasing the gross product of
industry. All work is indirectly for the community.


The man who can lay 500 bricks in eight hours without
hurting himself, and only lays 300, undermines his own
character, dwarfs his own capacity and energy, and daily
becomes less a man.
While strikes hinder our industrial progress, while class
warfare obtrudes into our politics, while our members remain
almost stationary, and our vast task of developing Australia is
trifled with, great world movements which threaten to engulf
us swing forward with giant strides. Strikes rarely take place
where Profit Sharing is established. Obviously there is no
necessity when employees get the standard wage, and, in addi-
tion, share in the profits.
Cessation of class warfare is one of Australia’s first needs.
If every strike may be thought of as possibly a nail in the
coflin of our Commonwealth, every successful scheme of Co-
partnership may be considered as a pillar in the edifice of
an enduring national life. But there is more than patriotism
—there is the service to humanity. What satisfaction is there
that wealth and success fever bring which can compare to
what Sir W. H. Lever must have experienced when on the
occasion of announcing and expounding his Co-partnership
plan, he listened to the tumultuous applause of his thousands
of loyal and contented employees making the rafters ring
again and again.
Deep, very deep might the time markings be on the walls
of their houses, i.e., in Sunlight Villages created by the firm.
Dark might the oak of their gables grow, but lightly, very
lightly might the hand of time rest upon their beloved chief
and his family.
What a marked contrast to the present attitude in Aus-
tralia between employer and employee! Which is the right
feeling? Undoubtedly that which binds the two classes to-
gether. Capital and Labor must work hand in hand to ad-
vance Australia in the great industrial race of the nations,
otherwise we stand a great risk of being supplanted and losing
our identity.


Chapter 11.
Australian Industrial Warfare.
Australia legislates against strikes.
The following particulars will illustrate how non-effective
this legislation is, and the approximate cost to the country of
Industrial Tribunals, also loss in wages for the years 1913-14,
and for the period ending 30th June, 1915:
COST OF INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNALS IN EACH STATE
OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
NOTE —In Queensland. South Australia and Tasmania, Industrial Acts were not in
force in those years in which the spaces are blank.
Year ended
30th June
New South
Wales
t
Victoria
t
Queensland
§
South
•Australia
ii
Western
Australia
If
Tasmania
**
£
£
£■
£
£
£
1903
*
890
1904
*
1,371
*
*
1905
*
1,755
*
2,195
1906
*
730
*
2,110
1907
*
1,534
*
1,902
1908
*
2,412
*
1,676
1909
3,137
2,592
*
*
1,603
1910
8,821
3,253 )
4,800
*
1,628
*
1911
8,525
7,825 )
*
*
1,936
#
1912
10,474
9,226
1,176
1,377
1,943
1,613
1913
13,653
11,761
1,452
769
2,025
1,787
1914
14,455
8,139
2,046
382
2,527
1,158
1915
9,154
4,591
*
*
2,067
486
Particulars not available,
t Cost of Industrial Boards only and hot including the cost of the Court of Industrial
Appeals.
t Cost of VVaaes Boards only and not including the cost of the Court of Industrial
Appeals.
§ Cost prior to 1912 of Wages Boards and subsequently of Industrial Boards only, and
not including the cost of the Court of Appeals or the Industrial Court
|| Cost of Wages Boards only and not including the cost of the Court of Appeals or
the Industrial Arbitration Court.
J Cost of Court of Arbitration including the cost of lay members, but not including
the salary of the President.
** Cost of Wages Board only.
The latest figures for the Commonwealth Arbitration Court
are as f0110w1912, £4047; 1913, £4690; 1914, £6450.


The figures given herein total the sum of £177,143, as fur-
nished by the Commonwealth Statistician. They are only
approximate, and very incomplete, as will be noticed by reference
to the table of figures, and therefore cannot be taken as showing
the whole total cost of Industrial Tribunals from the year 1897-
1915; sufficient, however, to illustrate how costly the whole
business is.
Approximate cost of Industrial Tribunals to 1915 £177,143
Cost of "Wages Boards to September, 1915 .. .. 54,013
Total .... £231,156
Disputes for the years 1913-14 and for the period ending
30th June, 1915: —
1913 Number of Disputes for the year 206
1914 Number of Disputes for the year 334
Number of Disputes for the period ending 30th
June, 1915 118
Total Disputes for 2*4 years 658
1913 Number of Workers involved 49,913
1914 Number of Workers involved 70,931
Total Workers involved for 2 years 120,844
1913 — Number of working days lost .... 618,635
1914 Number of working days lost .... 998,251
Total days lost, 2 years 1,616,886
1913 — Estimated loss of Wages £286,006
1914 Estimated loss of Wages 499,957
Estimated loss of Wages for period ending
30th June, 1915 173,006
Total loss of Wages, 2 y 2 years £958,969


The loss in wages for 2y 2 years is thus close upon one
million sterling. From this illustration one can realise in a
measure what the loss to Australia must have been during the
past 30 years, since strikes first originated.
Multiplication of Industrial Awards.
The employees of the firm of Anthony Hordern and Son,
Sydney, are working under no less than 41 different awards.
The report of the committee on the affairs of the Cockatoo
Island Dock, New South Wales, page 15, states: —“The work
of the island is carried on under no less than 51 separate in-
dustrial awards.”
As the General Manager, Mr. King Salter, rightly remarks:
“Here I am working under 51 awards, and new ones keep
cropping up every day. How on earth can a man run an
establishment of this sort and meet the contending forces of
51 different awards? Several Unions cover one industry.
There are two Painters’ Unions and three Carpenters’ Unions.”
No wonder the - cost of turning out a cruiser at Cockatoo Island
is roughly 50 per cent, in excess of what the cost would he in
England. It must take the General Manager all his time to
study these awards and to see that he is not infringing any of
them. Whilst this system continues—and it is growing daily—
so long will our Industries be handicapped. Notwithstanding
that we are in the throes of the greatest war that the world has
ever known —Industrial warfare is even more rampant than in
times of peace.
It is all very well for the worker to ask for higher wages
(after all, he needs them under the present conditions, in order
to cope with the ever-increasing prices of Commodities).
Wages can only, however, reach a certain level, when they
must automatically recede, for the very simple reason that the
cost of production would be so great that it would be impossible
for Australian products—primary or manufacturing industries
—to successfully compete in the world’s markets.
If the wealth produced by a community is, say, £2 per week
per adult, it is no use for the mass of adults to expect to he able
to live at the rate of, say, £4 per week.


The whole possibility is limited by the economic output. The
total wealth produced divided by the number of adults who are
to share it, is all that each can possibly get, and no escape from
this fact. If you want to live on a better scale you must
produce more, that is, either work harder or work more efficiently
or both combined. That Nation which works the hardest and
the most efficiently must assuredly dominate the Nation that
works lazily and inefficiently.
Labor has much to learn if it is to weather the coming
storm; Capital has even more. If the moral for Labor is
maximum production as the only way to make up for the waste
of wealth during the war, the moral for Capital is maximum
taxation as the only way of meeting the State’s new burden of
debt.
Differences between Capital and Labor cannot effectively
be dealt with by Acts of Parliament, that must be left to the
parties themselves to settle. As Carlyle truly observed: “All
reform, except a moral one, will prove unavailing. Political
reform can, indeed, root out the weeds, but it leaves the ground
empty, ready either for noble fruits or for new worse tares.”


Chapter 111.
Are Trades Unionism and Co-partnership
Incompatible ? *
It will probably conduce to a clearer understanding of
the problem to be discussed if some consideration is given
by way of preface, not so much as to what we mean when
we speak either of Trades Unionism or of Co-partnership, but
rather to definition of the aims of both. We will then en-
deavour to discover whether, either in the goal to be reached or
in the paths thereto to be traversed, incompatibility exists.
Broadly speaking, the trades unions may be grouped
under two heads, viz., those of skilled and unskilled workers,
of the artisan and the laborer. There is, of course, no hard
and fast line of demarcation between the two, as a greater
or less degree of skill is necessary in following all industrial
callings. As examples, may be mentioned occupations involv-
ing the handling of a shovel or the swinging of a hammer,
though these operations would, however, require on the part
of the workman dexterity rather than such craft as would
be exercised in, let us say, constructing the panels of a door
truly and rectangularly, or in preparing the supports or hear-
ings for a crank-shaft, so that it may easily revolve in them.
It would occupy too long to discuss in detail the particular
aims of the many unions registered in Great Britain, and it
must suffice to use certain examples as illustrations.
For this purpose we may take the Amalgamated Society
of Engineers as a type of one of the older unions of skilled
tradesmen, and the National Union of Gasworkers and General
Laborers as an example of the newer combinations of the un-
skilled workers.
The former was founded more than sixty years ago, it has
a membership of upwards of 120,000, and its objects are set
out in its rules as follows:
(a) To protect and regulate the conditions of labor in, and
the relation of its members with, the engineering trades.
* Paper read before the British Association for the Advancement of
Science at the Birmingham Meeting, September 11, 1913, by Dr. Charles
Carpenter, D.Sc., M. Inst. C.E., Chairman of the South Metropolitan Gas
Company (London).


(b) To assist its members when out of work or in distressed
circumstances; to support them in case of sickness, accident,
or by superannuation; to supply them with legal assistance in
obtaining redress for accidents; and to provide for their burial
and that of their wives.
(c) To assist such of them as desire to acquire possession of
their dwellings.
(d) To aid by federation other societies having similar ob-
jects, and
(e) By extending its system of investments for co-operative
productive purposes, to assist in altering the competitive sys-
tem of industry for a co-operative system so as to secure for
the worker a full share of the fruits of his labor.
The National Union of Gasworkers and General Laborers
was founded more recently—hardly twenty-five years since—
and its rules state the following to be its objects:—
(a) To shorten the hours of labor and obtain a legal eight
hours working day; to abolish wherever possible overtime and
Sunday labor, or, where not possible, to obtain payment at a
higher rate; to abolish piecework; to raise wages; and, where
women do the same work as men, to obtain for them the same
rates of pay.
(b) To abolish the present system of contracts and agree-
ments between employer and employed, and to enforce the pro-
visions of the Truck Act.
(c) To settle labor disputes by amicable agreement wherever
possible, and to obtain equality of employer and employed
before the law.
(d) To provide relief for the disablement of its members.
(e) To obtain legislation for bettering the lives of the work-
ing class, and
(f) To secure the election to Parliament and Municipal
Bodies of members of the Union pledged to the collective
ownership of the means of production, distribution, and ex-
change, and to assist similar organisations having similar
objects.
It will be obvious from this comparison of the aims of the
two societies taken as examples, that trades unionism does
not always mean quite the same thing, and this view will be


emphasised by reference to the foreword with which each set
of rules is introduced to the members of the respective organisa-
tions.
The engineers’ union assumes that every artisan following
a given occupation has an interest in forming rules by which
that particular trade shall be regulated, and by concentration
of means to enable himself to make his power felt, and obtain
security against the risks to which he would otherwise be ex-
posed. It points out that although during employment its
members may obtain the necessaries of life, yet the fear of
loss of work is not absent, and its happening brings with it
the shattering of the worker’s hopes of improving by frugality
his social condition. Finally it expresses the belief that if its
members do their duty, not only may a craft or trade be handed
on to a future generation, but also the means of maintaining
its best interests until some more general principle of co-
operation shall come into being, whereby every man has the
full enjoyment of the product of his labor.
The gasworkers’ organisation strikes another and a dif-
ferent note. It affirms that in trades unionism lies the hope
of the workers for the future, but the unionism must be one
which definitely assumes that to-day there are only two classes,
the producing working class and the possessing master class,
and that the interests of each class are opposed to those of
the other. No help, it is stated, can be expected from the
masters as a class, the workers’ only hope being in themselves,
an army of labor which by its organisation and union is march-
ing steadily forward to its goal—the Emancipation of the
Working Classes.
Here, then, we have two trades union pictures, painted, not
by the author, but by the organisations themselves, and the
finishing touches in both instances are as recent of application
as a year ago, within which time their rules have been in both
instances brought up to date.
Let us now turn our thoughts to the object sought by
Co-partnership. Whatever the particular industrial organisa-
tion may be, labor skilled and unskilled is essential to it
in greater or less degree, and the employer goes into the market
with the primary idea of obtaining his requirements as cheaply


as possible. In many cases tlie trades union has been there
before him and settled the hours to be worked and the rates
to be paid to the workers, and the employer has to make the
best of the human material thus provided, the tenure of its
employment being not infrequently terminable by one hour’s
notice, rarely more than a week’s, on either side. The Co-
partnership employer, however, goes much further. In effect
he says to the laborer, “I want something more than a hireling.
lam willing to take you into my business as a partner. I
will pay you the rates of wages and you shall work the hours
which are customary in the trade. If you sign an agreement
of service with me, in return I will undertake by it to share
with you the profits we make together, I largely by brains,
you largely by labor, after, say, 4 or 5 per cent, has been paid
as interest on the capital I have laid out.” One other factor
has to be brought into the partnership—namely, its duration.
In the case of carrying out specific work, such as the construc-
tion of a harbor or the building of a ship, the time limit of
the partnership may be the completion of the respective
tasks; in the case of continuing businesses such as the working
of a railway, or the manufacture of chemicals, the agreements
may be for yearly or quarterly periods renewable from time to
time.
Having thus stated definitions, we can now proceed to con-
sider relations. I will begin by referring to a historic one,
that between the South Metropolitan Gas Company and the
Gasworkers’ Union. Gas manufacture is a continuous pro-
cess; that is to say, it has to be carried on day and night.
Prior to 1889 the labor in London, though not in some other
parts of the country, was provided by a day shift and a night
shift of men, thus dividing the twenty-four hours into two
parts. In the spring of that year the Union put forward a
demand for the day to be divided into three eight-hour shifts
instead of two twelve-hour shifts, without reduction in pay.
This was granted. But instead of being content with so
great and bloodless a victory the leaders organised a sort of
guerilla warfare. Scarcely a week passed but some concession
would be demanded, often too unreasonable to be given will-
ingly, but generally too small to risk a quarrel over, until at
last it was openly spoken, “You have only to ask for gold


watches and you’ll get them.” Such was the temper of the
retort-house men in the autumn of 1889, when it became ap-
parent that the seeds of their discontent were beginning to
spring up among the artisans, mechanics, and laborers who
formed an equally large and important part of the staff, and
who said in effect, ‘‘lt is time we asked for something.” Mr.
George Livesey (as he then was) felt the moment was ripe to
act, and offered his profit-sharing or Co-partnership scheme to
all of his employees who chose to accept it.
I must pause here for a moment to give a word of credit
to the man who first publicly proposed the sharing of gas
works’ profits with employees. The sliding scales under which
London gas undertakings carry on their work originated with
Mr. Livesey, and by them, as is well known, only a fraction
of any profit made above 4 or 5 per cent., as the case may
be, goes to the shareholders, the major part passing auto-
matically to the consumers by way of reduction in the price
they are charged for gas. In 1882 Mr. Thomas Travers, man-
ager of the Cork Gas Works, in a paper upon “Industrial
Co-partnership,” expressed the opinion that Mr. Livesey “only
performed half the work when he settled the sliding scale
for the benefit of the consumers and the proprietors, and
omitted the workers on whom the labor devolved of making
it a success. He had no doubt that Co-partnership would be
the system of labor in the future.” Mr. Livesey’s remarks
upon the occasion are very interesting. He is reported to
have said that “he always felt the work would not be com-
plete if it stopped at the shareholders. After the sliding scale
principle was adopted he brought the matter before the direc-
tors of his Company, but they would not hear of it.”
In 1889 wiser counsels prevailed, and the Board listened
sympathetically to his voice. The profit-sharing scheme was
thus started and agreements of Co-partnership were volun-
tarily entered into by all the Company’s repairing staff, but
the stokers would have none of them. Three stokers, how-
ever, signed on, and when the Union heard of this it demanded
their removal from the works and that of all other men who
had entered into agreements, as well as the abolition of the
profit-sharing scheme. The demand was not complied with,
and, after a week’s notice, in the middle of December the whole


of the retort-house men went out on strike. The strike failed,
and soon afterwards the secretary of the Union made a public
speech in which he warned the people of London that a week’s
notice would not be given of the next one. As a result of
this a declaration was incorporated in the agreements of em-
ployment that the workman signing was not a member of the
Gas-workers’ Union. This stipulation has, however, long since
been omitted, for the fear of strikes has lost its terrors under
Co-partnership, and unionists are as eager as non-unionists
to sign for assured service. One other fact deserves to he
recorded; it is that since 1889 the wages of gas stokers in
London have been twice substantially increased on the initia-
tive of the companies, and without the intervention of the
Union.
So much for the attitude of one trades union to Co-part-
nership. On the other hand, the same Company employs a
large number of other workers than the retort-house men; for
instance, artisans of all kinds, bricklayers, carpenters, plas-
terers, plumbers, machinists, fitters, etc., and no antagonism
has ever been shown to the Company’s Co-partnership by their
respective unions. The right of combination among workers
is admitted without question by the advocates of Co-partner-
ship. The payment of trades union wages rates is equally
accepted as a principle by them, and the question of hours is
nowadays not likely to give rise to difficulty.
Let us now discuss the matter of the agreements specify-
ing definite periods of service, which are held up as a bogey
by some opponents of Co-partnership. One would almost think
that signing a Co-partnership agreement was equivalent to
taking the King’s shilling. As a matter of fact, there is no
such analogy. Taking the agreement of the Company referred
to as a type, it is a mutual bargain on the following basis.
The Company contracts to employ the man for a fixed period
if he remains sober, honest, and industrious, and able to per-
form his work. The man agrees to work in the capacity in
which he is employed at the current rate of wages (which it
is stipulated shall not be reduced during the running of an
agreement) and, further, to obey the orders pf the foreman
in charge. In return he gets a share in the profits, amounting
at the present time to per cent, on his wages. The con-


tract can be cancelled by mutual consent before its expiration
if it is found that the man’s services can be dispensed with
without detriment to the Company. The agreements do not
terminate all together on one particular date. If the signing
on were for a particular job this would be possible, and the
method is indeed adopted by the Company in filling its sea-
sonal as distinct from its regular requirements of labor. The
great bulk of its employment is, however, continuous year in
and year out, and in such cases they terminate in about equal
quantities every month. Oh! it is said, but this prevents men
striking simultaneously or putting forward organised demands
for shorter hours, better wages, or improved working rules,
and all chance of going out on a sympathetic strike is averted.
Nothing of the sort! No agreement of service would keep an
organised body of men from striking if they were earnestly
of opinion that their conditions of employment were unfair
or unjust. They would strike despite any agreement they
had entered into. If an association of, or individual, workers
adopted such a course they would certainly run the risk of
consequent punishment by fine or imprisonment. The workers
in whatever industry was concerned would first have to make
up their minds that the game was worth the candle. They
are perfectly well able to weigh the pros and cons, and to
arrive at a conclusion concordant with their interests.
It is conceivable that, having been once bitten, they or
their organisation might say, "We will adopt as a principle no
more agreement signing in future.” But nearly twenty-five
years’ experience proves that without exception unionists and
non-unionists alike are willing, nay eager, to sign agreements
assuring them of employment, whether such unionists are engi-
neers or gas stokers. Moreover, while workers are under
agreements, there is nothing whatever to prevent their bagain-
ing either by themselves or through their organisation, in re-
spect of hours, or wages, or conditions. If strikes are to take
place, it would be better for them to be the result of deliberate
judgment than hastily and ill-considered actions. Agreements
will in all cases afford time for reflection and give opportunity
for some other and less primitive course to be adopted than
"downing tools.”


This advantage is not the employer’s only gain by Co-
partnership. More profit accrues by reason of the extra zeal
and care exercised by his workpeople. His men are loyal,
diligent, and trustworthy. Supervision is lightened, waste of
time and material is lessened, and greater pains taken to
satisfy the requirements of the firm’s customers. Above all
a spirit of contentment has arisen, not by any means from
sacrifice of hope in the future, but, for the first time in most
cases, by reason of an understanding of the principles upon
which the industrial constitution is founded, and the knowledge
that the opportunity to share in the wealth it produces has
been accorded.
What are the alternative and usual terms of employment?
An hour’s notice in many cases, a week’s in most others.
At the expiration of that notice the father of a family is no
longer a wage earner, income from his toil ceases. Is there
any wonder that the laborer should give in return for his hire
no more than he is compelled? The South Metropolitan Gas
Company has had immunity from strikes or the fear of strikes
for nearly twenty-five years, and during all that period its
employees have been enjoying the benefit of assured service
for, in the majority of cases, yearly terms, in the minority,
quarterly. Cannot a picture be formed of what that must
mean? And is it not infinitely better than providing for the
contingency of striking which may never happen ?
It may be convenient to state here that when the allocation
of profits under Co-partnership is spoken of by its advocates
they refer to those which arise after all requirements of the
business, either necessary or voluntary, have been met. For
instance, the provision of workmen’s dwellings, institutes,
holidays, pensions, etc., are considered purely as charges on
the business, and not as being in any sense of the word a
distribution of a share of profits arising out of the Co-partner-
ship.
Just as the peer and the peasant have an equal right to the
protection of the State, though their stake in it may greatly
differ, so I hold that the worker should have accorded to him
the right to share in the profits of the business with which he
associates himself. Ido not say an unrestricted right. Obliga-


tions must be mutual. But Parliament should recognise the
principle that, capital and labor being essential to each other,
their partnership should be the basis of all hiring or service
agreements.
It has been sometimes urged that labor becomes less mobile
under Co-partnership. ■ Less mobile by reason of holding some
stock or shares in an industrial organisation? Where does the
immobility arise? Does not the possession of wealth make us
more mobile rather than less, seeing that we have thereby the
means necessary to enable us to avail ourselves of opportuni-
ties for locomotion?
Fortunately there is an exact reply to such a criticism by
reason of the fact that some statistics are available as to what
actually happens in the case of the Co-partnership undertaking
to which reference has been made. They do not go back very
far, as the information has only been tabulated during the last
four or five years. These records show that since 1908 no less
than 293 men have left the Company’s service to proceed to
the colonies, selling stock to an aggregate value of £8,585, an
average of £29 6s.
In certain cases, it is true, employees voluntarily make
some sacrifice of their mobility in order to acquire the houses
they wish to live in. In the same Company 116 Co-partners
have bought their houses outright at a cost of £29,839, while
272 are still buying, haying already paid towards the purchase
£41,512. The figures as to the workmen’s holdings are very
interesting. On December 31 last 5593 Co-partner employees
held in their own name stock with a nominal value of £301,480.
or an average of £54 per man. In addition to this, £8,635 is
held by trustees on behalf of 2931 employees. How much is
possessed by those who have left or retired from the Com-
pany’s service, or by the descendants of those who have died,
is unknown.
These are great results, but Co-partnership as practised by
the South Metropolitan Gas Company has achieved much
more. For many years it has had a mutual fund for providing
allowances in case of accident. In 1892 it inaugurated a sys-
tem by which the co-operative principle was invoked to reduce
the number of industrial accidents. Since then every accident


to life or limb has been the subject of enquiry by juries of
Co-partners, who endeavour to trace causes and suggest
remedies.
YEAR.
No. of Men
Employed.
No. of
Accidents.
Percentage of
Men meeting
with Accidents.
1898
3,664
299
8.16
1899
3,903
297
7.60
1900
4,488
318
7.08
1901
4,920
315
6.40
1902
5,019
259
5.16
1903
5,071
286
5.63
1904
5,359
267
4.98
1905
5,478
243
4.43
1906
5,674
210
3.70
1907
5,707
269
4.71
1908
5,568
192
3.44
1909
5,726
206
3.59
1910
5,933
221
3.72
1911
6,226
246
3.95
1912
6,473
261
4.03
Moreover, a body, called the Co-partnership Committee,
consisting of fifty-four officials and workmen in equal num-
bers, has met regularly for the last twenty-three years to
discuss all sorts of questions pertaining to the welfare of the
Company and its employees. The men’s representatives are
elected by ballot of the Co-partners, and one could not be
present at a single meeting without being impressed by the
advantages to be derived from educating employer and em-
ployed in the mutuality of their interests.
It is not improbable that the successes attained by the
Co-partnership Committee and the Co-partnership juries were
factors in determining Sir George Livesey to press for the
inclusion of Co-partnership on the Board of Management of
the Company. In the face of considerable opposition the
scheme was carried, and since 1898 employee directors have
had seats on the Board and taken their full share of its de-
liberations. The complete Board consists of ten members,
three of whom are elected by the Co-partnership employees.
The aggregate holding of employee shareholders empowering
the election of employee directors is required to be not less
than £200,000 nominal stock. The qualification of the em-


ployee director is two-fold, i.e., fourteen years’ continuous
service, and the holding for not less than one year prior to
election and continuing to hold not less than £l2O of stock.
Criticism has been levelled against the system; on the one
hand because the representation is proportionately largely in
excess of that accorded to the ordinary shareholders, and on
the other that the number of employees is too few to influence
the decisions arrived at. An experience of fifteen years has
shown that such objections have no foundation in fact. The
employees’ representation to be effective must be tangible, and
not a mere matter of form. Influence is a matter of personality
rather than majority, and the various choices made, though
differing in kind, have always been excellent.
Let us now sum up and see how far it has been possible
under a Co-partnership to reach the goals sought by the two
Unions taken as examples at the outset of this paper. We
will begin with the engineers.
[(a) To protect and regulate the conditions of labour in, and the
relation of its members with, the engineering trades.]
No difficulty as regards conditions of labor or relationship
with its members has arisen.
[(6) To assist its members when out of work or in distressed cir-
cumstances; to support them in the case of sickness, accident, or by
superannuation; to supply them with legal assistance in obtaining redress
for accidents; and to provide for their burial and that of their wives.]
The Co-partnership bonus provides a nest-egg available
for special cases, such as loss of employment or distressing
happenings. Mutual funds to provide for sickness, accident,
and burial have existed for seventy-one years, and for super-
annuation fifty-eight years, whilst for the past twenty-one
years the circumstances of every accident have come before a
jury of workers.
[(c) To assist such of them as desire to acquire possession of their
dwellings.]
The Co-partnership has enabled many to purchase their
houses.
[(d) To aid by federation other societies having similar objects.]
The example of this Co-partnership has been followed in
nearly every particular by many others.


1(e) By extending its system of investments for co-operative produc-
tive purposes to assist in altering the competitive system of industry for
a co-operative system so as to secure for the worker a full share of the
fruits of his labour.]
The value of the employees’ holding in the Company for
which they work is about £350,000.
Let us now deal similarly with the gasworkers.
[(a) To shorten the hours of labour and obtain a legal eight hours
working day; to abolish wherever possible overtime and Sunday labor,
or, where not possible, to obtain payment at a higher rate; to abolish
piece-work; to raise wages; and where women do the same work as men
to obtain for them the same rates of pay.]
The working day is one of eight hours throughout; over-
time and Sunday labor are obviated as much as possible, hut
when unavoidable are paid for at higher rates. Piecework is,
however, mutually preferred whenever it is possible to arrange
it.
[(6) To abolish the present system of contracts and agreements
between employer and employed, and to enforce the provisions of the
Truck Act.]
Employment contracts are desired and voluntarily entered
into by members of the Union in this as well as in other com-
panies. Contributions to the various funds are only collected
by the Company on the personal request of the employee.
[(c) To settle labour disputes by amicable agreement wherever pos-
sible, and to obtain equality of employer and employed before the law.]
The Co-partnership Committee provides machinery for this
purpose with an equality of representation of workmen and
officials.
[(d) To provide relief for the disablement of its members.]
The disabled are not only provided for, but means are con-
tinuously sought to reduce their number.
[(e) To obtain legislation for bettering the lives of the working
class.]
Co-partnership and the provisions under it for workmen
directors have been recognised by the Legislature.
[ (/) To secure the election to Parliament and Municipal Bodies of
members of the Union pledged to the collective ownership of the means
of production, distribution, and exchange, and to assist similar organisa-
tions having similar objects.]
Co-partnership is put forward as being a solution of the
labor problem in advance of that possible under what is called


collective ownership, each industry having its own colonies
of workers contentedly endeavoring to improve their lot in
life as well as to increase production.
In the foregoing I think I have proved that the goals both
of Co-partnership and Trades Unionism cannot be regarded
as incompatible. In conclusion, let me briefly refer to the
paths by which those goals are to be reached, for it is therein
that the great difficulties have lain in the past and exist
to-day.
The employer in most cases regards the Union as an
enemy; too often, it is to be feared, correctly. But the con-
ditions of industry have not been in the past suitable to
develop friendship between employer and employed, and the
routes followed towards the progress it is in the interests of
both to aim at have been chosen in most cases for fighting lines
rather than as roads for peaceful traverse.
Under Co-partnership we have now incontestable proof
that antipathy between master and man dies down, and mutual
respect and friendship take its place. Trades unions will
thus have no further need for their most cherished weapon,
which they can afford to throw aside, and to journey side by
side with the employers in a united pilgrimage towards the
goal they will seek, as they must always seek, in common, the
Triumph of their Industry.


Chapter IV.
Profit-Sharing from the Employer’s
Point of View.
“What is meant by ‘real’ profit sharing?”
‘ ‘ Simply this, an allotment to the employee of a proportion
of any profit realised after paying salaries and standard rates
of wages and interest on capital.”
“And this, you say, is a success?”
“Undoubtedly. It is not, of course, a magic corrective of
incompetent management, or an antidote for bad trade, nor
does it claim so great a moral influence as to make it impossible
for employer and employed ever to quarrel. But it meets the
worker’s feeling that when profits exceed a fair interest on
capital he is entitled to a share of the surplus he has helped
to create. It produces that mutual understanding between
employer and employed which the rise and reign of the factory
system and the company system have made it almost impossible
otherwise to secure. It shows the worker that he is not re-
garded as a mere machine, and so lessens the likelihood of
any serious dispute between employer and employed. More-
over, by furnishing a moral and a monetary incentive to good
work, it tends to the success of the business with which it is
allied. The considerateness of the employer tends to evoke
conscientiousness in the employee, and self-interest operates
to sustain it. With men thus interested in their work man-
agement becomes easier, less expensive, and more efficient.”
“But you will not deny that there are difficulties? For
example, it is easy to please employees by admitting them to
a share of profits, but what happens if another year there be a
loss?”
“This is really no difficulty at all. Men understand that
when no profit is made there can be none to share. Profits
given to workers are generally given either in cash (this is
simple profit-sharing) or in scrip representing shares entitled
to future dividends in cash (this is profit-sharing and Co-
partnership). The shares are fully paid. If a loss occur in


any year, therefore, the worst that can happen to a worker
is that he gets nothing but full wages that year and any shares
he already has may depreciate in value. As, however, he paid
nothing for the shares, he is no worse off than his friend at
a non-profit-sharing concern; on the contrary, he can look back,
perhaps, over several years when he has had a share in profits,
and he has, may be, a good chance of future dividends. I
can name a case where, two years in succession, no profit
was made, hut this caused no trouble with the workers. They
and their employer pulled together, and for thirteen years since
then they have never been without a share of profits; and this
is not an isolated case. ’ ’
‘ ‘ So, then, the employer is to share his profits, but shoulder
his losses himself?”
• “No employer would expect his workers, as workers, to
share his losses. If they have become shareholders, that is
co-partners, they share his fortunes, good or bad, according
to the extent of their holding. An illustration: When intro-
ducing his now famous and highly successful profit-sharing
scheme to the South Metropolitan (London) Gas Company,
the late Sir George Livesey was met by one of the Directors
with the old retort, ‘Will the men share losses.’ ' Turning
to the Director, he said in effect, ‘Sir, what do you estimate
is the difference in value between a thoroughly contented well-
satisfied workman who puts his heart into his work and one
who is discontented and without real interest in his work? Is
it five per cent.?’ ‘Five per cent.,’ laughed the Director,
‘why, it’s twenty per cent.’ ‘Very well,’ replied Livesey,
‘in bad times the men will give you that extra 20 per cent,
of value, and get nothing for it. In that way they share
losses.’ What is your next difficulty?”
“This: It is surely a risky thing to admit employees to a
share in the control of one’s business?”
“This is another bogey. Co-partnership, in its full de-
velopment, no doubt seems logically to involve co-operation
in management, but whether a voice in the control be given to
the workers employed under profit-sharing, and, if so, to what
extent, is a matter for decision in each case. If voting rights
are given, the worker-shareholders’ voting power is naturally


very limited at first, and though it grows as their share-holding
grows, their experience is growing at the same time. There
is no case I know where the worker-shareholders have injured
any business.”
“What is usual in this matter?”
“The practice of co-operation in management is much
more important than the precise rules to regulate it. It is
generally adopted in one way or another by successful profit-
sharers; sometimes by joint committees or conferences; some-
times by the workers having votes as shareholders. In a few
cases even employee-directors have been tried and found a
success, but this, of course, is not essential.”
“But at least a man would have to publish his balance-
sheet, and what trouble that might cause! Let it show a decent
profit, and there would at once be a cry for a rise in wages.”
“This fear is also groundless. Public companies publish
their results without being embarrassed in this way. But
if the concern were a private limited company there would
be no need to publish a balance-sheet, though, of course, the
rate of dividend would be declared. All reasonable workers
are willing that after they have had wages or salaries at
standard or customary rates and the capitalist has had an
agreed rate of interest on his capital, and he and they should
share any surplus at, say, the same rate per cent, on capital
and wages, or in any other proportion agreed upon before-
hand. In a Co-partnership business the workers gradually
become capitalists themselves, and in this capacity get the
interest on the shares previously given to them, before capital
(including their own capital) and wages have a further divi-
dend. In a business where the personnel of the workers is
constantly changing, profit-sharing in cash is more common
than Co-partnership.”
“You speak of giving or allotting shares; what about a
man’s family? Is an employer to give his business away?”
‘ ‘ That is not in the least necessary. The principles of profit-
sharing and labor Co-partnership can be variously applied.
Many businesses so expand that the workers’ proportion of
the profits can be given to them year after year in new shares
representing new and needed capital. "When this cannot be


done, the employer should, if possible, sell some of his own
shares to be allotted to the employees, thus making them fellow-
shareholders. If, for any reason, he cannot do this, or if,
having thus sold part of his holding, he wishes to retain the
rest, he may pay the workers’ proportion in cash or in shares
of a subsidiary company, e.g., a building society. Moreover,
it can easily he arranged by the company that shares of workers
who leave, or those held by the representatives of deceased
employees, may be transferred at market value to present
workers to capitalise their share of profits. Capital is thus
circulated and the need for the expedients just mentioned is
obviated or delayed.”


Chapter V.
Co-partnership and Profit-Sharing as
Successfully Practised.
In the “Labor Gazette” for September, 1914, the Board
of Trade brings its list of Profit-Sharing schemes up to date.
The original report issued in 1912 took note of 137 schemes;
the total was increased to 143 in 1913; and now the losses are
put at 5 and the gains at 13, making a net gain of 8, and raising
the number of schemes in active working up to 152. As
there is bound to be a certain leakage of either unsound or
unfortunate attempts, this shows a satisfactory advance; it is,
indeed, an increase of 15 in two years. The gas industry
still supplies the largest number of new adherents to the
principle in any one kind of business, hut drapers, grocers,
woollen merchants, printers, and others, are following suit.
A far larger number of firms than 13—-the number of fresh
adherents in 1914—are considering the matter at the present
time. These schemes of Profit Sharing are very diverse in
their details, but the tendency towards capitalisation of the
workers’ share of profits still shows itself.
Gas Companies.
The chief industry which has adopted Co-partnership
widely is the gas industry as carried on by public companies.
A table showing the progress of these Profit-Sharing Gas Com-
panies, is given hereunder:—


Particulars of Co-partnership and Profit-sharing in British
Gas Companies at December, 31st, 1914.
Name of Company.
No. of Years Scheme lias
been in operation.
Capital in 1914.
Total Share and Loan.
No. of Employees under
Agreement for Profit-
sharing or Co-partnership.
Amount divided among
Employees for year etading
December, 1914.
Amount per cent, on
Wages.
Total Profit to Employees
since scheme was adopted.
Amount of Shares and De-
posits held by Employees in
the Company. Market value
on Dec. 31, 1914 (about).
£
£
%
£
£
South Metropolitan (a)
25
8,325,340
6,303
49,189
8+
691,596
450,683$
South Suburban (b)...
21
1,406,205
948
6,376*
7J
56,468
51,980
Commercial
13J
2,548,280
1,245
7,135*
6
73,081
65,880
Chester
13
181,414
103
646*
n
4,105
3,124
Leamington Priors ...
7
86,500
106
419
5
2,659
2,719
Wrexham
7
142,160
71
372
7&
2,417
1,530
Rugby
7
64,254
50
256
6
—
—
Tottenham, &c.
61
1,905,509
765
5,397*
8f
25,532
24,264
Bournemouth
6
837,687
491
3,427
8
15,266
16,789
Cardiff
51
703,014
342
1,803
51
6,714
6,099
Gloucester
6
238,762
109
632*
71
3,203
2,368
Walker & Wallsend...
61
271,468
102
458
41
2,398
5,380
Wellingborough
6
90,853
64
347*
6
1,827
6,694+
Tunbridge Wells
61
178,266
144
652*
6
3,670
3,420
Croydon
6
748,767
628
2,382z
6
12,412
12,546
W eston- super-Mare.. .
6
146,070
112
346
4
3,043
1,247
Gas Light and Coke...
6
29,513,248
9,617
45,653*
5
228,516
191,622
Grantham
6
106,068
49
216f
6
1,122
839«
Cambridge
5
200 177
186
972*
6f
4,267
3,557
Waterford
51
70,900
53
325*
8
1,351
869
Ilford
51
280,505
166
903
51
3,851
4,27011
Watford
51
214,376
114
554
5
2,743
2,942
Dartford
6
117,346
48
205
4
1,174
957
Longwood
4
100,244
43
195+
7
574
350
Wandsworth, &c. ...
41
1,209,221
790
5,333*
7
13,885
9,836
Merthyr Tydvil
4
81,253
35
141
5
405
55
Plymouth
4
409,017
322
781
3
3,714
3,571
Liverpool
31
2,947,624
1,821
8,372*
51
25,395
31,710
Harrow
3
333,956
99
426
5
1,394
1,280
Hertford
3
22,609
22
89
51
243
—
Aldershot
3
414,037
159
568
41
1,262
535
Bridgwater
3
59,805
26
223
8
623
751
Canterbury
2
125,870
79
261
41
526
47
Swansea
2
442,815
185
657*
4
1,351
94
Redhill
1
125,369
73
174*
3
174
—
Ipswich
1
190,591
211
801*
5
801
827!
54,839,580
25,681
146,686
1,197,762
908,835
(a) Three employee representatives on the Board. (£) Two employee representatives on
the Board. § Upwards of Stock belonging to pensioned employees and widows of co-
partners has been transferred to the ordinary Share ledger, and is not included in this figure.
* Year ending June, t Indluding large holdings acquired before commencement of scheme,
t Year ending, March 0 Including presentation stock 139 at commencement to old em-
ployees. || Excluding capital purchased outside the scheme, h Commenced with the gift of
a year’s dividend. z Information for 9 months to March, 1914.


Only one Gas Company has ever stopped a system of Co-
partnership after once adopting it, and that Company tried
it for so short a time as to be no criterion of its worth.
But there have been four amalgamations, which have reduced
the number of companies, though not the amounts given in the
table.
During 1914 two new Gas Companies started schemes,
bringing the total number up to thirty-five.
It is well to note the constant growth of all the totals in
the table of figures.
The Boston (U.S.A.) Consolidated Gas Co. adopted a Co-
partnership scheme in June, 1907; the Co-partners elect a
representative on to the Board of Directors. The Stafford
Corporation Gas and Electric Department has practised Profit-
Sharing for fifteen years, and for 1914 paid a dividend on
wages of IC% per cent., dividing £971 among 145 employees.
The Hampstead Borough Council have adopted a scheme
whereby employees of all grades share in differing proportions,
according to the grade of each worker, in all profits in excess
of a certain sum. It has been maintained that Profit Sharing,
and even Co-partnership, could be applied to the productive
departments of municipalities, and welcome this new experi-
ment, especially as it is in London, and will doubtless attract
attention from other London Municipalities. The Corporation
of Burton-on-Trent have approved a Profit-Sharing scheme
for the Municipal Gas "Works, under which the employees
will receive a dividend of y 2 per cent, upon their wages for
every Id. by which the manufacturing cost falls below 2s.
per 1000 cubic feet of gas sold. The Gas Department are
issuing to all its gas workers a very clear explanation of the
scheme. This shows that if the scheme had been working in
1913 the workers would have received a dividend on wages
of 5 y 2 per cent.; the dividend is not expected to be quite as
large for 1914. These are, as far as we know, the only muni-
cipal experiments now being practised since that started in
connection with the Belfast Corporation Tramways was
stopped (temporarily at any rate) by a particular legal de-
cision. The Stafford scheme is interesting 1 also, because it
applies to the generation of electricity as well as of gas. This


example was followed by the Notting Hill Electric Lighting Co.
Ltd. two years ago. For 1914 a dividend was paid on wages
at the rate of 8 per cent.
The South Suburban, late the Crystal Palace Gas Company,
is a much smaller company, but it has adopted substantially
the plan of the South Metropolitan. Its scheme began in
1894. The employees have received £50,090 as their share of
profit, and they hold £47,139 of capital. They elected in 1907,
for the first time, two directors on the board.
The scheme of the Gas Light and Coke Co. —the largest
gas company in the world—is much younger, having been
started in 1909. The profits allotted to the employees to date
amount to £182,864, and over £172,019 is invested in the com-
pany’s capital.
Co-partnership principles have made great headway in the
gas industry. Many companies have adopted the principle
since 1908, including, among the largest:—Bournemouth
(1908), Cardiff (1908), Tottenham (1908), Croydon (1908), Gas
Light and Coke—London (1909), and Liverpool (1912), making
now a total of 37 companies.
Up to the present time about 24,697 employees are taking
advantage of Co-partnership schemes in gas companies, having
a total capital of £52,025,671, out of a total paid-up capital
in gas companies in the United Kingdom of £92,000,000. These
employees now hold £837,530 in the stock of the various com-
panies, and have had allocated to them during the last year
£140,107. The total amount allocated to labor since the intro-
duction of the schemes has been £1,047,658.
Other Companies.
Another method of applying Co-partnership principles has
been adopted by Messrs. Lever Brothers, of Port Sunlight.
The scheme provides for the creation of £500,000 par value
Partnership Certificates, to be allotted to those who are
considered desirable partners and who are 25 years of age
and have been with the firm not less than five years. January
Ist, 1901, was taken as the starting point of the scheme, so
that those who at that date had been for five years in the
employ of the firm and were 25 years of age became eligible


for these certificates. The value of the certificates which may
be issued to an employee is based on the amount of salary,
working out roughly at 10 per cent, of the salary per year,
so that an employee receiving £lOO a year, who has been
employed for eight years and who is in other ways qualified
may be allotted £BO in Partnership Certificates, this being in-
creased by yearly increments of £lO until a maximum laid
down in the scheme is reached. In the case of retired em-
ployees who have attained the age of 65 in the case of men,
or 60 in the case of women, or those who have retired from
ill-health before reaching these ages, or in the case of widows
of employees, the Partnership Certificates will be changed into
preferential certificates on the basis of ten years’ purchase of
the average dividends of the Partnership Certificates. As to
dividends, first preference shares receive 5 per cent, and 6
per cent., as provided in the Articles of Association, then 5
per cent, is paid to ordinary shares, next 5 per cent, on pre-
ferential certificates held by the aged and retired employees,
after which Partnership Certificates and ordinary shares par-
ticipate equally in any profit, so that if it is possible to pay
ordinary shares a further 5 per cent., making 10 per cent,
in all, Partnership Certificates get 5 per cent. It is claimed
that giving ordinary shares 5 per cent, start is perfectly fair,
seeing that they represent cash paid or its equivalent, whereas
in the case of the Partnership Certificates no cash is paid for
them by the employee.
At the first distribution on July 23rd, 1909, Partnership
Certificates representing nominal capital of £116,064 were dis-
tributed. To-day the total allotment of Co-partnership Certifi-
cates to employees is £373,000. The last distribution took
place in January, 1915, when a 10 per cent, dividend on
the certificates, amounting in all to £33,000, was announced
by Sir William Lever, the total amount of dividend paid to
Co-partner employees since the scheme was begun being
£122,000. At first the dividend was paid in cash, but now it
is paid in 5 per cent, preference shares of the company, which
are the inalienable property of the Co-partner, and which he
either retains as an investment or converts into cash at his
pleasure. However, it is provided that the Lever Bros.’ shares
paid to the employees as their Co-partners’ dividend, and con-


tinuously retained by them, shall also be credited with a bonus
equal to the dividend earned on the Co-partnership certificate.
Thus, the partner-employee who keeps his dividend in shares
as an investment at 5 per cent, in the company, receives upon
these shares 15 per cent, in all, or the same profit as the holders
of the ordinary shares.
William Thomson and Sons, Ltd., of Woodhouse Mills,
Huddersfield, have practised Co-partnership for twenty-seven
years. Their trade for 1913 again showed an increase, and after
payment of interest on loan stock left a profit of £4,626, of
which £912 was credited to the workers. The firm accords
ideal conditions to its employees, and a pension fund has been
established, to which £5OO was added this year out of the
profits.
The interesting scheme of Messrs. J., T. and J. Taylor,* of
Batley, must now be mentioned. It was started in 1896, and
at first was simple profit-sharing, but in 1909 Mr. T. C. Taylor,
M.P., the head of the company, arranged the present scheme,
as follows:—After meeting all wages and other fixed expenses,
allowing for depreciation, etc., the first charge on any profit
is 5 per cent, interest on share capital. Any surplus profit
remaining after meeting this charge is divided at an equal rate
per £ of capital and £ of wages; with this condition, that
all those employees not less than 21 years of age, who had
been five calendar years in the company’s service, and who
own shares to the amount of half a year’s wages, receive
double the bonus allotted to other employees. For instance,
in a year when the bonus on wages is, say, 7% per cent., an
employee whose wages for the year amount to £7O, who owns
shares to the extent of £35, who is not less than 21 years of
age, and has been five calendar years with the company, will
receive bonus in shares on his wages at the rate of 15 per
cent, instead of 7V& per cent., that is, he will get £lO 10s. in-
stead of £5 ss.
It had been all along Mr. Taylor’s wish that the workers
should ultimately become the owners of the business, and so
he arranged that each employee must allow his profits to ac-
cumulate as shares until a sum equal to his year’s earnings
* Woollen Manufacturers.


is reached. When this minimum is reached the employee is
at liberty to sell all further shares that he receives.
It is eighteen years since Mr. Taylor turned his business
into a private limited company in order to extend his profit-
sharing to all his employees. During the interval the em-
ployees have increased in number from 600 to 1600, and over
£130,000 has gone to the workers in bonus shares, in cash
dividends, and in allocations to and interest on the Workers'
Benefit Fund. More than half the capital of the company is
now owned by employees. The cash dividend on shares for
1913 was 10 per cent., the minimum bonus on wages (given
in the shape of shares) 5 per cent., many of the employees re-
ceiving double bonus, viz., 10 per cent.
Under the “Limited Partnership Law,” which came into
operation on January Ist, 1908, a body corporate may become
a limited partner in a business without interfering with the
old trade name or in any way affecting the private character
of the firm. This change in the law should very greatly pro-
mote the growth of Co-partnership arrangements in such cases,
seeing that there are many employers who would be very glad
to take their employees into partnership, but who do not see
their way to registering their businesses with limited liability.
A limited partner incurs no liability beyond the amount of
his, or in this case its, share in the business, while the general
partners remain responsible for the debts of the business to
the full extent of all they possess, like the partners in any
ordinary private business. On the other hand, the limited
partner must not by law interfere with the management of the
business, beyond exercising some very limited powers of con-
sultation.
Messrs. Clarke, Nickolls and Coombs, Ltd* of London, have
successfully worked an interesting profit-sharing scheme for
some years. The business was founded in 1872, and became a
limited liability company in 1887. In 1890 the shareholders
sanctioned a scheme of profit-sharing with their workpeople.
After paying the ordinary shareholders 6 per cent, on their
capital, the surplus profits are divided in equal proportions
between the workpeople and the shareholders, and the fol-
lowing figures show the result:—
* Confectioners.


For 1890 the amount of profit paid to labor was £1,400
„ 1895 „ „ „ 2,762
„ 1900 „ „ „ 9,500
„ 1905 „ „ 12,000
„ 1910 „ „ „ 9,500
„ 1911 „ „ „ 13,250
„ 1912 „ „ „ 10,000
„ 1913 „ „ „ 14,500
For the 24 years the total is £196,525. All who have worked
one year participate in the profit, whilst the profit accruing
to the wages of those who have not worked one year and ful-
filled other necessary conditions is carried to a provident or
superannuation fund. This superannuation fund will be avail-
able in 1915 for those who have served the company for 25
years, and now stands at £40,000. During the busy season
over 3000 workers are employed. The bonus is given in cash,
but every encouragement is given to the workpeople to acquire
shares, and their holding is considerable.
In an interesting description of the scheme by the manag-
ing director, Mr. Alexander Horn, the following paragraphs
appear:—
“In the development and perfecting of this scheme it will
become not only the duty but the interest of the present man-
agers to train up a disciplined body of workers from amongst
whom may be appointed substitutes to take the place of those
who in due course must retire from their present posts in the
management. It will be a work of time, but each succeeding
year should find the progress of evolution more rapid. To a
great extent the rate of development will be in the hands of
the workpeople.
“The principle of profit-sharing, but little understood, and
unfortunately still less acted upon in England, has for many
years been reduced to actual practice with the most satis-
factory results in some foreign countries, and more especially
in France, the house of Leclaire being one of the best known
and mcst successful examples. The whole of this business
now belongs to the workpeople, and is managed by themselves,
and it is the desire and hope of the directors that a similar
result may ultimately be achieved by the employees of the
company.”


No account of Co-partnership schemes would be complete
without a reference to the Maison Leclaire, Painters and Deco-
rators, of Paris.
Leclaire came to Paris at the age of 17, in 1818, and while
an apprentice earned about £4 a year beyond his board and
lodging. At 20 his money earnings were only £45 a year, but
at 26 he started for himself as a house decorator, and shortly
afterwards was offering wages of 4s. 2d. a day instead of the
recognised 3s. 4d. In 1838 he established a “Society of Mutual
Help,” and the next year started a scheme for paying fore-
men and older hands special extra wages. Then he inaugurated
a scheme for dividing a share of the profits among the pick
of his workmen, and in order to convince them of his sincerity
he paid out the money due for the past year. Thus, in 1842,
he divided £475 among 44 workmen; in 1843, £490 among 44;
and in 1844, £7BO among 82 workmen.
This profit-sharing scheme Leclaire brought to an end in
1863, for in that year he incorporated the “Mutual” as a
sleeping partner in the business, adding £4,000 to its capital
of £1,600. The partners were to receive 5 per cent, on their
capital, and the sleeping partner—that is, the Mutual Help
Society—was to have 20 per cent, of the remaining profits.
In 1869 Leclaire withdrew from active work and the capital
was fixed at £16,000, Leclaire supplying £4,000, his partner
£4,000, and the Mutual £B,OOO. It was arranged that 15 per
cent, of the profits should go to the managers, 35 per cent,
to the Provident and Mutual Aid Societies, and 50 per cent,
to the employees according to their wages and salaries. Alto-
gether, since the commencement, the workers have received
£328,029, and the Mutual Insurance £180,733.
The central body consists of all the fully-competent em-
ployees, and it elects the managing partners, who have all
the powers and responsibilities of partners in a private firm.
It also elects a conciliation committee to settle any disputes
between employees and employer, and has other duties—
especially the care of apprentices.
The Provident and Mutual Society consists of 130 mem-
bers, and its assets in April, 1912, were £167,500. The society
arranges for medical service, invalid pay, and pensions for
its members, their widows and orphans, but it also provides


these in a lesser degree for those employees who are not mem-
bers. In 1912 the sum of £9,674 was paid to some 230 people
in these ways.
Mr. N. 0. Nelson, the head of the N. 0. Nelson Manufactur-
ing Co., St. Louis, U.S.A., founded his Co-partnership scheme
on that of Leclaire, and when he took his factory out into the
country and built a model village for his workpeople he named
it Leclaire.
I take the following from two letters of Mr. Nelson’s,
which, I think, will be found of interest: —“A quarter of a
century ago this month (March, 1911) we started Co-partner-
ship. From allowing an equal dividend on capital and wages,
we have come to allotting all the profits to employees and
customers, after paying simple interest on’the capital. For
the last six years dividends to wages have varied from 10 to
30 per cent., averaging 25. The dividends are paid in shares.”
The workers (1100) and customers now own about two-
thirds of the capital and surplus, say, £200,000 of £367,975.
The business keeps increasing, and last year a new factory
was built for making enamelled baths and lavatories. The
model village of Leclaire, founded by this company, where it
has one of its factories and where many of its workers live,
is now twenty-four years old. Last year twenty-six new
houses were built for employees and others, costing from £250
to £SOO. These are being bought by monthly payments of from
£2 Bs. to £5. It still “needs no law or police or boss; has no
unemployed; a death-rate of three per thousand, and rarely an
employee off sick.”
Other large American companies which are described as
having profit-sharing and pension plans are the United States
Steel Corporation, with 180,000 employees; the International
Harvester Company, with 50,000, and the Westinghouse Elec-
tric Company, with 30,000.
Foster, Sons and Company, Ltd., is a builders’ company at
Padiham, Lancs. It has arranged for its employees to organise
and register themselvess as an Employees’ Investment Society
under the Industrial and Provident Societies Acts. The Em-
ployees’ Investment Society has become in its corporate


capacity a partner in the firm of Messrs. Foster, Sons and
Company, Limited. By an agreement between the Company
and the Employees’ Investment Society, after all fixed charges
have been met, and 5 per cent, interest has been paid on capital,
40 per cent, of the net profit goes to the Employees’ Investment
Society, and is credited in that society as £1 shares to the in-
dividual workers. The Investment Society invests the total
amount in the company and holds the same in its corporate
'capacity, having representation at the meetings of shareholders
proportionate to its investment in the company.
Perhaps one of the most interesting conversions of a private
business to a labor co-partnership one is that of the famous
Ironfoundry at Guise, in France, the history of which is de-
scribed in an interesting work published by the Labor Co-
partnership Association. The works at Guise and the branch
establishment in Belgium employ over 2700 people in the
manufacture of about 2000 articles of different kinds or dif-
ferent models. The selling price of the products leaving the
works for 1911 was £340,000, and the wages paid exceeded
£144,000.
The method of dividing the profits is fixed by the rules of
the society. The first charge upon the gross profits, before any
•dividend is apportioned, are the amounts for:—
1. Depreciation of buildings and raw material.
2. Votes to the various mutual insurance funds.
3. The expenses of education.
4. The interest payable to the owners of saving certificates
(or as we should say, accumulated shares).
What remains constitutes the net profits, and is divided as
follows:—7s per cent, of it as dividend upon the wages of labor
and the wages (or interest) of capital, and 25 per cent, of it
as the reward of ability. In this way the partnership of capital,
labor, and ability is realised. The following table shows the
results of the 33 years from 1879 to 1911. The amount appor-
tioned to the four different classes of workers into which the
employees are divided are shown:—


75% OF THE PROFITS ARE DIVIDED UPON WAGES AND
UPON THE INTEREST OF CAPITAL.
Years
Profits
to
Divide
To First
Class
Mem-
bers
To
Asso-
ciates
To
Profit
Shares
To Helpers
through
1 Insurance
j Fund
To
Reserve
Savings
Total
on
Wages
Total
on
Interest
1879-1911
£
526,395
£
115 450
£
56.424
£
96,765
£
62,978
£
18,935
£
350 552
£
33,376
A glance over this shows that the workmen have received
over and above their wages more than £350,000 out of the
total profits divided in these 33 years, while capital has re-
ceived over and above its wages or interest, about £33,000.
The following shows the amount apportioned to ability in
the 33 years, 1879 to 1911, as £127,976.
2570 OF THE NET PROFITS ARE ALLOWED TO ABILITY.
Years
To
Managing
Director
To the
1 Committee of
Management
and
Supervising
Committee
Balance of
the 16%
allotted to
Committee
of Manage-
ment
Mainte-
nance of
Pupils in
the
Government
Schools
Reward for
Useful
Inventions
Total
to
Ability
1879-1911
£
28,948
£
65,724
£
18.499
£
4.277
£
10,528
£
127,976
To complete the explanation of the financial regulations of
the society, I must add that the employees are at present the
owners of the whole capital, which was fixed at £184,000 by
the deed executed in 1880 by Godin and his fellow-workers,
and has since been increased to £242,000.
There are other cases where there is no sharing of profits
upon wages, but where the employees are encouraged to in-
vest in the shares of the business; or, again, where deposits
are received from the workmen at a rate of interest fluctuat-
ing with the profits of the business. An example of the last
kind exists in the great firm of Sir William Armstrong, Whit-
worth and Company, Limited, of Newcastle, which employs
nearly 20,000 workmen. The following figures illustrating the
growth of investments by these employees are of interest:—
1901, £124,306; 1905, £195,500; 1910, £237,852; and 1911,
£241,432. On these investments they receive a minimum of 4
per cent., with a fluctuating addition which may easily reach
another 6 per cent., making in all 10 per cent., according to the
profits of the business.


Messrs. Hazell, "Watson and Viney, the well-known printers,
have an interesting scheme for encouraging their 1500 em-
ployees to invest in the firm through shares and deposits.
There are now 1016 deposit accounts open, and the amount
on deposit at 4 per cent, is £13,799. As security the firm has
placed 4 per cent, debentures to the amount of £14,000 in the
hands of trustees, so that whatever happens to the business,
the depositors are safe. Deposits may be withdrawn without
notice, though the firm retains, as a safeguard, the right to
ask for three months’ notice. Some of this money is again
used for thrift purposes by being lent to employees who may
wish to buy a house, or in any other way to improve their
position in life. By this means 72 loans have been granted,
amounting to £15,444, of which upwards of £10,841 has been
repaid. Connected with the loan is an insurance scheme,
whereby if the borrower dies before the loan is repaid the
whole debt is wiped off. They also have 730 members in a
provident fund to which both the employees and the firm con-
tribute. This fund has an invested capital of over £15,202,
and gives benefits not only at death but also at the discretion
of the trustees for exceptional sickness or calamity. It also
provides, so far as funds permit, pensions of 10s. weekly to
employees over 60 years of age, and there are now 25 of these
pensioners. They also have sick funds, of which the majority
of the employees are members. The shareholding of the em-
ployees is also growing. About 300 persons hold shares, which
the company has enabled them to buy at less than the market
value. The market value of the shares thus held is about
£18,900.
Shares held by Employees £18,900
Savings Bank Deposits 13,324
Provident Fund 14,544
Staff Pension Fund 1,604
Thrift Fund, total loans granted (£13,472
amount repaid) 9,327
Total .... £57,699


John Knight, Ltd.—This scheme has now been in opera-
tion for eleven years; under it all employees get a dividend
on wages of roughly 1 per cent, for every y 2 per cent, above
5 per cent, which the shareholders get. The employees’ in-
vestments get interest at the same rate as share capital.
Court Laundry, Dublin.—Mr. H. C. Watson, the proprietor,
states that because of the uncertainties caused by the war he
did not have a half-yearly distribution, but is waiting for a
complete year. Considerable publicity has been given to the
scheme through the trade journal, “The Power Laundry,’'
which described the scheme and recommended its adoption.
The scheme of Messrs. Plaistowe and Co., Ltd., jam manu-
facturers, continues very satisfactorily. A 10 per cent, divi-
dend has again been distributed among the 450 workers who
hold Co-partnership certificates.
The Co-partnership scheme which the Hon. Edward Strutt
has for some years put into practice on an estate of Lord Ray-
leigh, is working smoothly and satisfactorily to all concerned,
and the laborers’ share capital is increasing in amount.
Messrs. Hasler and Clapham, Dunmow, seed merchants,
report that the Profit-Sharing scheme which they started in
1910 is progressing very satisfactorily indeed, both, they think,
from their point of view, also that of their employees. They
add: “At the time of our annual gathering in September we
had £lOOO on deposit belonging to the employees, and during
the year they have made very good use of the facilities given
them of depositing and withdrawing their savings. The bonus
for 1914 was 6 per cent, on the wages paid.
Messrs. E. S. and A. Robinson, Ltd., Bristol, wholesale
stationers, state that their second distribution took place last
April, for the eight months ending February 28th, 1914, when
the dividend on wages was about 5 y 2 per cent, on the wages
earned.
Messrs. Johnson 8r05.,, Ltd., dyers, who have a Profit-
Sharing scheme for some of their workers at the Central Works
at Bootle, and a somewhat different one for their branches,
have recently adopted a scheme for encouraging workers to
purchase special Employees’ Shares. A year ago the working
Soap Manufacturers.


hours were reduced from 48 to 46 per week, and the firm seem
quite satisfied with the result.
Messrs. Wm. Cory and Son have introduced a scheme under
which all members of the Cory Thrift Society are given the
right to subscribe at par for any number up to 100 of special
Employees’ £1 Shares. These shares will rank for dividend
equally with ordinary shares, which have averaged 10 per cent,
per annum for some years.
Grainger and Smith, Manufacturing Clothiers, at Dudley,
have arranged that all employees who have worked the com-
plete year shall receive a dividend on wages. The dividend
will be capitalised and bear interest at 4 per cent., together
with y 2 per cent, for each 1 per cent, which ordinary shares re-
ceive above 6 per cent. For the year 1914 about £l2OO will
bfe divided among 300 employees.
The Farr Alpaca Co., Holyoke, Mass., U.S.A., adopted a
scheme of Profit-Sharing at the commencement of 1914. In
January, 1915, a dividend on wages of 8 per cent, was paid. The
company have received a letter of thanks from the workers
acting through their committee, in which they state:—“The
employees of the company believe that this is one of the im-
portant steps which has been taken in this country to solve the
relation between labor and capital, and hope that it not only
will be continued, but may be the means of establishing an
enduring feeling of goodwill between the stockholders and
employees of the company.”
A noteworthy incident took place at the annual meeting
of Messrs. Ben Evans and Co., Ltd., at Swansea. A shareholder
rose and suggested that whatever profit was made above 6
per cent, should be divided with the employees. Particular
attention is drawn to this, as it shows that an ordinary share-
holder can help forward the movement toward co-partnership
and towards the general improvement of factory life. The sug-
gestion was received most sympathetically by the Chairman,
Mr. James Jackson, J.P.
Lord Eayleigh, 0.M., known to the scientific world as the
discoverer of argon, finding himself over 20 years ago in pos-
session of a large acreage of agricultural land in Essex, came


to the conclusion that it was a breach of moral duty not to
enter upon agriculture as a business. The management of
his estate was handed over to his brother, the Hon. Edward
Strutt, known as one of the ablest minds in agriculture, and
the prosperous condition of the estate is evidence of his suc-
cess. He introduced a bonus system to encourage his em-
ployees, 250 in number, to invest their savings in the farms,
and agricultural Co-partnership was adopted in 1910. The
men receive on their investments the dividends declared by
the farms after all expenses, including the cost of manage-
ment and rent to Lord Rayleigh and interest on his capital,
have been paid, a minimum interest of 4 per cent, per annum
being guaranteed. About 150 men have now become investors,
and have nearly £4OOO standing to their credit. In March,
1913, it was stated that the amount to be paid in bonuses,
profits, and interest for the year just closed came to £IOOO.
Mr. Strutt, who is President of the Surveyors’ Institution,
has now adopted Co-partnership on the farms owned by his
firm, Messrs. Strutt and Parker, at Southminster, though not
as a substitute for fair wages, for he has advocated the rais-
ing of agricultural wages, believing that low wages are un-
economical.
Mr. Theodore Taylor, of J. T. and J. Taylor, Ltd., of Batley,
said: “For myself I never really enjoyed my business until I
started labor Co-partnership. It doubles the pleasure and it
halves the difficulties, because it does away with the greatest
curse of industry—mutual distrust between masters and men.”
Sir George Watson, of the Maypole Dairy Co., Ltd., said re-
cently that in his business a system of Co-partnership was
adopted in 1898, with the result that the number of the firm’s
establishments between then and 1913 rose from 186 to 790,
while the annual net profits advanced from £60,000 to £490,000.
Sir Jesse Boot, Chairman of Boots Cash Chemists, Ltd., stated
last June that they propose again this year to give a profit-
sharing bonus of 2 y 2 per cent., equal to an additional divi-
dend of that amount on all shares held for a certain period
by qualified chemists, stocktakers, or inspectors engaged in
the retail chemists business of any of their associated com-
panies, charging this against expenses of the current year.
The profit-sharing and pension arrangements of Sir W. P.


Hartley, jam manufacturer, of Aintree, Liverpool, may also
be mentioned. In 1912, on the twentieth anniversary of profit-
sharing, £4,650 was distributed, bringing the total from the
origin up to £71,155. At Romano’s, Ltd., the well-known
Strand Restaurant, the waiters have received a share of the
profits for the last 10 years, during which period the trade
has doubled. For the year 1913 it is stated a sum of £2700
was distributed out of profits amounting to £8,346. Sir George
Watson advises the Boards of all large Limited Companies
to inform their staffs and employees generally that in the
future they will (in addition to their wages) divide amongst
their employees a certain percentage (25 to 50 per cent.) of
all increases in future profits in excess of the average of the
previous three or five years—half of the increase to be paid
in cash, the other half to be invested in shares of the com-
pany. This was the plan adopted by the Maypole Dairy Co.,
Ltd.
Provident funds are frequently found in connection with
French profit-sharing schemes, and the management of the
fund is in many cases entrusted to consultative committees
chosen from the workers, which has the advantage of bringing
them into relations with the firm that are at once human and
equal, as do the conciliation committees of English profit-
sharing firms.
Some of the oldest insurance companies in France are on
a profit-sharing basis, and amongst other firms which have
adopted the system may be mentioned the Bon Marche, of
Paris, the well-known shopping establishment, with a turnover
of £9,000,000 per annum; Laroche, Joubert and Company, of
Angouleme, paper-makers, having a capital of £150,000; and
also the Imprimerie Chaix, of Paris, printers of railway matter,
which issues publications giving particulars of profit-sharing
in France, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. One of the
most successful Co-partnership undertakings in Germany is
the firm of Carl Zeiss, of Jena, where 3000 workpeople are em-
ployed in the manufacture of optical instruments, and 1000
in glass works. In 1891 the proprietor, Ernst Abbe, gave the
works to the workers, the administration to be by a com-
mittee representing the factory, the University, and the Govern-
ment. In 1899 Abbe introduced the eight-hour day, keeping


careful record of work done. In the first year they earned by
piece-work about 3 per cent, more on the average than in the
previous year, though the men for the most part were unaware
of making extra effort.
At the annual meeting of the Labor Co-partnership As-
sociation held at the Westminster Central Buildings, London,
on the 21st May, 1914, the following addresses (amongst
numerous others) were given by the Director of Maypole
Dairy Co., and the Manager of the Editorial and Social De-
partment, Lever Bros., Ltd.: —
Sir George Watson spoke as follows about the Maypole
Dairy, of which he is a Director:—
The Maypole Dairy Company, of which I have the honour
to be Chairman, introduced Profit-Sharing twenty-four years
ago. At first it was confined to the Managers and Heads of
Departments, hut later all the lower grades of their em-
ployees were allowed to participate, and now every adult
male employee with three months service is interested
therein.
Since the incorporation of the Company sixteen years ago,
the large sum of £743,000 has been allotted to the employees
of the Maypole Dairy Company Limited as their share of in-
crease in profits. This amount has, however, taken the place
of individual increases in wages or salaries with all except
the lower members of the staff.
Co-partnership.
The Maypole Dairy Company adopted Co-partnership five
years ago, that is, nineteen years after the first introduction
of Profit-Sharing. A part (as fixed by the Directors) of each
employee’s share in increased profits is handed over to the
Trustees for investment in the shares of the Company, the
employee interested getting the dividends whilst in the employ
of the Company, and when he leaves the Company’s service
he gets half the then value of the shares and the other half
of their then value three years later, unless the Company
decides to give him the full value immediately he leaves their
service.


The Maypole Dairy Company have now over 1500 Co-
partnership Shareholders, and the present market value of
their Co-partnership shares is more than £IBO,OOO, this is in
addition to the Co-partnership shares held by the employees
of the Maypole Dairy Company’s subsidiary Companies, where
Co-partnership and Profit Sharing has also been introduced
during the last few years.
When Co-partnership was first adopted by the Maypole
Dairy Company in the year 1909, the yearly profits were
£302,912, whereas the profits for the year 1913 had grown to
£489,643, and as Chairman of the Company I can testify to
the great interest which is taken by all our employees to pro-
mote efficiency and progress and to prevent waste.
I feel convinced that the future will show that no large
business can continue to be successful unless it does give its
employees, more especially its managing employees, an in-
terest in its success. Unless Profit Sharing and Co-partnership
is adopted there will be more and more labor unrest, as em-
ployees will not continuously give their best efforts solely on
behalf of a body of shareholders with whom they never come
into personal contact, and who apparently take no personal
interest in the welfare of the employees in the Companies in
which they are shareholders.
It should not be difficult for the Chairman of any Com-
pany to induce his Board and Shareholders to give their em-
ployees, in addition to their wages, a proportion of all in-
creases in profits, part of this increase to be paid in cash and
the remainder invested in Trust shares, saleable only when the
employee leaves the service of the Company.
This was the system which my Company introduced, and
we have met with no practical difficulties from our share-
holders or from our employees.
Success and increase in profits is generally attributable
to hard work and able and progressive management, com-
bined with increased efficiency and the prevention of waste,
and the two latter essentials are very much dependent upon
the employees.
I should be very pleased to give any employer particulars
of the scheme we adopted, although I believe each employer


will prefer to introduce a scheme suited to the conditions of
his particular business.
Mr. Alexander Paul spoke as follows about Messrs. Lever
Bros., Ltd., where he is Manager of the Editorial and Social
Department:—
There are now over 2000 Co-partner-employees of the Com-
pany and its Associated Companies, holding between them
Partnership Certificates of the nominal value of £373,000.
These certificates rank for a dividend of 10 per cent, when the
dividend payable on the ordinary shares of the Company is
15 per cent., as it has been for the last four years.
The scheme came into operation in 1909; the partner-em-
ployees’ dividends last year amounted to £38,000. Up to date
the total dividend paid on employee-partners’ certificates ex-
ceeded £122,000.
The Chairman has remarked on the various mechanisms of
Profit-Sharing and Co-partnership Schemes, and it seems to
me that the encouraging feature of the partnership movement
to-day is the spirit behind these mechanisms. The motive
underlying the Co-partnership Scheme in existence in Lever
Brothers was the desire to get away from the consideration of
the employer and the employee as being antagonistic to each
other, and to regard both employer and employed as servants
of the community. The object of the founder of our Co-
partnership Scheme was to promote the personal interest of
the whole staff in the whole undertaking. From the begin-
ning of the firm’s history there had been a desire that the
workers should prosper with the business, but for a long time
no scheme of profit sharing commended itself to Sir William
Lever. He' considered past profit-sharing schemes to be
unsound, and they certainly had, on the average, a short
duration. An economically sound profit-sharing scheme, he
considered, must provide for the sharing of losses when they
occurred; and for a long time no scheme which would enable
the workers to share losses as well as profits came to his
knowledge.
In the absence of a sound profit-sharing scheme a system
to which the name “Prosperity Sharing” has been given was
adopted. The firm provided for their workpeople those com-


fortable homes, open spaces, and village institutions which
have given to Port Sunlight its leadership amongst what are
now called “Garden Cities.” But when people come to Port
Sunlight imagining that the houses there can be taken as a
pattern for the building of beautiful workmen’s houses which
will pay a moderate interest on capital, they are promptly dis-
illusioned. These houses were not let art an economic rent,
they are a kind of collective profit sharing; the site value and
the construction value have both been met out of the capital
and the interest written off yearly in the Company’s books,
so that the rents asked for barely pay for the maintenance of
the village.
The system of Prosperity Sharing also included other wel-
fare arrangements, notably, an Employees’ Provident Fund.
It was as an addition to these forms of collective Prosperity
Sharing that there came at last a promising, and, up till now,
eminently successful scheme of genuine profit sharing.
This system under which employees are able to share
profits and also to bear losses was found in a scheme for
granting Partnership Certificates for a nominal amount of
capital generally equal to about 10 per cent, of the workers’
earnings. These have been given to all grades of workers of
both sexes, but not, as in some of the other schemes just de-
scribed, to every man, woman, or child. It has been the a’m
of the founder to bring back into business the kind of partner-
ship arrangements that were possible before the Companies
Acts and the days of limited liability—the days when sons
were taken into partnership with their fathers after a reason-
able service and at a responsible age. The age of admission
to Co-partnership in Lever Brothers is 25, provided that at
that age five years’ faithful service has been given. The
motto of the Co-partnership is—“ Waste not, want not”—
and the workers are asked to aim at a type of intelligent
service which will enable them ultimately to produce more
goods of a better quality with less labor—fewer hours and
higher wages.
The Co-partners received, to begin with, not less than Trade
Union rate of wages—rather more when the hours of work
and workers’ benefits are taken into account; and after the


dividends on capital have been paid they share the surplus
dividend, which is paid according to the number and amount
of their Partnership Certificates. If there is no surplus divi-
dend —a state of affairs not yet experienced—there will be no
dividend on the Partnership Certificates; that is the sense in
which the Co-partners share the losses.
An interesting development of the Partnership Scheme has
recently been introduced to emphasise the gain made out of
the dividend, and to enable the Co-partners tb feel that they
are gaining or losing with the principal partner. The Co-
partners used to have their dividends paid into a Savings Bank
from which they could either draw them out in cash or leave
them in at interest varying in rate according to the length
of time the deposit was allowed to lie. But now the dividends
are paid in the Company’s Shares. It is still open, however,
to the Co-partners to turn their shares immediately into cash.
Five shilling shares have been created to facilitate the trans-
actions of the partner-employees. But if the Co-partners do
not turn their shares into cash, but keep them continuously,
this is what happens.
The shares are 5 per cent. Preference Shares in Lever
Brothers, Limited, and they pay their holders 5 per cent, as a
matter of course. But when the time comes round for the pay-
ment of the co-partners’ dividend on the Partnership Certifi-
cates, that Co-partners’ dividend—lo per cent, so far—will be
paid on their shares as well—the shares previously paid as
dividend and not parted with. “Now,” said the Chairman,
“your shares and mine are ranking for the same total dividend
—l5 per cent.”
Sir William Lever has recently been round the world on a
business tour, and has made in the intervals of his business a
study of the working of the Wages Boards in the Colonies.
This study has led him to make some interesting observations
recently to the Co-partners’ Club at Port Sunlight as to the
advantage of Co-partnership. It was, he said, becoming a
common complaint in the Colonies that the result of an in-
crease of wages through the Wages Boards was to raise the
cost of the articles made by the workers; and so to necessi-
tate in course of time another rise of wages. This brings one


argument for Co-partnership into a strong light; for the
Co-partners’ dividend does not affect the price of the manu-
factured product. It does not enter into the cost of the article
produced, but is an addition to income received after the
profits have been counted up at the end of the year. Co-
partnership, therefore, must be looked upon as a means of
betterment for the producer without increasing the cost of
the product.
Sir William Lever, in the course of his annual address,
December, 1915, to the Co-partners in Lever Brothers Ltd.,
said: —
Progress of the Business during Co-partnership.
What effect has this had on us and on our business? I
cannot tell, but I will give you a few facts. Since the adop-
tion of Co-partnership, the volume of the business has more
than doubled, the profits have more than doubled, the capital
has more than doubled. And the dividends paid to the Co-
partners, as their share of the increased profits, have not been
obtained by cutting down wages.
Co-partnership Dividends without Reduction of Wages.
I know many people look upon Co-partnership with sus-
picion, believing that it will reduce wages and be paid for
by deductions from wages. Well, I may tell you that since
the year 1908 (which was the year preceding the issue of Co-
partnership Certificates and the adoption and application of
Co-partnership here), the wages for unskilled labor, including
War Bonus, have increased by 55 per cent., namely, from 20/-
in 1908 to 31/- in 1915. Corresponding increases have occurred
in the skilled trades, but they vary in amount in accordance
with the rule of the Societies; but unskilled labor, as I have
already told you, has advanced 55 per cent. Therefore, the
sum of £200,000 has not been taken out of wages. Where has
it come from? We shall have paid £200,000 to Co-partners by
January Ist, 1916, whilst the dividend last year on the Ordinary
Shares was £lOO,OOO less. This year, as far as I know, the
Ordinary Shareholders are likely to receive another £lOO,OOO
less; so, therefore, the Ordinary Shareholders in this concern
have, apparently, in receiving 33 l-3rd per cent, less, provided
the dividends for the Co-partners.


Co-partner Employees and the Losses.
Now, some people meet with a stumbling block here. They
say, “What about losses? Who is going to share the losses?
If you are going to give a share of your profits, is nobody going
to share your losses when you make any?” No; and I will
tell you why. It would not be fair and it would not be logical.
Haven’t I asked you to agree that management must be left
in the same position as at present, as regards the management
of the business? Well, therefore, if that is the case, it is
obvious that management, which in most industries —in almost
all industries —is supplied by capital and appointed by capital,
must, in order to obtain a right to manage the business, be
prepared to take the losses. That is right. That is the only
justification that management has got for saying, “Well, we
wish the management to be left in our hands.” The price that
management—capital—has got to pay for that right is that if
there are profits they can be divided, but if there are losses
those who appoint the management must take them. Now, I
say that is quite logical, and that to ask a Co-partner who does
not appoint the management to take some of the loss which
that management may have created would be illogical. It is
quite sufficient that, in the event of losses being incurred instead
of profits being made, the Co-partner loses his share of profits.
That is his share, and the only share he can bear—that he loses
the profits which he might otherwise have made.
There are several firms practising Co-partnership and Profit-
Sharing in Australia. The following have been noted, viz.,
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Wunderlich Ltd., Messrs.
Saltau and Sons (Warrnambool), Bilson and Co. (Colac),
Varley and Co., H. V. McKay, and Moran and Cato (Melbourne),
and many other firms in Victoria, who have more or less adopted
some form of Profit-Sharing. In November, 1915, the Excel-
sior Woollen Mills, at Geelong, distributed £2OOO amongst its
employees. The most up-to-date and extensive Profit-Sharing
and Co-partnership scheme in Australia is that of the British-
Australasian Tobacco Company.
Through the courtesy of the Directors of the British Tobacco
Company (Australia) Ltd. (comprising The British Austral-
asian Tobacco Co. Pty. Ltd., The States Tobacco Co. Pty. Ltd,


and W. D. and H. 0. Wills (Aust.) Ltd.), I am permitted to
give the following particulars relative to their various Profit-
Sharing and Co-partnership schemes.
Profit Sharing and Co-partnership.
The Directors in March, 1914, allocated the sum of £30,000
—for the benefit of eligible employees—to be invested in the
company’s shares. This represented, roughly, 30,000 ordinary
shares.
In March, 1915, a further distribution took place—this time
amounting to no less a sum than £38,708.
The following are the conditions under which these shares
are issued.:—
These “Ordinary” Shares will be in exactly the same posi-
tion as all “Ordinary” Shares of the Company, and will
secure to the shareholders the same dividends that are pay-
able to ordinary shareholders as well as equal capital rights.
The shares referred to, however, cannot be sold, disposed
of, transferred or otherwise dealt with until five years after
their issue to the employees; but provision will be made for
their realisation in the case of the death of any employee.
The shares will be held in trust by Trustees to be appointed,
who will pay to the respective employees the dividends as
declared on the shares held in trust for them. After the lapse
of five years, an employee may, if he so desire, give instruc-
tions to the Trustees to dispose of such shares as have been
held for not less than five years on his or her behalf, and the
proceeds of the sale would be handed to him or her. There
are six Trustees—employers represented by four Trustees and
employees represented by two Trustees.
The following will be eligible to participate in the dis-
tribution, viz.:—
(a) All male and female employees who on January 31st,
1914, were over 21 years of age, and had completed two years'
continuous service in the employ of the above-mentioned com-
panies at Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, or Perth.
(b) All female employees who being under 21 years of age
on January 31st, 1914, had completed on that date four years’
continuous service in the employ of any of the above-mentioned
companies at the above centres.


(e) All employees of W. D. and H. 0. “Wills (Aust.) Ltd.,
Adelaide, who have fulfilled the conditions as to age and service
mentioned in (a) or (b).
(d) All employees of The British-Australasian Tobacco
Co. Pty., Ltd., Adelaide, who have been or may be transferred
to Melbourne or Sydney, and who remain in their new posi-
tions for not less than three months, and who have fulfilled
the conditions as to age and service mentioned in (a) or (b).
The shares will be an actual gift to the employees, and
will be free of all conditions other than the restriction of the
right of sale for five years and the vesting of the shares in
the Trustees on their behalf, and in estimating the proportion
of shares to be allotted to any individual the salary or wages
actually earned will be the basis, but any excess over £250 per
annum will be disregarded.
Any employee dismissed at any time prior to the date of
the actual distribution of the Participation Certificates, will
not be entitled to participate.
The Company does not bind itself in any way to continue
these distributions of shares yearly; it is quite optional on
their part and depends greatly on the general prosperity of
the Company and by the employees recognising and heartily
responding to the generous efforts made by the Directors on
their behalf.
The value of the shares already distributed is roughly
about £140,000, so that although the employee may get only a
share which at par is valued at £l, the market value is very
close up to £2 per share. In fact, at the present time (January,
1915) the shares are selling at 355.; in normal times they
have sold from 425. 6d. to 455. per share. The dividend on
these shares is the same as is declared on ordinary shares
in the Company, and if the dividend amounts to 10 per cent,
or 12 per cent, the employee gets this amount. In fact, his
shares are practically the same as the ordinary shares of the
Company, with the exception that for five years he is unable
to sell same, and he has no voting power. At the end of
five years he is in a position to sell, and at the end of eight
years he is in a position to go on the register and have the privi-
lege of having a say in the management, the same as any


HOUSE-BUILDING
SCHEME.-
-REPAYMENT TABLES.
Each Payment includes Interest on Balance owing, computed Quarterly at 3% per annum, the remainder being applied in
reduction of Princi
pal.
Table 1
Table 2
»
Table £
50 Weekly Payments per Year of 2/1 for every
50 Weekly Payments per Year of 2/4 for every
50 Weekly Payments per Year of 2/7 for every
£100 borrowed for 28 years and 35 weeks.
£100 borrowed for 24 years and 7 weeks.
£100 borrowed for 20 years and 45 weeks
Repayment
for Year
Payment
A/c.
Interest at
3%.
Account
Principal
Balance of
Principal
Owing
Repayment
for Year
Payment
A/c.
Interest at
3 %
Account
Principal
Balance of
Principal
Owing
Repayment
for Year
Payment
A/c.
Interest at
Z°!o
Account
Principal
Balance of
Principal
Owing
1st
5
4
2
2
19
5
2
4
9
97
15
3
5
16
8
2 19
4
2
17
4
97
2
8
6
9
2
2 19 3
3
9
11
96
10
1
1st
5
4
2
2
18
1
2
6
1
95
9
2
5
16
8
2 17
7
2
19
1
94
3
7
6
9
2
2 17 1
3
12
1
92
18
0
2nd
5
4
2
2
16
8
2
7
6
93
1
8
5
16
8
2 15
9
3
0
11
91
2
8
6
9
2
2 14 11
3
14
3
89
3
9
3rd
4th
5
4
2
2
15
3
2
8
11
90
12
9
5
16
8
2 13
11
3
2
9
87
19
11
6
9
2
2" 12 8
3
16
6
85
7
3
4th
5th
5
4
2
2
13
10
2
10
4
88
2
5
5
16
8
2 12
0
3
4
8
84
15
3
6
9
2
2 10 4
3
18
10
81
8
5
5th
6th
5
4
2
2
12
4
2
n
10
85
10
7
5
16
8
2 10
0
3
6
8
81
8
7
6
9
2
2 8 0
4
1
2
77
7
3
6th
7th
5
4
2
2
10
9
2
13
5
82
17
2
5
16
8
2 8
0
3
8
8
77
19
11
6
9
2
2 5 6
4
3
8
73
3
7
7th
8th
5
4
2
2
9
1
2
15
1
80
2
1
5
16
8
2 5
11
3
10
9
74
9
2
6
9
2
2.3 0
4
6
2
68
17
5
8th
9th
5
4
2
2
7
5
2
16
9
77
5
4
5
16
8
2 3
10
3
12
10
70
16
4
6
9
2
2 0 4
4
8
10
64
8
7
9th
10th
5
4
2
2
5
9
2
18
5
74
6
11
5
16
8
2 1
7
3
15
1
67
1
3
6
9
2
1 17 8
4
11
6
59
17
1
10th
11th
5
4
2
2
4
0
3
0
2
71
6
9
5
16
8
1 19
4
3
17
4
63
3
11
6
9
2
1 14 11
4
14
3
55
2
10
11th
12th
5
4
2
2
2
2
3
2
0
68
4
9
5
16
8
1 17
0
3
19
8
59
4
3
6
9
2
1 12 0
4
17
2
50
5
8
12th
13th
5
4
2
2
0
3
3
3
11
65
0 10
5
16
8
1 14
6
4
2
2
55
2
1
6
9
2
19 1
5
0
1
45
5
7
13th
14th
5
4
2
1
18
4
3
5
10
61
15
0
5
16
8
1 12
0
4
4
8
50
17
5
6
9
2
1 6 0
5
3
2
40
2
5
14th
15th
5
4
2
1
16
5
3
7
9
58
7
3
5
16
8
1 9
5
4
7
3
46
10
2
6
9
2
1 2 11
5
6
3
34
16
2
15th
16th
5
4
2
1
14
3
3
9
11
54
17
4
5
16
8
1 6
9
4
9
11
42
0
3
6
9
2
0 19 8
5
9
6
29
6
8
16th
17th
5
4
2
1
12
1
3
12
1
51
5
3
5
16
8
1 4
1
4
12
7
37
7
8
6
9
2
0 16 4
5
12
10
23
13
10
17th
18th
5
4
2
1
9
11
3
14
3
47
11
0
5
16
8
1 1
3
4
15
5
32
12
3
6
9
2
0 12 11
5
16
3
17
17
7
18th
19th
5
4
2
1
7
6
3
16
6
43
14
6
5
16
8
0 18
4
4
18
4
27
13
11
6
9
2
0 9 5
5
19
9
11
17
10
19th
20th
5
4
2
1
5
4
3
18
10
39
15
8
5
16
8
0 15
4
5
1
4
22
12
7
6
9
2
0 5 9
6
3
5
5
14
5
20th
21st
5
4
2
1
2
11
4
1
3
35
14
5
5
16
8
0 12
4
5
4
4
17
8
3
5 16
3
0 1 10
5
14
5
21st
22nd
5
4
2
1
0
6
4
3
8
31
10
9
5
16
8
0 9
3
5
7
5
12
0
10
22nd
23rd
5
2
0
17
11
4
6
3
27
■4
6
5
16
8
0 6
1
5
10
7
6
10
3
23rd
24th
5
4
2
0
15
8
4
8
11
22
15
7
5
16
8
0 2
8
5
14
0
0
16
3
24th
25th
5
4
2
0
12
7
4
11
7
18
4
0
0
16
4
0 0
1
0
16
3
25th
26th
5
4
2
0
9
9
4
14
5
13
9
7
26th
27th
5
4
2
0
6
11
4
17
3
8
12
4
27th
28th
5
4
2
e
4
0
5
0
2
3
12
2
28th
29th
3 12 11
0
0
9
3
12
2
29th
149
9
7
49
9
7
100
0
0
140 16
4
40 16
4
100
0
0
134
19
7
34 19 7
100
0
0
I hereby Certify that the above Tables are correct,
E. S. CORBETT,
Associate of the Institute of Actuaries.


other shareholders who have purchased shares on the Stock
Exchange.
House Building Scheme.
This scheme has been framed on the lines of what is popu-
larly known as the Credit Foncier System. A small deposit,
on a 5 per cent, basis, is required from each participant in
the scheme, the balance being advanced by the Company at
the exceptionally low rate of interest of 3 per cent, per annum.
Repayments as shown by the accompanying tables will be
made weekly, and may be extended over optional periods
ranging from 21 to 29 years. The low rate of interest and
the spreading of the repayments over such lengthy periods
will place well within the means of all the erection on a nice
block of land of a comfortable and roomy brick house of good
appearance.
Life Assurance Scheme.
The Directors announce that to encourage the male em-
ployees of the Company to make provision for their old age,
they have decided to introduce a Life Assurance Scheme.
Every man 21 years of age and over who has been in the
service of the Company for a period of two years, and whose
salary does not exceed £3OO per annum is eligible to enter into
this scheme.
Each employee desiring to participate will take out a policy
with the Australian Mutual Provident Society, for such an
amount according to his age as is shown in the accompanying
schedule, and the Company will pay one-half of the annual
premiums on such policy.
The “Endowment Assurance” principle has been adopted
as the basis of the scheme, because of the great advantages it
offers. Under this form of Life Assurance, the amount of the
policy, together with bonuses, is payable to the assured himself
at the age for which the policy is taken out, or to his executors
or administrators at his death should that event occur pre-
viously. By this means not only will provision be made for
the assured’s old age, but also for those dependent upon him
should he die before the policy matures.


SCHEDULE
SHOWING PARTICULARS OP POLICIES to be effected on the lives of Employees
[Compiled by The AUSTRALIAN MUTUAL PROVIDENT SOCIETY]
j Age next Birthday.
PRE
Emp
Cont
(On
Weekly.
MIUM.
loyee’s
ribution
e half).
Yearly.
Total
Annual
Premium
as per
Tables.
Policy to mature at age.
Rndo
(Table J
lives wh
Medici
Amount
of
Original
Policy.
“A."
wment Assurance
) See Noted). For
o pass the Society’s
il Examination as
first class.
Results at Maturity
based on payments
actually made in
respect of Policies
recently matuied.
See Note 3.
" B.”
Endowment or
Alternative
Annuity
(Special Table)
See Note 2
For lives who fail
to pass the
Society’s Medical
Examination.
Guaranteed Value
at Maturity.
| - Age next Birthday.
Cash
Value.
Alternative
Equivalent
Annuity.
See Note 4.
Cash
Value
Equivalent
Annuity
See Note 4.
21
1/5
£i
13
8
£7
7
4
60
£299
.6" 595
£52
17 7
.6*52
10
6
21
22
1/5
3
13
8
7
7
4
60
290
577
51
5 7
563
50
0
9
22
23
1/6
3
18
0
7
16
0
60
298
593
52
14 0
567
50
7
10
23
24
1/7
4
2
4
8
4
8
60
304
589
52
6 8
568
50
9
4
24
25
1/7
4
2
4
8
4
8
60
295
569
50
11 5
540
47
19
10
25
26
1/8
4
6
8
8
13
4
60
300
576
51
3 10
539
-7
18
1
26
27
1/9
4
11
0
9
2
0
60
305
564
50
2 4
538
47
16
0
27
28
l/n
4
19
8
9
19
4
60
322
573
50
18 4
558
49
11
8
28
29
2A
5
4
0
10
8
0
60*
325
572
50
16 8
551
48
19
4
29
30
2/1
5
8
4
10
16
8
60
327
565
50
4 0
544
43
7
0
30
31
2/3
5
17
0
11
14
0
60
340
571
50
14 8
555
49
6
4
31
32
2/5
6
5
8
12
11
4
60
351
579
51
9 0
564
50
2
4
32
33
2/7
6
14
4
13
8
8
60
361
581
51
12 8
569
50
11
4.
33
34
2/8
6
18
8
13
17
4
60
357
564
50
2 6
553
49
2
11
34
35
2/11
7
u
8
15
3
4
60
374
575
51
2 1
570
50
13
2
35
36
3/2
8
4
8
16
9
4
60
383
582
51
14 6
581
51
12
9
36
37
3/4
8
13
4
17
6
8
60
390
573
50
18 6
574
51
0
3
37
38
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
60
390
557
49
10 1
565
50
4
3
38
39
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
60
372
528
46
18 6
529
47
0
3
39
40
2/5
6
5
8
12 11
4
65
293
454
47
14 1
477
50
2
8
40
41
2/7
6
14
4
13
8
8
65
299
457
48
0 8
479
50
7
0
41
42
2/9
7
3
0
14
6
0
65
305
454
47
14 4
479
50
7
0
42
43
2/11
7
11
8
15
8
4
65
308
449
47
4 0
476
50
0
8
43
44
. 3/1
8
0
4
16
0
8
65
311
441
46
7 0
470
49
8
0
44
45
3/4
8
13
4
17
6
8
65
319
440
46
5 0
474
49
16
4
*5
46
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
318
432
45
8 3
464
48
15
7
46
47
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
301
397
41
14 8
431
45
6
2
47
48
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
284
369
38
15 10
399
41
18
11
48
49
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
268
343
36
1 2
368
38
13
9
49
50
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
251
316
33
4 5
339
35
12
9
50
51
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
234
290
30
9 9
310
32
11
9
51
52
3/6
9
2
0
18
0
65
218
265
27
17 2
283
29
15
0
52
53
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
201
243
25
10 11
257
27
0
4
53
54
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
184
222
23
6 *9
231
24
5
8
54
55 .
3/6
9
2
0
18
4
0
65
167
202
21
4 8
206
21
13
1
55
NOTE I.—The Society’s Endowment Assurance Policies (Table J) mature at the end of a term of
years represented by the difference between the maturity age and the age next birthday at
entry. In th* event of death before maturity the full amount of the original policy with
accrued Bonuses to date of death is payable. Bonuses do not vest until the policy has been in
force for two years.
NOTE 2. —Policies under this special Table would mature at the end of a term of years represented
by the difference between the maturity age and the age next birthday at entry. In the event
of death before maturity, all premiums paid, other than the first, together with Simple
Interest thereon at 3% per annum would be payable.
NOTE 3. —The Bonuses included in the results quoted above represent the actual payments under
policies of similar age and duration, recently matured. It is neither promised nor guaranteed
that similar results will be realised in the future. Future Bonuses will depend on the profits
made by the Society in the future, which in their turn will depend on the conditions ruling
from time to time in regard to the main sources from which such profits are derived, viz.: (a)
The rate of Interest realised on the Society’s funds, (b) the rate of mortality experienced
amongst policy-holders and (c) the rate of expense at which the business of the Society is
conducted.
NOTE 4.—The Annuity is computed as commencing immediately after the birthday following
the maturity of the policy. The first instalment for a fractional period would be payable on
the first of the following month and thenceforth by quarterly instalments, ceasing on the
Quarter-day preceding death.
(Sgd.) F. T. BRIDGES.
Melbourne. Sth December, 1911, Resident Secretary A.M.P. Society.


Under “Endowment Assurance,” however, it is necessary
that a medical examination should be passed, and it cannot be
expected that in such a large body of men all will pass the test.
Accordingly, in those cases where the Assurance Society declines
the risk, weekly payments equal to the rates fixed for the
“Endowment Assurance” are made by the Company and the
employee to Individual Trust Account opened at the Govern-
ment Savings Bank.
The figures shown in the schedule have been arranged on
the most equitable basis possible, and will, it is hoped, give
satisfaction to all. The rates have all been supplied by the
A.M.P. Society, and while the annuity tables have been
specially compiled for the employees of the Company, the
premiums shown for the endowment assurance may be found
in the prospectus issued to the public by the Society. It must
be distinctly understood that the estimated values of the
policies at maturity are based entirely on past results of the
A.M.P. Society, and while there is no reason to believe that
these results will not be maintained, the Company accepts no
responsibility regarding them.
On account of the very heavy premiums, it has been found
impracticable to bring the men over 55 years of age under
the insurance tables. It is desired, however, that they should
receive from the Company as much consideration as the other
employees, and accordingly a special arrangement has been
made for them. Individual trust accounts will be opened at
the Government Savings Bank for their benefit, the Company
and the employee each paying 3s. 6d. per week into the ac-
count, which will earn interest at the Savings Bank current
rate.
The Directors confidently anticipate that every man in the
service of the Company will take advantage of this opportunity
to make a wise provision for his declining years and for those
depending upon him by ensuring them a competency in the
event of his death.
In addition to the foregoing, the Company pays half of
the Lodge Subsidy for the different employees, who get medi-
cal attention and medicine, also varying amounts ranging to
about £1 per week. In addition to this they allow employees


who are ill:—Males £1 Is. per week, and females 10s. 6d. per
week, for a period of 30 days during the 12 months; and in
cases where it is proved that they are still unable to come to
work, it is left to the management’s discretion to continue.
The employees have an excellent lunch at a cost of about
6d. per meal. The Company contributes a proportionate
amount, which runs into roughly £1,200 per annum for the
Melbourne factory. Plant necessary for preparing the lunch
is supplied free of charge.
Comment on the above seems superfluous, except to remark
that if only other Companies and employers in Australia gener-
ally adopted one-half of what the British Tobacco Co. have
done, and are doing on behalf of their employees, fewer strikes
would be taking place to-day.
In describing all these schemes it has been easiest to quote
financial results, but these are by no means the most important.
It is the effect of such schemes on the character of the in-
dividual worker which must be considered chiefly. There
seems to be no doubt but that the entire lack of interest in
their daily work from which so many workers suffer, causes
a gradual lowering of mental and moral standards, and there-
fore some method must be introduced so that each day’s work
shall leave the worker a better and more capable citizen, in-
stead of the reverse, as is too often the case. "Work in a
modem machinery-filled factory is often very monotonous,
and the only practical way of encouraging mental activity
in the worker, is by securing his interest in the progress of
the whole business or of the department in which he is work-
ing, which is frequently done by means of committees and
councils.
If industries so diverse as Gas production, Woollen and
Soap Manufacturers, Printing, Newspapers, and Agriculture
—whether in large or small Companies—or in private firms or
individual ownership, find it practicable, surely other indus-
tries can equally apply the principle. Profit Sharing can be
applied to any business, no matter however small.
The evidence contained in the foregoing, together with the
following chronology, should surely convince the greatest of
sceptics as to the practicability and wisdom of Profit Sharing.


Chronological Notes on British Profit-Sharing
and Co-Partnership.
These Chronological Notes from a short summary of the successful
Profit Sharing movement in Great Britain from the year 1895 to 1914.
1895. R. Binns & Sons, Nurserymen, Cross. Bonus, partly in cash.
1895. T. Chalmers & Son Ltd., Paper Makers. Bonus paid in cash.
1895. G. W. Chitty & Co. Ltd., Flour Mills, Dover. Bonus, partly in
cash and partly to provident fund.
1895. R. B. Carr, Lomas & Co. Ltd., Mantle Manufacturers, Manchester.
Cash- bonus.
1896. Pearson & Rutter, Provision Merchants, Liverpool, &c. Cash bonus.
1896. T. J. and J. Taylor, Woollen Manufacturers, Batley. Bonus in-
vested in shares.
1897. H. Hutchinson, Builder, Haslemere. Bonus, partly cash and
partly provident fund.
1897. W. Latimer, Builder, Carlisle. Cash bonus.
1898. S. Mordan & Co., Silversmiths, &c., London Bonus credited to
provident fund
1898. T. Morley, Printer, Reading. Cash bonus.
1899. Humphries & Bobbett, Corn Millers, Bristol. Cash bonus.
1899. Rollason & Jones, Web, &c., Manufacturers, Nuneaton. Cash bonus.
1899. Wyles Bros. Ltd., Boot Merchants, Derby. Cash bonus.
1900. Stafford Corporation, Gas & Electricity Dept. Cash bonus.
1900. W. Foster & Sons, Slaters, &c., Padiham. Cash bonus.
1900. Spillers & Bakers, Millers, &c., Cardiff, &c. Cash bonus.
1900. D. Cameron & Son, Builders, Edinburgh. Cash bonus.
1900 John Stow Ltd., Cabinet Makers, Bradford. Cash bonus.
1901. Sir Hereward Wake, Bart. Profit-sharing bonus, in cash, to farm
employees.
1901. Commercial Gas Co. Profit-sharing on basis of sliding scale. Half
withdrawable, and half invested in stock.
1901. Chester United Gas Co. Part cash and part invested.
1901. Newport (Mon) Gas Co. Provident fund.
1902. Lord Rayleigh introduced profit-sharing in connection with his
farms at Tarling, Essex.
1902. British Columbia Electric Railway Co., Canada. Cash bonus.
1902. Morris & Bolton Ltd., Printing-ink Manufacturers, Furnival Street,
E.C. Cash bonus.
1902. H. Backhouse & Co. Ltd., Grocers, Druggists, &c., Dundalk, Ire-
land. Cash bonus.
1902. J. Cropper & Co. Ltd., Paper Makers, Kendal. Cash bonus.
1903. P. C. Garnett, Ironfounder, Cleckheaton. Cash bonus.
1903. Saville’s (1902) Ltd., Brewer’s Sundrymen, Hulme, Manchester.
Cash bonus.
1904. John Knight & Sons Ltd., Soap Manufacturers. Cash bonus.
1904. Butt, Yosper & Knight, Woollen Merchants, Plymouth. Cash bonus.


1904. J. Adams & Son, Brewers, Newbury. Cash bonus.
1905. Hay & Son Ltd., Wine Merchants, Sheffield. Cash bonus.
1905. Mackenzie & Storrie Ltd., Printers, Leith. Cash bonus.
1906. Henry Sagar Ltd., Dyers, Halifax. Cash bonus.
1906. “Mail & Leader” Ltd., Publishers, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Cash
bonus.
1907. Prudential Assurance Co. (Annuities Branch). Cash bonus.
1907. W. J. Parry Ltd., General Merchants, Bethesda. Bonus invested.
1907. Douglas & Son Ltd., Musical Instrument Manufacturers, Glasgow.
Cash bonus.
1907. A. C. Penman, Queensbury Motor Works, Dumfries. Cash bonus.
1907. D. Bedhead & Co. Ltd., Confectioners, Kettering. Cash bonus.
1908. Leamington Priors Gas Co. Cash and investment.
1908. “The Reporter” Ltd., Publishers, Dewsbury. Cash bonus.
1908. Bournemouth Gas & Water Co. Detained until £lO stock is pur-
chased; afterwards half is withdrawable.
1908. Cardiff Gas Light & Coke Co. Entire bonus to be invested in
stock.
1908. Castner-Kellner Alkali Co. Ltd. Cash bonus.
1908. Croydon Gas Co. Bonus retained until £5 stock is allotted; half
withdrawable afterwards.
1908. Epsom & Ewell Gas Co. Bonus invested in stock.
1908. Gloucester Gas Light Co. Half invested and half withdrawable.
1908. Rugby Gas Co. Accumulates until sufficient to buy £lO stock.
Partly withdrawable after.
1908. Tottenham & Edmonton Gas Light & Coke Co. Half invested and
half withdrawable.
1908. Tunbridge Wells Gas Co. Accumulates for 5 years. Afterwards
part is withdrawable and part invested.
1908. Walker & Wallsend Union Gas Co. Accumulates for investment.
1908. Wrexham Gas Co. Accumulates for 5 years. Half withdraw-
able afterwards.
1908. Tamworth Herald Co. Ltd. Cash bonus.
1908. Strutt & Parker, Farmers, Dengie, Essex. Cash bonus.
1908. Wellingborough Gas Light Co. Ltd. Bonus invested in ordinary
stock.
1909. Gas Light & Coke Co. After £5 of stock has been purchased,
half is retained for investment and half withdrawable in cash.
1909. Lever Bros. Ltd., Soap Manufacturers. “Annual distribution of
partnership (share) certificates, benefiting as ordinary shares
after fixed percentage has been paid on these.” (Partner-
ship shares cannot be transferred, and are cancelled if holder
leaves the firm’s service.)
1909. Barratt & Co. Ltd., Manufacturing Confectioners. Profit-sharing
bonus in cash.
1909. Cotton Powder Co. Ltd. Bonus invested in ordinary stock.
1909. Cambridge University & Town Gas Light Co. Bonus, partly
withdrawable and partly retained.
1909. Dartford Gas Co. Bonus retained for investment in stock.
1909. Grantham Gas Co. Bonus, partly withdrawable and part invested.
1909. Watford Gas Light & Coke Co. Bonus invested in stock.


1909. Ilford Gas Co. Bonus retained. Half invested, and remainder
withdrawable in ease of urgent necessity.
1909. Norman Sawyer & Co. Ltd. Printers & Stationers. Cash bonus.
1909. Weston-Super-Mare Gas Co. Bonus, half invested and half with-
drawable.
1909. Westminster Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. Cash bonus.
1910. Inglis & Co. Ltd. Bread & Cake Manufacturers. Bonus re-
tained until £5 is accumulated; further sums withdrawable or
may be left on deposit.
1910. Hasler & Clapham, Corn Merchants, Walford. Cash bonus.
1910. Longwood Gas Co. Half bonus invested, remainder withdrawable.
1910. Wandsworth & Putney Gas Co. Bonus wholly invested in stock.
1910. J. T. Cooper & Son, Upholsterers, Gravesend. Cash bonus.
1910. Wilkin & Sons Ltd., Jam Manufacturers, Tiptree, Essex. Cash
bonus.
1910. The “Sanitas” Co. Ltd., Limehouse, E. Cash bonus.
1910. Walford, Hasler & Co. Ltd., Coal Merchants, Dunmow. Cash
bonus.
1910. Gregory, Love & Co. Ltd., Grocers, Beading. Cash bonus.
1911. Plymouth & Stonehouse Gas, Coal, & Lighting Co. Part of bonus
withdrawable; remainder, invested.
1911. Plaistowe Ltd., Fruit Preserves. Modified form of Lever Bro-
thers’ scheme.
1911. Harrow & Stanmore Gas Co. Bonus wholly invested in stock.
1911. Bussells & Wrangham Ltd., Brewers, &c, Malton. Bonus invested.
1911. Johnson Bros. (Dyers) Ltd., Bootle, Liverpool. Cash bonus.
1911. Loders & Nucoline Ltd., Oilseed Mills, Silvertown. Bonus part
in cash and part invested.
1911. C. H. Osborne, Hat Manufacturer, Luton. Cash bonus.
1912. Wilkinson & Biddell Ltd., Wholesale Drapers, Birmingham. Sur-
plus profits divided between shareholders and employees.
1912. Liverpool United Gas Light Co. Bonus on wages, based on slid-
ing scale; half invested in stock, and half withdrawable under
special circumstances.
1912. Notting Hill Electric Lighting Co. Ltd. Cash bonus.
1912. Solicitors Law Stationery Society Ltd. Cash bonus.
1912. Samuel Jones & Co., Paper Merchants. Cash bonus.
1912. B. S. Murray & Co. Ltd., Manufacturing Confectioners. Cash
bonus.
1912. E. S. &A. Eobinson Ltd., Printers, etc. Cash bonus.
1912. Bobert Martin Ltd., Printers. Bonus applied to purchase shares
until £5O has been allotted; afterwards in cash if so desired.
1913. John S. Booth & Sons Ltd., Cloth Manufacturers. Cash bonus.
1913. Canterbury Gas & Water Co. Bonus invested in stock.
1913. Walter Somer & Co. Ltd., Forgemasters. Cash bonus.
1913. Swansea Gas Light Co., half bonus invested in stock, and re-
mainder credited to deposit account.
1914. Bedhill Gas Co. Bonus to be all invested for first five years;
afterwards half may be withdrawn for approved purposes.
1914. Grainger & Smith, Cloth Makers & Manufacturing Clothiers, Dud-
ley.


Chapter VI.
Co-partnership and Industrial Efficiency.
No one can look back upon the events which have taken
place, and are taking place, in the Labor world during the
past few years, without arriving at the conclusion that grave
defects exist in our industrial system.
Throughout the length and breadth of the land there has
been an upheaval of turbulence and discontent unprecedented
in its character, and which certainly shook at its foundations
the complex structure of our modem civilization. To what
must this outburst be attributable? There can be no doubt
that, whatever may have been its origin, the rapid extension
of disaffection must be ascribed to the. existence of a wide-
spread belief among the working classes that they have not
had their fair share of the increased wealth and prosperity
the country as a whole has enjoyed. On every side are evident
signs of the greater luxury existing to-day compared with, say,
a quarter of a century ago; and, in considering them, the
average workman if asked whether his position and prospects
in life have improved in the same degree, almost invariably
answers in the negative. On the other hand, most employers,
if questioned upon the subject, would just as unhesitatingly
affirm that their men did not work so well as formerly, that
they took less interest in their employment, and could be less
depended upon than in the past to perform satisfactorily the
duties they engaged themselves to fulfil.
In these two statements may be shortly summed up the
men’s and the masters’ cases. There is a large proportion of
truth in both, and that they may fairly, be considered to
describe the state of affairs existing to-day by reason of which
our industries are divided into two opposing camps—the em-
ployers and the employees.
Now, it is this state of affairs which is at the bottom of
much of the industrial unrest, and it is this evil which by
the adoption of Co-partnership can be removed. The principle
upon which it is based is that after Capital has been fairly


remunerated for the risks it takes by its investment in an
undertaking, it should give to the employees a fair share of
the further profits. How will this work out in practice?
Here is a concrete case, that of the South Metropolitan Gas
(London) Company’s Co-partnership. The share capital of
this undertaking on the 31st December, 1914, was £8,325,340.
As an inducement to economical working, the Company are
allowed by Parliament to pay two shillings and eightpence
per cent, for each penny in reduction of the price of gas; and
by the Co-partnership scheme every employee gets three-
quarters per cent, extra on his wages for every such penny
reduction.
This scheme has been in existence since 1889, and up to the
31st December, 1914, £691,596 had been distributed among
employees, as a bonus to their wages. The employees, number-
ing 6,303, actually held on 31st December, 1914, shares which
had a market value of no less than £450,683, in addition to
which some have used the bonus for the purchase of houses,
or to set themselves up beyond the seas, where many are
doing well. So far from a Co-partner being less mobile by
reason of his partnership, he is potentially more so. He can
move about the world with greater freedom through having
ready cash.
What has been the result to the Company of this Co-partner-
ship? For twenty-five years, unruffled industrial peace. The
men do their work with goodwill, and intelligently enter into
the requirements of their duties, whether fixed or changing by
circumstances. Think of the difference between a willing and
an unwilling worker! What percentage in value might it not
reach? The men carry the flag of the business all over the
area supplied with gas. What must it not be worth to the
Company to have the thousands of jobs necessary in the
houses of consumers of gas performed by men who have an
interest in the business and are attached to it, rather than
by (as is too often the case) covert enemies? The Company
constantly receive evidence that this is actually so. They
get the use of their men’s brains as well as their muscles;
and whenever difficulties arise connected with the supply or
use of gas, they are always ready to give the undertaking


the benefit of the experience which so often, in technical
matters, can only be obtained by intimate day-by-day associa-
tion with the many operations involved in them.
Let us, by way of illustration, assume a case. Suppose
an undertaking with a capital of £IOO,OOO earns, say, £II,OOO
profit per annum. £SOOO of this profit is allocated in payment
of interest charges at five per cent, on the capital, and the
remainder divided in equal percentages to capital and labor.
If the cost of wages per annum were £IOO,OOO then the share
of both labor and capital would be equal in amount; that is to
say, £3OOO to each, or at the rate of three per cent. But sup-
pose the wages only equalled £50,000, the profit remaining the
same, labor would get £2OOO, its four per cent., and capital would
get £4OOO, its four per cent. Again, if the labor costs were
£200,000 the surplus could only be appropriated on a two per
cent, basis, £4OOO going to labor and £2OOO to capital.
The employers’ indifference is bound to diminish as they
realise more and more clearly that the present condition of
things cannot continue. The employer, who is frequently con-
servative in his ideas, says, “You are asking me to adopt a
scheme whereby I may have to pay an increase of five or ten
per cent., perhaps, on my wages. Why, I can only just manage
to make ends meet now!” Precisely! Because by his wages
system of payment he has done nothing to attach his employees
to the business in which they are engaged, and thus given
them an inducement to look at matters from the employer’s
standpoint as well as their own. Some people rim away with
the idea that the percentage share paid under Co-partnership
is a medium for grinding more work out pf the worker.
Nothing of the kind. He is asked not to work otherwise than
fairly, hut to give up wasting his time and materials, to take
an intelligent interest in his work, and therefore to give his
employer the advantage not only of willing hands instead of
unwilling ones, but a sympathetic spirit in substitution for an
obstructive one. Neither a house nor a State can stand divided
against itself. Yet does not this describe our Industrial State
as it very largely exists to-day?
Robert Owen was shown over a large mill at Leeds, the
owner of which remarked, “This army of working people, if


they chose to be careful in the use of the material entrusted
to them, might save me £4OOO a year.” “Then,” replied Owen,
‘ ‘ why not give them £2OOO to do it, and you will gain the other
£2000.”
The employee is at present placed in a position of personal
indifference, so far as his own financial responsibility is con-
cerned, in the success or failure of the business. The employee
sharing in the profits of the business, in addition to receiving
salary or wages, would ever have in his mind that the failure
of the business would sweep away his annually increasing
share in the profits of the undertaking, which share, equally
as is the case with the Capitalist, has taken him a lifetime
of unremitting application and patient effort to acquire.
Therefore, Co-partnership, rightly constituted, must of neces-
sity bring the employee into close contact with Capital in loss
sharing as well as in profit sharing, which would lift both
Management and Labor into the stimulating, developing, and
elevating heights of profit earner and profit sharer, in addition
to that of the salary or wage drawer.
Co-partnership is an extension of profit sharing, enabling
the worker to accumulate a portion, or all, of his share of
profits in the capital of the business employing him, thus gain-
ing the rights and responsibilities of a shareholder. The
principle upon which Co-partnership proceeds is recognition
of the necessity, in the first instance, of a wage payment to
the workman for his labor, and of the right of the Capitalist
to a return upon the Capital he has employed in the business;
after that an equitable sharing of such profits as may remain,
these to be secured to the workman by giving him an actual
share in the property of the undertaking. The principle is as
simple as it is just, and the practical difficulties in the way of
putting it into operation are seen to be surprisingly few.
A still further stage adopted in some Co-partnership
schemes is the provision of a direct share in the management of
a business, as well as a share in the profits, one or more seats
on the Board of Directors being expressly reserved for repre-
sentatives of the workers. Thus it will be seen that while
Profit Sharing is good, Co-partnership is better, for it gives
to the participating worker a definite tangible share of his
firm’s assets, and is therefore calculated to impress him with
the responsibilities of his position.


The Late Sir G. Livesey on Co-partnership and Industrial
Efficiency.
1. Co-partnership identifies and unites the interests of em-
ployers and employed, and leads them to work together for
the common good as nothing else has done or can do.
2. It relieves the Directors and the responsible officers of
all anxiety in their relations with those under them, makes
strikes impossible, and enables all questions between employers
and employed to be settled amicably and justly, thereby pre-
venting all difficulties and disputes.
3. It gives to the employed of all ranks a sense of responsi-
bility and an interest in their work unknown under any other
system.
4. By helping them to become owners of property, it makes
their present position in life more secure, and gives them hope
for the future, enabling them to make provision for old age
or misfortune.
5. The unrest of the present time is largely due to the un-
equal distribution of property. Co-partnership effects a better
distribution, and converts the “have nots” into the “haves;”
thereby displacing discontent by contentment. Co-partnership
is thus the best antidote to Socialism.
6. By giving men an interest in their work and in the pros-
perity of the business, and thereby creating a feeling of re-
sponsibility for its success, by encouraging thrift, habits of
self-denial and self-control are formed, and self-respect is
increased and character strengthened. The result must be
better workmen and more profitable servants.
7. Co-partnership is therefore good, sound, and profitable
business.
8. It fulfils Mazzini’s prophecy, and proves it true that
partnership must be the ultimate position of the laborer.
9. The dispute between Capital and Labor has to be settled ;
Co-partnership is the final and only solution.
10. There are difficulties in many trades in the way of its
introduction, but they have all been easily overcome. Is it not
therefore the duty of employers to lead in the great work of
showing the way to peace to the world of industry, and thereby
benefiting not only themselves, but the nations at large?


A word of advice. In starting Co-partnership, it is neces-
sary to gain the confidence of the employees. To gain their
trust they must be trusted, and it must be made perfectly clear
that it is not simply a selfish move to benefit the business only,
for if that is its sole object it will deservedly fail. There
are two objects of equal importance to be attained: First, to
give the employees an interest in the business beyond their
salaries or wages; and, secondly, and quite as important, to
enable them to permanently improve their position in life,
to help to make them better men and therefore better servants.
These objects must be always kept in view. Co-partnership is
comradeship, brotherhood in business. This is the goal which
can be Avon, or I should not waste your time in argument on
the subject.
For sixty years have I been at work in the gas industry,
and have had the privilege and the happiness of taking part
in its advancement and benefit; but looking back over a long
and active business life, nothing in conection therewith can
compare with the satisfaction resulting from the settlement
of the Capital and Labor question by Co-partnership. It was
inconceivable twenty years ago, and would be still but for
the fact that it has been done. Its accomplishment is due
firstly to being founded on the right principle (the Golden
Rule, in fact), and secondly to the whole-hearted co-operation
of all concerned —shareholders, directors, officials, and fore-
men, and, not least, by the great majority of the workmen.
A system that creates a bond of union which no other plan
has done or can do, must be founded on an unassailable
principle.
Our Creator has not left his creature Man without guid-
ance, but has in a single sentence, which is proof of its divine
origin, given a rule to govern all the relations and dealings
of man with his fellows, in all ages and places, and under
all circumstances and conditions. It is often said it is not
applicable to business. It is certainly very difficult for im-
perfect beings such as ourselves to live up to a perfect rule.
But it is the fact that the nearer we approach it the better
and the happier we are. He who “spake as never man
spake” did not make a mistake when He said: “Therefore
all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,


do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets.”
It sounds almost like sacrilege to quote those divine words
in the face of one’s own imperfections and shortcomings.
But there they are for our guidance in all our acts and deal-
ings; and I venture humbly and reverently to submit that
their application to the business relations of employers and
employed is the system known as Co-partnership.
The late Sir G. Livesey was little of a theorist, but a prac-
tical man, advocating a remedy for an evil which he saw was
sapping the vitality and checking the activity of industrial
life, and for a quarter of a century the company whose
destinies he had guided so ably has enjoyed the inestimable
blessing of industrial peace. When trade in the Port of
London was at a standstill during the great strike, the com-
pany’s tugs and barges went their accustomed way upon an
otherwise deserted river; its carmen delivered coke and gas
appliances to its usual customers when the transport workers
all around it were idle. And thus, unhampered by labor
troubles, its officials have been able to devote their whole
energies and their entire resources to increasing the popu-
larity of gas by improved methods of production, and by more
intelligent application of its uses to solidify and strengthen
the foundation upon which their business stands. Just as
patriotism animates a nation, so Co-partnership can permeate
a manufacturing company with its animating force, and bring
back to the soulless mammoths of which industrial life is
now mainly composed the same spirit of brotherhood and
fellowship which animated master and man before the factory
system turned its mankind—and womankind too —into mere
dehumanised units of a vast mechanical organisation.
This, then, is the Co-partnership ideal, “Efficiency” in-
spired by hope and contentment. Industry can desire no
higher one, and the path of Co-partnership is in many sincere
opinions the only one by which it will be reached.
The following passage is quoted from F. W. Taylor, on
“The Principles of Scientific Management” (Harper, New
York, 1911): —
“During a period of nearly 30 years the employees of one
company after another, including a large range and diversity
of industries, have gradually changed from the ordinary to


the scientific type of management. At least 50,000 workmen
in the United States are now employed under this system;
and they are receiving from 30 per cent, to 100 per cent,
higher wages daily than are paid to men of similar calibre
with whom they are surrounded, while the companies em-
ploying them are more prosperous than ever before. In these
companies the output per man and per machine has on the
average been doubled. During all these years there has never
been a single strike among the men working under this sys-
tem. In place of suspicions, watchfulness, and the more or
less open warfare which characterises the ordinary types of
management, there is universally friendly co-operation be-
tween the managers and the men.”
Groups
Production
Horse-
power
Wage-
earners
Value per
wage-earner
Horsepower
per 1.000
wagre- earners
1. Textiles, Etc.: —
United Kingdom ...
£
173,634,300
1,470,940
714,559
£
243
2,060
United States
247,347,000
1,650,350
584,165
423
2,826
2. Clothing, Etc.: —
United Kingdom ...
97,368,000
51,443
590,288
165
87
United States
354,478,000
291,443
772,444
459
378
3. Gasworks, Etc.: —
United Kingdom ...
49,435,000
137,668
113,840
434
1,209
United States
99,740,000
619,365
109,296
912
5,667
4. Railway Carriages,
Etc. : —
United Kingdom ...
13,187,000
38,824
48,482
272
801
United States
49,261,000
198,888
114,654
432
1,734
5. Paper, Printing,
Etc.: —
United Kingdom ...
30,027,000
214,573
101,034
297
2,124
United States
214,697,000
1,629,612
379,984
565
4,289
6. Food and Drink: —
United Kingdom ...
93,589,000
95,906
131,379
712
730
United States
168,964,000
495,538
122,234
1,382
4,054
Totals : —
United Kingdom ...
457,240,000
2,009,354 !
1,699,582
269
1,182
United States
1,134,487,000
4,885,196 !
2,082,777
545
2,346
1. Cotton goods, silks, textile dyeing, etc., leather
2. Boots and shoes, clothing, hats and caps, gloves, hosiery
3. Lime, cement, gasworks, soap and candles, paint and varnish, matches
4. Railway carriages and wagons, firearms and ammunition, clocks and watches, cutlery
and tools
5. Paper, cardboard boxes, pens and pencils, printing and publishing
6. Brewing and malting, butter and cheese, cocoa, chocolate and confectionery
gloves, hosiery


Indeed, in the matter of industrial efficiency we have much
to learn from America. A fairly wide comparison can be
made between our census of production which relates to 1907
and that of the United States for 1909, and shows startling
results. The comparison as made covers 26 separate occupa-
tions, which may be combined into six groups, as under; and
the figures given include value of production, horse-power
employed, and number of wage-earners, with proportions
shown of value produced and horse-power employed per wage-
earner.
It will be seen that, taking all these trades together, the
proportion of value produced per wage-earner for the year’s
work is £545 for the United States, as compared with £269 for
the United Kingdom; but the values may not be strictly com-
parable, the United States may obtain less value of goods for
the cost than we do. But in any case the margin in favor of
the United States is very large, and is clearly explicable by the
proportion of machine-power used, which is as 2346 per 1000
wage-earners in the United States compared to 1182 for the
United Kingdom.
It is not to be supposed that we could at once adopt Ameri-
can methods; the circumstances of the two countries differ
too much. Increase of trade must go hand in hand with im-
proved mechanical appliances, or labor will be,displaced; but
the comparison undoubtedly shows how large a margin there
remains for possible benefit either to the employer, the wage-
earner, the capitalist, or the consumer.
Conclusion.
The essentials of successful Profit-Sharing and Co-partner-
ship are as follows:
1. It must not degenerate into charity or philanthropy.
2. Its object must be the increased success of the under-
taking, with increased prosperity for all connected with it.
3. It must not place Management in the position of servant
to Labor through liability to criticism and censure.
4. It must ensure to Labor freedom from control of Man-
agement in the enjoyment of the benefits derived from Profit
Sharing.


5. Its benefits must be felt by wives and children.
6. It must have a distinctly elevating tendency on Manage-
ment and -Labor, raising them in the social and intellectual
scale, and increasing their power for enjoyment and happiness
as well as their power of usefulness.
7. Control must remain with those who find the Capital.
Certain lessons may be learned by a study of the records
of failure in profit-sharing. These are some of them:—
(a) A cash bonus, which can be dissipated without pro-
ducing any permanent benefit to the recipient, is a crude and
unsatisfactory arrangement which may fail at any time. Ie
is only a stage in the evolution of Co-partnership.
(b) Conditions of labor and rates of wages which are in
the slightest degree inferior to those prevailing among the
best employers are fatal to the success of any profit-sharing
or Co-partnership scheme.
(c) To make a condition that a workman shall contribute
anything out of his ordinary earnings is to court failure.
(d) Any interference with a man’s relations to trades
unions or other organisations is certain to arouse a feeling of
resentment.
It needs considerable tact, patience, and faith in Co-
partnership to enable you to convince all your employees that
you really desire to permanently benefit them; for a long time
there may remain a few irreconcilables who suspect your
motives and misrepresent your actions.
When a scheme fails because it is not adapted to modern
industrial and social conditions, or because it has been used
for the undue advantage of a particular class or party, it is
not fair to regard it as a failure of Co-partnership principles
The true solution of the conflict between Capital and Labor
is to be found in their union; that is, by the general distribu-
tion of shares, or other form of interest in the company or
business, as the case may be.
Profit Sharing and Co-partnership is the only present
method whereby master and man can work together in har-
mony. A wise and equitable bond of union between the three
great forces in industrial activities —Capital, Management, and
Labor.
