



i’UEITY .SERIES, \ O . HI.
THE CHOICE BETWEEN
&UPJJPY AMD IMPUI^UPY.
By
RICHARD ARTHUR, M.A., M.D,
AN APPEAL TO YOUNG MEN*
Price, 3d. Redaction tor
*£ijhnsu 5
WILLIAM BROOKS & CO., EDUCATIONAI* IRPJNTEES*
17 CASiLsasAOH SirasEr


II o"
vx.
>. -r c
"■ 'V ~


The Choice Between
PURITY AND IMPURITY
booklet is addressed to those who are
standing on the threshold of manhood,
and to whom the unknown future seems full of
promise and gladness. This is a period crowded
with possibilities of coming good or ill.
Boyhood, with its thoughtlessness and de-
pendence on others, has passed away, and the
time has arrived when the lad must stand on
his own feet, and decide for himself his course
in life. He finds himself at the parting of the
ways. He must choose wisely, for the time for
choice is short, and his decisions are not to be
recalled.
Now the essential difference between the boy
and the man consists in this—that the boy is,
truly speaking, a sexless being, while in the
man there has gradually developed that strange,
imperious, almost over-mastering sense we call
the sexual instinct. The reason for the in-
tensity of this perfectly natural instinct is
evident. It is that men shall be prompted to
reproduce their kind, and thus ensure the
continuance of the race.


The boy knows nothing of this instinct,
which is well ; and I believe that most lads
would not be disturbed by the vague stirrings
of the sox sense, were it not that in many of
them it is precociously developed by a constant
turning of the attention to sex matters, and a
pruriency of imagination, which some wise and
judicious teaching at an earlier age would have
prevented.
Bur, even though the development of this
sense be retarded, it comes at last, and then the
young man is truly, as I have said, at the
parting of the ways.
If we grasp the fact that the desire for
sexual gratification is undoubtedly the strongest
temptation which any young man has to face,
we will then realise that by far the most
important choice he is called upon to make is
connected with this sexual instinct.
He has to choose—though he may not be
conscious of the necessity of the decision—
whether he will be master of his sex sense, or
Ms sex sense master of him.
The position is this: Before him lie a
number of years, during which this sexual
desire will more or less surge up within him,
demanding urgently and constantly to be grati-
fied, It is useless to deny or belittle its
strength, for, after that of self-preservation, it.


is the most potent instinct in human nature.
Now two courses are open to him ; He may
decide either that he will keep this instinct in
perfect subjection till the time arrives when he
may rightfully gratify it in marriage, or that he
will yield to its demands, and take ■or make
opportunities for its satisfaction, spending, as
some one says, 84 years of struggle in foul
morasses aad waste of precious life-strength.”
The one road leads to a noble and virile
manhood, the other to the bondage of sensuality
and the dangers of physical and moral
corruption.
You, then, reader of these words, who are
about to put out on life’s voyage, which do you
choose ?
You prefer to yield. It is the easier way
and the more pleasant. Very good I We will
see whither this road leads. But, first of all,
do not seek to Justify yourself by the excuse
that it is impossible for a young man to main-
tain continence till marriage. There are
thousands of witnesses to disprove this—men
who have gone to their wives with the same
chastity that they expected from them. And
let mo quote what one distinguished surgeon
says-— 84 My own opinion is that where, as in
the case with a large number, a young man’s
education has been properly watched, and his


mind has nofc been debased by any vile practices,
it is usually a comparatively easy task to be
continent, and requires no great or extra-
ordinary effort; and every year of voluntary
chastity renders the task easier by the mere
force of habit.” Another authority states :
“ The habit of continence, early established, will
make the practice of it in after years a com-
paratively easy thing, while early and un-
restrained indulgence will bring about such
nervous irritation and constitutional arrest,
not to mention great instability of purpose and
diminished power of self-control, as will lead
the unhappy sufferer to seek relief in unlawful
or perilous expedients.”
Now, these opinions, and others I shall quote
later, are those of some of the most eminent
men in the medical profession; and they all
point to the same conclusion—that absolute
continence is perfectly possible for every young
man. It is useless, then, for you to think that
you are an exception to this rule.
But you may avail yours elf of another excuse
which is very commonly used to defend and
justify immorality.
You may say that, though continence is
possible, yet the practice of it is injurious to
health, and that some medical men recom-


mend sexual indulgence as a “ physiological
necessity.”
I will admit that this mischievous belief is a
widespread one, though it has no foundation
whatever in fact, and, because many are misled
by it, I will give the opinions of some well-known
doctors who have spoken out on this subject.
Sir Andrew Clark, the greatest physician of
his day in London, said, in a lecture at Oxford
University :— !£ Continence does no harm, does
not interfere with development, elevates the
whole nature, increases energy, and sharpens
insight. Incontinence is not necessary, weakens
self-denial, dulls and lowers the whole nature.
To say that fornication is necessary to the
health of young men is not only an error, but a
cruelty. There is difficulty and trial, but no
injury in continence.”
Sir James Pwget, the surgeon to the Queen,
in an address to medical students, says:
“ Many of your patients will ask you about
sexual intercourse, and expect you to prescribe
fornication. I would just as soon prescribe
theft or lying, or anything else that God has
forbidden. Chastity does no harm to mind or
body ; its discipline is excellent. Marriage can
be safely waited for,”
Dr. Gowers, the great authority on nervous
diseases, states : —“ The opinions which, on


grounds falsely called ‘ physiological/ suggest or
permit unchastity are terribly prevalent among
young men, but they are absolutely false. With
all the force that any knowledge I possess and
any authority I have can give, I assert that
this belief is contrary to fact. I assert that
no mao ever yet was in the slightest degree the
worse for continence, or the better for in-
continence. From incontinence during un-
married life all are worse morally j a ' clear
majority are, in the end, worse physically; and
in no small number the result is, and ever will
be, utter physical shipwreck on one of the many
rocks, sharp, Jagged-edged, which beset the way,
or on one of the many banks of festering slime
which no care can possibly avoid.”
And, finally, this is what Professor Lionel
Beale says :
“ I would remark that no sufficent valid
objections have been established upon reasonable
grounds, or upon facts of physiology and health,
to living—nay, to passing the whole life—in a
state of celibacy. The argument that if mar-
riage cannot, for various reasons, be carried out,
it is nevertheless necessary, upon physiological
grounds, that a substitute of some kind should
be found, is altogether without foundation. It
cannot be too distinctly stated that the strictest
temperance and purity is as much in accordance


with physiological as moral law, and that the
yielding to desire, appetite, and passion is no
more to be justified on physiological or physical
than upon moral or religious grounds.”
I could go on multiplying these -sayings of
eminent medical men, but this is unnecessary.
Enough has been quoted to prove that the
leaders in the medical world are on the side of
continence and purity. And so, if a doctor—
and I am ashamed to think that this noble
profession should contain any such men—should
recommend you to commit fornication, you can
reply that his advice is contrary to that of all
the greatest and most high-minded medical
men. lam almost tempted to suggest that you
should also ask, as one young man is reported
to have done on a similar occasion : “ Have you
a daughter, doctor, to enable me to follow your
advice 1”
Continence, then, means health, nob ill-health,
so let us dismiss altogether this miserable
excuse for wrongdoing. It is necessary to
advance some other reasons than this as a plea
for yielding to your sexual desires.
You fall back, then, on this : that you think
(i a young man should s sow his wild oats,’ and
see some life before he settles down to
respectability. Others have done this, and


have been none the worse for it, and why
should not yon f”
So be it! I will accept this reason. If you
choose deliberately to “ sow these oats,” why,
then, you must, and there is no one to prevent
you. But what I want you to know is that
these wild oats have a harvest which hag to be
reaped, and what this harvest is I am going to
tell you so plainly and fully that you will do
your sowing with your eyes open, and will not
be able to plead ignorance.
In this particular sin one must have a
partner—the woman. Thus you are not only
doing wrong yourself, but you are dragging
another person into it.
Now', there are two alternatives before a man
who is determined to gratify his sexual passions.
He must choose as his partner in wrongdoing
either a woman who has previously been chaste,
or he must consort with one of those un-
fortunates who live by hiring their bodies for
money on the streets. lam prepared to believe
that many young men are rushed by their
passions into sin without having given any
thought to what they are doing, or to the
actual or possible results of their action. It is
to prevent this that I ask you, before yielding
to the demands of this exceedingly strong and
imperious instinct, to sit down' calmly and


count the cost of yielding. Look the matter
straight in the face, and then, when the
temptation comes, it, at least, will not take you
unawares.
If your partner is a woman previously pure,
then it will only be by the meanest and most
treacherous of devices that you will be able to
attain your object. All chaste women shrink
instinctively from impurity, and it is only
through their ignorance, their weakness, or,
most pitiful of all, their love, that they are
ruined. Women yield often because their
affection carries them away, and their nature
renders them prone to make any sacrifice for
the man they love. You will have to work
with lying promises, with false protestations of
affection, with all that is devilish and degrading
to manhood, and in the end the woman will
only consent passively and reluctantly.
You will gain a momentary gratification, and
the physical, and also the social consequences
to yourself, if your wrong-doing come to light,
will be altogether trivial. The moral conse-
quences to you are a different matter. And
now for the woman ! You have taken from
her what is deemed her most precious possession.
In her own eyes, and, strangely enough, in
yours too, she can never be the same as she
was before, however purely she may henceforth


I 1 !?' f come to know ol her
fell, across _ her name will be drawn a smear
wfajcb nothing will ever wipe out. The lowest
and most debased will claim her as their equal
and the righteous will gather up their garments
and pass widely by.
And you must remember, further, that this
one act of wrongdoing may cause her to
become a mother, with the dangers and life-
long responsibilities that this entails
Try and realise her mental state when the
revelation of such an occurrence is forced upon
her. Think of the agony of shame and dread,
the awful revulsion of natural feeling when the
knowledge which should bring gladness and
content to a woman produces nothing but
horror and loathing.
Think how, at the hour of her greatest need
she may be cast out from home, and all the
lovmg attention that should be then her due,
and have to face suffering, and perhaps death’
with only cold and unsympathetic strangers
around her.
And remember, too, that there is always a
first step to the very lowest depths of degrada-
tion, and that the bright and innocent girl of
to-day who yields herself to your lust, may be
the painted, gin-soddea harlot of a few years


hence, whose consumptive cough drowns her
hoarse and despairing laughter.
Sit down and think of it ; then ask what are
the moral consequences to yourself. The woman
may have come to that, and you in. the same
future may be successful, respected, surrounded
by loving wife and happy children.
But how will your soul compare with hers on
the day of reckoning ? You may be upright in
your business, you may be loyal to your friends ;
in a shipwreck you would scorn to seek your
own safety till the last woman and child were
provided for.
Then how does this strike you ? Can you,
who would do this, talk of honour, or bravery,
or manliness? Go to 1 You are the chief, of
cowards, the dastard of ail dastards ! When
you should have been strong, you have allowed
yourself to be mastered by your lust; when
everything counselled you to honour and self-
control, you have taken advantage of trustful-
ness and innocence, and are a soul-murderer.
These are the moral consequences to yourself.
The woman may fall low, but never to such a
depth as you!
And if the thought of such a possible
degradation and infamy does not make a man
set his teeth, and call out to God for strength
to resist temptation, then there is no manliness


in him, and we may judge him one of the most
debased of our human race.
But you hasten to assure me : “ This thing I
would never do, I would never betray an
innocent girl, and take advantage of her love
for me to ruin her. I may not be very straight-
laced, but I have not sunk so low as this,”
“Very good then,” I say. “I applaud this
“As f ar as you are concerned, all pure women
are safe from insult and injury, >s You mean,
then, to choose the other alternative, and gain
your pleasure by means of some wretched and
unsexed unfortunate whom you may meet by
chance on the streets. You are to offer money,
and obtain what a woman should accord to a
man only in the sacred union of marriage.
And you will form another of the hundreds
of men who have bought the body of this
unhappy woman as you might that of some
animal in the market place.
Well, I am not going to tell you how, in
doing this, you sin against God, how you help
further to degrade the woman and prevent her
from ever returning te purity of life ; how you
confirm her more and more in that incon-
ceivably terrible and tragic life, the life of the
prostitute—a life so outcast and abandoned
that only constant drinking keeps many of this
woeful sisterhood from suicide. Nor shall I


take up time in telling how you waste money
and the vital strength which is so necessary to
ensure success in life, in the pursuit of this
fleeting pleasure which turns to gall and worm-
wood almost before it is past.
I must leave it to others to show you the
sin, the defilement, the cowardliness of becoming
a sharer in this miserable traffic. Others have
done this well, but none so wisely or so well as
Miss Ellice Hopkins in the many booklets in
which she appeals to the honour and chivalry of
men 10 make an end of this great wrong to
womankind.
My intention is, as a physician, to deal very
openly with one particular aspect of the subject,
—the physical results that spring from impurity.
For while I am aw'are that most young men
are familiar with the fact that there are diseases
almost inseparably connected with prostitution,
I also believe that this knowledge is often
..erroneous and inadequate. And as this imperfect
and misleading knowledge not inftequently
leads to most disastrous consequences, I feel
justified, for the sake of young men, in dwelling
at length on this matter.
As I have said, then, there are diseases
known as venereal, which are almost inseparably
connected with impurity. If sexual immor-
ality should cease, these diseases would also


disappear, But as long as men ignore the
dictates of their higher nature, and help to
maintain a class of women to pander to their
lust, so long will these diseases do their deadly
work, and produce their harvest of shame,
suffering, and death.
And as I said before, I wish my reader who
should choose sin to go into it with his eyes
opened to the terrible risks he runs, so I will
not hesitate to speak with a plainness which
some might condemn,
I would say, then, that the night you go out
to seek this forbidden pleasure all may seem
well with you. Your health may be excellent,
your prospects in life may be bright and hopeful;
when you return it may be with the shadow of
lifelong misery and disaster, from which there
is no escape, impending over you.
The two formidable diseases of impurity are
gonorrhoea and syphilis, and these diseases are
responsible for an immense amount of suffering,
not only among the guilty, but among the
innocent.
Both these diseases are extremely contagious,
and it is hardly possible for a man who lives &
ife of debauchery not to acquire one of them
sooner or later; and it is important to realise
that the first lapse into sin may be the occasion
oa which a man shall blast his whole future life.


The disease of gonorrhoea is one which is
exceedingly common, and the popular belief
among young men is that it is a very trivial
matter, which need give no concern; in fact,
an attack of 51 clap ” is often looked upon as
subject for a jest. Now, there could not be a
greater mistake. There are doubtlessly many
cases which are simple and of short duration,
but others are accompanied by complications of
a serious nature, which may lead to permanent
disease. As one great surgical authority says :
“ Gonorrhoea, when acute or virulent, seldom
runs its course without local complications of
some kind, often of considerable severity, and
occasionally even hazardous to life.” Among
these complications are inflammation of the
bladder, which may become chronic, and
inflammation of the testicles, resulting some-
times in an incapacity to beget children.
Again, a complication occasionally accompanying
this disease is an inflammation of the eyes, an
inflammation so virulent that it leads sometimes
to destruction of the sight. In other cases the
Joints may be inflamed ami permanently
stiffened, and now and then a condition of
general blood-poisoning is produced.
But by far the most serious complication of
gonorrhoea is what is known as stricture of the
urethra, or, in other words, narrowing of the


passage between the bladder and the exterior.
In the vast majority of cases this serious con-
dition is caused by a long-continued gonorrhoea,
and it may not make itself evident till many
years after the attack which produces it.
It is generally middle aged men who are
affected - men who have probably forgotten all
about their “ wild oats,” but who have to learn,
through ill-health and suffering, that Nature
does not forget; for this condition of stricture
is the cause of much misery, requires often
serious surgical operations for its relief, and, in
a great many cases, shortens life. Sometimes
the narrowing is so great that the urine cannot
be passed, and this is often accompanied by
agonising pain till relief is obtained by surgical
means.
I think I have said enough to prove that
gonorrhoea is by no means a disease to be held
lightly, but must be regarded as a very for-
midable condition. But, serious though it is, it
is infinitely less so than the next disease to be
considered—syphilis. It would be difficult to
overstate the effects of this frightful disease,
and, in order to avoid the charge of exaggeration,
I will give the opinions of some distinguished
medical men on this subject.
Dr. .Gowers, whom I have before quoted,
says :— 5£ Strange it is to think that this malady


syphilis), rivalled in its total capacity for
wrecking human happiness and health and life
by no other, is formidable by reason of our
limited power over it. There is but one way
by which it can be prevented, a method not only
possible, but sure and open to all. It is the
certain prevention secured by unbroken
chastity.”
Professor Lionel Beale says : “ There is not
an organ in the body, not a tissue, which may
not be temporarily deranged or permanently
damaged by that very serious contagion of
syphilis, in its effects the most lasting of all con-
tagious poisons.”
And Dr. Le Gros Clark, a President of the
Royal College of Surgeons, draws the following
picture of the disease—a picture so striking
thab . l prefer to give it at length, instead of
seeking myself to describe the possible conse-
syphilis. He says '“ I speak o? this
disease in all its many forms as terrible, because
it is loathsome, and often of life-long duration.
I have seen handsome faces disfigured and made
hideous and repulsive, without hope of remedy.
Limbs are distorted; the skin is spotted and
scai'red with leprous-like blotches which pro-
claim their loathsome origin; the throat and
voice are affected, the bones are diseased,' and
even the brain is attacked by this awful malady,


which clings with obstinate tenacity where once
it has got hold. Of all the sad sights it has
been my lot to witness, I can recall none more
revolting, and at the same time more humiliating
and pitiable, than the shattered object of this
disease, bowed down by bodily suffering and
remorse, and retaining nothing but the
withered and disfigured semblance of the human
form and face. X wish that those who are not
to be persuaded by what I have said to abstain,
even out of purely selfish consideration, from
the sin of fornication, could see a few of these
cases. ' I think they would hesitate, for theii
own sakes only, from incurring such frightful
risks.”
I _ would hardly have dared to writ*.- so
terrible an account of this disease lest I should
be accused of seeking to frighten you without
cause. And there is little or nothing that I
can add to this description.
I would only ask you to remember that all
these frightful penalties may result from the
first occasion of wrong-doing. So let no one
comfort himself with the thought that he may
sow a few t£ wild oats,” and then draw up before
any harm is done.
You must realise that the momentary grati-
fication may have to be paid for by this
disease, though seemingly cured, bursting out


m some loathsome form ten, twenty, even
thirty years after it lias been acquired.
On the other hand, I do not wish to lead
anyone who has been infected by this disease to
believe that his case is perfectly hopeless and
incurable. To do so would be wrong, and it
might produce a state of mental depression and
fright more injurious than the disease itself.
Many cases of syphilis are slight, and others,'
even of the severe type, are amenable to proper
treatment. But it is impossible to tell before-
hand if the disease will be severe or not, and so
anyone incurring this risk is in danger of the
terrible consequences that have been described.
The only safety lies in complete self-control.
But the tale of woe about these hateful
diseases is not ended. If their effects could be
confined to the guilty party, they could at leist
be regarded as the penalties of deliberate
wrong-doing. But it often happens that the
innocent are involved in the misery and suffer-
ing produced by these diseases. And this is
true both of gonorrhoea and syphilis. The man
who has suffered from either of these in his
youth may bring lifelong ill-health and suffering
on the woman whom he marries, and, in the
case of syphilis, on the children she bears.
Formerly, gonorrhoea affecting a woman used
to be regarded, even by the medical profession.


&s a trivial complaint, but now it Is recognised
not so much from itself, but from the conse-
quences which follow it, as one of the most
serious diseases from which a woman can
suffer,, Many of the conditions which render a
woman an invalid for years, or even for life, or
create the need for operations of the gravest
nature are due to this disease. This is what
often happens. A man who has suffered from
this disease, perhaps many years before, but
who had never been entirely cured—though he
may not know it—marries, and, shortly after
marriage, his innocent wife, seemingly without
cause, falls into' ill health, which may become
chronic, or require surgical interference. So
serious is this matter that some doctors have
proposed that no man should be allowed to
marry unless he could be certified as free from
disease of this nature.
Again, it sometimes happens that a man
acquires syphilis, and, after the lapse of a year
or two, believes himself cured, and marries a
girl whom he loves and respects, and with
whom he hopes to pass a long and happy life.
He forgets the past, and thinks he shall not
u reap what he sowed.” But suddenly his wife
shows symptoms of the foul disease he himself
suffered from. The husband, who was to have
cherished and guarded her, has brought her


shame and sickness and, perhaps, life-long
suffering. It is difficult to realise what the
woman’s feelings towards her husband must be
ever afterwards when she discovers ’ the truth.
But this is not all. Syphilis alone, of all
diseases, is truly hereditary. The child that
the wife bears comes Into the world with the
stamp of its father’s sin upon it. The life-blood
that it has received from its mother has been
poisoned, and the infant, if it be bom alive, soon
becomes sickly, and often dies. If it survive
it grows up stunted both in body and mind,
sometimes fit only for an asylum for idiots.
There is no more pitiful sight than the poor,
innocent child who is unmistakably marked
with this terrible inheritance, and whose life is
blasted by the sins of another.
But I have dealt enough with this revolting
subject—a subject I shrank from touching
upon, but have felt compelled to lay plainly
before you, in order to show you what a terrible
crop often springs from the “ sowing of wild
oats.” If anyone, after reading this, enters
upon impurity, he will do so realising to the
full the tremendous risks he runs.
I know well that fear of consequences is but
a poor and despicable motive to prevent wrong-
doing ; but when the wrong-doer brings such
suffering not only on himself, hut on others, it


Is right that appeal should be made to anything
or everything that will keep him from this sin.
Still, though I have dwelt so long on these
results of impurity, my hope is that none will
be kept from wrong-doing solely by an ignoble
motive like this. My hope is that you will
shrink from impurity because it is a mean and
cowardly sin, degrading both to yourself and to
your partner in wrong-doing. On the other
hand, I have shown you that complete self-
control is quite possible for every man, and that
it leads to perfect moral and physical health.
And if this be so, will you not choose it ? God
has so ordered the world that we men are the
natural protectors of the weaker ones—the
women and children. Is it not a terrible thing
if we abuse our strength to bring *'misery and
ruin upon them ?
I repeat that we are the guardians and
protectors of women, and this duty and privilege
is laid on all men worthy of the name. The
ideal which everyone must set before him is
this.
He will determine, God helping him, to
strive after perfect purity of life. He will
realise that the struggle for this, however severe
it may be, will only strengthen his character,
and make his manhood more complete. He
will see that by this he will be taking rank


with the true chivalry which shrinks from the
thought of insulting or degrading any woman,
however low she may have fallen, which exists,
in fact, for the defence and honour of woman-
kind. And this chivalrous attitude towards
women will make him guard them, not only
against himself, but against all others who
might seek to do them wrong. Think of this.
it not a high calling, a splendid service, to
Join the army of those who stand for honour
and purity, who are sworn to overcome foulness
and injustice?
I would ask you to set up before yourself
such an ideal Say, “In the manhood I am
about to enter on, I will strive to follow purity
and nobility, to keep toy body and mind
untainted by the foul growth of uncleaaness.
I reverence and battle for all womanhood,
and fear nob to suffer hardships, that I may
hold my passions in strict subjection.”
If you do this, you will have your reward.
Your life will be clean and healthy ; you will be
able to look all men and women in the face with-
out shame : by your conscious efforts, you will
grow to have purer and noble conceptions of
womanhood, and to shrink more and more from
anything that is unclean and impure. You
will influence those around you in the same
direction, saying them from the evils you avoid


yourself When you come to marry the woman
you love and respect, you will have the con-
sciousness that you have no disgraceful past to
conceal from her, and that there is no possibi-
bility of bringing disease upon her and her
children.
And is it not only just that you should go to
yourwifewith a chastity equal to that you demand
from her 1 Would you ever dream of marrying
a girl whom you knew to have been previously
impure? You would not. You must realise,
then, tint if spotless chastity be necessary for
her, there is required from you not a past
defiled with impurity, and perhaps tainted with
loathsome disease, but a life equal in purity to
that you expect and reverence in her.
If a young man be armed with this ideal,
there need be no fear for Mm. Loyalty to his
future wife will keep his life pure. And it is
right and proper that every man should look
forward to marriage and the joys it brings.
I believe it is a good thing for a man to marry
young, if circumstances will permit him to do
so. I do not for a moment recommend rash
and hasty marriages, but I do say that after a
man has come to an age between 21 and 25
years, it is quite fitting for him to be on the
outlook for his future wife, who is to comfort


and inspire him through life, and make it
brighter and nobler for him.
Believe in the possibility of a deep, pure,
lasting love between man and woman whatever
may be said to the contrary. This love is one
of the glories of a world which holds much
of trouble and disappointment. And even if a
man cannot afford at the time to marry, he can
wait patiently, and work for the means which
will enable him to do so. lam convinced tint
nothing causes a man to shrink from and loathe
impurity in any form so much as the conscious-
ness of possessing and responding to the affection
of a pure and high-minded girl.
The greatest of our Poets Laureate realises
the truth of this :
Indeed I knew
Of no more subtle master under heaven
Than is the maiden passion for a maid,
Not only to keep down the base in man
But teach high thought, and amiable words.
And courtliness, and the desire of fame,
And love of truth, and all that makes a man.
It is true, also, that if the marriage state is
to be kept at a high level, there will be reed
for much forbearance and self-control, and the
man who has learnt this before marriage will
accord to his wife the deference and respect
*hich are her due, and which will prevent


marriage from becoming, as it so often does,
the enforced union of a man satiated with
sensual gratification, and a woman horrified by
the discovery that that was all she seems to
have been desired for.
Purity and self-restraint before marriage bear
the promise of high living and true happiness
afterwards.
But surely enough has been said to prove to
every young man that, in deciding for purity of
life, he chooses the right manly, and noble way.
Impurity means degradation —moral and physical
rain. Purity means health, strength, moral
rectitude, self-respect, a conscience devoid of
offence. Which, then, shall you choose, as you
stand at the parting of the ways? You have
only one life to live—perhaps have only one
opportunity of choosing. Look to it that you
take the best, and cling firmly to it, waiting for
the fulfilment of the promise, which shall fulfil
itself somehow, that the pure shall see God .


