

» ! i !
£ j I !
r-» i i
■::; , : :; •' x\j I 1m l:
i. ' V\ if :'i!lj I ! i !
•h.] ; 5 if V\ Ji I I li‘ * i !
i.J \i l U ;, L n'i j
Nk
■ I
Y6Z
' I \; i n
\I : V * ! »
» 1 • jv. ! • V
:l • k . < i
V ! I \ \ 1 1
■ 11 \J//
;!l I I -."-.nr, r ■ ■
!i!i ; ; rL i i' !
i ! |i i VvL'U ij ‘lFi ! I L r,
iii i i
J/JKJARY PLESJ.Ii'I.! ■ •
\ \ J ■'* , V • f J' * e■' * j
v v / / J l a , \5 j Sr
\\ ///. ! j h. . I i
\v/ f! i • [f ja 1 t
\ / < 7(1 I.
I d i ('ll I
I ,V - '—s „ - iL. i_
U o •* o\j v> U L _.il,
■;:3rv n
\\\
1 \
j '
l N
r\ ['
. V :
UVU
' J;


militarisation and of the youth
AND TASKS OF THE YOUNG COMMUNIST LEAGUE.
. i Resolution of January Plenum of -the Executive Committeo
of the Young Communist Internationale
The Plenum of the Executive Committee of tho Yeung Ccm-
muhigt International (E. C.Y.C. I.) fully associates itself with
the. decisions of the 13th Planum of tho Communist Interns. •
tiohal (E, C.C. I.).
world economic crisis arising On the basis of the go-
nearal crisis of capitalism, -which is becoming more profound,
has shaken. the foundations of the entire capitalist system and
intensified the class and other internal imperialist antago-
nisms o , The bourgeoisie mobilises and makes use of All the re-
actionary forces and methods In the feverish search for a way
out of f .the crisis« Fascist oppression and ex picitation of the
wording-class is increasing. There is an unbelievable in •
crease in the want and misery of the toiling masses- The im-
perialist countries arc franctically preparing for a nev* anned
division of the world.
At the same time throughout the world there is an increase
in'the indignation of the toiling masses and their readiness to
overthrow the unbearable oppression of the'exploiting
Socialist construction is victoriously developing on one’ sixth
of "the globe; the power of the basis of the* international pro-
letarian revolution, the U.S.S.R.. is steadily strengthening-.
~The contrast between the U.S.S.R. and the capitalist world
is deepening more and more.
~”At the present time the world is approaching more close-
ly to a new t oyole of revolutions'ond wars.” (Resolution of
the 13th Plenum, E.C.C.1.).
EXPLOITATION OF YOUTH IS UNPRECEDENTED,
During the years of the economic crisis, an army of mill--
lions of unemployed youth has grown up in the capitalist coun-
tries. There is a greater and greater increase in the section
of the youth who havo never had a job anywhere. The plunder


Page two.
of wages from the employed youth is taking on unprecedented
forms. A,slavish system of apprenticeship is being established.
The toiling peasant youth, especially the farm laborers, are in
a state of'complete exploitation by the landlords and money-
lenders. Their situation is approaching nearer and nearer to
that of the colonial youth. Uncertainty as to the morrow is
more and more felt by the student youth, and children of the
intellectuals and also the potty-bourgeois who, are being ruined
under the blows of the crisis. The youth in capitalist coun-
tries are compelled to defend their economic and political
rights by a fierce struggle.
f In the conditions of the extreme intensity of class rela-
tions and the approach of new revolutions and wars-, the politi-
co I ]. activity of the youth is growing. Their role in the class
struggle is rising. The bourgeoisie also, like their chief so-
cial buttress, social-democracy, are unable to keep the broad
masses of the youth under their influence by the old bourgeois
democratic methods. It is evdrywhoro going "over to terrorist,
compulsory state methods of fascisation and militarisation of
the’ youth.
The bourgeoisie is depriving the youth of all politic-
al rights. With brutal violence it is attacking the revolu
tionary organisations of the youth. The Y.C.L, of Germany has
boon driven underground and is subjected td un-hjard-of perse-
cution, By moans of arrests and prison sentences, the bour-
geoisie is trying to paralyse completely tho political activity
of tho Y.C.L. of Gsechc-Slovakia and Austria, w ich have al-
ready been suppressed.
The slightest manifestation of discontent and the slightest
demands are most vigorously combatted by the bourgeoisie in all
countries. However, the reorganisation of the bourgeoisie in
the struggle for the youth is not,’ only charag.terisod by clear
terrprist methods (arrests, jails, concentration camps, torture
and shootings).




Pago four.
The Young Socialist International (Y. 5.1.) in all its trea-
cherous policy, carried out the line of the Second Internation-
al- a line for weakening", disarming and splitting the working
class, training its young generation in the spirit of the de-
fence. of theibourgeois fatherland and bourgeois-democracy. The
Y.S.I. like the.whole of the Second Irrteraltional, as the ex-
perience of Ggnnahy showed, helps the to establish
the .fascist dictatorship and prepare for imperialist war.
.. The process of the ideological -and organisational bankrupt-
cy did disintegration Of the Y. 3. becomes intensified, and ac-
celerated under the conditions of the intensification of the in-
perialist class'; contradictions,' the growth of Communist influ-
ence- and the. class, consciousness of the youth. In spite of the
wishes, of,the loaders, the rank, and file members of the Y.S.I.
are more and more joining with the Young Communists for a joint
revolutionary struggle against fascism and war.
NEW "LEFT" MANOEUVRED OF SOCIAL FASCISTS.
■■■■■ ' 1 n ■— T " " ’ 1 “ " ■'
The Social-fassist leaders are compelled to use. ever more
"left” manoeuvres and shorn revolutionary phrases to keep the
youth Under their influence. ' ‘Under the flag of struggle for
the dictatorship of the proletariat, the so-called "left" so-
cialist youth organisations, in a bloc with the Trotskyite
counter-revolutionary foremost detachments of the counter -re-
volutionary brougeoisie, are trying- to frustrate the establish-
ment of ...the united f,ront of the toiling youth in the struggle
and rallying them around the revolutionary
vanguard - the Communist Parties. They are trying to form a
new youth international and its influence! among the masses aof
the. youth.
The Y. C.I. was formed by the great . leader and teaches* of


Page five.
the international revolutionary.proletariat (comrade Lenin ).
It was and is the only revolutionary organisation of the youth,
not in words, but in deeds. Despite the fascist terror, despite
persecution and oppression, it carried on and will continue to
carry on a decisive and uncompromising struggle against capita-
l-ism, against imperialist wars, for the dictatorship of the
■ proletariat, for socialism.
In the U.S.S.R. in the struggle for socialism; in China
—in the struggle for Soviet Power, against feudal-landlord and
bourgeois oppression and international imperialism; in Germany,
Poland and Italy,— in the,conditions of brutal terror, in , the
heroic struggle against bloody fascist dictatorship; in Japan
holding high the bannerdf proletarian internationalism; in
Spain and in Cuba - everywhere the Y.C.L.' ors b *ve shown them-
selves to be worthy assistants of the Communist Parties in their,
heroic struggle for the cause of the working-class and.the toil-
ing masses.
THE Tasks OF THE YOUNG cm UNI ST LEAGUES.
.The approach Of the- decisive-, clasps-struggles, the danger of
the outbreak of counter-revolutionary 'war against the U. S.S.R.
and new-imperialist wars, the growing danger of fascism and .the':
sharpening class struggle for the youth puts before all sections
of the Y.C.L. new md still more-difficult and responsible tasks*
The Y. C.L. is the closest assistant of the Communist Party. r
which carried its influence, to the bro-ad masses of the youth.
The chidf task of the Y.C.L. is to rally the masses of the youth
around the Communist Party., and to educate in,the spirit of
struggle for'the dictatorship of the proletariat, for socialism.
STRUGGLE FOR THE MaSSES OF THE YOUTH.
1., Tha i "Y.C.L. will only be able to fulfill this task if it
undeviatingly carries out the line of the Comintern in- practice,
j,nd conducts a most merciless struggle against concrete manifes-
tations of opportunism and sectarianism in practice, "in the
first place against right opportunism (Gutmass, Remmele and


Page 6»
Neumann and the defeatists in other countries in the estimation
of the perspectives of the German revolution)" -E.C.C.Ii- if it
deeply studies Marxist-Leninist revolutionary theory and its
Bolshevik application in the struggle against the social and na-
tional oppression of the youth.
The Y.C.L. must decisively increase its role as the revolu-
tionary organiser of the youth, fighting under the leadership of
the Communist Party for improving the economic situation of the
youth, for increasing wages, resisting wage-cuts, for unemploy—
ment relief for the youth, against any worsening of the condi —
tions of its labour and life.
... THe Y.C.L* must mobilise all of its forces, energy and ini-
tiative for the struggle against the chauvinist and nationalist
propaganda of the bourgeoisie. This requires from the Y. C. L.
th t it should increasingly propagate Leninist revolutionary
teachings among the broadest strata of the youth as well as in-
tensify the struggle for the smallest economic needs and demands
of the youth and against their compulsory fascisation and raili—
tarisation.
Without forgetting'for a moment that the chief task of the
Communist Party is to win over the majority of the working class
and work in the mills and factories, it is necessary to carry on
wide'mass economic, political and organisational work in the
forced labour camps, in the mass bourgeois, fascist ‘and reform-
ist organisations, in the universities, the schools', the planta-
tions, the villages - everywhere the youth are to be : found.
Arming itself and the youth with Marxist - Leninist theory,
the Y.C.L. must give revolutionary perspectives to the youth.
This can be achieved if our propaganda is linked up with the
struggles of the working-class and the toilers against the ex-
ploiters, with the struggle for the smallest economic interests
and political demands of the youth. , The Y. C. L. ,by seizing on
the economic interests of the youth, must draw them into the
strike struggle of the working class on a wide..-scale, making the
greatest use of strikes as a tried weapon in the struggle
against capitalism, linking up the struggle for economic power
demands with the preparation of the toiling youth for the strug-
gle for power.


Pag;a 7.
In the economic struggle the Y.C.L. must widely popularise
and make concrete its programme and the programme of economic
darionds of the Y.C.L. In organising the youth for the strug-
gle •.against every attack of the employers on wages and condi-
tions of labour, the Y.C.L. must see that this sis
raised to a higher political level and must tike an active part
in mass andrgeneral political stricks, in the decisive class
struggles against fascism, for the dictatorship of the prolet-
ariate
2» It is the duty of every Young/ Communist to expose the
class nature of fascism among the broad musses of youth, ox-
plaining to them that "Fascism is the open terrorist dictator-
ship of the most reactionary, most chauvinist, and the most im-
perialist elements of finance capital.”
They must make the youth understand that* ”In Germany and
in a number of other capitalist countries the-growth of fascism
and its seizure of power mean that;---
(a) The revolutionary crisis .and the indignation of tho
bro -d masses against the rale of capitalism is
g rowing•
(b) The capitalists are no longor able to maintain their
dictatorship by tho old methods of parliamentarism
and bourgoois-domocracy in general*
(c) Further, the methods of p .rliamentarism and I’ourgkois
democracy in general are becoming a hindrance for
the capitalists both in into nal politics (the
struggle against tho proletariat) as well as in
foreign politics (war for the imperialist/ rcdivl-
sion of tho world).
(d) Capital is compelled as the result of this to pass on
to the open terroristic dictatorship inside, tho
country and to unrestrained chauvinism in foreign
politics, which represents the direct preparation
for imperialist war."
(Resolution of the 13th Plenum cf the E. C. C. I.)
In Germany before the fascists came to power they promis-
ed to liquidate unemployment, to prohibit tho exploitation of


Ihge 8.
child labour, night work and injurious work for the youth, to
repeal the low for reducing wages, to give a yearly paid 3-week
vacation to the youth, etc.•
In practice the fascist government not only failed to carry
out a single one of these promises, but it liquidated the re-
mains of the political rights and freedom of the youth, gave
concentration camps and jails, drove hundreds and thousands of
the youth into the labour service camps under slavish condi-
of work.
ta reality the fascists brought unprecedented oppression
and increased exploitition and poverty of the youth, under the
cover of chauvinist and nationalist propaganda as well as anti-
capitalist demagogy.
They are preparing cadres for,..the future imperialist war
from among the youth and are pushing than, into the abyss.
It must bo explained to the youth that;
"Fascism, born in the womb of bourgeois- democracy, is in
the eyes of capitalists a means of saving capitalism from
destruction. Only with the aim of deceiving and disarming the
workers, social-democracy denies the fascisation of bourgeois-
democracy, making a distinction in principle between the demo-
cratic countries and the countries of the fascist dictators hi pi'
The masses of the youth must be made to understand tho-
roughly that;—
"The fascist dictatorship 1 is not an inevitable stage in the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie in all countries. The possibi-
lity of, averting it depends on the forces of the fighting pro-
letariat, which are being paralysed most of all by the disin-
tegrating influence of sooial-decomracy which is and remains
the chief social buttress of theibourgeoisie."
On the basis of Marxist-Leninist theory, on the basis of
concrete examples and facts, the- real nature of bourgeois -demo-?
cracy must be exposed to the masses of the youth.
By the example of the Soviet Union the essence of prole-


Page 9.
tarian donocraoy must be explained to the youth in plain lan-
guage.
CHIEF SLOGAN NOW IS FOR SOVIET POWER.
Every Y.C.L.’or must bear in mind the directives of the
Communist International that there is only one path of struggle
for overthrowing every dictatorship of tho bourgeoisie. The
chief slogan of the Communist International in this struggle is
Soviet Power.
By living examples of the Soviet Union, the youth
should be shown that the Soviet power on one-sixth of tho globe
has destroyed economic and political oppression and slavery for
the toiling youth' and will destroy it throughout the
that it will not only destroy the ■■ si~h system o-f forced la-
bour and apprenticeship, but will work for-the youth,
the defence of labour (6-4 working hour day, equal pay for
equal work, 4 weeks vacation with pay, material well-being and
physical health).
The Soviet Power is reorganising technical and profession”
al education, making it possible for every sroung worker to re-
ceive the necessary qualifications which he needs and wants in
the shortest possible time'. The Soviet* power'opens wide the
doors of all educational institutions and opens up the path to-
wards the commanding positions in industry, agrltculture ,
science, technic, etc. It ensures, the active participation of
all the toiling youth in all government life, in the construc-
tion of socialism.
The Young Communists must carry on all their work in such a,
way that the revolutionary activity of the youth and their par-
ticipation class struggle will constantly improve. Uhr-
der the leadership of the Party, the Y.C.L.’ers must promptly
rouse the maqses of thd youth to dhe struggle for their vital
demands in defence of the trade unions, the workers' press, por-
kers clubs, the freedom of strikes, of workers’ meetings, orga-
nising protests, 'demonstrations,strikes and forgo tho united


Pag? I 0«
front 0 f struggle against fascism, for Socialism d an( j
for Soviet Power.
STRUGGLE AG3tINS T. iMFERIAL IST WAR.
3. The Y.C.L. must build up its mass work in such
a way that at the present time, in the period of tho airoct •
transition to a now cycle ; rovolutions-and wars, the broad
masses of the youth will be organised for an active
struggle against imperialist war and its preparations, for con-
verting of imperialist war into civil war, for the courageous
defence of tne Soviet Union and the Chinese Soviet Republic.
In struggling against the opportunist under-estimation
of the danger of war, the Y.C.L. must expose the fight against:
every measure undertaken by the bourgeoisie in preparation for
war and increase its political-educational work in the army,
and activity rhown by tho local organisations of uhe Y.C.L* in
participating and preparing tho Pari? Tp+r.vn, n +.jonal Congress
arid tho American National Congress of Youth for the struggle
against war and fascism. By actively participating in tho for-
mation of anti-war and anti-fascist committees and in tho elec-
tion of delegates, by participating in meetings ,of the social-
ist and reformist youth and tho youth in other organisations,
many Y.C.L. organisations have ~ obtained success in tho
decisions of tho December Plenum of tho E. C.Y. C. I. on mass work.
Howovor, those are only tho fix-st stops 9 The results thus
obtained and tho contacts with the masses nf youth must be con-
solidated and tho united front of the youth must bo widonod
still further in the struggle for thoir economic interest and
political rights, against fascism and vra.r.
FIGHT FOR UNITED FRONT FRCM BELOW.
4. The Plenum of the E. C.Y. C. 1., faced with tho decisive
class struggles and imperialist wars, calls upon the Young
Communist organisations to mobilize thoir forces and energy ia:.
tho struggle for the formation of tho united front.
While forming and strengthening tho united front of the
toiling youth in the struggle for their economic and political
interests, in the struggle against fascism and war, and not by
negotiations from above and behind the backs of the masses, crea-
ring it from below, it is necessary to utterly expose tho bank-
rupt leaders of tho second International and the Y. S'. I. among
the masses.


Pago 11.
The social-fascist loaders of tho Y.S.I. and also tho load-
ers of .the (Second International and the reformist trade unions,
whp in .practice organise- th-e;. reactionary united front with tho
bourgeoisie under the cover-of' empty talk about unity and demo-
cracy, split the working-class, clear the-'path for fascism and
prepare the masses for imperialist wars.
' They "are mote and more throwing out of the ranks of the so-
cialist youth orga isations " those who being, not’ in words but
in practice, to:struggle jointly with I the revolutionary workers,
with tho Communists and the Y.C.L. against the attack of -the em-
ployers on the wages of the youth, against hunger and want
against fascism and war.
It is necessary'to give active support to'the growing revo-
lutionary oppositional movement among the young Socialists. To-
gether with them, shoulder to shoitlder, uni tdd 'organs <->f strug-
gle should bo formed from below and the fight must be carried on
i j • |" ‘ ■. -f
against exploitation and oppression, against tho fascisation
and militarisation of the youth. ‘ It must be explained to them
that the path of their leaders is the path of fascism and war
Without waiting for the final breakdown and disintegration of
tho Y. S. 'l., it is necessary to Win over into our ranks and the
side of Communism all the honest and revolutionary elements
amone- the youth who are still under, social-fascist influence.
A. most determined struggle must be declared against tho op-
portunist distortions of,the line of the Comintern, which con-
ceal the face of the Y.C.L. in its struggle for the united front
and which strengthens social-democratic illusions among tho
masses.'
- It is•impossible to tolerate such gross distortions of tho
decisions of the December Plenum of the E. C.'Y. C.I. and the po-
litical misstakes vfhich were conmitteed. •
In Germany, wherb’lndividual Y. C. L.*ers, instead of clearly
and definitely putting before the Young Socialists the questions
of a jbiht struggle, or their coming over to the Y.C.L., them —
selves .strengthened their bankrupt and -decaying organisations,
instead;; cf bringing them and their individual -members into the
the Y.C.L.


Page 12.
In C zee ho-Slovakia, jvhere the Y.C. L., ’’hoping" that tho
loaders of the Young Socialists would eocept its proposals for
the united front, concealed its political face, stopped tho
struggle against social-fascism and found itself lagging behind
the revolutibnised youth.
In. France, the opportunists in the leadership of the Y. C. L.
who were later exposed, not seeing the manoeuvres of thp£, lead-
ers of the Young Socialists, began to carry on negotiations
from above on the question of the united front,-disorientating
the League, which slackened its struggle for the formation of
the united front from below.
In Austria, where the Y. C. L. supporting the opposition
movement in the Socialist Youth organisations, did not whow
sufficient activity in winning the revolutionary elements of
the Young Socialists over to our side and in exposing the.
manoeuvres of the leaders of the Young Socialists and the cen-
trist opposition.
IVhile creating organs of the united front jointly with the
Young Socialists for a common struggle against the'reduction of
the wages of the youth, against the plunder of unemployment re-
lief, against any worsening of the conditions of labor and life
of the toiling youth, against fascism and war, supporting the
growing oppesitional movement in the ranks of the-. Young Social-
ist organisations, it. is necessary in view of the conditions of
the class' struggle and the revolutionising of the youth,
directly to raise the. question that individual lower organisa-
tions arid members of the Young Socialists should come over to
the Y. C. L. .
Y.C.L. IftllT NEXT TO EVERY PaRTY SHOP UNIT
5. The chief task of the Communist Parties is to win over
the majority of the workipg-qlass.and therefore the majority of
youth.
However, in the practical ,work of many of the'Y. C.L. .or-
ganisations, thsrei-is 'ribt a : sufficient struggle for the-working-
youth. after thfe. I)!ec‘ember Plenum cf. the E. C. Y. C. I.' in 1932, no
decisive successesriivere achieved.in the struggle for carrying
out the slogan of the - Comintern op, the firmation bf a Y. C. L.
coll in,eyery place viHere there is a factory Party cell.


Page 13.
In Great Britain, this slpgan was "annulled," not without
the knowledge of some Party - “organisations. In France and in
soie other countries, this concrete task of the struggle for
■the working youth ,was likewise not brought forward as oije of
the chief tasks of the Party and the Y* C-L.' .organisations.
In the struggle for the working youth, for the formation of
a Y.C.L. cell alongside every factory cell, a radical
Change must be brought about. The whole of the work of all the
Y.C.L. organisations and above all of their leading • organs,
must be subordinated to the struggle for the working youth.
Every Y. C. L. f er must always remember in connection with this
that his authority will be strong and high, the cell will
develop and have authority oily if the youth see that the Y-C. L.-
ers not only understand how to agitate in words, but are able
to in practice organise their struggle for their own every day
economic demands and needs, however small thes* 3 •. «v be.
ROOT Y.C.L. ■ IN BOURGEOIS MaSS ORGANISATIONS.
6. The December Plenum of the E.C.Y. C. I. pointed out that:-
"The Y.C.L. must liquidate with bolshevik insistence and
consistency the ignoring and sectarian underestimation of the
struggle for the masses of the toiling youth in the Y.S. I. , the
reformist, - fascist, syndicalist, Christian, militarist and-simi-
lar organisations, attracting the members of these organisations
into the class struggle,on the basis of the united front from below
and carrying on among them active revolutionary mass political
work."
, These directives of the E.E.Y.C.I. have not yet been put ; at
the basis of the mass work of all the 6. L» organisations.
Every young Communist must understand that; a successful
struggle against the fascination [.end militarisation of the,
youth is impossible unless work is carried on among the Masses,
in the wLd spread network of bourgeois:, fascist,' reformist and
sport organisations, surd also in forced labor camps, attention
must be focussed particularly on the work among the masses’" of
youth in the fefojrmist, fascist, christain-and syndicalist trade
iihlons.
It is necessary to ensure in practice that not a Single mass


'i' /.'Of!
‘V ■ .•
< • I
, r ’
ju, ir.
i'V 1 •
f - •" f
j . ; 'i . v


Page 15*
ganisations. In many sections of the Y.C.L. a purely formal
attitude was taken to the directives of the December Planum of
the E.C. on the reconstruction of the work on the basis of the
development of initiative and the heightening of the activity
of all members of the Y. C.L» on the basis of inner League deom-
craoy and bolshevik self-criticism.
We cannot tolerate the situation in which, as formerly, a
restricted section of activities in many organisations try to
work for the mass of the members and take the place of their
activity and initiative. The work of al 1 the leading bodies
especially in the legal organisations must be put under the
control of the masses, and in practice we murt bring about a
heightening of personal political responsibility, .and must
bring about living concrete leadership, and not leadership by
i
circulars in a bureeracratio manner, jfoung cadres of workers-
who have been tasted on mass work in the struggle for the
Party line must be decisively promoted.- -It is necessary to
ensure the strengthening of Party guidance and an- increase in
the Party core in all sections of the organisation*.
• All sections of the Y.C.L. wi'a .„t exception;' must immed-
iately develop a bolshevik struggle for the fulfillment of
the directives of the 13th Plenum* that :--
"The entire situation demands from the Communist Parties
the simultaneous training of CADRES for underground work, a
serious organisation of STRUGGLE aGaINST PROVOCATION,' combin-
ing the strictest CON’SPtRATORIAL methods with the greatest
guarantee of the best contacts with the MASSES xnd to see that
the structure and the wark of the illegal organisations will
not be SCHEMATIC."
In all the organisations of the Y.C.L., it is necessary to
start immodiatly to carry on a profound'struly of the revolu-
tionary theory of the proletariat, Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin,
arid to attain a genuine BOLSHEVIK application of this in the
every day struggles.


31508022937434
