

ixaX.
*3- ißjJUsxLc^
/r iv. T
(uvlcM. &Lj( (S4LSJ~Lje^
flfsi~Vrrr . ty.. m ruj '*sy f£vo
C.I;
oox v




Art. Vl. The State of Religion and Education in Neiv South
Wales. By William Westbrooke Burton, Esq., One of
the Judges of the Supreme Court in the Colony. London:
Cross; and Simpkin and Marshall. 1840.
THIS is a valuable and well-timed publication. The station of
the author, his opportunities of obtaining information, his mani-
fest impartiality, and his freedom from anything like party pre-
judices or party purposes, concur in rendering his work one of
the most trustworthy which we have seen, Mr. Justice Burton
writes as a man who is desirous of telling the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, be the consequences what they may, or
light the condemnation on what it will. His language is re-
markable for its simplicity, and the absence of meretricious
ornament and “ad captandum” phrases to stir the feelings and
work on the prepossessions of his readers. He writes not for
effect; his sole object appears to be to lay before the public a
correct statement of the religious condition of the colony in which
he has exercised the functions of a judge for a period of six
years. His work is not, in the common sense of the word, a
■popular one —it will not interest that numerous class of readers
to whom thought is irksome and reflection unknown. We could,
indeed, almost have wished that he had spared us in some in-
stances the minuteness of detail in which he enters : but when
we consider the nature of his object, and how desirable it is that
every statement which is made should be clearly substantiated,
we feel that Mr. Burton has pursued the most fitting course, and
that his fullness and particularity on every point form one of the
main excellencies of his work. We rise from its perusal with the
conviction that we have the whole case before us, and that we
are able to form a correct judgment upon the state of religion
and education in New South Wales, without having recourse to
any other quarter.
The colony of New South Wales comes under our notice in
a peculiar point of view. Founded about fifty-two years ao-o
with the principal, if not sole, object of receiving our convict
population,, and affording them an opportunity of regaining, in
a distant lari'd, the character which their crimes had forfeited in
this country, we should have imagined that the benevolent
devisers of the scheme would have made religion the basis of
their plan, and not have looked for the reformation of the crimi-
nal, without providing him with the means whereby that refor-
mation could be most surely worked out. We are far from
saying that this consideration did not, to a certain extent, enter


into their design: but that it was not the foundation of the
system, the whole history of the colony up to the present
moment clearly proves. It was by the merest accident that the
first expedition did not sail without a minister of religion.
This extraordinary circumstance must probably be regarded
as an oversight on the part of those who were engaged in carry-
ing into effect the objects cof the Government. It was still a
singular omission, and shows conclusively that religion was not
in all the thoughts of its projectors. The first settlers, includ-
ing nearly seven hundred cronvicts, amounted to more than one
thousand persons. The territory was taken possession of and
the British standard erectedl with the customary honours. Mr.
Burton makes some pious ;and appropriate reflections on the
solemnities of that day, of wlhich religious worship seems to have
formed no part.
“ For six years the clergyman had to celebrate divine worship in the
open air, subject to all the disadvantages and interruptions consequent
upon such an arrangement in a changeable climate ; at length he built
a temporary place of worship at his own expence, which was opened
for divine service on the 25th of August, 1795.” p. 0.
“ In 1794, the population had been increased by the addition of a
few free settlers, with their families, and upwards of 4,000 convicts ;
and in March of that year the Rev. Samuel Marsden arrived in the
colony, and divided with Mr. Johnston the labours of the ministry
until the year 1800, when Mr. Johnston quitted the colony, and its
spiritual concerns were again left under the superintendence of one
Clergyman for seven years more of its infant state.” p. 6.
The colony went on increasing. In 1810 the population
amounted to 10,452 souls; in 1817 to 17,214, of whom 6,777
were convicts. During this interval one chaplain was added to
the establishment. Between 1818 and 1824 the number of
chaplains remained the same.
“ There must also be noted the indifference of those in authority to
religious matters, so remarkable in the single fact, that one of the
earliest Governors had to be informed by the clergyman, that five or
six persons only attended divine service ; and that it was then that he
determined to go to church himself, and stated that ‘he expected that
his example would bo followed by the people.’” p. 10.
“ Notwithstanding urgent and frequent appeals to every quarter for
increased spiritual means, this state of things continued with so little
alleviation, that iu September, 1833, (the population then amounting to
60,794 souls, of whom 16,151 were convicts, 43,095 being Protestants
and 17,238 Roman Catholics), bis Excellency the Governor, in repre-
senting the religious means of the community to the Right Honourable
the Secretary for the Colonies, could only enumerate ‘an archdeacon,
fifteen chaplains, and four catechists, as belonging to the Church of


England ; and that with respect to places of worship, the Church of
England possessed at that time in Sydney, and within forty miles of it,
seven stone or brick churches of moderate size and respectable appear-
ance, besides two others of the same description in more remote parts
of the colony, and several less permanent buildings in various places.”
The foregoing statements will show the difficulties with which
the clergy had to contend, and the parsimoniousness with
which religious means were grudged to the colony. Entreaties
and remonstrances seem alike to have been disregarded: and
religious instructors were doled out to the population—a scat-
tered, convict, and for the most part an adult population—in just
sufficient numbers to take away the stigma that religion was
wholly uncared for, but not in sufficient numbers_ to bring the
great mass of the people under the influence of religious princi-
ples and feelings.
In 1833 the working of another, we wish that we could add
a better, order of things is found in active operation. Care for
the religious culture of the people seems no longer to have been
unheeded; a religious impulse of some kind makes itself felt
in high places: and that impulse produces, as its effect, a con-
siderable addition to the religious means of New South Wales.
In a word, the spirit of popery traverses the Pacific, and erects
its idolatrous standard on the shores of Australia. An imme-
diate stop is put to the increase of the clergy of the Church ;
though, as it were, to counteract in some measure the evils of
Romanism, Presbyterianism and Dissent are encouraged, and
advance pari passu to influence and power. “ The Church of
England (says Mr. Burton), as to the number of its clergymen,
continued the same in 1837 as it was in 1829, the population
having in the meanwhile been doubled .” But not so with the
rival and now favoured establishment of Scotland and of Rome.
“ Meanwhile, however, provision was made in the estimates thus
referred to, as stated by the governor, for ‘ considerable additions to
tire ministers of the Scotch Church and to the Roman Catholic clergy.’
“ The estimate for those of the former communion being one-
third in amount greater for 1833 than it had been in the previous
year, and for those of the latter more than double; whilst provision was
made in the estimate for 1834 for four ministers of the Established
Church of Scotland, and for a Roman Catholic vicar-general and six
Roman Catholic chaplains; and the amount for Roman Catholic
schools was increased fourfold ; in the estimate for 1835, provision
was made for the same number of Presbyterian clergy and Roman
Catholic clergy ; and in the estimate for 1836, provision was made for
eight ministers of the Established Church of Scotland, and for a Bishop
of the Church of Rome, a vicar-general and six Roman Catholic chap-
lains; whilst no addition was made to the number of the clergymen of
VOL. VIII. 1


the Church of England until the year 1837, and none authorised and
recommended by the governor of the colony until after the passing of
the new act, viz., in November 1836 ; and in England that circum-
stance took place which was noticed in the report of the Diocesan
Committee before referred to, viz., the return of the Bishop of Aus-
tralia to his charge in 1836, without an additional clergyman ; ‘ which
was owing (state the comraitttee) to the refusal of his Majesty’s Govern-
ment to sanction any allowance towards the expense of the passage,
or procuring a residence or mieans of support for any additional clergy-
man.’" 2 From these circumstances, it would indeed almost appear as
if it had been the intention, iif not the recommendation, of the Colonial
Government not to increase tthe establishment of the Church of England
until each of these other chrarches should have arrived at an equality
with it in every respect. Each was considerably advanced towards
that equality, hut especially the Roman Catholic, before the plan of the
Colonial Government for the future ecclesiastical establishment was
promulgated in the colony. In the estimates for 1834 and 1835, the
clergymen of the Church of England only exceeded the numbers of the
Roman Catholic and Presbyterian clergy together, by four; in the
estimates for 1836, their united numbers were actually equal to those
of the Church of England ; and they possessed an advantage over the
latter in the fact, that the newly-introduced clergymen of both churches
were younger men, and in the case of the Roman Catholics under the
jurisdiction of a Bishop.”
Not only was the Church of England thus impeded in her
progress by the neglect of the Government, but “ a heavy blow
and great discouragement” was actually aimed against her
existence by those who ought to have upheld her by every
means in their power. Carrying out the designs of the Govern-
ment which founded the colony, and made provision for the
assignment of four hundred acres for a glebe, and two hundred
acres for a school in every township, the Ministers of the
Crown, in the year 1826, advised his Majesty King George
IV. to erect into a corporation the leading officers of the colony,
together with the Archdeacon and a certain number of chaplains;
and vested in them all the lands set apart in the colony, for the
purposes of education, and for the maintenance of the clergy ;
and, likewise, enjoined the governor—
“To set apart in each and every county, hundred, &c. into which the
colony might be divided, a tract of land comprising one-seventb part in
extent and value of all the lands in each and every such county, to be
thenceforward called and known by the name of the clergy and school
estates of such county, and the governor was directed to make to the
corporation grants thereof.”
The Ecclesiastical Corporation thus formed was admirably
* Report of the Diocesan Committee of the Societies for the Propagation of
the Gospel in Foreign Parts, and for Promoting Christian Knowledge, for 1837.


calculated to answer the purposes designed in the royal charter.
Had the provisions of the charter been honestly carried into
effect, at this moment the religious condition of the colony, as
to the efficiency of the establishment, would have resembled
that of our own country. In every township there would have
been a minister of the Gospel, with a fair, though not inadequate
remuneration, independent for the means of support of those
among whom he ministered, doing his duty zealously and fear-
lessly, and diffusing around him the blessings of the Gospel.
There would have been likewise a school, in which the young
would have been religiously trained in the sound principles of
Christianity taught by our Church. The colonial treasury
would have been relieved of a considerable annual payment; and,
without taxing one single individual, ample revenues would have
been provided for the Church—revenues increasing with the
increased population, and enabling the spirit of religion and the
spirit of worldly enterprise, to go hand in hand into the wastes
of Australia. Such a picture, however, it did not suit the
enemies of the Church to contemplate with pleasure. Accord-
ingly, every obstacle was thrown in the way of the corporation;
the * lands which were theirs by royal charter were studiously
withheld, or when granted, were studiously allotted in the
worst situations, and the least available for agricultural purposes.
It is notorious that not one-seventh in quantity, much less iu
value, was at any time assigned them.
But though thus deprived of that power which the royal
bounty had made, on the corporation was thrown the whole ex-
pense of maintaining the existing clergy and schools. With an
honest determination of purpose to fulfil the trust confided to
them, the trustees were induced to sell a portion of the glebes
which had been assigned to the clergy some years before; they
thus, unwisely we think, sacrificed the future to the present, and
the result has been that the Church has been despoiled of that
which was hers of undoubted right.
While struggling with difficulties such as these, and every day
more and more surmounting them by an unwearied perseverance
seeino- more clearly the probability of effecting the objects for
which they were incorporated, without intimation of any kind
that their proceedings were disapproved of by the Government
at home —the trustees suddenly received a notice that their func-
tions were to cease, that the charter was to be revoked, and that
their lands and property were to revert to the Crown. This re-
vocation of the charter took place while Sir George Murray was
Secretary for the Colonies; and we believe it is the boast of Dr.


Lang, a Presbyterian clergyman, that by his meddling inter-
ference the act of revocation) was effected.
The folly of this act of the Government is only to be exceeded
by its iniquity. On the faiitth of the charter, many persons had
given money, flocks, and luerds, to the corporation: they weie
now all swept away into the (colonial treasury; or rather, we should
say, a considerable proportiion put into the pocket of the govern-
ment collector.
et It was an object of the coirporation, hy the quiet and unexpensive
increase of these, to create a rrevenue in aid of their other assets: and
there is no doubt that, underr similar management, they would have
become as profitable to them, as similar stock was at the same period
to other proprietors in the collony. It was the interest of the agent,
however, by a speedy sale, to) increase the amount of the per centage,
upon which his emoluments mainly depended ; and this he proceeded
to do in a mode which shows him to have been fully impressed with the
value of turning them into mconey ; and they were all disposed of by
public auction between tiler Ist of January, 1834, and the 28th of
March, 1837, the wool and stock together having realised, between
these dates, the sum of not less than . . £16,539 10 8J
“ The proceeds collected boy him between these
dates, and for rents of hands . . . 4,279 11 5f
p. 40. “ Amounting to not less than £20,819 2 2
It is a singular circumsttance in the whole proceeding that the
charter was annulled withrout reference to the trustees, or any
inquiry as to its working aind efficiency. Secrecy seems to have
been the policy of the Coilonial Office; and the desire appears
to have been, that no remionstrance should be offered, no infor-
mation given, which miglht shake the purpose of the Colonial
Secretary. We cannot acquit Sir George Murray in this instance
of unfairness to the Church, and of yielding to the undue in-
fluence of its enemies.
« The notification of the Eight Honourable Secretary of State’s (then
Sir George Murray) counsel to his Majesty to revoke the letters patent
by which the corporation bad been created, ‘ was conveyed to the
Governor of New South Wales in a despatch dated 28th of May, 1829,
(No. 213), and it is not a little remarkable that Archdeacon Brough-
ton, who sailed from England the day after that despatch bore date,
havin' l ' been, on the resignation of Archdeacon Scott, appointed Arch-
deacon of New South Wales, and, as such, vice-president of the corpo-
ration, and having been in constant communication with the Colonial
Office during the four preceding months, left England in entire igno-
rance of the existence of any intention to revoke the charter. He
arrived in New South Wades on the 15th of September in the same
year, and immediately entered upon his duties as vice-president of the


corporation; and on the 4th of December, the tenor of the above dis-
patch, suspending the further proceedings of the corporation, was
communicated.” p. 38.
Well, the enemies of the Church having succeeded thus far 4
first in stopping the supply of clergymen, and then in robbing;
them of their property, speedily and vigorously followed up then-
victory. There was now no longer a colonial governor in whose
breast the welfare of the Church was a predominant feeling :
Governor Darling had fulfilled his term, and had been succeeded
by Governor Bourke. The charter had contained a clause
which empowered its revocation. So far the proceeding was
legal, though it was not just. The next attack upon the Church
had not, however, this poor excuse to cover its glaring injustice
—it was as illegal as it was inexpedient. It was no less than the
attempt to deprive the Church of England of her supremacy,
and by a local act of the Governor and Council of New South
Wales to do that which it is hardly competent for the Imperial
Legislature to do ! It was, to use the words of Mr. Burton, “ a
revolution in the constitutional principles on which the colony of
New South Wales had been founded.” Mr. Burton argues the
case clearly and convincingly; he fully demonstrates that the
Church was by law the Established Church of New South Wales,
and could not be other than the Established Church of that
colony except by an act of the Imperial Parliment.
There can be no doubt whatever that the Church of England
was by law the Established Church of New South Wales, and
that notwithstanding Sir Richard Bourke’s local act, she still
continues so; and that, consequently, when between Lord Glenelg
and Sir Richard Bourke the transaction which we are about to
detail took place, they were guilty of an unconstitutional exercise
of the authority vested in them. As regards Sir Richard Bourke,
it is impossible not to observe a rancorous hostility to the Church
and Clergy of the Church of England; from the general tenor
of his dispatch, as well as from particular passages of it, we see
a spirit at work internally, and an influence pressing him exter-
nally, essentially hostile to the Church. We regret to say that
the evidence on which he rests his case in his statement to Lord
Glenelg is made for the occasion. He alleges a general com-
plaint as existing against the Church of England in the colony,
and talks of a petition which has been presented to him, emanat-
ing from a public meeting, numerously signed. Now what is
the inference which Sir Richard wished Lord Glenelg to draw
from hence ? Why that it would be a popular act in the colony
to overthrow the Established Church ! And that public opinion
in New South Wales was so adverse to the continuance of the


Church, that public meetings were being held, and that agitation
and excitement were rife upon the subject. Sir Richard con-
cealed from the Secretary of State the facts that the petition
(and the meeting from which it proceeded) teas got up by his
own partizans for this specif ic purpose ; that though it might
be numerously, it was not respectably signed; that on the con-
trary, with a very few exceptions, no respectable man in Sydney
had signed it; but that the scum and refuse of a convict popu-
lation, and those who favouredl their most unwarrantable pre-
tensions, among whom Sir Riichard was at that moment seeking
his popularity, were the persoms by whom, and by ivlxom alone,
the complaint, which he represents as “ general,” was made.
The petition and the signatures Sir Richard did not dare to lay
before the council; no inquiry was made into the truth of its
allegations; and yet he uses it as an argument with the Se-
cretary of State in favour of his new scheme for placing all
religions, true or false, on the same footing! And had the
petition emanated from the respectable classes in Sydney, had
it been as respectably signed as notoriously it was otherwise,
what a ground for a legislator to found his acts upon ? Mere
popular feeling, the clamour of the moment, an interested
clamour, got up for a party purpose ! Lord Stanley, who pre-
ceded Lord Glenelg in the Colonial Office, treated Sir Richard
and his dispatch as they deserved, with silent but marked con-
tempt. For two whole years it lay unnoticed in the archives
of the Colonial Office. At length, however, the hour arrived for
its re-production into light. Voluntaryism in religion was ram-
pantly exhibiting itself in England, and the time was propitious
for Government to manifest to their friends and supporters, that
though they acknowledged the preamble to be good, they could
not yet carry it out at home, but that in the colonies they were
willing to give it a trial. We are quite sure that some intima-
tion of the intention of Government was afforded to the Roman
Catholics, for as soon as Sir Richard Bourke’s local act was
passed they were prepared to take immediate advantage of its
provisions; while, on the other hand, the Church of England had
to await an interval of many months before steps could be taken
with the same view. Ris amusing, in the correspondence
between Sir Richard Bourke and Lord Glenelg, to observe the
tone of congratulation and self-satisfaction which pervades both
parties. They laud themselves on anticipation of the excellency
and wisdom of their plan and seem to think that their names
would be handed down to posterity as having first broken through
the trammels of prejudice irn favour of an Established Church,
and laid the foundation of religion in New South Wales on the


safe principles of voluntaryism. A compunctious feeling does
appear to have visited Lord Glenelg’ when he reflected that he,
his colleagues, and above all his royal master, were still, in prin-
ciple, members of the Church of England; and he puts in some
words expressive of his desire that that Church may continue
to meet with the greatest proportion of public favour ; but the
measure which he was at the time promoting was so manifestly
against her welfare, that we may regard his affected attachment
as adding insult to injury. We have not space for the corres-
pondence. It is to be found entire in the appendix to Mr.
Burton’s work, and admirably commented upon in the body of
the book. We cannot envy the feelings either of Sir Richard
Bourke or of Lord Glenelg as they read Mr. Justice Burton’s
calm and temperate, though striking exposure of their traitor-
ous proceedings.
The principle of the measure thus proposed was to extend
equal support to “ the three grand divisions of Christianity,”
viz., the “Churches of England, Scotland,and Rome;” in other
words, to establish three churches in the colony instead of one.
But why were other communions excluded ? Members of dis-
senting congregations pay their proportion of taxes, and there-
fore come within Sir Richard’s money-principle of “ providing
the fund from which distribution is made.” An unfair use is
made of the numbers of the dissenters: so long as the Church
of England is to be the object of attack they are ostentatiously
paraded, but when the “ equitable footing” principle comes to
be applied, they are thrown overboard, as not belonging to any
of “ the grand divisions of Christianity.”
“ It was not proposed to extend equal support to any of those de-
nominations of Protestants who dissent from the National Church,
although these are equally within the pecuniary principle, since they
were part of ‘ the colonists who provide the funds from which this
distribution is madeand these had surely a superior claim, upon
every constitutional principle, to that of the Church of Rome, if the
support of religious institutions w'ere intended to be placed upon what
is termed an c equitable footing.’ Religionists of all denominations
are included as ‘ persons who provide the funds, but derive no support
from their religious institutions • as persons who at the public meeting
pray for ‘ a reduction of the expenditure for the support of the Church
of England,’ as swelling the amount of the disproportion of the sums
annually granted to the Church of England; but when a new distri-
bution is to be made, it is remarkable that they are not included.”—
p. 54, 55.
What then is the notable scheme which is dignified by Lord
Glenelg with the title of public religion, and which Sir


Richard Bourke somewhat humourously describes as “ laying
the foundations of the Christian religion in the young and rising
colony” of New South Wales : in which young and rising colony,
be it observed, there existed at the time an archdeacon and
fifteen clergy of the Church of England, several ministers of the
Church of Scotland, a vicar-general and six Roman Catholic
priests, and Dissenting ministers of various denominations !
The scheme is simply this : the Church of England is no longer
to be recognized as the Established Church, but is, together
with the Kirk of Scotland and the Churcn of Rome, to de-
pend for its support on the voluntary contributions of its members,
aided in proportion to their numbers by grants from the Colonial
treasury. The parochial arrangement which was contemplated
by the founders of the colony, and expressly recognized in the
royal charter, is at once superseded, and it is enacted —
“ That wherever there are one hundred adults (convicts included)
who shall sign a paper stating their desire to attend a church or chapel,
towards the building of which not less than 200/. shall have been
subscribed, the governor shall be empowered to advance from the
colonial treasury an annual sum of 100/. for the maintenance of the
minister; if two hundred adults, 150/. yearly, and if five hundred, 200/.,
which it is declared shall be the highest stipend to be issued from the
colonial treasury towards the support of any one officiating minister of
religion.”—p. 56, 57.
The scheme itself is full of contradictions and blunders. In
one clause religionists of all denominations are included; in
another, a limitation is made to members of “ the three grand
divisionsin a third, the will of the governor is to bo taken
for law, and he is empowered to alter or add to, or to modify its
provisions, as he may think proper. It is evidently framed upon
a most accommodating principle, so as to be applicable to any
new circumstances of expediency as they may arise, and to fit
any new class of sectarians which, springing up on the hot-bed of
dissent, may become powerful enough to act upon the Govern-
ment. We wish to direct attention particularly to that clause
which gives “ convicts” the privilege of signing the Minister’s
testimonials. It is a curious provision ; and at first sight strikes
us as a covert ridicule of the whole affair as a sly insinuation
against religion itself. But there is design, and deep design,
in the enactment. At the period when the Act was passed and
for some time previously, Roman Gatholic influence had been
workino - principally on the colony ; the Government offices were
being daily filled with members of that Church the Attorney-
General was of that persuasion—and they who watched the signs
of the times were aware that Romanism was in the ascendant at


Government-house, and overshadowed Downing-street. The
Act itself was passed with an especial object to the advancement
of the Roman Catholic Church; but it happened that the
members of that Church as yet had no hold on the property or
respectability of the colony; they were to be found principally
among the convicted felons. “ The equitable footing” princi-
ple, therefore, would have entirely failed, had free men only been
permitted to sign this certificate. Hence the anomaly in
modern legislation of giving to persons civilly dead and morally
hostile to religion the right of exercising an influence on the
most important matter connected with the well-being of a state
—the national faith. The absurdity would be self-evident were
the principle applied to any other branch of legislation. It is
only when statesmen consider all religions equally true or equally
false, that they suffer convicted felons to become the medium of
providing for the community those religious means which prac-
tically they set at nought. We are far from thinking that reli-
gion ought not to be brought home to the convict; but it is the
duty of the Government to provide it for him —not his duty to
sit in judgment upon forms and creeds, and to exercise an in-
fluence either for or against the Established Church of the land.
Thus degraded from her position, reduced to the condition of
a sect among sects, her ministers from habit, from feeling, from
principle, unable to enter the held and canvass convicts for
their votes, signatures, and good opinions, a vital blow, it was
thought, was struck against the Church of England. But, alas !
for the wisdom of the framers of unjust measures ! Good sprang
out of the evil, and the Church of England, cramped and confined
by the previous neglect of Government, immediately manifested
gratifying proofs that she was living in the affections of the
great majority of the colonists. Aided in her objects by the
munificence of the Societies for Promoting Christian Know-
ledge and Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, her
energies, directed by the zealous and judicious Bishop that
Providence had allowed to preside over her in an eventful
hour, she was enabled to testify to the world with how great in-
justice she had been treated by Sir Richard Bourke, when her
crying entreaties for labourers in the vineyard of the Lord had
been°so repeatedly and cruelly disregarded. Churches and
congregations appeared in every quarter of the colony, and the
cry was— the universal cry of the Church—“ More Clergymen.”
In 1833, the clergy amounted to sixteen; in 1839, to thirty-
three ; since increased to forty-one; and still the want is press-
ingly felt. “ The simple fact that so many as forty-two churches
had been subscribed for in various parts of the colony, and that


no less than four additional Ohurches are absolutely wanted in
Sydney itself, for every one of which congregations are prepared,
abundantly established the position,” that the Church of Eng-
land had not been fairly treated in the years preceding the pass-
ing of the Act. °
These are gratifying circumstances; and, so far, causes of
“ fervent gratitude to Him who thus turned the hearts of men
to His service,” and the working out of his designs. It should,
however, be borne in mind that—
“The good was not unattended, with evil, in the more than equal
supply of those who are regarded by every sincere Protestant as teach-
ing for doctrines the traditions of men. It were an unwelcome task
to give utterance to opinions in disparagement of that measure, if it
were the necessary foundation of so much good as has undoubtedly
ensued. A little reflection, however, will show that the good might
have been produced by other means, whilst the evil is all its own.” p. 61.
The rapid and sudden advance of Romanism in New South
Wales must fill every sincere Protestant with feelings of appre-
hension and grief; and truly do we wish that it were not our
duty to ascribe it all to the soi-disant Protestant Government
of our 'country. We have abundant evidence in Mr. Justice
Burton’s book of “ the palmy'state ” to which Sir Richard Bourke
has advanced the Church of Rome.
“ The principle of the support afforded by the Government to minis-
ters of religion, which depends upon the number of signatures obtained
by or on behalf of the particular minister, of persons expressing a desire
to attend his church or chapel, is also highly favourable to the Roman
Catholic clergy, as it admits of the signatures of convicts for this pur-
pose, and by the subscription of one hundred adult persons, one hundred
a year may be obtained from the treasury; by that of two hundred
persons, one hundred and fifty pounds a year; and even if there be not
so many as one hundred persons, one hundred pounds a year may be
obtained for a clergyman. Either sum, it must be admitted, is not so
a stipend for a Roman Catholic clergyman, who is neces-
sarily by his vows without those natural ties which occasion the chief
expense of a Protestant household, as it is for a Protestant.
“ The clergy of the Church of Rome are, as may be expected, most
forward to take advantage of all these circumstances in their favour;
and it will not be a matter of surprise, if from among the ignorant, and
especially the convicts, many professors of their religion are obtained.
The influence of the Sisters of Charity” over the female convicts
confined in the factory (or penitentiary) at Parramatta, and which
began to be strongly felt at the time the writer of these observations
left the colony, may be expected to end in that result; and that their
numerous illegitimate children will be baptized into the Church of
Rome.
“ Additional Roman Catholic churches are in progress of erection in


many parts of the colony, at Windsor, at Goulburn, at Yass, at the
Tumat River, and on the Banks of the Murrimbidgee. For these pur-
poses their funds are derived from other sources than the donations
of their adherents in the colony.
“ Very few of these are amongst its landed proprietors ; but the
Roman Catholic establishment derives, it is believed, no inconsiderable
portion of its support from the zealous members of that Church out of
the colony, and that not in the United Kingdom alone, but in other
parts of the world.”
As a specimen of the qualifications of the popish priests of
Australia, the convict-elected voluntaries, we subjoin a letter
written by one Father Brady, a brilliant emeralder, to a gentle-
man who had declined subscribing for a popish chapel. We
present it to our readers precisely as it stands in the original, so
far as regards orthography and punctuation ; but for the sake of
illustration we have printed a variety of words in italics, not un-
derscored in the original:—
“Penrith June the 9th 1838.
“ Sir, —Educated in france & haveing lived with men of good feell-
ings, accustomd. to observe the rules of Society. I was not a little
surprised at the strange reception you gave me last Thursday when I
clone myself the plesure to Waite on you for your liberal subscription
tow-wards the erection of the R. C. Chapel at Penrith you might have
perceived, the great reserve made in answering your unbecoming ob-
servations on account of the place and circumstances it was in your
own house in presence of your aimable & respectable family I made a
sacrifice of my own rather than hurt their feedings were I to answer
you ad rem I always considered it a very unbecoming if not a verypre-
sumptious think on the part of a Lay man to expatiate on the Bible in
presence of a R C Clergyman who received a special education and
a regular mission ad hoc as for the subscription Sollicitedin behalf of
the R C Servants under your Controol I think 1 have done my duty
and an act of Justice and that you have been deficient in both by not
Subscribing to the erection of a j olac of worship for them.
“ I have the Honor to be your obedt. and humble servant
“Jo Brady R C 0”
Let our readers contrast the picture of the Popish Bishop, in
his canonicals, surrounded by a train of priests and a band of
soldiers, with the unostentatious manner in which the first Pro-
testant Bishop landed in the colony, without pomp or parade,
unattended by one single clergyman, and looked upon by the
Government with undissembled coldness. Bishop Broughton,
at the time he was in England, met with no favour from the
Colonial Secretary : his urgent applications for an increase of
the Established Church were treated with neglect—and wearied
out by fruitless efforts he returned to the colony downcast and
dispirited ; and confiding alone in the Providence of God he


entered upon the discharge off his episcopal functions. But
what was the first object which met Bishop Broughton’s eye on
his arrival ? A Roman Catholiic Bishop with a numerous train
of popish priests and catechists;, sisters of charity, &c. The
Right Rev. Dr. Folding had bieen advised, doubtless, that it
was expedient that he should appear in New South Wales as
the first Bishop, and accordingly, while Bishop Broughton was
in England urging his fruitless remonstrances at the Colonial
Office, he took his departure foir the colony. But he went not
alone: at the very time that Bishop Broughton was refused
assistance, Bishop Folding receiwed it to the extent of his desire.
Can there remain any doubtt, after these statements (and
they are no more than a sarnpile), that Romanism has been
unduly fostered in New South Wales ? And when we read the
recent note of Lord John Russell on transportration, and found
that none but Irish, i. e. Roman Catholic convicts, are for the
future to be sent to that colony, can we come to any other con-
clusion than that in process of’ time it will become a Roman
Catholic community ? And them we should like to see how Sir
Richard Bourke’s “ equitable fomting ” principle would act.
It is lamentable, however, to observe the highest of all human
concerns thus dealt with by our expediency statesmen. In the
case before us, one of the chief objects of concern, is the provi-
sion made for the support of the clergy, which is, as we have
seen, awfully deficient.
We cannot conclude this part oif our subject with the spirit-stir-
ring and eloquent appeal of Mr. Justice Burton, in consequence
of whose representations the two societies, before alluded to, have
again come forward and liberality contributed to the establish-
ment of a college in the neighbouirhood of Sydney, for which the
site has already been given by a pious individual. We recom-
mend the whole to the attentive consideration of our readers.
Our remarks and extracts on this part of the subject have
extended to so great a length, that we are obliged to treat more
cursorily than we could wish the other important portion of Mr.
Burton’s statement. The religirous education of the young, is
only inferior to the religious instruction of the people in any
community: but in a community like New South Wales, where
the temptations to vice and the examples of the vicious are so
powerful and alluring, the religious education of the young
becomes an object of increased imiporlance. That the Govern-
ment, therefore, should take an (especial interest in the matter
is not to be wondered at: the womder would have been, had the
ruling powers neglected to pay atttention to it. We find accord-
ingly that the State, confiding in thee Clergy of the national Church


liad, up to the date of Sir Richard Bourke’s despatch, committed
into their hands the almost exclusive direction of the education
of the poor and destitute. They had likewise, to a considerable,
though not sufficient extent, furnished the means for this pur-
pose. On the whole, under the management of the Clergy
and the Church and School Corporation, the schools for the
education of the poor and destitute children were in a satisfac-
tory state. No complaint was made by parents on account of
the religious instruction afforded, nor was any dissatisfaction
felt that the direction should be in the hands of the clergy.
We must charge Sir Richard Bourke with the heavy guilt of
haying first unsettled men’s minds in New South Wales on this
point; and of having introduced religious dissension into the
schools of that colony. Not satisfied with “ laying the foun-
dations of the public religion” in the colony, by his novel scheme
of relieving it from the pressure of one Established Church, by
calling into existence three Established Churches, it seems that
he was desirous, likewise, of laying the foundations of public
education on an equally novel principle. Taking for his example
the system of education introduced, in a luckless hour, into
Ireland by'Lord Stanley, he proposed to apply it to New South
Wales. He forgot, however, the different circumstances of the
two communities. Lord Stanley’s plan was founded on the
principle—the erroneous principle—of getting such portions
of the Bible read in schools as the Romish Priest would allow ;
thereby conceding the priest’s position, that the ichole Bible was
unfit tor general perusal. Sir Richard Bourke’s principle was
to take away the Bible from those who had been accustomed to
read it without restriction, and to substitute for the unmutilated
word of God selected portions, in which no creed should be
taught, no particular truth inculcated. In fact, Sir Richard
committed the grievous sin—he would not even call it blunder—
of endeavouring to deprive a Protestant community of what they
prized equally with their daily bread. With this intent, he gave
notice that,on a certain day, all Governmentaid would be withdrawn
from the existing schools; and that new schools would be estab-
lished in conformity with his plan, in which the religious instruc-
tion should be of such a nature, as while it professedly excluded
religious creeds of every kind, should yield the very point for
which the Romish Church had all along contended, and mutilate
the Bible according to her wishes and designs. Here, however,
Sir Richard Bourke was destined to encounter an opposition
which he little expected. His local Act for un-churching the
Church of England, had for its supporters all who departed from
her doctrines: so far the despoiling Act was popular. But


there were religious communions in New South Wales who
valued their Bible more highly than they prized any blow which
the governor might strike against the Church. To the im-
mortal honour of those communions, be it said, they buried at once
their feelings of enmity and rivalry, and one and all, Presbyte-
rians, Methodists, Baptists, Independents, (Socinians only ex-
cluded) gathered round Bishop Broughton, and fought the battle
of Protestantism nobly and successfully. True, Sir Richard
carried his measure through the council by an unfair and dis-
_ O J
honourable artifice ; and by taking advantage of a legal quibble,
he deprived the Lord Bishop of his seat in that assembly, so that
his lordship was obliged to appear there as a petitioner, ivhere, of
right, he should have been a judge.
The influence of the Bishop would, it was imagined, have
had an effect upon the votes of the council: nor can we doubt
that Sir Richard Bourke would have had considerable difficulty
in carrying his measure had the Bishop been present in the
Legislative Council. We do not think that one member at
least would, one day, have been found making a speech out of
doors, calling upon his hearers not to suffer themselves and their
chidren to be deprived of their birthright, the Bible, and on
another have come to the council and voted for that measure
which would have deprived thousands for ever of that very birth-
right. We think that the presence of the Bishop, who would,
in that case, have been a witness of both acts, would have de-
terred any man from such cringing and time-serving inconsistency.
But be that as it may, the Bishop teas excluded, the measure
was passed, the money was voted, but the schools were not
established ! Sir Richard Bourke, to whom popularity was as
essential as the air he breathed, dared not carry into effect his
own matured measure. A lesson had been read to him which
he would not easily forget; and he left New South Wales without
“ laying the foundations of public education” on his new and
improved principle of discarding the Bible from its schools.
We recommend our readers to notice particularly the whole
proceeding as clearly narrated by Mr. Justice Burton, whose
opinions on this important topic are as sound as his opinions on
the subject of the Church, and may be of beneficial service to
those who are now engaged in a somewhat similar contest with
“liberal statesmen” in this country.
We are glad to be able to add that an attempt of Sir George
Gipps, the present governor, to introduce the British and
Foreign School system has likewise failed; so that in New South
Wales the education of the youth of the Church of England
at present remains under the influence of the Clergy of that


Church. But for how long ? Let our readers judge from the
principles avowed by the governor when that subject was under
discussion in the council, and which will cause them as much
surprise as we have felt in the perusal. Is this a governor, we
ask, appointed by her Majesty’s advisers? and are these prin-
ciples in accordance with instructions from home ?
“ There is another subject on which I wish to say a few words.
Upon looking round this table, I cannot help being struck by the fact,
that there are thirteen members of one denomination of Christians, and
only two others. Ido not make these observations for the sake of
inducing gentlemen to sacrifice their opinions for the purpose of shew-
ing their generosity, but to remind the council that they sit, not as re-
presentatives of any particular sect, but as the guardians of the whole
community. When I made this remark, a few days since, the Eight
Eev. Prelate said, that we are in no other pcosition than that of Parlia-
ment —that there is no greater majority of imembers of the Church of
England in this council than there is in the Houses of Lords and Com-
mons. He was quite correct ; but I draw eu different conclusion from
that fact to what his lordship does—l draw ;a caution from it, for of all
the evils that now afflict the mother country, is there one that is not
to be traced to this fact—cannot all the calamities, all the dissensions
all the differences, every thing that makes us moan for England, be
traced, or are they not traceable to the fact. , that the majority of the
members of Parliament belong to one religious denomination, and have
legislated to preserve the dominancy of that denomination ? May God
Almighty, I sincerely pray, so guide your minds as to avert this evil
from this your rising land. This, gentlemen, comes much nearer to your
feelings than mine. Soon after my arrival in this colony, I stated, in
answer to one of the addresses presented to me, that I had a greater
stake in this colony than lands or possessions, but it is not to be denied,
gentlemen, that my interest is transitory—l am but a sojourner in the
land, I shall not establish my posterity here. I have but one child, and
him I hope to settle in the land of my fathers; but you are fathers
you may be termed the patriarchs of the land, and the interests of your
children and your children’s children may depend upon your vote this
day, whether or not the system of religious equality so happily esta-
blished shall be carried out, or whether this your adopted land shall be
marred by the plague spots of religious dissension. I will now, gen-
tlemen, take the sense of the council upon the first resolution.” ’ °
We should give our readers a very inadequate idea of Mr.
Justice Burton’s work, did we not tell them, that it embraces
the present state of religion and education in New South Wales
in every light in which it can be viewed. We have a detached
account of the number and stations of every minister of religion
of every denomination, of the various congregations and com-
municants, of the districts which are unprovided with religious
instructors, and of the probable wants of the colony in this respect,


for some years to come. We have, likewise, a full account of
the different schools and their efficiency—of the institutions for
the education of the higher and middling classes, of the colleges
—for Sydney has its colleges, so called—and even of the private
schools. There is no information which an emigrant can desire
in this respect, which is not to be found in Mr. Burton’s book;
and when we consider the unquestioning confidence which may
be placed in every, the minutest statements, we are assured that
a more valuable work, as regards that colony, has not yet issued
from the press.
As might have been expected from a gentleman in Mr.
Justice Burton’s station and religious principles, the condition
of the convict population occupies a considerable share of his
notice. There is an affecting, though painfully affecting picture
of the religious destitution of Norfolk Island, the penal settle-
ment of New South Wales; and a narrative of an atrocious con-
spiracy, the result, in some measure, of such destitution, which
took place in that island—the guilty parties to which Mr. Burton
had the painful task imposed upon him of trying and senten-
cing to death. It is a narrative full of horror, but of such intense
interest that we could not shut the book until we had read the
whole, though it harrowed up our feelings at every step. What
will our readers say of a Government which allowed 1,200 adults,
twice and thrice convicted felons, judged at each conviction
icorihy of death, to be confined on an island without a single
minister of religion, without the semblance of the ordinances of
Christianity ! Yet such was Norfolk Island at the time of Mr.
Justice Burton’s melancholy visit, and such it might have con-
tinued to this moment hut for that visit. A clergyman of the
Church of England and tiuo Roman Catholic priests have since
been stationed there : the priests being tivo, on the true Romish
principle, that, singly, they would be deprived of one of the rites
of their Church, viz., the confessional.
The condition of the convicts in the gaols and that of road-
gangs, is only less deplorable than those on Norfolk Island.
The latter are seldom blessed with the presence of a minister of
religion, and the former have only such attendance as the over-
burthened clergymen in Sydney and the other towns can give
consistently with justice to their other duties. Mr. Burton has
pleaded most earnestly and eloquently for this outcast popula-
tion, both in his works and before the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge. We trust that his representations will
reach the proper quarter, and be taken into consideration by the
Government, who alone can alleviate the evil.
Here, in the want of religious instruction, is to be placed


the main defect in the system of transportation, which a Com-
mittee of the House of Commons has declared to have com-
pletely failed. Need we say that the committee did not enquire
into its working in this respect: if they had contrasted the 7551.
per annum paid for the religious instruction of the convicts with
the 57,740/. 11s. 3d. paid for the police establishment of the
colony, as Mr. Burton has done, they would not have made the
startling assertion—that the system of transportation not only
exhibits an inefficiency in deterring from crime, but likewise “ a
remarkably efficiency, not in reforming, but in still further cor-
rupting the criminal, without adding, that religion formed no
part of the system, and that reformation without religion would
be a moral impossibility.
Art. Vll. —Jerusalem and the Jenvish Cause : a Letter to the
Light lion, and Light Lev, tihe Lord Lishop of London,
respecting the State and Prospects of the Jews and the Jewish
Mission in Syria. By the Rev. W. B. Hurnard, M.A.
London : Hayward and Moore. 1840.
2. Israel’s Leturn, or Palestine Legained. By Joseph Elisha
Freeman. London; Ward. 1840.
3. Sketches of Judaism and the Jeivs, Bv the Rev. Dr.
McCaul. London; Wertheim. 1838.
THE Jews have many claims upon Christian sympathy—to
them we are indebted for impulses of unspeakable value; our
greatest spiritual blessings have been communicated through
Jewish channels. The Jewish and Christian Churches, in their
early history, and in their future glories, are twins of the same
destiny, around which all prophecy unceasingly revolves.
Apart from all scriptural considerations, a very partial
acquaintance with the history of the Jews during their length-
ened dispersion, is sufficient to inspire us with regard for them.
They may be bowed down by the heavy burden of ages of politi-
cal slavery, babits may have been acquired, which subsist, in
relation to social institutions, in a state of degradation—these
will cease as soon as that relation is dissolved, and those insti-
tutions are improved ; but the impartial observer will admit,
that in struggling through centuries of desolation, as abandoned
outcasts, every where unsheltered from the ceaseless storms of
pitiless power, yet maintaining their national unity and distinct-
ness, upon the stake of some far distant and mysterious hope
they have exhibited an unconquerable freedom* of mind, an
VOL. VIII, —K


innate strength of character, which is unequalled. Even the
most determined opponent of the realities of prophecy will
probably admit, that a despised and persecuted people, who
could follow up some ever vanishing object of expectation
through so vast an interval of time, with unbroken faith and
unrepining confidence —uintainted by the fluctuating customs of
the workf—must possess? some latent and enduring energies of
mind which would be called forth if the influences which
depressed them were talken awaysurely, some extraordinary
destiny must await a faimily which has been guided by such
strange instincts. Thosse who associate nobility with love of
country will also regard the Jews; the descendants of Abraham
never forget the “ pleasant land,” and maintain, under every
variety of outward circumistance, the same unperishing attach-
ment to their ancient mountains. The burden of their song is
unchangeable; “ Iff forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right
hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave to the rood' of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusa-
lem above my chief joy.’”
There is something (peculiarly appalling in the fixedness of
the Jewish character, as a proverbial reproach, during a career
of bondage so protracted and enduring; the flood of time seems
to have carried along witli it no exercise of sympathy or remission
of oppression. If the pilgrims of sorrow could scan the history
of their wearisome journey, and trace the events of successive
ages, from the dispersion to the conclusion of the last century,
they might mark out ccertain stages in the great diary, and
reckon up at each thee civil earnings and benefits conferred
upon the commonwealtlh of Israel; but they would reiterate, at
the expiration of every (cancelled cycle, an unchanging response:
“ The enemy hath persecuted my soul, he hath smitten my life
down to the ground, he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as
those that have been long dead.”
Every year now, however, brings with it a series of events
which unite in testifying that the captives are approaching the
term of their degradation:. In commenting upon these, we have
no intention of entering into the soundness of the policy of
Christian Governments conferring civil privileges upon uncon-
verted Jews, but merely desire to deal with such circumstances,
in common with other novelties of the age, as indicative of the
passing away of the Jewish tribulation. The events of the year
that is past, although somewhat chequered, have been, never-
theless, very generally delineated in favour of the Jews; the
exceptions being limitetd to a few detached spots, where small
sections are infolded in the grasp of some decaying fragment of




3 1508 01512638 1
