

Perru
_ 2 j
jb i (*5 •*,
RtfUGiaUfe PAMS
BO* 2
REFUTATION OF THE CHARGES
AGAINST
THE WESLEYAN MISSIONARIES
IN THE FEEJEE ISLANDS.
BY CAPTAIN THOMAS C. DUNN,
OF THE BARQUE “ DRAGON,” SALEM.
(PROM THE “NEW-YORK HERALD” OP NOVEMBER 9th, 1856.)
TO THE EDITOR OF THE « NEW-YORK HERALD.”
Salem, November 2d, 1856.
Having lately returned from a trading voyage to the Feejee
Islands, my attention has been called to a communication, published
in the columns of the “ Herald" of the 16th of February last, pur-
porting to have been written at those Islands, and signed “ David
Stuart,” giving a long list of massacres and crimes committed by the
natives against the whites residing there; and also charging the
English Wesleyan Missionaries with being accessory to, and instigating
many of, the atrocities so minutely detailed. Feeling assured that
such a communication would never have found admission to the
columns of your paper had you been aware of the errors it contained,
Intake this, the earliest, opportunity afforded me, of replying to it, and of
vindicating the character of a body of noble-minded and self-denying
men. I have been engaged in trading among those Islands for the
past ten years, and every white resident is well known to me. There
is no person living there of that name'. lam well assured, in my own
mind, as to the identity of the writer. But since he has chosen to
shield himself under a false signature, it is not for me to publish his
name.
After some preliminary statements regarding the wars between the
natives and the massacres of shipwrecked mariners, your correspond-
ent says:—
“ About this time a few English strangers arrived at these Islands
from Sydney, and, finding that a good field here presented itself for
enterprise and speculation, remained amongst us. There being no one
amongst them who was a scientific man or mechanic, (except one, a
shoemaker,) and being apparently men of some education, we retained
them to teach our children, and to instruct, and endeavour, as far as
possible, to convert the natives."
He then goes on to state, in substance, that, soon having the satis-
A


faction of seeing beneficial results flow from this incipient Missionary
scheme, and believing that the natives would readily embrace Chris-
tianity if properly instructed, they (the white residents) did what lay
in their power to procure Missionaries to reside at the Islands, and
soon had the pleasure of welcoming three holy F athers of the Catholic
Church from France, whose subsequent arduous and indefatigable
efforts had been productive of much good. > .
The error of this statement regarding the establishment of Missions
at the Islands will be apparent, when 1 state, that those persons whom
your correspondent describes as “ adventurers from Sydney, seeking
and accepting employment from the white residents, as teachers for
their children,” came from London in 1834, as accredited Missionaries
from the London Wesleyan Missionary Society, which Society has
continued to support and steadily increase their Missionary establish-
ments there. At the time of their arrival, there were but four or five
Whites residing at the group, and they were living in the houses of the
native Chiefs. There was scarcely any trade there, owing to the
cannibalism and ferocity of the natives ; for, however exaggerated the
statements of your correspondent regarding the cruelties and crimes of
the natives at the present day, they were undoubtedly too true at that
time; and it is principally owing to the civilizing and Christianizing
influences of the Wesleyan Missionaries for the space of twenty-two
years that the present trade has grown up there, or that white persons
have been able to resort there in such numbers as to call themselves
a community. - T i j r
The writer of the letter referred to did not go to the Islands tor
many years subsequent to the establishment of the Wesleyan Mission,
and there are now but three persons living there who came prior to
their settlement. Thus it will be seen, that the assertions of your
correspondent, of their having come there as adventurers from Sydney,
and of their having been employed by the Whites to teach their chil-
dren are incorrect. The children of the hites never had any legulai
instructors until 1850, when, in answer to a request from some of
the leading white residents, a Teacher was sent out from London,
by the Wesleyan Missionary Society, for that purpose, and is now
performing that duty solely at the expense of the Society ; the Whites
having contributed very little, if anything, towards the support of the
T each or.
The statements of your correspondent regarding the French Catholic
Missionaries having come to the Islands at the request of the Whites,
and of the favour and estimation in which they are held, are equally
erroneous. They arrived at the Islands in 1846, twelve years subse-
quent to the establishment of the Wesleyan Missions. And, however
estimable they may be in their private character, they have had very
little success in making converts to their Roman Catholic doctrines.
While the Wesleyan Society has Mission-stations at nearly all the
principal towns in the group, the French Priests have but one station,
which is upon the island of Ovalau. I believe they have also a lay
Teacher at Rewa. The assertion of your correspondent, that the
Whites preferred to entrust the education of their children to the
French Priests, is also an error. With the exception of two or
three, among whom is the author of the statement, their religion is
decidedly unpopular with the mass of the Whites, and the school at
Levuka (the town where the Whites reside) is still under the control
of the Wesleyan Teacher.


And now follows a series of statements from your correspondent,
regarding the character and actions of the Wesleyan Missionaries, so
utterly unfounded, that it must excite the indignation of every well-
principled mind. He accuses them as the instigators of many, if not
all, the crimes of the natives, inciting them to plunder and massacre
the Whites, particularly the Americans; the causes assigned being
revenge for having been dismissed from among (he Whites, hopes of
gain from monopolizing the traffic with the natives, and hatred of the
French Priests, and jealousy of their influence.
My previous remarks regarding the first and last of these reasons
were sufficient to show that no such feelings could exist. I will speak
of the charge of hostility to Americans, and trading and trafficking
with the natives, —the whole of which statements are as unfounded as
those which I have previously noticed. I have enjoyed an intimate
acquaintance with nearly all the members of the Mission-establishment
at the Islands for the past ten years, and I take pleasure in saying,
that I never met with any body of men who appear to hold Americans
and American institutions in such high estimation as the gentlemen in
question. They uniformly speak well of them, and are always ready
and willing to assist any and all Americans who go there, to the full
extent of their power. I, for one, as an American shipmaster, have to
acknowledge many acts of courtesy and kindness at their hands.
And it is well known and acknowledged by the Whites at these
Islands, that the Missionaries are ever ready and willing to accommo-
date and oblige them, when in their power to do so. And should the
paper containing the statement of your correspondent find its way to
the Islands.—as it probably will, —it will nowhere cause a greater
indignation than among that very community of white residents in
whose behalf your correspondent pretends to write ; for although some
ill-feeling has been felt and expressed by some of their number, yet
none of them would be guilty of endorsing statements of this
character.
I have always found the Wesleyan Missionaries, one and all, evince
the greatest interest in the prosperity of the American trade at the
Islands, and have often heard them express the hope, that it might
prove sufficiently profitable to insure its continuance, as they believed
and hoped that the prospect of acquiring property might stimulate the
natives to exertion, and tend to promote habits of civilization and
industry among them. The truth of this statement will be readily
corroborated by a number of respectable shipmasters, and others, in
Salem and its vicinity, who have at various times been engaged in the
island trade. I appeal to them all to say, if any one among them ever
knew any Missionary at the Islands to endeavour to influence any of
the natives against Americans or the American trade; and if they
have not, on the contrary, endeavoured, to the extent of their means,
to promote it. Your correspondent styles himself an American mer-
chant doing business at the Islands. I know the writer; he does not,
and for some years has not, done any business there. There are a
number of the Whites residing there, who, with praiseworthy industry
and exertion, have built for themselves several decked boats; with
these they visit the different islands of the group, for the purpose of
trading with the natives, selling the produce which they procure to the
vessels trading there, and thus earn for themselves an honest and
respectable livelihood. But so far are the Islands from affording those
splendid avenues to fortune which your correspondent so graphically
a 2


describes, there is not one of them at the present day, after years of
exertion, who can call himself worth 5,000 dollars. If this is true ot
those who have devoted their whole time and exertion to the accumu-
lation of property, what becomes of the statements of your correspond-
ent regarding the rapid fortunes acquired by the Missionaries . JN or
are the small profits of the traders at all owing to the danger ot
trading among the natives, or the insecurity of property, the fearful
tales of David Stuart to the contrary notwithstanding. 1 will not
speak of affairs which took place twenty or thirty years back, when
cannibalism and crime were rife among the natives, and before the
influence of the Wesleyan Missionaries had begun to produce a
beneficial effect upon the native character. Of the occurrences ot that
period I have no personal knowledge; but with the whole course o
affairs during the past ten years lam well acquainted. During this
period there have been on the average from forty to fifty Whites
residing at the Islands, mostly all at the town ot Levuka, on the
island of Ovalau. They have about fifteen decked boats, built by
themselves, varying from three to fifteen tons capacity, which are
generally manned by three persons, sometimes by only two. W ith
these boats they visit every part of the group, trading with the natives,
sometimes being absent from their homes over a month.
In view of the statements of your correspondent regarding the
hostility and ferocity of the natives, one would wonder how men can
venture to go among them, having property to excite their cupidity,
and no power to protect it. What can two or three persons do, it
attacked by a crowd of natives ? Yet, during the period referred to ot
ten years, there have been but three cases where boats have been
attacked and robbed by the natives, and in which five Whites were
killed. This is certainly bad enough, and it is right that the perpe-
trators of those acts should be punished, and that severely. But it is
not at all according to the representations of your correspondent, lie
uives a long list of massacres and robberies, artfully representing them
as of recent occurrence, while, in fact, most of them took place
upwards of twenty, and some of them thirty, years ago. Of the whale
ship, “Oneo,” which, he says, was wrecked at lurtle Island, and
twenty-eight of her crew murdered, I never before heard. It sudh a
ship was wrecked, it must have been full thirty years ago. Ihe
“Charles Doggett” affair took place in 1834. The massacre of the
Captain and two men of the French schooner, “ Amiable Josephine,
was also in 1834. The killing of the Captain and Mate of the
“Tahiti” schooner was in 1837* Of the affair of the Juno I never
heard That, also, if it ever took place, must have been a good while
before" I ever went to the Islands. The other cases named by your
correspondent were all trading boats belonging to the Islands and
all took place before I went there. Since 1828 there have been
twelve vessels wrecked at the Islands, whose crews have been, m
every instance, well treated by the natives. Their names were the
“Glide,” “Fawn," “Niagara,” and “Tim Pickering, of Salem the
“Shylock,” American whaler, the “Active, Yaladness Lady
Howden,” “Fanny," “ Opalia,” “Emma Sherntt and Solomon
Salters,” of Sydney. Of these your correspondent makes no mention.
I do not wish to palliate any of the atrocities committed by the
natives. On the contrary, I consider it the duty of our Government
to protect the lives and interests of its citizens, wherever they may be
scattered, and to investigate and punish all crimes committed against


them. But no Commander of a national ship should receive as truth
such Avholesale charges against the natives, and also against a body of
men so respectable as the Wesleyan Missionaries, no matter by whom
preferred, without a candid and cautious investigation into their truth.
This, I regret to say, was not done by Commander Boutwell, of the
. United States ship “ John Adams,” in his recent visit to Feejee ; and
whose action in those matters your correspondent evidently wishes to
hold up, through the columns of the “ Herald,” to the admiration of
the American public in general, and as an example to the Com-
manders of our navy in particular. How far that admiration and the
eulogiums of your correspondent are deserved by the gallant Com-
mander, your readers will be able to judge when I come to speak of
his doings there.
Your correspondent states, that it was reported to Commander
Boutwell, that each and all of the English Missionaries had
engaged in the commerce of the Islands, to the neglect of their
spiritual affair's; and by means of levying upon the natives for large
quantities of beche-de-mer, cocoa-nut oil, and tortoise-shell, which
they export to Sydney for sale on their own account, were rapidly
acquiring fortunes, —thus preventing American vessels from obtaining
those articles, except through the English Missionaries. It is very
true that this absurd tale was communicated to Commander Boutwell,
(most probably by the correspondent of the “ Herald,”) and it
certainly does not reflect any great credit on the sagacity or motives of
that individual, that such a statement should have been so readily
credited without question. By a very slight inquiry he might have
satisfied himself of its entire incorrectness. I am, and have been for
the last six years, more largely engaged in that trade than any other
person, and it is impossible that any of the Missionaries should have
become engaged in traffic with the natives without my knowledge. It
is true that lately a small quantity of cocoa-nut oil has been sent to
Sydney in the Mission-brig, “John Wesley,” and there sold “on
account of the Society.” But that has been a voluntary contribution
by the native members of the church, towards the support of their
Teachers, and the proceeds are devoted to the Mission cause. This is
what your correspondent terms “ levying contributions upon the
natives." Uo not the members of every religious community contri-
bute something towards the support of their Ministers ? and why
should the Missionaries be censured for receiving these voluntary gifts
from those people whom they have so largely benefited?
From what I have here stated, your readers will perceive how
utterly unfounded are the accusations of your correspondent; and
every upright mind will be ready to do justice to those noble-hearted
men, who, from motives of religion and philanthropy, voluntarily
expatriate themselves and their families from all the comforts of
civilized society, and spend their lives in those far-off and barbaric
lands, labouring for the enlightenment and conversion of those who
otherwise would be left to perish in their darkness and Heathenism.
What shall compensate them for the injury already done them by the
publication of the statements of your correspondent, through the
columns of the press of a distant country, to which they have hardly
any means of replying ? They have been held up as monsters of
iniquity, as men stained by crimes of the blackest dye, instigators of
the most atrocious crimes, from pecuniary motives,- —and all under the
garb of sanctity and religion. This tale has gone forth to the public


through the columns of the “ Herald.” It has been read, and most
probably believed, by many who were but too ready to believe any
thing to the discredit of Ministers of religion, and who will never read,
or, if they do, will pay but little attention to, this vindication of them.
Unfortunately, human nature is ever too ready to believe evil ot its
kind, as if it therein found excuse for its own inherent depravity.
There is one other charge against one of the members of the Mis-
sion, which I will notice before I proceed to comment upon the action
of Commander Boutwell regarding the enforcement of claims ot
American citizens upon the native Chiefs. Your correspondent states,
that “ one of the Missionaries, having previously dishonoured the wite
of one of the principal Chiefs, found it necessary to take passage to
Sydney, his career as a Missionary being gone for ever.’ This state-
ment is of a piece with those already disposed of. The gentleman
referred to has been a Missionary at the Islands for seventeen years,
(the last four years being Chairman of the District,) and is held in
high estimation by all the members of the Mission. Having translated
a large portion of the sacred Scriptures into the Feejeean language, he
sailed, in October last, for Sydney, in the Mission-brig, John
Wesley,” on his way to England, for the purpose of superintending
the issue of an edition of the Bible in the native language; after
which, it is expected, he will return, and resume his labours at the
Islands. , , „ . ...»
I will now proceed to remark upon the style of investigation pur-
sued by Commander Boutwell, in his recent examination of the claims
of American citizens against the native Chiefs, and which is so much
lauded by your correspondent. Before doing this, it will be necessary
to state some particulars regarding affairs at the Islands, for some time
previous to Commander Boutwell’s arrival. There had been, as your
correspondent states, a sort of civil war existing between the several
Chiefs of Feejee; but as the American public are probably very little
interested in the contests of savages, I will confine myself to the
recital of events in which the foreign white residents were conceirned
In 1849 the Whites, to the number of about fifty, resided at the
town of Levuka, upon the island of Ovalau, the Chief of which, Tin
Levuka, was upon friendly terms with Thakomhau, one of the prin-
cipal Chiefs engaged in the war. Though not actually subject to
Thakorabau, Tui Levuka frequently assisted him in his wars, and was
considered throughout the Islands as being one of his party. Ihe
Whites, also, very generally espoused the cause of Thakombau in
opinion, although none of them took any active part in the war, ihe
American Consul, John B. Williams, Esq., resided upon a small
island, called Nukulau, which, I believe, he had purchased from
Ngarrengeo, a Chief of Rewa, who was the principal Chief opposed to
Thakombau. Upon the 4th of July, 1849, while he was celebrating
the day by firing cannon, the house of the Consul accidentally took
fire, and was burned to the ground. During the progress of the.fire a
crowd of natives collected, and indulged their thievish propensities by
seizing and carrying off whatever they could lay their hands upon.
In such a case it was, of course, impossible to say how much was
stolen and how much destroyed by the fire. But as the natives were
pretty expert in saving articles where there was such a prospect of
their securing them for their own use it that a good deal
was stolen. Soon after, in 1851, the United States ship St Mary s
Captain Magruder, visiting the Islands, Mr. Williams applied to that


officer for compensation to be required of the Chiefs, and handed-in a
schedule of goods stolen, amounting to 5,001 dollars 38 cents, (it
seems singular that he could know the exact articles stolen, so as to
charge such an exact account, even to the thirty-eight cents,) the
truth of which, that officer not being able (as his time was limited) to
satisfy himself concerning its accuracy, left in the hands of the llev.
Mr. Calvert, one of the Missionaries, and Mr. David Whippy, United
States Vice-Commercial Agent, requesting them to examine Mr.
Williams’s claim, and also several other small claims preferred by Mr.
Williams against native Chiefs on behalf of American citizens; to
arbitrate upon the same, and to report to the Commander of the next
United States ship-of-war which should visit Feejee, and to the
Secretary of State at Washington, Mr. Calvert accordingly wrote to
Commander Boutvvell, upon his arrival at Feejee, upon the subject.
But as his report did not at all agree with the notions of Mr, Consul
Williams, being rather unfavourable to the justice of his claim, he was
very coolly informed by that gentleman that, —
“It was considered a piece of presumption for him to interfere in
matters concerning American citizens or their interests, as he (Mr.
Williams) and Commander Boutvvell were fully competent to settle
all such affairs without any of his assistance.”
In 1853, a boat belonging to some of the white residents of Levuka
was taken and robbed by the natives of a place called Malaki. The
three men composing her crew escaped in their dory,—a small boat,—-
came to Levuka, and reported the outrage. The Whites, exasperated
at the story, determined to punish the offenders. They accordingly
organized an expedition, and, accompanied by the Chief of the town
where they resided, with a number of his native warriors, went to the
place, which they captured and burned ; and the native force which
accompanied them killed a number of the people of the town,
although no resistance was made. That the Whites did right in this
affair is unquestioned, as it was requisite for them to show the natives
that they would not allow any of their number to be robbed with
impunity. The people of the destroyed town were subject to the
Chief of an island called Vewa. They carried complaint to him of
the destruction of their town by the Whites; and it is asserted by the
Whites that he, the Vewa Chief, applied to Thakorabau for permis-
sion to avenge himself by destroying Levuka. Although Thakombau
positively denies all knowledge of the matter, rumours of the medi-
tated burning of their town coming to the ears of the Whites, they
organized and kept a regular night-watch to guard against treachery.
Notwithstanding this precaution, the town was fired in the night, and
most of it reduced to ashes. As there was a Native Teacher belong-
ing to Vewa living in the town at the time, the exasperated Whites
at once fixed upon him as the incendiary, for no other reason, so far as
I have been able to ascertain, than that, being a native of Vewa, he
must have been ordered by his Chief to set fire to the town.
Although at no subsequent investigation could any reliable proof be
adduced to fix the fact upon him, the impression becoming general
among the Whites that Thakombau had authorized the destruction of
their town, the Chief Tui Levuka declared against him, and was
joined by all the AVhites. They immediately constructed a few
temporary dwellings, around which they built a fence, which they
fortified with several pieces of cannon, against any anticipated attack
of Thakombau. But he never went near them, although your com-


spondent states, that several ineffectual attempts were made to carry
the town. He sent several peaceful messages, assuring them that he
had nothing to do with the burning of their town; that he was very
sorry for the occurrence; and that he would do all in his power to
discover and punish the perpetrators of the outrage. All this I state
as facts. Having had considerable property in the hands of an agent
living in the town, which was all destroyed by the fire, I have taken
considerable pains to investigate the matter with a view of demanding
indemnity, if the destruction could be traced to any responsible party.
But it is still shrouded in mystery ; the Native Teacher and the Yewa
Chief, who were charged with the act, having been killed a few days
after by the mountain tribes of Ovalau.
It was right that Commander Boutwell should have endeavoured to
examine into the matter, as considerable American property had been
destroyed; but he should have done so in an impartial spirit, according
to the instructions of Commodore Mervine, Commander-in-Chief of
the Pacific squadron, by whom he was despatched upon this business.
I quote from those instructions :—“ You will not take it for granted
that all the allegations against the supposed offenders are true, simply
because claimants have filed their reports at the State Department. In
prosecuting the important duty entrusted to your management and
discretion, sound policy dictates that a close and thorough examina-
tion, upon the strictest principles of justice, should be made into every
case presented for adjustment.”
To show how far these wise and equitable instructions of Commodore
Mervine were carried out by Commander Boutwell, I will here insert
some of the correspondence which passed between him and the native
Chiefs upon the subject. The first is a letter from Commander Bout-
well, dated a few days after his arrival at the Islands, and addressed
to Thakombau. I give it entire -
“ To Thakombau Tui Vili, or the Presiding Chief in his absence.
“ I have been directed by the Government of the United States to
visit the Feejee Islands, in the United States ship ‘John Adams,’ for
the purpose of inquiring into and redressing the wrongs which Ameri-
can citizens have received at your hands. Jhe great Chief who has
charged me with this mission, presides over a country whose resources
are inexhaustible, and whose power to punish her enemies are beyond
the comprehension of those who have never visited her empire. It is
charged against you, that you have caused American property, to a very
large amount, and valued at many thousands of dollars, to be taken
from the island of Nukulau and other places, and appropriated to your
own purpose and to that of your friends. You have treated the
persons who came here in ships bearing the same flag that you now
see floating over the ‘John Adams,’ in a manner that will not
be submitted to by the Government of the United States of America,
You are therefore required to restore that, or its value, with interest,
to ask pardon of my nation, and to promise to respect its flag for the
future.
“ E. B. Boutwell,
“ Commanding U. S. ship ‘ John Adams' ”
The following day, and before any answer to the above had been
received, another letter in the following style was sent, accompanied
with the appended agreement for the Chiefs of Buu to sign.


“ United Stales ship ‘ John Adams,’
“ Levuka, Ovalau, Sept. 27th, 1855.
“ I, Commander Boutwell, do, on behalf of the Government of the
United States of America, demand of the Chief of Ban thirty thousand
dollars, or that amount to be paid in fish, cocoa-nut oil, gum, pigs, and
yams, within twelve months from this date; the money, or its equiva-
lent, to be paid into the hands of John B. Williams, Esq., United
States Commercial Agent at the Feejee Islands, and to be distributed
in the following manner: 15,000 dollars to John B. Williams, Esq.,
for the loss of property on the island of Nukulau; 3,000 dollars to
James H. Williams, Esq,, for the loss of property on the island of
Namuka; 4,000 dollars to Messrs. Chamberlain and Co., of Salem,
for the loss of property at the burning of Levuka; 4,000 dollars to
Mr. Whippy, United States Vice-Consul at Levuka, for the loss of his
property at Ovalau; 1,500 dollars to Shattuck and M‘Comber, each,
as compensation for the loss of their property, and for being clubbed
by the natives of Namuka, at the time they robbed Mr. Williams of
Sydney; and 1,000 dollars for the robbery of the barque ‘ Elizabeth,’
at Totonga.
“As I have many claims on these and other islands to settle, and
my time being limited, I must urge the authorities of Bau to act
speedily, and not compel me to go after the so-called Tui Viti, or
approach nearer Bau, as my powder is quick and my balls are round.
“E. B. Boutwell, Commander.”
Appended to this was the following document:—
“ Bau, Sept. 2 8th, 1855.
“ We, the undersigned, Chiefs of Bau, admit the justice of John B.
Williams’s claim, as also that of the other American citizens, and
promise on our part to pay the amount demanded by Commander
Boutwell within twelve months from this date.”
Thakombau, the principal Chief of Bau, being absent from his town
at the time the above letters were received, Yagodamu, the second
Chief, replied to the demand of Commander Boutwell, by the follow-
ing humble remonstrance against the unjust proceeding.
“ Bau, Sept. 29 th, 1855.
“ To E. B. Boutwell, Esq., Commanding U. S. ship ‘■John Adams.’
“ Sir, I beg most respectfully to inform you that the claim now
made on us by John B. Williams, Esq., is unjust; first, because we
were not accessories in any degree whatever to the seizure of the
property belonging to J. B. Williams, James H. Williams, and Messrs.
Shattuck and MUomber; secondly, because the place where these
outrages were committed——the islands of Nukulau and Namuka—
were not included in our dominions at the time, neither are they now.
In proof of this we refer to the statements of Commodore Wilkes, of
the United States Exploring Expedition, in 1840, and of every com-
mander in the naval and merchant service who have visited these
parts. We refer to the record of the inquiry lately instituted on board
11. B. M. ship ‘ Herald,’ at which Mr. Whippy, United States Vice-
Consul at Levuka, Ovalau, was present. We refer to those American
citizens at Ovalau who are acquainted with the subject. Lastly, we
refer to the claims which John B. Williams himself made on Phillips,


the late Chief of Rewa, and which that Chief admitted, and engaged
to discharge. With reference to the claim of Messrs. Chamberlain
and Co., we can only inform you, that the burning of Levuka is still
involved in mystery. We maintain that we were not accessories, and
would again most respectfully refer to the evidence given on the sub-
ject by the Whites on board the ‘ Herald,’
“ I am, Sir, your obedient, humble servant,
(Signed by a mark) “Yagodamu.
“ On behalf of himself and the other Chiefs now present in Bau."
To this letter of Yagodamu, Commander Boutwell, who had been
instructed by his Commander-in-Chief to “ institute a close and
thorough inquiry, upon the strictest principles of justice, into every
case presented for his adjustment,” replies in the following unique
specimen of quarter-deck judgment.
“ United States ship ‘ John Adams’
“ Levuka , Ovalau , Oct. 2d , 1855.
“When I made the demand on the Chiefs of Bau for indemnity,
I expected an acknowledgment of your indebtedness and willingness
to pay, and not a letter of explanation. My officer had no authority
from me to enter into any agreement with you or the head of your
nation. lam satisfied of the guilt of Tui Yiti, as the Chief of Bau.
I know that his influence prevented Phillips from paying Mr. Williams
for his losses on Nukulau. I know that a wffiale’s tooth was sent to
Suva, from Bau, with orders to club Shattuck and M‘Comber. I
know that the Yew r a people robbed Americans at Levuka, and that
Bau sanctioned it ; and lam satisfied in my own mind that the Native
Teacher set fire to the town of Levuka, and that Tui Yiti sanctioned
it. The Chief, Tui Levuka, states that the Bau people robbed the
whaleship ‘ Elizabeth,’ at Ovalau. Mr. Williams and Mr. Whippy
both testify to the same fact. I am well aware that there are other
Chiefs, and their people, guilty of having injured Americans. I will
in time call them to account; but at present I am in pursuit of Bau,
or her principal Chief. I have to request that you will write me no
more letters, but forthwith pay the money, or give me ample security
that it will be paid in twelve months. The brave never threaten, nor
do the virtuous boast of their chastity. I therefore do not tell you of
the consequences of a non-compliance with these requirements. I
would, however, remind your teachers of ethics, that the golden rule
is too often forgotten, and that the eleventh commandment has, by
general consent, become binding on all those who keep the other ten.
“ I am, sir, yours respectfully,
“E. B. Boutwell, Commander,
“ To Yagodamu , Chief.”
From the above letter may be seen the manner in which Com-
mander Boutwell commenced to carry out the instructions of Commo-
dore Mervine, in which he is ordered “ not to take for granted that all
the allegations against the supposed offenders are true,” but to “ make
full inquiry, upon the strictest principles of justice, into every case
presented to him for adjustment.” He arrives at the islands, and is
immediately waited upon by Mr. John B. Williams, United States
Commercial Agent, one of the principal claimants for indemnity, and
by several others, who also have claims upon the Chiefs. These per-


WESLEYAN MISSIONARIES IN THE FEEJEE ISLANDS. 1
sons tell their own story. (And your correspondent, David Stuart, in
his letter, gives us a pretty good idea what kind of a story that was.)
Commander Boutwell, without inquiring into the truth of the charges
from any but the avowed enemies of the Bau Chiefs, immediately
becomes “assured in his own mind of the guilt of Thakombau,” and
without giving him any opportunity of defending himself, demands
compensation to the amount of thirty thousand dollars—fifteen thou-
sand of which is awarded “to John B. Williams, Esq., for the loss of
property on the island of Nukulau,” when the original claim, as pre-
sented to Captain Magruder, two years after the fire, was only five
thousand. The poor Chiefs, not feeling quite so assured of their guilt,
ventured to remonstrate against this summary proceeding, and to ask
to be allowed opportunity to endeavour to justify themselves. But the
gallant Commander did not want any letters of explanation, but an
“ acknowledgment of their indebtedness and willingness to pay ; ” and
though the “brave never threaten,” yet he just intimates that his
“ balls are round, and his powder quick.” He then goes on to say,
“ I know,” “ I know," “ I know,” this, that, and the other : and “ I
therefore request that you will write me no more letters, but forthwith
pay the money, or give me ample security that it will be paid in twelve
months.” In their extremity, the Chiefs applied to the Wesleyan
Missionaries to write to Commander Boutwell on their behalf; which
they did, but were politely informed by that gentleman, that he could
settle the matter without any of their assistance. At this juncture,
another American ship of war, the “ St. Mary’s,” Commander Bailey,
arrived at Ovalau, to whom Mr. Calvert, the Chairman of the Wes-
leyan Mission, addressed the following letter.
“ Verva, Feejee , Oct 9th , 1855.
“ Sir, —I hail with great pleasure your arrival in Feejee, which I
deem most opportune, as intricate affairs are now pending between
Bau and J. B. Williams, Esq., United States Commercial Agent.
Having been requested by G. A. Magruder, Esq., of the United
States Navy, to arbitrate, in connexion with Mr. Whippy, respecting
claims said to be due to J. B. Williams, Esq., and also respecting the
barque ‘ Elizabeth,’ and after having with reluctance (after objecting
to do it) undertaken to do what I could in the complicated affairs, I
thought it right to report what had been done in the matter to E. B.
Boutwell, Esq., commanding United States ship ‘John Adams.’
“ To my letter I have received two replies : one from Mr. Williams,
who complains that my interference is uncalled for, &c.
«A copy of my letter to Commander Boutwell, with the replies
thereto, I enclose, begging you will peruse and consider the same, as
I think it unfair that I should be represented to your Government as
‘ presumptuous,’ after I had been requested to do what I have done by
a naval officer in the United States service. Herewith I beg to enclose
to you a copy of a letter addressed to the Honourable Secretary of
State, United States of America, respecting a levy which Mr. Whippy
and I, after due deliberation, in virtue of Commander Magruder’s
request, conjointly made, as being the only claim we could fairly make
out for depredations on the property of the ‘ Elizabeth.’
“I forward this by the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, who has had the
honour to be the first Missionary at Bau, and who has been the means
of bringing about a great change on that island. He was at Levuka
at the time it was burnt; with reference to which lam shocked to find


Commander Boutwell writes, —‘ lam well assured in my own mind,
that the Native Teacher set fire to the town.' This is indeed a most
grave implication, and which I hope Mr. Waterhouse will have the
opportunity of proving as without foundation.
“ Hoping that these matters may now at length be fully investigated
and properly settled, so that Feejee, after its wars, Heathenism, and
cannibalism, may begin afresh, on better principles, and become
enlightened, honourable, and religious,
“ I am, Sir, yours respectfully,
“ James Calvert.
“ To Commander Bailey , United States ship ‘ St. Marys
A letter was also addressed by John B. Williams, Esq, to Com-
mander Bailey, in the following style:—
“ United States ship ‘ John Adams,’ Oct. 6th, 1855.
“To Commander Bailey , commanding United States ship , ‘ St. Mary’s.’
“Sir, —The United States ship ‘John Adams,’ Commander E. B.
Boutwell, having arrived some weeks previous to yourself, and having
made himself acquainted with the subjects of complaints of American
citizens, and having made his demands on Bau and other places for
indemnity, it may be safe to leave the affair in his hands, as they are
now in a fair train for settlement. And in my opinion, any change in
the demands or requirements made on them (the natives) by the
Commander of the ‘John Adams,’ might be injurious to American
citizens.
“ I have the honour to be, &c.,
“ John B. Williams, U. S. Commercial Agent.
Commander Boutwell, hearing that Mr. Calvert had written to
Commander Bailey, and that the latter gentleman was displeased with
his (Commander Boutwell’s) summary mode of procedure, wrote to
Commander Bailey, requesting him to remain in Feejee and settle the
affair himself; to which Commander Bailey replied, that as he (Com-
mander Boutwell) appeared to be pursuing a course involving a devia-
tion from his instructions, he should have felt compelled to remain and
settle it himself, were it not that Mr. Williams, the principal claimant,
and also, as United States Commercial Agent, representative of the
other American claimants, had expressed a decided preference for his
(Boutwell’s) adjustment. He therefore left it in his hands, w'ith a
caution as to his deviating in the slightest degree from his original
instructions; and an express order “to afford the accused every oppor-
tunity upon all formal occasions to appear in person, as w r ell as by
respectable counsel, without regard to their nation or religion.” This
order from Bailey, Boutwell, as junior, was bound to obey. But he
chose to obey it after his own fashion. He sent a notice to Thakom-
bau to appear on board his ship, upon a certain day, to answer the
charges preferred against him. He also notified the Rev. Joseph
Waterhouse that he would be permitted to act as counsel for the
accused, and appointed a board of arbitration, consisting of two of his
own officers, Avho had already made up their minds, to decide upon
the matter. On the day appointed, Mr. Waterhouse, with Thakombau,
repaired on board, and was permitted to speak in his behalf; but he
was treated with insult and contempt, and w'as not permitted to call-in
any witnesses, us evidence against the allegations ol John B. Williams.


The board of arbitration therefore decided that all the claims were just,
and Commander Doutwell added-on fifteen thousand dollars moie, on
account, as he informed Mr. Waterhouse, “ of the interference of Com-
mander Bailey and the representations of the Rev. Mr. Calvert. The
award now stood thus: “To John B. Williams, Esq., 18,331 dollars,
Chamberlain and Co., 7,300 dollars; David Whippy, 6,000 dollars;
owners of barque “Elizabeth,” 1,000 dollars; owners of bng lim
Pickering,” 2,800 dollars; Thomas Ryder, 1,500 dollars; Wilkinson,
Brothers, and Co., Sydney, 4,000 dollars; Messrs. Shattuck and
MUomber, 2,600 dollars.
Here, then, is the final decision of Commander Boutwell. Ihe
claim of John B. Williams, originally 5,000 dollars, has, through this
beautiful system of investigation, grown to 18,331 dollars! Upon
what grounds we are not informed. Having arrived at this satifactory
conclusion, a paper was drawn up which was called a txeaty, and which
Thakombau was compelled to sign—by which he agreed to discharge
the sum in two years —under the heaviest threats if he to
comply; and the “ promise, on the arrival of a ship of w r ar belonging
to the American nation, to resign the government of Bau, and to go
voluntarily on board that ship, and submit to any punishment which
it may be the pleasure of the Commander to inflict. This was the
prompt justice which your correspondent so much lauds. He says,—
“ Omnipotence had heard our prayers, and Commander Boutwell was
the chosen one to give us aid.” In ray opinion, David Stuart would
be the one most largely benefited, if the award of Commander Bout-
well should be enforced by the American Government; but I cannot
believe it will be. Our Government has always been just in its deal-
ings with the Polynesian communities; and the partial, harsh, and
unjust proceedings related above, will, I am persuaded, undergo a
severe scrutiny at Washington. That there were claims which it was
Commander Boutwell’s duty to examine and enforce, was undoubted.
The loss of 7,000 dollars, of Messrs. Chamberlain and Co., of Salem,
was real; it was property left by me in the hands of an agent at
Levuka, on their account, which was all destroyed by the fire. Other
Americans residing at the place lost their all. It is not at present clear
by what Chief’s orders the place was fired. This was a question for
Commander Boutwell to inquire into; but it would seem that Mr. John
B. Williams took advantage of these real and just claims to introduce
his original claim of 5,000 dollars, now, by some species of mercantile
legerdemain, increased to 18,000 dollars; and crushing all fair inquiry,
by endeavouring to blacken the characters of the Wesleyan Mission-
aries, whose truthful testimony, he feared, might defeat his deep-laid
plans to get Commander Boutwell to enforce the whole amount against
Thakombau, who, for some years, has been the object of his special
enmity. That Commander Boutwell listened to his tales, and imbibed
that prejudice they would so naturally engender, is but too evident
from his subsequent proceedings.
Immediately upon returning to Bau, from the “John Adams,
where he had been compelled to sign the so-called treaty, acknowledg-
ing the justice of the claims, and promising to pay the 45,000 dollars
in two years, Thakombau addressed the following protest to the United
States Consul at Sydney, New South Wales, requesting it might be
forwarded to the Government of the United States.


Feejee , Oct. 2Qlh, 1855.
“ I, Tiiakombau, the Yunivalu of Bau, Feejee, do hereby make
known my protest against the oppressive conduct of Captain Boutwell.
I do hereby declare and make known to you, Sir, the United States
Consul nearest Feejee, that I did not sign the treaty with Captain
Boutwell of my own accord, but under the greatest fear. He threat-
ened to take me away to America, and stamped on the floor right in
my face, because I objected to give my signature, and then I was afraid
and signed it. I make known that 1 now protest against that treaty,
and declare it to be unrighteous, tyrannical, unwarrantable, and un-
worthy of the Government of America. It is not my deed,
“ I also make known, Sir, that he told another Chief that he would
hang me. But there is nothing for which he should hang me. I
besought him to investigate the charges made against me by the Whites
of Ovalau, but he refused.
I beseech you, Sir, to inform the Government of the United States
of America of these transactions. I am continually in fear lest this
Captain kill me, whilst lam innocent. I had hoped that my profes-
sion of Christianity would have prevented such arbitrary conduct. I
cannot believe that it will he sustained by the American authorities.
(Signed by a mark) “ Thakombau.
“ Witnesses—William Moore and Joseph Waterhouse, Wesleyan
Missionaries.”
Copies of the above protest, duly authenticated, have been for-
warded by the United States Consul at Sydney to the authorities at
Washington, and also to the Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific
squadron. There is, therefore, no doubt that the affair will undergo
a more thorough and just investigation, by the orders of the American
Government. „ ,
I have here given a true account of the proceedings of Commander
Boutwell in relation to these affairs, taken from authenticated copies
of all the correspondence that passed upon the subject, now in my
possession. Your readers no doubt will be surprised, upon referring
to the “Herald,” of the 16th of February last, to find your cor-
respondent, David Stuart, so highly applauding Commander Boutwell.
He says, speaking of the action of preceding Commanders, This
course has, however, been changed by Commander Boutwell; and the
truly republican conduct of that officer, and his praiseworthy resistance
of all attempts to induce him to abandon his countrymen to the power
of the English Missionaries, has, it is well known here, incurred the
manifest displeasure of the Missionaries; but he has the consolation
of knowing that he left us with the united and heartfelt thanks of our
young islandic republic ; and after the tedious and unpleasant task he
has accomplished, he will return to a country and a people whose
motto is ‘ Liberty and Justice,’ and whose approbation will in this
instance be no less deserving than just.” It is to be hoped that the
Government of the “ people whose motto is c Liberty and Justice,
will visit upon Commander Boutwell that censure and displeasure
which his unjust and oppressive proceedings are so justly calculated
to inspire. .
Hoping that you will not fail to give the above an early insertion in
your paper, I am, Sir, yours, &c,,
3 11 THOMAS C. DUNN.


Copy of a Letter from Captain Magruder.
“ United States Frigate , ‘ Congress ,’
“ Gibraltar , July 1856.
“ My dear Sir, —Your letter, dated at Sydney in January last, and
directed to me at Washington City, has just reached me at this place.
I have been attached to this squadron, as Captain of the Fleet, for a
year past, which accounts for the delay in its receipt. I heartily con-
gratulate you and your fellow-labourers in the success of your efforts
among the Feejees. I thought I saw indications of a favourable
change when I had the pleasure to see you there; but the magnitude
of the work you have described as accomplished, I was by no means
prepared for. I heartily wish you continued success. It is a work
over which the Christian and philanthropist may rejoice, with thanks-
giving to the Most High.
“ I am sorry to hear of further difficulties between our Agent, Mr.
Williams, and the Chief of Mbau; and especially that it has resulted
in the punishment of innocent people. Ido not know what has hap-
pened since I investigated the claims of Mr. Williams against the
Chief; but I well remember that I considered some of the claims
preferred unjust, and thought Mr. Williams in the wrong: and so
reported to the Government. My official letter is on record on the
files of the Navy Department. It was dated, C U, S. S. “ St. Marys,
Valparaiso, Sept. 28th, 1851,’ and was addressed to Commodore Ch. S.
M‘Cauley, commanding Pacific squadron. In the letter I stated that
‘ I was sorry to find a bad state of feeling existing between our Agent
and the King. They had had business transactions together, in some
of which I thought Mr. Williams in the wrong; and that it was
unfortunate for our commercial interests that this state of things
should exist.’
“ I did not state, in the report above referred to, the particulars of
my investigation of the claim of Mr. Williams ; but I well remember,
that, in the inventory of articles said to have been stolen by the
natives, and not returned, charges were made in some instances for
articles which it was ascertained afterwards had been received by Mr,.
Williams.
“ If it is necessary to refer to my letter in any investigation before
the Department, it can be easily done. Were I at home, I would
cheerfully aid you in having the matter fully investigated, and justice
done to any parties who may have been injured.
“ I am, my dear Sir, very truly yours,
“ G. A. Magruder.
“ Rev. James Calvert , Wesleyan Mission-House , London.
LONDON: PRINTED BY JAMES NICHOLS, HOXTON-SfIOABE,


