

Peru
A /j
S' 1 '
IN GEN 10 EFFODERE OPES.
THE SCHOOL OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES.
BALLAARAT.
A LECTURE
The Flora of Australia:
DELIVERED IN THE
LECTURE ROOM OP THE SCHOOL, -
Baron Ferd. von Mueller, K.0.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S., &c.
ON WEDNESDAY, 13th SEPTEMBER, 1882.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OP THE COUNCIL,
Ballaarat :
PRINTED BY P. W. NIVEN & Co., 34, STURT STREET.
MDCCCLXXXII.
A 1;.' 1 -Z <


BALLAARAT:
F. W. NIVEN & CO., PRINTERS, PUBLISHERS, AND LITHOGRAPHERS,
34 STURT STREET.
3 1508 00246080 1


Date. Name. Subject.
June 9 G. Foord, Esq., F.I.C. (Royal Alchemy.
INGENIO EFFODE OPES.
THE SCHOOL OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES,
BALLAARAT.
POPULAR SCIENCE LECTURES.
WINTER COURSE, 1 88 2.
(Evenings, Eight o’clock).
Date. Name.
June 9 G. Foord, Esq., F.I.C. (Royal
Mint)
„ 21 Rev. T. E. Ick, M.A, (Sand-
hurst).
July 5 R. L. J. Ellery, Esq., F.R.S.
(Government Astronomer.)
~ 19 W. J. Thomas, Esq. (Geelong.)
August 2 Rev. T. E. Ick, M.A. (Sand-
hurst. )
„ 16 W. J. Thomas, Esq. (Geelong.)
~ 30 J. F. Usher, Esq., M.D.
SeptemberlS Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G,
(Government Botanist.)
„ 27 Professor Mica Smith, B.Sc.
October 11 Professor F. M. KrausA
The Wonders of Coral Life
The Sun’s Distances and
the Transits of Venus.
The Earth as a Planet.
Molluscs—their Homes
and Habits.
The Stellar Universe.
Physiology—Body and
Bones.
General Observations on
the Flora of Australia.
Gold.
On the Volcanic Rocks of
the Ballaarat District.
Free Tickets for these Lectures may be obtained on appli-
cation at The School, or to any member of the Administrative
Council.
Andw. Berry,
Acting Kegistrar.




GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
ON THE
FLORA OF AUSTRALIA:
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED BT
Baron Ferd. von Mueller, K.C.M.G,, M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S.,
&C., &C,
Oy WEDNESDA Y, 13th SEPTEMBER , 1882.
Jambs Oddie, Esq., J.P., Vice-President, in the Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
In some former lectures and essays I have endeavoured to
sketch the general features of the vegetation of Australia, al-
though in entering cursorily on any expositions of the rich
material, much that from special views might have been deemed
important had to be left untouched, or could receive but slight
attention or had altogether to be passed. Within the hour al-
lotted to us at present, it will be more particularly my endeavour
to institute some comparison of the Australian Flora with that
of other countries j though, in a vegetation so vast and largely


so remarkable as that of the fifth or rather sixth continent, the
multifariously intermingled affinities cannot be set forth exten-
sively at a passing glance. While addressing an institution in
which scientific teaching forms a leading duty I have not held
it necessary to render myself understood in strictly popular
terms; contrarily I thought this opportunity an apt one for in-
dicating in professional wording some of the precincts and out-
lines of an intended future essay on the influences, which rule
the isolation and regional distribution of the Australian plants.
To have acquired gradually a wide insight into the floral treasures
of this part of the globe, has needed the exertions of more than
a century. The great Linne knew no plant from Australian soil
through autopsy ; because the very few north-west Australian
species, of which the main founder of biomorphic science could
have had any knowledge —those namely, from Dampier’s voyages
in 1688 and 1699, partly illustrated in the geographic work of
that navigator, and partly figured in the phytographia of Plu-
kenet, do not seem to have come under his observation while
he was on a visit to England in 1737, though Dampier’s specimens
are still preserved in the Oxford Museum. No other naval ex-
pedition prior to that of Cook brought any Australian plants, so
that it fell to the share of Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander to
carry the first botanical riches from our shores to Europe. Through
these collections the younger Linne was enabled in 1781 (only
two years before his death) to establish the genus Banksia, of
which he defined four species, namely, Banksia ericifolia, B. in-
tegrifolia, B. dentata, and B. serrata ■ but no other exclusively
Australian plants were described either by him or by his illus-
trious parent. Banks returned from Cook’s first voyage in 1771,
at a time when the health of the elder Linne had given way so
far already, as not to allow any more of his entering on literary
pursuits.
It is not an object on this occasion to sketch historically the
progress of botanical discoveries in our far southern lands; to do
this with some approach to fulness would require a special lecture;
but, whoever may be interested in this subject, can readily refer
to the introductory chapter of Sir Joseph Hooker’s masterly “Flora
Tasmaniae,” in which essay, among other considerations, the main
facts connected with the successive unfolding of the Flora of
Australia, through itineration and literary exertions up to 1859,
are lucidly placed on record. Suffice it to observe that the ap-
proximate number of one thousand species of plants were
gathered by Banks and Solander, during Cook’s voyage along the
shores of East Australia in 1770, that Robert Brown, the dis-


tinguished naturalist of Captain Flinders’ expedition, augmented
these to about 4000, when the great but unfortunate naval officer,
whose name is leadingly commemorated in the main city of Vic-
toria, afforded opportunities to his illustrious companion for in-
vestigating personally the vegetation of the southern shores of
Australia, including that which surrounds Port Phillip Bay, in
1802. This number of plants has, in the course of the present
century, been fully trebled, inasmuch as now about 12,250 well-
defined species stand recorded as the constituents of the total
Australian Flora.
R. Brown’s “ Prodromus” however brought out descriptively
only 1700 really distinct plants, inasmuch as the Evasculares
and the majority of the Dicotyledonese remained unpublished by
him in 1810. More curiously still, Dryander in summing up all
that had been noted as Australian in published works up to
1805, gave less than 400 species.
It is at once here clearly to be understood, that while Tas-
mania, with a vegetation peculiar only in many of its alpine types,
must botanically be regarded as an integral part of Australia, we
have to assign to New Zealand an almost distinct substantiality
in reference to its Flora; because—as recognized long ago —es-
pecially through Sir Joseph Hooker’s researches, the whole woody
vegetation of the New Zealandian Islands is so different to that
of Australia, as to present not a single form of specific identity
among the trees, and but very few among the shrubs; while also
most of its herbaceous plants are distinct from ours, though some
conformity with Australian species does exist in its alpine Flora,
and though among Acotyledonese the general law of wide dis-
tribution of species holds good to some extent in this instance
also ; a union of the flora of New Zealand with that of Aus-
tralia would therefore disturb the view over either. Continuing
numerical considerations, it is to be noted, that of the plants, as-
certained up to the present date to be indigenous to Australia,
G9OO belong to Dicotyledonese, 1550 to Monocotyledonese, and
3800 to Acotyledonese. Of these nearly 8000 (but no evascular
plants) are described in the seven volumes of the “ Flora Austra-
liensis,” which the venerable Bentham from 1862 to 1878 published
through co-operation with myself; during the progress of the
work, and subsequent to it, neai’ly 800 cotyledonar plants have
been added, chiefly from publications of my own. The future
access to the acotyledonar main division will doubtless be con-
siderable, as the lowest and minutest forms of vegetable life are
not yet so extensively traced through all the regions of our con-


tinent, as those of the more highly developed plants; but it is
not to be anticipated that additions equally extensive will be
made to the cotyledonar plants of either two divisions ; hence we
have fair means of contrasting now their proportions already
with some approach to ultimate results.
The numeric relation of Monocotyledonefe to Dicotyledonese
for the 4000 chiefly litoral species, known to Rob. Brown in the
beginning of this century, was 4-*W ; whereas now through large
additions from the inland regions this proportion has become
altered to 44-4 for all Australia.
As might be expected, these data of computation cannot be
regarded as final; because only for Tasmania, Victoria, New South
Wales, and the southern portions of South Australia, some com-
pleteness of our knowledge of the vegetation has been attained,
while we have yet to learn much of that of the jungles stretching
through North-east Australia, much also of the littoral vegetation
of Carpentaria, and of the far inland plants of extra-tropical
and sub-tropical Western Australia.
Tabulated below are the grand totals of vascular plants at
present known from within the boundaries of the several colonies.
Presented are furthermore the sums of all the species,
hitherto regarded as peculiar for Australia to each of the terri-
tories, though doubtless many will yet be traced from one colony
into the other.
Total of
all plants indigenous in each colony
plants indigenous in eacn colony :
New
West South Tas- Vic- South
Austr. Austr. mania, toria. Wales, land.
2552 1331 685 1217 2106 2245
555 358 271 388 568 621
29 34 75 85 130 168
3136 1723 1031 1690 2804 3034
r e are restricted to each colony the fo
North
Austr.
Dicotyledonese
Monocotyledonese
Ferns and Allies
Of the
above
following
numbers :


Vic-
toria.
New
South
Wales.
Queens-
land.
North
Austr.
33
404
792
739
21
100
169
130
5
22
61
4
59
526
1022
873
West
Austr.
Dicotyledonese
Monocotyledonese
Ferns and Allies
The total number of vascular plants known as in
digenous in Australia is about
Of these are found also in various other countries
about
Thus leaving as strictly endemic about ... ... 7550 species,
being rather more than six-sevenths of the whole number, expressive of an
intrinsic wealth almost without example elsewhere on so large a scale.
From the above it will further be observed that the differ-
ences in the number of species indigenous respectively to extra-
tropic West Australia, to New South Wales, and to Queensland,
is not great; but that extra-tropic South Australia, Victoria, and
North Australia, while not much differing from each other in
their absolute number of specific plants, come up numerically to
only half the floral exuberance of the other colonies; yet Vic-
toria, considering its far more limited area, is also comparatively
rich, whereas Queensland is likely in future to gain the greatest
access.
Singular remains the proportion of Mono- to Dicotyledonese
in Tasmania, it being nearly while in South Australia, it
is about 44-ff, and in Western Australia
In limiting the several colonial territories, I have for our
present purpose chosen the tropic of Capricorn as the boundary
line to separate North Australia from West and South Australia
phytogeographically, thus rendering the botanic areas of the two
latter colonial divisions entirely extra-tropical, although the
great Central Australian depressions, with a Flora throughout
of considerable similarity, stretch widely into West and South
Australia, and into Queensland also. The same limitation is
adopted for a recent census of all the species of Australian
plants, with geographic, chronologic, and literary annotations, of
which work the first part, comprising the Dicotyledonete, is likely
to appear in the course of this year. The whole is intended as a
basis for a new synoptical Flora.


In carrying on the numerical analysis of our own colonial
Floras, it would be of particular interest to ascertain how many
species are common to all the territories, and how many are to
be found unitedly in two or more of the colonies, I have how-
ever not had sufficient leisure available to calculate this for
the present paper.
Before we compute the vegetative wealth of any portions
of other great divisions of the world, it seemed incumbent to
contrast the great geographic regions of Australia in reference
to the specific extent of the vegetation in each ; but it is not at-
tempted to draw together the plants into their main natural
regions as dependent on climatic conditions, Metereologic obser-
vations are not yet extant from all parts of Australia, nor are
they from many places of sufficient scope and duration to warrant
the elaboration of schematic arrangements of plants into great
physiographic groups, notwithstanding the rapid strides made also
in Australian climatology ; but as political boundaries separate
the colonies, and as each of these is interested to know how
many plants are coming to its share, I have set forth the numbers
of species, and shall follow up the data thus obtained by mutual
considerations and by comparisions with the vegetation of some
Extra-Australian countries.
In considering the very unequal proportions of plants,
restricted within each colonial region, it is all the more startling to
perceive that the species, which in such vast numbers are peculiar
to extra-tropical Western Australia, are not spread over the whole
area, but are almost confined to that outer triangle, which is
obtained by drawing a diagonal line from the western extremity
of the Great Bight to Shark Bay, therefore to within about one-
fourth of the whole extent of the country, the other three-fourths
being mainly occupied by the vegetation of the “ steppes,” which
in great general resemblance—subject to varied complexes—ex-
tend over fully half of the whole of the Australian continent.
If the bulk of the steppes-plants has not yet been traced from
many interior regions of Northern Australia, Queensland, and
New South Wales, quite into the Western Australian territory,
it is, because much of the inland stretches of country there have
not yet been searched by phytographic travellers, or have not
even yet been mapped by geographic explorers.
I abstain from burdening this document with any numerical
arrays of the largest ordinal groups, referring those of my hearers,
who may be further interested in the subject, to a chapter written


by me last year for Dr. Goeze’s “ Pflanzen Geographic. ” I would
however still remark, that we know now 550 genera from Aus-
tralia with one species only, 390 of which are represented else-
where—and often very largely so—leaving fully 160 Australian
monotypic genera, expressive of as many very original and
isolated forms.
It would be tiresome marshalling out the numbers of all the
predominating genera, as the danger has arisen already of render-
ing this discourse tedious, because it is largely analytical and sta-
tistical. But as a sort of corollary to much of what I state this
evening, it should be mentioned that the following, by virtue of
their abounding in species, form principal elements in the consti-
tution of the Australian Flora, the approximate number of species
of each being annexed according to our present state of know-
ledge :
Acacia 320 Daviesia 55
Styphelia (in its Bssckea ... ... 55
extended boun- Fimbristylis ... 55
daries) 170 Scheenus 55
Grevillea ... 150 Phyllanthus ... 50
Eucalyptus ... 120 Ptilotus ... ... 50
Melaleuca ... 100 Scawola 50
Helichrysum (in- Solanum... ... 50
eluding Helip- Drosera ... ... 45
terum) 100 Banksia 45
Hakea 95 Dryandra • ... 45
Hibbertia ... 85 Ipomcea 45
Stylidiuxn ... 85 Prostanthera ... 40
Pultenaea ... 75 Dodonsea ... 40
Chorizema (as com- Haloragis ... 40
bined with Oxy- Brachycome ... 40
lobium and Gas- Andropogon ... 40
trolobium) ... 75 Hibiscus... ... 35
Goodenia ... 75 Bossiaea ... 35
Pimelea 70 Verticordia ... 35
Cyperus 65 Calycothrix ... 35
Persoonia ... 60 Darwinia ... 35
Aster 60 Petrophila ... 35
Eremophila ... 60 Dampiera ... 35
Panicum ... 60 Lepidosperma ... 35
Boronia ... ... 55 Senecio ... ... 30
Eriostemon ... 55 Cladium... ... 30
Cryptandra ... 55 Carex ... ... 30
In the overwhelming genus, Acacia, only 22 species have the
ordinary pinnate leaves occurring in almost all extra-Australian
congeners, the vast majority of ours showing phyllodinous foliage
through the complete confluence of petioles with leaflets; 75 of


ours have spicate, the rest capitate, all yellow flowers, though
they may be whitish-pale in a few.
Accounts of travellers who traverse the desert interior are
apt to leave the impression that, especially in sandy portions, it
is as devoid of vegetable life as the Libyan desert. To some
extent such ideas might be justified if the arid steppes are viewed
during the months of desolation, or in seasons of drought. But
with us here, any waterless wastes are comprehended as deserts,
whether constituted by sand-undulations or limestone plains, or
clayey or saline flats; but each of these geologic tracts has vegetable
peculiarities, irrespective of some generally diffused forms of
plants. Hence as a whole the great interior, even in its physiog-
nomically most cheerless and monotonous proportions, is by no
means reduced to an extreme scantiness of vegetation; contrarily
occasional heavy showers will call forth during spring a multitu-
dinous display of most varied flowers, and will particularly clothe
the ground with small annual unpretensive herbs, so much so, that
the few hundred woody plants of the more central regions of our
island continent are far outnumbered by the species of mere her-
baceous growth.
Like the Sahara, which only to about one-fifth consists of
areas of drift-sand, so also the great deserts dispersed throughout
much of the inlands of Australia, contain only partially sand-
tracts. Both these great desert regions are to a great extent
elevated, but the African on the whole considerably more so than
ours; both are traversed by isolated mountain regions, in Africa
however to much higher elevations than with us; in both the
average temperature is much the same, ranging from slight frosts
in the cool season to intense heat in the summer months ; but in
our deserts we have nowhere any absolutely rainless regions, such
as are encountered in some portions of the Sahara. Our real de-
serts largely owe their origin to the decomposition of sandstone
rocks; the wide table-lands of the latter towards north-western
Australia, regarded by Professor Tate as at upper miocene age, are
resting extensively on metamorphic rocks, and are broken by gene-
rally granitic or prophyritic extrusions. The detritus of Trappean
outcroppings and other basaltic effluvia contributes much towards
the formation of the fertile downs with rich pasturage, often
suddenly adjacent to the drift sands. All this tends to constitute
a comparatively varied Flora in the far inland regions.
The real nativity, among the edibles, of the rice, of an Ipomcea
(surrogative of the sweet potato), of the tamarind, of true Dioscorea


Yams, the Taro Colocasia and its ally, also the Green Gram
(Phaseolus Max) and some other pulses and also millets, is quite
incontestably established in north-western or other tropical
regions of Australia, as well as the occurence of the true melon
in its wild diminutive state and of three genuine bananas though
none with succulent fruits.
But even in our days the Australian race, wherever it
has not yet come in contact with the Caucasian, lives in the
“ Stone Age,” in barbarous superstition, in timid insecurity of life,
in that pristine state of a wild hunter, which misapplied consi-
derations, misguiding traditions, and misdirected philanthrophy
may depicture as the happiness of primeval simplicity, claiming
for this perhaps supposed Edenic state that ground occupied by
mere thousands, where millions under the enlightened rule of a
great nation are destined to exist. Thus the native race, through
the many and many centuries of its occupancy of the wild tracts
all over the Australian lands, might have emerged to the first rise
in civilized life by entering on at least the crudest of cultural
pursuits, such as casting about the grain of the one cereal
within their immediate reach, if they could not change the wild
into a luscious fruit or extract the pigment from the true Indigo
plant, a real native of Queensland. Thus gradually their ideas
would have become elevated, their means of maintenance would
have been augmented, increased population would have been
allowed, and some approach to comfort and therewith to settled
homes would have been provided.
Why to a large measure the north-western tracts of Austra-
lia are missing that forestral grandeur, which might have been
anticipated in such a littoral tropical region, is mainly explained
by the comparative lowness of the whole country ; over this,
during the rain months there, the north-western monsoon passes
without meeting high ranges on which the moisture, wafted
thither from oceanic expanses, could largely become precipitated;
moreover the north-eastern trade wind is much intercepted by the
ample and extremely lofty ranges of New Guinea, thus not send-
ing its moisture-laden currents extensively to North-western Aus-
tralia, though showering its heavy summer rains against the
eastern slopes of high mountain tiers in Queensland. In a some-
what analogous manner we have a clue why suddenly in the east-
ern parts of Gippsland but not (in the same latitude at no great
distance and likewise in densely-wooded regions) towards Cape
Otway, rather suddenly tropical plants, such as Nephelium,
Acronychia, Ficus, Passiflora, Tylophora,. Marsdenia, and Livis-


tona make their appearance. Tasmania, with its high ranges,
shelters the south-eastern extreme of the Australian continent
against the cold Antarctic breezes, to which the Cape Otway
region is fully and freely exposed ; but though these in occasional
stormy speed or even hurricane swiftness may within a single
days’ time rush into the rarified air prevailing during the torrid
season in Southern and Central Australia, they do not pro-
duce regular rainfalls, but contrarily frequent dispersions and
evaporation of the dissolving and vanishing clouds. Under such
circumstances it is not to be wondered at, if differences of shade—
temperature have been registered in the interior from 15 to 120°
or as the great geographic explorer Capt. Sturt has affirmed of
fully ten degrees more! Several Eucalypts, various Acacias,
many saltbushes and a good lot of other woody plants will live
through such changes. The south-west monsoon, which dashes in
tremendous vastness its waters against the southerly precipices of
lofty ranges of India, causing a downpour unexampled elsewhere in
the world cannot exercise any appreciable influence during our
cool season on North-west Australia, where lowlands prevail much
out of the reach of its current. Nevertheless tropical features
are not wanting there altogether in the vegetation as exem-
plified in Arnheim’s land by the occurrence of Adansonia,
Cochlospermura, Bauhinia, Cycas, Livistonia, Kentia, Pandanus,
and even two tall bamboos, not to speak of plants less remarkable
and less pretensive.
Comparisons of the Australian with other Floras lead us
first, as nearest, to New Zealand, the vegetation of which counts
about 960 vascular plants as truly indigenous, after deducting a
number of varieties described as specific forms. Of these more
genuine species about 130 belong to vascular Acotyledoneae, a
number much larger than that of all Europe, where Nyman, in
1865, fixed it at 105. Humid, warm climes, especially in moun-
tain regions, are favorable, as is well known, for the specific
development of ferns; but that alone does not account for their
extreme scantiness in south-western Australia, even in regions
hilly, forestral, and throughout the year almost equably damp,
such as the Karri country between Cape Leeuwyn and King
George’s Sound, where the currents of two oceans meet, with the
result of producing an insular clime in the adjacent country, and
with the sequence of calling forth a belt of vegetation remarkable
for many peculiarities. Indeed the clime of the Karri country is
similar to that of Gippsland, where ferns abound. The vast rich-
dom of filices in some of the Malayan and South Sea Islands is
neither solely explained by combined tropical warmth and humid-


ity, and partially only through the trade winds and monsoons ;
else the coast-lines of Carpentaria and Arnheim’s Land ought to
be very much richer in their fern vegetation than they have
proved to be. Other causes operate in this respect, else a single
range in Java could not produce more species of ferns than occur
in all Australia. If we count up such vascular plants as are
common to Australia and New Zealand, but do not exist else-
where, we will find the number to reach hardly 100, comprising
largely glumaceous and herbaceous species, besides about 16 peren-
nial, but only eight shrubby plants, the vast contrast of the two
Floras being thus demonstrated. The learned Dr. Engler of Kiel
quite lately has subjected the Flora of Australia and also that of
New Zealand to an analytic exposition and comparison (Yersuch
einer Entwickelungs Geschichte der Pflanzen-Welt, II Theil,
1882) from the works of Sir Joseph Hooker for New Zealand,
and from those by Mr. Bentham and by myself for Australia, thus
facilitating phyto-geographic speculations. The phanerogamic
Flora of New Zealand is not much richer than that of Tasmania,
although the area of the latter is little more than a fourth of
that of the former, and although in New Zealand the alpine vege-
tation reaches elevations of 8000 feet, while the Tasmanian Alps
nowhere exceed 6000 feet in height. But while the number of
New Zealand plants will likely be somewhat increased by future
explorations throughout several regions as yet hardly accessible*
it will admit perhaps of some further reductions also, inasmuch
as there the species of Veronica, Epilobium, Coprosma, Aster
(Celmisia, Olearia) and of some other genera are subject to extraor-
dinary degrees of variation, the reasons of which are hitherto not
yet clearly understood. Very remarkable after all remains in
New Zealand the paucity of endemic genera, which indeed are
reduced to 14 (Notothlaspi, Entelea, Hectorella, Corynocarpus,
Notospartium, Ixerba, Carpodetus, Alseuosmia, Teucridium,
Rhabdothamnus, Haastia, Dactylanthus, Sporadanthus, and
Loxsoma), two of which are closely allied to generic forms of
Lord Howe’s Island, where Carmichaelia also occurs. Singular
enough the New Zealand Flax-Lily (Phormium tenax) extends
both to the Auckland Islands and to Norfolk Island, but neither
to Australia nor Howe’s Island. It would lead too far were we
to engage in an extended enquiry into the botanical features of
the two neighboring islands, grandest in this part of the world
through ever snow-clad mountains, unique in their super-glacial
zones, picturesque in bases of alpine spurs being washed by the
waves and spray of the ocean, and charming in having extensive
towns and cities arising from regions littoral as well as alpine. It
is in the islands of New Zealand also, where palms reach their


furthest southern boundary in the world, a solitary but noble
representative (Kentia sapida) being found down to the 44th
degree of south latitude, whereas Cocos australis and Trithrinax
campestris—as the most southern of American members of this
princely tribe of plants—cease already in Argentina at the 34th
degree. The palm lilies of New Zealand, tall, hardy, and mag-
nificent, find nowhere competitors on the Australian continent,
though an ally of them as well as a palm, akin to the Nika, graces
the shores of Norfolk Island. Fuchsias and Calceolarias, leading
favorites among conservatory plants, came across as genera but
not as species from south-west America; so also evergreen beeches
(Fagus), reaching however in again other representatives New
South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania; fern-trees likewise advance
further south in New Zealand than elsewhere, braving some
frosts, but seeking shelter against storms, alike to our most
southern ones here. Epacrideae, in an order of fully 300 species,
are in their really arborescent forms restricted to a few kinds of
Dracophyllum in New Zealand, to one other in Lord Howe’s
Island, to one more, which with the equally palm-like Bichea
pandanifolia impresses a tropical aspect on some of the snowy
glens of Tasmania, and lastly to the littoral Styphelia elliptica in
Victoria and New South Wales. Arborescent Asters and Sene-
cios, as exceptional features in large cosmopolitan genera and
indeed in the vastest of all natural orders of plants, occur also
here as well as in New Zealand, perserving however wide specific
difference.
In 1865 it was shown by Brogniart that then already about
1100 Dicotyledonese and about 200 Monocotyledonese had been
collected in New Caledonia ; but to these 1300 species numerous
others have been added since, so that in this isolated island,
though limited to an area of only one-third of Tasmania,
a vegetation is presented absolutely marvellous for its multi-
farious exuberance, concentrating on a small insular area the
surviving remnants of what, in former ages, may have extended
over wide but now submerged territories. A proportionate
richdom in Proteaceaj, considering areal difference, New Cale-
donia shares with Australia and South Africa; in Rubiaceae,
which, Avith over 100 species, seems to be the largest of all orders
there, it excels even the proportions held by that rich group of
plants in the Brazilian Flora ; the New Caledonian is the only
region where capsular-fruited Myrtaceae are largely developed
outside of Australia, though no Eucalypt among them. Brogniart
well contrasts the respective preponderance of the largest orders
in India, in Australia and in New Caledonia ; in referring here


only to the four richest in each, we have—for India: Leguminosse,
Rubiacea?, Orchidese, Composite; for Australia: Leguminosfe,
Myrtacese, Proteacese, Composite; for New Caledonia : Rubiacese,
Myrtacete, Euphorbiacese, Leguminosse. In its details the Flora
of New Caledonia is as largely singular as that of New Zealand ;
still a few connecting links with Australia do exist in the genera
Halfordia, Monococcus, Argophyllum, Duboisia and Balanops,
all woody plants, to which genera may be added Diplanthera,
which however extends to the Sunda Islands.
In proceeding it may be of some interest, particularly to
those of you whose happy remembrances are wandering still
across to distant homes of childhood, to view the vegetation of
Europe in relation to the Flora, which surrounds us in Australia.
Nyman’s “ Sylloge,” published in 1855 and supplemented in
1865, enumerates about 9100 Dicotyledonese and 1800 Monoco-
tyledonese, therefore 10,900 phanerogamic plants within an area
not much larger than the whole Australian territory, Europe
stretching over 3,730,000 square miles, Australia over 2,989,000,
At first sight it would therefore seem as if our Flora were rather
poor in comparison, especially when we remember that Europe
is entirely extra-tropical, whereas about two-fifths of Australia
are included within the tropics. The demarcations however of
the species in Nyman’s list are drawn within much narrower
limits than those adopted by Bentham in the Flora Australiensis ;
and even the limitations assigned by the last named great phyto-
grapher received still some further reductions from myself. Here
it may be incidentally remarked, that the first really descriptive
work for the whole Flora of Europe was commenced only a few
years ago by Grisebach, who entertained rather conservative
views as regards the scope of specific forms ; but this intended
connected publication on the plants of all European countries
remained (in consequence of his lamented recent death) un-
finished. But while the magnificence of a tropic vegetation is
denied to all portions of the European territory, the latter is
largely compensated for this loss by the varied development of
mountain plants on highly elevated ranges, such as in similar
extensiveness Australia does not possess; for the real Alps of
Tasmania, Yictoria, and New South Wales are not of very wide
extent, and although the coast ranges of East Australia culmi-
nate on a few places as well within as outside the tropics in
elevations of about 5000 feet, we ha\e in no other portions of
our continent any mountains high enough for offering such re-
ductions of the temperature as would create varied zones of
vegetation analogous to what occurs in. Europe. Still, if we


carry our comparisons to the acotyledoneous plants, then Aus-
tralia, as a whole, stands far behind; because the climatic condi-
tions necessary for the profuse development of mosses, lichens
and fungs, which all delight in equable humidity, and more or
less in coolness, prevail only in the densely wooded portions of
Tasmania, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, as not
even in the moist shore regions of Carpentaria and Arnhem’s
Land any extensive opulence of cryptogams is to be witnessed,
while indeed these kind of plants vanish in the scorching
aridity towards Central Australia almost entirely. But singu-
larly enough our oceanic Flora of the whole extra-tropic coast,
and also of the eastern shores within the tropics competes not
only with the Algic riches of Europe, but exceeds it in some of
our coast regions to such a degree, as to render Australia, among
the great divisions of the world, altogether the richest in Algae,
more than 1000 clearly distinct kinds of seaweeds fringing gaily
and most prettily our beaches, the numerous Diatomese—as
directly invisible—uncounted. Schiraper’s synopsis in 1876 de-
fined 906 mosses for Europe ; the 11th volume of my Fragmenta
gave compilatory 743 for Australia, whereas Mitten, the leading
bryologist in Britain, has obligingly counted up on my request
the material accessible to him from this part of the world, enu-
merating thus 582 species, as published in the volume of our
Royal Society for 1882, the actual number to be admitted as
known fluctuating between the two sums mentioned, it being
understood that mosses are distinguished by systematists on very
trifling characteristics. For further comparison’s sake I may
mention that the known moss-vegetation of the whole of South
America, from the tropical jungles to the Andes and the Fuegian
icefields, comprises about 1700, according to a list published by
Mr. Mitten in 1869, Our Alps and Fern-tree Gullies are rich
in mosses, so much so that Dr. Berggren, when returning from
New Zealand, after carrying his moss studies previously even into
the ice moors of Spitzbergen, noted on our “ Black Spur” (of
“giant trees” fame) some 140 sorts of mosses ; but in the higher
latitudes of Scandinavia, as many as 240 have been found con-
gregated within a few square miles on spots exceptionally rich in
their moss flora. Dr. D. Moore gives as exhaustive the number
for Ireland, which island has very favorable moss areas, as 370.
Our Victorian Dawsonia superba competes in stateliness with
the grandest Splachnums of the polar regions, and with the
tallest of Spiridens of the tropics.
The United Kingdon, with an area about equal to that of
Victoria and Tasmania, exhibits according to limitations adopted


by Sir Joseph Hooker in his “Student’s Flora,” 1278 species of
vascular plants; hence the British phanerogamic Flora falls far
short of ours in Victoria, as might be expected, partly from its
insular position, and partly through its greater remoteness from the
tropics. What strikes as remarkable, if we cast a general com-
parative glance on the vegetation of Britain, is the large develop-
ment of Caryophyllese, Rosacese, Campanulacese, Ericaceae (with
us replaced by Epacrideas) and Primulacese, (to which latter
here Myrsinese are succedaneous). Again we have neither in
this province, nor elsewhere in Australia, representatives of
Berberideae, Fumariaceae, Resedaceae, Cistineae, Salicineae (Wil-
lows), Yalerianeae, Dipsaceae, nor happily Equisetaceae. But though
our colony, Victoria, is much richer in phanerogamic plants than
Britain, we remain far behind in fungs, for already in 1860 the
Revd. J. M. Berkeley, as the great specialist, enumerated 2380
fungaceous plants for the United Kingdom.
Now, from all Australia we know hitherto only half as many
as from Britain; still we ought not simply on that account to
entertain the hope of seeing finally the phanerogamic plants of
Australia numerically exceeded by mere fungi among crytogamic
plants, even if many should become wafted across to us additionally
from abroad. The large proportion of fungaceous to phaneroga-
mous plants, as shown in Britain, holds only good for territories
with a humid clime, and not even for all of them.. Thus in
Australia, away from the coast ranges, not only the fungal tribes,
but also all other cryptogamic orders are far exceeded by the
phamerogamae, till towards Central Australia, where still a rather
varied and extensive Flora of Mono- and Di-cotyledonese exists,
all the Acotyledonese over vast tracts of country dwindle away
to insignificance, and on places of greatest aridity, even to
annihilation, as remarked before already.
Reverting further to the relative sum of the species in the
Australian vegetation, we have means of comparison with Japan,
and with Chili also, as enumerative lists of the plants of these,
to each other almost antipodal, countries have been completed not
long ago by Franchet and Savatier and by Phillipi respectively.
Geographically a connection is so far established, as the meridians
of Japan traverse the middle portion of Australia also, and as
the parallels of Chili are identical with the extra-tropical latitudes
of our continent.
The areal differences between Japan and Chili are not very
great; and if we sever that outer triangular area of south-western


Australia within which the endemic forms of plant life are
almost completely enclosed, we obtain a territorial extent corres-
ponding for our comparisons sufficiently with that of Chili and
Japan. The vegetation in all three is eminently peculiar, the
climate of south-western Australia being the warmest, and the
configuration of the country there the least elevated ; nevertheless,
South-western Australia carries for vast abundance of originality
of forms the palm, rivalling with California and South Africa in
its rich endemism more particularly. As might be expected, the
relation of the Flora of Australia to that of western extra-tro-
pical South America is not extensive, but it is significant, because
the affinity pertains to the alpine vegetation mainly, which, in the
frigid latitudes of Patagonia and Fuegia, descends to the low-
lands. This remark applies also to the small groups of the
Auckland and Campbell Islands, situated to the south of New
Zealand, almost in the latitude of Cape Horn ; in this cold zone
we meet, both in the eastern and western hemisphere, a consider-
able display of plant life, conformous in some or even many
specific types. I prefer to call this farthest of southern Floras
pre-antartic, because in the exact geographic sense any really
polar vegetation would be included within the Antarctic circle.
Sir Joseph Hooker—who shared the honors, but also the perils,
of the Antarctic voyage in the Erebus and Terror, before these
ships of both glorious and sad historical renown were lost in the
achievement of a north-western passage through Arctic waters—
seems to be convinced that no part of the Antarctic continent is
decked by a floral mantle, notwithstanding that the ever active
fumes of Mount Erebus must be warming the air at least within
the territorial surroundings. It must however not be insisted on,
to limit Arctic or Antarctic Floras by strictly geographic
latitudes, inasmuch as a natural demarcation of successive lati-
tudinal zones, for vegetation is largely dependent on isothermal
lines, as established fiist by Humboldt and Dove.
When attending the meeting of German physicians and
naturalists for 1846, which in that year was held in Kiel, I
listened to a brilliant discourse of Dr. Forchhammer of Copen-
hagen, who became so celebrated for his researches in Scandi-
navian geology, and for his chemical analyses of oceanic waters.
The Danish Professor then most lucidly pointed out what an
enormous influence the gulf stream exercises on the temperature
of western Europe, where Britain would participate in the clime
of Labrador, did that mild oceanic current not pass the British
shores. Future explorations in preantarctic latitudes may like-
wise demonstrate that deviations in the temperature are there


neither bound to degrees of latitude; for researches in polar
geography with all the collateral inquiries into geological data, into
terrestial magnetism, into climatology, and biomorphic science,
ironclads can now-a-days furrow with impunity the thinner
strata of ice, and can force their straight course by the almost
magic action of steam, and perhaps by a power even more mar-
vellous still, that of electricity. We here in these far southern
regions, as especially interested, ought also to promote exertions
so noble as those in which an Italian naval commander, aided
by his own Government and that of the La Plata States, is now
engaged in endeavours to complete the chart of the South Polar
Legions, and that not for scientific purposes alone, but for
opening also new channels of commerce, be it in whale chasing or
seal hunting or perhaps general fishery. Suppose for argument’s
sake that the expedition now on its way towards the South Pole
should discover large coalfields, how soon would we have some
permanent settlements then on Victoria Land ! Suppose that the
outcroppings of quartz were glittering there in gold, how soon
would the undaunted enterprise of miners enliven the icy
solitudes of still primeval ages ! New Zealand for retreat dur-
ing the season of uninterrupted nights, and perhaps unendurable
colds, is not farther distant from the high towering mountains,
Erebus and Terror, than Port Phillip by sea from Cape York ;
and let it not be forgotten, Sir James Ross, when in sight of
the two great volcanos active and extinct, had already, without
iron sheeting and without steam power reached three-fourths of
the distance from New Zealand to the southern geographic pole.
Any mountain regions near the polar axis might in calm clear
weather be reconnoitered perhaps by a moderate balloon-ascent,
and thus possibly be brought into view for the completion of the
map without actual traversing. I have advised the Italian-Argen-
tine expedition to take turfs of fruit bushes, of nutritive grasses,
rushes, and lichens, from Fuegia across to Victoria Land as a first
attempt to create vegetation there. Who will say whether or
not in some future century the reindeer may not browse on willow
or lichen pastures, which originated at our time within the
Antarctic Circle.*
But to return to the subject, which is before us at this
gathering, let me remark, that for botanic purposes, the term
*Since these remarks were written, intelligence has reached us of
the disasters which brought this recent effort for extending Antarctic re-
searches to a termination almost at the out-set; it is to be hoped however
that this deplorable event will not deter from following up enterprises so
noble as these, especially if ampler means for such become available.


Antarctic received afar more extended meaning here in the south,
than correspondingly expressed in the north, so much so that
Labillardiere, the companion of Admiral D’Entrecasteaux, in
in his search after Count LaPerouse, bestowed the name Cymo-
docea Antarctica (Ruppia) on a widely distributed sea-grass of
our Australian shores, which however seems not even to extend
to New Zealand, though Dicksonia Antarctica, so named by him,
when in 1792 he discovered this splendid fern-tree at the place,
where since the city of Hobart arose, does certainly advance to
New Zealand, but not to any of the small islands farther south ;
yet although one of the hardiest of arborescent ferns, it
succumbs nevertheless if unsheltered—left exposed to any severe
frosts— barely enduring the winter temperature in the mildest
portions of England. Labillardiere’s Hierochloa (Disarrhena) Ant-
arctica reaches however to Campbell’s Island and to Cape Horn.
But it was through Banks and Solander already, that the term
Antarctic was extended to South America by applying it to one
of the evergieen beeches of Fuegia j in this they were followed by
Yahl who in 1791 bestowed the same specific appellation on an
Alopecurus, and in 1804 on a Pinguicula, of which latter genus
of pleasant home reminiscences we have searched vainly in
Australia. A grape vine, impatient to any frost, passing far into
our tropics, but not to Cape Howe, was even called Antarctic by
Yentenat in 1803. From the resemblance or identity of portions
of the far southern alpine Floras, we are bound to assume that it
had one centre of origination, though its continuity is now so
very far severed by wide oceanic spaces; and we can only explain
the association of this ancient Flora with many other forms of
vegetable life in South America, New Zealand, and Australia by
regarding the locally admixed plants as advancingly transmigrated
frSm newer-starting points of creation after great telluric changes,
especially so, as the majority of our endemic alpine plants belong
to generic types, of which different species occur in the lowlands
also, irrespective of those conspecific forms which by robust
constitution were able to ascend from warm depressions to frigid
heights. Adduced are now the plants common to the cooler
regions of Australia (including Tasmania) and the southern
territorial extremes of America ;
Oxalis magellanica,
Tetragonia expansa,
Mesembrianthemum aequi-
laterale,
Myriophyllum elatinoides,
Oreomyrrhis andicola,
Apium prostratum,
Crantzia lineata,
Coprosma Nertera,
Samolus repens,
Gentiana saxosa,
Euphrasia antarctica,
Juncus planifolius,
Hierochloa antarctica,
Azolla magellanica.


But this very limited number of absolutely identical species
would not establish more than a very small fractional alliance of
our Flora to that of South America, were it not additionally for
the repetition of generic identity albeit specific diversity in forms
of the following genera :
Drymis, Abrotanella,
Colobanthus, Pernettya,
Eucryphia, Donatia,
Gunnera, Phyllachne,
Ontes, Ourisia,
Lomatia, Fitzroya (Diselma),
Azoreiia, T ..
Coprosma, Libertia.
Lagenophora, Astelia,
Microseris, Oreobolus,
Flaveria, Carpha,
Huanaca, Uncinia,
which are all entirely or nearly restricted to South America and to
extra-tropical Australia, extending however mostly to New Zealand
with its small insular dependencies, where Libosedrus, Fuschia and
Calceolaria also occur. But the affinity, such as it is, between the
several far southern parts of the world does not end in what has
been adduced j for, as pointed out long ago, the only American
plant of Epacridese, constituting the genus Lebetanthus, which is
a close ally to the Tasmanian Prionotes, occurs in Patagonia and
Fuegia ; furthermore, evergreen beeches, as stated already, form
forests in the cooler regions of New South Wales, and more
extensively of Victoria, Tasmania and New Zealand, as well as
in South America, and even the curious edible Cyttaria fun°-s,
raspberry-like in appearance, occur alike in Tasmania (C. Gunnfi)’
and in Fuegia and Chili (C. Berteroi, 0. Darwinii and 0. disci-
formis), growing wherever they occur, exclusively on the branches
of ever-green beech trees. The Calthas of the section Psychro-
phila are also all confined to far southern localities, both in the
eastern and western hemisphere ; with us they are glacier plants.
Whether and how far the alpine types above alluded to may
be repeated on the snowy mountains of New Guinea remains
involved in obscurity, as only elevations of 6000 feet with a tem-
perate therefore but not frigid clime, have as yet been reached in
the great Papuan Island and solely on Mt. Arfak by Dr. Beccari
where that distinguished traveller noticed, what must be start-
ling, our Moreton Bay Araucaria (A. Cunninghami) so far away
It. would require elevations of 10,000 feet-in New Guinea to
bring about any alpine features; whereas in the mountains of
Victoria vegetable forms of the snowy zone -commence at about


5,000 feet, in the cooler regions of Tasmania at about 4,000,
while in New Zealand the lower line of winter snows varies
according to latitude : but on mountains, exceeding any of Aus-
tralia much in height, Mr. Buchanan has traced some straggling
Veronicas and a few other alpine plants up to 8,000 feet, and they
would likely ascend still higher there if the loose scoriae and
abrupt declivities of the summits afforded any holding to vege-
tation.
In closely viewing the Japan Flora (of which mention was
made before) throughout its details, it will be noticed that of the
2,740 vascular plants, known as indigenous in that Archipelagus,
only 190 are absolutely identical with any of ours; again of this
comparatively small proportion merely fifty :
Nelumbo nucifera,
Poly gala Chinensis,
P.Sibirica,
Hypericum Japonicum,
Drosera lunata,
Melia Azedarach,
Ficus pumila,
Ulmus parvifolia,
Statice Taxanthema.
Polygonum strigosum,
Cassia Sophera,
Haloragis micrantha,
Rubus parvifolius,
Lagerstroemia Indica,
Osbeckia Chinensis,
Exocarpus latifolia,
Thesium australe,
Viscum articulatum,
Lagenophora Billardieri,
Centipeda orbicularis,
Gnaphalium Japonicum,
Emilia sonchifolia,
Wedelia calendulacea,
Crepis Japonica,
Saussurea carthamoides,
Symplocos spicata,
Lysimachia Japonica,
Datura alba,
Centranthera hispida,
Dopatrium junceum,
Limnophila punctata,
Cuscuta Chinensis,
Hoya camosa,
Mitrasacme Indica,
M. pygmsea,
Salvia plebeja,
Crinum Asiaticum,
Ottelia alismoides,
Blyxa Roxburgh!!,
Carex pumila,
C.breviculmis, C.Brownii,
Lipocarpha microcephala,
Cladium glomeratum,
Poa Chinensis,
Pennisetum compressum,
Isachne Australis,
Zoysia pungens,
Azolla pinnata,
Lygodium Japonicum,
Lindsaya cultrata,
Lomatia euphlebia,
are more particularly confined to eastern and southern Asia and
eastern Australia jointly. Among the others some are cosmo-
politan water plants, many are common weeds of wide distribution,
several are grasses and rushes of frequency elsewhere, and not a
few are ferns of extensive range; none of all these therefore
indicate any special alliance of the Flora of Japan to that of our
parts of the world. Indeed the vegetation of Australia, espec-


ially in its northern and north-eastern regions, has far more
connecting links with that of insular and continental India, than
with any other Flora, not omitting that of New Zealand,
notwithstanding the much closer vicinity of the latter to con-
tinental Australia and Tasmania. But strange as it may appear,
there is proportionately less identity between the forms of plant
life in Australia and New Guinea, than between the vegetation
of Lower India and Australia, inasmuch as only the litoral plants
to a considerable number are the same, whereas the Papuan
mountain Flora seems largely distinct from that of the elevated
country, both in India and Queensland.
In a small work on “ Papuan plants,” issued by me a few
years ago, very many species are enumerated from material
obtained in the south-eastern portion of the great island chiefly
through the exertions of Chevalier d’Albertis and the enterprise
of the Missionaries; to their plants I added what became
elaborated from the N.W. part of New Guinea by Drs. Blume,
Miquel, and Scheffer. The total gave about 650 species, of
which 250 occur in tropical Australia likewise; but this latter
number represents in its main bulk those kinds which have a
wide tropical dispersion, although it mixes very scantily also
such strictly Australian types as Eucalyptus, phyllodinous
Acacias, and Banksia, seemingly all identical with our species,
into a Flora of otherwise largely Malayan type ; in all likelihood
however the high mountains of the island of the Paradise Birds
will show as much endemisrnus in their Flora as in their Fauna.
As yet only a commencement has been made in the publication
of Dr. Beccari’s extensive collections from the regions of the
N.W. side of New Guinea ; but we may judge of the richdom of
the vegetation both in the uplands and lowlands there, so far as he
scrutinized it hitherto, if we instance as many as half a hundred
species of palms (nearly all restricted to the island), whereby a fair
standard is given for estimating the extent of the vegetable trea-
sures yet to be rendered known from there.
The occurence of real oaks, of the teak, of Rhododendrons,
Viburnum, a true honeysuckle (Lonicera) so far south stands forth
as highly remarkable; but balsams (Impatiens) and Begonias,
species of which have already been disclosed from there, may
yet be awaiting their recognition as likewise Australian in
hidden glens of North Queensland. Familiar northern form of
plant-life, such as firs and roses, known as far south as the Sunda


Islands, may possibly pass the equator still further and quite
into New Guinea. Here is perhaps the proper place to re-
member the few plants of extensive Australian type, which, so
to say, strayed away in but solitary or very few species across to
to South Asia, but not to other regions of the globe ; these
stragglers are comprised in the genera Eucalyptus, Stackhousia,
Haloragis, Calogyne, Stylidium, Thysanotus, and Centrolepis.
It was already explained how very distant the affinity has
proved of the Japan Flora to ours; indeed the share of identity
is so small that almost as many connections are to be found be-
tween the vegetation of the countries surrounding the Mediter-
ranean sea and the Flora of our far southern lands ; for at least
30 species of plants (any clearly imported ones uncounted) can
be traced from South Europe to Australia, but not to Japan.
These are;—
Myosurus minimus,
Ranunculus parviflorus,
Alyssum linifolium,
Arabis glabra,
Frankenia Isevis,
Aldrovandra vesiculosa,
Hibiscus Trionum,
Euphorbia Chamaesyce,
Nitraria Schoberi,
Gypsophila tubulosa,
Mollugo Glinus,
M. Cerviana,
Polygonum plebejum,
Acacia Farnesiana
Geum urbanum,
Alchemilla vulgaris,
Sicyos angulata.
Sium latifolium,
S. angustifolium,
Yiscum orientale,
Veronica serpillifolia,
Samolus Valerandi,
Cressa Cretica,
Heliotropium Europseun?
Orobanche cernua,
Alisma parnassifolium,
Carex paniculata,
C. flava,
0. Buxbaumii,
0. Psendo-Cyperus,
Festuca fusca,
Cheilanthes vellea,
Grammitis rutifolia.
This list, in proof of what has been asserted, is limited to such
as have not a wide range to the western hemisphere also. We
possess in the “ Flora Orientalis ” a highly important and very
extensive but not yet completed work by Boissier on the vegeta-
tion of those countries, which in the sense of the ancients, and
indeed in the language, political or otherwise, of West-European
nations constitute the “Orient.” Through these volumes we
have thus obtained a complete insight into the vegetation of these
regions, as far as the orders of Dicotyledoneae are concerned, the
rest of the work having not yet appeared.
The complex of countries, connectedly treated as regards
their Florae by Boissier, consists of Greece, European Turkey as


far as the Balkan, the Crimea, the Caucasus, Egypt to the first
cataracts, Arabia as far as the tropic circle, Asia Minor, Armenia,
Syria, Mosopotamia, Persia, Afghanistan, Beloochistan, and
Turkestan up to the 45th degree of latitude. These territories
comprise unitedly an area almost equivalent to that of all
Australia. As a whole the vegetation is eminently rich, partly
because the warmer and colder temperate and the alpine zones
are productive of floral regions, very varied according to
altitudes and parallels mountains with ever-snowy heights rising
in many places of this vast area. The total of the dicotyledonous
plants, descriptively defined for these countries, amounts to about
10,000, therefore to very much more than occurs in the corres-
ponding vegetation of Australia. Assuming that the proportion
of Endogenes to Exogenes would be 1:4 in the Orient, it varying
from 1;3 to 1;5 in different parts of the globe, we would obtain
12,500 for the great Oriental areas, as above defined.
But when we contemplate that, for instance, the genus
Silene is credited with 205 species ; Astragulus (which in Austra-
lia is replaced by Swainsona) with the astounding number of 757 ;
Centaurea with 183 ; Euphorbia with 131 ; Campanula with 125 ;
Verbascum (apt to run into hybrid forms) with 123; Trifolium
with 115; Ranunculus with 110; and Salvia with 107 ;it may be
assumed that the specific limitations are drawn somewhat closer
than those which Mr. Bentham and myself have assigned in
general, to Australian plants, Nevertheless we obtain an idea of
the lavishing exuberance of the oriental plant world, explainable
from the commigration of several Floras and from their wide
development on high mountain systems of various geologic ages
over a much larger area than was possible in Australia. It
speaks for the almost total difference of the Oriental Flora from
ours, when we note that of 37 of such dicotyledonous genera, as
have over half a hundred species in each, only 10, namely :
Ranunculus, Erysimum, Polygonum, Rumex, Euphorbia, Senecio,
Plantago, Heliotropium, Teucrium, and Veronica possess several
species in Australia, and these again almost entirely different,
while 31 of the largest oriental genera have not a single
representative here.
As my present writing is intended to be chiefly statistical, I
cannot enter now on a detailed comparison bf the Oriental Flora
with ours; indeed it would swell my pages far beyond the literary
scope of a lecture, nor is there much to remind of our plants,


although Sisymbrium, Lepidium, Zygophyllum, Atriplex, Tribu-
lus, Indigofera, and Helichrysum are there as here rather promi-
nent also, beyond those noted already.
In looking comparingly on the vegetation of the north-eastern
states of the American Union, we find from the reliable data af-
forded by Asa Gray, who for many years brought his sterling talent
to bear on the North American Flora, that the Dicotyledonese
amount to 1580 the Monocotyledonem to 670 and the vascular
? 3 Acotyledoneie to 90, giving a total of-90d0-Vasculares. The terri-
tory thus brought under comparison is that east of the Mississippi
and north of Carolina and Tennessee, comprising an area some-
what less than that of Queensland, but somewhat larger than that
of the extra-tropic portion of South Australia. What strikes
as odd is the large proportion of Endogens to Exogens, it
/ ; % J being as 13*8, to some extent influenced by the enormous
diversification in the highly interesting genus Carex, of which
about 150 fairly limited forms are recorded as specific, against
about 30 for all Australia, where, even in the Alps, it is
largely replaced by other cyperaceous genera; but for Japan,
also, nearly 100 Carices stand on record, and for Europe 180,
of which 60 are British; furthermore is to be noted as remarkable
how many plants of tropical type reach in north-eastern America
as far as 36° 30" north, therefore to the latitude of the southern
extremities of Spain, Sicily and Greece; and yet Europe in these
regions with a much milder clime shows far less sub-tropical forms
of plant life, their migration northward having doubtless been
much intercepted by the Mediterranean Sea. Let me for instance
adduce as North American genera within the indicated temperate
zone : Nelumbo, Cabomba, Cocculus, Litsea, Xanthoxylon, Gor-
donia, Sesuvium, Tragia, Podostemon, Olitoria, Aeschynomene,
Galactia, Cassia, Passiflora, Spermacoce, Yernonia, Elephantopus,
Physalis, Bignonia, Tecoma, Bletia, Pogonia, Habenaria (there
almost entirely replacing the genus Orchis), Burmannia, Comme-
lyna, the Bambusaceous Arunclinaria, Lygodium. Only 6of these
genera are wanting in Australia, although respectively all their
species are different, excepting that of the aquatic Cabomba and
of the maritime Sesuvium; furthermore only 5 of the genera
come as far south as Victoria, none reaching Tasmania, notwith-
standing winters far less severe than those in any of the eastern
United States. To the above exemplification of plants of sub-tro-
pical origin, advancing so far north, might be added the exclusive-
ly American genera Cuphea, Opuntia, Mentzelia, Baccharis, Yer-
besine, Gonolobus, Tradescantia, Tillandsia, Agave and Yucca.


The extensiveness of the following ordinal groups of north-eastern
American plants, given in the sequence of their prevalence is
worthy of notice: Composite with 288 species, Cyperace* 248
Gramme® 172, Leguminosse 98, Eosacete 72, Ericeaj 67, Liliacese
Do*
It was my intention to dwell in this address on geologic data
so far as irrespective of climatic and other agencies, they may aid
to explain restriction or intermingling (often alike enigmatical)
ot the species, which constitute as original the Australian ve<mta-
tlon ’ b , u l th f sub Jf ct . is so large, and it is surrounded with so
many difficulties that its discussion would need a special essav *
moreover in our present state of knowledge it could not be ex-
haustively treated, the reliably completed portions of the geologi-
cal chart of all Australia being very small indeed in proportion to
what is imperfectly sketched, or perhaps fallaciously indicated or
even not yet touched at all. Let it be understood that a
vast number of our plants have a wide range over various geologic
formations, and that regional limitations of those which are actu-
ally dependent on the soil of distinctive rocks have, as yet been
insufficiently traced. Very much in this respect has to be done
m future. It was necessarily—and it is indeed yet—the main
work for natural history of this century to discover the species
throughout all extra-European countries, and to fix with accuracv
their diagnoses ; it will be the work of the next seculal epoch in
botanical science, to study connectedly and comparingly the ana-
tomy and physiology throughout all existing forms of vegetation •
to enquire more fully and more closely into their distribution'
their chemical constitution, their utilitarian applicability their
ages in the history of the world. J
Now whilst my address is drawing to a close, you might
reasonably ask what was its intention, what is its object ? Mv
thoughts led me to show, that whatever part of the habitable
world we may turn to, there is not a spot left unendowed with
objects of deep interest in nature for the benefit, instruction, and
enjoyment of man. I was anxious especially to demonstrate,
that in the floral complexes—however intricately interwoven they
may be each of their constituent particles, even at the widest
. and in the course of ages, preserves its distinct
-***. «ftdividuahty, and this within a cyclus, however expansive of
. ai i unc Gons, out of which no organism can* wander, I was
jiger to demonstrate that a fixed reign of order has ever been
dominating throughout the whole creation, nothing being left to


blind chances, all heralding a super-earthly control. We have
drifted away to generalize too much on imperfect data j we should
remain more cognizant of Tycho de Brahe’s advice, given to the
astronomers at his time, that more of observations and less of
deduction therefrom was wanted Dicta, such as were prema-
truely put forward, and even largely accepted, on the causes which
operated in calling forth life in its marvellously multudinous
organisms, can only explain the formation of varieties, or the
origin of hybrids, but not the ancestry of truly specific beings,
the ascendance doctrine gives us no clue, why groups of highly
developed saurians, colossal marsupials, and gigantic struthionous
birds, or why tree-like forms of club-mosses and huge equiseta-
ceous plants have not, through becoming renewedly evolved under
conditions still more favorable, entered again into the present
creation of organic life, instead of leaving in many instances
types only of lesser development, or dwindling into insignifi-
cance or vanishing into annihilation. No process of gradual
adaptation through ever so many ages could restore to vitality,
what once is swept away from the face of the globe, whether it
be a Diprotodon or a Moa, whether a Lepidodendron or a
Calamites, whether a Spondylostrobus {in verdure once at the
very place where we are here assembled) or far distant,
Ebony Melhania, (which flourished still on yonder isolated
oceanic cliff of St. Helena under the sight of people yet living)
or be any other plant exterminated in the present creation
within memory of our time. Now, as of yore, the simplest and
minutest of organisms exist by Godly ordainment, designed tor
purposes of their own, limited to a series of predestined vital
function, but never intended to be originating points of uninter-
rupted transitory forms, out of which chaotically higher organic
development, and more excelling animation—-with finally proud
man himself should arise. No! it cannot be, that mere mechanic
forces and physical laws, which rule the inorganic world, as well
as the enlivened, have solely operated to create the vital empire
of marvel and vastness around us. That is my creed in natura
religion, it was held by me in the zenith of my life, and remains
the same at approaching evening of my day’s time. The world,
through man’s action, is sorrowful enough already, to be rendered
more doleful still by fostering atheistic tendencies on the field
of science also.
Why should that Divine Power, which the extremest of
scepticism must acknowledge as the beginning of all beginning,
be ennarrowed, according to the glimpses of poor mortal souls in


this our atom of world of worlds, to operations such as only be
within mortal grasp ? Why should any one of us endeavour to
reduce, what must be eternally sublime beyond all human con-
ception, to simple formulas or calculable processes ? Sad would
it be, were the end results of scientific striving to culminate in
disputing away that consoling and trust-inspiring and elevating
blessing, which any mind imbued with piety, must derive from the
contemplation of Nature’s wonders; it is thus, that through
worldly revelation we are allowed to perceive, though slight it
may be, some of that grandeur of supernatural supremity, which
blessingly for human existence is in its Godly fulness denied to
mortal eye!


it t.rv
■
fw ) ; . r Aoli/shvo-t vlIA-iow
> > t r: (0”. t od v. . i I
.ov. ■
y
'?;
.
.
