

Missionary Society Report.
1811




REPORT
OF
THE DIRECTORS,
TO THE
MISSIONARY SOCIETY,
MAY 9, 1811,
(ABRIDGED.)
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
HY J, DBNNBTT, LEATHER LANE, HOLMORN,




REPORT
OF
THE DIRECTORS,
MAY 9, 1811,
( ABRIDGED.)
The Directors will commence their Report, as they have
usually done, with the islands of the Pacific Ocean.
OTAHEITE.
In the Report of the last year, the Directors informed
the Society that the greater part of the Missionaries had
thought it necessary to retire from Otaheite, in consequence
of a civil war •, that four of the single brethren had, how-
ever, continued at Otaheite, and that the rest had retired to
a neighbouring island. The Directors have now to report
more particularly on this afflicting event, and on other oc-
currences which have induced the Missionaries to remove
to New South Wales,
It appears that open rebellion broke out at Otaheite on
the Oth of November, 1808. The married brethren, toge-
ther with Messrs. Davies, Teissier, and Warner, were con-
veyed on the 10th, to Huahcine, in the brig Perseverance,
which providentially was at that time at Otaheite, Messrs.
Hayward, Nott, Scott, and Wilson remained with the king,
but were soon obliged to remove to Eimeo ; and on the dc-
' s 2


feat of Pomarre, the houses of the Missionaries were burnt,
their plantations demolished, their cattle seized, and all the
Society’s property which could not be put on board the
Perseverance, carried away.
The Missionaries thus express their feelings on the oc-
casion—“ We unanimously agreed, that the state of the
island is such that there is no prospect of safety or useful-
ness, Should even the disaffected chiefs prove our friends,
we dread the thought of living under a government where
nothing is to be expected but constat* quarrels and confu-
sion. We think that Pomarre’s government, with all its
delects, is a blessing to the island ; and the natives acknow-
ledge that if it be overthrown, there will be nothing but war
and The consideration of these things, toge-
ther with the little success that has hitherto attended the
labours of many years at Otaheite, and Providence having,
at the present juncture, put into our hands the means of
removal to another island, fully determined our minds.”
After they had resided about four months at Huaheine,
Messrs. Scott and Wilson arrived from -Eimeo, and were
soon followed by Mr. Hayward. They reported that the
state of affairs at Otaheite was as bad as ever; that Pomarre
had been defeated in several attempts to subdue the insur-
gents, and that the whole island was in their possession.
They also stated, that the means which the Missionaries
had taken to inform the commanders of such ships as might
touch at Otaheite, of the state of that island, had provi-
dentially saved Captain Campbell and the ship’s company of
the Hibernia from the fury of the islanders ; but that, un-
fortunately, the Venus, from Port Jackson, had fallen into
their bands, the first mate of which vessel they had killed,
and had imprisoned the crew, with a view to offer them in
sacrifice to their god Oro. These were, however, humanely
ransomed by Captain Campbell, and the vessel retaken.
On the 17th October, 1809, the brig Hibernia, Captain
Campbell, and the Venus schooner, arrived at Huaheine,
and brought intelligence that Pomarre was still unsuccessful
in his efforts to regain the sovereignty. And the Mission-
aries having agreed with Captain Campbell for a passage to
Port Jackson, they sailed from Huaheine on the 26ih Oc-
tober, excepting Mr. Hayward and Mr. Nott, who resolved
to remain for the present at that island, and to wait for a
future conveyance to New South Wales.
The Missionaries were kindly received at Port Jackson,
His Excellency Gov. Macquarrie promised them the privi-


lege of settlers, and recommend that some of them should
undertake the instruction of youth. Such, be said, should
be victualled from his Majesty’s stores, as well as those who
had families, and who could not do any thing immediately
to support themselves. Soon after this, the Rev. Mr. Mars-
den arrived from England, and renewed those benevolent
exertions on behalf of the Missionaries and the Society, to
which he had been accustomed. By his means, the married
brethren particularly, were agreeably accommodated, and
the single men were put into a way of supporting themselves
in useful and respectable situations.
The Directors have signified their full approbation of Mr.
Marsden’s proceedings, and have cheerfully repaid the sums
of money which he thought it expedient to apply for the
use of the Missionaries. They have also solicited his conti-
nued attention to the brethren and sisters, and have particu-
larly recommended Mr. and Mrs. Bicknell, and the four
females who accompanied them from this country to rein-
force the South Sea Mission, to his care. They have thought
it right also to intimate, that in case the said females should
not choose to remain in New South Wales, the Directors
will sanction the provision of a passage home.
The Directors indulge a hope that the removal of the
Missionaries to New South Wales, will be productive of
much benefit to that colony, especially as it respects the in-
struction of youth ; and that by their instrumentality many
of the rising generation may be trained up in the good ways
of God.
Such, according to the latest accounts received by the
Directors, is the actual state of the Mission to Otaheite and
its neighbouring islands; a Mission which originated in the
purest benevolence, and which, when it is considered as an
energetic attempt to introduce the everlasting gospel into
the very numerous islands of the South Sea, must be ac-
knowledged to be of great importance. The Divine Being,
whose sovereign will it is to exercise the faith and patience
of his servants, even with regard to objects which he ap-
proves, has not been pleased to afford that success which
was anticipated ; and to bis will the Directors desire most
submissively to bow.
The Directors do not, however, consider that the past ef-
forts of the Society are entirely lost, and that all their hopes
are extinct. That good has been done, they are fully con-
fident ; and they review with satisfaction the correspon-
dence of the Missionaries, in which their hope of happy ef


fects finally resulting from their labours, supported them
under the numerous hardships which they endured. The
seed of divine truth has been copiously sown ; impressions,
however latent at present, have, doubtless, been made on
many ; the benevolence, meekness, patience, and fortitude
of those who instructed them, will be reflected upon, al-
though the Missionaries themselves are removed ; many a
wish for their return will pass from heart to heart, and re-
vive former impressions 5 and whoever may be the happy
and honoured instruments, in reaping the harvest resulting
from the prayers and efforts of the British Israel, they will
acknowledge that the ground was broken up, and the seed
sown, by their praiseworthy predecessors. Of the progress
in civilization, made by some of the natives, the Society has
had an opportunity of judging from the letter addressed to
them by their Chief; and this ought not to be considered as
a solitary mark of the progress made towards civilization.
The desire of knowledge which they have excited, cannot
lie dormant; their thirst for further improvement will na-
turally be attached to the persons of those who produced it,
and will prepare the way either for their return, or tor the
arrival of others. Should no further effort be made for
years to come, the chief difficulties in the way have been
surmounted. Experience has shewn, that in times of tran-
quillity, persons sustaining the inoffensive character of
Christian Missionaries, may reside among them with secu-
rity j that they may discharge the duties of their sacred
functions ; and the means of so doing have been rendered
comparatively easy, by the labours of the Missionaries,
which have reduced the language to the arrangements of
cultivated tongues. ,
Such are the general considerations which the intelligence,
now communicated by the Directors, has brought to their
minds. Whether, with the departure of the Missionaries,
the exertions of the Society in the South Seas are brought
to a close or not, it remains for that all-wise Being who
controuls all human affairs, by the future dispensations of
his providence, to decide. The Directors wait with sub-
mission and attention for the further intimations of his will.
POSTCRIPT.
Since this part of the Report teas written , letters have
keen received from the Rev. Mr. Marsden , and from the
Missionaries, dated October 25, 1810. Air. Alarsden is of


opinion that the Otaheitan Mission may be renewed with a
probability of ultimate success, if a vessel of 150 or 200
tons were sent out from England with a suitable investment
for Port Jackson and the islands of the South Sea ; and
which, by trading among them, and procuring their pro-
duce, would soon cover the whole expense of the equipment,
and provide for the support of the Mission, while it would
secure the means of intercourse with.the Missionaries. The
greater part of the Missionaries now at Port Jackson have
also signified their readiness to resume the Mission, if this
plan can be adopted either by the Society, or by individuals ,
and a suitable opportunity should be presented by the res-
toration of tranquillity at Otaheile.
SOUTH AFRICA .
BETHELSDORP.
The Directors have the pleasure to report, that the work
of God among the Hottentots, continues to be carried on in
an encouraging manner. Our venerable brother Vander-
kemp informs us, that the public services of religion at Be-
thelsdorp are well attended, and that the power of divine
grace has been displayed in several instances. The number
of persons generally resident there, amounts to Q/Q, in-
cluding men, women, and children. The increase during
the year 1809, was 2 69.
The progress of civilization has been considerable. The
knitting school prospers. Several useful articles are pro-
duced, by the profits of which, about thirty of the children
have derived their daily subsistence. Matts and baskets
are alo made in considerable quantities, and readily sold at
Fort Frederic, &c. The manufacture of salt has likewise
met with much encouragement, and is bartered for wheat
and other necessaries. Soap-boiling, sawing, and wood-
cutting for waggons, are also carried on with diligence, and
become a source of support. The good effect of Christian
instruction, in thus rendering the most indolent of mankind
industrious and useful members of civil society, is peculiarly
pleasing, and affords much encouragement to proceed with
vigour in our attempts to evangelize even the most uncivi-
lized of the human race.


The very favourable harvest of the year 1808, operated
as a powerful stimulus to agricultural diligence, so that
more than forty sacks of wheat were sown, besides barley,
rice, beans, peas, Indian corn, and pumpkins. Some foun-
tains have also been discovered in the neighbourhood, amply
sufficient for domestic purposes.
The Society will recollect how much the heart of Dr.
Vanderkemp, was set upon attempting a Mission to the
island of Madagascar. To facilitate this important measure,
application was made to Lord Caledon, who was pleased to
assure Dr. Vanderkemp of his readiness to promote his
views. The Directors remain uncertain whether the Doctor
still intends to attempt that mission j but considering that
he has been at times very seriously indisposed, they are
rather inclined to request his valuable services in another
way. The number of Missionaries being considerably aug-
mented, it has appeared to the Directors desirable that a su-
perfntendant should reside at the Cape, who might manage
all the pecuniary concerns of the Society, and give that ad-
vice to new Missionaries which his talents and experience
have so eminently qualified him to afford.
It is with pleasure the Directors mention the safe arrival
of the Brethren Wimmer and Pacalt at the Cape, who pro-
ceeded as soon as an opportunity offered to Bethelsdorp,
where they were gladly received.
Our indefatigable brethren, not content with doing all the
good in their power at Bethelsdorp, made some excursions
into the interior of the colony, and preached many sermons
to the people. Brother Read took a journey into the coun-
try of the Caffres, accompanied by the native Brother Cu-
pido, &c. they were generally received in a hospitable man-
ner, and the Caffres expressed a strong desire for instruc-
tion. The particulars of this journey, exhibiting the cus-
toms of the country, and the very extensive field it presents
for Missionary exertions, are inserted in the 22d Number of
the Transactions.
NAMAQUAS.
At this distant station, the two brethren Christian and
Abraham Albrecht, have laboured with success for several
years. The Directors have now to state, that Mr. Abraham
Albrecht, after struggling with a pulmonary disorder for
several months, died in the month of July 1810. The So-
ciety have lost in him a faithful and useful labourer.


Mr. Christian Albrecht, finding that a place called the
Warm Bath was best situated to become his stated resi-
dence, determined to abide there, intending, when the num-
ber of the Missionaries should be increased, to make, from
that centre, preaching excursions to the surrounding tribes.
The brethren had the pleasure of baptizing nine of. the
Namaquas, and afterwards of administering the ordinance
of the Lord’s Supper to them and others. “ After the ordi-
nance (say the Missionaries) we invited them to dine with
us, and we shed tears of joy and thankfulness for the great
blessings we have received from the Lord, in making us,
his poor and unworthy servants, useful to the heathen. To
one man, named John, we lent some clothes, such as he
had never before worn ; and while we were dressing him,
he burst into tears, and joyfully cried— ‘ O what great
things Cod does for me, who am a poor sinner! O God,
strengthen me that I may always remain faithful to thee, to
the last moment of my life !’ ”
There is a pleasing prospect of being able greatly to ex-
tend the Namaqua Mission. A chief, named Kagap, ex-
pressed a wish that the Missionaries would go with him to
instruct his people; he also assured them that another na-
tion, called Field-sltoe-ivearers , and another residing at Ka-
raghill, wished to hear the gospel.
Upwards of 1200 persons, including men, women, and
children, are under Missionary instruction, of whom about
300 reside at Warm Bath ; the rest live at various distances;
and about 200 attend the service every Lord’s-day.
The Missionaries have made a trial to grow cotton, and
they find it answers very well, produces a fine sort; and
promises to he of great advantage to the settlement.
The brethren are anxious to obtain more labourers, for,
say they, “ it is impossible for us to attend so large a con-
gregation, compelled as they are to lead a wandering kind
of life. Besides Warm Bath, there are other stations, in
each of which two Missionaries might be fully employed.”
The Directors, at'entive to these pressing calls of their
Missionaries, have engaged five German brethren, who
were several years under the tuition of the Rev. Mr.
Jaenicke, of Berlin, have been several months in Lon-
don, have received ordination according to the forms of the
Lutheran church, and who have also been instructed in va-
rious useful arts, which may promote the improvement of
the natives. To these brethren (Jiey have added a young
negro, of the name of Corner, who was born at Demarara,
b 3


and being sent to Scotland, was, by the generosity of a pious
lady, put to school; and discovering a desire for instruction,
and a serious regard to religion, was placed under the care
of the Perth Missionary Society. The addition of six Mis-
lionaries to those already employed in Africa, will, the
Directors trust, greatly strengthen and extend the work in
that country.
ORANGE RIVER.
This station appears still to prosper, although deprived
for many months of the labours of the two Missionaries
Mr. Anderson and Mr. Kramer, the former of whom, hav-
ing occasion to visit Cape Town, has been detained by
violent and repeated attacks of disease. His last letter, how-
ever, states, that he had been restored in great measure to
health, and w'as earnestly desirous of returning to his station
as soon as possible. Letters and messages received by him
from Mr. Janz, who continued at the station, were highly
satisfactory.
The attendance of the people at the place of worship was
regular and numerous. Mr. Janz continued his solitary la-
bours, with much patience and perseverance, and they ap-
pear to have been attended with the divine blessing. “ Our
labours,” says Mr. Anderson, “ have been amply rewarded,
and the pecuniary assistance of our friends in England has
not been given in vain. Our prayers have been answered.
Several who were the fruits of our ministry have died in the
faith, and are now around the throne, glorifying that grace
which you were made the instruments of communicating ;
and there are still many more who daily bow their knees
and offer up their thanksgivings to God, in that (till we
came among them) unknown part of Africa. O that the
Lord may grant me, and my brethren, and the Society, per-
severing grace; we shall reap if we faint not. I desire
earnestly an interest in your most fervent prayers.”
The long stay of Mr. Anderson at the Cape, is a circum-
stance much lamented by the Directors, as the station at
the Orange River requires the labour of several Mission-
aries ; Mr. Janz informs him, that the people were so much
distressed at Mr. A’s absence, that nothing could pacify
them liil he read them his letter, in which he assured them,
that as soon as his health was restored he would certainly
return to them. Some pt them told Mr. Janz, that if Mr.


A, did not return, they should die of grief. It may certainly
be hoped that a people so sensible of the value of their mi-
nister, are not unacquainted with the excellence and the
power of that Gospel which he preaches unto them.
The situation of Mr. Janz was rendered peculiarly trying,
bv the painful apprehensions of a hostile attack from the
Caffrei These cruel people who had murdered many of
the Biiquas, seemed to have formed a resolution of attack-
ing them also. In consequence of information to that ef-
fect, all the people from the adjacent kralls collected at the
settlement, Mr Jauz, and the good people with him, im-
mediately set apart a day for extraordinary prayer to the
Father of mercies, for his gracious protection. This was
Friday, the 11th of May 1810, when we also were assem-
bled at our Anniversary to pray for them. A few days
after, they sent some of their people to the Caffres, with a
present and a pacific message, requesting them in a friendly
manner, to withdraw. Through the goodness of God, this
application succeeded, and the messengers shortly returned
with the pleasing news that these terrific people had deter-
mined to comply with their request, and to pass over the
river as soon as it was sufficiently low, acknowledging also
that they thought the Missionaries were good men who
loved peace, although they themselves did not, and that
they sought their welfare,
Mr Anderson expresses a very strong desire to extend to
the Briquas, a numerous people not very distant from the
Great River, the blessings of the gospel. He begs that two
Missionaries may be sent out for this purpose. ‘‘ Our sta-
tion,” he says, “ is more than 300 miles distant from the
utmost bounds of the colony, (that is, from Zak River) and
we are separated from all intercourse j but the Briquas are
only five days’ journey from us ! O what an extensive field
is there open for us !”
Upon the whole, the African Missions appear to increase
in their magnitude and importance ; and the Directors in-
dulge a hope, that when so many of the tribes of that rude
and uninformed country are crying aloud, “ Come over and
help us!” the Lord will display the power of his Holy Spirit,
in the conversion of a numerous body to the praise of the
glory of his grace. The support and enlargement of these
Missions have indeed become a source of very considerable
expense, especially since the circumstances of the Rotterdam
Society, who had engaged to defray a part of it, have un-
happily become such as to disable them from fulfilling their


Intentions j but we are persuaded, that when the finger of
God so plainly directs to a country wherein many are
thirsting for the word of life, the generosity of British
Christians will enable the Directors to increase the number
of labourers.
ASIA.
To this most populous quarter of the globe the Directors
can never call the attention of the Society without feeling
all their sympathies and energies powerfully awakened.
The empires of the East present such spacious fields for
Missionary labours ; their superstition, idolatry, and vice,
call so loudly for the benevolent exertions of the Christian
world, that the Directors would greatly rejoice were they
but furnished with suitable Missionaries and sufficient funds
to enable them to commence a Mission in every one of
them. What has hitherto been attempted is indeed but
little compared with the magnitude of the object. Though
an entrance has been made on the borders of the Chinese,
the Burman, and Mahratta empires, yet to penetrate into
the interior of these vast countries, to acquire the various
languages of the people, and to preach the Gospel of the
kingdom to their almost countless millions, is an honour re-
served for others. Assured, however, of the final triumph
of the Cross over all nations, the Directors desire to be found
diligently using such means as God may put into their hands:
and whenever he sees fit to deprive them of any of their
faithful Missionaries, they desire to bow in silence, and adore
his inscrutable dispensations. An event of a more painful
nature the Directors have not been called to report than the
death of their valuable Missionary, the late Mr. Augustus
Des Granges, at
VIZAGAPATAM.
Abter a residence of five years in India, he had with
much abour, acquired the language of the country, in which
he had begun to preach, and into which lie had translated
the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. The removal
of this valuable man is a severe stroke, but a stroke from
that hoy hand which requires mute submission: but let
Caristians pray that it may please God to raise up other


able men to carry on the good work, Mr Des Grangeg
was taken ill on the 4th of July, 1810, and died on the 12ih,
in the 30th year of his age. Mrs. Des Granges was lying
ill at the same time in the next room ; and as the physicians
desired she might be removed to another house, a tew hours
before the death of her husband, she was carried through
his chamber, when being desirous of seeing each other once
more, they took their last farewell. His children were also
brought to his bed-side. The scene was affecting beyond
description. In regard to the stare of our brother’s mind,
during his' affliction, say his surviving colleagues, it was
calm and serene ; his words were few, owing to his great
pain and weakness. When asked what he was most anxious
about, he replied, “ The concerns of the Mission, more
particularly the translation of the scriptures ■, but.” added
he, “ God can carry that on without my means, so that my
life is not necessary on that account.” He particularly de-
sired that we would take care of Ananderayer, the Christian
Brahmin, who assisted him in translating the Scriptures, and
that he should continue at that work. He expressed his
wish also, that his Brethren Gordon and Lee should con-
tinue at that station, and write immediately for more Mis-
sionaries. He wished that great attention might be paid to
Aukapillai, a village about sixteen aides distant, from which
several persons had lately come to make enquiries about the
Christian religion ; that the Brahmin might often be sent to
preach at that place, and that, if possible, a school might be
established there. He desired also particularly that the
native school at Vizagapatam should be nourished. He re-
joiced in the hope of being with Christ, and also of meeting
in Heaven his much beloved Brother Cran.
Poor Ananderayer was much affl-cted ; and on being as-
sured that the same care should be taken of him, he burst
into tears, and pressing the hands of his dying father, as he
called him, to his lips, he kissed them, and said, “ Will
you pray to Jesus to give us his blessing ?” Mr. Des Granges
then closed his hands and prayed for him. The Brahmin
then said, “ I will not go from this place, but w ill go on
translating the Old ami New Testaments as long as God
will give me pow'er. In the place where you die, I will die,
and will not leave this compound (or garden) to go any
where else.” Many natives surrounded his bed, weeping,
who were all constrained to say he was a good man. His
remains were conveyed to the European burial place, attended
by nearly all the gentlemen in the settlement, and a vast


number of the natives. The boarders, charity boys, and
servants followed, weeping, as a testimony of their affec-
tion. After the funeral service had been performed, an
honourable testimony was given to the excellence of IVIr,
Des Granges’s character, by a gentleman present Indeed
he wa< a truly pious and devoted servant ot Christ. His
disposition was mild and gentle, and his conduct uptight
and exact. He w'as an affectionate husband and a tender
father. As a friend, faithful and sincere, studying to pro-
mote peace sas a Christian he followed the Lord finl} r . As
a Missionary, he determined to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. His soul longed for the conver-
sion of the Heathen. In pursuit of this object he attained
their language under great disadvantages, reasoned with
their Brahmins, and collected the villagers, speaking to them
the great things of God. In the most indefatigable manner
he laboured at the translation of the scriptures. During the
months of May and June he laboured very hard to finish
the gospel of Luke, that he might send a copy ot it to Ben-
gal, against the meeting of the Corresponding Committee
of the British and Foreign Bible Society. He just accom-
plished his desire, but was soon obliged for ever to'abandon
that good work, in which his whole soul had been most
actively engaged. He had also a strong desire to see a
church of °Christ formed in the Mission. In this also he
was gratified ; for just three months before his death, he ad-
ministered the Lord s Supper, for the first time, and in a
manner peculiarly impressive. This was, alas 1 the last
public service in which he was permitted to engage.
The affliction of this event'was at the time much en-
hanced by the severe illness of Brother Gordon j but sub-
sequent accounts have been received of his returning health.
To comply with the request for more Missionaries, the Di-
rectors have forwarded to India, Messrs. Spralt, May, and
Thompson.
BELL ARY.
This is a new station, occupied by Mr. Hands, who
was originally intended for Seringapatam, but as great ob-
stacles presented themselves to his proceeding thither, he
settled at Bellary, to which place he appeared to be provi-
dentially directed. We are happy to learn that he is blessed
with good health ; and is favoured with opportunities
for the regular performance of divine service among the


Europeans every Lord’s-day. He is diligently employed in
learning the language of the country, in which he is as-
sisted by a Monshee, who is deemed a man of consider-
able learning. The Brahmins are comparatively few in that
quarter, and seem to have less influence there than in many
other places. Some of them have visited him in a very
friendly manner. There are a good many country-born, or
half-cast people resident there, some of whom attend his
ministry, and he has reason to hope that his labours have
been blessed among them. Some gentlemen are very de-
sirous of establishing a school for the instruction of the poor
children, Mr. Hands earnestly requests that more Mission-
aries may be sent out to his assistance, and with this request
the Directors will be happy to comply.
MADRAS.
During the last year, Mr. Loveless has continued to
cheer us with accounts of his returning health. He con-
tinues unwearied in his exertions to promote the cause of
Christ at the Orphan Asylum, and in his new chapel in the
Black Town, which is now nearly finished, and supported
by the liberality of his constant hearers.
BURMAN EMPIRE.
The entrance of our two brethren, Pritchett and Brain,
into this remote empire, was scarcely announced, before we
were called to receive the painful intelligence of the death
of Mr. Brain. He was removed by a violent disorder which
seized him on the 2d of July, and which terminated his valu-
able life on the 10th. The brethren were received at Rangoon
with fraternal affection by Messrs. Chater and Carey, the
Baptist Missionaries, A great part of the city nad been
burnt down, but by the providence of God, their habitation,
which was at a small distance, had been preserved. ,f The
country,” says Mr. Pritchett, “ is very pleasant, abounding
with woods and groves, but the whole is in a wild sta f e.
The only effects to be perceived of human industry are the
numberless temples and images of Gaudma, which meet the
eye in every direction. This is indeed one of the dark
nlaces of the earth, and full of the habitations of cruelty. O
that the Sun of righteousness may speedily arise, scatter this
dreadful darkness, and shine into the hearts of the poor Bur


mans, that they may be turned from their dumb idols to
serve the living God.”
Mr. Pritchett intends to proceed to Ava, the capital of
the country, where by acquiring the knowledge of the lan-
guage in the most advantageous manner, he will be belter
qualified to effect the great object of his mission, by translating
the sacred Scriptures, and preaching the unsearchable riches
of Christ. When the Directors shall have received a more
particular account of his situation, they hope to send another
Missionary to assist him.
OODAGHERRY, IN TRAVANCORE.
The last accounts from our Brother Ringeltanbe were
dated from "this place, where he is now gone to reside.
Owing to a complication of distressing events, in conse-
quence of the war in Travancore, he had been detained a
considerable time, nearly inactive at Pa’amcotta. Peace
having been at length restored, he had resumed his labours.
He specifies six places as his principal stations, where he is
assisted by native catechists. His journal contains an ac-
count of his having baptized between two and three hun-
dred, and that there were many more candidates for bap-
tism. At some of these stations he had built and opened
places of worship, and in others, ground and timber had
been purchased for the purpose.
At Auticada, he writes, that on the 7th October, after
preaching to a considerable number under a mango tree, he
baptized an old man from Covilvilley of ninety-seven years
of age, whom he called the Patriarch Jacob, who, leaning
on two of his sons, shed tears of joy for their conversion as
well as his own, as they were baptized at the same time
with himself. But a more interesting figure, if possible, in
this gronpe, was a schoolmaster crippled in both legs by a
fall from a tree, who had been brought ten miles on men’s
shoulders to hear the word. “ Since,” said he, “ I lost the
use of my legs, 1 have nothing but heaven in view',” After
preaching on the latter part of the second chapter of the
first Epistle of Peter, adds our brother, “ 1 took occasion to
exhort the people to be obedient to their masters, and parti-
cularly to the -magistrates and to w r ave all view's of temporal
advantage by professing Christianity, and not to imagine
they would be exempt from the cross, or discharged from
the obligation of their relative duties.”


CEYLON.
In our last annual Report we noticed the lively interest
which the deplorable condition of the native Cingalese had
excited in the breasts of some benevolent persons of great
respectability in the island. By the arrival in this country
of the Hon. Sir Alexander Johnston, Chief Justice of Ceylon,
the Directors have been favoured with an opportunity of
conferring with him. Impressed with a generous concern
for the amelioration of the condition of the natives, he was
earnestly desirous of obtaining Christian teachers to super-
intend the schools which had formerly been established,
and was of opinion that if our Missionaries were directed to
leave the coast towns, which are inhabited chiefly by Eu-
ropeans, and to reside more in the interior among the na-
tives, that the fostering hand of Government would not be
withheld, but would, in all probability, co-operate in for-
warding the benevolent views of the Society. As this gen-
tleman was on the eve of returning to Ceylon, the Directors
have written to Messrs. Paim, Erhardt, and Read, that they
should embrace the opportunity which now offers of prose-
cuting the work of their Mission, by going to such parts of
the interior as the Governor in Council may be pleased to
appoint; so that by a residence among the people, they
may be able more speedily to acquire the language, that by
the instruction, particularly of the children, in the pure
principles of the doctrine of Christ, a foundation might be
laid for raising Christian churches among the native Cinga-
lese.
CHINA.
By Mr. Morrison’s Journal it appears that he continues
to apply himself with most commendable assiduity, and
with considerable success, at Canton, and occasionally at
Macao, to the study of the extremely difficult language of
China. From the grammar and dictionary which he has
with immense labour composed, the most vamab e assistance
will be derived by any Missionaries who may hereafter be
sent to that empire, as well as by others of our countrymen,
who, from their peculiar pursuits, may be induced to study
the language. By Mr. Morrisons superior facility in
writing the character, and conversing with the natives, he
has already been enabled to render important services to the


public, of which a suitable sense appears to be entertained,
and which are likely to be advantageous towards the support
of this expensive .Mission.
When we consider Mr, Morrison as the first Protestant
Missionary to this vast country, and as the translator of the
sacred Scriptures, the word of life and salvation, into the
language of three hundred millions of souls, we cannot but
intreat the prayers of the whole Society that the great Head
of the Church may be pleased to prolong his valuable life,
till he shall not only have completed the translation, but
printed and circulated it through all the regions of that ex-
tensive empire.
As Mr. Morrison greatly needs, and earnestly desires a
coadjutor in his arduous work, the Directors are still look-
ing out for a devoted man of sufficient talents to unite with
him in the great undertaking—a measure, which, however
expensive, appears to be necessary for the relief of Mr.
Morrison, and the stability of the Mission.
(A Missionary has since been Jixed upon for this pur-
pose.)
WEST INDIES, &c.
Fhom the vast regions of the East, we now turn our eyes
to the new world in the West, the discovery of which has
had such an important influence on the affairs of Europe,
and which has proved the means of extending so widely the
glorious Gospel of his Son. Evangelized as a portion of
America is, multitudes of its inhabitants still remain in the
grossest darkness. Endeavours to enlighten the Indians in
North America, appear to be the appropriate province of
our Anglo-American brethren, who,, in the United States,
have zealously associated themselves in Missionary societies;
but it is to the poor Africans, in a state of slavery, that this
Society has directed their principal attention, and, blessed be
God, not without success. In the detail of the proceedings,
we begin with
DEMARARA.
Since the death of Mr. Post who had been the honoured
instrument of introducing the Gospel to this colony, several
other valuable friends have been raised up to encourage the
same work. It appears that the white inhabitants are,
in general; favourable to the object of the Mission. One


gentleman of considerable influence, who has several estates
under his care, is very friendly. There are others, who at
first opposed the Mission, but, on seeing the good effects
produced by the Gospel on the conduct of the slaves, have
applied to Mr. Wray, desiring him to instruct their negroes,
saying, that his ministry had proved a great blessing to the
people, and that they would soon have no need of drivers,
for ihe slaves would be obedient without them,
Mr. Wray continues his labours “ in season and out of
season,” even beyond his strength, “ I feel,” he says,
“ at present very weak and unwell ; catechizing the negroes
who cannot read is very laborious ; it requires patience,
strength, and a great deal of time to teach five or six. hun-
dred persons : but i hope God will strengthen me to perse-
vere in the work.” And he mentions it as his decided opi-
nion, that catechizing is the principal method that is likely
to be useful to them—without which, they cannot under-
stand what is delivered in a sermon.
Through the medium of a friend at Stabrook, he had
been introduced to Mahaica, a village on the coast, twenty-
five miles from town, in the vicinity of several estates, from
which great numbers of people appear willing to attend the
preaching. The gentlemen residing here, expressed a great
desire io have a Missionary to instruct them; are very anx-
ious to build a place of worship, and have already sub-
scribed towards it.
On this pleasing prospect Mr. W. thus expresses him-
self—“ The opening at Mahaica is likely to be a great
blessing to the Missionary cause, as it will be supported by
the first people in the colony. The chapel will be built
principally tor the white gentlemen and ladies, and the free
people of colour; but it will open a way, I trust, to instruct
all the negroes on the many estates around, and on other
parts of the coast. And I hope in time preaching will ex-
tend all the way to Berbice.”
On the state of the Mission at Resouvenir, he says, “ I
trust that the Lord is daily revealing his arm among the
poor negroes, and causing many of them to believe the re-
port of his Gospel ; the number of hearers increases, and
many are enquiring, “ What must we do to be saved ?” In
about three weeks, six more will be received by baptism.
I administer the Lord’s Supper every first Lord’s day of the
month. We experience these to be limes of refieshing. I
often feel much affected when sitting at the table of the
Lord with these poor black people, seeing tears of joy flow


from their eyes, and hearing them mourn on account of
their sins. Their very souls rejoice in this ordinance; they
always appear to be greatly affected. One woman, of the
name of Asia, being sick the week before it was admi-
nistered, wept a whole day because she thought she should
not be able to come to the table. What a blessing that
these poor people are so desirous to hear the Gospel, and
what an encouragement for the Missionary Society to go on
in the great and glorious work.”
In another communication, he remarks — u Several of the
negroes have learned to read, and irom reading, as well as
from memory, some of them are become good catechists,
and begin to assist me. One of them told me, that 113 had
come to him to be instructed; and lam sometimes asto-
nished to fin'd how correctly they learn the catechism from
each other. About 200 attend public worship regularly,
several of whom, having learned the tunes, can conduct the
singing without the assistance of white people ; and many
begin to pray in our social meetings with great fluency,
and it is remarkable, they pray much in Scripture ian-
guage.”
The whole of this letter, dated 18th December, appears
very encouraging ; he had visited several new places, where
the people appeared ripe for instruction. Respecting Esse-
quibo, he says, “ This is an excellent field of labour, and
there is every reason to believe a Missionary would meet
with the greatest encouragement from respectable persons;
the negroes are extremely attentive.” He also observes,
Mr. Davies appears to be going on well in town, and to be
doing much among the people who attend his ministry;
the school is also in a very flourishing stale.
TRINIDAD.
Mr. Apam still continues his Missionary labours at this
place, with encreasing prospects of usefulness. Some delay
has taken place in the eret tion of the chapel at Port of
Spain—the subscriptions however have increased to i 750,
exclusive of jL 100 voted by the Directors In the mean time,
divine worship is regular y carried on in a room where from
150 to 200 persons attend, some of whom are slaves. In the
course of the year he has repeatedly visited several estates
on the coast. A gentleman of consideiable influence ap-
pears particularly favourable to the design of the Mission ;
he has invited him to his own estate to preach to his slaves.


and appears to be anxious that they as well as others should
enjoy the means of salvation. Several of the proprietors
having expressed a wish to have their people instructed, he
has access to eight estates, containing about 2500 negroes.
He has begun the instruction of the negroes, for which pur-
pose they meet twice a week. He says, “ The Gospel, I
trust, has been made the power of God to the salvation of
several individuals ; some have died rejoicing in its blessings,
and a few are, I trust, living examples of its power and
grace on their souls.”
TOBAGO.
Mr. Elliot still continues to labour at Tobago, not only
at Scarborough, but in various parts of the island among
both the .whites and the negroes. In a letter lately received,
he states, that appearances of success are more favourable
than they were some time since. A good number of per-
sons attend the Missionary prayer-meeting, and a meeting
for improvement in psalmody. Some who formerly disco-
vered a dislike to the word, now attend diligently, and ob-
serve the Sabbath as they never did before. Many of the
negroes kept the last Christmas in a manner that differed
much from their former customs some of them are evi-
dently much reformed, and a few appear to be seeking, in
good earnest, the salvation of their souls.
NORTH AMERICA .
Mr. Pidgeon spent the greatest part of the last year at
Prince Edward Island, where, it appears, his labours have
been acceptable. He speaks of this situation as being well
calculated for Missionary exertions. The people are nu-
merous, and glad to hear. The island being in the centre
of the Gulph of St. Lawrence, affords facilities for visiting
other places in the neighbourhood,
\*
An application has been made to the Directors by a num-
ber of persons who settled in 1/84, in the district of Johns-
town, in Upper Canada, near Lake Ontario, and whose
principal residence bears the name of Elizabeth Town,
After applications for assistance to other bodies of Christians,
in which they have been painfully disappointed, they deter-
mined to apply to this Society. Their petition, signed by
more than 100 names, expresses an earnest desire to enjoy
the means of grace, and a dread of wholly losing that sense


of religion which they took with them from this country.
The Directors could not hesitate a moment. Mr. Smart,
one of the Missionary students, is about to sail immediately
for Canada.
THE JEWS.
It will be expected that the Directors should notice their
late efforts in behalf of the Jews ; and while it is with diffi-
dence (hey speak of the apparent issue of their endeavours,
(hey ran assure the Society that they have faithfully em-
ployed such means of awakening the attention of the Jew-
ish people, as were, in their judgment, consistent with
(he nature of the ob ect in view. The Gospel has been af-
fectionately proposed to the consideration of their adults,
both from the-pulpit and the press; the benefits of education
have been offered gratuitously to the young ; and Christian
benevolence lias been extended to the necessitous. Other
means than these (he Directors concluded it was not their
duty to employ, and from these they did not desist, while,
by the attendance of the Jews upon them, a prospect of
their being efficacious remained.
The second part of the Essays addressed to the Jews, by
the Rev, Greville Ewing, has been published, copies of
which have been distributed ; and the Society enjoys the
satisfaction of having produced in that work, an admirable
mean of introducing the Jewish people to clear and com-
pendious acquaintance with the Christian dispensation,
whenever their atteniion shall be seriously awakened to
that momentous subject. * Soon may that happy period
come ! and, in the success of every suitable endeavour to
advance it, whoever may be the honoured instruments, the
Directors will sincerely rejoice.
SEMINARY.
Titere are now in the Seminary at Gosport, six young
men of promising abilities, two of whom, from the Island
of Jersey, have been recently admitted. Those who have
been for some time under the care of the tutor, have af-
forded him much satisfaction. During the last year, four
students have left the Seminary, Mr. Thompson, Mr. May,
and Mr. Spratt, who are now on their way to India; and
* Ministers and other friends of the Society, who have an oppor-
funiiy of employing the essays for the benefit of the Jews, may be fur-
nished with copies, gratis, on applying to the Secretary, or to any of the
Directors.


Mr. Smart, who is just embarking for Canada. The Di-
rectors entertain pleasing hopes ot their proving useful Mis-
sionaries of Jesus Christ,
Besides these, five German brethren, who were educated
at the Missionary Seminary at Berlin, under the Rev Mr.
Jamicke, have been taken under the patronage of this So-
ciety, and are about to sail for the Cape.
The Directors, having thus presented to the Society a
general view' of the state of every Mission under their care,
submit the whole to their consideration. This Institution
has now subsisted sixteen years, during which, about one
hundred Missionaries have been sent forth They have not
been uniformly successful; the Sovereign Ruler of the
Church has not seen fit to gratify all their sanguine expecta-
tions ; but he has been pleased to bestow such tokens of his
approbation, as are amply sufficient to reward their endea-
vours, to animate their hopes, and to stimulate them to
greater exertions. It cannot be recollected without grati-
tude, that the first energetic movements of this Society
gave an impulse, unknown before, to the church of God at
large; numerous institutions of a similar nature have since
arisen, beneficial in a high degree to the best interests of
mankind. Had no other effect been produced, this alone
would have been a noble reward : but, by the divine bless-
ing, the specific object of this Institution has been attained
In a happy measure.
Look at Southern Africa! at Bethelsdorp, the Orange
River, and the Namaquas ; and behold several thousands of
people, whose existence was scarcely known, now listening
with eager attention to the Gospel of our Saviour; more
than a few of them converted by his power, baptized into
his church, and humble communicants at his table, living to
the praise of the glory of his grace; while neighbouring
tribes, astonished at the change, long to resemble them, and
intreat the Missionaries to visit and instruct them also.
Look at the East Indies ! The language of the country
acquired ; three of the Gospels translated into it; Brahmins
converted, and become evangelists; children educated in
the Christian faith ; and many of the natives inquiring,
" What shall we do to be saved ?” This hopeful work
may perhaps be retarded by the death of two of our Missi-
onaries, but others are still there, and more are on their
way thither; and s«ch a good foundation is laid as to justify
the most pleasing hopes of future success.
Look at the West Indies ! There also the word of God
grows and prevails. In several places, besides the spititual


privileges afforded to men of our own country or colour,
many of the poor negroes, low as they are in the scale of
talent and of rank, have been made “ wise to salvation,
and are become “ free indeed !” in some of these places,
savages have been civilized, the dissolute have been re-
claimed, and idolaters have cast their images to the moles
and to the bats Slothful servants have become industrious
and faithful the drunken have become sober, and the im-
pure chaste. Surely this is the finger of God !
But while we rejoice and give thanks, let us not sit down
as if our work were done j we have made a beginning, but
it is merely a beginning. At every station already occu-
pied, our Missionaries ai'e earnestly intreating us to send out
additional labourers. What are seven or eight Missionaries
in India ? Hundreds are wanted there. What are twelve
Missionaries in South Africa ? Hundreds are needed there
also. What are four or five in the West ? A great number
is wanted there too. What are twenty stations in different
parts of the globe ? Hundreds of places equally need our
help. “ The fields are already white unto the harvest'”
Many, many more labourers are required. Populous regions
of the earth appear ready to welcome the Gospel of Christ j
thousands cry, “ Come over and help us.’ Millions of men
are in darkness. Who shall enlighten them ? Men, them-
selves enlightened. Who shall select them ? Who shall
send them forth ? Who shall support them ? You j our dear
and honoured friends of this Society, and others like-minded
with you. To you they stretch out their arms—to you
they direct their eyes. And will you not regard them ?
The experience of fifteen years will not allow a doubt on
this head to remain in any mind. Your exertions will be
renewed, your contributions will be increased. Yes, let us
this day determine, in the strength of the Lord of Hosts, to
persevere, and to abound more and more in our efforts. W«
have already reaped no scanty harvest, and we may be con-
fident that harvests yet more abundant shall crown our
more abundant efforts.
THE END.
Printed by J. Dennett, Leather Lane, London.




