

RELATING TO
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE
COLONIAL REGISTER
OF THE
§anli of Jonth
Australia
Printed for Private Distribution.
m *
1 8 7 7.
, ' ■■ i
U, 'p
- r' ,




trs>3
~-a>
1 N I) E X.
PAGE.
Resolutions as to Increase of Capital .. ~ .. .. 5
Mr. Maurice Powell’s Circular .. .. .. .. .. 6
An Old Shareholder’s Reply .. .. .. .. .. 9
A Quiet Shareholder on Mr. Maurice Powell .. .. .. 12
An Old Shareholder's Circular .. .. ~ .. .. 14
The Old Shareholder’s Reply .. .. .. ~ ... 16
An Old Shareholder’s Circular thereon .. .. .. .. 18
Report to Proprietors .. .. ~ .. .. ~ 19
Sir R. R. Torrens’ Speech on Mr. Maurice Powell’s Circular 20
Further Report to Proprietors .. .. .. .. .. 23
Circular Despatch to Branch Managers .. .. .. .. 24
Report to Shareholders .. .. .. .. .. ~ 27
Circulars to Shareholders .. .. ~ .. .. .. 29
Letters of Allotment:—
Form A .. .. .. .. .*. .. .. .. 30
„ B » 31
*» 0 32
Acceptance of Shares .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
Fractional Claims .. .. .. ~ .. .. 33
~ Vouchers '.. .. ~ .. ~ ~ 35
Extracts from Newspapers .. .. .. .. .. 36




RESOLUTIONS
AS TO
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
INCREASE OF CAPITAL.
1. That the Capital of the Bank, now consisting of £500,000,
in Shares of £25 fully paid up, be increased to £625,000 by the
creation and issue of 6,000 Shares of £25 each.
2. The said 5,000 Shares so to be issued shall be placed
upon the Colonial Share Register of the Company, and shall be
transferable in South Australia and not elsewhere, and the
placing of such Shares upon the Colonial Share Register of the
Company shall not affect the power to transfer to such Register
one-fourth of the Shares representing for the time being the
subscribed Capital of the Company, irrespective of such 5,000
shares.
3. Such shares shall be proportionately offered at a premium
of £lO per share to the Proprietors of the Company, duly regis-
tered on the Ist day of July, 1877, and shares not accepted
within such period, and in such manner as shall be appointed
by the Court of Directors, shall be sold as provided by the Deed
of Settlement in relation to forfeited shares ; but subject to all
such discretionary powers as are by the said Deed or otherwise
conferred upon the Court of Directors.
4. No Proprietor shall vote in respect to the share or shares
issued until the same be fully paid up ; but subject to payment
in full, the holders of the said shares to be on a footing of equality
in all respects as to voting, dividends and otherwise, with the
other Shareholders of the Bank.


5. Except and so far as hereinbefore otherwise expressed, or
shall be requisite to give full effect to the aforesaid regulations,
all the provisions and regulations applicable to the existing
shares of the Bank and the existing Shareholders of the Bank,
shall extend, and be applicable, to the new issue of shares and
the holders of such shares.
G. The total amount received by the Company in respect
of premium upon the said 5,000 shares, shall be carried to the
credit of the Reserve Fund, and shall be applied in augmentation
of that Fund accordingly.
TO THE PROPRIETORS OP THE
HANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
8, Harcourt Buildings, Temple, E.C.,
1 dth June, 1877.
You will, as a Proprietor, have received a circular
letter from the Directors of the above named Bank, informing
you of their intention to propose an increase in the capital of
the Bank from £500,000 to £625,000, and to offer the new shares
to existing Proprietors, in proportion to their holdings, at the
price of £35 for each £25 share, and subject to the shares being
transferable in South Australia only.
I take the liberty of calling your attention to the fact that
this is the first time in the history of this most prosperous Bank
that an increase of capital has ever been sought to be made on
such terms as these. In 1842, the Bank started as a separate
concern with a capital of £200,000, and this capital was increased


by £IOO,OOO on three successive occasions, as shown by the fol-
lowing table: —
1842 £200,000
1852 300,000
1857 400,000
1862 500,000
On each of those occasions the increase of capital was obtained
by an allotment of new shares at par to existing Proprietors.
The Directors in these cases acted in accordance with the 28th
clause of the Deed of Settlement, a clause on which -they either
now place a different interpretation, or seek to vary by a special
resolution, which must be carried.by a majority of Proprietors
of four to one.
It is proposed that the £50,000 thus obtained as premium for
the new shares should be devoted to increase the reserve fund,
whereas the former policy of the Bank has ever been to accumu-
late a reserve fund out of profits earned, and this is the first
occasion any attempt has been made to obtain it by direct pay-
ment from the Proprietors.
Since the last issue of shares in 1862, the reserve fund has
been raised out of profits alone from £lOO,OOO to £125,000, the
limit fixed by the Deed of Settlement, and a further sum of
£25,000 undivided profits was voted at the General Meeting in
June last, to increase this fund. Thus, while the Directors have
since 1862 applied £50,000 profits to form reserve, they now
seek to deprive the present Proprietors of their prescriptive right
to the benefits which would accrue to them by the allotment of
new shares at par.
As the reserve fund is now really £150,000, it is only neces-
sary to increase it by £6,250 out of earnings, to raise it to the
limit of one-fourth the entire capital of £625,000. The present
opportunity is therefore a favourable one for enabling the
Proprietors to realise some advantage by a remunerative invest-
ment of further capital in the Bank. The tendency of any new
issue will be to lower the value of all the shares in the market,


and it is very doubtful if the new shares, fettered with the con-
dition that they shall be transferred in Adelaide only, would
realise £36 in the market.
In short, the Directors propose to deprive Proprietors of the
privilege of purchasing new shares at par, a privilege which they
have on every previous occasion enjoyed*, and to which they are
entitled, upon the construction which the Directors themselves
have always hitherto put upon the Deed of Settlement. It is
not proposed to confer upon the Bank at large any advantage
to compensate for the loss thus occasioned to Proprietors, who
might desire to avail themselves of this privilege, as it is pro-
posed that the money to be thus realised at their expense should
be sunk in the reserve fund, where it is not wanted, and will
yield no corresponding benefit to the Bank.
If you agree with me in thinking the old policy of the Bank
should be adhered to, viz., that no increase of shares should be
made otherwise than by an allotment at par to existing Pro-
prietors, and that any increase in the reserve fund should be
derived from profits alone, I shall be obliged if you will attend
the Special Meeting to be held at the Bank Premises, 54, Old
Broad Street, on Tuesday, June 26th, at one o'clock, and give mo
your support. If you are unable to do so, may I ask you to
sign, and return me the annexed Proxy, at your earliest con-
venience, to enable me to vote for you at the Meeting ? lam
reluctantly compelled to take this course, as at the special meet-
ing last June, the Directors, for the first time in the history of
the Bank, produced proxies in their favour.
I should add, that but for my invention in 1874, the shares
now proposed to be allotted to us at £35, would, I believe, have
been allotted to non-proprietors in the Colony, selected by the
Directors, at from £29 to £Bl, and the loss to us such an issue
would have been, may be easily seen.
As I have not the pleasure of a personal acquaintance with
you, I should perhaps say that I have been a Proprietor since


1863, and have held 40 shares since 1866 ; most of these shares
having been held by my late father.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
MAURICE POWELL.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
VERSUS
Mr. MAURICE POWELL.
To the Proprietors of the Bank.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
As an unusual opposition is threatened at the Special
General Meeting, to the proposals of the Directors, I venture a
few suggestive and critical remarks for your consideration.
Since Mr. Maurice Powell admits that “ this most prosperous
Bank ” affords an excellent investment for capital, he should
reflect on the effect of his misdirected actions. Has he taken
counsel with the Directors, who have administered the affairs ?
Is he familiar with their long continued labours to combine
Colonial support with English capital ? It is for him to ponder
these questions as he has flung down the gauntlet by inviting a
conflict with those who have enjoyed the Proprietors’ confidence,
and hitherto have done all that is possible to achieve successful
results.
It is significantly manifest, throughout his Circular, that he
assumes the interests of the Bank to be antagonistic to those of the
Shareholders. He surely would be better advised to regard them
as identical, coexistent, and not divisible in any degree, it being
generally believed that whatever conduces to the prosperity of a
corporate body is advantageous to its individual members. Do
not the Directors, then, propose the £lO premium for the new


shares for the common good ? Is it not certain that the Bank
will benefit in its position, its credit, and its prestige, by the pro-
posed increase to the Reserve Fund.
It might be supposed that there is supreme wisdom in con-
trasting the “ former policy ” with that now recommended ; but
only an immature mind can recognize nothing new in the pre-
sent period, and when all proposed changes are contrasted with
epochs that have passed away, or circumstances that have no
weight or significance. To think of the Bank’s proceedings in
1842 and 1852, is something like travelling back into remote
antiquity. Even taking 1857, the Reserve Fund was £55,609,
while in 1862 it only amounted to £91,025. Now, however, it
moves with rapid strides—
It was in ... 1872 ... ... ... £125,000
„ will be in 1877 150,000
And should Mr. Maurice Powell fail in his efforts, as he may
expect to do, the Bank may rely in 1879, perhaps in 1878, of
attaining the respectable amount of £200,000 as a Reserve
Fund.
This is the position the Directors wish to achieve shortly,
fairly, and by a truly co-operative measure. Let the Share-
holders contrast it with Mr. Maurice Powell’s scheme. He pro-
poses £6,250 “ out of earnings ” to be carried to the credit of
the Fund. It follows that £6,250 by accumulation will only
realise in eight years the same total amount. The simple issue,
then, is, which is best—the bold measure or the niggling, slow
process. The latter drags annually at profits —diverts them
from the dividend, while the former gives strength to every
movement, power to each recurring dividend, and an annual
return always available to Proprietors.
Take the proposition in its component parts. Surely shares
increase in value as Reserve Funds are augmented. In this
Bank it has been very apparent, and even now there is an
immediate, responsive movement in the improved value of the


shares, as soon as the new issue has been announced. It is no
difficult problem to determine this by figures based on the
Reserve:—
£125,000 on 20,000 Shares =£6 5 0 per Share.
150.000 „ 20,000 „ „ 710 0
200.000 „ 25,000 „ „ 8 0 0
Then let these amounts be added to the £25 par value, and the
actual value of the stock is as follows : —£3l 55., £32 10s., and
£33 respectively. This, apart altogether from the value of a
large growing business, the land and premises, to say nothing of
other improving acquisitions.
It will be obvious, therefore, that there is a needless parade of
martyrdom in Mr. Maurice Powell’s circular. The proprietors
are not deprived of “ privileges,” nor are they expected to “ sink”
their money in any sentimental undertaking; but rather, in Mr.
Maurice Powell’s own language, to proceed to a “ remunerative
investment of further capital in the Bank.” The oracles of the
Stock Exchange are not usually denizens of the Temple, and in
this instance the proof is certainly complete, for instead of the
“ tendency of the new issue being to lower the value of all the
“ shares in the market,” the old stock has risen from £4O to £47.
So it should be ; for Reserve means strength, and when the
continued increase is commensurate with the business of Banks,
with the claims attaching alike to place and community, the
public know how to manifest its confidence. Let the following
tabular statement as regards 1876 be considered—
Percentage
of Reserve
on Capital.
Capital
Paid up.
Bank.
Dividend.
Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney
Bank of Victoria
Bank of New South Wales
National Bank of Australasia,
Union Bank of Australia
Bank of South Australia
Mercantile Bank of Sydney.
Bank of Australasia
Australian Joint Stock Bank
Bank of Adelaide
English, Scottish & Australian Chartered Bank
London Chartered Bank of Australia
£500,000
500.000
1,000,000
750.000
1.250.000
600.000
200,000
1.200.000
500.000
400.000
600.000
1,000,000
25 IP cent.
12 „
17J »
16 „
10 „
m „
m »
m „
10 ,
8 ,
9 .
11


The result is that the Bank of South Australia has not pro-
gressed in its Reserve Fund as have other banks ; indeed several
of those recently established are stronger, and those of purely
local origin have far distanced those of an Anglo-Australian
character.
Mr. Maurice Powell may rejoice in thepaternity over his shares;
but he will fail to improve his birthright in destroying the oppor-
tunity for strengthening the bank. The Shareholders should
turn no willing ear to his strange devices or entreaties, dictated
as they are by views singularly narrow ; thoughtful only of his
individual interests, not of the permanent success of the bank.
I have just seen the Directors’ Annual Report, which furnishes
the best proof that their policy should be supported, not frus-
trated ; and I venture to express the belief that votes and proxies
will be given, not to their opponents, but to those who support
the present policy of the bank.
AN OLD SHAREHOLDER.
June 20th, 1877.
Me. MAUEICE POWELL
AT THE
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA’S MEETING
To my Fellow Proprietors in the Bank.
I attended the Meeting of the Bank on Tuesday, the
26th June, looking on at the disputants passively, rather than
taking any active part in the proceedings. My great interest
was in Mr. Maurice Powell, who was far from being “ the little
David” of the occasion. He came terribly armed for the


conflict, although agitation and confusion, not repose and
comfort, were supreme in every expression and movement.
There is a trite remark that a good man struggling with
difficulties, is a sight worthy of the Gods. But in this case
there was no goodness and the difficulties were self-created.
The notorious circular was exposed to a searching, sifting
criticism from Sir Robert Torrens, which rendered Mr. Powell
helpless, his only refuge being in unsparing, reckless abuse of
everybody who differed from him or doubted his statements,
which were far from veracious, clear, or pertinent to the
occasion.
Hour after hour was thus spent, and, when the wearisome
debate lacked point and vigour, Mr. Powell had the usual weapon
of his profession, by calumniating those who resisted his
proceedings. v
I take up no weapon in the Chairman’s favour; the able
Solicitor to the Bank can defend himself; and the General
Manager must look to his Directors for absolution ! Yet each
in turn received, not homoeopathic doses, but large and copious
supplies of virulence, unworthy imputations and base aspersions.
The leader of the Bank was told, forsooth !—he had no ability
in making official statements ; the legal adviser that he ought to
be better informed, or give place to one skilled in colonial law;
and the chief officer, that he had exceeded his duties to those
who both command and control his services.
Now, as an on-looker, and coolly reflecting over all that
passed at this meeting, I appeal to my Co-shareholders to
denounce this unworthy, dangerous, and mis-guided agitation.
The most effectual course which now remains is to record
opinions—to vote either in person or by proxy—to support the
Directors in their steady, fixed, and resolute determination to
impart increased strength to the Bank.
The measures proposed by them have a threefold character,
viz.:—


To give a reasonable bonus to the Shareholders.
To complete the Reserve Fund to £200,000, and
To consolidate the permanent interests of the Bank
by creating a Colonial Proprietary.
These are the solid, substantial results which Mr. Powell
would defeat or fritter away—if allowed—even to his own
detriment!
I rely on the Directors being supported, not only by votes
and influence, but by determined resistance to one who would
sow mischief, forgetful that the only harvest for him is defeat
a nd discomfiture.
A QUIET SHAREHOLDER.
London, June, 1877.
[CIRCULAR.]
The following observations on the recent proceedings at
the Bank of South Australia Meetings are deemed worthy of
being submitted to the Shareholders. That the measures pro-
posed by the Directors of the Bank for increasing the Capital
and the Reserve Fund should have occasioned dissatisfaction and
opposition is not to be wondered at.
The object desired by the Shareholders generally, no less
than by the Directors, is that residents in the Colony should
become Shareholders and have the advantage of local registration
for a limited portion of the Capital. To effect this, all that was
necessary was to obtain the sanction of the Proprietors and of
the Treasury, and then make arrangements to enable colonial
residents to acquire shares if they wished to do so by purchase
in London.
Thus no increase of Capital would have been necessary,
and that none should be made, the following extracts from the
Balance-Sheets for 1874, 1875 and 1876 will sufficiently
prove :


On 31st Dec.. 1874.
Deposits not bearing Interest £236,013
Ditto
1875.
ditto
294,571
Ditto
1876.
ditto
322,169
On 31st Dec., 1874.
Deposits bearing Interest ..
£692,584
Ditto
1875.
ditto
950,154
Ditto
1876.
ditto
1,191,451
In each year the Capital and Reserve were of the same
amounts ; assuredly then, there has been no want of confidence
in the credit and stability of the Bank. The Directors and
General Manager wish, however, to have the power to deal not
only with a larger Capital, but with a larger Reserve Fund, by
raising the former from £500,000 to £625,000, and the latter
from £160,000 to £200,000 by levying £lO premium on each
additional £25 share, from present proprietors, instead of
increasing it from profits by good and ecomomical management.
These gentlemen take umbrage because opposition to their
scheme is expressed and an endeavour made to check it.
At the Annual General Meeting on the 26th ultimo, a poll was
demanded ; it was ordered to be taken at once, which was done ;
the personal and proxy votes given did not afford the majority
required for the Directors proposals, seeing this, the Solicitor
suggested that the meeting should be adjourned, which was done,
and before the next meeting (some days after) the Directors had
gained sufficient strength ; many opposed to them declining to
vote for various reasons. Mr. Powell, who demanded the poll,
considered that the adjourned meeting was an improper one, —did
not produce more proxies and protested. By the General
Manager’s Circular of 30th ultimo, it is shewn that £123,480 of
Capital was not represented. Had the Proprietors of this
amount voted, the result might have been different.
The effect of the measure must now be patiently awaited.
Higher dividends ought to be the consequence, otherwise the
Proprietors will not be benefited.
The Shareholders, as was remarked by Dr. Beattie, have not
yet received any dividend from profits gained in the year 1876


nor have £25,000 retained, from former years’ profits, been, a;
yet, added to the Reserve Fund.
The Directors will deserve and gain more approbation if they
rely more on their own judgment than hitherto, and bring the
affairs of the Bank more nearly, if not altogether equal, to the
standard of the other Australian Banks.
Yours faithfully,
AN OLD SHAREHOLDER.
July 2nd, 1877.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
AND THE
OPPOSITION TO THE DIRECTORS.
To the Proprietors of the Bank.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
There is a usurpation of my title in the Circular
just issued, although dated so far hack as 2nd July. The writer
as much lacks originality, as wisdom in argument, or loyalty to
the Bank. His statements look very specious, hut can easily be
analysed and answered :
His first assumption is :
“ All that was necessary was to
“ obtain the sanction of the Pro-
“ prietors and of the Treasury, and
“ then make arrangements to enable
“ Colonial residents to acquire
“ shares, if they wished to do so,
“ by purchase in London.”
The facts are :
That such sanction was obtained
from the Lords of the Treasury in
October, 1874, and from the Share-
holders at the Special General
Meetings of 31st December, 1874,
and 16th January, 1875.
That these measures have not
been successful in obtaining tne
necessary results.
16


The second statement of importance
There is here a palpable absurdity ,
is :—
almost too transparent to re -
That the deposits show that “no
quire attention :—
“ increase of capital would have
Surely Deposits have to be re-
“ been necessary,” and therefore
paid, while Capital can be per-
that none should be made.
manently relied on.
The Proprietors, at the recent
Meetings, exposed the fallacy of
Banks trading on credit, and fully
recognised that Colonial prosperity
affords encouragement for the
employment of increased Capital.
The third point is : —
That the Reserve Fund, instead
The reply has been more than once
furnished :—
of being at once increased, as the
That slow progress now is con-
Directors propose, should be in-
trary to sound principles.
creased from “ profits by good and
That Reserve and Capital should
“ economical management.”
be concurrently augmented.
That the method of immediate,
rather than slow protracted in-
crease, is wise and prudent.
There are many other mistakes either in fact or argument,
bungling in character, unintentionally arising, perhaps, from a
laxity in the use of language, or the want of that clearness and
precision which should mark the compositions of careful,
consistent opponents.
The studied attack, however, on the Chairman and Directors,
in all the references to the recent Special General Meetings,
must not escape attention. The “umbrage” taken at the
opposition was because it was neither courteous nor fair; not
consistent with many interests, nor gentlemanly in character.
It was hoped from the manner in which the Meeting of Saturday,
the 80th ultimo, closed, that the “ hatchet ” was buried, and
that the “ internal dissensions ” had terminated. Yet now the
question is re-opened to challenge the conduct of those who


guided absentee Shareholders to the vote, and who gave to the
misled and misdirected, an opportunity of returning to their
allegiance. If there are any who wish to revive the contest, they
should reflect over the Proxies pro and con; — there would then
be a natural desire to know the true friends of the Bank, and on
examination there could be no doubt that the result —which it is
said “ might have been different —would have been fully and
completely confirmed.
In fact, it is known that Shareholders now recognise their
interests to be one and indivisible with that of the Bank, and
there are few exceptions to the general statement that right-
minded men, in Commerce and Banking, endowed with high
principles, superior to mere individual advantages, desire com-
plete success to the Directors’ proposals, which have in view the
permanent welfare of the Bank.
The agitation to frustrate the measures is, truly enough,
revealing its worst tendencies. It is unruly and lawless in
nature. It is that of a small clique, such as Hibernians mani-
fest in legislative assemblies. There are, of course, “ Home
Rulers ” out of Parliament, and the principles of “ obstruction ”
always characterise those who wish to be notorious rather than
useful.
The Circular of 2nd July is, therefore, altogether mischievous
and intended to foster ill feeling. It deserves the reprobation
of those who have honorably withdrawn from the contest, and
must be stigmatised by all as out of place in time and character,
as it is weak and inefficient in argument.
THE OLD SHAREHOLDER.
London, 10th July, 1877.
[CIRCULAR.]
There is much reason to suspect that the letter of the 10th
inst. addressed to the Proprietors of the Bank of South


Australia, signed “ The Old Shareholder ” (as if there were only
one such) is issued from the Bank Office. It is couched in a
style and spirit which would not be exhibited by any one who is
not concerned in conducting the Bank’s affairs, and whose
procedure in this respect is impugned. lam satisfied to leave
his statement and mine to the impartial judgment of my Co-pro-
prietors as to which of the two is the most gentlemanly, and
represents the soundest principles of Banking, and I fear not a
reference on the latter point to every experienced Bank Manager
in London.
For a refutation of the system advocated by “ The Old Share-
holder ” of increasing Capital in proportion to Deposits, and
hastily adding to the Reserve Fund by large advances from Share-
holders instead of gradually from Profits, reference may be made
to numbers of “ The Bankers’ Magazine,” in which admirable
essays on Banking, and the annual accounts of most of the
London and Colonial Public Banks are published.
AN OLD SHAREHOLDER.
12 th July, 1877.
EE POET TO PEOPEIETOES.
The Court of Directors have to call the attention of the
Shareholders to the position of the Resolutions for increasing
the capital of the Bank from £500,000 to £625,000.
The Special General Meeting held this day was almost
unanimous in giving effect to the proposed measures, the result
arrived at being as follows ;
For Against
By show of hands 33 4
Votes of the same Proprietors .. 125 17
Therefore if the question had depended solely on the votes of
the Meeting, the Resolutions would have been carried. But this
decision was over-ruled by the production of proxies, making the
total votes ;


For the Directors 379
Against „ 98
being three votes short of the requisite number, for, as you are
doubtless aware, the Deed of Settlement requires a majority of
four-fifths of the votes to carry any change in the constitution
of the Bank.
It now becomes of essential importance that absent Pro-
prietors, or those who have not previously voted, should know
the grounds on which they are asked to consider the question at
issue.
I am, therefore, instructed by the Court of Directors, to hand
herewith a report of the Chairman’s speech, which in their
opinion demands your immediate and serious consideration.
Should you be unable to attend the Adjourned Meeting
convened for Saturday, 30th inst,, I enclose a proxy filled up for
you to vote in favour of the proposed measures.
By order of the Court,
WILLIAM PURDY,
General Manager.
54, Old Broad Street,
London, 26th June, 1877.
EXTRACT FROM SIR ROBT. RICHARD TORRENS’
SPEECH,
IN REPLY TO MR. M. POWELL’S CIRCULAR OF
19th JUNE, 1877.
After tracing the history of the Bank's movements , during the last
few years, for obtaining a Colonial Proprietary, Sir R. R.
Torrens said —
I would remark, in the first place, that it is a usage
amongst gentlemen associated in a common venture of this
20


character, to give timely notice of any purpose to traverse or
frustrate action proposed in the general interest. The learned
gentleman, Mr. Maurice Powell, who circulated this paper has
not thought fit to notify to me, as Chairman of the Court, his
purposed action in this matter, nor to furnish copy of his circular
to the Directors or the Manager of the Bank. The consequence
is, that I have not had an opportunity to send round a reply
exposing the many fallacies and erroneous statements, by which
shareholders may have been induced to comply with his request
to furnish him with proxies to defeat a project which, if they
had not been so deceived, they would have approved.
It is also possible that of the Proprietors here present, some
may have given credence to the circular. It is therefore necessary
that I should reply.
The learned gentleman has sought to gain the confidence of
those he addresses, by representing himself as the saviour by
whose intervention “ the shares now proposed to be allotted,
would in 1874, have been allotted to non-shareholders selected
by the Directors, at from £29 to £3ladding, “the loss such an
issue would have been to those he addresses may be easily seen.”
In the above short paragraph, there are no less than three
mis-statements of facts and one non sequitur. First, it was not
the learned gentleman, but Mr. Larnach and Dr, Beattie that, on
the occasion he refers to, by their intervention, caused the issue
of new shares to be rejected.
It never was proposed that these shares should be allotted to
parties selected hp the Directors , as is insinuated.
It never was proposed that these shares should be allotted at
from £29 to £3l.
Lastly, it does not follow that any loss whatever would have
fallen upon existing proprietors, even if the shares had been so
allotted at that price. The better opinion seems to me, and to
men thoroughly conversant with the Colony, to be that the
premium placed to the Reserve Fund, (the common property of


all shareholders), and the prestige of a colonial proprietary,
obtained by the measure, would have far more than compensated
the then proprietors for the surrender of their pre-emptive rights.
Again, in paragraph 2, the learned gentleman makes a state-
ment wholly at variance with fact, and puts forward a represen-
tation of the action of the Directors in relation to the 28 th clause
of the Deed of Settlement, which representation he repeats in
the sth paragraph, although it is to all, who have the Deed of
Settlement by them to refer to, transparently delusive.
So far from its being true that on the three occasions on
which the Bank’s capital was increased, the new shares were
issued at par, as stated by tbe learned gentleman, £17,582 was
raised in 1853 by the issue of 981 shares at £22 premium, and in
1861, £1,031 was raised by the issue of 148 shares at £8 premium.
The statement in paragraphs 3 and 4 that “ this is the first
occasion on which an attempt has been made to obtain contri-
bution to the Reserve Fund, by applying to that purpose premium
upon new shares,” is equally fallacious.
The premiums paid on the two occasions I have cited, were
placed to the Reserve. But if it were otherwise, are we to be
so tied by usage that we may not adjust our action to the
altering conditions of a commercial age and a young colony ?
What, then, is the alternative recommended by the learned
gentleman ? Forsooth, that a portion of the earnings of the
Bank be set aside annually—£6,2so as contribution to the
Reserve until it be raised to £200,000. But if so, that contri-
bution must pro tanto diminish dividend.
I would invite shareholders to consider for a moment, even
from the Stock Exchange point of view, what would be the effect
on the price of shares to-morrow morning if such a proposition
were carried, in substitution for that of the Directors, which
would place the Bank at once on a strong and advantageous
position before the public, with a paid up capital of £625,000,
and a Reserve of £200,000.


I will not detain the meeting by exposing further the fallacies
put forward in this paper. I feel that I have said enough, and
more than enough, to convince shareholders present, how little
reliance can be placed on the representations of the learned
gentleman, and I only fear that absent shareholders may have
been deluded into complying with his application for proxies,
when no opportunity has been afforded for undeceiving them.
I confidently submit for your approval the resolutions pro-
posed by the Court, which resolutions are embodied in the
Treasury Warrant of Approval.
FURTHER REPORT TO PROPRIETORS.
The Court of Directors have to communicate the result of the
voting on the Eesolutions for increasing the capital of the Bank
from £500,000 to £625,000.
At the adjourned Meeting on 30th June, Mr. Maurice Powell
stated it was not conducive to the Bank’s interests that internal
dissensions should exist, and, so far as he could consistently
comply with the strong desires to terminate the contest, he
withdrew altogether from the Poll he had demanded.
The Chairman heartily acknowledged the manner in which
Mr. Powell had thus acted, and stated that, in the remarks he
had thought it necessary to make on the circular, and in refuta-
tion of several assertions, he had no intention to impute to
Mr. Powell wilful misrepresentations.
The votes recorded in favor of the Eesolutions were —For,
662 ; Against, 75.
The Chairman declared the said Eesolutions carried.
The par value of the total stock represented on the occasion
was—


For the Directors £335,425
Against ~ 34,675
Immediately after the Resolutions are confirmed, the letters
of allotment will be sent to individual Shareholders in the
proportion of one new to four old Shares.
By order of the Court,
WILLIAM PURDY,
General Manager.
80 th June, 1877.
CIRCULAR DESPATCH TO BRANCH MANAGERS.
London, Gth Jahj, 1877.
Dear Sir,
Increase of Capital. —l advised you, last mail, that measures
were to be submitted at the Annual General Meeting for an in-
crease of capital, and that the new shares were to be restricted
to the Colonial Share Register. There was no expectation of
carrying the proposed resolutions without a struggle ; but I did
not anticipate so fierce a contest as had, in twelve to fourteen
days, to be encountered, resisted, and conquered; contending
against a well organised opposition, which hoped, by a canvass
of the whole body of proprietors, to defeat, if not the entire
measures, at least that feature which was of vital importance to
the Bank’s permanent prosperity.
Official Papers. —lt may be of interest, hereafter, to have
among the Bank’s records the various reports issued in the pro-
gress of the agitation, and I, therefore, enclose herewith the
official documents, referring you to the public prints sent this
mail for all unofficial comments, or supplementary sources of
information, provided for the occasion, and which may have
assisted in the successful result.
Value of Shares. —It becomes my pleasing duty to state that
as there can now be little doubt of a complete triumph of the


Directors’ measures, I may again invite your co-operation in
creating a demand for the new Shares among your Depositors
or Local Capitalists, who are seeking permanent investments.
Although it is not within the province of officers to resort to
“ puffing ” what may he termed the “ Bank’s wares,” I may
request your judicious assistance in placing before your con-
nections the solid advantages the shares offer to the public. To
illustrate their present position, take the following figures to
determine the proximate value :
4 Old Shares at £27,
less dividend £1 ss. per Share £45 15 = £123
1 New Share at £35 35
to be apportioned among the five shares. If, then, the present
market value is maintained, the new share is worth £43 125.,
and, on the present dividend, the investment yields say 5J per
cent, per annum. You well know the basis on which the Bank
rests in respect to soundness of Assets ; also as to Land and
Premises, and, I may add, that the Reserve Fund is invested
apart from the risks of the current business ; one-third being in
Imperial Parliamentary Funds, and two-thirds in the Securities
of various Colonial Governments.
Payments for Shares. —In order to make the new shares as
popular as possible, the intention is to call up, by instalments,
the amounts payable ;
Ist October, 1877 ... £7
Ist January, 1878... ... ... 7
Ist April, do. ... ... ... 7
Ist July, do 7
Ist October, do. ... ... ... 7
The option will, however, be given to holders to pay up in full on
Ist October next. All amounts paid in respect to Share Capital


(apart from the Eeserve Fund) will participate in the current divi-
dend ; — e.g., there will be three months out of the profits of 1876,
viz., 10 per cent, per annum from Ist October to 31st December
next, while there is now the accrued profit to 30th June last,
which will become divisible on or about May next under the new
regulation for half-yearly dividends.
Method of Action. — Thus, then, the advantages of the new
Shares can be clearly understood, and I hope that a regular,
steady demand, rather from small than large investors, will
arise for the Shares in the Colony. My idea is to release
them from the present Proprietors at a price between £4O and
£42 ; to send them in parcels of 300 to 500 Shares to Adelaide,
subject to such regulations for transfer as the Local Board may
lay down, —it being especially desirable that all operations for
sale or purchase be made through authorised Brokers, so that
the Shares shall have a recognised position on the public market
with other securities of a like nature.
Reference to Inspector. —You will on receipt of this circular
despatch, find that the Inspector will have had from me all
necessary information for your further guidance in the business,
it being my intention to advise him by telegram of the number
of shares for immediate sale in the Colony, and the minimum
price fixed on for the benefit of the present proprietors.
Thanks of Proprietors. —l take this opportunity of communi-
cating to you the thanks expressed at the Annual General Meet-
ing of Shareholders, to Branch Managers generally, and to hand
copy of the Director’s Eeport on that important occasion.
I am,
Dear Sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) WILLIAM PUEDY,
General Manager.


THIRTY-SIXTH
ANNUAL REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS.
The Court of Directors beg to submit the Annual Accounts,
duly audited, and, in reporting a continued increase of business,
to state that the affairs of the Bank are in a satisfactory con-
dition.
The Balance of the Profit and Loss Account allows the recom-
mendation of a Dividend at the rate of ten per cent, per annum,
payable half-yearly as heretofore.
The Kesolutions passed at the Special General Meetings of
27th June and 13th July last, have been referred to the Lords
Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury. Those Resolutions
authorised the application for a new Supplementary Charter;
but their Lordships have intimated that “ they are not able to
“ entertain the application, because they have laid down a rule
“ not to advise Her Majesty to grant, by Royal Charter, new
“ privileges or rights to Banks, and they can allow no exception
“to their rule.” Therefore the Resolutions Nos. Ito 6 will be
brought into effect when the necessary Warrant shall have been
obtained ; but the Resolutions Nos. 7 to 10 have become
inoperative.
In order to adjust the Bank’s proceedings to the modified
position thus indicated, the Court of Directors propose that this
shall be the last Annual General Meeting. In future, Half-yearly
Meetings will be held to submit Reports and Accounts, and to
declare Dividends. Although a pro forma Meeting will be held
in November next, the first of the regular Meetings will be held
in or about the month of May, 1878.
When the Accounts for the said Meeting are arranged, the
opportunity will be availed of for crediting the Reserve Fund
with the £25,000 specially adverted to in the last Annual Report,
raising that Fund to £150,000 accordingly.
While obtaining the assent by Warrant of the Lords Com-
missioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury to these changes in the


constitution, their concurrence has also been sought so far as is
necessary to the proposal for raising the Capital from £500,000
to £625,000 ; and the Resolutions, to be submitted for that pur-
pose, are arranged with the view of giving strength to the
Bank’s operations through a Colonial constituency, so long
recognised to be essentially conducive to the permanent success
of the Institution.
The method of raising the new Capital embraces the further
augmentation of the Reserve Fund to Two hundred thousand
pounds (£200,000), an amount which will be no more than com-
mensurate with the Bank’s present business and its prospective
operations.
ROBERT R. TORRENS, Chairman.
By Order of the Court,
WILLIAM PURDY, General Manager.
54, Old Broad Street,
London, 19 th June, 1877.
CIRCULARS TO SHAREHOLDERS
LETTER OF ALLOTMENT.
JVb. No. 64, Old Broad Street,
27 th July, 1877.
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
I have the pleasure to inform you that, in accordance
with the terms of the New Issue of Shares, and the Resolutions
of the Special General Meeting of 26th June, confirmed by the
Meeting on 19th July, you are entitled to Shares of the
said Issue.
If you do not signify your acceptance thereof (or of any less
mmher) by signing and returning to me the enclosed letter of
acceptance, duly filled up, on or before 27th August, you will be
deemed to have elected not to take any of the Shares now offered.


The amount payable in respect of each Share is £35, which
may be paid by Instalments, as follows:
Ist October, 1877 ... ... ... £7 0 0
Ist January, 1878 ... ... ... 7 0 0
Ist April, ~ ... ... ... 7 0 0
Ist July, ~ 7 0 0
Ist October, „ ... 7 0 0
Total £35 0 0
New Share £25 0 0
Reserved Fund ... 10 0 0
£B5 0 >0
and, if you observe that arrangement,
Form A will have to be used, after accepting the Shares,
when making the first payment.
Should you, however, desire to pay the amount of the Shares in
full on or before Ist October next, you are at liberty to do so, —
and
Form B provides for the exercise of the option accordingly.
In each case the current rate of Dividend will apply to the New
Shares from the date of payment, whether in full or by instal-
ments.
If you desire to nominate any other person to receive the
Allotment to which you are entitled, the enclosed form (C) must
be returned, signed by you and your nominee, on or before the
said 27th August, any nomination you may make, being subject
to the approval of the Court of Directors.
In the event of non-compliance with the terms of this letter,
or in case of non-payment of any instalment by the stipulated
date or dates, all claim to the Shares, and all payments made
thereon will be forfeited, and the Court of Directors are
empowered to dispose of the Shares, as they may think fit, for
the benefit of the Bank,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
WILLIAM PURDY,
General Manager.


BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER, 1847.
I ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
M
< No
w
w Form A.
w
H
>< To the Court of Directors.
w J
w Having accepted
Shares of the New Issue on the
conditions specified in the Letter of Allotment of 27th July, I
w agree to execute, whenever called upon, the Deed of Settlement
w for the said Shares.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
a
s
§
w
3 No.
Received from.
the sum of.
p
g First Instalment on.
3
M
«
New Shares on the Colonial Register .
For the London and Westminstrr Bank.
w r
« X,
o
STAMP.
30


BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER, 1847.
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
Form B.
W To the Court of Directors.
h J
(h Having accepted Shares of the New Issue on the
p conditions specified in the Letter of Allotment of 27th July, I
have made payment in full of the amount due in respect thereof.
£3 I agree to execute, whenever called upon, the Deed of Settle-
rt ment for the said shares.
Name of Proprietor.
Address
Date.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
M
M
P
o No.
Received from
the sum of.
w
B
amount due on New Shares on the Colonial Register.
w
■B
For the London and Westminster Bank.
H
* 4?
M L
m
STAMP.


BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
o
"S Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1847.
O
CO
o
S ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
to
•H
S Form C.
£ No
.a To the Court of Directors,
Pv* 47 , ’
” 2 I request you to allot Shares of the New Issue
•P |•> # j
-g S to which lam entitled, to
t-i bp
<u n p
£-*J of_
~ £ who is willing to accept the same,
a §
S *3 iVame
o o Address
£ o
a S Date
T 3 <3
-
■C2
O »H
to +*
o To the Court of Directors of the
S g
.2 Bank of South Australia.
>S °
g § I hereby accept the above Shares upon the terms
® § of the Letter of Allotment, dated 27th July, 1877, with which
© ® terms I agree to comply, and to execute the Supplementary
g Deed of Settlement in respect thereof.
;s*
g I propose to pay by Instalments, or to pay for the Shares in
Jf full, on or before the Ist October next. *
*8
JO
Name.
Address
Date
* The part of this clause to be struck out which does not meet the
requirements of the case.
32


BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1847.
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
ACCEPTANCE OF SHAKES
To the Court of Directors.
I hereby accept
Shares of the New Issue
upon the terms of the Letter of Allotment dated 27th July, 1877,
with which terms I agree to comply, and to execute the
Supplementary Deed of Settlement in respect thereof.
I propose to act under Fo:
Name.
Address
Date.
LETTER OF ALLOTMENT
FRACTIONAL CLAIMS.
No. 54, Old Broad Street, London, E.C.,
27th July , 1877.
I have the pleasure to inform you that, in accordance with
the terms of the New Issue of Shares, and the Resolutions of
the Special General Meeting of 26th June, confirmed by the


1st October, 1877
••• •••
...
£7
0
0
1st January, 1878
...
...
7
0
0
1st April, ,,
...
...
7
0
0
1st July, ,,
...
...
7
0
0
1st October, „
...
7
0
0
Total
• • •
£35
0
0
New Share
... £25
0 0
Reserved Fund
10
0 0
Meeting on 19th July, although you are not entitled to any
Share of the said Issue, your fractional claims have been con-
sidered by the enclosed vouchers.
If you do not signify your acceptance of the same by signing
and returning to me the enclosed letter of acceptance, duly filled
up, on or before 27th August, you will be deemed to have elected
not to avail thereof.
The amount payable in respect of each Share is £35, which
may be paid by Instalments, as follows :
£35 0 0
The current rate of Dividend will apply to the New Share from
the date of payment.
If you desire to nominate any other person to receive the
Allotment to which you are entitled, the enclosed Form C must
be returned, signed by you and your nominee, on or before the
said 27th August, any nomination you may make, being subject
to the approval of the Court of Directors.
In the event of non-compliance with the terms of this letter,
or in case of non-payment of any instalment by the stipulated
date or dates, all claim to the Share, and all payments made
thereon will be forfeited, and the Court of Directors are
empowered to dispose of the Share, as they may think fit, for
the benefit of the Bank.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
WILLIAM PURDY,
General Manager.


BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1847.
ISSUE OF NEW SHARES ON THE COLONIAL REGISTER.
FRACTIONAL VOUCHERS
Tlie Court of Directors have provided for the advantages
accruing to you from the number of Shares you hold not being
exactly divisible, by the enclosed Voucher , from which you
will find the method you can avail of for the sale thereof, or the
acquisition of a whole Share of the New Issue.
By order of the Court,
WILLIAM PURDY,
General Manager.
21th July, 1877.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
21th July, 1877.
The holder of this Fractional Voucher, issued with the Letter
of Allotment bearing the same number, is entitled to one-fourth
of the value of £35, and the premium (if any) thereon.
The following conditions are to apply to this Voucher, viz.:—
It is assignable by endorsement or transfer. It must be returned to the
London office of the Bank on or before 27th August next. It is only available
when accompanied by three Vouchers of a like character.
In exchange for such Vouchers the Bank will allot one Share of the New
Issue to an allottee, approved by the Court of Directors,


EXTRACTS FROM NEWSPAPERS.
From “ The Bullionist,” 28th June, 1877.
Mr. Powell’s objection to the policy of the directors in
increasing the capital is, that the present shareholders are not,
as on former occasions of similar extensions, to enjoy the privi-
lege of allotment of the new shares at par! He accuses the
directors of seeking to deprive the proprietors of their prescrip-
tive rights to the benefits which would thus accrue to them, and
he even suggests the doubt whether the new shares will realise
in the market the £35 at which it is proposed to allot them.
All Mr. Powell’s objections centre round one point of an assumed
injustice to the shareholders, by depriving them of an alleged
prescriptive right to obtain the new shares at par. There is an
old proverb which tells us “it is an ill bird that fouls its own
nest; ” and Mr. Powell seems to be performing that somewhat
ungracious function. He appears altogether to ignore the fact
that the interests of the bank and those of the shareholders are
one and the same. He treats them as if they were antagonistic,
and in the very breath in which he acknowledges the exceeding
prosperity of the bank, brought about by the exertions of the
directors, he tries to discredit those gentlemen, and destroy the
confidence of the proprietors in them. Mr. Powell is evidently
of opinion that in some way or another, which he does not ex-
plain, the £lO premium for the new shares will not benefit the
shareholders, though it is obvious that it must help the bank by
strengthening its position and extending its prestige. The fact


that the directors do not follow in 1877 the same precise course
in which they found it prudent to go in 1842 and 1852, is surely
a sign—not of going backwards, but of progress. The directors
wish to give the bank a reserve fund of £200,000, and they will
accomplish their object next year, or at latest in 1879, unless
the proprietors are led away by the foolish and shortsighted
misrepresentations of Mr. Powell. Let the shareholders con-
sider that the more their reserves are augmented the more
valuable their shares must become, and they will be certain to
reject the counsels now offered them.
From “ The Bullionist,” 30th June, 1877.
The threatened opposition to the policy of the directors of this
flourishing institution, of which we spoke last week, culminated
at the meeting held last Tuesday. All Mr. Powell’s efforts and
eloquence, however, failed to secure even a respectable show of
support on a division, and the original resolutions were carried
by a vote of more than nine to one. We cannot doubt that a
like result will attend the counting of the proxies to-day—for a
poll was demanded—and that the effect of the movement will
ultimately be to strengthen the hands of the directors in carrying
through the policy which experience and reflection combined
have convinced them is best for the permanent interests of the
Bank. These cannot be really inconsistent with the interests of
the shareholders, though, of course, there may be shareholders
who are willing to sacrifice the future in order to make sure of a
present gain. Without saying that the opponents of the
directors are consciously so disposed, we must say that the
course they adopt is calculated to have that effect. In increasing


the capital of the bank, and taking steps to extend its local
power in the colony, by placing the new shares upon the colonial
share register of the company, they are providing in good time
for the prospective expansion of business which they see good
reason to anticipate. It is necessary to lay solid foundations
for increased business in a colony of only 250,000 inhabitants,
in which there is the formidable competition of six banks
bidding against each other for the confidence of the colo-
nists. The chairman, at the general meeting on Tuesday, re-
ferred to the disadvantage at which the Bank of South Australia
has been placed relatively to those of their rivals who have a
local proprietary in South Australia, and those who have had
experience of our colonies know what an important element of
success that is. It is necessary for the Bank of South Australia
“ to lengthen its cords and strengthen its stakes,” in order that
it may compete with its rivals. There is no doubt of the great
future that is in store for the colony. It is in the van of our
colonies (truly said the chairman) as regards the production of
staple articles, its trade, the lightness of its taxation, and the
smallness of its debt. There is, therefore, a good field for the
judicious efforts of a bank, and the addition of a local pro-
prietary will doubtless give this bank a pow’er which it would
not probably obtain in any other way. So far as we can see,
there is no reasonable objection that ought to have force
with intelligent proprietors to the directors’ policy. The only
point as to which there can be any doubt is in regard to the
issue of the new shares at a premium. Here, however, as wo
showed last week, the directors had to discharge a double duty,
which might appear to some to be inconsistent with itself, but
which is not really so. Looking to immediate interests alone, it
is possible to maintain that the shareholders ought to have the
option of taking the new shares at par; but if w r e have regard
to the future of the bank, and therefore to what are the perma-
nent as distinguished from the temporary interests of the pro-
prietors, we think there can be no room for question that the


directors have done wisely in taking the course they have adopted.
We have no doubt this will he the conclusion of the great ma-
jority of the shareholders.
From “Financial Opinion,” 2Sth June, 1877.
The proposal of the directors of the Bank of South Australia
to increase the capital of the Bank, involves a wholly new and
curious point of interest for the banking community. We,
therefore, give below the accounts of the bank and the contro-
versy to which the proposal has given rise at considerable
length.
The point is this : “ Is it fair to the shareholders of a bank
to offer them new shares in their own bank at a premium, and
ought they not, if they take up the shares, to get them at par ? ”
This, so far as we know, is a new point. Mr. Maurice Powell,
a shareholder in the Bank of South Australia, takes an adverse
view. He thinks he ought, as a shareholder, to have his new
shares at par.
But there is another point. It is proposed by the directors
that a sum of £50,000, which represents the premium over the
par value of the new shares offered to the shareholders, should
be devoted to increase the reserve fund. Mr. Powell says, in
effect: “I am so well satisfied with the state of the reserve
fund that I do not see any necessity for me as a shareholder to
sacrifice the usual honne-bouche of bank shareholders in improving
it.”
“ An Old Shareholder,” unknown to us, prefers to devote his
bonne-bouche to improving the relative position of his pet bank to
other colonial banks. He says, in effect:—“ The reserve fund
of my bank stands sixth on a list of twelve colonial banks. Our
reserve fund may be sufficient to satisfy Mr. Powell, but I want
to move up the ladder.” In this paternal ambition of an “ old
Shareholder ” the directors coincide, and there our share in the
controversy, having stated the problem, ceases. We give the
documents further on.


31st Dec.,
1876.
£
105,262
208,162
16,168
322,169
1,191,451
1,843,212
500,000
125,000
52,317
2,520,529
185,667
96,097
1,757
465,250
61,170
1,710,588
2,520,529
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Comparison of published Accounts for Half-years ended
31st December, 1874, 1875, and 1876 :
BALANCE-SHEET.
Liabilities.
Promissory Notes in circulation not
bearing interest
Bills of Exchange in circulation not
bearing interest
Balance due to other Banks
Cash deposited not bearing interest, say
Cash deposited bearing interest
Total due to the Public
0 05^
A S« « Capital paid up.
■/. i " i i—
“| | %%% J Reserve Fund .
i i :
I Profit and Loss .
oo oo oo
Assets.
Coin and Bullion
Balance due from other Banks
Promissory Notes or Bills of other Banks
Government Securities ■
Landed or other Property of the Cor-
poration
Notes and Bills discounted, or other
Debts due to the Corporation not
included under the foregoing heads .
31st Dec.,
1874.
91,008
111,820
23,905
236,013
692,584
1,155,330
500.000
125.000
54,504
1,834,834
125,834
18,701
42,938
196,200
36,820*
1,414,341
31st Dec.,
1875.
104,236
95,998
7,904
294,572
950,154
1,452,864
600,000
125,000
60,394
2,128,258
215,927
98,476
300,105
40,290
1,471,634
1,834,834
2,128,258
*Viz., Amount expended between
Nov. 1840, and 31st Dec., 1874... £99,276 6 0
Less Amount written off 62,456 6 0
£36,820 0 0
40


RESERVED FUND.
New 3 per Cent. Annuities
Reduced 3 per Cents
Consolidated 3 per Cents
Australian Government Bonds ..
New Zealand Government Bonds
Amount of Fund
31st Dec.,
187 G.
15.000
22.000
10,000
58.000
20.000
125,000
PROFIT AND LOSS
ACCOUNT
Balance carried forward
Balance brought forward
Interest on Reserve Fund ....
Profits from all Offices
41


From “ The Morning Post,” June 23rd , 1877.
The Bank of South Australia having obtained the authority
of the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury to the
raising of the capital from £500,000 to £625,000, proposes to
issue the new capital in £25 shares to the present proprietors in
proportion to their holdings at £35 per share, being £lO premium,
subject to a provision that the shares are to be transferable in
South Australia only, the object being to form a local colonial
constituency, which must be of essential advantage in promoting
the future business of the institution, whilst it is proposed to
carry the premium at which the shares are issued to the reserve
fund, thus increasing it to £200,000, or a little over 30 per cent,
of the capital. There can be no doubt that the object which the
directors have in view in forming a colonial constituency is a
most wise one, and perhaps it would have been better if that
could have been done by a direct allotment of shares in the colony
in the same way as several English banks have issued shares in
districts where they proposed to open new branches. As to the
application of the premium, there can be no doubt, whatever
may have been the former practice of the bank, that no more
legitimate use can be made of it than increasing the reserve fund,
by which all the proprietors will ultimately benefit, it being well
known that the greater the proportion of the reserve fund to the
paid-up capital, the greater is the confidence reposed in a bank,
and the better the price which the shares will command; and
such, we have no doubt, will be the views endorsed by the
majority of the shareholders.




