

E I■ ’ s
LEk,iGiOU&
gOjC qf
PRINTED BY REQUEST]
[price 6d.
THE PERSON, CHARACTER, AND
TEACHING, OF JESUS.
A lay Sermon read to the Sunday Free Discussion Society , Turn Verein Hall
Melbourne, October 6, 1872.
John vii, 24. Judge!— not according- to the appearance,—but judge-
righteous judgment I
Mi main object in this paper, is to review the teaching of Jesus,
and to form a more accurate estimate than I have lately heard
expressed of its worth in the past and present; but I have thought
it right to include his person and character in my theme to protect
myself from that misconception which is otherwise almost certain
to arise. For in all questions connected with religion, the sympathies
of men are so powerfully engaged, that the criticism of a doctrine
is frequently regarded as a personal attack upon the character of
Mm who promulgated it, if not upon that of anyone who may
undertake its defence. I think also that erroneous impressions
prevail as to the means we possess for judging the person and
character of Jesus ; and 'therefore that a few minutes may be
profitably devoted to the consideration of those two points.
Now of the person of Jesus, we of course know nothing
directly; and our indirect information about him is as doubtful as
it is scanty. The inevitable tendency of modern criticism is to
throw doubt upon the personality of all those typical characters
which tradition has handed down to us as the founders of human
improvement. It was like the uprooting of an old affection to
learn that Homer and iEsop were imaginary characters ; and if
the personality of Jesus has no greater title to historic reality, the
arrival at that conviction must certainly cost a pang, for which
nothing could compensate but the accompanying certainty of an
approximation to reasonable probability, if not to demonstrable truth.
The evidence preponderates in my opinion against the
reality of the existence of Jesus. It is most remarkable that a
person of his asserted pretensions and views should, himself have writtea


—nothing ! Not a word—to preclude the otherwise certain misconception
and distortion of his precepts; to say nothing of his objects and
personal character. This would certainly he quite intelligible on
one supposition which has strong support in the Gospels; namely,
that his regards were limited exclusively to his own generation, in
which he plainly said that he expected that the heavens and the
earth would pass away. But this —is to impute to him an ignorance
wholly inconsistent with his asserted character, if not altogether
fatal to it. Not only did Jesus himself write nothing, but nothing
was written about him for such a long time after the date assigned
to him, as to preclude direct disproof of any statement respecting
him —however absurd ; for inherent improbability or incongruity
with contemporary history cannot amount to more than moral
disproof. Of improbabilities—nay impossibilities—the story is full,
but to those who are as full of faith, even such mountains are easily
moveable. But when in addition—the utter silence is -remembered of
contemporary historians who made it their business to report every
analogous it should be evident that the constant
adjurations throughout the Gospels to exercise faith, —not only met
a perceived want in even that credulous age, but also indicated a
consciousness even then, that the evidence was not in itself probable
or credible to those, who could not possibly then discern that faith
is an intellectual vice, instead of a virtue.
But it may he said Socrates also wrote nothing, yet his
existence is not doubtful. True, but first, he made no such
pretensions as did Jesus; secondly, we have otherwise the best
authority of that age for believing in his real existence ; and
thirdly there is nothing improbable in his story. History had made
its appearance in the world, and if any history of that age is
credible at all, those of Greece and Rome are the most so. There
can be no comparison between the testimony of the cultivated
Xenophon, Plato, and Aristotle, and that of the obscure and in
fact—unknown writers of the Gospels ; although the death of
Socrates took place 400 years before Christ, when Xenophon was
about 54 years of age, Plato 30; Aristotle being born 15 years later.
But of the existence of Jesus no mention whatever is made
by the contemporary writers of Greece and Rome, or of the world ;
which proves that it could not have had any prominent publicity at
the time, if any reality at all. The fact that he is not alluded to
in the writings of Philo Judaeus, who was horn about the same
time as Jesus’s asserted birth, and lived to old age in which he


wrote extensively upon Jewish philosophy and religion ; or in those
of Josephus,* who was born near the time of Jesus’s supposed death,
and wrote the history of the Jewish people and of his own time,—
is ample evidence against the truth of the Gospels, even if their
testimony presented a general aspect of probability instead of fable.
But we have no such particulars of the Evangelists at all—as we have
of the disciples of Socrates ; and we know that their names were
altogether arbitrarily attached to their putative writings, to give them
what cannot but be a spurious authenticity, by some of the fathers ;
who, from their own statements, besides being grossly incompetent
witnesses and judges, did not scruple to deceive, lie, and forge,
whatever seemed to suit their purposes.! The Gospels themselves,
the dates of which are thus mere guesswork, are known to have
been selected by the same incompetent fraudulent old fathers from
scores of others scarcely more incredible. ■ln addition to this we
have the positive testimony of several of them that the Scriptures
were to be understood allegorically. Some say that Jesus—if he
really lived—was not really crucified at all, but that Simon the
Cyrenian was substituted for him. Some gravely contended that he
was but a phantom. It appears that this was a not uncommon
opinion ; some saying that a portion, others that the whole of the
Gospels, was not to be understood literally. But more important
still is the witness of the Gospels themselves. They make Jesus
speak distinctly of subsequent events,' —and even of some— as past,
—which did not occur until long after his reputed death! One
glaring instance is at verse 35 of the xxiii chapter of Matthew,
where he speaks of the death of Zacharias the son of Barachias as
past; although according to Josephus it did not happen until about
the year 70. J This fact suggests the possible identity of the Jesus
* See Gibbon, vol. li, p. 90 (Bohn's edition), and Taylor’s Diegesis, p.p. 363-4 &
385-9, for evidence of the forgery of the passage in which Jesus is named.
t See Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History and Middleton’s Free Enquiry.
I “The story in Josephus, of Jesus the son of Ananus, (see Wars vi, v, 3) is
evidently the basis of much of that of Jesus of Nazareth. The similarity of then-
vaticinations (compare Mat. xxiii is very striking. The 35th verse of the xxiii eh.
of Mat. affords overwhelming proof that It was written long (say at least 20 years)
after the destruction of Jerusalem, Zacharias, the son of Barachias, being killed in
the temple 34 years after the reputed date of the crucifixion (Josephus, Wars iv, v. 4);
and sufficient time must be allowed for the confusion of dates to arise The cunning
reference In the popular editions of Josephus to 2 Chron. xxiv, 21, will not satisfy
the demands of the citation. For “ from righteous Abel to Zacharias ”is evidently
meant to include the complete series from the first to the last notorious case of murder
—and the passage in Chron. refers to a time 900 years before Jesus. The prophet
Zeehariah, who has also been suggested as the person referred to, and the manner of
whose death has not been recorded, and was therefore not notorious, lived about 600
years before. The Zacharias of Chronicles also was the son of Jehqiada not Barachias ;
the prophet Zeehariah was the son of Berechiah. (Zech i, 1).”


of Scripture with a Jesus son of Ananus, of whom Josephus speaks
as prophesying the destruction of Jerusalem just before the event ;
and that it was when his character was invested with the divine
or supernatural nimbus that his appearance was ante dated nearly
half a century in order to set criticism at defiance. This was of
course easy in an age and country, where there were no newspapers
or records, which in any case would have had to prove a negative.
The date of the story had only to be carried back beyond the
memory of those addressed, to be secure from refutation. This
theory concurs with the probably real conditions of the case, which
are totally at variance with the received Gospel story. The date
assigned to Jesus is altogether incompatible with that, but agrees
perfectly with the theory which identifies him with Jesus son of
Ananus, as the mere nucleus round which the stories of Chrishna
and others, picked up probably by Paul in Arabia, and modified by
the prevalent Neoplatonism, afterwards gathered. Of these we know
that that of the slaughter of the innocents, and that of the taxing
of the world are wholly incredible and mere inventions as applied
to Jesus.
Paul’s curious visit to Arabia, as mentioned by himself, is as
incongruous with the rest of his story, as the fact, —that many of
the leading incidents in the history of Jesus, are mere plagiarisms
from the far older history of the Indian Christna—is fatal to the
originality and historic truth of the Gospels. That Paul’s epoch is
also ante dated, and that his otherwise unintelligible visit to Arabia
■ —much more probably ensued upon the destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus, concurs much better than the received chronology—with
Lucian’s supposed account of Paul, as, “a bald longnosed Galilean,
who had been taken up to the third heaven and had there heard
unspeakable words,” and whom he had actually seen; for Lucian
was born in the second century , writing and dying near the end of it.
And even without these materials for a re-adjustment of dates,
there would remain to be accounted for, the long period of time
between all these asserted events, and the date of the first authentic
Christian writing, and respecting which no explanation whatever can
be given on the orthodox hypothesis.
These conclusions must of course more or less affect our
estimate of the J character of Jesus. The son of Ananus was
evidently no better than a lunatic, whose vaticinations related to
nothing beyond the evidently impending destruction of the city and
nationality of the Jews. But the character of the Jesus of the


Gospels—imaginary or not—is another matter. As portrayed,
impartial criticism must recognise in him a mild enthusiast, whose
ideas of virtue and of philosophy were equally a caricature. But
we judge of character mainly by actions, and those attributed to
Jesus leave his open to considerable queston. The most remarkable
thing reported of him is, that he went about ostensibly practising
thaumaturgy and curing diseases ; for the expressed ‘purpose, less
of labouring for the good of others, than to prove the truth of Ms
doctrines! (John x, 37 8) Than which nothing could be more
absurd. If Dr. Tracy were to appeal to his clever cures, as proof
of the accuracy of his theological opinions, we should simply laugh
at him ; because, there is no congruity or relation between the two
things ; the one can no more be proved by the other, than any
theology will enable a man without medical knowledge to cure
diseases; and the pretension to cure anything so, proves something
very different, —the folly or the roguery of the pretender. Yet such
was the sole object of the miracles of Jesus! Also much suspicion
is thrown upon those miracles, by the plain statement that their
success depended, not so much upon his ability, as on the credulity
of the spectators. (Mat. xiii, 58, Mark vi, 5-6.) “And he did
not many mighty works there, because of theie unbelief ! ” —The
very reason why he pretended to do them, and should have done
them if he could! “ And he could there do no mighty work, save
that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them. And
he marvelled because of their unbelief.” He, —who “ knew what was
in man,”- —the manufacturer of man, marvelled ! For what purpose
did he profess to work miracles but to cure unbelief ? yet when
the occasion served, and demanded it, he could not do so! Jesus’s
statement (Mark ix, 22) that “ all things are possible to them that
believe,” is obviously untrue, for a mistake would then be impossible.
Further than this there
is really little or nothing by which we can judge of his moral
character. He admittedly lived the life of a vagrant, apparently
helping himself—or directing his disciples to help him—to other
people’s corn (Mat. xii, 1. Mark ii, 23) and donkeys, (Mat. xxi, 2.
John xii, 14,) and giving evasive answers to plain questions. He
never was in a position of trust and responsibility, and we have not
very encouraging means of judging how he would have acted if he
had been in one. His asserted meekness was certainly not proved
when he scourged the people out of the temple, an incident in
itself devoid of all semblance of probability. (Mat. xxi, 12. Mark
xi, 15.) His judgment appears to have been worse than indifferent
in more than one instance; not so much perhaps in the fact that


he expected very different results in that generation—for the wisest
of men are often deceived, —as in that he selected the greatest
rogue for his treasurer in the person of Judas, It may also be
thought that he might well have taken care that the records of his
life and teaching might come to us in such an authentic manner
and reasonable form, that they would not have been open to such
very grave suspicion; to say no more. The grotesquely ascetic
character of his doctrines is in perfect keeping with the fact that
it is recorded of him that he wept and groaned, while it is not
hinted that he ever laughed or even smiled.
On the other side, what can be said ? His devotion to his
visionary purpose is, I fear, the best. He was sacrificed at last
(accepting the story as credible) not with that confidence, enthusiasm
and endurance which alone can give the halo of glory to the martyr,
but in misery and despair! He begged that the cup might, if possible ,
pass from him! Not with the conscious joy of rectitude, hut
sweating drops of bloodl He implied that he believed—' whether he did
or not—that his God had forsaken him in his last agony. Could this
have been without a conviction that his life was an error, and his
devotion a mistake ? A pitiable case indeed! Let us thank common
sense and straightforward criticism, that it is probably altogether
fictitious. Pray observe that I regret as much as any one, that
most of his good must be interred with his bones, and that the evil
that men cause comes after them. I insinuate nothing against him
but what the Gospels have said ; and for that, I do not blame him .
I devoutly thank my philosophy that while pitying Mm as a deluded
fanatic, and deploring the enormous evils which the teaching
attributed to him has brought upon humanity, I can honor him for
his good attempted, pity him for his misfortunes, and entirely
exonerate him from all evil intentions. From the essential stand
point of all religion—freewill—so much charity would be a simple
impossibility. If man had a power of initiating action or motion-
as freewill implies ; —if under the same conditions it were possible
for him to act otherwise than as he does, there would then be room
for blame to Jesus. With me, I rejoice to say, there is none.
But religion can see no error without calling it sin. It assumes
that faults are voluntary, intentional, and of choice, and calls the-
ignorant victim of inherited passion, vicious education, and stringent
circumstance, wicked, perverse, and damnable! Blind to the inevitable
fact, that, according to its own principles, if sin can be, it must
originate with the originator I That if man is bad, God—if there


be one-—made Mm so! It lias no right to deny this, and then
assert that God is the author and giver of virtue, of which it thus
robs man. It cannot be charitable any more than consistent. Its
pretensions to consistency would be absurd, if they were not
repudiated; but its claims to be charitable are impudently false.
But in any ease the necessitarian sees that all such visionaries
are the victims of exalted imagination, as well as of external
circumstance, and that the intentions of all are equally blameless.
Bather, perhaps, that intention enters hut nominally, or faintly if at
all, into the causation of action. For man’s intentions are—like his
acts—necessary products of his constitution and circumstances, over
which he has no control, and which he cannot select. Thus,
and thus only, is charity possible. And therefore, “ let us not
condemn one another any more; but judge this rather, that no man
put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brother’s way.”
(Rom. xiv, 13).
Poor Jesus! deluded visionary S Thanks be to common sense
and growing knowledge, your story is happily altogether incredible !
But the teaching —whosesoever it is—is here ! and I wish to
examine it impartially and truly. For it is a stumbling block in
the way of many. I shall lay little stress on particular texts, which
may be shewn to be contradicted, or as piety would say explained,
by others. I shall not touch now upon the implied communism, nor
on the toleration of the adulteress, Nor on the doctrine of faith,
which deserves a separate paper. But I shall deal with leading
admitted doctrines only ; and shall quote, if at all, merely for
general purposes of illustration.
The first thing to be done, is to distinguish what was peculiar
in Jesus’s teaching, from what he merely repeated ; from what was
taught hundreds of years before, by Confucius, Zoroaster, &c. Thus
the doctrine of immortality was older than Moses, and was notoriously
held by the Pharisees is Jesus’s time. The common statement then
that Jesus brought immortality to light, can only be made in wild
contempt for veracity and fact. And for the golden rule,—“Do not
to others what ye would not that others should do to you,”—Jesus
deserves no more credit than any other man that quotes it with
approval ; but it must not be overlooked that in repeating it he
spoilt it by putting it in the positive form—“Do to others as ye
would that others should do to you.” And the good of this maxim
is very much exaggerated; for it is not of universal social application,
and strict conformity to it would produce serious evil. If judges.


constables and jailers were to do to our criminals as they would be
done by, crime would have no check, and society would collapse.
This brings me to the next thing, which is to point out, that
what Jesus repeated, he invariably exaggerated and caricatured. He
could not inculcate that aggression and retaliation are evil, (because
provoking strife, and therefore opposed to self interest as much as
to morality,) without a caricature, and saying, that if struck on one
cheek you should offer the other to be treated likewise. And,
“ whoever shall take your cloak, give to him your coat also. If any
one compel you to go with him a mile, go with him twain.’ 5 Such
teaching is absurd; and in practice would be destructive of true
morality, and of society also. So is “ resist not evil; ” and “ love
your enemies,” which is not only impracticable hut wrong. Act
towards your enemies so as to convert them into friends if you can,
and no one will admire the wisdom and propriety of such conduct
more than I. But to love them, is not more difficult than immoral.
And here I shall venture to lay down a canon, which I think
is a decided advance upon any teaching of Jesus. I am satisfied
that one great cause of the prevalence not only of immorality but
of the vague and unfruitful ideas on the subject of ethics generally,—
is the want of such a canon. But it is in diametrical opposition to
the general teaching of Jesus. I hold that nothing would so much
conduce to the improvement of morals generally both public and
private as the fulfilment of such a rule as the following. I say
that man individually and collectively should never let slip any
opportunity of pronouncing in the most emphatic manner possible, the
broad distinction between good and evil, virtue and vice; so far as
he has attained to it. Love your enemies ? Not at all. Hate
them not, however evil they may be. Bor if they are evil, they
did not make themselves. But mark your dis-approval of evil conduct
wherever you may find it. I say not, “judge not, lest ye be judged,”
but, judge, inviting judgment; as we do here. Resist evil; ay!
and to the death!
But according to Jesus, you should make no distinction
whatever between your friends and your enemies, the just and the
unjust. You are not to judge, but to love and bless, your enemies;
do good to, and pray for, them! (Mat. v, 44-5) And what else in
the name of common sense are you to do to your friends? You
are thus told by Jesus, to ignore the distinction between, and
suppress your own judgment of, good and evil, virtue and vice;
Why f “ That ye may he the children of your father which is in
Heaven, for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good;


and sendeth rain on the just, and on the unjust,” without any
distinction whatever !! ! Is not this either rank blasphemy; or else,
a complete refutation of the idea of God? And this is not the only
place where God is said to he no respecter of persons.
But though it is hard to find any doctrine originally taught
by Jesus, there is one, which he has particularly appropriated;
namely, the Forgiveness of Sins; and this I propose to shew, is
both false and pernicious. And it is directly obnoxious to the rule
I have laid down. For it places the good and bad upon a level,
and is therefore execrably immoral. If we look round on nature
or on human society, we find that evil, or error, —ay! unconscious
error too, —is never forgiven. The evil consequences of evil acts
are as inevitable as recurring day and night; and must be so until
the acts themselves can be undone. And mark! it is solely because
this is so-—because we find that fire always burns, that we keep
■our fingers out of it. And it is only because such ignorant notions,
produced by such false teaching, prevail on the subject of morality,
that we are less certain of the effects of vice, than of those of fire.
The obvious result has been that men believe (as they have been
taught) that they may touch pitch and not be defiled ! They have
been led to think that they may safely err, because repentance and
forgiveness avert the natural consequences of error. The vile sale
of indulgences was but the natural and proper fruit of such confusion
of the principles of virtue and vice ; and men for 1800 years have
literally—upon this false promise of the Forgiveness of Sins, — sold
themselves to work iniquity before the Lord ! I !
If men were similarly taught that fire does not burn, they
would soon learn the truth by experience of the directly obvious
effects. But though more complex and therefore obscure, the effects
of vice and crime are not less certain ; and therefore, though they
have been taught this falsehood for 18 centuries, most men have
been acute enough to see their interest in being really moral, and
dispensing with that forgiveness of sins, which puts others, bound
hand and foot, into the power of the priest. But even yet many
cannot discern it. They think a man may lie or steal with impunity,
if only not found out. Not so. retribution is always of the
most appropriate kind. Those who so mis-use their judgment destroy
it. Falsehood invariably causes the destruction more or less of the
capacity to distinguish between good and evil, wise and foolish ; and
we frequently see this remarkably proved by the silly manner in
which, after a career of deception, men of good original abilities, at
ast commit themselves and come to grief. But if they do not do


this evidently to their fellows, the personal deterioration and
degradation is all the greater, and all the more inevitable, because it
is unconscious in operation and in effect, and demands intellectual
foresight to avoid. I suspect that a much more direct connection
than could possibly be perceived at once, will yet be traced between
lunacy and falsehood.* That natural retribution in complex cases,
though absolutely certain, is difficult to discern at first, is no disproof.
That is quite in accordance with the method of nature in the
development of intellect. To apprehend this truth demands the
complete exercise of the logical faculty, involving a bold deduction,
and extended verification by inductions of great complexity. But the
establishment of this as a fundamental moral truth, is worthy of the
perfection of intellectual effort. Discoveries of greatest value have
always been most difficult of achievement. But though as yet
intellectually so hard to discern, this is instinctively, and generally
admitted and affirmed in all such popular axioms as, “ Honesty is the
best policy! ” Honesty IS the best policy. This is truer than all
the Gospels. If it were not, morality would be a wild chimera,
instead of a growing fact.
I must however turn, before I conclude, to Jesus’s summary
of the whole law.—“ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the
first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it.
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” (Mat. xxii, 37-9.) This
is as obnoxious to my canon as the rest. Love your neighbours,
good, bad, and indifferent, all alike ! And if their virtues and vices
are not really theirs, but the capricious gift of God, I don’t see
why you shouldn’t. But if the qualities which distinguish them, are
their essential characteristics in accordance with which they cannot
hut act; 1 say, mark as plainly as possible upon every occasion,
your judgment of their good or evil conduct, and so far do your
part to educate posterity. Judge, and be judged. In complex and
obscure cases, investigate, compare, discuss, and judge to the stretch
of your capacity, every phase of human conduct; approve the good,
and condemn the bad. On philosophical,—though not on religious,—
principles, you may do this, and love the lovely to your heart’s
content: and without hating even your evil neighbour. You may
hate his evil conduct, and if you like, the evil circumstances which
* See corroborative remarks in Maudsley’s Physiology and Pathology of the
Mind, pp. 210-1.


produce it. But he, like yourself, is as good as Ms constitution and
circumstances admit; and if he be so mischievous as to produce
much evil or even insecurity to society, (which has preferent claims
upon you exactly in proportion to its greater numbers) hesitate not,
in your position as a member of society, to judge him, to stay him,
to exterminate him, if necessary. But not in the spirit of religion.
Judgment should be without love, and without hate, but not
without discernment —blind. After judgment, love the worthy;
but not the unworthy, who should be indifferent to you.
But let worth and worth alone, determine your judgment and
your love. One great blot upon the Decalogue is the fifth command,
to honor your parents irrespective of desert, and for no reason but
the personal relation to yourself! nothing could be more vilely
immoral or subversive of the radical distinction between right and
wrong, virtue and vice. Do not then love your neighbours—or parents—
indiscriminately. Honor what is honorable. Love what is lovely ; but
condemn what is evil, and abhor what is vile, as you would hate and
shun your own destruction.
But love God first, says Jesus. Is God the better for your
love ? No ! Is man ? Yes, largely. Then, I say, love man, that
is, the worthy man, first. Cannot God take care of himself ? If
not, how can he take care of you ? Morality is- —the manners of
men towards each other. To love any other being (except woman)
more, must therefore be immoral and evil. It is this putting God
first, that is the evil essence of religion. Hark to the man after
God’s own heart—David, (see Psalm cxxxix, 21, 2) “Do not I hate
them, O Lord, that hate thee ? And am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee ? Yea, I hate them with perfect hatred.
I count them mine enemies.” What a diabolical utterance! Thus
it is that the love of God, is, and always has been, the perfect
hatred of humanity! When a man’s imaginative egotism is once
projected and exalted into the idea of a God and leads him to fancy
that he can possibly owe a higher duty, than to his neighbour and
himself, there is no length to which his pious enthusiasm will not
carry him, to effect any purpose which he may be so unfortunate
as to be persuaded is the will of his God! Let history tell how he
has endeavored to emulate his fictitious divine fiend, in inventing
horrid tortures for his unfortunate neighbour, whom he has deliberately
sacrificed with holy joy, for a sweet smelling savour in the nostrils
of the demon Jehovah! Could anything be more immoral? Yet
Jesus taught all this in effect, when he said love God first . Yet we
can freely forgive him, for he knew not what he did!


To conclude, what did Jesus teach that had not been taught
before ? nothing ! The golden rule, which he spoilt, was better
taught by Confucius and Zoroaster, and probably “by thousands before
them. So was the forgiveness of injuries as well as of sins. Even
the precepts—to resist not evil, and to love enemies, did not originate
with him, though he may have given more prominence to them, or
exaggerated them more, than his predecessors. Why then, if he
taught nothing new that was good, or good that was new, is he
preferred to them, and falsely invested with particular credit, for
repeating what others had said? Simply because his painful though
impossible story, his unmerited wrongs, and miserable fate, have
invested his memory with a melting pathos, which appeals directly
and powerfully to human sympathy ; which while it captivates the
affections, deceives the judgment, Men are moved, aye, and to tears,
far more readily by reading fiction than by witnessing fact. This is
why men are utterly blinded to the otherwise obvious and vital
defects of Jesus’s teaching, and actually adore him, for what they
would contemn another. And until men and women better appreciate
and utilise their precious faculty of reason, and recognise their duty
and interest in exercising it unreservedly upon every subject that
comes before them, to distinguish and emphasize the distinction
between good and evil, right and wrong, their very virtues will
always be liable to run them headlong into vice, and their good will
he evil. And again I say unto you,— Judge ! not according to
the appearance, but judge righteous judgment!
HOKOR.
1508
H. THOMAS, PRINTER, 75 LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
