

WHAT IS FIJI,
SOVEREIGNTY OF WHICH IS OFFERED TO HER
MAJESTY P
BT WILLIAM AHTHUB, A.M.,
MEMBER OS THIS ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, FELLOW Ql» TUB ETHNOLOGICAL
SOCIETY, ETC.
LONDON:
HAMILTON, 'ADAMS,: AND CO., PATERNOSTER ROW,
1859,
Price Twopence,


WHAT IS TUI ?
The Fiji (or Feojoc) Islands arc a group lum-
bering 211, of which 80 arc inhabited. The largest
is about 860 miles in circmnt’crouco, and the next
about 800. They spread over about 4,0,000 square
miles of the Pacific Ocean, directly on the track
between Australia and Panama and British Colum-
bia. Almost every island has a harbour; many
of these are capacious enough for a whole navy.
Nearly every harbour '.has a river. One of these
has been traced for 91 miles by a party from Her
Majesty’s ship “Herald.” Several are navigable.
Pijl is 1,500 miles from Sydney, and about 1,000
from New Zealand.
The group is the key and centre of all Polynesia,
Between it and our Colonies lies the largo Trench
island of New Caledonia, on the same side the
New Hebrides, and on the other side, to its north
and east, stretch the Navigators’, PTicmdly, and
Society Isles. Its superiority over the other
groups in size and population ’is conspicutms. lit
is equal to the Friendly Isles, the Horvey Isles,
the Navigators 5 , Marquesas, and the Society Is-
lands, including Tahiti, all put together, with a largo
balance of both territory' and population,* . The
area of tho two largo Islands is computed at about
equal to that of Belgium, 11,000 square miles: and
of the whole group about equal to that of Holland,
above 13,000.
The climate is not unlike that of Ceylon; the mean
temperature being 80°. '.Fevers are little known.
They lie in lot. 15° to 20° 8„ long, 177® E. and 178°
W. «So beautiful was their aspect,” says Oom-
* See a valuable work recently published, “ Fiji and the, Fijians,
vol, I, The Islands and their Inhabitants. By Thomas Williams,”
p. 9.


modore Wilkes, “that I could scarcely "bring my
mind to the realizing sense of the well-known fact,
that they were the abode of a savage, ferocious,
and treacherous race of cannibals.”*
The soil is a dark red or yellowish loam, often
containing much vegetable matter, deep, and
extremely rich. It is agreed by all visitors and
Missionaries, that more productive land does not
exist. The islands are mountainous, with a few
tracts gravelly and barren ; hut it is affirmed
that two-thirds of their entire surface is available
for cultivation.
The productions of the Islands are various and
rich. The accounts of a native feast show how
prolific nature must be. Besides a profusion of
the finest vegetables and fruits, the plains sponta-
neously yield coffee, nutmegs, turmeric, ginger,
sugar-cane, and indigo. The cotton, even as
grown wild, when submitted to Mr. Bazley, and
other Manchester authorities, is pronounced as
well adapted to our manufacturing purposes as any
that is known. Dr. Macdonald, of Her Majesty’s
ship “Herald,” has made a list of seventy-four
kinds of trees; many of which are very valuable,
and this enumeration is incomplete, f He says of
one river, “ Timber to almost any amount might
he felled and rafted down the river by native
labour at a trifling cost.” The New Zealand pine
exists in forests. A beautiful wood, said not to he
inferior to rosewood or mahogany, is called, “ dilo.”
Some trees of this kind would make round tables
four feet in diameter in one cut.
The only mineral products of value which we
remember to have seen mentioned are, antimony,
of which specimens have come to England, and a
fine potters’ clay, the possession of which enables
the Eijians to manufacture those articles of
* “United States’ Exploring Expedition,” vol. ill, p.
f See a Paper published by the lloyal Geographical Society, read
June 32ud, 1857.
A 2


crockery in respect of which they are believed
to be in advance of all known savages.
The population numbers 200,000, or about
double wbat that of New Zealand was. They are
a mixed race between the Papuan, or New Guinea
Negro, and the Malay race which peoples the more
eastern islands. They have amazing physical
strength, broad chests, great limbs, and an average
height of five feet ten, often above six feet. They
are born sailors; living in and upon the water;
and therefore, like the New Zealanders, offering to
our colonial ship owners fine material for manning
their vessels. Tliey huild the best canoes in all
the Pacific. Their houses, also, are built with
considerable skill. They not only manufacture the
ordinary hark cloth of the South Seas, hut pnni it.
Their carving, as displayed in spears and clubs, is
very onrious. Their sinnet work is ingenious. In
wigs they are the greatest of all nations. Por
interesting details of their habits and arts we must
refer to the work on “ Piji and the Pijians.”
One traveller has said that they were the only
savages he had ever met with who could sustain a
lengthened conversation, or give reasons. Ail
authors describe them as acute and witty; cheerful
at work, and polite, even punctilious, in inter-
course. They have a poetry and proverbs which
indicate considerable talent, They are willing to
labour when they can count upon reaping the
fruits of their labour, which they rarely can under
their Chiefs. They are also said to he tractable when
kindly managed by those who know their pecu-
lJfo known race had sunk to such a depth of bar-
barism as the Pijians. The canmbalisin of Now
Zealand was mild compared with the incredible
forma which that practice assumed among them.
Life was of no account. War was almost con-
tinual. Yet this ferocity was not hacked by
courage. Nothing can he more cowardly than tne
ordinary proceedings of Pijian warriors; and


■tlieir subjection, and servility to theiv Chiefs is
almost incredible.
Within the last twenty years a wonderful change
has been effected in these Islands. The labours of
the Wesleyan Missionaries have been successful in
turning multitudes of the people from their old ways.
Certainly fifty or sixty thousand, probably many
more, have become Christians. It is said that, in
addition to these, a number equally large have
renounced heathenism, without, as yet, becoming
decided Christians. Cannibalism has totally dis-
appeared from large Districts ; and is rapidly dis-
appearing from others. New wants, habits, and
institutions have been introduced. The Scriptures
have been translated, books printed on the spot,
and Schools established. Schoolmasters trained in
the Normal Institutions of this country have
trained Native Teachers, and these are spread far
and wide through the Islands. In these Schools
at-least 20,000 Pupils are taught. Large numbers
of Adults have also learned to read. Thakomban,
tbo leading Chief, King of the powerful State of
Pan, long held out against the progress of Chris-
tianity, hut a few years ago renounced his savage
practices, and became an avowed convert.* ■
The conduct of Drench and American naval
Officers of late years has convinced Thakomban
that lie and Ms valuable islands cannot remain
independent. Peeling that he must Ml to one o
the three naval powers, he turns to England; arm
asks our Queen not to extend to Mm a Protectorate,
but to take the Sovereignty. An Americaii Com-
maxider has fastened upon Mm a fine of £9,000, to
be paid in a year; and this he naturally regarc
preparatory to further steps. Prance has taken
New Caledonia lying between, him and Australia,
and he is likely to come next. ,
It is natural that he should turn to. England.
* lor a description of tins potentate, in Na jeathen state see
Captainßvskine’s “Journal of a Crime among the Islands of
.Western Pacific.” : -


She is the great power of the South Seas; the
mistress of Australia ami New Zealand. Her
possessions hare been peaceably acquired, the
former by colonizing, the latter by cession from
the Natives. Her Missionaries brought to him
and his people the Christian light which has made
such a wonderful change in the Islands. France
is known through her doings at Tahiti, and
menaces elsewhere ; America through her whalers,
and ships of war.
Mr. Pritchard, Her Majesty’s Consul in Fiji,
has come home with the proffered Treaty of
Thakombau, conveying the Sovereignty to the
Queen. To the crown, or any party who will pay
the £9,000 claimed by America, he offers as a
direct equivalent 200,000 acres of land. It is well
known that the Governor General of New South
"Wales, the Naval Commandant at Sydney, and the
head of the surveying service, all unite to recom-
mend that the offer be accepted. Nor is it any
secret that the occupation of the Islands had been
previously recommended by Captain Fremantle,
Captain Denham, of H.M.S. “Herald,” Captain
Erskine, of H.M.S. “ Havannah,” and other officers
who had visited them. The Colonists are exceed-
ingly desirous that it should take place.
The reasons which weigh with these different
parties are twofold, Commercial and National.
As a whaling rendezvous, Fiji is of great im-
portance to Sydney. If the Islands were under
England, the trade created by the whalers would
centre in that port; if under America, it would he
lost to it. The imports and exports of Fiji
would follow the same course. The former already
amount to £20,000, and the latter to £82,000 a
year m American vessels alone , as shown "by the
American Consul. Those in British ships are at
least equal; and Hamburgh vessels do a consider-
able trade. The exports are cocoa-nut oil,
tortoise-shell, and Mcbe-de-mer. Commodore
Wilkes mentions an American, Captain Eggleston,


whose cargo of bMie-de-mer. cost 1,200 dollars
and "brought 12,000 dollars, and another coat 3,500
dollars and brought 27,000 dollars. Tortoise-shell,
which cost Mm 5,700 dollars, brought 29,050
dollars. The cocoa-uut oil sent to America was
last year about 700 tuns; and all these rich
productions may be indefinitely increased. Then
the field for cotton being so extensive, and the
labour to produce it so ready, the Colonists foresee
immense commercial advantages in the possession
of this rich group. To us this latter advantage is
not less important than to our friends in Australia.
The political considerations in favour of accept-
ing the Islands are strong. Could their continued
independence he secured, these would lose much of
their weight, if not all. But it cannot. They are
too rich, too beautiful, too well seated for counter-
balancing British ascendancy in the South Seas in
time of peace, and for harassing British shores and
ships in war, to be left to poor Thakomhau. If we
do not take them, either Trance or America will.
If America do, our route to Panama is in her
hands; and also that between Australasia and British
Columbia. Our Australian coasts and commerce
could he harassed by a few ships, which would elude
even great fleets in the innumerable harbours of
Piji. The expense of defending our own posses-
sions would be enormous.
If Prance take it, with New Caledonia on the one
side and Tahiti on the other, she will have a line
of posts right across our track. She will have a
pretext for keeping up in peace a greater fleet
than that which already disquiets our Colonists, by
its disproportion to our own; and, though a small
power in the South Seas, will, in war, he in a con-
dition to drive us from the high road, to harass our
grand possessions, and to compel us to maintain a
vast force, or submit to humiliation.
Place the Islands under England, and the Trench
line from New Caledonia to Tahiti is broken, and the
highway of the Pacific in our hands. The coasts


of our great Colonies are comparatively protected,
and future anxieties much _ diminished. The trade
of the whole of Polynesia is secured to onr COJ.O-
- Id the loyalty of the latter increased by
seeing proof that the Home Government is alive to
their interests,
Besides the considerations which Statesmen are
likely to entertain, there are others less profes-
sional, hut not less weighty with the multi-
tudes in this country who have taken a lively
interest in the Regeneration of Eiji They have
seen one of the fairest and most wonderful trans-
formations in the history of Christianity wrought
on a barbarous people. They could not see it
marred without pain and hitter regrefi lx Ireiicn
cannon make Eiji into another Tahiti, millions
of hearts in Britain will feel sore. The work
which our Missionaries have been the instruments
of doing is better known to the people than to their
rulers. Eiji has received from England the
greatest blessing of all, the Gospel. It asks that
which ranks next, peace and good government.
The Ring wishes it, because he would rather
have England over him than Eranoe, _ which is
odious in all'Polynesia; or America, whence his
Missionaries did not come. The people wish it,
that they may be protected in reaping the reward
of their labour, instead of being at the mercy of
Chiefs. The Missionaries wish it, that their intent
Churches and promising Schools be not blasted by
war and temptation as in Tahiti. The Colonists,
that their trade may gain, their coasts be sale,
and their mail route open. The manufacturers
of this country, that a hopeful cotton field may be
secured: and the friends of Christian Missions, that
one of the most energetic Tribes ever recovered
from degrading barbarism may have a fair oppor-
tunity of advancing in peace through successive
stages of Christian civilization.
LONDON; PRINTED BY ’WILLIAM NICHOLS* 3S ; LONDON WALL.
