













THREE TIMES AROUND THE WORLD,
OR
LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OF
ALONZO D. SAMPSON.
BUFFALO:
EXPRESS PRINTING COMPANY, NO. 4 EAST SWAN STREET.
1867.




LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OR
ALONZO D. SAMPSON
I was born, October Btb, 1831, in the town of Ashford, Catta-
raugus Co., N. Y. A desire for travel and adventure w r as a
leading trait of my character from a child, and boohs descrip-
tive of foreign countries, and accounts of voyages by sea pos-
sessed a wonderful interest for me, and were sought and read
with the greatest avidity.
The first opportunity I had of penetrating the enchanted regi-
ons of which my reading had given me some faint idea, was af-
forded by our war with Mexico. At the breaking out of hostili-
ties in April, 1846,1 was not fifteen years old ; but in August,
1848, I was accepted as a volunteer, although not quite seven-
teen. I enlisted at Buffalo, in Company M, 2d Regiment Light
Artillery. We were sent from Buffalo to Fort Hamilton, on
Long Island, where we lay two months learning our drill, and
then were ordered to the seat of war. We embarked at New
York on board the ship Canton and sailed for Yera Cruz, which
we reached after a pleasant passage of sixteen days, I was de


lighted with this my first experience of sea-going, and decided
in my own mind that ray vocation was to “ a life on the ocean
wave.”
We landed in surf boats, about three miles from Yera Cruz,
where we lay encamped a month, our regiment being included
in the command of Gen. Win, O. Butler. We had not received
our horses yet when we were ordered to the city of Mexico, and
commenced the march on foot through sand over our shoes at
every step, and hot with such sunshine as burns down on no
other part of the world I have seen except the Tierras Galientes ,
or hot lands of Mexico. The men began the march with full
knapsacks, but we had not gone many miles before every des-
cription of garment worn by Uncle Sam’s boys could be had
along our route for the picking up. Such a fall in dry goods
had perhaps never been witnessed in that vicinity. Long ere
night the burden of each man was reduced to an overcoat and
one blanket.
Our first night’s encampment on the march was near the fa-
mous National Bridge, a fine and costly structure, erected in the
davs of Spanish dominion. From the National Bridge to the
Capital we had a good road, macadamized nearly all of the way,
and we averaged about twenty miles a day. We had several
skirmishes with the guerillas, the principal of which occurred at
Huamantla and Eio Frio ; and even these would not be con-
sidered worth mentioning by the generation which has made
and read the history of the great rebellion ; but they were a good
deal talked of and written about in their day.
The vegetation along the route, for the first few days, was
strange to me; too strange, indeed, to be very interesting.
Had I known the names and natural history of the various trees,
shrubs, vines, flowers and curious plants that I saw, 1 should
have observed them more carefully. As it was, they w r ere beau-
tiful and strange, and that was all. As wo ascended to what
are called the tierras smvpladers , or temperate lands, I saw
plenty to remind me of home. There were pine and chestnut
trees in the woods and wheat and barley in the fields. In the
hot country three crops of corn are sometimes raised from the


same ground in one year, and the cotton plant flourishes as a
shrub, from year to year, without the trouble of re-planting.
Oranges and other tropical fruits were plentiful and were brought
to us for sale by the natives. They carried their loads in shal-
low boxes or in baskets on their heads, and sometimes when
change was scarce among the boys they managed to upset a box
or basket, and probably from having learned at home that it
was not very wrong to pick up fruit from the ground and eat it,
they relieved the owner in such cases from any further trouble
with it Complaints to the officers did no good, as the latter
wished to discourage the bringing of fruit to us for sale on ac-
count of our health.
We reached Mexico City on Christmas Eve, tired and dirty,
and with feet terribly sore. Our living upon the march had
been hard bread and hit pork, but upon arriving at the city there
was a decided change for the better, and while in the valley of
Mexico we lived well, though to a considerable extent at our own
individual expense. Rations of flour, fresh beef and goafs meat
were regularly issued. If we wanted any vegetables we had to
buy them ourselves, but in this there was no restriction, except
what was imposed by lack of cash. We were quartered in the
Citadel, so called, one-fourth of a mile from the city, on the road
to Chapultepec. Here we were very comfortable, or at least as
much so a? is possible in a country so infested with fleas, and we
remained eight months with nothing to do except to drill and
exercise our horses, an infantry force stationed with us having
all the guard and police duty to perform. Any sober man
could get a pass to visit the city every afternoon, and I became
in time as familiar witli its streets as I am or have been with
those of any city of my native land.
It was generally thought that some precautions were to be ob-
served in our intercourse with the natives, to guard against
treachery, hence a man seldom went far alone. But only a sin-
gle instance of the murder of our men by Mexicans came within
my immediate knowledge, and in that instance the two men
who were stabbed were known to have been drunk at the time,
and may have given serious provocation. I remember they


were found dead upon some stone steps in an alley near a large
snuff factory. From all accounts I should think a Union soldier
at the south was in far greater danger of being murdered, it
caught at a disadvantage, than our men were in Mexico.
My recollections of the city of the Montezumas are necessarily
somewhat vague, owing to the lapse of time since I saw it, and
the variety of exciting scenes that I have passed through in the
interval. But there are some things in that city and the region
around it which a man who has once seen them never can forget.
The valley of Mexico is oval in form and about two hundred
miles in circuit, and the view of it from any commanding posi-
tion in the city is grand and beautiful beyond description. There
is nothing to obstruct the sight, which extends unbroken to the
very base of the encircling mountains and wanders nipt and
mazed among the peaks that compose them, to rest finally with
profound awe and wonder upon the hoary head of Popocatepetl,
crowned with its dark wreaths of rolling vapor. The fresh,
clear waters of the lake of Chaleo are seen gleaming in the dis-
tance, while the salt waves of that of Tezenco wash the city
walls.
In the city itself the most notable object is the great cathedral,
which I suppose is the most magnificent structure in America.
It is five hundred feet in length by four hundred and twenty in
breadth, and was nearly a hundred years in building. Within
the inclosure of the cathedral is a stone which is known as the
“stone of sacrifice.” It is nine or ten feet across, and is curi-
ously sculptured. If it is true, as is stated, that this stone, which
is of porphyry, was used by the ancient Mexicans for the sacri-
fice of human victims, hundreds of thousands—immense armies
—of men have been butchered upon it, in time.
A striking peculiarity of the city is that the squares and not
the streets are named, so that instead of directing you to a cer-
tain street for the place you are in search of, a Mexican will di-
rect you to a square by its name.
The great square with its marble pavement and beautiful
fountains, is a thing to be remembered, but I could not describe
it, even if it were proper to do so here. And, in short, a book


longer than 1 propose to publish might he written, by a qualified
person, upon the spot, descriptive of what I saw in Mexico ; and
it would be a very interesting book too, if justice wire done.
Among the admirable things we saw, however, the Senoritas
must not be forgotten. They looked very piquant and fascinat-
ing in their peculiar costume, and as a general thing showed
their good taste by admiring ns “ North Americans ” in turn.
How they would stand the test of comparison side by side with
our northern women, is doubtful. But they are certainly very
pretty in their way. What with attentions to these and a con-
siderable indulgence in aquardiente and pulque, the boys man-
aired somehow to pass their time. Aquardiente is a kind of
rum, and pulque the fermented juice of the Mexican aloe o l '
maquey plant. It is of the color of the whey pressed from
cheese, and about as strong as lager beer, but far more palatable
I think. Tiie plant from which it is obtained consists of a large
cluster of lienee shaped leaves two or three feet long, set round
with spines or thorns which makes the plant good material for
fences. From the midst of the leaves a round stalk shoots up,
which is sometimes a foot or more through. This stalk is tapped
for the pulque.
But in spite of the novelties of the country, the beauty ot the
senoritas, and the excellence of the drinks, we were pining with
inaction, and longing to return to “America,” as the boys had it.
We had visited again and again all the notable objects in the
city and vicinity, including the battle fields of Ohurubusco, Con-
treras and Chapultepec, and were growing more and more weary
and homesick, when one night at midnight we received marching
orders. In an hour we were in our saddles. We rode until
daylight and then halted. We were now informed that peace
had been concluded and that we were on our homeward march.
We were a glad and happy crowd. There were plenty of men
among us who had no home, strictly speaking, and I was one of
them ; yet such seemed to rejoice as heartily as others at the
prospect of a return to their native land. The proverb runs
that “homo is home, be it ever so homely,” but I have learned
that the charm is still strong when it is no home at all, except in


the associations of childhood and the natural yearnings of the
heart.
It was in the “rainy season” that we marched back to Yera
Cruz, but the journey was comparatively pleasant. The road
winds in one place round the very base of the Cofre of Perote,
once a volcano, and the earth there is covered everywhere as far
as one can see with huge masses of lava.
We sailed from Yera Cruz for Hew Orleans in the steamer
Maria Burt and went into camp for two weeks at the race course
some three miles above-the latter city. We expected to be paid
off there but were disappointed. Embarking again in the ship
Mary Wilder we made a passage of twenty days to Hew York
where we went into quarters on Governor’s Island July Ist. We
had not experienced any active service at all, but during the
week that we lay there we had many visitors from the city who
seemed to regard us as veterans. And indeed, if rags and dirt
could go any way to establish our claim to the title, it was ours
past dispute. Ho clothing had been issued to us since our first
departure from Vera Cruz, and taking our life in quarters, in
camp, on the march, and on shipboard, for nearly a year into the
account, the reader can form a pretty good guess at our condi-
tion.
Our joy at being paid off was unbounded, but the case of a
few of our number, who being intoxicated at the time of their
enlistment, had entered the service for five years instead of dur-
ing the war, and were now told that they would not be dis.
charged, was a very hard one, we all thought.
I had fifty dollars in cash and a land warrant for one hundred
and sixty acres as the result of my year’s service. This, consid-
ering ray age and the wages then usually paid a laboring man,
was very good remuneration indeed, especially as my health had
been good all the time, and my constitution was uninjured by
exposure to a tropical climate. My pay had been ten dollars a
month and clothing and rations, but with a soldier a great deal
generally goes for tobacco and other luxuries and extras.
I now returned to my native town, where I remained until
about the first of the following February. The discovery of the


California Gold Mines had been made the previous summer, and
the country was alive with the excitement it occasioned. I felt
that I must go to the new Ophir, so I sold my land warrant for
one hundred dollars, and, in company with a young man named
Holman, went to New York, with a view to taking passage
round Cape Horn. But we soon found that our funds were not
equal to the undertaking, and so, as an alternative, we concluded
to go to sea, at least for a while. Wo thought seriously of en-
listing on board a man-of-war, but being earnestly advised not
to do so, we turned our attention towards the fisheries, particu-
larly whaling.
We took steamer to New London, but found that we were
quite too early in the season to get berths on a whaler. We
staid there three weeks, being, as is too often the case with men
of a roving disposition, in no hurry while our money lasted.
Then we visited Stonington, Providence and New Bedford, one
after the other, with no better success. It was still too early.
We next went to Boston. There we took regular board and
endeavored to amuse ourselves- Besides the theatres, we visited
all the places of note, including the Bunker Hill Monument and
Navy Yard. Men were being engaged in Boston for a whaling
vessel at Beverly, which was bound on what is called a “ plum
pudding cruise ; ” that is, a cruise for sperm whale in the At-
lantic. We concluded to ship in her, and having signed papers
to that effect, were sent to Beverly by the cars. I engaged for
the one hundred and fiftieth part of the net proceeds of the
cruise. We were imposed upon and made to assist in getting
the ship ready, stowing cargo, wood, water, &c., with which we
properly had nothing to do.
We were within two or three days of sailing when there came
on one night a violent rain storm, and the water poured in cata-
racts through the seams in the deck, wetting us completely in
our berths. The thought of suffering this kind of thing for
eighteen months together, that being the length of the intended
cruise, was anything but agreeable to me, and I told my part-
ner, Holman, that I would have a better vessel than that or none.
He, however, determined to stick by the vessel, and I left with-
out him.


I now concluded to try cod fishing, and with that view went
to Gloucester, with two other men from the same vessel. I got
a berth, say about April 25th, on a small schooner of fifty tons
burthen; wages twelve dollars per month. Wo sailed tor
George’s Banks to fish for cod and halibut. Our schooner car-
ried eight men, all told. She had also* on board a quantity of
ice in which to pack the fish which were intended to be carried
fresh to Boston. The bait used is pickled clams.
Arrived at the Banks we all fell to getting the fishing tackle
ready for service. When at work the men were stationed four
on each side of the vessel, with two lines to a man and two
hooks to each line. The sinker is of lead and weighs about six
pounds.
The man who catches the first fish of any one cruise is called
the best man for that cruise, and there is some excitement about
the matter generally. The captain stands aft and his is called
the “first line,” and in our case the first lino was the lucky one.
The captain caught the first fish—a halibut weighing one hun-
dred pounds. It was hauled to the top of the water by the line
and then lifted on board with gall's, which are poles with hooks
in the ends.
In spite of this promising beginning, the voyage, as a whole,
was a failure. We caught very few fish and were tossed about
a good share of the time in a gale. We lay too, five days under-
shortened sail. The storm was a heavy one, from the north-east,
accompanied by snow. I was now sea-sick for the first time in
my life. Riding out such a storm as that, in a vessel of only
fifty tons burthen is not to be recommended as a pleasant way
of passing the time. I was disgusted with cod fishing. Even
the favorite dish of the fishermen could not reconcile me to its
hardships. This dish is a chowder made by boiling up the
head, bones, “sounds,” heart, liver, &c., of the cod, with pota-
toes and onions. It is a very palatable soup indeed, but I never
could quite see the necessary connection between it and ginger-
bread, which my Yankee shipmates considered the indispensible
accompaniment of every meal.
We only took out a supply of provisions for a month, at the


end of which time we returned to port and I took my discharge.
After making some necessary purchases I had barely money left
to take me to Boston, whither I now repaired. I went at once
to a shipping ofiice, signed papers, and was sent down, the same
night, in company with eight others, to New Bedford. There
was a whaling bark, the Willis, fitting out for sea at Mattapoisett,
eight miles above New Bedford, and to that vessel we were ulti-
mately sent. This time we went to a boarding house to wait the
getting ready of our vessel, and in the meantime bought our
outfit. This consists of a small seaman’s chest, a “ sou-wester ”
or tarpaulin hat, monkey jacket, two shirts, two pairs pants, a pair-
shoes, fifty pounds of tobacco, sheath knife and belt, tin pan,
quart pot and iron spoon to each man. These articles are fur-
nished by the owners of the ship, and the men are each charged
one hundred dollars for them. Our destination was the coast of
Africa, and my “ lay” or share of the profits was the one hun-
dred and fortieth. The bark Willis was of three hundred tons
burthen, carried thirty men, all told, and was commanded by
Capt. Joseph Tabor. She sailed on the eighth of May, 1849.
She left her wharf early in the morning with the owners on
board and dropped down to New Bedford, where, after wishing
us the best of luck, the owners landed. About the middle of
the afternoon we cleared the capes of Buzzards Bay and stood
out to sea. Then Captain Tabor called all hands aft and made
them a short speech ; he told them that if they would be quiet
and orderly, and attentive to their duty, he would do everything
in his power to make them comfortable, but otherwise they
would find him a hard master. He then divided the crew into
two watches, s>nd the officers selected the boat steerers and the
crews of the several boats. Of these last we had only three,
though it is usual for a large whaler, on a long voyage, to cany
from four to seven. Our thirty men comprised nineteen Ameri-
cans, two Englishmen, three Irishmen and six Portuguese. Only
five men of them all were sailors, and these had at first to do all
the duty of the ship that required skill. Four men besides the
officers and boat steerer constituted a boat’s crew. One’boat was
nominally the captain’s, but this was generally in charge of the
third mate.


These preliminaries gone through with, we were set to work
stowing and lashing everything safely, preparatory to the rough
weather so frequently experienced in the Gulf stream. The pre-
caution was not taken too soon, for that very night we were over-
taken by a violent gale. The lightning, thunder and rain, were
tremendous. The captain, who had the first watch, had ordered
all the lighter sails taken in, so that the ship was in a groat
measure prepared for the storm when it broke; but in the hurly
burly of its first onset came the order u all hands take in sail.”
/ The mate came down into the forecastle and turned the men
out half naked upon the deck. He was a lucky fellow who had
secured both his pants and tarpaulin. When we had reached
the open air we heard the command “clew down foredop-sail.”
This, to most of us, might as well have been said in Greek.
However, we were pushed, hauled and hustled to our several
posts, and told to take hold of this, pull that and belay the other.
The green hands followed the sailors up into the rigging, but the
most they could do was to keep themselves there by holding on
with both hands. Hext the order came, “ clew down and reef
main-top-sail?” When we had done this and taken a couple
of reefs in it, we were allowed to go below.
We had been but a short time below, and were beginning to
be comfortable, when eight bells sounded the hour of midnight,
and we heard the call, “ larboard watch, ahoy! turn out here,”
and we hurried on deck again. The storm had passed entirely,
and the weather was clear and beautiful, though there was still
a brisk wind blowing. When the first watch had left the deck,
the mate called his men aft and ordered the able seamen to teach
us the names of the ropes, while one man was sent to the com-
pass to take a lesson upon it from the man at the wheel. We
wore given one week in which to learn our business as sailors,
so that we could in the darkest night and wildest storm make
our way to any part of the rigging and there execute any order
that might be issued. The man who did not accomplish so much
of his education in seven days, thenceforth had no “ watch be-
low,” that is, no sleep, until he reached the required standard.
I had had an experience on board the fishing schooner that now


stood me in good stead, but many of tiie men overwent tlie pre-
scribed time, and lost sleep in proportion ; some of them even
took two weeks, though of course these slept more or less on
deck.
A few words here in explanation of the nautical method of
computing the hours, which in print often puzzles the lands-
man, Beginning, then, at one-half hour past noon, we have one
bell. At one o’clock, two bells ; at one one-half, three bells ; at
two, four bells ; at two one-half, five bells ; at three, six bells ; at
three one-half, seven bells, and at four, eight bells. At half-past
four we have one stroke again, and so on until eight o’clock,
when we have eight bells repeated. The reader will see by this
that the number of bells—or strokes of the bell—is no true indi-
cation of the time of day or night, since four bells, for instance,
occurs three times every twelve hours, namely, at two, at six and
at ten o’clock. The true time, however, is indicated by the num-
ber of bells and the number or name of the watch in which it is
struck. Thus, from eight o’clock A, M. till noon is the first
watch, and five bells of the first watch would be ten one-half
o’clock. From twelve to four is the second watch. From four
to eight is the day watch, or all hands on deck. Then comes
the first night watch, then the mid-watch, then the morning watch,
which include the twenty-four hours.
As soon as we had crossed the Gulf Stream, which in that
latitude is about one hundred and fifty miles wide, all hands
were set to work preparing the impliments for use. “Irons,'’
(harpoons,) lances and spades, were got up and sharpened ; kegs
filled with water and placed in the boats. The armament for
each whale boat is four harpoons, two lances, a spade, a boat
hatchet and a knife. These were put in their respective places,
as also the lantern keg which contains the lantern, the compass,
some hard bread, matches, Ac. The tub in which the harpoon
line is coiled is about as thick through as a three barrel cask,
and is two feet high. Each tub contains two thousand feet,
more or less, of the very best inch rope. The whale boat is of
peculiar construction, sharp at both ends and about twenty feet
long, and is steered with an oar eighteen feet long. It carries a


small sail, principally for the purpose of enabling the crew to
approach the whale silently when that is at all possible. The
line attached to the harpoon is drawn out through a deep groove
in the gunwale at the bow when the whale is struck, and while
he is diving it is generally necessary to pour water on this
groove to prevent the boat taking fire from the powerful friction.
When the boats were all completely rigged and everything ready
for service, and while we lay becalmed one day, we were ordered
to clear away and lower the boats for practice. A barrel was
carried to a distance from the bark and thrown into the sea, and
the three boats being manned commenced a series of mancevres
around it, in imitation of an attack upon a whale. The mate in
each boat sat in the stern and steered her. Five men, including
the harpooner, (technically called the boat-steerer,) rowed, and
as we approached within throwing distance of the barrel the of-
ficer cried to the boat-steerer “stand up!” The “ irons,” when
ready for instant use, are laid in “crotches” on the starboard
side of the boat, with their points resting upon the bow. At
the order “ stand up,” the harpooner rose, took his place forward,
and seized the iron to which the line was attached, preparatory
to a throw. When the officer thinks, in the case of the actual
whale, that the boat is as near as it can get without alarming
him, he calls out “ give it to him,” upon which the harpooner
lets fly at a vital part of the animal, and then grasps and throws
another iron a& cpiickly as possible. But in our practice
with the barrel the iron was thrown from various distances
to test the skill and power of the harpooner. The instant the
harpoon was thrown the officer would cry out “ stern,” and then
we would exert all our force to back the boat away from the sup-
posed danger, for a blow from the monster’s tail, in case of a
real attack, may bo fatal to an entire boat’s crew. After several
hours of this kind of sport we returned on board, hoisted up the
boats and enjoyed the rest we needed.
As we approached the whaling ground between the Gulf
Stream and the Azores, orders were issued to “stand mast
heads,” upon which a boat-steerer ascended the main-mast and
a forward hand the fore-mast to the top-gallant cross trees, and


the new duty of standing regular "watches of two hours each at
that dizzy elevation began every morning at sunrise and ended
at sunset.
The fact that the whale is not a fish is now so generally under-
stood that it may be thought needless to mention it here. It is
a warm blooded animal, and brings forth its young generally
not more than one at a time, which it suckles as the cow does
her calf. Whales resemble cattle, too, in the particular of herd-
ing together, which they nearly always do, except when they
have been separated by accident. Finally, they are distin-
guished among whalemen by the designation of bulls, cows and
calves.
The sperm whale, the particular kind of which we were in
search, is the most formidable specie that is hunted. The “right”
whale whose exclusive habitation is the cold expanse of water
that surrounds either pole, has no other means of offense or de-
fense than its tail, which, however, is sufficiently powerful to
crush a boat with a blow, as easily as a man can crush an egg ;
but in addition to this the sperm whale can stave in a ship’s side
with his snout, or crush a boat in his mouth with ease. From
this some idea may be formed of the danger that attends whaling.
The fare of a whaleman before the mast, in those waters,
consists of sea biscuit, salt beef and pork, beans and rice, with
coffee in the morning and tea at night, to which is added as
much molasses as ho wishes to use, and a pudding almost pecu-
liar to seamen, called duff, which is made by mixing dried ap-
ples into properly prepared batter, and then boiling in a bag
Tins pudding was served up to us three times a week.
We also had some potatoes when they could be got, principally
in our hash. Our bill of fare was with varied scouse, a dish so
called, prepared by soaking hard bread in water, and then bak-
ing with pork, &c. The fare in the cabin comprised “softtack”
(bread baked on board,) pics, puddings, and a duff cooked with
raisins instead of dried apples. The boat-steerers, being consid-
ered a sort of petty officers, ate in the cabin and slept in the steer-
age, a compartment fitted up for the purpose between the hold
and cabin.


Our employment while cruising in search of whale consisted
in picking oakum, mending old sails, repairing rigging, splicing
ropes, Ac. We were generally buisy while on watch, but pur-
sued our several occupations very leisurely.
We had been two months out, when one morning at sunrise
the mast-head watchman, on taking his stand sung out, in the
customary phrase, “There she blows! ”
“Where away,” the captain demanded.
“ Three points oft' the lee bow, live miles off,” was the reply.
“ All hands stand by the boats ! ”
Every man was now anxious and excited. The boats were
lowered away in a hurry and as speedily manned. There was a
light breeze blowing at the time, and we set sail and steered for
the game. When we were within one-fourth of a mile of the
whale he went down and remained out of sight for an hour and
ten minutes, being the longest stay under water that I ever wit-
nessed in a whale,
The captain, cooper, carpenter, steward, cook and cabin boy
on board a whaler are called ship keepers. Our bark lacked
some of these, but such as we had were on board and kept a look
out. At length the cooper from the mast head signaled us that
the whale had come to the surface three miles to windward.
We now furled sail and took our oars, pulling with a will. We
got within half a mile of him and ‘then took paddles, which
made less noise than oars, and paddled to within five or six
fathoms when the whale went down again. We could tell by
the wake the general direction the whale was going, and we re-
sumed our oars and pulled away in pursuit. Our three boats
spread out, say a quarter of a mile apart, so that one of them, if
possible, might bo near him when he rose ; but the game was
frightened—“ gallied,” whalemen call it—and we could not get
within striking distance of him. Once the mate’s boat was so
near that the boat-steerer took his iron and was about to launch
it, but the monster got under motion at that moment, and the
distance was so great that he did not throw.
We continued the fruitless chase until we were out of sight of
the ship, and the sun was going down. Finally we gave it up
2


and began to think of our return. We had the direction of the
vessel and a small compass, so that we were all right, unless it
should come on to storm. We had eaten nothing since we left
the ship, and of course thought ourselves pretty well exhausted,
but the sight of a “ school ” or herd of whales between us and the
ship gave us renewed strength.
In a short time we in the mate’s boat fastened to one whale
and the second mate to another. The latter had scarcely suc-
ceeded in this when a whale, that had been down, came up right
under his boat with such force as to break it nearly in two, and
one of the men was so scared that he jumped into the coil of
line, which is about the worst place a man can choose. Their
line was of course cut at once, and thenceforth they were only
a hindrance to us. Our whale kept us along in the school, which
carried us away from the sunken boat. The herd will not scatter
and desert a wounded companion so long as he is able to keep
up with their natural speed. By this time we had expended our
supply of irons and were following them up with lances. For
this operation the officer takes his place forward and uses the
weapon, while the so-called boat-steerer becomes such in reality
The third mate had fastened to a whale about the time the mis-
hap overtook the second mate, but his line getting “ foul,” —that
is, tangled—he was obliged to cut it, so that we got only one out
of that school.
When we had killed our whale, the third mate picked up the
crew of the second and took his disabled boat in tow, while we
cut a hole in the dead whale’s “ flukes ” —the tail is so called—
through which we passed a tow line, and after fastening his fins
back to his body to prevent too great a drag on the water, began
to pull for the bark.
The latter had been nearing us, and we could now see the sig-
nal light at her mast head. We raised our boat masts with our
lanterns at their heads in reply, and our united speed soon
brought us together. Then the captain hauled back the main
yard of his vessel and we towed our prize alongside and threw
the tow line on board.
The next thing was to haul up the boats, after which Captain


Tabor called the steward and ordered him to bring a bucket of
rum on deck, and we bad a drink round.
It was ten o’clock at nigbt when the fluke rope and bead rope
were got on deck, and as the weather was fair the former only
was made fast to the carcass, just forward ot the flukes. Then
we got up the two tackles for raising the blubber, and rove the
falls—heavy ropes —in the blocks. These tackles are made last
about twenty feet up the main-mast. The falls run thence to the
fore-mast, where they are rove through blocks, one on each side
of the mast, and thence again down to the windlass, to which
they are made fast with a turn. The spades for cutting the blub-
ber were produced. These are a size larger than those carried
in the boats. It is the carpenter’s business to keep these sharp
when in use. Two short stagings were slung over the ship’s
side the men to stand on while “ cutting in,” as this opera-
tion is styled.
Day was now breaking, and all this time we had eaten noth-
ing except as some of us may have managed to swallow a tew
mouthfuls of hard bread while discharging our duty. The cook
was ordered to bring us our coffee, a quart pot full to each man,
sweetened with molasses, and sea biscuit as much as we pleased.
Before breakfasting, however, the captain called us to “ splice
the main brace,” which is the sailor’s phrase for taking a drink
of spirits. Then we sat down on deck and satisfied our appe-
tites, each man endeavoring to be heard in illustration of the
prodigies he had himself either seen or performed. Breakfast
over, the order was “ all hands turn to at the windlass,” which
was obeyed by all the men before the mast. The cutting in is
done by the mates and petty officers. The captain then took
charge of the staging next to the whale’s head and the mate of
the other, and the head was cut off, or very near so, only enough
of the skin being left uncut to keep the head from going adrift
The blubber, which is a layer of fat, a foot or so thick, under the
skin, (scientifically, I believe, it is a part of the skin itself,) was
then pierced with a spade through to the flesh, and heavy iron
hooks, two feet long and three or four inches thick attached to
this end of the falls, inserted in the holes. It is the boat-steerer’s


business to step on the whale and insert the hooks, or “ hook
on,” as the term is. When this was done we were ordered to
heave on the windlass-, and as soon as strain enough was pro-
duced on the blubber to make it give away, that process began.
The strip thus started is called a “ blanket,” and it is about six
feet wide. We were working the windlass constantly to keep
the blanket “ taut,” the whale rolling as we proceeded with the
work. When the first end of the blubber got up to the tackles
on the mainmast, the other hook was inserted in a hole at the
end still attached to the carcass, and we continued to heave
away on the windlass as before, but now by the other fall, or
rope, and so on alternately, the blanket unwinding spirally
around the whale’s body until nothing but the lean and worth-
less portion was left.
As soon as the hook was entered anew near the whale’s body,
the part of the blanket above it was cut away and allowed to
swing over the main hatch, when it was lowered into the hold
and stowed away there.
The blubber being all secured, holes are cut in the back part
of the head and the hooks transferred to them, and then the car-
cass was cut away entirely and sent adrift as food for sharks and
vultures. We hove away on the windlass until the head was
raised well out of water, nose down, and a hole was cut into the
“sperm well,” which is situated in the head, and men went to
work bailing out the sperm oil, which was put into the try pots,
two kettles holding five barrels each, and set in arches on deck;
when these were full the remainder was put in casks ; but it has
all to be boiled before it is stowed away finally. The amount
taken from the head of this whale was about twenty-five barrels.
The reservoir, called the sphrm well, is so large in some
whales that from six to ten men enter it at a time with buckets
to bail out the oil. It is divided into several compartments,
each of which may contain two men and allow them room to
work. The raw sperm oil is about as thick as the starch that
the laundress has prepared for her clothes, and looks some like
it. When boiled the oil is not put hot into casks, but stands
awhile first in the coolers, from which it is drawn by fawcets di-
rectly into casks.


When the well was all bailed out the head was raised upon
deck and cut up into pieces ready for trying out. It consists
almost entirely of solid “junk” or fat, and this one was thirty
feet long. The under jaw was twenty-five feet long and was of
no use to us, except the teeth, forty-eight in number and six or
seven inches in length ; they are quite valuable, being an interior
kind of ivory. The whole carcass of this whale, which was a
bull, was little less than one hundred feet long, and the whole
yield of oil one hundred and twenty barrels. When the head
and blubber were stowed away, we made sail in search of more
game.
While trying blubber we were divided into what are called
“ try watches,” which are six hours on and six off duty. The
blubber is first cut in pieces six or eight inches wide and two
feet long, and thrown on deck, where it is run through a machine
called a mincing machine, which does not cut these strips en-
tirely through, but only nearly so, in order to give the oil a
chance to escape easily. Blubber is about as hard as fat pork,
but coarser and more stringy in its grain, and the oil, being
thinner than lard, is yielded much more readily. When it lies
on deck in warm weather it is necessary to keep bailing up the
oil to prevent waste.
The fires are kindled under the try pots first with wood, but
as soon as a couple of pots of blubber are tried out the scraps
or cracknels skimmed from the boiling oil are quite sufficient to
keep up the fires for the remainder of the process. When the
strips before described are completely “ tried,” the cracknel left
is not larger than a man’s hand. The oil is drained from the
coolers into casks holding six to eight barrels each, which are
then stowed in the hold.
My “lay ” or share in the products of this, our first prize, was
about fifty dollars, as oil and spermaceti were selling at that
time ; in other words, half enough to pay for my outfit.
We continued our cruise for five months without capturing
another whale. In September the ship encountered a very
heavy equinoctial gale, in the course of which we carried no
sail for a whole week, except close reefed raain-top-sail, fore-sail,


fore top-mast stay-sail and mizzon or spanker. Once, during the
continuance of the gale we lowered our boats and attacked a
whale ; we fastened to him, but the sea was so rough that the
irons bore out and we lost him. The waves rolled so high while
we were out in the pursuit that our bark could only be seen
when she and our boat were on the top of the swell, and once
while we were fast to the whale, and ho was in the trough, our
boat plunged down upon him so that we were for some seconds
exactly over his back. A plunge and a stroke of his tail at that
moment and my adventures would have been at an end.
When the gale was over we made sail for the Azores, or West-
ern Isles, and on the 18th of October, my eighteenth birthday,
we arrived at Flores. We were in want of fresh provisions,
fruits and recruiting generally, and these islands are a great re-
sort for these purposes, and there may nearly always be found
several whaling vessels there.
The Azores are a cluster, or rather, perhaps, three clusters of
volcanic islands, nine or ten in all, in the North Atlantic. They
produce sugar, coffee, and a variety of fruits, both of the torrid
and temperate zones, in great abundance and perfection. When
discovered they were without any inhabitants, and the Portu-
guese took possession of them just sixty years before Columbus
made his first voyage to America. The productions of the
islands are almost spontaneous, for the people are too ignorant
and lazy to cultivate the soil properly. The generality of the
people live on the bitter lupira, a seed of a plant of the bean or
pea kind, which they first parboil in salt water to correct the
bitterness. The leading productions are wine and brandy,
oranges and lemons. The people are less than one quarter
million.
These islands are subject to earthquakes. In one thousand
eight hundred and eight a volcano rose on St. George’s Island,
one of the Azores, to the height of three thousand five hundred
feet and overwhelmed the whole island with a flood of lava,
leaving it a ruin. Three years later a volcano broke out in the
sea, above which it rose three hundred feet, and after throwing
out vast quantities of water, sank again.


I suppose they are called Western Isles were for
some time the most westerly land known to navigators. They
have no harbors, properly speaking. That of Fayal, the best,
is only an anchorage in the channel between the island of Fayal
and that of Fico.
The six Portuguese who formed a part of our crew belonged
on the island of Flores, and they were set ashore in order that
they might visit their friends for a day, according to their under-
standing when they shipped.
The island of Flores is very beautiful. The land lies high
and is covered at all seasons with growing corn, grain and vines,
and dotted here and there with cottages of white washed stone.
But the inhabitants live mostly in little villages clustered around
their churches. We obtained a plenty of grapes, figs and ap-
ples ; also of fowls ; together with a few hogs. These we got
on board the bark in a single day while she was “.lying off and
on,” for she did not come to anchor at Flores, and then we
sailed for Fayal. We entered the harbor the second day from
Flores, and the remainder of our crew had a day ashore, our
Portuguese, (“gees” they are called on whalers,) keeping ship,
which was not brought to anchor.
At Fayal I saw the leaky vessel I had left at Beverly. She
had not as yet taken a single whale.
The town of Fayal, which is more properly called Horta or
Yilla Orta, is a place of some five thousand inhabitants. More
than one hundred and fifty American whalers used to touch
there every year, as also the British West India mail company’s
steam packets, regularly. The town is very pretty and sightly,
standing upon the hillside, its houses white and low, and covered
with red tiles. Seen from a distance on the water it looks like
a pretty picture rather than a real town. The entire exports of
all the islands are shipped from Horta. The island of Fayal is
mostly mountainous, and contains a little over forty square miles.
American Consul Dobbin, son-in-law of Prof. Webster, who
was hanged in Boston for the murder of Dr. Parker,' owns a fine
estate in Fayal, and a splendid residence in Horta, built in the
English style.


The people of the place drive a thriving trade with sailors
and whalemen at their stands in the streets, where they sell
fruits and little articles of home manufacture. The women
make fine straw hats which their customers buy merely for the
fun of the thing, having really no use for them. A hat worth a
dollar in Hew York could be bought in Horta for twenty-five cents.
Having taken in further supplies we sailed for the Cape Yerde
Isles, keeping a sharp look-out for whales. In the passage we
run through between the Canaries, a group of islands belonging
to Spain. They are volcanic and mountainous, one peak, that of
Teneriffe, rising to a height of more than twelve hundred feet.
The views as we sailed among them were grand and beautiful
in the extreme. The climate here is not so pleasant as at the
Azores, being hotter and dryer, and a wind like the sirocco
sometimes blows from the coast of Africa.
We saw myriads of petrels, called stormy petrels and “Mother
Cary’s Chickens” by the sailors, though, scientifically speaking,
the petrel proper is a somewhat different bird from the stormy
petrel. They are scarcely ever seen at rest, but pass their lives
in skimming over the surface of the sea, generally with a flut-
tering of the wings, very suggestive of a half fledged chicken.
They sometimes run for a considerable distance on the water,
which their webbed feet enables them to do. This walking on
the water gets them the name of petrels—-that is, little Peters,
from the Bible account of the Apostle Peter having alone the
like at the command of the Savior. They like to follow in the
wake of vessels, as anything which agitates the sea brings to the
surface mollusks and other small water animals that they feed
upon. For the same reason they are more numerous and lively
in a time of high wind, which gives rise to the belief among
sailors that they are the fore-runners of a storm. The same bird
will follow a vessel, flitting around it, for weeks together. Old
seamen regard the killing of them as little less than murder, and
many openly avow a belief that they are animated by the souls
of sailors who have perished at sea. They only visit the shore
for the purpose of breeding, and they lay their eggs on the bare
rock.


We also saw many whales of the finback and hnmpback
kinds. The former also called razor-back by sailors and rovqual
by naturalists, is the largest and most powerful of living animals,
and it is at the same time the most active of the whale specie.
This fact, together with that of its being poor, both in oil and
bone (or baleen,) prevents its being hunted by the whalemen. It
is known by a large fin which usually projects two or three feet
from the water when it swims, and at a greater distance by its
peculiar manner of blowing or spouting.
The humpback whale is sometimes killed for its oil, as I shall
soon have occasion to relate, but this can only be done in sound-
ings, or shallow water, because the animal dives too deep when
struck for any line in common use.
We made the Cape Verdes one morning early in October, but
in that climate of perpetual summer the word “ October” sug-
gests no sush ideas of storm and frost as it does here in Western
New York. The first laud seen w r as St. Antonie, and as wo had
been promised three weeks liberty while taking in a supply of
fruit, fresh water and provisions, we hailed its appearance with
joy. The channel between St. Antonie and St. Vincent, called
by the natives Sao Yinoente, is fifteen miles'wide, and through
this we sailed to the town of St. Vincent, which consists of fifty
or sixty bamboo dwellings, scattered promiscuously around the
bay of the same name. The people are mostly native negroes,
and mulattoes ; one person in twenty being white, and there
are a few slaves. The Islands belong to Portugal and a corrupt
dialect of the Portuguese is spoken among them. A couple of
natives, claiming to be pilots, boarded us in a boat, and we soon
came to anchor in the bay.
The next day we had liberty, by watches—the captaih’s watch
first. We had no money, but tobacco at one dollar per pound
was a lawful tender, and for one pound we could buy a peck of
figs, basket and all, or one hundred oranges, or two dozen cocoa
nuts. Besides these fruits w T e bartered for plantains, bananas,
pine apples, yams, water melons and quavas. This last is a
fruit about the size of a common apple, full of seeds, and with
the flavor of a strawberry.
3


Among the natives every full grown man is a “captain,” and
indeed the title seems to be used a good deal as “Mister” is with
ns. Half a dozen distinguished Cap’ns invited us out to dine.
We accepted with thanks, and in the interval before the dinner
hour we rambled round loose, sailor fashion, gazing at and
making comments on whatever was to see. There was plenty of
aguardiente to be had everywhere, and here and there wine, both
of which articles had its devotees among us.
At dinner we had eggs, fowls and goat’s meat but no bread
except hard tack obtained from vessels. Half a dozen bottles of
pretty fair wine, however, made up all deficiencies of the feast,
and wo had a jovial time generally.
The Cape Yerde group consists of fourteen islands, large and
small. They have a very dry climate, and though the rainy
season lasts, nominally, from the middle of August till Novem-
ber, there is sometimes no rain for years, and then the people
suffer terribly from famine. A drought began in 1828, and in
1832 it is stated that thirty thousand people perished. In 185 d
the population was less than one hundred thousand. The islands
are low at the coast but mountainous in the interior, and are al-
most treeless. Like Ireland, they are entirely free from venom-
ous reptiles, but monkeys and a kind of animals called bisam
cats are found wild there. These islands, like the Azores and
Canaries, are of volcanic origin, and on the island of Fogo there
is a volcano nearly ten thousand feet high.
The houses of the people, like those of the natives of most
tropical climates, are built by setting four posts into the ground,
and on these rest the roof of bamboo or palm leaves, or straw.
The walls are composed of a bamboo wicker work, open and
airy.
I saw no cattle on St. Vincent, but horses, mules and asses
seem to be plentiful. When you hire a mule to ride, you also
engage a driver, who follows him up with a sharp stick and Irots
along behind you, thus saving you a great deal of labor and
cursing in getting the animal along. The watch to which I be-
longed rode out to the residence of the American Consul, which
was only a better sort of shantv, such as I have described, The


consul was a Dutchman, who rejoiced in a mulatto wife and a
plantation of fruit trees. We were treated to fruit as much as
we pleased, free. We remained at the consul’s a couple of
hours and then started across the island, a distance of five miles,
in great glee. The road passes through a valley which was
green and rich, though the hills on each side look dry, barren
and rocky enough. While we were riding along at the highest
speed we could get up, the saddle upon which one of our com-
rades was riding suddenly turned, and he fell upon a rock,
breaking his leg. “ Bout ship” was now the word, and we con-
veyed the wounded man back to the bay as tenderly as possible,
under the circumstances.
The captain of a whaler is a doctor by virtue of his position.
He carries a medical treatise in the cabin, which he reads or not,
as the case may be. Whenever he has an operation to perform,
he does it “by main strength and pure awkwardness,” and on
this principle the poor fellow’s leg was soon “ set to rights.”
Each watch had alternately twenty-four hours ashore. Every
night there was a general fandango , in which the whalemen
figured pretty largely. I have read somewhere that “ when the
sun goes down all Africa dances.” I can bear testimony to the
truth of this, so far as the Cape Yerde Islands are concerned.
The islanders dance in the Spanish fashion. Though the most of
the women are black—regular shiners —some of the mixed-breed
are graceful and good looking. There were no full-blood whites
at these dances except ourselves. Every morning, besides
fruits, &c., a good many severe headaches were taken on board
in the boats. Whenever the owner of the [headache was too
drunk to stand, he w r as hoisted up like a pig or a sack of pota-
toes. I was too young as a sailor for that, and indeed in all my
experience I do not recollect ever to have been so far gone in
drink as to be unable u to navigate,” though I confess to having
had “ two sheets in the wind ” pretty often, and to having been
now and then “ half seas over.” Somehow 7 whaling-and temper-
ance do not seem to go together.
The watch that was aboard ship w r as all the time getting
ready to take in water, and in other There are said to


be only two springs on this island, one near where we lay and
one on the other side of the land. One day while there two
humpback whales were discovered in the bay, and the watch on
board made signal to the shore for help. 'The men ashore went
to the boat damning the luck, the whale and the eyes of the
man who first saw it. In due time the boats were manned and
lowered, and started in pursuit. The whales proved to be a
cow and calf. The mate fastened to the cow and she towed us
around the harbor in grand style. There are safer and more reli-
able modes of travel than to be towed by a whale, but tlfPhovelty
of this latter might reconcile a man to it, even if it were not, as
in our case, in the line of his business. The water was so shal-
low that the game could not descend to any great depth, and
her struggles were mostly on the surface. In a case like the one
I speak of, it is customary to approach the whale when quiet, by
hauling in the lino, which is either carefully coiled or thrown
overboard as it passes through the hands. But our boat-steerer
was so eager that he neglected this duty and threw the line
down in the bottom of the boat, and when we had got close to
the animal by hauling in, the lance was used and the mate sung
out to us to stand by the oars to back out of harm’s way. Feel-
ing the pain of a fresh wound, the whale went down. At the
same moment I went up. I was pulling the midship oar, and-
the line getting “ foul ” or tangled, caught me in some way so as
to throw me several feet into the air. The motion was too quick
for analysis, and though I was there myself, and an eye witness
of the whole proceeding, I still wonder how the thing happened.
“ Cut the line,” cried the mate ; but before this order could
be executed the whale had reached bottom, and the line slacked
up, so that it became possible to save the line, the whale and me.
I got on board only a little the worse for wear.
The next time the whale came up she ceased to strive with her
destiny, and showing no sign that she felt the lances with which
we continued to ply her, she laid quite still and died with dig-
nity. In doing so, however, she blew out clots of gore as large
as a common bucket, and the harbor all around her rolled pur-
ple with her blood.


When the cow was dead it was pitiful to see the actions of the
calf, which was too small to he worth anything to us. It would
swim alongside of our boat and rub against it, peering up at us
with a look which it was easy to interpret as a reproach. The
affection between a mother whale and her offspring is remark-
able. I have seen the humpback whale, when “gallied,”
carry off her young upon her back, and it is common when the
cow cannot be approached, to fasten to the calf, wdien she will
return |nd die in the endeavor to defend it.
We Ml the blubber out there in the harbor, and got fifty
barrels of\ilf but it was poor, gummy stuff. The weather was
warm, of course, and we could only save that portion which
flowed from the blubber while we were handling it, by stopping
the scuppers and bailing it up from the deck. The consequence
was that the deck had a sticky or gluey feeling whenever it was
wet, for months afterwards. Our skipper said this was the last
humpback for him.
We trave the carcass of the whale to the natives, and they
towed it to the shore, and from the gleanings got three barrels of
oil. Their gratitude was at least equal to the favor, and from
that time we lived at free commons when ashore.
From the ashes left after the blubber had first been tried and
then the scraps burned for fuel, we made a strong ley, which
was of use instead of soap. They are much superior to wood
ashes for this purpose.
The two w T atches —larboard and starboard—took their hours
on shore alternately, for the first two weeks at St. Vincent, and
then, for the remainder of the time there, we all remained ashore
every night, but one man, the captain considering the practice
safe, and wishing to give us all the liberty he could. The
weather was good, and sudden squalls are not prevalent there, at
least not at that season.
At last, having got our fruits, fowls and fresh water all on
board, we made sail southwardly, intending to bear away to-
wards South America, in latitude O’ —that is, along the equator,
our destination for the present cruise being the mouth of the
Kio de la Plata—Fiver Plate, as w r e called it on board the bark.


But in latitude, 10 ° north, we fell in with the whaling bark
President, of New Bedford, which had been down on the Eiver
Plate whaling grounds, and reported no success. She was now
bound for the grounds north of Cape Yerde Islands, known as
Porqos Banks. We “gammed”—(visited) with her all day,
and finally our skipper determined to turn back and accompany
her. Wo arrived on the banks on Christmas, 1819. We
“raised”—(saw,) whales, lowered our boats and captured one
the same day. When we had our prize alongside, the sharks
gathered around it so numerous that we had to keep tfiem off
with spades and lances. The water was alive with'them.
Our cruising ground there was off the coast of the Great
African Desert, about fifty miles distant. The land was dimly
visible through the lurid atmosphere, which was constantly
filled with fine red particles from the sandy waste on shore. In
the night it was difficult to breathe the sultry and dust-burthened
air, and from what I experienced of the Sahara while at that
distance out at sea, I do not think I should like it as a country
to live in or travel over.
We now had a splendid run of luck. We took whales almost
every day. The whaleman as well as the farmer has to “ make
hay while the sun shines.” There was nothing but “ work,
work, work,” day and night. The men became so exhausted
and weary that they would fall asleep at their work and even
on the look-out at the mast head. I have often dozed off un-
consciously there, and been awakened when a lurch of the ship
threatened mo with a fall. I would arouse myself then with an
effort, reflect that it was dangerous to indulge in a nap in that
elevated berth, look about lively for a whale, and in another
minute be asleep again, to go through the same process repeat-
edly. It is singular, perhaps, but I never knew a man to fall
from the mast head while asleep. I suppose the habit of holding
on stands one in stead to some degree, even in sleep. There
was formerly a kind of crib called a “crow’s nest” in use for
the occupancy of the mast head look-out. It was invented by a
celebrated English whaler by the name of Scoresby, and I think
must have been employed mostly by the English. There was


nothing of the kind on any vessel that I ever sailed in. The
top gallant cross trees are sticks three inches broad on top by
three feet long, one on each side of the mast. On one of these
we were compelled in good weather to stand, but in bad weather
we were allowed to sit down. We were not permitted to lash
ourselves to the mast, and it was seldom done.
In one month on Porqos Banks we had taken four hundred
barrels of oil, and thus our stock on hand was over five hundred
barrels. In the meanwhile our sometime consort, the President,
which we saw from time to time, had done little or nothing.
Snch is “fisherman’s luck.”
When we were out of fruits and wood we put back to St. Vin-
cent again in a run of three days. We lay two weeks in port,
taking in needed supplies and enjoying ourselves after the old
style, and then returned to our fishing ground where we remained
until about April Ist 1850. By this time we had a full cargo of
one thousand barrels, and had thrown over board all our surplus
of water and provisions to make room for oil. We filled our
chests with sea bread to economize space. The intention was to
visit St. Vincent again before going home, so we “cut in” our
last whale, and made for port where we tried out the oil. Try-
pots, coolers, everything was full. Our jolly wdialemen fairly
jumped for joy at their great success.
Then commenced cleaning up. Everything was scrubbed,
scoured or painted, “fore and aft aloft and alow,”inside and out;
the rigging repaired and made all taut, new sails bent, and spread
for “home, sweet home.”
We sighted Montauk point in a month trom the Cape Verdes
and taking a Pilot off Block Island ran up Buzzard’s bay with a
fair wind.
The owners had not heard from the Bark since she left the
Azores luckless and almost empty. One of them now came on
board and wanted to know why we had returned so soon, the
failure of our cruise being a foregone conclusion with him.
“ The old bark leaks like a basket,” captain Tabor replied,
putting on a sullen look. “ Men ought not to be sent to sea in
such a tub.”


“Yery sorry, indeed,” said the chopfallen owner, “thought
she was a seaworthy craft as any afloat.”
. “ Notice how low she swims,” observed the captain, “ why she’s
as heavy as a stone.’ 1 ’
“ Yon got some oil?” said the owner timidly.
“Hardjy any,” was the reply. “Here, men, you lubbers,”
continued the skipper with a merry twinkle in the corner of his
eye, “ come here and lift the hatch, and show Mr. Barstow what
little we’ve got.”
The men obeyed, and surprise and joy succeeded to disappoint-
ment and mortification in the heart of our owner. He wore a
tall white hat, and this when ho found how successful we had
been, he lifted from his head and with a whoop he flung it as far
as he could into the bay!
We touched the wharf at Mattapoisett on the fifth day of June,
1850, at eighth bells of the second watch (four P. M.) after an
absence of thirteen months lacking three days. All hands sprung
aloft and bundled the sails around the yards any way it hap-
pened, and the quickest the best, in our haste to get ashore, and
descending we had out our chests in the shake of a whale’s fluke.
There was only one boarding house in the place, and that was
kept by a Mrs. Herrington, who had a couple of fine daughters,
which circumstance did not serve to prejudice us against the
house at all. Mrs. Herrington was I think, a really good and
kind old lady, and so very different from most of the sailors’
boarding house keepers who are mere “land sharks” preying
upon their customers and getting fat upon their plunder.
In two or three days most of the meip got tired of the quiet of
Mattapoisett, and went off to New Bedford to enjoy the sights
and excitements of the Whalemen’s Metropolis. However, six
of us remained at Mrs. Herrington’s two weeks, when we were
paid off. I had to my share two hundred and fifty dollars, in
hand. The men who went to New Bedford were present, accom-
panied by a “school” of land sharks, who by this time had fleeced
them so completely that few of them had a dollar to swear by>
which however did not prevent their swearing. They had now
only to look out for another berth, and to make another voyage.


I do not think there ever was a pursuit more conducive to dis-
sipation and reckless extravagance than that ot a whaleman.
Whether on board or in port, every restraint^ that society or civi-
lization imposes is removed from his life. Abroad he visits
mostly barbarous and heathen countries, where neither law nor
custom operates to check his appetites or passions. At home in
a whaling port it is still worse. Even before his toot touches the
shore he is surrounded by a crowd of swindlers, pimps, courte-
sans and generally, and his employers who belong to
the ruling class in such places afford every facility to the leeches
to suck his blood. It is their interest. The quicker a sailor
spends his hard earnings, the sooner he will be ready to ship
again, and the more abject his poverty, the better terms lor
themselves they can get out of him. So they encourage him to
spend his money, and countenance all the means that are used
to defraud him.
I now concluded X would go no more a-whaling. My minds
eye all this time had dwelt upon the gold-fields of California, as
the goal of my hopes, and thinking the time had come for their
realization I went to Boston to look up a ship bound for San
Francisco, but 1 could hear of none to sail before hall. Ihe diffi-
culty was how to dispose of myself until then. I stayed in Bos-
ton three or four weeks, by the end of which time I got thoroughly
tired of inaction, and finally determined to try a whaling voyage
to the north-west coast, as such voyages are called, though they
often include a general scouring of the Pacific, south as well as
north, and more or less of cruising in the Atlantic and Indian
oceans, and the Japan and other seas on the coast of Asia.
With this object I repaired to New Bedford, the grand empor-
ium of the whale fisheries since the sceptre departed from Nan-
tucket,
New Bedford is, or rather was, a city of one idea, and that idea
was Whale. It literally smelt whale, and talked whale, and
fmurativelv ate and drank whale. The entire social machinery
2D •/
was greased and kept going with whale oil, while the bowels of
that whole people yearned after spermaceti. The one thing
needful to a citizen was a share in a whaling vessel or venture
4


and the more such shares a man possesses the more elevated and
assured was his position in the eyes of the community. The
highest ambition of every boy was to be a whaleman, and a
young (Jamanche Indian does not more naturally take to the
lasso, than a juvenile son of New Bedford to the harpoon. The
native talent began to be cultivated as soon as the infant arm
was able to launch a knitting-needle at a fly, and it had a bril-
liant development when it could attach grandmother’s stocking
yarn to the handle of a fork and “ fasten ” to the house-cat. The
cry of “ there she blows! ” was the echo to poor pussie’s yell of
pain, and “ pay out line, granny ! there she goes through the
window !” were the exulting terms in which the future Nimrod
of the Oceans would announce a successful achievement of this
sort. The enamored youth of the whale city wooed his sweet-
heart in the peculiar slang of the whale ships, and she replied in
kind. There was no fault that a New Bedford maiden would
not tolerate in her lover more willingly than a failure to come
up to her ideal of a whaleman. Nay, this was a downright dis-
grace. An anecdote will illustrate :
A young man just returned from a whaling voyage visited his
betrothed and found her cool and distant—in short, not “ the
girl he left behind him,” at all. lie asked an explanation.
“ You remember the time yon missed that big bull whale ? ”
she said contemptuously.
“ Yes,” ho replied, with the air of a man pleading guilty to
having stolen the molasses off from a blind beggar’s pancake.
11l news travels fast, and this had reached his charmer
some time before him. He had thrown the “iron,” and had not
touched the game. “ Yes,” ho repeated, in hope to waken her
pity, “I remember it too well. It was a clear miss.”
“ Well, that’s the time you missed me,” she replied, and turn-
ing her back upon the recreant and unworthy swain, she re-
nounced him forever.
I shipped at New Bedford on the eightieth “lay ” (or share,)
in the ship “Junior,” of six hundred tons burthen, David R.
Green & Co., owners, and Captain Silas Tingham, master. She
carried four boats and a crew of thirty-five men, ad told. My


experience in the former voyage enabled me to take the berth
and discharge the duties of boat-steerer, so that I now ranked as
one of the petty officers of the ship. I was ottered an advance
of two hundred dollars, but hawing money of ray own I de-
clined it.
We sailed from New Bedford on the 21st ot July, 1850, and
swept down the bay with a fair wind, making such headway that
we were out of sight of land before night. When tairly at sea
the usual ceremony upon such occasions was gone through with,
not differing materially from what I have related of my experi-
ence in the “ Willis.” Captain Tingham promised the men good
usage and generous fare in return for prompt obedience and
faithful attention to duty, and well he redeemed his promise.
Though I ate in the cabin, I do not think I fared materially bet-
ter than the men forward. There was no stint of butter, cheese
and diied apples ; nor of vegetables and fruits while we had them
on board. The men could have flour cooked to their order any
day; and they had duff every day when at work, ordered or
not. In fact, we had good fare, good men, and as good officers
as ever trod a deck.
Our course was laid for the Azores, as before, but we did not
stop to cruise, only taking such wdiales as came in our way.
When near the islands we captured one, —a perfect monster of
his kind. 1 have forgotten his dimensions, but 1 well remember
that we sent his jaw home to our owners as a curiosity, on ac-
count of its size. We also, as is customary in such cases, sent
home the oil we got out of him from Fayal, where we tried it
out. We lay in that port four days, with liberty to the men on
shore. On the last day of our stay the watch ashore got drunk
by common consent, so as to be unable to perform duty, so the
captain ordered them below and remained all night at anchor.
I forgot to say that while in Fayal this time, Captain Tingham,
to favor the men, adopted the plan of boat’s crew watches,
which, instead of fifteen, requires only six or seven men with
an officer on deck. Sometimes a boat-steerer takes charge of
this watch, and all the officers have the whole night for sleep.
At day-break the cry rung out, “ all hands, ahoy 1 heave up


anchor.” As soon as the anchor was fairly “ atrip ” —that is,
clear of the bottom, the mate gave the order “jump up there
and loosen sail.” When out of the harbor we spread every rag
of canvas to the favoring breeze, and stretched away for the
Canaries, which we passed as before. From there we steered
for the Cape Yerdes, which we reached without seeing any
whales. We then sailed for the coast of Brazil, and thence to
the Cape of Good Hope, with like success—or want of it.
The reader may be surprised, after my statement that our
destination w T as the Northwest Coast, and that we did not delay
on our way thither to cruise for whales, to read that we
sailed first to Africa by the Azores and Canaries, then to South
America and back to Africa again ; but such is the shortest
route to the Cape of Good Hope, on the principle that “ the
farthest way round is sometimes the nearest way home.” The
reason of this is that the prevailing winds north of 30 ° north
are westerly and south westerly ; these, sometimes called passage
winds, take you to the African coast ; then a few hundred miles
southing brings you within the influence of the trade winds,
which blow constantly to the westward, between the tropics.
Passing beyond .this to the south, you strike the southern passage
winds, blowing from the north-west and west, and are borne in
the direction of the Cape of Good Hope. One would naturally
think that a vessel at the Cape Yerdes would do best to run
south with the wind abeam, down the African coast, to the cape.
But owing to the proximity of the headed land, the winds, for a
considerable distance from that coast, are baffling and variable,
and cannot be relied upon, besides which, whaling vessels are
generally very dull sailers, being built more with an eye to capa-
city than to speed, and do not sail well on a side wind. The
additional space covered in the longer route, on what is esteemed
fair fishing grounds for sperm whales, is also, no doubt, some in-
ducement to its adoption.
We had beautiful weather throughout the voyage, which was
growing somewhat dull and monotonous when we raised the
Island of Tristan da Cunha.
This island is the largest of a cluster of three, and is named


after its discoverer. It is about twenty miles in circumference
and on three sides rises abruptly from the sea to the height of
one mile and a half. On the north side is some country that is
low and level, aud here vessels may touch and obtain some sup-
plies. The two other islands of the group can only be ap-
proached in a calm. They are called “Nightingale” and “In-
accessible” respectively.
In this vicinity we fell in with a “ school ” of whales of which
we captured ten. The captain did not go in his boat, which he
placed in charge of the fourth mate, himself remaining on board
and actively assisting the men at their work. In so doing lie
blistered one of his hands by hauling on the ropes, and it soon
swelled up and became painful. The whales we took there were
small, of the description known among whalers as “school
whales.” They averaged less than fifty barrels of oil each. We
managed to keep along with the herd, and several of the ten we
got were killed with lances alone. We had them all dead upon
our hands at once, and along side at dark. The captain said to
the mate :
“Mr. Hammond, draw a bucket of rum for the men and bring
it on deck. This has been a good day’s work. We will show
people how to do this kind of thing, Mr. Hammond.”
From this time the captain’s hand grew worse and worse.
He suffered terribly, day and night, and could get no rest.
Finally, one night he took opium or laudanum, as was supposed,
to deaden the pain and to give him sleep, and he slept—the last
trumpet alone to wake him. In the morning he was found to
be dead !
I think there was not a man on board that did not sincerely
mourn for Captain Tingham, even to' the shedding of
which, in the case of strong, rough men, generally means some-
thing.
At first it was intended to take the body to Cape Town for
burial, but this w r as afterwards given up and we prepared for a
funeral on board. The corpse was sewed up in canvas, with a
bag of sand attached to the feet. It was then brought on deck
and laid, with the feet towards the sea, on the gangway plank,


which for the present purpose was placed on the top of the bul-
wark. The second mate read a chapter of Corinthians, and
then the shipward end of the plank was elevated and the body
slid into the sea, but when it struck the water it seemed to lin-
ger a moment with the rebound, and as it did so it turned its
face towards the vessel and disappeared.
This w T as considered by the men a very bad omen, as indica-
ting that the captain wanted a man to go with him, and so full
was the conviction with some that we should lose another man,
that it threw a gloom over the ship in addition to that wo already
fel t.
As soon as our whales were all cut in and the solemnities of
the funeral over, w r e crowded on all sail for Cape Town, where
wo anchored, and the mate went ashore to surrender the ship
into the hands of the American Consul there, that being the
mode of proceeding upon such occasions. A few hours later the
Consul came on board and put the question to the men whether
they were willing to continue the voyage under command of the
mate. Wc agreed unanimously that we were, and thus the mate
became captain, the second mate became mate, &c. Wo now
had fourteen day’s liberty, by watches.
Cape Town is a handsome city of some twenty-five thousand
inhabitants, situated on Table Bay, at the foot of Table Moun-
tain. The Bay itself is fine and large, but it is open to the
ocean swells that often roll in from the Atlantic, making the an-
chorage uncertain. Some of the streets are ornamented with
trees, and most of the houses are built of brick, faced with
stucco, and in some parts of the town decorated with quaint and
singular devices. These also have raised platforms in front,
which the natives call from which I suppose our word
“stoops” is derived. “Cape Colony,” the country of which
Cape Town is the capital, was settled by the Dutch. It is about
as large as and is for the most part a barren and
desolate region, with a climate the healthiest in the world. The
white people, except in the towns, are mostly Dutch, and are
called Boers, a word which means farmers originally, but which
the English in the towns, who hate and are hated by them, have


corrupted into “ Boors,” and use to signify coarse, unmannerly
persons. Immediately back of the city stands Table Mountain,
with precipitous sides and a top smooth and level, whence its
name. Whenever clouds appear on this level, it is said that
the table cloth is spread and a storm may be expected. Cool
breezes blow there from the south-east all summer long, and the
mercury seldom or never rises above 90 ° . Besides English and
Dutch there arc a great many Hottentots, the original inhabi-
tants of the country, and Malays and Negroes, descendants ot
slaves, and various mixtures of all these races, Die Boers are
a race of very large people, quite unlike the parent stock in
Holland, which proves the effect of climate upon mankind.
The women, sprung from a cross between the Dutch and Malays,
are considered to be unrivalled for the beauty of their forms.
The population of Cape Colony is about two hundred and
eighty thousand, of whom some one hundred and fitty-five
thousand arc whites.
While at Cape Town our men got on a big spree, and in con-
junction with the sailors on shore from the LI. S. Sloop-of-war
Portsmouth, then in the town, concluded to try their hand at
taking the town. I do not now recollect what the original provo-
cation was, but the riot became serious, and the police, headed
by the Mayor, mustered in full force to quell it. Nothing
daunted the tars went in on their muscle. One of them stabbed
the Mayor’s horse, and we soon routed his posse, “ horse, foot
and dragoon.” Then the military were called out, and when
muskets were leveled and bayonets brought to a charge, the
cold steel proved too much for us, and discretion began to be
considered the better part of valor. The worst of our case was
that we could find no place of refuge, we were obliged to pass
the night in the guard house, handcuffed, where, to illustrate
their English idea of fair play, when we were completely at
their mercy, our guards amused themselves with pounding and
kicking our heads to a jelly. In the morning we were fined
five dollars each and discharged.
We were allowed on shore twenty-four hours at a time. The
boats came ashore at six and at nine in the evening, when we


could go on board or not, as we chose. One night after the
boats had returned to the ship a party of us, finding ourselves
without money and in a place not particularly friendly, repented
of our choice to stay ashore, but having no means of our own of
getting aboard, were fain to try our powers of persuasion on
the police who were guarding the boats at the landing.
“Could we hire a boat to take us on board the whaler in the
bay ?” I asked of one of the policemen.
“ No,” he replied, in a surly tone, taking evident pleasure in
our disappointment.
“I am glad of that,” 1 replied, “ because, in that case, we
shall take one for nothing, which will be cheaper,” and with that
our men broke the lock by which a boat was fastened and pro-
ceeded to take possession of her. The policeman interfered.
Having no love, as may be guessed, for the British officials of
Cape Town, I really took pleasure in knocking the fellow into
the dock, after which I entered the boat and we pulled away for
our ship. It was blowing fresh and most of us were tipsy, so
that the boat was badly handled, and we drifted past the “ Ju-
nior ” at the rate of five knots. There was a merchantman
lying a mile beyond and nearly on our course. We made for
her and as we approached we hailed. “ Give us a rope,” we
shouted, but the attempt was a failure and it was now every man
for himself. As the boat grazed the side of the vessel we each
caught her chains as best we might. Luckily we all got on
board, while our impressed boat went dancing away into the
darkness.
The skipper of the merchantman sent us to our ship next
morning, and when cur boats brought the remainder of our
Tvatch from the shore we chuckled over their account of the
“ cock, and bull story” that my well soaked policeman had told
them about the performances of some of their “ d—d Yankee
whalemen.” The adventure had like to have cost us dear, but
now that we had weathered the danger, we looked only on what
was, to us, its funny side. When questioned about the fracas
afterwards on shore, of course our memories failed to serve us
at all as to that particular night. The wreck of the unfortunate


boat was afterwards found beaten to splinters by the surf, on the
beach of Pelican Island, at the entrance of the bay.
On the whole, in spite of skirmishes with the police, and
bruised heads, we had a line time at Cape Town. Fruits, such
as oranges, figs, apricots, and grapes were abundant. Other
rarities w r e enjoyed in the shape of ostrich eggs, and goat’s milk
cheese. The cheeses were very nice. They were made about
the size of a common saucer, and an inch thick. They may be
kept five years on shipboard. AVe bought them for four cents
each. For ostrich we paid ten cents a piece. They are
about as large as a pint bowl, and do not differ much in flavor
from hen’s eggs. Our favorite way of cooking them was in pan-
cakes, with flour enough stirred into them to form batter, of
proper consistency. Wo took on board .five tons of sw r cet pota-
toes, four tons of onions, and one ton of beef, and, after a stay
of three weeks in Table Bay, got under way in the direction of
Australia, touching at St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands for
fresh fish. These islands, or rather islets, are low and sandy
with no vegetation that I could see except Marsh grass. They
are a resort of fishing vessels from Australia. The fish, a species
like codfish somewhat but very fat, and weighing from fifteen to
twenty pounds each, swarm there in myriads. We lowered
our boats and pulled in shore at St. Paul’s, where in one day,
with hooks and lines, we caught twenty-five barrels of fish.
There is also a sort of crawfish there, like a lobster, and weighing
three or four pounds each, of which we caught a boat load. At
Amsterdam Island we did not have as good luck.
The wind was fair for ns from the Cape to these islands, and
for a week afterwards, when w r e encountered a severe gale, ac-
companied by torrents of rain. The storm began during the
mid-watch. When I came on deck with the morning (larboard)
watch, the lighter sails, including fore and main top gallant sails
and flying gib, had been taken in, and the mizzen top-sail close
reefed, and the ship was running before the wind. It was cold,
and the air was full of mist of that kind called a Scotch mist
by sailors.
As soon as we were fairly on deck the mate ordered us to
5


clew down the fore and main top-sail and haul down the jib.
This done he sung out :
“Clew up mizzen top-sail. Take two reefs in fore and main
top-sail. Furl jib and mizzen top-sail.”
Part of the watch went aloft, while I with two others went to
furl the jib. I was ahead on the jibboom. When the sail was
laid along the boom I felt it roll in an unusual manner, and
looking towards the ship I saw through the morning haze that
one of our men was missing. Then I heard him strike the water.
“ Man overboard ! ” I shouted with all my might and sprung for
the deck. In an instant the word was passed through the ship
“ man overboard.” The men in the mizzen top glanced astern as
they descended and saw our unfortunate shipmate come to the
surface, in the wake of the vessel, which had passed clear over
him, and begin the struggle to keep himself afloat. The sea
birds, gulls and albatrosses were flitting around him by hundreds.
At the alarm the watch below rushed on deck.
“ Brace up fore and mizzen yard ! ” cried the mate, and the
ship was brought up to the wind with the main top-sail aback
to stop her headway. The starboard boat being to leeward was
cleared away and the men stood by the tackle falls ; the boat
swung clear and the crew jumped in, myself among them. We
were lowered to the water and took to the oars, and pulled as
near as we could judge in the direction of the man when last
seen. Our progress was slow and laborious over the heavy sea
and against the wind, and there was nothing by which we could
tell when we had arrived in the right neighborhood for our
search. In the roar and rolling and seething of the billows, and
the tossing of the spray, it Would have been a miracle if we had
found the drowning man—and no miracle intervened. What
we could do, we did ; but in vain. Having pulled about for an
hour in the keen, cold wind, we gave up the search and turned
to go back to the ship. As we did so the boat fell lengthwise
into the trough of the sea, and a wave dashed over us, nearly
sinking us. We had nothing to bail with except our tarpaulins,
every bucket having been left on board in the hurry of our de~
parture. We used such means as we had to the best advantage,


and finally arrived, wet, cold and benumbed, alongside the ship,
which was rolling to a degree that made it dangerous for us to
approach her. We were in latitude 60 ° south, and so piercing
was the blast that before we could get on board most of us were
helpless, and our boat, under our clumsy management, threat-
ened every moment to swamp with us. To guard against
the worst, ropes were thrown us which wo managed to tie
around our bodies, and by which we might be hauled on board
in the last extremity. However, after great exertion and sufter-
ing, the boat as well as our lives was saved. When it had been
hoisted up the head yards were squared away and we held on
our course.
Many were now the significant nods and superstitious mutter-
terings interchanged among the “ old salts”, in connection with
the fatal accident. “There,” said one, confidently, “that was
what the captain looked back at his ship for before he sunk.”
“Yes,” was the reply, “we know now to a certainty which of
us he wanted.”
“ I have told you all the while that the ship’s company would
never reach the Pacific without a death among them,” remarked
a third, and so they went on.
Our course was laid for the southern capes of Van Diemen's
Land. About six bells one morning watch, while I was on deck,
we “raised,” a whale, and it was so long since the cry “there
she blows ” had been heard on board that it had a musical and
cheery sound. One of the men at the mast head unhesitatingly
pronounced it a right whale, from its double spout, for whereas
the right whale sends up two columns of water the sperm whale
sends up but one. This, being my first experience of right
whale, my curiosity was alive to all its peculiarities. It was a
mile away when we lowered. We approached without difficulty
and fastened to the prize, when, instead of settling down into
the sea like the sperm, it threw its flukes into the air with a vio-
lent effort and dived almost perpendicularly, lashing the water
into foam as it went. The whale was pretty easily secured, r lhe
air in that vicinity, and indeed throughout all that region, was
alive with sea birds of a great many different kinds, some of which


we caught, and one, the goney or albatross, we ate for the joke’s
sake, boiled in whale oil, as we also did cakes at different times.
Besides its nickname of goney, sailors also call the albatross the
man-of-war bird or frigate bird, probably from its being the
largest of sea birds. This name, however, properly belongs to
the pelican, a much smaller bird. One kind of albatross meas-
ures eleven or twelve feet from tip to tip of wings, and in ex-
treme cases over seventeen feet; one we caught at the time I have
just spoken of measured fourteen feet. Their greatest weight is
twenty-live to twenty-eight pounds, but generally they do not
weigh more than half as much. They are webfooted, and their
color, except a few black or gray feathers, is white. They are
very gluttonous and very foolish, and the same bird may be
caught two or three times in succession with a line and hook
baited with a piece of fat pork. They live on any animal mat-
ter that comes in their way, and can swallow a fish of four or
live pounds weight. Their ability to sustain themselves in the
air for a long time is remarkable, and sailors believe they can
sleep on the wing.
The Cape pigeon is a very pretty white bird, of the gull kind,
resembling a tame pigeon, being about the same size. Then
there were what the sailors call “right whale birds”, as large as
common fowls, and “Blue jays,” as large as a turkey. These,
with a great variety of other birds, flew and shrieked around the
ship by myriads if not by millions, throughout the passage from
the Cape to Yan Dicraan’s Land, and particularly while we were
cutting in the whale last mentioned, which afforded one hundred
barrels of oil and a ton and a half of bone.
Whale bone, so called, or baleen, is not bone at all, but a sub-
stance composed of almost exactly the same elements as hair. It
is found in the whale’s mouth in the shape of large slabs or
blades, doing the office apparently partly of the tongue and partly
of teeth, which latter the right whale lacks entirely.
We sighted Yan Dieman’s Land in the northern horizon, and
then steered for New Zealand, where we were to have liberty
again on shore. In January we entered the Port of Mongonni,
a city of three houses and perhaps seven or eight native huts.


The Bay of islands is the usual place for whalers to touch, but
some cause sent our Captain to Mongonni.
The Islands of New Zealand are three in number, to wit, the
North, the Middle, the South or Stewart’s Island. Taken as a
whole they are about the size of Italy which they resemble in
shape, the toe of the boot being turned north instead of south.
They seem to be best adapted to promote the health and longev-
ity of Anglo Saxon Colonists of any new country ever discovered.
The climate on the coast is said to be at once the most temperate
and the most changeable in the world; the thermometer ranging
from 40 ° to 70°, and sometimes touching both extremes in
twenty-four hours. The North Island, on which is Mongonni, has
volcanoes, and earthquakes are frequent, something like an aver-
age of two shocks a month occurring some years. Many moun-
tains, volcanic and otherwise, are visible from the sea, and some
of them covered with perpetual snow. The principal peaks range
from six thousand to thirteen thousand feet high. The soil ot the
plains is fertile, and all English fruits and grains ripen, besides
peaches, nectarines, melons, grapes and Indian corn.
Unlike most of the Pacific Islands and Countries adjacent there
are no wet and dry seasons, but it almost certainly rains every
twelve or fifteen days the year round, and there are seldom or
never more than three days of cloudy weather in succession.
The natives are called Maoris (Mowrics nearly) and they say
they came about five hundred years ago from the Navigator’s
Islands, in twenty large canoes. Thpn they were about eight
hundred in number. When the whites first settled among them
their number was estimated at one hundred thousand; but an
actual enumeration which took place eight years ago, proves that
they are not much over fifty thousand; and they are supposed to
be rapidly decreasing from diseases that have been introduced
among them by the whites. They are of the Malay race like all
of the Pacific Islanders, and were formerly the most bloodthirsty
and hideous of savages, tattooing their bodies as if they wished
to resemble hyenas as much as possible, and eating the enemies
taken in battle. In spite of their constant wars and their canni-
balism they seemed to be increasing. Now, that they have for


the greater part professed Christianity and seldom go to war,
they are dying out.
The trees of New Zealand rival those in California in size and
height, some kinds growing forty feet in circumference, and
ninety feet to the first limb. They are nearly all evergreens, so
that the woods have much the same appearance summer and
winter. The country, by all accounts, abounds in natural curi-
osities, among which I heard mention of a great many hot
springs like the Geyser’s of Iceland, in some of which the water
was several degrees hotter than boiling, but as I did not see any
of these, a description of them does not belong here. There are
no snakes, toads or frogs in these islands, but there is a species
of birds, called kiwis by the natives, which arc a wonder. They
have neither wings, nor tails, and their feathers look just like
hair. They go about by night, instead of by day, and burrow
in the ground like a rabbit or wood chuck.
There were some ships at Mongonni before us, and we found
the market pretty bare of supplies, except potatoes and onions.
We got a few peaches, which grow wild there. They are
only middling for quality.
Mongonni is a fine harbor, and no doubt there is a fine town
built upon it by this time. It extends five miles inland, stretch-
ing east and west. On the south side of the bay was a large
fine house for that wild place, kept by an Englishman, named
Butler, for the accommodation of the officers. lie kept billiard
tables, besides liquors and other refreshments. The captains
generally stay there while their vessels are in port On the
north side was a house of entertainment for the. sailors, kept by
two Irishmen. Here money was advanced to us at the rate of
five dollars per day, for spending or “ liberty money,” which
was to be deducted from our dues at the end of the voyage, to-
gether with twelve and one-half per cent interest. The Irish-
men called theirs the “ Donnybrook House,” and it stood upon
the top of a bank or eminence reached by a flight of thirty steps
cut in the earth. On the plateau in front of the house the men
instituted something as near the original “ Donnybrook Fair,”
as circumstances would permit. To get into a scuffle and turnble


an antagonist down the bank, was an achievement that was hailed
with roars of laughter, and sometimes two at a time would go
down, which, if possible would double the fun.
There was a large negro there who belonged to the ship
“ Condor,” and his shipmates were fond of bragging him up for
a “Bully man.” A little fellow T of ours, a boat steerer, one “Mac”
Martin of Rochester, took their big talk as a kind of challenge,
and remarked that he could “whip any nigger that ever was
born.” The men being all in the right humor a match was soon
got up, and a ring was formed. We were all Americans and
the fight was to be a “rough and tumble” one without any rule,
except that the party whipped should be his own judge when.
“Mac” had the advantage of his adversary in “science,” and
knocked him down three times, without however doing him any
apparent harm. Then the “ negro” dived and w r ent at “Mac ”
head foremost, bearing him to the ground w T ith his weight; but
“Mac,” though at the bottom, continued the fight, and resorting
to the “gouge game” soon made the darkey cry “enough.” This
was a signal for three cheers for the Ship Junior by her exulting
crew.
During the time that we lay at Mongonni, there were several
desertions, but the Mowries, for a small reward, would look up
runaways and bring them in bound hand and foot, with a pole
thrust between their legs and arms and carried upon the shoul-
ders of a couple of ugly tattooed customers. Several* had been
retaken, but there were others no less resolved to venture upon
the experiment. One of these was a chum of mine from Ohio,
named Booth. Wo called him “Isaac” and “deacon.” lie was
an able and educated man, but not the sort for a whaleman, and
in spite of all my efforts to teach him to learn his duty,
his awkwardness was the laughing stock of the ship. Convinced
that the place for him was on shore, and hearing that school-
teachers were in demand at the bay of Islands fifty miles north,
he determined to desert at all hazards. So he gave me his chest
and books, and with a comrade took to the bush. When the
time was up for us to sail the Mowries had not yet brought him
in, so w r e lay there two days longer to give them time. Howr


ever the “Deacon” was either too cunning or too lucky for them,
and he escaped, at which I secretly rejoiced, for he was a good
sober fellow—too good a man to ever make a whaler. On the
eighth or ninth day after our arrival, having a supply of wood,
water, potatoes, onions, and five barrels of peaches, and having
shipped in place of the deserters a couple of Mowries “Pete”
and “Joe,” who had served as whalemen and who spoke some
English, we got under way, and bore in the direction of the
Friendly Isles, where we intended to take in a supply of hogs,
together with cccoanuts and other fruits, before going north.
The first group that we sighted was that ot‘ Jonga, the most
southerly of three that compose the Friendly Isles, the other
groups being the Hapai and the Yavao. They got the name
Friendly from Captain Cook, whom it has since been learned
the natives intended to murder; but they had been discovered
thirty years before by the Dutch navigator, Abel Tasman, the
same who discovered Van Dieman’s Land, New Zealand, and
Fccjee (or Fiji,) Islands.
The Friendly Islands are more than one hundred and eighty
in number, of which only about thirty or forty are inhabited.
They arc mostly low, coral islands, but some of them are volcanic;
and one of them, Tafooa, has an active volcano, and earthquakes
are common. The climate is very warm and moist, and there
is plenty of fresh water on all the islands. They lie in the
track of the trade winds which, however, are very inconstant
among them, and terrible hurricanes occur. The natives culti-
vate yams, sweet potatoes, bananas, cocoanuts, bread fruit, sugar
cane, lemons, pawpaws, watermelons, oranges and some corn.
The principal island is Tongataboo, or Sacred Isle. It is a low,
coral island, eighteen miles long by twelve broad, and nowhere
rises a hundred feet above the sea. Port Refuge, in the Island
of V avao, is the best harbor, and is the most frequented by
whaling vessels.
Hogs, said to be a native breed, run wild in great numbers,
and are caught and sold to whalers. The Islanders hunt and
take them with dogs. We fitted up a part of the Junior’s hold
as a pen, into which we put eighty head of wild hogs, and ship-
ped cocoanuts and yams to feed them on.


We had brought with vis from Kew Bedford a native of Tong-
ataboo, named “Johnny Knife,” who had been taken off as a whale-
man by Captain Tingham on a former voyage, under (he usual
promise to bring him back at the end of the voyage. As we
approached the island the natives met us in their canoes a mile
from shore, and, at the sight of their returned countryman, set up
a joyful shout of “Johnny Knife ! Johnny Knife ! ” The ship being
thus recognized, a chief inquired earnestly for “ Captain Silas,”
the name by which they knew Captain Tingham. The mate
told him that Captain Silas was dead, upon which he burst out
crying, and mingled with his tears and sobs the frequent excla-
mation “Captain Silas very good man, very good man.”
As Johnny Knife wanted to see his mother, wo lowered away
a boat and took him and his sea chest ashore. The beach was
everywhere so guarded by sharp coral rocks that we dare not
touch, for there was a gentle surf rolling. Many natives, mostly
Wyeenas (Wahinas, that is women,) crowded down to the wat-
er’s edge to see us, and some of them plunged into the sea and
swam out and around our boat, saluting us from the waves like
so many mermaids.
We had scarcely more than hoisted up the boat again when
we sighted a whale, which we captured. It was quite alone,
but was in itself a fine prize, yielding eighty barrels of oil.
It was now that we finished up the job of getting our hogs
and fruits aboard. The manner of “ stowing ” the latter is pecu-
liar. Bananas and such fruits as have stems are tied up by
them to the rigging, anywhere out of the* way, while oranges
and the like are put in large network sacks and strung up in
like manner, hanging like golden clouds overhead. The men
always ate the fruit without restriction.
Our carpenter had been for some time disabled with a sore
on one of his legs, and it was thought that if he went north in
this condition it would be the worse for him, so the captain told
him that he could remain here on the islands if he chose, and
he decided to stay. I thought I should like to stay there ray-
self, but unfortunately I was well and healthy. These islands,
with their dark eyed houries, were enchanting—a real paradise
6


to my eyes and my imagination. My desire to remain there
was inflamed by the captain’s asking me if I would like to stay,
which made me hope that I could make terms and get him to
leave me. I replied that I should like very much to stay. He
seemed to hesitate a moment and then said : “No, no; I can’t
let yon go.” This conversation took place while we were on
shore to land the carpenter, and in reply to a request from
one of the chiefs, that the captain would let me and another
man stay on the island.
We left the captain on shore with the carpenter and pulled
back to the ship, with orders to return for him at sunset. We
cruised round the small island on which the captain was un-
til evening, and meantime I put on two shirts and two pairs of
thin pants, determined to escape if any chance should offer.
When we called for the captain it seemed he was not quite
ready to gooff to the ship, and he told us we might come ashore
awhile if we wished. We did so, and went up to the native
village, where we found the carpenter sitting at supper by the
side of the “ king,” who had already bestowed a wife upon him.
The feast consisted of fresh pig and hard bread, with fruits.
The carpenter’s wyeena , who was sitting by her white bride-
groom, was said to be the chief’s own daughter, and I envied
my former shipmate his good fortune.
I looked around for my opportunity to got away unobserved,
but the captain’s eye was on me constantly, and it would have
been worse than useless to make any attempt under the circum-
stances, so, as a last resort, I said ;
“ Captain Hammond, don’t you think you had better let me
stay?”
“No, Sampson, I cannot spare you,” he replied. “Go north
with me one season, and then you may stay in the islands if
you wish.”
“Thank you, sir,” I replied, “I shall stick you to that
promise.” Soon after we went aboard.
We now set sail for Behring’s Straits, by way of the Japan and
Kamtschatka seas. In the former we encountered a gale of
wind the wildest I ever experienced. It blew fair for us and


we run before it with the little canvas we dared to carry. Our
boats were hoisted as high as we could get them, but so rough
and violent was the sea that in spite of all our care two of them
were carried away and lost. Our hogs, with an infernal concert
of squeals, were dashed incessantly from side to side of their
pen in the hold, until some were hilled and more were badly
hurt. These we threw overboard when the storm abated.
We saw no whales until we reached the vicinity of the Straits,
about the first of May, when we found plenty of them. We
cruised along the edge of the ice, which was solid, from the
American to the Asiatic shore. But though whales were plen-
tiful there, it was very difficult, in most cases, to secure them,
for if attacked they made at once for the ice, when it was neces-
sary to cut our lines to escape being drawn under. The first
whale we succeeded in taking here yielded two hundred and
forty barrels of oil, being the best I ever saw captured.
In the course of a month we had taken one thousand barrels
of oil, and then the ice broke up and began to drift southward.
The sea was covered with walruses and sea elephants, a seal so
called by the whalemen, though the true sea elephants inhabit
the Antarctic seas only, and are half as large as a common right
whale, and consequently much larger than any land elephant.
The kind of seal we saw so numerous about the Straits, I suppose
is more properly called the sea lion. They are sometimes fif-
teen to twenty feet long and will weigh nearly a ton. They roar
like a lion, have the same color and have manes like him (though
theirs are more like that of a horse,) and they are altogether a
terrible looking monster ; but they will not fight a man if there
is any chance to escape. They live on fish.
The walruses are still nearer related to the land animals than
even the seal, and live mostly on sea weeds. They attain to
about the same size and weight as the sea lion just described.
Their skin, which is nearly two inches thick and very difficult
to penetrate with the harpoon, is covered with a pretty thick
coat of brown hair. They have tusks weighing from five to ten
pounds, esteemed a very fine quality of ivory, with which they
are able to strike tremendous blows in their combats with their


enemies, the white bears on land and on ice, and the narwhal or
sea unicorn, sometimes improperly called sword-fish, and car-
nivorous fishes in the water. Out of w 7 ater they move very
clumsily, dragging themselves along with their tusks when they
can. The walrus cannot bite, its mouth being no larger than
a man’s fist, yet the killing of them is more difficult and danger-
ous than that of the sea lions or other seals, as they sometimes
will hook on a boat with their tusks and capsize it, and they
yield less oil, but of a sweeter taste and purer quality. The
tusks were worth fifty cents a pound at Oahu.
The floating ice through which we carefully worked our way to
the northward was also covered with hair seals, among which
we sometimes darted a harpoon, more for the fun of seeing them
scatter and plunge into the sea, than with a view to kill them for
the profit. Occasionally, too, in spite of the disadvantages of
manouevring among the ice, w r e took a whale.
At the end of a month we had got through the drift ice into the
Arctic Ocean, and reached Takootskoi, in Siberia, where the na-
tives came on board to trade walrus tusks, white, gray and black
fox skins, and sometimes also skins of the fur seal, for tobacco
and rum. When their canoes got within speaking distance of the
ship their occupants would begin to shout “Masinka,” which means
good. I dont know whether this is their usual salutation or
whether they used the word in reference to their intended pur-
chases. A single glass of rum would set one of them quite crazy.
When a lot of them had climbed on board, Captain Hammond
ordered a bucket of molasses and a supply of hard bread
brought on deck and told our visitors to “ go in,” which they did
with apparent great relish. However, they would eat a big
lump of blubber and wash it down with a pint or so of train oil
to top of with, and then turn their broad, greasy faces and say
“ masinka!” They dressed in furs, even in the summer, but go
about bare headed. Their women make water-proof coats out
of whales’ entrails, which answer a very good purpose. We pur-
chased some of these coats at a cost of four ounces of tobacco
each. The material is dressed in a manner peculiar to these
people, and sewed with the sinews of animals.


The natives carried no arms except knives. We drove a
thriving trade with, them in these articles, manufacturing them
for the occasion out of some old hoop iron, which makes a very
•good knife—to sell.
White bears were numerous on shore, and we frequently saw
them on the floating ice. One day we discovered one on an ice-
berg fifty miles from shore. We carried a gun in the boat, so
•we pulled towards him ; but he was for meeting us half way, if
mot more, so we retreated to a safe distance and fired five shots
:into him in succession, after which we finished him with lances,
•whalemen fashion. We got ten gallons of oil out of the carcass
,—genuine bear’s grease —probably the only genuine that we had
ever seen, though the lard which is generally sold for it is per-
haps just as good for the hair.
While we were cruising in the neighborhood there were fre-
quently eighty or ninety sail of whaling vessels in sight at once;
American, English, Dutch and French, and the whales grew
{shy of approaching the shore. After a while we left that locality
and entering the sea of Anadir, anchored. The captain now adopt-
ed the plan of sending out the boats with a supply of provisions,
to pursue the game close in shore, and when a prize was taken
:It'was towed to the ship. Sometimes on a warm day we found a
•whale lying asleep close to land. On such occasions we stole upon
him silently, and before the huge creature could get awake all
over, we had three or four irons into his body. Then came “ tall ”
[flouncing, that sometimes almost threatened to swamp our boats
hy the waves it threw.
The shores of the sea of Anadir, near us, were high, rocky
and forbidding. When wo had lain there three weeks we
found that the whales had mostly left, and we hove up an-
chor and sailed north through the Straits. On the way we
■“ gammed ” the ship “ Clunatis,” and during our intercourse
•with her crew we learned, from comparison, (what we already sus-
•pected to be the case,) that wo were highly favored in the char-
acter of our officers and the quality of our fare.
At this time the darkness of night lasted only from eleven
(o’clock at night to one in the morning, and thus a watch was


kept up at the mast head twenty-two hours each day. Part of
our crew were on board the Clunatis and part of her’s on board
the Junior, until night came on, when we separated. In less
than two hours the Clunatis went ashore hopelessly. The
natives, learning the accident, came round the doomed ship in
considerable numbers, and in spite of the efforts of the officers
and crew, who disliked the idea of proceeding to violence, eighty
of them got on deck, and boldly entering the cabin they de-
manded rum. Being refused, they signified their determination
to have it any way, and it was found, necessary to fight them.
A “ battle royal” ensued, in which half the natives on the deck
were killed [outright, and the remainder driven into the sea,
when they escaped to the shores in their canoes. A Narragan-
sett Indian, belonging to the crew, true to the instincts of his
race, seized a hatchet at the commencement of the fight, and in
the course of it killed five of the assailants, whose numbers
availed them nothing against the superior weapons of the whale-
men, who did not lose a man.
Not having been an eye witness of what I relate here, of course
I only tell the story as it was currently told at the time, by the
Clunatis’ crew, part of whom we took on board, while a part
were taken by other vessels. The “India,” of New London,
took off the oil—one thousand barrels—of the wrecked vessel,
and carried it to the Sandwich Islands, I believe for a share of it.
The whales, it was now said, had gone northward, so we made
sail, cruising in that direction, until we reached the edge of the
solid ice, in latitude 70° north, from which, as far as w t c were
able to judge, the surface of the ocean was one unbroken ex-
panse of ice tp the very pole itself.
We cruised along the edge of the vast field of ice until about
the middle of August, taking on an average one whale a week,
when we fell in with the ship “Win. Hamilton,” of New Bed-
ford, and gammed with her. She was abont to leave for the
Islands, her master thinking it unsafe to remain on that whaling
ground any longer. Our captain thought he would risk to stay
a while yet. We parted company that day at noon and the
Hamilton stood south, with all sail set, and was soon out of sight.


We cruised about there the rest of that day, and the next
morning found us completely surrounded and shut in with ice-
We passed the forenoon in endeavors to extricate ourselves, but
our efforts were useless. Before night the “Junior” was immov-
ably fixed among masses of ice, soft and slushy, where it had
been exposed to the sun, so that in general it was incapable of
crushing the ship.
Though in no immediate danger, our situation was anything
but a pleasant one, since it was possible that wo might drift
against the solid ice and be frozen in for the winter. We furled
the sails and awaited our fate, with nothing to do but eat, drink,
sleep and ramble over the surrounding ice in chase of seals. In
this helpless condition we lay a month, our only hope of release
being in a wind that should break up the mass around us, or
loosen it so that we could press through into the open water.
At last a gale came on, and for two days we continued to force
the Junior through the ice that ground, and crushed, and grated
against her sides incessantly. When we got through the pack,
as this kind of ice is called, the sheathing was all cut clear from
our vessel and her bottom had sustained a cruel scouring, but
she did not leak. With what joy we hailed the free blue sea
once more, I leave the reader to imagine. Ours was the last
vessel that passed through the Straits that year, except two ; and
one of these, the “ Huntress,” of Hew Bedford, was lost in doing so,
and the other, the “ Citizen,” of Nantucket, passed by within
sight of the wreck without offering any help, and left her crew
to pass the winter on the Asiatic coast, south of the Straits, where,
before Spriug, one-half of them perished. They lived in the
native style—or died. Among the survivors, howpver, was the
captain’s wife.
“Every stitch of Canvass for Oahu,” was now the motto with
us. We had the wind fair and strong, and in eighteen days
from Behring’s Straits we anchored in the harbor of Honolulu,
which is large, beautiful and safe. The coral reef which
surrounds the Island of Oahu is open there, and probably there
only, as if by a special providence for the benefit of sailors.
The Sandwich or Hawaiian Islands, of which Oahu is the


fourth in size, are thirteen in number, only seven of them being
habitable. Hawaii, or Owhyhee, the principal Island is more
than twice as large as all the others put together, and contains
nearly one third of the inhabitants of the group. These Islands
like the friendly group are partly of coralline and partly of vol-
canic formation. There are three active volcanoes on Hawaii
of these Manna Loe, is quite famous for its eruptions, one of
which (the last, I think) I witnessed myself as I shall relate in
its place. The area of the Islands is something over six thousand
square miles, but a great portion of their surface is rocky and
arid, and some of it covered with volcanic scoriae and ashes,
so that the number of acres of arable land upon them all is
only about half a million, or say not more than may be found in
two counties at the west. In thirty years the population has
diminished one half, that is from one hundred and forty thousand
to seventy thousand, mostly owing to diseases brought among
the people by the whites, and to the change from their original
and natural style of living, though quite a number have emi-
grated to one place or another, on ships that have touched at
their ports.
The Islanders are supposed to be of the Malay race, but
many of them are not darker than an average white man who
has been exposed to the sun and weather. They arc considered
quite handsome, and the women are of very easy disposition,
which makes them groat favorites with sailors generally. It is
said that when first visited by whites these people were without
any word corresponding to justice, and consequently they must
have been without the idea, as well as that of chastity , which
last is even yet very faint among them, after fifty years of reli-
gious teaching. Descent in the royal family was b}- the female
line, it being impossible to guess who might be the father of the
queens children, she having always several husbands at once,
and changing them from time to time as suited her fancy. And
her subjects were not slow to follow her royal example.
When the whaling business was in its palmiest days more than
five hundred vessels engaged in it touched at the Hawaiian
Islands in a single year, and nearly three million gallons of oil


and two million pounds of bone were trans-shipped there, besides
the far vaster quantities that entered their harbors, but did not
change bottoms there.
The climate of these islands is considered one of the most de-
lightful in the world, the mercury seldom or never falling below
00 ° or rising above 88 ° of Farenbeit. All the tropical fruits
are produced plentifully, while wheat is raised on the high lands.
Cattle and hogs are also abundant and cheap, or were at the
time I speak of.
Honolulu is the capital of the islands, and hero the king re-
sides with his court and government, as well as the consuls of
the various commercial nations, and the leading missionary offi-
cials of the various sects who have established missions among
the natives. The city has a population of about ten thousand in
the summer, and in winter, when the whalemen and foreigners
congregate there, about twelve thousand. The harbor was dis-
covered in 179tt by an English captain named Brown, who, like
Captain Cook, the discoverer of the Islands, was murdered by
the islanders. It seems probable that a more treacherous and
unprincipled race of cannibals never existed than these natives
were at the time of Cook’s visit, though they do not seem to
have been guilty of such deliberate and studied cruelty, as our
Indians used to inflict upon their enemies whenever it was in
their power. A Hawaiian chief would butcher a common man
for the crime of stepping on his shadow, with as. little ceremony
as we use in killing a fly, and cat him into the bargain.
As soon as we could get about it we began to get ready for
repairs on our vessel, “breaking out” cargo and moving it
from the bow to the stern so as to lift the former as much as pos-
sible out of water. When she was sufficiently “ down by the
stern,” workmen from the shore commenced restoring her sheath-
ing, which had been lost by contact with the ice. While this
was being done we scrubbed the ship thoroughly, and painted
and repaired generally, and got wood and water, &c., on board.
This took us near six weeks, at the end of which we had two
weeks liberty, by watches, each watch twenty-four hours on shore
at a time.
7


There were sixty ships in the harbor of Honolulu that winter,
and it may be estimated that from three hundred to five hundred
sailors and whaleis were constantly ob shore, who made the
situation of a native policeman no sinecure. In a common way
we entertained no particular ill will against them , but there was
an auxiliary force of English, from Australia, known as the
“Sidney Rangers,” whom we hated cordially. Besides the over-
bearing manner natural to their nation, they usually displayed
peculiar brutality, acquired during a lawless life among the
islands of the Pacific, and collisions between them and the
seamen were marked with considerable animosity.
A favorite recreation with us was to ride out across the island,
a distance of about twenty miles, for which purpose we hired
horses in the city. One of the municipal regulations was that
no one should ride within the limits of the corporation faster
than a walk, under a penalty of five dollars and imprisonment
until paid, or at the discretion of the court. On one occasion
half the crew of the “ Eagle,” of Sag Harbor, were out on an
excursion of this kind, and upon their return, being boisterous
with animal and other spirits, one of their number announced
his intention to ride into town at full speed, which he did, stop-
ping only on reaching the stable where the horse was owned.
The native police immediately gathered around to arrest him,
and he was hurried before the authorities. There he refused to
pay his fine and was ordered to be taken to the fort for confine-
ment. On the way thither he knocked down several of his
guard, and was about to make his escape when a couple of the
Hangers came to their assistance, overpowered the prisoner, tied
him, and finally got him into the fort.
AVhen there, and helpless, he continued to resist in the only
practicable way, that is, with his tongue ; abusing his captors,
yelling and roaring, to the great annoyance of the Sidney men,
one of whom at length struck the unlucky whaleman upon the
head with his club and killed him.
The news of this transaction soon got wind, and as it passed
from mouth to mouth among the seamen it created an intense
excitement. A deputation from their number proceeded to find


the American Consul and demanded of him that the murderer
should be given up to them. As nothing was done to appease
them they soon resorted to violence. The captains and ship’s
officers, who shared more or less the resentment of the men,
had little or nothing to say, and as matters began to look serious,
they generally retired on board their vessels.
Then we “went in.” We were about five hundred in num-
ber, and though mostly unarmed, there were probably no five
thousand men on the islands that could have withstood our
charge. In a few minutes the streets were cleared, and in an hour
the entire population of the city was flying pell mell, in a con-
fused and frightened mass, for the mountains. The custom house
was fired and the assailants pushed on to the fort, which was
given up without a struggle by the horror stricken native sob
diery, who retired and took up a position on what is called
“ Punch Bowl Hill.” The king and the consuls did their utmost
to restrain the rage of the rioters and succeeded in extinguishing
most of the fires that had been kindled, but further than that
their efforts were in vain. We followed the soldiers and chased
them from Punch Bowl Hill, dispersing them utterly. Their
fire was scattering and ineffectual. It was said at the time that
the most of them, in their fright, had loaded their muskets by
putting down their cartridge ball first. We now returned to
plunder the city. Stores, grog shops, dwellings, all were thrown
open and ransacked. The king dispatched a messenger to
Lahaina Mani, where there were ships of war, for assistance, but
in the meantime, having held the town for three days without
molestation, and having gratified our vengeance and enjoyed
our spree, we retired quietly, as the humor took us, on board
our several vessels, leaving the city a solitude. For our satis-
faction it was told ns that the “ Ranger,” whose crime had been
the cause of so much trouble and loss, had been banished to the
island of Ranai for life ; whether it was true or not I cannot
say. And so ended the “ Great Sailors Riot,” in which, singular
to relate, not a single life was lost.
While at Honolulu we lived high, faring on the best the mar-
ket afforded. Besides fresh beef and all the tropical fruits in


abundance, there were sometimes to be had apples, from Oregon,
at the moderate charge of twenty-five cents each.
We left Honolulu January Ist, 1852, to cruise on the line for
sperm whale, and prepare for our return to the north the next
summer, by recruiting generally. In the course of the winter
wo visited or sighted nearly all the islands in that region. The
principal of these, the Society Islands, consist of two
distinguished as the windward and leeward, about seventy
miles apart and twelve or thirteen in number, exclusive of some
islets. They have an aggregate area about equal to that of
Cattaraugus County, or say seven hundred square miles, with a
population of fifteen thousand. Taniti, or Otaheite, is the most
important island, and its general description will answer for all
its sister islands. In the interior of Tahati is a mountain about
nine thousand feet high, surrounded by lower elevations, until
next to the sea, all round it there extends a belt, from one to five
miles wide, of very rich level ground. Like most other Pacific
islands, their origin was volcanic, but the coral insect has no
doubt assisted in their construction, and especially in that of the
low lands. They contain no active volcanoes. The islands are
nearly all well watered, and besides the numerous streams some
of them have beautiful little lakes. Corresponding to every
valley that opens up among the hills, from the shore, there is an
opening in the coral reef that surrounds each island, at a dis-
tance of from a few rods to four or five miles from the shore.
Through all these openings the canoes of the natives, and through
some of them large ships can pass into the quiet enclosed water,
and thus escape from the heavy seas outside, which almost con-
stantly break in a surf of tremendous violence on the reef with-
out, especially on the southern and western shores. The climate
is said to be the mildest and most equal in the world, a change
of seasons producing no apparent change in the temperature of
the air.
The Society Islands were discovered by Captain Wallis,
an Englishman, in 1767, and were visited two years later by
Captain Cook, who named them for his patrons of the Royal
Society of London. It was to Tahiti that the brig Bounty was


sent for young bread fruit trees and other plants to be carried to
the British West India Islands for propagation, which gave rise
to the famous mutiny celebrated by Byron in his poem of “ The
Island.”
The natives of these groups are larger in build and of darker
complexion than the Sandwich Islanders, and their history, since
their discovery by whites, is similar. On those islands, where
there has been the most intercourse with civilized men, more
than four fifths of the population has died out ; or, in other
words, there has been a decrease in the ratio of five to one.
The Society Islands produce spontaneously a large variety of
tropical fruits, to which have been added, with success, the
orange, lime and quava. This last, a native of the American
continent, has spread, since its introduction in the islands?, until
whole districts are overgrown with forests of it. The quava
tree produces abundantly a delicious fruit, about the size of a
common apple, which, as I believe I have stated already, has the
flavor of a strawberry, and on which the hogs and cattle of the
Islanders fatten.
But the most notable product of these islands is the bread
fruit, which grows upon a tree fifty feet high and looks like a
melon or large rough orange. The leaves of the tree are of a
singular formation, and are sometimes twenty inches long by
twelve broad. The fruit is not eaten raw, but the natives pie-
pare it by digging a hole in the ground, in which they put a
layer of hot stones and then one of the fruit, covering both with
dirt. When cooked it tastes very much like a roasted Irish po-
tato. The seeds of the fruit are much sweeter and richer than
the nut itself, which is eaten clear or mixed with orange juice
or milk from the cocoannt. When stale it is no better than a
cold roasted potato, if it is as good. The bread fruit tree fur-
nishes a bark from which the natives make a kind of cloth, and in
this respect it is a relation of the nettle, a species of which, in
Australia, is so large and its sting so deadly that to come in
contact with it will instantly kill a man or a horse, while in other
points it is akin to the celebrated Upas tree of Java, and the
Indian fig, both of which are classed among the most virulent
and fatal poisons.


A favorite dish of the natives, called poi, is made from taro
root. It is, in fact, little else than starch, I think, and is prized
according to its thickness or consistency. It is known as two
finger or three finger poi, according as it takes two or three
finders to lift a mouthful of it.
When disco vered, the Society Islands possessed no quadrupeds
except hogs, dogs and rats ; but cattle are plentiful now, and
they increase rapidly there, but sheep do not thrive there.
Chickens arc native to the islands, besides a variety of land and
sea birds.
The next island that we visited was that of Wytatooke or
Whylootacke, a lovely and fruitful spot, upon which an English
missionary and his wife were the only white inhabitants. Fine
fish abound among all these islands. The natives cook them
without dressing, in the manner I have given for bread fruit, or
eat them raw, according to taste.
At this time we generally “raised” a new island every day,
but did not get much liberty. The captain was unwilling to
make good his promise to discharge me, and partly for that and
partly because I was not so anxious as formerly to live among
the Islanders, I stuck to the ship. We traded with the natives
such trinkets and commodities as we had for hats, mats, sea
shells, corals and implements of w r ar. Some of their war clubs
were terrible looking weapons, being stuck round M T ith sharks’
teeth, in an exceeding ferocious style of workmanship.
The corals are among the greatest curiosities of nature. They
are found in almost infinite variety of form, but always of the
same composition, from the equator to the icy seas, differing in
shape with the different conditions of their production. Though
some species are formed at immense depths in mid-ocean, those
kinds which are developed in the greatest beauty and luxuriance
are confined to tropical and semi-tropical regions, and do not
flourish at a greater depth than one hundred and twenty feet.
For centuries the corals, now known to be a secretion of minute
animals called polyps, were supposed to be a vegetable growth,
and such is their resemblance to various plants that it is difficult
to reject the old theory for the new fact. One kind reminds


you of cabbage, another of lettuce. Here one spreads out like
the leaves of an oak, there one takes the form of a mushroom.
In this you imagine 'you have found a marine asparagus bed,
and in that a beautiful clump of moss. Pinks, carnations,
anemones and asters are seen blooming in endless profusion in
the yielding and tepid water, while shrubs and flowering vines,
interspersed with nameless and incomparable blossoms of green
and purple diversify the subaqueous gardens.
The animals who secrete the matter for these corals, as the
oyster secretes the matter for his shell, differ considerably in
structure, each species invariably producing the same form of
the coral. They also differ in size ; one kind requiring a square
inch to every four polyps, while sixty of another species can
work in the same space. The material from which the vast
ledges of coral that surround the Pacific and Indian Isles, and
that stretch in continuous ridges for hundreds of miles across
the open sea, is all extracted by these minute beings from the
sea water itself. On some of the islands coral rocks, as perfect
as the day they left their native element, are to be found thous-
ands of feet above the level of the ocean, having been lifted
from their former place by volcanic forces. Indeed, 1 have read
that corals equally perfect are found on the upper Missouri, near
the bases of the Rocky Mountains, proving not only that the
sea once covered that region, but from the species of the speci-
mens found that it once enjoyed a tropical climate. It is as-
serted by geologists that nearly all the limestone and chalk of
the earth is of corallian formation, aggregated with such shells
and other matter as happened to be deposited at the same time.
Strange thino-s to think of!
o o
The coral reefs, perhaps myriads in number, that are found in
the open water, that is not attached to or surrounding any
island, are called atolls. One of these is a thousand miles in
length. Many are of the form of a ring, from a few rods to
thirty or forty miles in diameter, having always an opening on
the leeward side through which the tide ebbs and flows. Ships
may enter these inclosures and And from fifty to five hundred
feet of water there, surrounded by a rim of rock, edged at the


water line, both within and without, with fine white sand, a strip
of soil generally running along the center of the rim, between
the inner and outer beach, sometimes several hundred yards
wide, on which grow beautiful groves of cocoanut trees. It is
supposed that the inclosed spaces were once occupied by islands,
which have slowly sunk beneath the waves, while the coral
polyp has kept the encircling reefs built up to the surface. This
seems the more probable from the fact that the foundations of
the atolls consist of coral rock far below the depth at which
the polyp of those regions can work. The water is generally
deep up to the very edge of the atoll, and on their outer beach
the unresting breakers, with a force accumulated in a sweep of
a thousand miles, burst in foam and thunder, as if they would
shake the very foundations of the earth, while within the placid
waters lie clear and tranquil, looking, in the sunshine, as green
as any lawn in June. Nothing can be imagined more romantic,
and beautiful than some of these atolls from which the cocoa
palm, crowned with its single tuft of leaves, some of which are
more than one-fourth as long as the tree on which they grow,
rises to the height of sixty or eighty feet into the warm and pure
atmosphere that kisses those summer seas.
The species of palm which produces the cocoa nut is probably
useful for more purposes than any other plant that grows. It
begins to bear its fruit in six or seven years from the seed, flow-
ering during the rainy season about once in six weeks, and pro-
ducing about one hundred nuts a year. The leaves are used for
covering dwellings, being better for this purpose than shingles ;
for fine mats, for brooms and for baskets ; their midribs are
fashioned, by the natives, into oars and paddles, while their
ashes are strong with potash. A sap called toddy is obtained
from the body of the tree, which is at first clear as water and
has not much taste, but it soon begins to “ work ” or ferment,
when it becomes intoxicating. It is then called Palm wine,
which is distilled to produce a fiery spirit of the brandy kind,
known as arrack. Sugar may also be made from the sap. From
the outer husk of the nut a kind of cordage is manufactured
which will last longer without rotting than any other, Froin the


shell of the nut drinking cups and other utensils are made. From
the nut itself, besides its ordinary use for food, palm oil is ex-
tracted. The nut is considered the greatest luxury when about
half grown. It is then sugared and eaten with a spoon. Every
one has noticed the three indentations at one end of the nut
which give it the appearance of a monkey’s face. These are the
eyes, which, like those of the potato, send out sprouts for a new
plant, with this difference, that only one eye of each cocoanut
ever sprouts. The article generally called cocoa, from which
chocolate is made, is more properly called cocao , and is not pro-
duced, as one w r ould think from its name, from the cocoauor any
other variety of palm but from a large bean, growing upon a
very different kind of tree in Central and South America, &c.,
where the natives use it sometimes for small change, as we use
coppers.
We were some two months cruising, with moderate success,
among the Pacific Islands that lie near the Equator; and then
we steered for the port of Queue in the Lad rones, where wo ar-
rived late in March.
These islands are volcanic, and twenty in number, of which
five are inhabited, the population being about 10,000. They
were discovered by Magellan in 1521, at which time the natives
numbered near 50,000, but they have nearly disappeared, the
present population being mostly of Spanish descent. Guain, or
Guahera, or San Juan, at which w r e touched, is the southern and
most important island. The harbor where we anchored is twenty
miles from the town of 500 people, of which it serves as port, the
former harbor having been destroyed by an earthquake. To ac-
complish the journey from our vessel to the town wo had our
choice to ride on oxen or go on foot, as neither carriages nor
proper saddle animals were to be had. Some adopted one mode
and some the other. The ox riders afforded a good deal of
amusement to the footmen during the trip, which was over a fair
road lined with wild orange, cocoanut and banana trees. There
was, on the way, only one house, which was called the Half way
House, at which we found refreshments, and a bowling alley and
billiard tables. We rested there two hours, and then pushed on
8


to town where we arrived at dusk. It was quite difficult to get
board, so many strangers were there before us. At last we were
able to engage meals with a landlady called Mary Rose, while
as to lodgings we lay around loose. Board was $5 a week; the
cooking was done up in American style, and eggs and chickens
figured largely among the viands.
The word Ladrones means thieves, and the name was given
the islands by Magellan to signalize his opinion of the natives.
The natives are gone, but their successors keep up the pretensions
of their country to its name. Bull fights, cock fights, dog fights,
and free fights between the seamen and landsmen, made up the
staple of the amusements that the place afforded. Fleas swarm-
ed in millions, rendering comfortable sleep impossible. Though
these islands afford the greatest variety and abundance of tropi-
cal fruits, I think their principal product is fleas. The hides of
hogs and dogs are kept raw with the bites of these and other
insects, and men, especially white men, do not fare much better.
Our consul here was an American naval officer, who, unlike
most men in his position, was not to be bought up by the skip-
pers. 1 don’t mean fleas, but ship captains. The master of a
whaleor, who had flogged one of his men, was brought before the
Consul, and forgetting that he was not now on his own quarter
deck, he offered that official some impertinence and got knocked
down for his pains. A sound caneing and kicking, seasoned
with good advice not too politely expressed, was added to the
lesson, and the captain left, “a sadder and a sorer man.” The
Consul, after this, had an incredible amount of bad aquardente
drank to his health and happiness by the men, and was corres-
pondingly damned by the officers.
By the time our two weeks’ liberty was up, we went cheerfully
back to the ship for wo were tired of officiating as breakfast,
dinner, supper and lunch to the hungry fleas of Guam, and while
the other half of the crew went up for their holiday, we were
busied getting in supplies for our summer cruise to the north.
Some of the men had bought parrots and cockatoos and brought
them on board for pets. The cooper, among others, owned a
cockatoo, and having made it up with a boat steerer and a for-


ward hand to desert the ship, he took his bird with him. For a
time our search for the runaways was of no avail, but we sus'
pected they were concealed, not far from the ship, upon a small
island, to which we could wade at low tide. Accordingly we
ransacked the island pretty thoroughly, but without success, and
were about to give up beaten, when the cockatoo gave a squall,
directing us to the thicket where the three men lay concealed,
and we soon had them in custody. The cooper was so enraged
at the mishap that he wrung the neck of the unlucky pet upon
the spot.
The prisoners were taken to town and lodged in a pen that
was called a calaboose; they tore it down the first night and got
away again, but again they were taken. Then they told Capt.
Hammond that he might as well discharge them, as they were
determined to do no more duty on the ship. The Captain con-
sidering, perhaps, that it would not be safe attempting to coerce
three such resolute fellows, who might be able to raise a mutiny
on boad, discharged the cooper and boatsteerer, and ordered the
other deserter to his duty, threatening to flog him if he attempt-
ed to run away again.
When once more under way we steered for the sea of Japan,
which is considered tolerable ground for both sperm and right
whale. One day we fastened to a bull of the former species, and
supposing him to be sufficiently exhausted, proceeded to lance
him. To our astonishment and alarm he turned and came at us
with his ponderous jaws open, and we saw at once that there
was no escape for the boat. Every man for himself “ shouted
the officer in command of the boat, and we all jumped overboard
except one man, the midship oarsman, who was too frightened
to stir. The monster took the boat in his mouth, man and all,
crushed and shook it to his satisfaction, and then dropped it and
went down. Our other boat picked us up, and we found that
the man in the wrecked boat had had his back so pierced with
one of the whale’s teeth that he was quite helpless, and he was
sent, at the first chance, to the islands, (which word when so used
always means Sandwich Islands) from which the Consul for-
warded him to his home in the States.


Another boat coming off to our assistance from the ship, we
succeeded finally in killing our pugnacious whale which yielded
when tried, 95 barrels of oil. He had in his body when he died
besides our irons, two others belonging to the ship “Ann Alex-
ander,” of Hew Bedford, which vessel he had sunk a few days
before, at least he was believed to be the animal that had done
this mischief. The boats of the Ann Alexander had attacked a
whale, which had stove three of them in rapid succession. Her
captain having picked up his men in his remaining ready boat,
attempted to run the whale down with his ship, when the “levia-
than” darted upon her and struck her such a blow that she sunk.
There was barely time for the crew to escape in the spare boats
before she went to the bottom. The fugitives in the boats were
fallen in with four days later by the “Ontario,” of Nantucket,
and the lives of all the crew were saved, but everything else was
lost.
We now bore away northward, and early in May reached
the entrance of the Ochotsk sea. This sea is frozen over solid
every winter, but when we got there it was clear to a distance of
nearly sixty miles. There was only one vessel, the ship “Tiger,”
Dexter, of Stonington, ahead of us in the sea, and she had taken
500 barrels of oil already. We found no whales for a week,
when we fell in with a “school” and succeeded in taking three in
one day, which added 400 barrels to our stock of oil. Other
vessels now arrived rapidly, and the ice breaking up next to
shore left open space there and the game passed under the solid
mass to it, and so avoided their pursuers. We followed up as
fast as practicable, entering Shanty Bay July sth, when there
were fifty ships in sight. We passed a good distance up the bay
and anchored, with a view to pursue the whales in shore with
our boats. In doing this we were sometime absent a week from
the ship. The weather was awful. For a month our clothes
were never dry. More than once w T e were two days and upv ards
towing a captured whale to the ship, pulling while tiie tide was
with us, and then when it turned anchoring to wait for a favora-
ble tide again. Finally the captain, fearing that we should lose
our health from so much exposure, gave orders that we should


come on board every night. From this time we rose at 2 o’clock
in the morning, and were ready to enter the boats at three.
After rowing thirty miles we returned to the ship at ten and
generally were in our bunks at eleven. The ship keepers stood
all the watches. This was a hard kind of life, and how the poor
fellows stand it who do not, as we did have the best of fare, it is
difficult to say.
At length the ice was all out, and the whales scattered and
became scarce, in our neighborhood. They were reported to
have gone to the head of the sea now, but so many vessels went
up in pursuit that there was not half a whale apiece for them.
At “Bowhead” Island, which gets its name from its resemblance
to a kind of whale so-called, the kind mostly found in these
waters, we remained two days for wood. There is no timber
there but birch and fir; the latter grows very tall and straight,
and makes splendid spars. Passing on we touched at Ayan, a
Russian town of fifty or sixty people, and at Ochotsk city, a
town inhabited by about the same number of Tungouses, and
twice as many dogs of the breed used for drawing sledges. As
we landed at the latter place the dogs came at us, barking furi-
ously, but there was not much bite to them apparently. They
are about the sixe of an ordinary Newfoundland dog, and are of
all colors, though mostly black. Their ears are sharp and erect
like those of a wolf We sauntered through the “city” looking
at the sights, (not signs) and then with a present of four fat pup-
pies returned on board.
We got no whales in this vicinity, and so sailed to “Dobra”
(Good) Bay, where after cruising a while we steered again for
the entrance of the sea. There we hoped to find some of the
genuine “right” whales, which being wilder than the bowheads
do not venture into the bays. Once outside w t c cruised south-
ward, and entered the sea of Kamtschatka. Up to this we had
only about 800 barrels of oil this season, but we here succeeded
in taking two fine “right” whales, October Ist, 1852, in spite of
the bad prospect, for the sea was full of “killers” or “thrashers.”
These animals, which are of the whale species and about twenty-
five feet long, may be a variety of the grampus, but we sailors


always made a distinction between them and the common gram-
pus, though the books, it seems, do not. They get their names
first given above from the fact that they attack the whale and
pound him to death with repeated blows of their snouts. The
sword fish assists in this work of slaughter. It is asserted that
when the whale is dead the only use the killers make of the
carcass is to eat the tongue, which, however, is a considerable
morsel after yielding five barrels of oil; while the lip will yield
ten, sometimes.
We now made sail to the southward, being occupied for the
first few days afterwards in cleaning our whale bone, or baleen,
which is done by scraping the gum from it and washing it. The
clean bone is then tied up in bundles of 50 lbs each and stowed
away.
At the end of fifteen days we sighted the volcanic peak of
Hawaii, and after three more anchored in the harbor of Hono-
lulu, where we lay until Christmas, mostly engaged in stowing
the cargo carefully and preparing the vessel for the passage
home. On Christmas day we set sail, and we had a fine run
down to Cape Horn. We stood mast heads all the way, but the
watchman took care not to see any whales, as we were eager to
get back to our home port. I can scarce tell why, for with most
of ns that was likely to be little more than a change of vessels,
and for the worse, too. The mast head watch was discontinued
at the Horn, but resumed as we approached the mouth of the
“River Platte,” wdiich is esteemed good fishing ground.
We had left those tropical regions where the night is glorified
by that splendid phenomenon, the zodiacal light, which w T as now
exchanged for the luminous nebulae, known as the “ Magellan
Clouds,” and the still more magnificent “Southern Cross,” the
queen of all the constellations. I ought to be a pretty goodjudge
of the comparative brightness and beauty of these, having seen
and studied them night after night for years, in every degree of
longitude, in every latitude north and south, from the equator to
the vicinity of the two poles. But I have looked my last upon
the stars. Stricken with blindness in my prime, there is nothing
left me now of either celestial or earthly scenery but the dim and
mournful memory.


We had doubled the Cape and were bowling along at a fine
rate in the latitude of the La Plata when the man at the mast-
head sung out “ There she blows!” much to the disgust of the
men, who had no desire for delay of any kind.
“h—n his eyes,” said one loud enough to be overheard, “I
wish he’d fall and break his neck.”
“ What is it like?” asked the officer of the deck.
“Finback?” replied the lookout, taking the hint.
“ All right!” and we ploughed ahead.
Off Cape St. Koque we fell in with a succession of baffling
winds and tremendous storms of rain, with lightning and thun-
der, and intervals of dead calm, during which we lay rocking
with provoking helplessness on the dead swells that heaved the
sea’s unrippled surface. The clouds seemed to swing like a huge
black pendulum over our heads, from the shore and back again,
pouring down torrents upon us every time they passed. We
improved the time and economized the water by scrubbing the
ship thoroughly; and when the rains ceased and were succeeded
by a calm of two tedious weeks’ duration, we painted and tarred
down the rigging fore and aft.
At length a fine breeze sprung up from the southeast and we
crowded on every rag of canvas in our eagerness to make the
most of it, carrying studding sails on both sides of the ship,
this way we ran at the rate of 350 miles in twenty-four hours,
overhauling the ship “ Montezuma,” of New Bedford, also home-
ward bound. At this time there were water spouts all around
us, five or six being visible at once. They are undoubtedly very
dangerous neighbors, being more or less in the nature of a whirl-
wind. Sometimes the whirling air carries up* to the cloud, water
in drops and spray, or whatever smaller objects come in its way;
and sometimes when the tendency of the spout is downward, a
vast mass of cloud is almost instantly compressed into a compar-
atively small space, and hurled in a flood upon the earth or sea
beneath. I have no doubt that the memorable deluge with
which the village of Gowanda was visited a few years ago, was
of this kind. I have read of as many as three or four hundred
water spouts being seen at a time, but I think it would puzzle a


person to count them, for they are almost always in motion, and
do not last beyond about ten or fifteen minutes each.
The Captain of the Montezuma boarded us and remained a
couple of hours. He had scarcely reached his own vessel when
the hail of our lookout sounded “ Sail, ho !”
“ Where away ?”
“Right ahead.” At this time the Montezuma was two or
three miles astern of us, where she was struck by a waterspout
that crossed her bows, tearing away her foremast, jibboom and
flying jibboom, clean, and nearly swamping the ship. She was
fitted with a temporary jibboom and made the port of Rio for
repairs.
The sail ahead proved to be the merchantman “ Red Jacket,”
of London, bound for Melbourne. Capt. Hammond spoke her
as we passed. We touched at Pernambuco, and lay there a day,
getting on board a supply of fruits, principally oranges and yams,
to last us home. After leaving that port, as our course lay along
near the coast we amused ourselves with watching the slaves who
go out to sea there, for fish. Their craft consists of two logs
lashed together, on which they raise a sail. This craft is called
a “Catamaran.” Each slave has a task set him and he remains
out, if possible, until he has got his quota of fish. One of these
catamarans lying in our track we made a pretense of running it
down. As we bore down on it the negroes on board stood for a
moment in astonishment and dismay, and then when their sus-
picions became a certainty they yelled lustily for mercy, and at
last jumped overboard and swam for their lives. We now sheer-
ed off and brought the “junior” into the wind, while a Portu-
guese we had on board negotiated, by order of the Captain, with
the frightened fishermen for some of their fish.
Soon after this, as is most common just there om,the equator,
we lost our breeze, and baffled about, deceived first by one
“catspaw,” and then another, for days, sometimes making scarce-
ly a mile in twenty-four hours. However, wo struck the north-
east tradewinds after a while and passing on entered the Gulf
Stream not far from the latitude of Cape Sable, whej’e the cur-
rent in our favor was as good as five knots an hour.


There is something very wonderful about the Gulf Stream. A
reasonable cause for its original motion was suggested first by
Dr. Franklin, namely, the constant blowing of the trades by
which the waters of the Atlantic are heaped up along the eastern
coast of South America, and can, from the nature of the case,
find no outlet except through the Gulf of Mexico and the chan-
nels between the Island of Cuba and the southern extremity of
Florida. But why the waters so escaping should choose one of
these passages in preference to all others, and having reached
the open sea again should turn a square corner, as it were, to
the north there and flow as a distinct and continuous stream for
thousands of miles to the north and east, instead of spreading
out and being, lost has never been satisfactorily explained. Espe-
cially is this most singular when considered in connection with
the fact that in passing up the coast of the United States, the
Gulf Stream meets a broad cold current of great force which
comes down through Davis Strait, and is easily traceable as far
south as the Coast of Florida. This northern current splits the
Gulf Stream into several bodies or currents, between which, as
well as next to the land the water is much colder than in the
Atlantic further east. Why do these currents reunite when ex-
tricated from contact with the cold one, and so continue their
course to the shores of Europe, increasing their motion by this
time almost lost, as they approach those shores?
The Gulf Stream where we struck it in our homeward voyage
with the “Junior” in 1853, is forty or fifty miles broad, and is
generally reported to flow at the rate of five miles an hour, its
speed diminishing somewhat in proportion to its increase of
width, which opposite to Sandy Hook is about 150 miles.
The weather was so fine and the wind so fair, as wo passed
the latitude of the Bermudas that we began to flatter ourselves
we should pass through that stormy locality without trouble,
though we had anticipated a gale there as a thing of course.
However, it was fated that we should be disappointed in our
hopes rather than in our expectations, for one evening the clouds
gathered thick and black in the western horizon, portending any-
thing but the “nice time” we had began that day to predict; and
9


about midnight the wind fell to a dead calm. With luck w’e
should have reached “home” in the next twenty-four hours, but
before morning a gale set in from the northwest, accompanied
with snow. We were soon obliged to take in all sail except reefed
fore and maintopsail, foresail and jib, under which we stood
southward and westward on the wind.
In the course of the next forenoon the gale subsided and the
weather came oft’fair; so we “cracked on sail” again, and stood
on our course northward. Arrived oft’ Montauk we took a pilot
on board and considered ourselves almost ready to jump ashore.
But the storm returned with a reinforcement, and met us with a
cannonade t)f snow again, dead ahead. We bore up against it
as long as we could, and then ran into Newport tor shelter.
There we furled the sails, and lay two days, which we employed
in looking round generally. I thought it a pretty town enough,
but very dry, for a watering place. The streets were as still as
if the people were doing penance for all the Sundays that had
been broken there the summer before, or those they expected to
see broken the summer coming.
We caught a fair wind from Newport to New Bedford, and
when we arrived off Clark’s Point a perfect “school” of “sharks”
came on board, hungry for the pickings that they knew we should
afford them. Once at our wharf in New Bedford we tumbled
up the sails, no matter how, and rushed ashore.
The first thing was to go to Frank Seabury’s outfit store and
get our infit, to wit, a complete new suit throughout to each man,
next to a barber’s, and then to a boarding house. Six of us, in-
cluding the 3rd mate, boat steerers and steward, put up at Mrs.
Kelly’s house, and having “stowed our toggery” there commenc-
ed, as usual, the life of sea faring “gentlemen of leisure about
town.”
Our “catch” amounted in all to something over 2,500 barrels,
which, with the bone, I reckoned would give me SSOO to my
share. But there w T as a delay, I have thought intentional, of two
weeks, in paying us off; in the meantime, unfortunately, we
could draw on Seabury for spending money, and the most of us
petty officers spent on an average a dollar an hour. Before pay


day most of the forward hands had cleared for home with a new
suit and $25 or S3O each, the rest of their “pay” having been
advanced to them from time to time. A whaleman does not
expect to make anything the first voyage, as a general thing
and in this he is never disappointed. He merely “goes to learn,”
and when he has learned he usually goes home in disgust, swear-
ing “you’ll never catch him going to sea again,” but the more he
swears the surer you may be that he will go again, if he is of any
account as a whaleman or sailor.
At last, when ne further excuse could be found for delay, we
got our money, what was left of it. The SSOO that I should have
gone off with if I had got it duly, had dwindled to S2OO, a pitiful
sum on which to carry out my plan of going west and settling
down. I went to Boston, Springfield, Hartford, Hew York City
and Buffalo, staying a short time in each, and so back to Ash-
ford, having been absent from there about four years.
Ho language can depict the dullness of country life on a farm
as it appeared to me after so much travel and excitement. It
was in vain that I recalled the hardships that I had suffered, the
risks I had run, the labor that I had performed, and the little I
had realized for it all. Habit added its influenceito my inborn
predilection for the sea. I was a sailor by second nature, if not
by first, and a true sailor too long on shore becomes “a fish out
of water.”
I had a relative recently returned from California, with a con-
stitution weak or broken. He had been “doctoring” for some
time with no apparent benefit. From some instances that had
come under my notice, I entertained the opinion that a taste of
seafaring life would help, if not cure, him. So I persuaded him
to go with me and make a fishing voyage. We settled it between
us, and took the route for Boston.
We “knocked around” a while among the Yankees, at the
place where one of their noted men was born, that is, at “Cape
Cod and all along the shore,” and finally shipped at Province-
town in the schooner “Abbey Thule,” Green, master, for a cod
fishing voyage to the Grand Bank of Hewfoundland. My friend
was to have sl4 a month and myself S2O. As our schooner


would be two weeks getting ready to sail we went to a boarding
bouse and took lodgings.
Provincetown is a place of 3,000 or 4,000 inhabitants, and is
situated upon a barren sand beach, a sheer desert, at the extrem-
ity of Cape Cod. Nothing will grow there, and it is said that it
takes two acres of the land on the Cape to sprout one bean. A
few of the houses, by virtue of muck hauled from a distance,
make a pretence of having gardens around them. But if the
place itself is poor the people are not particularly so. Some
thirty whaling vessels and more than one hundred other fishing
vessels are owned there. The harbor is good but the water is
shoal a good way out, and people went out in carts to the wharf
where the steamboat landed.
We got our outfit, consisting of a tarpaulin, an oilcloth coat,
and rubber boots, and after waiting till the first of August, sailed
for our fishing ground, which we reached after a passage of five
days.
The banks of Newfoundland aro»a phenomenon. All attempts
to account for them are so far mere surmises. They consist of
large areas of shoal water, varying trom one hundred and twen-
ty to one hundred and eighty feet in depth, with a flatbotton, ot
peculiar gravelly earth. The most general opinion seems to be,
that this earth has been floated down here from the far north frozen
to and imbedded in icebergs. Why particular localities, here
and there, should have been filled in so evenly, while around
and between them we have deep sea soundings, remains to be
accounted for. And then the Island of Newfoundland lies
directiv between the Grand Bank and Davis Strait, the supposed
source of the matter that composes it. In fact I consider the
cause of the banks like those of the Gulf Stream, unexplained,
and in the present state of geological knowledge inexplainable.
Arrived upon our fishing ground, we made ready and com-
menced business. Our success was fair, but the sea was rough,
as is usual in those waters, and my friend became so sick that I
beo’an to fear that his weakened constitution would not bear this
strain upon it, and that I had brought him to a watery grave.
He had attacks of vomiting, in which it seemed as if he would


lose his breath entirely. At last, having “thrown up his boots,”
as the phrase is, he began to recover tone and strength. The
improvement continued until he became a strong and hearty man,
and such he remains to this date.
As the Grand Bank lies directly in the track of vessels between
Liverpool and New York, one of the greatest dangers that besets
the fishermen in that foggy climate, is that of being run down
in the night, or even in the day time, for that matter. We stood
anchor watches, two men on deck all night, and there being eight
men who were liable to this duty my friend and self stood watch
every fourth night.
On one occasion, our watch was an uncommonly stormy and
disagreeable o ne even for that latitude. To use a sailor’s ex-
cD
pression, “it rained cats and dogs.” It was a night of Egyptian
darkness, thickened with fog and rain till you could scarcely stir
it with a stick. We kept a bright light burning, but its rays
seemed unable to penetrate the air more than a few inches. The
wind was blowing fiercely, aad altogether it was a night to be
dreaded and remembered. It was too much for the fortitude of
my friend, who proposed that we should go below. Luckily my
habit and discipline as an old sailor overcame any inclination I
might have felt to comply. I told him it would not do to desert
our post; the darker the night and the worse the weather the
more need of keeping a sharp lookout Just then we heard the
flapping of heavy sails, and knew that there was a large ship
close upon us, though I could see no light. I sung out with all
my might “ship ahoy,” and sprang for the bell, which I rung
furiously. Faintly through the lurking storm came the answer
to my hail. “All right,” I replied as the huge bulk of a heavy
merchantman just missed us, and went by, swift and irresistible
as an avalanche. My friend felt no further disposition to leave
the deck for a nap below after making an escape so narrow as
this. The ship that passed us was the Daniel Webster of New
York.
We remained on the banks until the first of November, pack-
ing down our catch in bulk in the hold, for which purpose our
schooner was prepared with a false bottom. The codfishing sea


son usually lasts until the end of November, but the fish were
getting so scarce that the Captain thought it would not pay to
remain any later than the first.
Cod fishing is done, as everybody, perhaps, knows, with a
line and a hook baited with lobsters, crab, clam, mussel, or any
small fish; for the cod is not at all particular what he eats. It
is common for a vessel employed in this service to carry about
three boats, from which the men, two in a boat, with two lines
apiece to manage, do the fishing, whenever the weather is not
too rough. Sometimes a line called a “bulltow,' 5 one thousand
to two thousand feet long, is stretched across the side, and sup-
ported by buoys, and from this fishing lines six feet long are
suspended at intervals of ten or twelve feet, with baited hooks.
These “bulltows” are set in the evening and in a good fishing
season are generally well strung with fish in the morning. In
this way are caught the best and largest fish, those too old and
wary to go near the boats.
Once under weigh for Provincetown we had a “spanking'’
breeze, and boomed it off at such a rate that in six days we were
alongside our wharf, where the fish were taken out of the hold
and washed. They are then dried upon ricks or rough platforms
built on shore, after which they are packed in storehouses ready
for market. However, this washing and packing was no part of
our business. We were discharged at the termination of our
cruise of four months, and I found myself a gainer by seventy
dollars clear.
Captain Green was to make his next voyage for mackerel and
wished us to go with him, but my friend, who admitted that sea-
going was a powerful remedy, insisted that while it was operat-
ing it was at least as bad as his disease had been, and declined
to ship again, and I kept with him. He had relatives at Water-
town, eight miles from Boston, aud we visited with them for a
couple of weeks, and then took the cars for Buffalo, arriving at
home about the last of November.
Shortly after this I went to Cincinnati. I passed the winter
and most of the following summer there and in Dayton, when I
again returned to my native place, with a view to go to sea


again. I had now lived on land nearly a year, and could stand
such nonsense no longer. “ Home is where the heart is,” and
mine was “on the rolling deep.”
I left Springville, which is in the town adjoining my native
Ashford, on election day, the first Tuesday in November, 1853,
for Boston. I was solicited there to take a boatsteerer’s berth in
a whaler that was to sail from Beverley, but I wanted a larger
vessel, and so w T ent down to New Bedford, where there were a
dozen different whalers fitting out. I shipped as steerer on the
the seventy-fifth lay in the ship Rebecca Sims, of five hundred
tons burthen, owned by Win. R. Rodman, Samuel Gavett, mas-
ter. The owners advanced me two hundred dollars for an outfit,
and we sailed on the 20th of November, our destination being
the northwest coast, and our game, of course, right whale. We
had the usual bother about getting all hands on board for a start.
The men were like the Irishman’s flea. The crew were got on
board with considerable trouble, and the petty officers with more.
We hung off all day, under the plea that the captain was not yet
on board, and the Captain was probably waiting to hear that the
men were all on board. Finally, when we were convinced that
the Captain had gone off to the ship and had been waiting two
hours for us, we gave in and followed him. In a few minutes
sail was made, and we stood out for blue water.
Our compliment was thirty-five men, all told, and by dint of
strict search and charitable judgment upon their condition,
enough were found who were deemed sufficiently sober to take
charge of the ship through the night, while the great majority
who had the good luck to be irresponsibly drunk had all night
in. The watch was busy during the first part of the night in
lashing and stowing the cargo, and in the morning the best pair
of eyes on the Rebecca Sims could not discern land. Our course
was laid for the Cape Verdes Islands, and for thirty days we had
a delightful run.
Capt. Gavett was the best man I ever sailed with. He was
too good. He spoiled such of his men, as good treatment could
spoil, and among sailors that class is not small. He spoiled his
own prospects as master of a whaling vessel, for he could never


get another after he returned from this voyage. However, I
hope he was able to live a happier life in some other occupation.
I certainly think he deserved it.
The Captain’s wife, who made the voyage with him, was not
so popular. In the first place sailors have a prejudice, pretty
generally justified, against women on board a ship. They think
a woman there is always in the way of somebody, and the Cap-
tain’s wife is generally in the way of everybody. For the want
of something else to do, she is constantly meddling with matters
that she does not understand, and influencing her husband to
neglect his duty for her, to shirk the danger and exposure in-
seperable from a faithful discharge of his office, and instigating
him to acts that annoy and irritate the crew.
Mrs. Gavett was a fine lady, and a fine looking lady—all the
worse, we thought, for a woman in her position of a sailor. She
was unnecessarily haughty, or rather supercilious, towards the
men, going out of her way sometimes to intimate her contempt
for them. On the other hand we did not lack for ways in which
to make her understand we Considered her more a nuisance than
otherwise. We had a story among us, with a good deal of truth
in it, I believe, that she was fast, and that the Captain brought
her along to save her character and his purse. During the
beautiful weather that favored our run to the Cape Yerdes, she
passed most of the day time on deck, where a chair was set for
her, she not having, in sailor’s phrase, “got on her sea legs,” if
it is not irreverent to suppose that the Captain’s wife possesses
these members.
Arrived at the Cape Yerdes, we entered the channel between
St. Yincent and St. Antonio, and stood off and on, while the
Second Mate’s boat was lowered and I steered the Captain and
lady ashore at the town. The American sloop of war, “Dale,”
and my former vessel, the Willis, were lying there. The man
who was mate of the Willis when I sailed in her was now master
of her. We remained away from the Sims all day, during which
time Capt. Gavett and his lady visited the sloop of war. In the
evening we returned to our vessel with a very short supply of
the fruits, &c., that we needed, and sailed for Cape Horn.


We touched at the Falkland Islands in the hope to get a
supply of fresh fish, and water fowl, great numbers of the latter
frequenting these islands in the breeding seasons, which it now
was, being the midsummer of the Southern hemisphere. Enter-
ing a small bay we produced our lines and hooks and two guns,
and lowered the boats. Yery little speed was made at fishing.
We caught about fifty, weighing from half a pound to a pound ;
and then landed to try our luck at fowling. In a short time we
secured six geese, and filled a keg, boat, bucket, &c., —about
three bushels in all—with eggs, when we returned on board with
our plunder and made sail.
The Falkland Islands are about two hundred in number, with
an area of six thousand square miles, of which the two principal
islands, East and West Falkland, comprise five-sixths. They are
inhabited, the population being about five hundred. Their ap-
pearance and character is bleak and dreary, and they are with-
out trees. The climate is not so cold as one would suppose, from
the fact that they lie at fifty-two degrees south, and it is claimed
that it is milder than that of England. The only quadruped
native to the island is an animal called the warrah, or wolf fox,
but various other animals introduced from Europe thrive well,
and it is said that there is nearly fifty thousand head of ■wild
cattle on the islands. The most notable object to be seen on the
shores are the flocks, or rather, as they appear standing upon the
beach, armies of Penquins. These are clumsy birds, with only
make-believe wings. They usually stand in rows at the water’s
edge, with their heads elevated, and, as in that position, they are
about four feet high, they present considerable resemblance to
soldiers in a black and white uniform. They go on shore only
in the breeding season, fur though they stand very erect, they
cannot move about on the land, except by an awkward crawling
motion, assisted by their club wings, and yet they get along
pretty fast too. They have sharp bills, but are w r eb-footed, and
splendid swimmers ; and though they cannot fly in the air, they
can under water, where they use their tin-like wings with won-
derful effect. Their flesh is so black and fishy that it is only
eaten as a last resoit to prevent starvation.
10


The usual course of vessels doubling Cape Horn is to bear
well south, so as to be sure of clear sailing in the frequent
squalls of that latitude, but Captain Gavett had somehow an idea
that a better course was to keep close to land, and pass through
the Strait of Le Maire, a channel about twenty miles wide, I
suppose, between the island of Staten and the eastern part of
Tierra del Fuego. The weather was fine when we entered the
Straits, but our progress was slow, and the second night we had a
rain squall, during which we could hear the dismal and danger-
ous music of the breakers raging against the rocky coast about
five miles off. However, as the next morning came off fair, the
captain began to felicitate himself upon the saving of time he
had effected by this manuoevre.
We were sailing along finely, some six miles from shore, when 5
right off the pitch of Cape Good Success, the wind failed, and a
squall met us. Clouds on a sudden gathered round us thick as
night, and settled so low as to hide the hill tops on the shore.
In an hour it was blowing a severe gale right in our teeth, and
we had taken in all sail except close reef raaintopsail, foresail,
jib and spanker. It was now the day watch ; night was coming
on, and we were drifting in unknown currents before a fierce
gale, partly in direction of the Strait, and partly upon the rock
bound coast, which lay under our stern at an angle of forty-five
degrees, with the course of the wind.
The gale wore round still more southerly, and it began to rain,
and this again turned to snow. It seemed as if all was up with
us. The whole ship’s company, the captain’s wife not excepted,
were gathered on deck. As darkness closed in around us, the
last we saw was a point of jagged and pitiless rocks but a short
way off, and directly under our lee. Nothing short of a power-
ful current setting off from that point could save us from imme-
diate shipwreck and certain death. The night grew darker, the
gale increased. We kept the ship’s head to the wind, but we
could hear the full roaring of the breakers, apparently but a few
yards from the stern. We were wet, cold, and exhausted, and
at four bells of the first night watch, Captain Gavett ordered
the men to be supplied with as much grog as they chose to drink.


Every hope and every effort to control the motions of the ship
was now abandoned. We furled the jib, and let her go, all
hands gathering aft in a huddle. At eight bells we heard a crash
aloft, and supposed one of the topmasts was gone, but the dark-
ness was inpenetrable to the sight, and no one stirred to ascertain
what was the matter. In this situation of awful suspense we
drove before the tempest all night long as helpless as a log.
When daylight came we rallied sufficiently from the stupor,
into which exposure and danger had thrown us, to observe that
the fore and main royal masts had been blown away like straws.
We made no effort to regain control of the vessel until eight
bells of the afternoon watch, when the wind suddenly lulled, and
we made sail on her again. First we loosed and set the main-
sail, and then the foretopsail and jib and mizen topsail, and
finally crowding on all the sail we could, we bore southward un-
til we reached latitude sixty degrees, and then beat up to west-
ward against a head wind forty days. In doing this we stood on
the larboard tack until we reached the ice, and then an equal
time upon the other tack until we found ourselves fairly round
the Cape, when we took a favorable southerly wind, and stretched
away for the islands under a press of sail.
We “raised” the mountains of Hawaii the last of February,
and soon after got to the windward—northward—of our port,
Lahaina, intending to run down the passage, ten miles wide, be-
tween Mani and Molokai. It was pretty dark when we squared
away the yards for this purpose, and put the ship before the wind.
In the obscurity, the Bay of Haraakua was mistaken for the
Strait, and about midnight, while running at ten knots, we
brought up all standing on a sand bar. I was below asleep at
the time. I have a pretty clear idea of what a “ shot from a
shovel ” is like, for the way I was landed out of my birth was a
forcible illustration of it. I “ went kiteing,” but as will happen,
under such circumstances the deck caught me. The men on the
spar deck were flung prostrate, and every one was more or less
stunned by the shock. The lamps were all extinguished, and as
soon as we could find our displaced clothes by grouping in the
darkness, we hurried on deck-—all hands—without waiting to be


called. Among the crowd who stood dumbfounded around
the captain was his handsome wife. She seemed to be even
worse affected than she had been under far more fearful circum-
stances in the Strait of Le Maire. But allowance must be made
for a lady surprised so rudely in the midst of pleasant dreams.
“Oh ! Samuel,” she cried in the tones of despair, “Oh ! Samuel,
what shall we do?” To be ready for the worst, in case the ship’s
bottom was stove in, the boats were cleared away, and put in a
shape to be used upon the shortest notice, and then the mate in-
dicated his intention to try and back her clear of the bar.
“ You can’t get her off, I think,” said the captain.
“ Belay everything,” shouted the mate. “ Brace up the yards !
Haul in the port braces!”
As soon as these orders were obeyed, the sails filled aback, and
in answer to the pressure, as the gentle swell of the sea lifted her
keel from the sand, the Rebecca Sims slid gracefully into deep
water, where she floated all right, and not materially injured.
Putting her upon the larboard tack, we stood northward to the
entrace of the true channel, and then squareing away the yards
again, at day break, we were off Lahaina, the principal port of
Mani, where we anchored.
Lahaina has no harbor but the anchorage is good, and well
sheltered by the island itself from the prevailing winds. There
is a coral reef half a mile from shore that prevents a nearer ap-
proach. We lay a week there, taking in supplies, during which
we were allowed two days liberty ashore, each.
When all was ready we got under way for the Okhotsk Sea,
in company with the whaling bark “ Ycsper,” of Hew London.
There was a bet between the two skippers as to which should
arrive first on our fishing ground. We beat her by one day,
making the run from Lahaina in twenty days, and entering the
Okhotsk Sea about May first. The ice had left already, and we
stood up the sea to Jonas Island, opposite Shanty (as we
called it, though I believe its real name is SJiantar ,) where we
took one whale. We then entered the bay, which was still pretty
full of ice. There are three entrances of which we passed through
that one known as the “India” passage, anchoring near the edge


of the icefield. Here we fastened to a whale which ran under
the ice and dragged the boat against it. Just as all our line was
run out the whale stopped at an air hole to breathe, and the men
of the other boats got to him and killed him. They cut our line
from the harpoon, and we hauled it in, and then shoved away
from the side of the iceberg against which we had been towed.
We had got but a little way from the berg, which was thirty feet
high, when it rolled over with crushing force, directly upon the
spot we had occupied. I consider this one of the narrowest
escapes I ever made in the whole course of a life of danger and
adventure.
We got our whale out of the ice with some considerable labor,
which was pretty well repaid by a yield of two hundred and ten
barrels of oil, with baleen in proportion.
The ice in the bay stretched around it in a semicircular form,
but there was everywhere a clear space next to the shore, to
which the game had retreated to escape pursuit. We hauled our
boats ten miles over the ice into this clear water, where we soon
got two whales, but could not get out with them, so we anchored
them and passed the night on shore, where there was plenty of
drift wood for a fire.
Our camp that night was near a high and inaccessible point
of rocks, which I had visited three summers, and always found a
bald eagle’s nest there, watched by probably the same pair of
birds, as these eagles are said to nest on the same spot for thirty
years in succession. The place we called “ Eagle Point.”
We remained in the neighborhood the next day and night,
without taking any more whales, and then as threatening weather
came on we went on board ship, leaving our game anchored.
Before we were long on board it began to blow a severe gale.
We put down both our anchors, and paid out all our cable, but
the ice, driven by the wind, came down upon us in such force
that we were carried out to sea with the loss of our anchors.
We now went in search of the Yesper, from which we got an
anchor, and then returned to the bay again, though not till after
an absence of a month. The search for our two whale was a
vain one. They were gone, anchors and all. The first vessel


that warped in among the ice had probably stolen them. At all
events she had secured one thousand eight hundred barrels before
the whales began to grow scarce. They were plentiful for a
while after we got in and we saved eight hundred barrels. Soon
there were fifty or sixty vessels in the bay, and then the only
chance to get anything was to go off in boats and visit the bays
and inlets. It was usual to take provisions for a week, and camp
on the beach. Sometimes there were eighty men together at one
encampment from the different vessels. Whenever the weather
was bad we built bough houses for protection, and kept large fires
burning.
There were plenty of white and cinnamon bears in the woods,
and their special haunt was the beach, where they feasted on the
carcases of the whales we killed. The cinnamon bear is probably
so called from his color, though I never saw one quite so light as
cinnamon. He is a gaunt, long legged, active fellow, and prob-
ably first cousin to the brown bear of America. There were also
numbers of fur foxes, black and gray.
As whales grew scarce and the weather warm, the men grew
lazy, and were more disposed to enjoy a good time than to stick
to business. They would meet and land, spin yarns and kill
time by a variety of methods generally considered more pleasant
than hard work. One day a boat from the “ Robin Hood,” of
Mystic, landed, and the crew, except one man who was left in
charge of the boat, went strolling in pairs “to see what they could
see.” The man in the boat kept her, as usual, some thirty feet
from the beach to prevent her taking any injury from pounding
on the rocks, or being left dry by the receding tide. Two of the
men, in the course of their ramble, found a bear’s young cub,
and thinking they had struck a nice thing, they picked the little
fellow up, and made for the boat. The cub cried for help and
soon his captors saw the old bear in pursuit, so taking a hint
they started on the run. Arrived at the beach they plunged into
the water, bruin following. Before they reached the boat she
was within reach of the man that carried the cub, and struck at
his head, peeling it, not quite so neatly as a Camanche Indian
would have done, but more completely. He now dropped the


cub, which the dam took in her teeth, and went away, with many
a threatening look behind at the discomfited sailors. One man,
at least, of that party was sick of that “soldiering” trip. Another
man under similar circumstances was killed outright, the old
bear crushing the life out of him with a hug.
After a while our jolly skippers began to “ smell a mice,” as
the saying is, and concluded that to send the men on shore to
play was not a paying prgcess, and they accordingly discontin-
ued it.
The whales had now been mostly driven to sea, where they
remained through the day coming in at night to feed, and it was
determined to try night hunting. The system of anchor watches
was adopted, whose duty it became to call the officers whenever
they heard whales blowing, which was generally about midnight.
All hands would then turn out and lower away the boats as
silently as possible so as not to galley the whales, which were
perhaps close around the ship. The different crews then rowed
their respective boats a little way from the ship and lay still
until a whale came up to them. They would then strike the
game and call the name of their vessel which brought its other
boats to their aid.
This business is very dangerous, much the more so of any
mode of hunting whale. Many boats were stove, and more men
drowned before the Captains could agree to quit it. The lay
swarmed with vessels, and rivalry and competition were warm
and active, which increased the danger.
We now cruised round generally for a while, and then ran
still farther up the Bay, and after which the boats were sent out
with orders to scatter and hunt singly. I went with the second
mate’s boat in different cruises of fifty miles. Each tide was
capable of carrying us ten miles, and we used to let her drift
when we had once got away from the ship, as one direction was
just as good luck as another. Once as we were sweeping sea-
ward with the tide we discovered a number of whales “breach-
ing” as the term is—that is at play, leaping out of water and
falling back again with a loud report, which when the wind is
still and the sea smooth, can be heard a long distance. Singling


one out from the sporting herd we made for him, and placed
ourselves as near as we could judge to where ho last went down.
As a general thing a whale does not rise very near to the spot
where he goes down, still, if you are where he went down you
are at the nearest point to every place where he can possibly rise.
In this case, however, the monster came up directly alongside of
us, and in his fall we narrowly escaped being crushed. Had he
fallen upon us, it might as well have been an iceberg. We were
wet all over and the boat partly filled with water, but we seized
our paddles and rushed up and fastened to him. He went down,
came up, and in ten minutes he was dead. We were three days
towing the carcass to the ship, floating or pulling with the tide,
and anchoring when the tide was against us. Our boat took
fourteen whales that season, beating the others by “chalks.”
It was now getting late in the season and the ships were leav-
ing. We had taken a great many whales, but most of them
were small and poor, some only yielding forty to fifty barrels.
Following the general example we “cracked on sail” and stood
for the mouth of the sea. As we reached it there were three
other ships in sight, when the wind hauled to the northeast, and
it began to snow. I never saw such another snow storm. It
fell in drifts and banks. As we could not get out against the
head wind, we tacked and ran back into the sea where we lay to
under short sail for three weary days. The water was shoal, and
from its muddy look I should judge that the short and wicked
sea which tossed us about so unmercifully, stirred it to the very
bottom. The ship pitched frantically and every timber in her
was tried as far as wind and water could try it. We were con-
gratulating ourselves that she bore the test so nobly, when she
ran under one billow more fierce and violent than the rest, which
carried away our jib boom, flying jib boom, and fore and main-
top gallant masts, which went completely by the board, and lay
trailing in the sea alongside. To get these portions of our rig-
ging on board again was a bitter job, for every thing was frozen
stiff'. However, by dint of resolute endeavqj; we accomplished
the task at last, and stowed away the impracticable mass of icy
spars and equally icy and almost as stiff ropes, for nothing better
could be done with them at present.


Finally, to our great relief the wind changed to the northwest,
which was fair for our purpose, and we stretched away for Hilo ;
which we reached in a run of twenty-five days. Hilo is a port
situated on the east northeast side of the island of Hawaii. The
town is only about twenty-five miles distant from the base of
Mauna Loa, the most noted volcano in the Pacific Islands. It
was in November, 1854, that we arrived at Hilo, and the same
month began that remarkable eruption of the mountain, to which
I have heretofore referred. A stream of lava from one of the
many craters started in the direction of the town, but Mr. Coan,
the missionary there, went up to the mountain and prayed, and
soon after the lava stopped flowing that way. The whole coun-
try was lit up with the unearthly gleam of the lava. I extract
from the “New American Cyclopaedia'’ an account of Mauna
Loa, and of its more recent eruptions.
“Its height, as ascertained by Lieutenant Wilkes, is thirteen
thousand seven hundred and fifty-eight feet. From the sea it
presents the appearance of a smooth regular hill of no great
elevation, clad with forests part way up its sides, and founded
off at the top like a dome. It has been built up by the accre-
tions hurled from the bowels of the earth by volcanic agency (to
which indeed the whole island owes its origin), but unlike other
volcanoes Mauna Loa has no cone of ashes. Its craters are
numerous, occuring on the summit and on the sides, and new
ones are frequently opening. The terminal crater is about fifteen
thousand feet in length, and eight thousand in width ; its west
bank is seven hundred and eighty-four feet deep, and its east
bank four hundred and seventy feet. The bottom was reached
by Wilkes, who describes it as traversed by ridges from ten to
fifty feet in height, alternating with deep chasms, smooth beds of
hardened lava, and fissures from which issue clouds of steam and
smoke. A short distance to the north of it is a smaller crater,
and when Wilkes was there two others were to be seen on the
summit. The whole top of the mountain is one expanse of lava
which has been thrown out in a fluid state, and lies like a smooth
mass of metal, or in vast beds of clinkers, spread over an area of
miles, and occasionally raised from ten to twenty feet above the
11


surrounding surface. There is no rock nor sand to be seen.
“On the southeast side of the mountain is a pit crater, thirty-
eight feet deep by two hundred in diameter, in which Dr. Judd,
who accompanied Wilkes, was overtaken by a sudden eruption,
and narrowly escaped death, though not without*a few burns.
In twelve minutes from the first outbreak the pit was full of mol-
ten lava. On the same side of the mountain, at an elevation of
four thousand one hundred and four feet above the sea, is the
great crater of Kilanca, which is three and a half miles long,
two and a half wide, and ten hundred and forty-four feet deep.
A black ledge of hardened lava, from six hundred to two thous-
and feet in width, surrounds it at a depth of six hundred and
sixty feet, and the bottom is occupied by a surging lake of liquid
fire, over which hangs a cloud silvery by day, and glowing red
by night.
“Vapors and steam escape from numerous apertures, and even
in times when the fires are comparatively at rest, masses of red
hot matter are every now and then cast up to the height of sixty
or seventy feet. On the 17th of January, 1841, the lake over-
flowed, and in one night discharged about fifteen million cubic
feet of lava, while the discharge from the small pit, which has
been called Judd’s Lake, was calculated to amount in a day to
two hundred million cubic feet.
“Kilanca was long held in awe by the natives as the abode of
the Goddess Pele ; and the slender threads of the hardened lava
spray which are collected around it are called by them Pole’s
hair.
“During the four or five years previous to 1860, Manna Loa
was unusually active. A violent eruption of thirteen months
occurred, mostly in the year 1855. Another began January 23,
1859. Three new craters were opened in the side of the moun-
tain, the highest being about ten thousand feet above the sea.
The two lower were the scenes of the most violent action. They
are about a mile apart, and were described, by an observer as
two cones of pumice and lava, each about one hundred and fifty
feet high ; from the lower one, which was nearly one thousand
feet in diameter, rose a column of liquid lava from one hundred


to two hundred feet high. From this place the fiery torrent
found its way by a subterraneous passage to an outlet about halt
a mile distant, where it bubbled up in a pool a few rods wide,
and poured in a cataract at a white heat over a precipice of titty
feet. It spread over the whole lower slope ot the mountain in a
net work of streams, and passing around the north side, reached
the sea in five days, destroying a fishing village in its way. r ihe
meeting of the lava and the waves is described as one of the
most terrific sights ever witnessed. The flow still continued into
the November following ; the lava on reaching the water, lull
forty miles distant from the crater, w r as still at a light red heat,
and moved with a velocity of two or three miles an hour. The
stream of lava was in some places five or six miles wide. Kil-
anca in the meantime continued comparatively quiet, but its
fiery lake was gradually increasing in size, and in November,
1859, had risen to a level with the black ledge described by
Wilkes, but it never runs over, being discharged by subterranean
channels. Several shocks of earthquake occurred during the
great eruption of 1859.”
Captain Guvott and his wife and the mate made a visit to
Kilanca, which is several miles nearer than the main dome of
Manna Loa to Hilo. They brought back some curiosities in the
way of lava, and reported having visited hot springs, in which
they cooked ham and eggs, and having seen a variety of other
wonders common to a volcanic region.
There is a creek which enters the sea at Hilo, and the wator
is usually considered good. But that we took on board at this
time was so affected by the sulphurous gases in the earth and
air that it was undrinkable after being awhile at sea, and we
were obliged to throw it overboard.
Hilo has only some twelve houses, and sixty inhabitants. It
boasts one store, and one hotel, saloon, or groggery, as you
please to call it. The best and only really respectable looking
house is that of the Mission, occupied at that time by Mr. Coan
ana family. Half'the houses in the place were kept to rent to
such skippers as wished to live ashore while in port. Besides
the houses which I have reckoned as forming the town proper,


quite a number of native huts were scattered along the beach for
a mile or two each way. At the time I speak of, there were
twelve si lips in port, the anchorage being two miles distant from
the town, and we used to land and walk or ride to it.
We passed our time, when ashore, in visiting around from
hut to hut, eating the fruits of the country, which were plentiful,
and, as we paid liberally, we wore welcomed everywhere. One
of the native fruits is peculiar. It is called a mummy apple,
and is of the size of a pint bowl. Its shape is that of a pear,
and its flavor somewhat that of a paw-paw.
We experienced some dreadful thunder storms while we lay
at Hilo. In one of these the ship “11110013,” of New Bedford,
was struck by lightning and had her main royalmast and main-
topmast shivered. The subtle and destructive fluid on reaching
deck seemed to have lost its force, and passed out at the scup-
pers, doing no further damage.
We lay there two months, each man being on shore one-half
the time. Then, having a supply of wood and water on board,
we "ot under weigh for Honolulu, where we did not anchor, but
lay off and on for supplies, wanting Irish potatoes most. We
got some, though a limited supply, and then we sailed for Hawaii
again, entering Ivealakeakua Bay, where Capt. Cook was killed
by the Islanders. There is a monument there to his memory,
erected by the English. Wo got as many potatoes there as we
wanted, and then sailed for Lower California, where we cruised
off the mouth of the Gulf and in the neighborhood of Cape St.
Lucas, in company with the ship Liverpool, of New Bedford,
until late in February, without success. All we got was a few
blackflsh, which wo captured more for the purpose of “ keeping
our hand in” than anything else. They arc poor game, yield-
ing only about live barrels of oil each.
Discouraged by our ill luck, we left early for the north, taking
the Islands in our way. Making all sail, wo reached Lahaina
March 17th, 1855. There wo had liberty for a week, and then
hove up anchor and stood for Okhotsk Sea, under a full press
of canvas. We entered the sea about the last of April. The
ice was so far gone that we advanced to Cape Oliver, (Aniva,)


where we sighted a whale. Lowering the boats, we lastened to
him, when he made directly for the ice, which still lined the shore
and covered the interior portions of the sea. He towed the boat
after him for some distance, but before the boat touched the ice
he gave out, when wo hauled him up and killed him. The oil
we got frftn him was considerably above the average yield in
that sea, being something over one hundred and fifty barrels.
In that vicinity we cruised till May Ist, taking three whales.
By this time there were sixty ships in the sea, and wc leit
Cape Aniva and made our way up to Jonas Island, where we
found the ship “ Edgar ” wrecked. She had taken one thous-
and barrels of oil this season, bat in the full tide of success she
had run on the rocks and stove her bottom in. Her cargo was
mostly lost. Wc picked up four casks, equal to twenty barrels.
There were, besides the oil, casks of provisions, &c., floating
about promiscuously, but by this time mostly spoiled. Wc took
off part of the crew, and the “ Sheffield” took the rest.
The Spring was cold and backward, and there was still con-
siderable snow to be seen on the hills, but the ice was nearly
We cruised to the head of the sea; then took a northwest
course and visited Ayan, where a war steamer was building.
This was in the time of the Crimean or Russian war. AVhen
the steamer was about half finished, an English fleet came from
Hong Kong, took the place and burned the unfinished vessel,
the inhabitants of the town, about fifty in number, fleeing to the
country. From Ayan the fleet sailed for Petrpavlovsk, or Pe-
terpaulowski, a Russian town on the eastern side of the Penin-
sula of Kamschatka. The Russians, warned of the enemy’s ap-
proach, but being weak in numbers, employed a volunteer force
of American whalemen to defend the town. The consequence
was that the British were badly beaten, and retreated with heavy
loss. On the way to Hong Kong, the commander of the fleet
committed suicide from chagrin at his failure.
We cruised some time in and about Dobra Bay, where some
forty of the ships were congregated, several of the skippers hav-
ing their wives with them. As the weather became warm and
pleasant, a pic-nic -party was formed, and each ship entering into


the arrangement sent its quota of edibles to a spot selected on
shore, where all the ladies, and as many of the other sex as they
chose to have invited, met and had a jolly good time. The
cloths were laid under the shadow of the firs, and the viands
were discussed amid a good deal of merriment, while a party
of natives stood by and looked on with an interest that seemed
to border on astonishment. You, dear reader, may be thinking
of the romance of a pic-nic dinner under the sighing firs on
the coast of northeastern Asia, but the best part of the joke to ns
who happened to beiof the boats’ crews, was that we were allowed
to make such a meal as we might out of the crumbs and scraps
that “ our betters” left. The pic-nic w T as followed by a dance
on board the “ Sheffield,” to the music of violins and clarionets,
for almost every whaler has something to boast in the way of
musicians and musical instruments. The dance was prolonged
well into the morning of the next day, when the party broke up,
and the persons composing it returning to their several ships
resumed business—all but the Captains’ wives, who I contend
had no business there.
Being now nearly out of wood and water, we sailed to Bow-
head Island, where we anchored and supplied ourselves with
fuel and then returned to Dobra Bay, in which we lay at anchor
two weeks. We were ashore daily, fishing for salmon, which
were very plentiful in a small river there. We fished with a
seine. It is a fact not generally understood, that so far as is
known, the true salmon never eats anything while in fresh water
consequently it cannot be caught wdth a hook. Ho fish is sup-
plied with a finer outfit of teeth, or a more capacious mouth as
compared with the size of its body; and the presumption of
course is that in the salt sea they do a great deal of eating, but
what they eat I do not know, for among millions almost that 1
have seen dressed, nothing in the shape of food w T as ever found
in the intestines. High authority, perhaps the very highest,
among naturalists, states that the salmon will sometimes bite
at the artificial fly, but I set up my experience and the testimony
of othel’s of still greater experience, in opposition to theory, and
assert that the real salmon never takes any food whatever while
in fresh water.


The quantities of salmon we caught in that stream were as-
tonishing. We took thirty barrels in a single day, salting them
down for market in the Islands, where they were worth $2O to
$25 a barrel. The crew were entitled to a share of the money
that these salmon brought, but by some hocus pocus they were
“ diddled” out of it, mostly, the amounts they got being merely
nominal. My own share amounted to the sum of five dollars.
Dobra (Good) Bay settlement consisted of some twenty houses in-
habited by Tungouscs. They live mostly by fishing and hunting.
In summer they lay up large supplies of smoked fish, ducks, geese
and other game, which they eat in winter without cooking. Some
of the Tungouse women I think very pretty. They make mittens,
moccasins and clothes for the men in a manner peculiar to them-
selves, and we bought gloves of their manufacture. These people
ail dress in the skins of the fur seal, even in the summer time.
They arc very hospitable, and great eaters. When any of us
went among them, we had to eat our way through the settle-
ment, house by house, as the greenhorn ate the whole bill of fare,
dish by dish. To pass any house without entering to partake
of the cheer which the family had to offer was not tolerated on
any account. The refreshments consisted generally of berries
and tea. Their berries look a good deal like our blackberries,
but they grow on bushes and stems only three or four inches
high, one berry to a bush. We used to buy them and pay in
tea.
There was one Tungouse woman there whom we all admired
as being particularly handsome. Captain Gavett’s lady dressed
her up in a civilized rig, with a set of car rings, breast pin,
finger ring, &c., and she presented a very fine appearance. We
have no account of the Tungouse youths who broke their hearts
or their necks in consequence, but it is probable that their name
was legion.
Having laid in a supply of water we again got under way,
and re-commenced cruising for a larger game than salmon. One
more month of whaling would complete the present voyage, and
we should be on the “ home stretch,” Sailor as I was by nature
and habit, 1 cannot deny that I was a little homesick at this time,


and eager to get back to Yankeedom. I even went so far jjs to
form my thousandth resolution to go no more to sea.
Arrived off Ayan, wo learned that the ship “Alexander
Coffin ” having sprung a leak, had put in there to discharge
cargo, and if possible, repair. She was found to bo quite
nnseaworthy, and was condemned and sold to the highest bidder,
there being some twenty whaling vessels in port at the time.
We anchored and Captain Gavett went on board the “ Coffin,”
which was sunk at the wharf, and her master, Captain Purrinton,
engaged the “ Sims” to carry fourteen hundred barrels of his
cargo of oil, or their equivalent, to the Islands. Accordingly,
we took on board one thousand barrels of oil, besides provisions,
and most of the “ Coffin’s ” crew, and as the whaling season was
well past we made sail for Hawaii.
A fine passage of six days carried us down the Sea of Okh-
otsk, and out into the broad ocean, where we were met by a
strong wind from the northwest. There were five vessels in
sight all bearing on the same course as ourselves. The wind in-
creased to a gale, and on the third day out of the sea the weather
was tremendous. We took in all our canvas except close-reefed
maintopsail and foresail, and let her run. That gale lasted a-
week. The waves were perfectly mountainous in their propor-
tions, and as our heavily-laden vessel rushed through the seeth-
ing waters down the precipitous sides of each titanic billow, it
seemed simply impossible that she should ever climb to the
spumy crest of the next, which at times appeared to overhang
her very masthead. Luckily, such a wind cannot last always,
and this one finally subsided to a light but favorable breeze that
carried us to the Islands. In about twenty days from the Okh-
otsk, and the impending winter, we anchored once more at Hilo
in the sunny Hawaii.
Of course, we had entertained no other thought than that of
soon sailing for “ home,” but to our chagrin wo found that the
owners had sent out a supply of provisions to last another season.
Most of the crew desired their discharge, but the Captain refused
it to them, when several of the men before the mast determined
to run away, and told him so. He replied that they could do as


the/ liked about it, but that if they ran away lie should catch
them, and they would have to pay the expense of the catching.
In spite of this threat and the strong probability that he would
be able to carry it out, six men deserted. Captain Gavett offered
the Kanakas a reward of five dollars for the return of each man
and they had been gone only three days when they were brought
back bound, and strung pig-fashion on poles which the Kanakas
carried on their shoulders. When the runaways were on board,
the Captain called them aft and reminded them of the warning
he had given them.
“ I told you,” he said, “ that I would catch you; and all the
result to you is the loss of five dollars each when you get home.
Another time I will flog you.”
The men replied doggedly that they would try it again if they
got a chance, and the conseqeuce was that all the foremast men
were denied any further liberty. So the misbehavior of the six
cost the crew their dearly earned and much prized privileges,
and got only two weeks at large when they would otherwise
have had a month. But this did not particularly affect me, for
the officers and boat-steerers were allowed ashore as usual.
The mate, however, and one of the boat-steerers got their dis-
charge, and went home on the ship “ Rambler” of New Bedford.
Wg attended church on shore, and heard the Rev. Mr. Coan
preach to the natives. The discourse was in the Kanaka lan-
guage entirely, as wo sailors were considered either too far gone,
or of too little account to be saved. We could only understand
a word—possibly a sentence —here and there ; the most impor-
tant being “powrore mucka,” or something sounding like it, the
meaning of which is to the effect that “Kanakas must all die,”
Mr. Coan lived in the missionary building, a fine house splen-
didly furnished, and surrounded by grounds set with beautiful
trees. The missionaries are paid by the A raerican Missionary
Society twelve hundred dollars a year each, besides which the
Kanakas are made to pay them fifty cents a month, and if we
wanted religious books or tracts we had to pay for them. These
humble servants of the meek and lowly Master would not speak
to the petty officers of a whale ship, much less to a common
12 v


sailor, but a skipper, uo matter what his character or antecedents
is their especial delight. They pet and flatter him to his heart’s
content.
There are some schools near Hilo taught by Americans, and
at one of these, of which a Mr, Lyman was head, we used to call
sometimes and hear the pupils recite in the oily native language
which has fewer consonants than the English, and those few very
slightly pronounced. A Kanaka can speak several of his sen-
tences in succession, sometimes without shutting his mouth, from
the fact that the more difficult consonants, such as m, &c.,
rarely (and several of them never) occur in their tongue. It
was queer enough to see a little fellow open his mouth and let
his lesson pour out of him with scarcely more apparent effort on
Ids part than just about what a jug makes in being emptied ot
water.
We lay at Hilo two months at this time, and having supplied
ourselves with water we sailed for Honolulu, which we reached
in three days from the former port. On the trip we sailed
through the Anan Passage, a channel some ten miles wide, be-
tween the islands of Molokai and Banai, or Laui, lor the nativas
do not make, and cannot understand the difference between r
and I. The wind was light, and we were under easy sail, about
live miles from either shore, and as the weather was fine, all
hands were on deck when eight bells struck for noon and dinner.
The men “all huddled below in good order,” as the song says,
only the man at the wheel being left behind.
Dinner over, we came leisurely on deck, one by one, and one
by one discovered that “Bill,” the man whose “trick” it was to
steer, had left his post, but not without lashing the helm so that
the “Rebecca Sims” kept on her way rejoicing, or if not rejoicing,
at worst showing no sign of distress. We supposed Bill had
found occasion to leave his post a moment, but were surprised
that no one had seen him, or could give any account of him.
Finally the mate called, but received no answer. It soon became
apparent that Bill was not on board the ship, and it was of course
concluded that he had fallen overboard. As “Blind Jack”—that
is nobody —had kept the vessel on her course, the lost sailor


might be five miles astern, and if alive, would be swimming for
one shore or the other ; and as it would be next to impossible to
find him among the multitudinous waves, we kept on our course.
The next summer we found Bill up north on board another
vessel. lie was one of those who had deserted at Hilo, and he
made good his promise to desert again by swimming five miles
with his clothes lashed to his back in water swarming with sharks,
lie was master of all the modes of swimming, and resorted to
them all many times before he reached shore, where he was
barely able to crawl out of the gentle surf on his hands and
knees. He was quite exhausted, and it took some nursing by the
natives to bring him round, A more daring and desperate feat
has seldom been performed in any cause.
At Honolulu we lay off and on for four days. The captain
and lady were on shore during the time. There were five or six
ships near us, from each of which one or more men deserted, and
as many as three were devoured by sharks, in the attempt to swim
ashore. We sent a boat to town each day for supplies, and one
day two men of the boat’s crew ran away. On the fourth day
the captain and wife came on board, and the report was that the
natives and police were on the track of the deserters, but I sup-
pose the promise of a flogging, if they were caught again, made
them cunning and nimble. Anyway they baffled their pursuers,
and we had to sail without them.-’
Mrs. Gavett had now sailed two consecutive seasons in the
Sims, and the captain wished her to remain ashore the ensuing
year, but she refused to be left at Honolulu.
Leaving port we sailed southward, touching at Atawai, where
we arrived in the evening, and lay off and on till the next day.
We then stood in to within a mile from shore, and lowered the
second mate’s boat, and the captain went on shore in her. The
result of this raid was two pigs and a dozen chickens all told ?
with which the boat returned. We tried again with no result
whatever, and so being a little disgusted we squared away the
yards and held on our own course to the southward, , intend-
ing to pass the remainder of the winter cruising on the line.
That night I shall never forget. It is distinguished among all


the nights I ever experienced in those latitudes by a squall which
lasted only four hours, but which was just as welcome to quit
when it did as if it lasted a week. During its continuance, the
darkness was thick and utter, except when it was rendered
momentarily visible by such Hashes of lightning, as we seemed
to feel as well as see. The rain came down in cataracts, and the
wind blew a tornado. The onslaught of the storm was so sudden
and furious that there was no chance for the waves to rise ; and
while the ocean lay still as if awestruck at the violence of the
blast, the spray and foam were lifted up like the same bulk of
feathers, and driven in vast sheets along the sin-face of the sea.
The thunder must have been terrific, yet we could but faintly
hear the reports that accompanied—not followed the lightning—
so overwhelming was the din that the hurricane made as it
passed over ns. The ship, with bare poles, was put before the
wind, and I was sent by the captain to help the man at the
wheel keep her there. We had all wo wanted to do. When the
storm lulled we were nearly sixty miles from where we had lain
four hours before.
A month later we were cruising on the line under easy sail
looking out for sperm whales. The first land we sighted in that
region was Ascension Island, which is very low, the trees being
visible before the land. The natives came on board with fruits,
which they were eager to trade for tobacco. As they were
dressed in suits of cocoa nut oil, only without a rag of anything
else about them, the captain’s wife voted them a great curiosity,
and gave them considerable of her attention. They are nearly
amphibious, in which respect, however, they do not greatly differ
from the other natives of Polynesia. They mostly swam to and
from the ship, taking to the water at least as readily as a water
spaniel. In speaking of their dress, I forgot to mention the
tattooing with which the males are covered from head to foot.
This is performed upon them in childhood, and seems to be
among them more than anything else, the distinctive glory of the
masculine gender, for females have none of it except a strip run-
ning from each corner of their mouths down under their chins.
Their is one objection to a coat (or petticoat, as the case may be)


of cocoanut oil, which is, that in a country where soap is as yet
an undiscovered luxury, the garment is hard to get off, and after
a while it "becomes rancid, when, to an uneducated nostiil, it
smells bad. From the bark of the cocoa tree the women make
mats and blankets which are very prettily painted. These
blankets are carried over the shoulders or around the waist by
grand people, or even by common folks on grand occasions.
The natives, besides these articles, broifght baskets of beautiful
shells and corals on board, for which only tobacco was considered
an equivalent. Money they had no use for. When we wished
them to leave the ship we had to drive them oft. Then they
dropped into the water like so many scared frogs jumping from a
log, and they struck out for shore as naturally as a duck.
X have now to relate what many will consider the most extra-
ordinary passage in my adventures, and one which not a few
will take the liberty, which I freely accord them, to disbelieve.
That there has been a great deal of humbug practised upon
credulous people in relation to a creature called the Sea Serpent,
I admit. But such a creature exists and I have seen it. We
were cruising in company with the “ Monongahelaof New
Bedford, when the lookout at our masthead discovered a strange
looking object in the water half a mile astern, and hailed witli
the intelligence. The Captain was called and came on deck
with his glass, and after examining the object he pronounced it
an immense serpent. By this time we were all gathered on
dock watching the motions of the monster, which would occa-
sionally elevate its head to a height of some ten feet above the
water, and after taking a survey of things would subside again
to the surface. The Captain called for volunteers to capture the
sea serpent, saying that to go home with a story of having seen
it, with nothing to show in proof, would only cause us to be
laughed at. A boat’s crew was soon made up, and a boat low-
ered, when we observed that the “Monongahela” had made the
same discovery as ourselves, and was also sending a boat in
pursuit. The “ Monongahela” was nearest to onr game, but the
two boats reached -its vicinity at about the same time. The
serpent lay quiet, only raising its head and looking around as


eyeing first one boat and then the other. I was in
our boat steering for the Captain, who, when we were near
enough, gave the word, and I took my harpoon in hand and
launched it into the animal at about his middle, the steercr of
the “ Monongehala’s” boat doing the same thing on the other
side at about the same moment. On being thus attacked, the
serpont began to writhe and go through the contortions usual
with his kind, lashing the water so furiously with his head and
tail that some of the men became frightened and jumped out
of the boat. During his struggles there was a constant and sin-
gular change in color passing over the surface of the monster’s
body. He settled down on the spot until he had run out several
of our lines, when he became stationary and so remained for
the next twenty-four hours, defying all our efforts to haul him
up. At the end of that period he came to the surface, dead. A
question now arose between the Captains as to which ship he
should be taken to. Finally the claim of the “ Monongahela ”
prevailed and we towed the carcass alongside of her. When
there we measured it. It was one hundred feet long, and in the
smallest place the neck it was ten feet in circumference, while
that of its body in the largest place was forty feet. The head,
which was shaped like an alligator’s, was ten feet long, and had
large sharp teeth in both jaws. The teeth were of the size of
whales’ teeth and of the same material, but in sharpness they
more resembled a shark’s. It had two small fins on each side of
the body not far from the head; but its tail was that of a snake,
pointed and without fins. Its eyes were larger than those of a
whale. The color of the body was much the same, when at rest,
as that of a whale. He did not spout, and had no apparatus for
the purpose We unjointed the neck and hoisted the head on
deck whole. The blubber, about half as thick as that of a whale,
was then saved, and then the carcass was cut into pieces and got
in with a view to preserve the skeleton. A quantity of fishes
were found in the stomach, such as a whale does not cat, nor in-
deed can, since his throat is not larger than a man’s fist. The
oil amounted to ten barrels when tried out. The bones were
cleaned and stowed away, and we calculated upon setting the


sea serpent question at rest. But it was fated otherwise. The
“ Monongahela ” entered the northern seas in the Spring and was
lost; all hands perished. No vestige of the wreck was ever
found except a cask or two.
¥e cruised along the Equator some three months, visiting
some new island almost every day when we kept in motion,
though we stayed two or three weoks each at or near several
different islands or groups. We found no whales, and the trip
was a success only when considered in the light of a pleasure
excursion, and indeed, scarcely in that, for we w T ere far from en-
joying the “largest liberty,” We Spoke the ship “ James Ar-
nold,” which was two years out. She had twelve hundred
barrels of oil on board. Also, towards Spring, fell in with the
bark “Arab,” of Fair Haven, bound for Guam to give her crew
liberty and recreation before going North. We had not been
there this voyage, so the Captain concluded to accompany the
“ Arab,” and accordingly w T e bore away in the direction of the
Ladrones. We carried all sail by day, and lay to at night, so
as not to go carelessly over the whaling ground ; for it was
thought necessary to economize every chance we had for a suc-
cessful voyage, as thus far our accumulation of oil was not the
largest, considering the time out.
Ton days, proceeding as above, brought us to Guam, where we
found thirty whaling vessels, and the brig “Astoria” from Oregon.
I think I have already stated that Guam (spelled also Guahan
and Guajan) and the rest of the Lad rone Islands are the head-
quarters of the insect creation, and the soil crawls and the air
hums with fleas and mosquitoes, ants, gnats, roaches and flics?
with all their varieties and all their relations near and remote.
Near the shore the islands consist mostly of dark rocks, but
inland they are densely wooded, and beautiful with never failing
verdure.
The port where whalers resort mostly is, as I have said, twenty
miles from the town to which it serves as a harbor, and this fact
placed Captain Gavett in a quandary. Of coarse it was abso-
lutely necessary that his lady should visit town, and at the same
time it was equally impossible to get any other mode of convey-


ance except on ox back, which in some countries is not cpiite the
style, but Guam has a way of its own. Mrs. Gavctt, with a
bravery that always distinguishes her sox when the result sought
is a visit, or other similar recreation, declared her ability to ride
an ox, and her willingness “to try it on.” So she went on shore
whore quite a number of those horned steeds were quietly await-
ing riders, and meantime chewing the cud in such peace and con'
tentment as it pleased the musquitoes to allow. An animal was
selected rather with reference to steady going than to speed, and
a small mountain of folded blankets, which gave him quite a
poetic resemblance to a camel, at least in the hump, was strapped
upon his back. To this eminence her ladyship was elevated, not
exactly “by a turn of the wrist,” but by pure muscle, and bos was
solicited to propel in the direction of town. On the contrary he
began a rapid “advance backwards” until the rider was brought
in contact with certain cocoa nut trees, which so unsettled her
that she dismounted in disgust. In other words, which come
nearer to the fact, she was wiped off’ at the imminent risk of
limbs and neck. The stnpilied brute, unaware and probably
unworthy of the honor intended him, then trptted off for the
bush, or as our boys in Mexico would have said, “vamosed for
the chapparral.”
Mrs. Gavett was like our “Southern brethren,” she was
“defeated, but not subdued,” She declared her readiness to
attempt the journey on foot; but it was far easier to believe she
was willing to try than that she was able to succeed ; so not to
put her to so severe a test, a couple of poles were procured, to
which a chair was suspended, and four natives taking up the car-
riage, Mrs. Gavctt was borne in state, if not in triumph, to town,
where she arrived in good order on the second day 7 from port.
In Guam we had a month’s liberty. The port being so far
from town, each watch alternately was ashore two weeks at a
time. Dutch, French and English whalemen were there in num-
bers, besides Yankees. One French ship had an American
second mate who wanted his discharge, but his captain refused it
to him. The mate, who seems to have been a remorseless devil,
determined to take his discharge nolens miens , and that, too,


without running away. There was a lot of gunpowder on board
the vessel, and the desperado, in the absence of the rest of the
officers, put a slow match to this powder, which was aft, and then
went on deck and walked forward to await the explosion. There
were several Kanakas asleep on deck aft. The noise of the
explosion attracted all eyes in that direction, and we saw frag-
ments of boats and of the vessel’s deck and rigging flying
through the air. She immediately sunk, and her cargo was soon
to be seen floating about the harbor, the sport of wind and wave.
Boats from the nearest ships hurried to the wreck, and took the
second mate off safe and unhurt. lie was imprisoned in the
fort to take his trial for piracy and murder. I never learned the
result. The Kanakas were blown to atoms, probably, as I never
heard of their bodies being found.
This occurred before any of us got our liberty. Finally the
ship being in order, the second mate’s (captain’s) watch, to which
I was attached, went on shore first. None of the crew except
myself had ever been in Guam, so I acted as pilot, and was
looked up to generally, thus proving in my own person for once,
that “knowledge is power.” There were several boarding houses
in town. That one to which the officers and boat steerers of the
“Sims” went was kept by one Madame Deloro. The foremast
men found quarters elsewhere. After a good supper, the staple
of which was eggs and chickens, we sallied out “to see what we
could see.” There being so many different nations represented
there, it was thought very probable that a street fight would
occur, but none came off; so, failing this diversion, we concluded
to go to the theatre as the next best thing in the programme.
The play was that undying favorite of seamen, “Black-eyed
Susan,” and between the first two acts the band played “Hail
Columbia,” which was duly, not to say boisterously, cheered.
When our national air was finished, the Englishmen present
called for “God Save the Queen.” The Americans refused to
hear it, and the noise and confusion became prodigious. There
could be but one solution of the difficulty, and the first blow that
was struck was a signal for a general row. “Our English
Cousins” did some prettv fair fighting, but it was of no use. The
12


Yankees “cleaned them out,” as they did in the last war, and
will in the next one. Several of the “Britishers” were flung
neck and heels out of the second story window, and some limbs
were broken, but luckily no necks. The American tars having
“conquered an honorable peace” subsided into quietness and
statu quo , and the play progressed to its natural conclusion.
Every day thereafter, while we remained in town, the Yankee
sailors paraded up and down the streets, as a challenge to their
historical foes, who may have sung for their own private delecta-
tion, “God Save the Queen,” but if they did, they sung it
“exceedingly small.”
Whenever their was no performance at the theatre at night-
there was a dance instead, both very decent and very democratic.
The wives of six ship captains were present, besides the other
ladies, and any sailor who was able to disguise Ids rank, or want
of it, in a “boiled shirt,” was permitted to take a hand, or say a
foot, in the recreation. Our two weeks went by like a dream.
They reminded me of the Irishman’s watch, which could “knock
off an hour in fifteen minutes any day.”
While the other watch wore taking their turn at “fun alive” in
town, we got our supplies of fruit, &c., aboard. Among other
luxuries was a quantity of cocoa nut rum (arrack), a few bottles
of wine, and some good cigars. We desired some of the fine
wood which grows plentifully in the Ladrones, to make boxes
and canes of, and accordingly we made a raid into the forest,
and brought back a boat load of lignuravitae, mahogany and
cocoa wood. The vessel was thought in sailing trim, and
everything stowed snug. ,
The day before we were ready to start Captain Gavett came
on board and ordered rooms to be fitted up for the accommoda-
tion of passengers, announcing that some actors going to Manilla
were to take passage with us. When the rooms were prepared*
ten actors came to occupy them.
All hands on board, and everything in readiness, we hove up
anchor, and stood out to sea. Manilla, in Luzon, the largest of
the Philippine Islands, lies directly west of Guam, but our
undertaking with the actors was only to carry them to some


point more in the track of general commerce, so that they might
more readily get to their ultimate port than they could hope to
do from Guam itself. So we bore away to the northward, and
left them on one of the Bonin Islands, in the northern part of
Magellan’s Archipelago. Singular as it may seem this was
one of the saddest partings I ever witnessed. Our passengers
had become so attached to the ship and its belongings that they
all left it in tears, and we all sympathized not a little with their
unfeigned sorrow.
Quite a change had come over the character and composition
of our crew since the last season north. Several of our men
had been discharged, others had ran off, and in their places we
had French, Gees (Portuguese) and Kanakas. We had shipped
three men from the French vessel blown up at Guam, mate,
cooper and boat steerer. I mentioned that our mate was dis-
charged at his own request in the islands, and we had then taken
in his place a mate discharged from the “Junior.” This new
mate thought Mrs. Gavett aspired rather too much to her
husband’s pants —place, I should say—and he was not willing to
recognize her as captain ; so of course she did not like him, and
of course he was discharged. In his place we took the mate—
Lavalette by name—of the French vessel. He may have had
any possible number of qualities fitting him for the place, but
none of us ever discovered them. Lavalette’s heels turned Mrs.
Gavett’s head, and she exclaimed in an ecstacy of admiration,
“Oh ! Captain, do ship Mr. Lavalette, he is such a splendid
dancer!” and that decided the matter. The dancing master, as
we called him, was shipped.
Having disposed of our passengers, we headed north-east for
the Japan Sea, where we cruised unsuccessfully till April Ist,
1856. We saw no whales. Then we kept off for Behring’s
Strait, which we reached the Bth of May. Ten vessels were
there already, and they had cruised there a week, taking nothing.
We bettered the pattern they gave.us by taking three whales in
two weeks, making five hundred barrels of oil. But the game
was very scarce, and wo ran for Behring’s Island, southeast of
the sea of Kamtschatka. Here we saw a fine right whale,


lowered a boat, and Mr. Lavalette fastened to him. "When he
came up the first time there was a good chance to kill him, but it
was not improved, the mate’s lancing being quite ineffectual.
The whale then put off to windward with five harpoons in him.
Every time he came up after the first ho was going too rapidly to
be approached. After he had towed one boat, and been pursued
in vain by the others for five hours, the chase was given up, the
lines were cut, and the dancing master lost his whale. Mrs.
Gavett did not like this very well. She probably was at a loss
to imagine how a man who danced so well could fail to be a good
whaleman.
We now saw right whales daily, but they were wild, and the
boats manned by Kanakas could not get near them. The Kana-
kas pronounced them “Oura maiti pihi” which being interpreted,
is “no good whale sure enough they were no good to us, for we
could not catch them. They were “sour grapes.” We caught
nothing here worth while, and so cruised back to the Strait again.
By this time the ice was gone, and the whales too, if any had
been there. Next we passed over to the American side, and
anchored in Plover Bay—so called after the British exploring
vessel “Plover.” The second day after our -arrival we were
joined by the ship “Chandler Price,” of New Bedford, which
anchored near us. While we lay there we used to lower our
boats, and drift out fifty miles into the Strait sometimes, and
watch for whales. The second mate’s boat, which I steered, took
one whale out there, and towed it along side the ship. We of
the boat’s crew then went on board the ship, ate a meal, dried
our clothes, and slept two hours, when we started on another
cruise.
When we were about five miles out we discovered a whale
making towards us, and I stood up with the irons ready. He
came on with his head to the boat, and at the command “give it
to him,” I let drive two irons, one after the other in quick suc-
cession, into his back. He dived under us, striking the boat as
he did so three times with his “fluke,” knocking her bottom all
in, and leaving her a wreck. Having passed just beyond reach
of the boat he struck again, breaking our only oar, and then


went down. We threw over every thing except the line, and the
boat sunk at once down to her gunwale. We all jumped out,
and keeping hold of the boat, began drifting helplessly out to
sea. The temperature of the water may be judged from the fact
that the ice was floating all about us. In this terrible situation
we lay six almost endless hours, during which three of the crew
became so exhausted and benumbed that they lost their hold
upon the boat and were drowned. Finally a boat from the
“ Price ” picked up such of us as were partly alive. They
hauled up our whale, which was only a little more dead than we,
and towed him and our wrecked boat back into the bay which
we had left with very different anticipations a few hours before.
I was unable to do any work for two months after this “cold
water rinse,” if that is a name for it.
The “ Bebecca Sims ” lay three weeks in Plover Bay and
then sailed for the Arctic Ocean, hoping to And game more
plentiful. We went as far north as 72 deg., which is the lati-
tude of Point Barrow, the most northerly point on the Ameri-
can continent, and we cruised for some time off’ Icy Cape. Wo
had only about one thousand barrels of oil, and there remained
but one short month to stay, not to say in the Arctic Ocean, but
in any of the northern seas. Already, on the Ist of September,
1856, we had a reminder of winter in the shape of a snow storm
which left two feet of snow on our decks. The Kanakas with
us were astonished at the sight of falling snow, the first they
had ever seen. At first they undertook to brush it off from
their clothes as fast as it fell, but in time they got tired of the
task. Our sails and rigging might as well have been made of
marble, they were so stiff with ice and sleety snow.
On this hint, we turned our bows southward, and still accom-
panied by the “Chandler Price,” made for Behring’s Island
once more. “ Misery loves company,” they say, and perhaps
we were somewhat reconciled to our luck by the fact that the
Price, which was now about twenty-eight months from home
had two hundred barrels of oil less than ourselves. We cruised
carefully down the Strait, but caught nothing, until we reached
the Island, where we continued to do the same, unless we ex


cept a quantity of fresh codfish, or a fish very like a codfish.
We also killed a good many duck, which at Behring’s Island
are, or were, so tame that we could row a boat right into the
midst of a flock. On the Island, foxes and rabbits are numer-
ous, and some of the former we “ saved ” in the western sense
of the word. From there we ran up into the Sea of Kamschat-
ka again, and cruised about till the first of October, when it was
considered time to leave for the south. On the passage we saw
“ Sail Kock,” a solitary pinnacle rising from the sea, which, at a
distance, looks just like a ship’s canvas. Its whiteness is from
the excrement of the thousands of sea fowl that frequent it in
summer.
Speaking of rocks and sea fowl reminds me of an incident
that I forgot to mention in its place. Once when we were in
the Okhotsk Sea, a Frenchman was observed to clamber upon
some high rocks near where we had landed, and then descend
with something in his hand. “ What have you got there?” our
mate asked him. “Young birds,” was the reply. “ What are
you going to do with them? ” “ Eat them.” And suiting the
action to the word, he gobbled them down, one after the other,
with as much gusto as an Alderman would exhibit in devour-
ing an oyster so big and fat it would take two men to swallow
it whole. I think this is the most disgusting feat I ever saw
performed in the way of eating. And yet, for anything I know
to the contrary, a young gull may be as palatable as an oyster.
The birds that the Frenchman masticated were “quite sizeable”
—a food fair mouthful—for a hoff.
Twenty-three days from the Sea of Kamschatka, we anchored
in the harbor of Honolulu. The men that had been shipped for
the season were now kept on board scrubbing and cleaning up
generally, and stowing cargo and water casks for the trip home.
Of the thirty-five men that left Kew Bedford in the Rebecca
Sims, there were now remaining to return with her only the
Captain and wife, the second mate and myself, and five men
forward. Some had run away, some had been discharged, some
had died or been drowned.
When the ship was cleaned the men shipped for the season


were discharged, except the cooper, who was going home to
France. Those discharged got $l5O to $3OO apiece. After
they went ashore we painted the ship, sent down the old sails,
bent new ones, and prepared the vessel throughout for the pas-
sage around Cape Horn. We were ashore every night at the
Theatre or Church. There is a very good Theatre in Honolulu,
and the Churches are good everywhere.
At length the vessel was all fitted up and w r e had almost per-
fect liberty. Ho regular watch was kept. There being few of
us we were furnished with plenty to eat of the very best the
market afforded. Finally, as the day of departure drew near,
we shipped twenty-three new sailors to make up our complement
for the coming trip, to wit: a cook, a steward, a mate and
twenty new sailors. A sailor got fourteen dollars a month
for the trip. Some of these men had been discharged from
other vessels, or quite likely had run away, wdiile others were
destitute men from California wanting to get home.
I drew sixty dollars on my voyage while at Honolulu at this
time, and tried hard to get my discharge with the purpose of
going to California, but Captain Gavett would not consent. He
did not wish to be left with an entire ship’s company of strangers
and to have me leave after having been with him so long would
seem like breaking up his family. These were the objections he
urged principally ; they were personal to himself and had little
or nothing to do with the safety of the ship or the interest of the
owners, and I suppose that if I had insisted I should have got
my discharge. It would have been well for me if I had insisted.
I should thus have escaped the manifold miseries of starvation,
imprisonment and anxiety that grew out of a contrary course,
and probably I might at this moment have had my sight entire
like other men. But it is useless to speculate upon possibilities.
Indeed, it is questionable, strictly speaking, whether any course
is possible to a man save that which he adopts, in compliance
with the force of circumstances, the ordinance of Providence,
or the decrees of destiny. But it was only ten days’ sail from
Honolulu to San Francisco by the regular packets, and the fare
only forty dollars. It was so easy, and I came so near it! Ah I


well. It is useless to repine. Some will offer the common con-
solation, “it might have been worse.” But what is worse than
blindness and dependence!
As we intended to cruise on the way home, the boat steerers
were needed to organize the crew ; and Captain Gavetfc took for
this purpose three of his old foremast hands. We sailed on
Christmas, 1856. When we got quite oft* the Islands we sent
up royal yards, rigged outstudding sail booms, bent all three
royals and set them, and arranged studding sails on deck ready
for use. Then we began to stand mast heads again, though we
did not much care to see whales. We saw none until on the
line. There we saw one—a sperm whale—and lowered three
boats. I belonged in the Captain’s and did not have to lower.
The second mate, Wilson boat steerer, made for the game and
approached within striking distance, when away went the iron
over the whale's hack. He went down, and when he rose again
he was five miles to windward. For my own part, I was sorry
to lose a chance at this whale, though as a general thing, whale-
men do not care to stop for anything when on the home trip.
The Captain also regretted the failure, and when the boats?
crews came on board, he asked :
“ Wilson, why in h—l did’nt you fasten to that whale ?”
“I didn’t want to fasten to him,” replied Wilson, sullenly.
“ You are a pretty fellow for a boat-steerer,” Captain Gavett
rejoined. “ You can’t have a chance at another whale on this
voyage. Take your ‘ donkey’ and go forward.”
While Wilson was gone for his seaman’s chest, called a “don-
key” by sailors, the second mate interceded for him with the
Captain, believing that the miss had been accidental, and that
the new harpooner preferred to be thought obstinate rather than
awkward. Captain Gavett finally relented and told Wilson he
might try his hand at the irons once more.
We stood on our course southward, but saw no more whales.
The men were engaged in tarring down the rigging, and in
making boxes, canes, &c., and getting up other articles of curious
workmanship, partly to please friends at home and partly to
kill time on the long voyage thither. Ko incident worth men


tioning occurred uutil one morning the mast head look-out
startled the stillness of the tropical mid-ocean with the cry of
“ Land, ho!”
“ Where away ?” the Captain asked.
u Right ahead.”
The land proved to be Wytatooke, or Whylootacke, the most
northerly of the group known as Cook’s Islands. I have already
given a general description of Wytatooke. Capt. Gavett had
determined to call there for fuel and fruits. As there is no pas-
sage that would admit our vessel through the coral reef that sur-
rounds the Island at an average of a half mile distant, we stood
off and on outstde, lowered the Captain’s boat, and rigged a
chain for Mrs. Gavett, which wo swung from the main yard, and
so lowered her into the boat. We then in the boat struck for a
narrow channel that opened through the reef and reached the
land. There was no settlement of whites on the Island, unless
the residence there of a single missionary and his wife before
mentioned, might be called so. Capt. Gavett took tea, coffee,
sugar, flour, butter, &c., on shore with him, intending to board
with the Missionary, or at least at his house, during his stay on
the Island. We procured five cords of wood at two dollars a
cord, which was paid in calico and tobacco. We also got abun-
dance of fruits, among which I may mention preserved bananas
as a particular luxury. They are cured by drying in the sun,
with plenty of sugar.
At the end of two days the Captain and lady came on board
and we were off* for New Zealand, in the expectation of finding
both sperm and right whale in our track. About two weeks after
leaving Wytatooke, land was again descried, about two points
on the starboard bow. It was so low that we were close upon it
before it was seen by the man at the masthead. It proved to be
Sunday Island, which is little more than a stretch of sea beach
about three miles long and one mile wdde, yet most of the soil
is rich and quite productive when cultivated in corn, potatoes,
and any and all vegetables common to the temperate zone. The
census of the Island which was taken while we were there show-
ed its population to be as follows ; White males (of the Ameri-
-14


can persuasion) —2 ; White women—o ; Male natives—o ;
Female natives (of some other Island) 2; All other classes of
society—o. We traded cloth, (blue dongaree,) and tobacco for
vegetables, which the above enumerated population raised in
considerable quantities from seed obtained on board of ships
When we were ready to leave, we missed a couple of our men,
and as the Captain decided not to look for them, it is reasonable
to suppose that a census taker the next day would have shown
an increase in the permanent population of Sunday Island
of 50 per cent, in 24 hours. I say permanent, because
as the Island is solitary and alone in an immeasurable wilderness
of waves, the chances for people to get away from it must be few
and far between.
Boats hoisted in again, we stood on our course for New Zealand
which \ve left to starboard, without raising any whales. Then
having gained the latitude of Capo Horn, we bore away to the
east, with a strong wind and heavy sea right aft. Wo ran four
days before this wind, which in the meantime became a first-rate
gale. One morning the mate began to think we were carrying
too much sail, and so went to the cabin and asked the Captain
if he should take in some of the canvas.
“Ho —not till I come up,” said Captain Gavett, and the mate
returned muttering that he supposed ho could stand it if the
skipper could. As seven bells struck, the Captain came up
the cabin gangway, and at the same time a huge sea came over
the vessel’s stern, and swept the deck fore and aft, taking the
Captain off his feet and shaking him up generally. He regain-
ed his feet with as much composure as naturally belongs to the
situation, but couldn’t resist the temptation to ask “ what on
airth was coming.” A little reflection satisfied him something
disagreeable was coming on sea, and that soon, unless we short-
ened sail ; so he gave the word, “Take in sail.”
The mate echoed : “All hands take in sail! Take in fore and
main topgallant sail ; haul down flying jib and pimp and furl
them !” The men sprang aloft to obey the order, of which no
one could doubt the propriety. When this was done, the mate
sang out again : “ Clew down foretopsail, jump up and put two


reefs in it; Clew down maintopsail and put one reef in it.” The
order to “take in mizzen topsail” followed, and then, with all
taut and snug, we held on our course before the gale, which,
however, soon began to abate.
The wind was strong and fair until we approached the halk-
land Islands, when it died away and came out ahead. Upon
this we braced up the yards and hauled in the starboard braces,
and stood to the eastward fjr twenty-four hours. Then we
tacked ship and bore up for the Islands again. We worked our
way thus by inches, as it were, for three days, when the wind
hauled and blew fair from the east and southeast. We now dis-
continued standing mastheads, and crowded on every sail that
a ship is made to carry, except studding sails, and so pressed on
our homeward course. In the meantime our try-works had been
taken down, and the material and rubbish thrown overboard,
and the try-pots sent below deck.
At length we struck the southeast trades, and then we sent up
lower topmast and topgallant studding sails, which greatly in-
creased our speed. This circumstance gave ns as much satisfac-
tion as if we had made our fortunes, and were only hastening
home to enjoy them, instead of having done very poorly, and
having, in fact, little to expect beyond a tew days of dissipation
on shore, and then another succession of toils, hard-
ships and perils similar to those we had undergone
on this voyage, without the comforts to which we had been
accustomed on board the Ilebecca Sims. Discipline, as usual
when nearing home, was less and less observed, and the night
watches passed the time in spinning yarns and cracking jokes.
We entered the harbor of Pernambuco without anchoiing, and
sent a boat ashore for fruits. Probably the finest oranges in the
world are found in that market. We bought a five barrel cask
of them at fifty cents a hundred. Out to sea again, and across
the line,we took the northeast trades in latitude ten degrees north,
and two days before entering the Gulf Stream, we spoke the
schooner “Dew Drop,” bound for the island of Grenada. We
send a boat off to her, and get newspapers and tobacco. We
had run so short of the weed that the men were resorting to


every expedient and every substitute to check their craving for
it. As is common in such cases they took to chewing rope yarn,
and it was remarked that we were lucky in being so near port,
or the shrouds might have been eaten away by the hungry
tobacco worms.
The weather was fine while we were crossing the Gulf Stream,
and no incident of note occurred until the man at the mast head
sung out the long expected hail, “Land, ho !” This happened at
about four bells in the afternoon watch, but we failed to get in
that night, for the wind went down with the sun, and we had a
dead calm till morning. Then we had the wind fair again, and
taking on a pilot off Montauk, we shaped our course past Block
Island and up Buzzard’s Bay. When we arrived off Clarke’s
Point in sight of New Bedford, it was the same old story
repeated ; the land sharks, with faces all smiles, and hearts all
treachery and greed, gathered round the sailors, and succeeded
in duping them again, as they always will to the end of time, I
am afraid. There was no hypocritical pretense in their expressed
joy at seeing us again. The hungry spider is not more surely
glad when a fat fly gets into his web than these fellows are to
meet a returned whaleman. And one victim escapes as rarely as
the other.
We got along side the wharf in New Bedford at three o’clock
P. M. of May 23d, 1857, and usual rush and bustle of pretending
to furl the sails occurred ; the same mad haste to get ashore and
commence spending money was exhibited as on former occasions.
Most of the crew got their injit at Seabury’s—“regardless of
expense.” How that man must have coined money out of the
heart’s blood of those foolish sailors.
I had now no thought but to stay ashore and settle down.
While on my way home I had run over a hundred times in my
mind what money I should receive, and what I would do with it.
I was not going to fool away any more of my hard earnings.
There was about six hundred dollars, as nearly as 1 could calcu-
late, coming to me, and I was going to take care of it. No land
shark, nor any of the small fry that swim in their wake, and
share their plunder, was going to get so much as a nibble at it.


I had a shipmate named Brooks, whom I valued, and who was
in the same mind as myself, and we strengthened and confirmed
each other’s good resolution by mutual encouragement and
examples of sobriety and self denial.
Unfortunately for all of us, Win. R. Rodman, former owner of
the Rebecca Sims, was dead, and the only person that could pay
us off was his son who was absent on a fishing excursion. The
time of his return was quite uncertain, so to be out of the way
of temptation and bad example, Brooks and I took a
trip up to Boston, and from there went out to visit friends at
Watertown, where we remained until we felt pretty sure young
Rodman had got into port. We then returned to ISTew Bedford,
where to our great annoyance we had to wait three weeks longer
for our paymaster. At length, about June 15th, he came, but
not until we were already whirling in the outer circles of the
mselstrom of dissipation. The Ith of July was at hand, and it
was understood that the metropolis of whaledom was to see a
grand time. In addition to the usual attractions of the day
there was to be a balloon ascension and a circus, and solicited on
every side, we agreed to stay and ‘‘see it out.” There were a
thousand sailors at liberty on shore, half of whom were already
penniless, but these had to be kept going at the expense of the
rest, for Jack would scorn to do less than treat the crowd when
refreshments of any kind are called for. To make a long story
short, when the glorious fourth” was fairly over, and everything
settled up, I had only about fifty dollars to bless my self with,
though I had been but six weeks ashore. There was nothing for
it, but I must go to sea again, without even visiting my relations
in Western New York. Such was the result of this most strenu-
ous and resolute attempt at economy !
Brooks and I began at once to look around for a new ship,
and as we both ranked first rate as hands, we could select the
best in port, with no danger of being rejected. I always liked
the “Junior.” She was roomy, handy, and a good sailer. She
was in port, and would be ready to sail on the 20th of July. I
took Brooks on board; and he liked her looks as well as I had
done, and it was agreed that we should ship on her. From the


vessel we repaired to the office of D. R. Green, and asked him
if he wanted two good boat steerers. He replied that he did.
“We are your men, then. We want to ship.”
“Who are yon ?” he asked.
I told him, and referred him to Captain Gavett.
“What lay do you want?” he demanded.
“I want the sixty-fifth,” I replied.
“I will give you the seventieth.”
“"Nothing short of the sixty-fifth for me. I know what my
services are worth, and that is not all, others know it too.”
“Well, I’ll tell you what. If you go and return in the Junior
all right, I’ll give you a sixty-fifth.”
“Enough said.”
Brooks shipped for the seventieth, and w r e had only about
two weeks in which to prepare for sea, and our preparation was
made in a seaman-like style. We asked Mr. Green for an ad-
vance of money. The reply -was the usual one, “Go to Sea-
bury.” So to Seabury we went, and got our outfit and some
cash, about two hundred dollars in all. These things disposed
the preparatory spree commenced. I soon sent two hundred
dollars more to look after my other five hundred and fifty dol-
lars, and Brooks emulated my example. One day we took
some girls out to Perry’s Neck gypsying, picking berries, and
shining around generally. In the evening, having deposited
our partners at their homes, we started for our boarding house
for the purpose of taking a couple of our landlady’s daughters
out on a drive. On the way we put our horses to the top of
their speed, right through the city, or in other words, “we
cracked on all sail, and made for port through one of the main
channels.” It was a miracle that we ran over no one, for the
hair breath escapes were several. We drove so near one man
that the horses heads knocked a cigar out of his mouth—so it
was asserted. Arrived at our boarding house w r e were soon
accosted by the livery keeper, who had got wind of our pro-
ceedings, with the information that he didn’t keep running stock,
and that we couldn’t drive his horses any more. This left us on
foot, and the landlady’s daughters missed their ride. The next


morning the livery man handed ns a little bill of five dollars a
day for the time we had used his horses, which we paid, and
were glad to get off so.
At last only one more night intervened before the day of sail-
ing, and we arranged to celebrate it with a grand ball at the
“ Alhambra.” All the officers and boat-steerers of the “Junior”
were present, and we “tripped it on the light fantastic toe”
until one o’clock in the morning; then, after seeing our girls
home, we went to bed for a nap.
We were roused early in the morning by a messenger from
Seabury, urging us to make haste on board, as the wind was fair
and everything was ready for heaving up the anchor. The for-
ward hands, he said, had been on board three days already.
With one accord, we promised that we would be “right down,”
but instead of that we made a raid up town and stayed until
afternoon, when we returned to Seabury’s. We were now ve-
hemently urged to go on board. “ Everything was ready, and
waiting. The anchor was apeak, the sails loose,” &c. “ Hur-
rah, boys.” Finally, we got our dunnage and went on board,
all in the gayest humor. We were several of us to return in a
temper very different, and under gloomier auspices.
We immediately made sail, amid cries of “Good bye,” “good
luck,” “a fine voyage,” &c.. from the shore. Our destination
was the northwest coast as before. We sailed, as I have intima-
ted, on the 20th of July, 1857. The ship was navigated by Ar-
chibald Mellen, Captain ; Nelson Provost, Mate ; Lord, 2d
Mate ; Smith, 3d Mate ; (we had no fourth mate, the Cap-
tain undertaking to lower and manage his own boat); A. D.
Sampson, Joseph Brooks, Cyrus W. Plummer, and Joe Enas,
(Portuguese,) boat-steerers ; a cooper, carpenter, cook and stew-
ard. They lived aft. The foremast men were twenty-three in
number.
We did not get out to sea the first night. A fog came on too
thick to permit safe navigation, so we anchored until morning,
when after a few hours’ sail we found ourselves once more on
the “rolling deep.” The usual speech from the Captain,
and the usual ceremony of dividing up the ship’s company


into watches and boat’s crews, was now gone through
with. The Captain having the first choice of boat
steerers selected me. The Mate chose the Portuguese, the 2nd
Mate chose Plummer, and Brooks was left for the 3d Mate. The
Captain’s boats crew was put with the 2d Mate’s to form the
starboard watch ; the other two crews formed the port watch.
The Captain had the first watch on deck. With the crew thus
organized we fell to work lashing the anchors, stowing cargo,
&c., to be ready for rough weather. This done, the boat steerers
applied themselves to getting their respective boats ready for
service. Implements were put in good order and laid in their
respective places. Shrouds and rigging were made all taut, and
the sails trimmed and adjusted. It is the business of the morn-
ing watch to scrub down the decks, for which purpose four split
brooms of hickory are used by as many forward hands, a boat-
steerer throwing water for them. They had nothing else to do
before breakfast. We had fine weather across the Cult Stream,
and we at once began standing mastheads, our course being
shaped for the Azores. On the first occasion of a smooth sea,
and comparative calm, the boats were lowered tor the usual
practice, as before described.
There was everything to encourage us in hoping tor a success-
ful termination of our voyage. The vessel, the Captain, the offi-
cers, the the outfit—everything, was pronounced first-class.
And yet the elements of mischief that were to mar all our fair
prospects were probably already at work in our midst.
Towards the last of August, say the 25th, we sighted Flores,
and the same day spoke the bark “President,” of Westport.
She had been out all summer, and had taken only about on
hundred and fifty barrels. Arrived at Fayal, the Captain went
ashore with a picked boat’s crew whom he thought he could
trust. We had a good time that day in town, and in the evening
returned on board with a tine lot of figs and grapes. It was
not the right season for apples there.
We wore then off in a southeasterly direction, carrying only
sail enough to secure steerage way—to wit, double reefed top-
sails. The men were practised in their duty every day watch ;


at the end of which the ordinary day’s work on shipboard is
considered done, and yarns and songs are the order of the eve-
ning till eight bells.
In all this time we caught no whales. We caught a porpoise
occasionally for the fun and the practice it afforded. We sight-
ed Cape Verde Islands, and then run for the Brazils, and thence
again for the Cape of Good Hope. Everything went smooth,
too smooth for our interest, and no incident occurred and we saw
nothing to mention until w r e reached Tristan de Cuntia, (or
“ Trusteen,” as sailors call it,) and even there 1 learned nothing
to add to my former account of this group, except that the
largest Island was settled by a Scotchman named Governor
Glass, who had a colored woman of some sort for a wife, and
who was father to children enough to make a good start towards
replenishing that detached portion of the earth. He had also a
fine stock of cattle, sheep and goats which had been brought
from the Cape. The Island is said to be good for grass, but I
did not see much.
Captain Mellen had his boat lowered and went ashore to visit
Governor Glass, leaving us of the crew in the boat to fish during
his absence. The place, as one of the men remarked, was all
very well for fishing, but not worth a darn for catching. When
the Captain returned after an absence of two hours, we had only
caught a few small fish—about as many as we could have eaten.
We continued for some time longer to try our luck, but all to no
purpose. So wo went on board, and stood off to the east. Soon
we tacked south, and finally again to the east, hoping for more
success at St. Paul’s and Amsterdam Islands. The space we
now passed over is'considered good ground for right whale, but
“ all signs fail in dry weather,” and all probabilities of success
are worthless when luck is against you, so we caught nothing and
saw nothing.
South of the Cape we fell in with the bark “ Adelaide,” of
Aberdeen, and our Captain hailed and invited her master to
come on board. Finally, after some parleying it was decided
that Captain Mellen should go on board the Adelaide. So we
luffed up and lowered the Captain’s boat and took him off to the
15


Scotchman. The vessels stood along together for halt a day,
when we returned to the “Junior,” richer by a present ot halt a
dozen bottles of gin, not to mention what wo drank, which en-
riched us not a little.
At last we raised a right whale, and lowered tor him *, but the
mate’s “ gee ” boat steerer threw the irons over him, and he
took fright and escaped. The mate returned aboard in gicat
disgust.
“ Captain Mellon,” said he, “ will you swap boat stceicis with
me ?”
“ No thank you,” I have no occasion.”
“ I wish you would, and I think it would pay.”
“What think you Sampson? Would you like the exchange!
said Captain Mellen to me.
“ I have no objection to it. It is all the same to me, I
replied.
“ Well, then, you will steer the mate’s boat hereafter.” So the
exchange was made. It never amounted to anything, how-
ever, owing to the tragic events that followed so soon.
At St. Paul’s Island we fished a single day, taking some twenty
barrels of fine fish, when cleaned. Here we fell in and “gam-
med” one day with ship “ Minerva Smith.” She had been two
years out and had already nineteen hundred barrels of oil.
Bidding her good bye, we stood off for the east, intending to
run south of Man Diemail’s Band, and so to ISew Zealand. Ac-
cordingly we sighted the former and then bore a few points
north and kept on.
About Christmas, 185 T, for the sake of favoring the men
arrangements were made to stand boats’ crew watches, in which
as I have already explained, a boat steerer heads a watch of four
men, besides himself. On Christmas night the Captain treated
the boatsteerers and other petty officers to rum, and we had a
lively time till eight bells, (eight o’clock,) when the first night
watch was set, to stand two hours. I had this watch. We had
been on deck only a short time when the mate came up with a
bottle of that gin obtained from the Adelaide, and treated the
watch. We drank round and then filled the bottle up with water


but still the liquor was of about average strength. We after-
wards finished the bottle, At ten o’clock I called Brooks who
headed the 3d mate’s crew, gave him the orders that I had re-
ceived, and turned in. Brooks was to call Plummer at twelve.
I do not know how long I had been asleep when I was awaken-
ed by the discharge of firearms in the cabin, which, it will be
remembered, adjoined our sleeping room. All of us in the
steerage, (and all the ship’s petty officers except Plummer,)
sprang up at once in alarm, and attempted to pass into the cabin,
the steward ahead, when some one, in the confusion I failed to
note who, shouted “go back, or I will cut you down.” Who-
ever it was did not stay long to guard the door against us, and
we soon passed into the cabin, where we found the mate and
2d mate. The room was dark and full of smoke, and we could
not see what the trouble was. We asked< “ what’s the matter ?”
The mate replied that he had been shot. On examination we
found that both he and the 2d mate had been shot in the shoul-
der, one in the right and the other in the left. We went into
the Captain s state room, and found liim kneeling down at his
chest, apparently trying to open it. We spoke to him but ho
made no reply. The mate then took hold of him and so ascer-
tained that he was quite dead. He had been struck in the
shoulder with some heavy weapon, an axe apparently, and split
right down into the body. He had other cuts upon him, and
“all cut to pieces” is the only phrase that fully describes his
condition. The 3d mate not making his appearance, we went
to his berth. He had got out of his bunk and was seated on
his chest with a boarding knife, (an old sword,) in his hand.
Like the Captain, he was entirely lifeless.
W hile we were learning these facts to our equal sorrow and
terror, there was a constant and rapid tramping upon deck, for
which of course we could only surmise a reason, but wn dreaded
the worst. In the meantime, the beds were on fire in the cabin,
and the prospect was imminent that we should smother unless
we could get air. The sound of footsteps on deck became more
distinct and presently I was called. I knew Plummer’s voice.
“ You, Sampson,” he sung out at the steerage hatch, “ come up


here.” I was very reluctant to go, but it was only to'take the
mutineers’ choice of evils where I had no choice of my own,
To stay where we were was to perish miserably. To go on deck
was to meet no worse fate, and there was a chance of something
better ;so I went. The mutineers stood all around the hatch
with the ship’s muskets and other weapons in their hands.
“ Have you got any arms about you ?” Plummer demanded, at
the same time that he and his followers examined me as closely
as possible by the dim light. I replied that I had not.
“ Then go forward to the waist.”
In this way the survivors of the cabin and steerage were call-
ed up one by one, till it came to the turn of the mate, Nelson
Provost. Plummer called him :
“Nelson, come up here.”
“ I shan’t come up there,” was the resolute reply ; for it seem-
ed Mr. Provost, or Mr. Nelson, as we called him, had no hope of
being spared by the bloodthirsty villains, and preferred to die
where he was. “ I shan’t come up there,” he repeated, “ and if
any of you shows himself below the hatch he is a dead man.
I have a revolver, and I will shoot.”
The hatch was now shut down and they waited awhile, appa-
rently undecided what to do. But as the ship was on fire in the
cabin, where there was a cask of powder, while three barrels
more lay under the after hatch, it was necessary to do something
and that speedily. So Plummer called the ship’s company
around him and said :
“ I want you all to understand that I am Captain of this ship
now. If you behave yourselves and obey orders, you will be
well treated ;if not, look out for squalls. All hands, except
the guard, turn to and put out the fire.”
In obedience to this last order, we proceeded to cut several
holes through the deck over the cabin, down which, as well as
down the skylight, we poured water. In this way we worked
for about four hours, and at last succeeded in our object. By
this time it was daylight.
It now appeared that Plummer had drawn all the forward
hands into his murderous plot, for they all went to work with a


will in carrying out Lis orders. They threw overboard every-
thing that was available as a w r eapon except arms for six men.
Even our sheath knives were taken from us and made away
with. Six men at a time with the reserved arms were kept con-
stantly on guard.
Plummer then ordered three men into the cabin to bring up
the bodies of the Captain and 3d mate. One of the three was a
Dutchman who, in groping around in the water, got hold of a
small dog that had been drowned there, and called out that “he
had found the Captain, he knew him by his whiskers.” When
he produced the dog, there was a strong tendency to a laugh,
notwithstanding the horror of the scene and of the situation.
When the Captain’s mutilated body was at length found, a rope
was let down through the skylight and made fast around it, and
it was hauled on deck. Looking about for something heavy to
sink the corpse, the grindstone was taken and lashed to its feet,
and it was at once launched into the sea, without ceremony, and
apparently without compunction. The same process was gone
through with the body of the 3d mate, which was sunk with a
piece of chain cable. In all this proceeding, we of the steerage
took no part, not having lifted a hand except to assist in putting
out the lire.
The mutineers now pumped the ship—a thing rendered quite
necessary by the quantity of water used in preventing a confla-
gration of the vessel. While this was going on, Plummer asked
the men if they had seen anything of the mate. All replied in
the negative, and at the same time it was mentioned that the
cabin windows were open, and that perhaps ho might have jump-
ed overboard.
We who belonged aft were now permitted to take possession
of our berths again, and things went on much as before the
mutiny. Plummer, however, exercising a strict supervision over
the vessel and all on board, and six of his armed followers being
constantly on guard, part above deck and part below. He hung
a little bell in the cabin where he slept, and run a string from it
to the deck so that the guard there might arouse and summon
him upon the slightest alarm. Some of his gang were with him
in the cabin most all the time.


He ordered me to take charge of the vessel during each
alternate watch, and keep the sails trimmed properly, while he
himself performed the same duty during the other watch. I
obeyed without any words, for wicked and lawless as the author-
ity was that he had set up, there was at present no appeal from
it. The vessel was headed for Australia.
The second mate all this time was quite helpless with his
wounds, which were severe, and he had nothing to say about
matters that were passing around him. Every day more or less
search was made for the mate, though the general impression was
that he had got some floating article out of the open cabin win-
dow and jumped into the sea with it, in the expectation of being
picked up by some passing vessel. This made Plummer uneasy?
and he was heard to declare that if the mate was not found he
would “get rid” of all the people except his friends, and then
run the ship ashore on the coast of Australia and burn her. It
was not pleasant to hear this reckless fellow talk of getting rid of
us, a phrase that suggested cut throats and a plunge overboard.
However, on the sixth day one of the men sung out from the
depths of the forward hold that he had found the mate. The
poor fellow, wounded almost to death, had managed to crawl
down there and conceal himself among and between the casks of
the “ground tier” so effectually as to baffle all search for the
time I have stated. He had evidently been resolved to perish
with hunger, rather than fall into the hands of the mutineers?
from whom he evidently expected no mercy. Plummer went
part way down and called him.
“Mr. Nelson, come up on deck. You shall not be hurt.”
But the mate could not get up alone, for besides the loss of
blood and the soreness of the terrible wound in his left shoulder
it seems he had not tasted meat nor drink during the whole
period of his concealment. So he was helped upon deck, and
taken aft to the cabin, where his wounds were dressed after a
fashion. Upon emerging to the light he presented a shocking
and pitiable appearance. His only (Slothing consisted of his
shirt and drawers, which were for the most part black with the
blood which had dried upon them. His tangled amkmatted hair


stood out from his head ; his eyes were dim and sunken, and his
face was as thin and pale as that of a corpse. The terrible cut
in his shoulder had never been so much as washed, and to our
eyes it appeared as if the wound must certainly be already struck
with mortification.
Plummer proposed to the mate that his life should be spared
on condition that he would navigate the ship to Australia, where
the mutineers proposed to leave her and take to the boats. At
the same time they exacted a promise from the mate that he
should never trouble them in the way of information, complaint
or prosecution. Mr. Provost readily gave the promise they
required, knowing of course that it was of no binding force, and
that he could not keep it even if he desired to do so.
On the eighth day after the mutiny we sighted the coast of
Australia at about thirty miles distance, and Plummer began at
once to get ready for leaving the ship, which was hauled up on
the wind with the maintopsail aback. Provisions, clothing
ammunition and whatever the gang desired were brought upon
deck, and two into which these articles were loaded.
When they were about ready to leave, Plummer said to Mr.
Provost :
“I shall want Sampson and Brooks to go in one of my boats
to navigate her, and the carpenter I want to go in the other boat
with me.”
“I should like very much to have Sampson stay in the ship
with me,” the mate replied.
“No matter. I want him with me. When I have done with
him he can go to the devil.”
Plummer entered the mate’s boat, which was new and good,
while Brooks and I were ordered into another, which was old
and unseaworthy. The mate shook hands with me as we went
over the side saying, “Good bye, Sampson ; God bless you !”
For my own part I felt so bad that I could not utter a word.
The boats shoved off and sot sail for land. As soon as we were
clear of the ship, the mate set the colors and saluted us, then
braced forward the main yard, and stood away on the wind,
Plummer’s boat, in which there were six persons, all mutineers


except the carpenter, led the way, and ours, containing Brooks,
myself and two armed mutineers, followed in their wake, "We
were so heavily loaded, and our boat leaked so that we were
compelled to bail all the time. With the night came on a strong
breeze, and we shaped our course more to the southward on that
account. Plummer outsailed us considerably, and being afraid
that he should lose sight of us in the rough weather and darkness,
he waited for us, and we lay to the rest of the night together.
The wind increased, and I told Plummer our boat could not
stand it, but with its present lading would certainly swamp.
He finally consented that everything in our boat should be
thrown overboard, except a keg of powder and a little hard
bread. In the morning he resumed his course, ordering us to
follow, which we did until the middle of the afternoon. But his
boat still outsailed ours, which, from the tossing it had received
while overladen, leaked worse and worse. Finally, their lead-
ers boat getting very far ahead, Brooks and I began to sound
the feeling and work upon the fear and jealousy of the two men
with us. They had never before been to sea, which gave us a
great advantage over them ; and under the circumsances we
soon convinced them that Plummer had plotted to drown them
and us from the fiist, else why did he put us in the worst boat
the ship carried? We urged it upon them as an undoubted
fact that our boat could not possibly survive another night of
such weather as we were experiencing, and thut our only chance
of safety consisted in getting ashore while there remained light
enough to enable us to select a landing place. Partly convinced
by our arguments, and partly overcome by their fears, they at
length consented that wo should run the boat ashore at the first
safe place, and accordingly we held closer to the shore which
was now not far off, say about a mile. The shore was ru2 , °’cd
and rocky, and there was considerable surf rolling, but after a
time we discovered a small space uf sand peach, and determin-
ed to risk the attempt there. We took our lives in our hand, and
headed our crazy boat directly for shore.
We advised our guard of the best plan for getting through
the surf, which was the moment the boat touched, to jump out,


take each other’s hands and run for life, right up the beach.
The billows of the surf generally come in threes, and there is a
longer interval of quiet after every third one. So we watched
an opportunity and “sailed in.” We had calculated well, and
the boat struck bow on. Brooks and I seized the bread and
water and sprang for land which we reached all right. But the
two mutineers were too badly frightened and confused to profit
by our directions, and they remained in the boat so long that
the next breaker coming in submerged them, threw the boat
broadside on and lifted her up and crushed her on the hard sand.
The men finally got ashore, however.
Our landing place was in the vicinity of Capo Howe, the south
eastern extremity of Australia, and about half way between
Sydney on the north and Melbourne on the west. In addition
to our small stock of bread and water we saved some powder,
tobacco and matches, and a spare shirt and blanket each. We
held a>kind of council, and agreed to rest there the remainder
of that day and the following night before starting on our travels,
so we kindled a fire on the beach from driftwood found there, and
set down by it to eat our scanty allowance, with a sense of re-
lief at having escaped from the clutches of Plummer and the
dangers of the sea, and little dreaming of what was before us.
Just before dark, Plummer and his crew hove in sight, having
come back in search of us. They approached within hail and
their chief asked what was the matter, and what in the devil’s
name we landed for. We replied that the boat was sinking and
that we landed to save our lives. He evidently did not credit
our story for ho stamped and raved with anger, and swore that
if he could get ashore he would shoot us. But the surf was
worse than when we landed, and the wind blowing on shore, so
he stood off again, sailing north.
The wind increased to a gale during the fore part of the night,
and the rain and darkness were such that it seemed impossible
to successfully navigate an open boat on a lee shore, and we
naturally concluded in the morning that the chief mutineer and
all his company had perished. Still, to avoid disagreeable pos-
sibilities, we took the opposite course from that the other boat
16


had taken, and traveled on, hoping to reach settlements soon.
For two days we kept our way picking it as best we could
along a rocky shore. At the end of that time our supply of
water gave out, and all that was left of our bread was the fine
crumbs and dust in the sack. This I dealt out by pinches to ray
fellow sufferers. On the morning of the third day we entered
upon a sand beach which stretched away to the south and west
as far as we could see, but affording no sign of a human habi-
tation. This beach we afterwards learned was called the “ Nine-
ty Mile Beach,” and it had the sea on one side and a forbidding
desert with billows of dry sand upon the other for the distance
indicated by its name. When we came upon this beach on the
evening of the second day, we had concluded to pass the night
there, though it was not quite sunset. The prospect grew more
and more disheartening, and not finding any water in the morn-
ing, we threw away our kegs, as well as the two guns, with an
intuitive feeling that in this race for our lives it would be folly
to carry dead weight. Though I was myself only about twenty
seven years of age I had traveled a great deal, and to ray com-
panions, who were all about twenty, I no doubt seemed an old
man, for they gave me the title of “ Old Dad,” and threw all the
responsibilities of leadership upon me.
As wo jogged along the beach under a burning sun, the desire
for drink became intolerable, and having heard that compara-
tively fresh water could be obtained by digging in the sand of
the shore, near the sea level, we resorted to that expedient and
succeeded in quenching our thirst with the help of a wood-
en match box which we happened to have with us. The water
we got was brackish, but a great deal better than none.
When the tide was low the walking along the hard damp sand
was excellent, but at high tide we had either to walk barefoot
in the edge of the water or take to the dry sand, which was hot
enough to blister our feet, almost, while it gave way and slid
from under them, and was, withal, so deep that in our weak
state we could hardly support the fatigues of toiling through it.
Our progress at the best was slow, and must not be estimated
by the standard of accustomed travellers, over good roads, we


did not average over fifteen miles a day for the whole journey,
finally our feet got so sore and tender that we judged it best not
to walk in the water any more.
On the third day, having seen no living thing but ourselves,
and surveying as far as our vision could penetrate,only a dreary
and monotonous stretch of desert waves, either of salt water or
of sand before and around ns, my three comrades gave up in
despair, and threw themselves upon the ground to die. It was
of no use they said to support their insufferable miseries any
longer in the hope of reaching an inhabited country, which
might be hundreds of miles away; whereas, they could at most,
only drag themselves a few rods further, and here was as good a
place to die as any.
I replied that it was no use to give it up so, I told them that I
had been in tight places before and had always got out some way,
by hook or by crook, and that I considered there was always
time enough to die when a fellow could’nt do anything else. I
hustled around the best I could, the fact that all depended on mo
seeming to give me strength and courage. At that moment I
took no thought of the misdeeds of the two mutineers, thinking
of them only as suffering comrades. I dug and found water,
which I brought them in the mere egg-shell of a vessel that was
all we had, and I gathered some weeds for them to eat. These
weeds, which we had tried already and found to afford some
relief to our hunger, were apparently the kind commonly called
pig-weed, and by some people “ lambs-quarter,” in allusion to
the shape of the leaf. They grew in the sunken spots between
the sand ridges, and small and stunted as they were, they were
the only succulent herb 1 could find. It seems singular that
they should grow there in the desert, but I have been told by
Californians that they grow in many places upon the borders
of the great American Desert.
After lying there an hour or two my three companions sum-
moned strength enough to start on again. Thus with alternate
fits of depression and hope the fourth day on shore and a part of
the fifth passed away. On the latter, at about noon, we reached
a small point of rocks jutting up in the edge of the water, and


accessible at low tide. I made my way to them, and gathered
from their wet sides something like two dozen (say about a pint)
of lirapits, a species of muscle about as large over as a half dol-
lar, and always found adhering to rocks. I divided these equally
among us, and we ate them raw. They are not considered quite
so good as oysters, but no oysters I ever ate did me so much
good.
We rested till the next morning, and then crawled on, stagger-
ing with weakness as we went. So we got through the sixth day,
and entered upon the seventh, when we discovered far ahead a
small rocky promontory. I don’t know why this should have
given us courage and strength, but it did. Perhaps it was
because we felt as if any change must be for the better. When
we reached the rocks, after a weary half day’s struggle, I ascended
to their top in hope to see some sign of inhabitants in the distance
But I was disappointed. The only object that broke the horrible
monotony of sea and sand was what appeared to be a clump of
bushes some five or six miles further on. I found a few more
limpits here, which we ate, and then we staggered forward. Just
before night fall we reached the supposed bushes, which proved
to be a thick grove of what are called “tea trees” in Australia.
They look some like hemlocks. We stopped in their shade, and
tried to eat some of the bark, but it was too bitter. Penetrating
the grove we found there the mouth of a small river, whose
banks as far up as we could see were timbered. By this time it
was getting dusk, and as we stood there and gazed in a mood
between perplexity and despair up the current of the stream we
saw a human being moved about!
“Boys!” I exclaimed, “yonder is an Indian, or something in
human shape. Let us go to him. It is the best we can do.
Our condition can’t be made any worse than it is already.”
As we approached the stranger he proved to be what I at first
suspected, an Australian native, and instead of awaiting us, he
ran off up the river. We followed him for about a quarter of a
mile, when we found the whole of his tribe encamped upon the
opposite side of the stream we hailed them, but they did not
understand English, and their only reply was to beckon us across


to them. Finally they launched a bark canoe, and sent a man
for us, who ferried us over one at a time. I went over first, and
as soon as I landed they seized and stripped me of all the cloth-
ing I possessed, except my shirt and pants. Fortunately they
did not know enough of the intricacies of civilized apparel to
think of examining ray pockets, and so the few trinkets I had in
them were saved. As the other men came over, one by one,
they were put through the same process. When they had robbed
us to their hearts content they took us before their chief, whom
we found in the principal hut, which would have made a tolerable
pig-sty in good weather. The chief was an old man, whose
head was covered with white wool, and as his robe of royalty
consisted entirely of the native article, we could see that the
scattering hairs upon his body were white also. He was nearly
blind into the bargain. But he examined us very minutely,
nevertheless, even looking into our mouths, to make sure that no
notable peculiarity should escape him. He addressed the vulgar
herd of his tribe (who were dressed just as he was) from time to
time, probably giving them the results of his scrutiny ; and they
all jabbered and laughed, and enjoyed themselves generally*
Finally his sooty lordship ordered us to be taken away, as was
evident from the motion which accompanied his words. We
were conducted to an empty hut, which we entered and sat
down. The hut was built of boughs and brush, and was calcu-
lated onlp to mitigate somewhat the extremes of heat and cold,
while against rain it would have afforded no defense whatever.
Our captors, or hosts, or whatever they were, or intended to be,
gathered around the door and looked in at us as much as so
many white boys might do at a cage of Guinea pigs.
In about half an hour one of the natives appeared with a raw
fish of about fifteen pounds weight in his hand. I arose and
approached him, and pointed with ray finger first at the fish, and
then at ray mouth, with other motions to give emphasis to my
mute demand for food. He nodded, seeming to understand me,
but he walked away very leisurely, from which I judged that the
prospect for our supper was poor, since 1 believed that the
natives eat their fish raw. However, when he had been gone an


hour he came back with the same fish cooked after the manner
of all South Sea savages, by covering it in the ground over hot
stones. He laid the fish down at the door of the hut, and left it,
and I suppose I shall be believed when I say we made short
work ot that fish. It was entirely fresh, but hunger, if not the
l>est sauce, is at least a very effective one. Three pounds offish,
net weight, is a pretty hearty meal for starving men, but we felt
no inconvenience from over eatino-.
We could form no idea of what the natives intended to do
with us, and were not a little uneasy. The Australian negroes
have had the reputation of being cannibals, and so far as we
could judge these were of that persuasion. So w T e stood watches
in order to guard against being massacred by stealth, and began
to look out for a chance to leave them. Hut whenever we went
out the natives followed us, and if we manifested a disposition to
stray too tar they placed themselves before us, and motioned us
back. The living of these people, at least at that place, was
mostly fish, with a swan or other water fowl occasionally. They
also ate grubs and worms which they dug from the ground,
whether from necessity or choice I do not know. I argue that
the grubs must either have been a choice morsel with them, or
they were sufficiently acquainted with the habits of whites to
know we would not oat them, for they never offered us any.
Wh were almost from the first on the lookout for a chance to
get away from the natives, but none offered for about a week.
We had many misgivings upon the subject, as we had heard that
the natives had the instinct of the dog for following a track, and
if they had any sinister intentions towards us, an unsuccessful
attempt to escape, would at once develop them and furnish a
pretext for putting them in execution. The natives slept among
and all round us, so that the first step was delicate, and required
great tact and caution. Finally we fixed upon a night for the
experiment, and lay awake until the guard, if such they were,
had all fallen asleep, and then rising in the darkness one by one,
we began to crawl out of the hut. Before we had succeeded in
doing so there was a stir among the natives, and we immediate-
ly subsided to our places again. However, as soon as all was


still we tried it once more and soon found ourselves in the open
air, and for the time, at least, free. As the natives kept no dogs
or domestic animals to give an alarm, or otherwise assist in pur-
suit of us, our show was pretty good, and whatever distance we
could make before daylight would be a clear gain.
We made our way without noise over the grassy slope that
led to the river and swam to the opposite shore. Then we fol-
lowed up the bank for half a mile through brush and briars and
over logs, and recrossed. We often started up what seemed to
be small droves of wild animals that went thrashing away
through the timber. I suppose they were Kangaroos, but it was
so dark wo could see nothing more than a few feet from us. In
this manner we continued our laborious progress until we had
swam the river twelve times, when one of the men gave out,
and Brooks and I were forced to support him and help him
along. As it was now no longer practicable to pursue our plan
of swimming the river at short intervals, we struck oil through
the woods,and in the course of the following day reached the waters
of another river, probably tributary to the former, whose banks
were peopled by a different tribe from that which we had just
left. Our new acquaintances had evidently had more inter-
course with the whites, and indeed, one of their number spoke a
little English. On inquiry w*e were told by this man that some
sixty miles from where then were, two white men lived, whose
occupation was that of herdsmen, and that these were the near-
est white men he knew of.
We asked for something to eat, and got it, such as the natives
had. They could muster nothing but a kind of wild black cur-
rant, which has aflat sweetish taste, but probably affords consid-
erable nourishment. We asked the native who spoke English
to guide us to the white men, and he replied that he would do
so if we would pay him.
“Of course,” we said. How much do you want? “Shirt,”
was the brief response, and so it w T as settled. Our guide in-
formed us in the course of the evening that his people were at
war with a neighboring tribe, in consequence of his having stolen
a woman from them as is the custom of their country, and he


went onto describe as well as his limited command of language
would allow, the mode of procedure in such cases. Women
among the natives are comparatively scarce, and when a young
fellow cannot get a wife amongst his own tribe, he generally
lurks about the encampment of a neighboring one until some
solitary woman falls within his power, when he knocks her
senseless with a club, and carries her off. The result, especially
if the woman has a husband already, which is generally the case,
is a war between the two tribes, and a single tattle ensues, in
which innumerable blows are given and taken, either one of
which would be instant death to a white man, but though there are
a great many bruised heads and bloody noses among the natives
no one is ever killed, I believe, except by accident. This is singu-
lar, too, when it is considered that they handle their war club,
called a waddy , with great dexterity, and throw their spears with
a force that carries them twelve or fourteen rods. Besides these
weapons, they have the boomerang, which is peculiar to them,
and which in the confusion of a fight must be guarded against
in the rear as well as in the front, since it can be thrown so as to
pass high over an enemy’s head and return with unerring cer-
tainty and strike him in the back, unless he changes his position.
One battle Royal, however it may go, ends the campaign and
the war. The mere act of fighting sufficiently vindicates the
honor of the injured party, and the aggressor always keeps his
ill gotten wife, at least until a luckier man can steal her again,
as he himself stole her. At the first glance this all seems very
foolish and inconsequent, but a little thought will enable us to
find the same principle carried out among the most civilized na-
tions. Thus, one gentleman insults another, the insulted gentle-
man challenges, and gets shot for his pains. But he is satisfied,
custom says he is bound to be, and that the shooting is fair com-
pensation for the insult. It is true, these things happen very
seldom now, but that is because they are contrary to law.
The next morning we started on our journey to reach the white
herdsmen. Our guide, accompanied by his “ squaw,” as he had
learned from the English to call the woman he had recently
wooed and won with his waddy, preceded us along the faint and


narrow foot path. He was constantly alert and on the look-out
for enemies, but none appeared. Just at night of this our first
day’s we were most agreeably surprised to come suddenly
upon the comfortable log house of the nearest herdsman. We
forgave our guide for his deception, if such he meant, in our joy
at the event, and entered the house of the hospitable English-
man, who, having cordially welcomed us, set at once to prepare
food for us without asking a single question. Brother Yankee!
think of that and wonder! Hospitality, indeed, is the fashion
of that country, as it is of all very new countries.
Besides a plenty of beef, abundance of vegetables which were
raised in the spacious garden about the house, were set before us,
and we certainly were not in a condition to neglect such an op-
portunity —and we did not neglect it. So far as it was possible
to make up in a single meal for a fortnight’s starvation, wo did
so.
After supper we explained to our host that we had been ship
wrecked, and had escaped in boats to the shores of Australia;
and we described our journeyings and adventures since. He
said in reply, that we were the first white men that had ever
made the trip w T e described, which was considered quite imprac-
ticable, and that it was a very great wonder that we had not
been killed by the natives. They mentioned that two white men
had once set out to explore the region we had passed through,
but though they were experienced back-woodsmen, and well
armed, they were never heard of afterwards. Our host, who
was called “Tom,” had the care of a considerable herd of cattle
and some horses, and though practically alone did not seem to
be afraid of the natives.
The next day we called upon the other white man, who answer-
ed to the name of “ Joe.” We passed four days in the neighbor-
hood, during which Brooks and I took an opportunity while out
fishing with Tom, to tell him the story of the mutiny, and that
our two comrades, not then present had been participators in it.
We asked Tom and his friend what we had better do, but they
were unable to advise us.
In the mean time our native guide made a demand for the
IT


shirt we had promised him, and as we had none to spare, we
tried with the aid of our hosts, to compromise the matter with
him. But Shylock was not more persistent in his demand for
the pound of flesh than was our colored brother for the stipulated
shirt. At last the two Englishmen took the affair into their own
hands, and offered him a liberal equivalent in flour.
“ No, Shirt,” insisted the dogged darkey.
“ You d d rascal,” said Tom, “ will nothing do you but
to take the last shirt from a man’s back? Leave here instantly
or I’ll shoot you on the spot.” So the fellqw went off without
any reward, which was a pity, though his disposition to take an
advantage of our necessities was not much to his credit.
Ever since we reached the white men the two mutineers had
shown themselves suspicious and uneasy, and with the true rest-
lessness of guilt, had been anxious to go on, though it seemed as
if they dared not leave us. As the idea among us all was to go
to the mines they seemed to intend to stay with us, which Brooks
and I were determined to avoid. The mines were sixty miles
away, and we were determined to get rid of them before we got
there. We were apprehensive that we should all be arrested,
innocent and guilty alike, and carried back to the United States,
and we did not at all like the prospect, though, as our English
friends suggested, Brooks and I were sure to get clear. Six or
eight months imprisonment, with consequent suffering and loss
of time, and the certain prospect of being ultimately turned
adrift without a penny, was not a thing to bo desired even by
the most innocent man in the world. I thought so then, in view
of probabilities; and now having experienced all the bitterness
that I could only imagine then, I find no reason to change my
mind. Indeed if I had the thing to go through with again, I
would take just as much pains to escape, under the same circum-
stances, as if I were actually guilty. It is a poor satisfaction to
me, for all I suffered, to know that some of the villians who
butchered the captain of the “Junior” wore convicted of the
crime only to be pardoned or “commuted,” or whatever name
they give it, by some bribed official, especially as there was no
lack of witnesses without me.


The stream upon the waters of which the two Englishmen
were located was called, so they told us, Snowy River, in allusion
to the Snowy Mountains or Australian Alps, in which it had its
source. They lived upon a kind of Delta between two streams,
and the soil was of an excellent quality. From there it was
fifty miles to the nearest ranch ; and now judging ourselves to
be sufficiently recruited we started on after many thanks to our
kind entertainers.
At the first parting or forking of the road Brooks and I were
determined to tell the two mutineers that it was necessary for us
to separate ourselves from them ; that we left the choice of roads
to them, and that whichever road they chose to take, we would
take the other.
The lands over which we passed were mostly low and rich, and
and heavily timbered, with occasional swamps. We noticed and
remarked upon the strange appearance of the trees, which are
for the most part quite different from any that I ever saw else-
where. One kind in particular affords a red wood very hard
and heavy, and has the peculiarity of shedding its bark. It
bears a broad largo leaf.
We arrived at the next settlement in two days, and found there
five stockmen and a Scotchman and his wife. We staid there all
night. As the roads separated here, Brooks and I told the com-
panions of our weary and perilous journey that we must now
leave them. We were, going down the coast we said, and they
could go wherever they pleased so not with us. They were very
reluctant to assent to this arrangement, but we insisted, giving as
a reason that it would be difficult for so many together to get
work anywhere, and that Brooks and I being old shipmates,
wanted to keep together. Though apparently dissatisfied they
could not prevent our quitting them. So in the morning we went
away from the house leaving them there, and I have never heard
anything certain of them since. ,
It was thirty miles on the route we had concluded to take to
the next ranch, and this distance Brooks and I made by ourselves.
It was a relief to be rid of the mutineers, for though under the
pressure of distress and danger we ceased to remember their


crimes against them, the thought of it always returned at the first
moment of comfort or leisure, and made their presence hateful.
Our hopes rose high at the thought that after all our misfortunes
we were at last among civilized men once more, that wo were
free, and only a few miles from the mines of gold whose riches
were the wonder of the world. For little as we sympathized
with the lawless and bloody deeds that had led to the present
posture of affairs, it is but human to accept the situation that has
been forced upon us, and make the best of it. And, as I have
before said or intimated, wo were not willing, for the sake of
assisting in the possible conviction and punishment of the
mutineers, to give our liberty and what would in effect be two
years time, with the certainty of getting nothing for our pains,
and being left destitute in the end. To denounce the two men
with us as criminals was to denounce ourselves as witnesses, and
under the circumstances the law makes no practical difference in
the treatment of the two. Which of my readers, having good
pecuniary prospects before him, would be willing to give up
those prospects and two years of his life for the sake of prosecu-
ting any criminal however great, when in any stage of the pro-
ceedings some carelessness of an officer, some trick of a lawyer,
some stupidity of a juror, or some bribe to a high official, might
and most probably would nullify all his endeavors! We were
satisfied that the two mere boys who had been with us were
comparatively innocent, and that if Plummer, the wicked insti-
gator of the massacre, should be arrested, there would be
evidence enough to convict him without our presence. We had
been from July to January from home, and though the primary
object of our voyage was frustrated, we considered wo could
without any injustice, upon the whole, which we could prevent
without a greater injustice to ourselves, make amends for our
luck by taking advantage of the favorable points of our situation.
If we were wrong, I for one have not become convinced of it.
To lie in jail from term to term of the court, while crafty and
well paid lawyers protracted the case for their own gain and
the benefit of the murderers, is what we came to at last; but we
did not meet the fate voluntarily, and would not if it were to do
again.


It was now the latter part of January, and consequently about
midsummer in Australia. The climate of the country is hotter
at times during the day than any other inhabited by civilized
men, ranging as high as one hundred and twenty degrees, and, as
reported, even one hundred and forty degrees Farenheit in the
shade, but as the air is dry this is not felt so much. This is
when the winds comes down from the parched and barren plains
of the interior. When the wind shifts and blows from the icy
seas around the South Pole, the change in temperature is both
sudden and great, amounting sometimes to about one hundred
degrees in twenty-four hours. This degree of heat, and these
changes would, I imagine, be almost unendurable in a moist
climate, but they do not affect the people so much as one might
suppose. 1
The aboriginees of Australia are a race of negroes by them-
selves, and are found only there and on a few ot the adjacent
islands. They are not quite so ugly, nor are they generally so
black as the Guinea negroes, whatever may bo said. I have seen
a good deal of both, and I know whereof I affirm. Their hair,
though it curls even to a wooliness, is not crisped so close to their
heads as the African’s is. They are not near so large as white
men, but resemble in size the mixed breeds of Central and South
America. They are like the African negroes in their disposition
to take up the manners and customs of the whites ; but whatever
thev may gain by civilization, it is not likely that civilization will
ever gain much by them.
As my comrade and myself journeyed through the wilderness
towards the denser settlements we were constantly reminded by
the strange vegetation and strange scenery that we were indeed
in a New World— the New World, in fact; for Australia is not
only the latest discovered and least explored of the great natu-
ral divisions, but it is, according to geologists the latest created,
or in other words, the most recently found of them all. As we
passed along under the shadows of the gigantic trees, docks ot
beautiful tropical birds flitted through their foliage, among them
the splendid cockatoo, and a great variety of parrots, the most
singular of which, to us, were the black and the white ones.


Along the trail at intervals of a half mile or so were holes ex-
cavated for the purpose of catching the surface water, for the
benefit of travellers and of stock. Many of these were entirely
dry, and others were nearly so. In one of those that still retained
a little water we found a dead ox, but such was the exigency of
our case that we were compelled to drink or do worse.
Among the plagues of the country are two kinds of poisonous
snakes, the diamond snake and the whip snake, besides a large
black snake which some say is poisonous; and two kinds of poi-
son spiders; then there are innumerable ants, some of them an
inch long, which are sufficiently vicious if they are not veno-
mous; and myriads of flies, varieties of which are not only dis-
agreeable but dangerous. The sand fly will blow wounded or
bruised spots on living animals, and maggots are developed in a
few hours, which destroy life if not checked. But the most ter-
rible denizen of the Australian woods is the nettle tree, which
kills the man or animal that runs against it in his tracks. There
is, however, an herb, always growing in the same localities, which
will save the life of a person stung with the nettle if applied in
time. But there would be no limit to what might be written of
the singularities of Australia.
At the next settlement we reached, we found regular farms
with orchards of apples and peaches, and beautiful fields of wheat.
Whenever we entered a house it was not necessary to ask for
food, neither would the people ask us if we were hungry; but
they would set at once about preparing a meal for us, and they
really seemed to take delight in the practice of a liberal hospi-
tality. We remained at a farm house all night, sleeping in a
straw stack from choice. We then travelled on through a lovely
country, consisting of alternate Prairie and woodland, over
which wandered fine droves of cattle and sheep, for the most
part free and unrestrained, but sometimes separated from one
another by w T ire fences. The houses along the road were gener-
ally about five miles apart. They were all public houses, and
kept ale and refreshments generally.
We concluded that we would hire out at the first good chance
and work awhile. In the afternoon we came upon the main road


from Port Albert to the mines, at about thirty miles from the
coast. A mile further on we reached a public house kept by an
Irishman by the name of Collins. He asked us if we wanted to
hire. We said “yes.”
“ What wages do you want? ” he inquired.
“ Twenty-five dollars a month,” I replied.
“ Are you Americans ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ I thought so from your dress.”
He must have been a cute Irishman to judge so well from
such limited data, for we were dressed very much as our colored
friends at the mouth of Snowy River had left us, except that we
had been provided with an old hat each, through the kindness of
the settlers, and possibly with some old shoes. We told the
people we conversed with that we had been wrecked on the coast
near Cape Howe, and that the crew had scattered, some of them
making their way North, while we came South, &c.
We hired to Collins for a mouth, and worked at digging water
holes and getting out fence posts. The landlady called us her
“ Mirikin servants,” to retaliate for which compliment we told
her that we had a different way of managing these things at
home, where the Americans were masters and mistresses, and
the Irish the servants, though for civilization sake we avoided
the word and called them assistants, helps or hired folks. She
would probably have turned up her nose at this information
but nature had already turned it up so much that this,
was impossible. We worked our month out, much to the satis-
faction of our employer, (master I believe he called himself,)
who would gladly have kept us longer, but we said we wanted
to go on to the mines. We bought ourselves some shoes and
coats with part of our wages and then travelled on. At about 1
twenty miles from there we reached a Police station called Flod-
den Creek. The Policemen of the country, who are mounted,
and are constantly engaged in scouring the country, a necessary
precaution, from the character of the convict part of the popu-
lation, had passed and re-passed, stopping at Collins’ house
without apparently noticing us specially. We had got a chance


to ride as far as the Station on one of the common carts of the
country, Flodden Creek is a small village. We got there in
the afternoon and went to a public house and asked for dinner,
and when that was disappeared, for cigars. Then we took a
cruise around town and so passed oft’ the afternoon. In the
evening we went into a saloon and asked for something to drink.
There we met a Scotchman, who came up to us and asked us if
we were Americans. We answered affirmatively.
“ Do you want to get a job of work ? ”
“ Yes, if we could get a good one.”
“Well, come home with me. It is right on your way, and I
think we can make a barp-ain.”
O
We consented to his proposal, and on the way hired to him to
get out fence timber, at the same wages as before, but this time
we were to live in a cabin of our own construction and cook for
ourselves. The timber was three miles from the house, and the
next day we went out to see it. On our way back, at half-way
across the plain, we met a couple of policemen, who rode past
without seeming to notice us, and called upon some stockmen
who were pursuing their business at a little distance. They soon
returned and overtook us, however, and asked where we were
going.
“ We are going to work for Mr. Smith,” I replied.
“ You are, eh ? ”
“ Yes, that is the calculation.”
“ What are your names ? ”
We told them.
“ Did you sail on the ship ‘ Junior.’ ”
“ Yes.”
“Just the men we want,” one of them said.
They then drew their revolvers and dismounted. I laughed
at this, and asked them what they were going to do with their
revolvers. They replied, “ Nothing, but wc arc going to put
you in irons.
They then produced handcuffs and put them upon our wrists
and took us back to the station and placed us in the calaboose.
Here among other questions they asked us where the other two


men were. We told them where we left them, and they spent
two weeks in a fruitless search, the men were not found. All
the rest were in custody. The police scoured the country on our
back track as far as they dared to go in the search, and expressed
the greatest wonder that we had survived our journey. Indeed,
had we not run right into their hands, they would never have
looked for us, they taking it for granted that if Plummer had
not killed us, we had perished in the desert.
The “Junior” when we left her had steered direct for Sydney,
arriving there next day, and the mate proceeded to tell his story
and surrender the ship to American Consul Merrill, who put the
crew through a ligid examination, and then gave such informa-
tion to the police and coast guard as made it impossible for
Plummer to escape if he should land upon any inhabited part ot
the coast. He did land at a place called Twofold Bay, where he
called himself Captain Wilson, and said that his ship was out-
side waiting for recruits. He was dressed in the clothes ot the
murdered captain, and wore his gold watch and ring. The arms
in his boat and other circumstances looking suspicious, he and
his gang were arrested, but there being no evidence against them
they were released, the order to be on the lookout not having yet
reached the police and guard at this secluded place. Plummer
took board at a hotel, and proceeded to make love, secundum
artem , to the landlady’s daughter. I even heard that they were
about to marry when the news came that secured Captain
Wilson’s arrest. He made no resistance, and the coast guard
took him to Sydney and lodged him in jail. He told where we
had landed with the other boat, but was not believed. It was
thought he had murdered us, and was so reported in the papers.
From Flodden Creek we were sent under guard to Port Albert,
and thence by steamer to Melbourne. The people of the latter
place swarmed the streets to got a look at us “pirates,” and
indulged in sundry expressions indicative of their views as to
what ought to be done with us. We had to run the gauntlet ot
their wolfish eyes a whole mile, from the ship to the jail, where
we lay three weeks waiting for a steamer to Sydney. When she
came, and was ready to return, the officer who had charge ot us
' 18


repeated the former free exhibition, compelling us to drag our
heavy irons of fourteen pounds weight the whole distance.
Towards the last the skin peeled from our ankles at every step.
I never killed a man, and hope I never may; but it ever 1
should, I hope it may be that officer, and I am sure my con-
science will hold me guiltless.
While on the passage to Sydney, Brooks found a pen-knife in
In’s berth, and being discovered in possession of it the officer ask-
ed where he got it. Ho told, upon which the cowardly possessor
of a little brief authority gave him the lie, and put us upon
a diet of bread and water for three days. The allowance of
bread was a single sea biscuit. A policeman patrolled the deck
in front of our state room door, day and night with a drawn
sword in his hand. We were allowed one hour on deck each
day—which I suppose the officer in charge of us thought would
be about a fair proportion of the time —to show us oft to the
gaping passengers. While we were going below, the sailors
would post themselves near the gangway and slip tobacco into
our hands.
We were live days making the trip to Sydney, and when we
arrived there a boat was sent ashore with the news that they had
two of the “Junior” pirates on board, so that when we landed
the wharf was black with spectators. The police made way for
us to the carriage, constructed purposely for such occasions,
and called the “Black Maria,” which was waiting, and
in which we rode to prison. There we mot the crew of the
“Junior” who shook hands with us and told us to keep up a
good heart, for, said they, “You are all right, we all know you
had no hand in the mutiny.”
Brooks and I were both confined in one cell, and wo only saw
Plummer and his boat’s crew when we were each day allowed a
few minutes exercise in the prison yard. They had employed a
lawyer to defend them, and as we now learned, they charged that
not only Brooks and the carpenter and myself had been engaged
in the conspiracy and murder, but that all the men, and even the
ship’s officers had taken part in it. After the lapse of a day
or two, the witnesses were examined touching our case, and


though confessedly nothing was elicited to criminate Brooks and
me, there were more victims wanted, or else Plummer’s gang
had more credit with the Court than those who testified that we
had been free from any complicity in the crime, and further that
we had been forced reluctantly to accompany the boats when
they left the ship. At all events we were remanded to prison.
The American Consul visited Brooks and me, and in the
course of the conversation that ensued, he assured us that he
was sorry indeed for the unfortunate turn our luck had taken,
he said he would do anything in his power for us, and help us
to everything we needed, but that he would have to send us
home with the rest, and that we would have to remain in prison
until the •‘Junior” could be fitted up with cells for the confine-
ment of the prisoners, and provided with a new captain and
crew. The mate of the “Junior” had already gone home in the
ship “India.”
We remained two months in prison, the confinement being
close, and, to men used to much exercise in the open air, very
trying both to mind and body. The only thing that varied the
terrible monotony of our lives was the preaching, which we
were permitted to attend every Sunday. The prisoners had
their choice of Protestant or Catholic services.
At length the ship was ready and we were taken on board
and locked in our respective cells, and she set sail. A part of
the “Junior’s” old crew, including the cooper and one man who
ran away, were loft in Australia, I suppose for the purpose of
identifying the yet unarrested mutineers, if they should ever fall
into the hands of the police. A report appeared afterwards in
the papers that those two men had been taken, tried and hung
there, but I do not know whether there was any truth in it or not.
The cells were upon the main deck, and were constructed of
sheet iron, and we were placed in them in the following order,
reckoning from the steerage, first myself, then Brooks, then the
carpenter, then Plummer, &c. The hand cuffs were taken off
from all of us. Captain Gardner, now of the “Junior” and in-
deed the whole ship’s company were very kind to me, and made
me as comfortable as the circumstances would permit. Off the


Brazils a strong suspicion was aroused that Plummer had form-
ed a plot to capture the vessel. There was a Dutchman on
guard, and he was requested by Plummer to hand something to
one of his gang, which was wrapped in a dirty scrap of paper.
The guard handed the paper to one of the officers, who detected
some suspicious words scratched upon it, which indicated that
communications had already passed between them. Plummer
was consequently handcuffed for the balance of the journey
home.
We entered the harbor of Pernambuco for water, which de-
layed us a little, but on the whole we made good time, landing
at the wharf in New Bedford, August 20th, ISSB. The wharf
was crowded with people, four thousand of whom, both men
and women, came on board to see us, being all more or less ac-
quainted with one or another of the prisoners. The mate had
already told the story of the mutiny and murder, assigning to
each individual his true part in the tragedy, so that Brooks and
I had no reason to complain of the reception we met. Every
one of our acquaintances was profuse with offers of sympathy
and prophecied a speedy delivery from our unpleasant situation.
We were sent over to Fairhaven in the police yacht, and on
landing passed through a mob, if possible, still more ferocious
than that myself and shipmate had encountered in Melbourne.
But the Fairhaven mob had so much in their favor—they had a
resonable certainty that the true criminals were before them, and
they were less special in their compliments to myself, Brooks and
the carpenter, from the fact that we were not handcuffed, while
Plummer and Co. were. We went by the cars from Fairhaven
to Boston, where we were lodged in the city prison.
After the usual delay we were taken before the court in Cam-
bridge street, where we went through another examination, and
were again remanded. We were still in irons as to our feet, and
had been now about ten months in confinement. When we
found that we (Brooks and I) were really about to be tried for
our lives, we engaged the services of two lawyers named Sydney
Webster and Wilder Dwight to defend us. Andrews, since
Governor of the State of Massachusetts, was counsel for one of


the prisoners, I forget which one, and the since famous B. F.
Butler defended Plummer. 0. C. Woodbury conducted the
prosecution for the State.
The real criminals were put upon their trial first, and the
result was that Plummer was convicted of piracy and murder in
the first degree, but as his counsel at once gave notice of an
application for a new trial, I believe ho was not sentenced. At
all events he had a new trial granted, which came off the next
spring. Ho was again convicted as before, and tin's time sen-
tenced to bo hung on the Bth of June following. To finish Ids
story, so far as I know it, Plummer, whoso real name was reported
Sumner, and who was said to be a nephew of Senator Sumner,
had hosts of friends who were determined to move heaven and
earth for his rescue from justice. Two petitions to the President
were circulated in his behalf, and signed by some of the best
men of Boston, but Mr. Buchanan would have nothing to do
with them. A third petition was carried by Plummer’s sister in
person, and his punishment was commuted "to imprisonment for
life in the penitentiary at Charlestown. I have not heard from
him since, but think it most likely that he has long since been
set at liberty, as the fashion is.
His accomplices were convicted at the first trial of murder in
the second degree, and sentenced to five years and ten months
imprisonment, and two thousand dollars fine each, to be worked
out in the county jails of the State. Brooks, the carpenter and
myself were kept in prison, under one pretense or another, until
late in the following spring. We were kept in irons, but our
situation was comparatively comfortable, and we were humanely
treated by the jailor, Mr. Bartlett, who was a good officer and a
kind man. In addition to the privileges common to men in our
circumstances, we had the advantage of bathing thoroughly every
Friday, a bath room being attached to the institution. Seabury
visited us there, and we also met him in Boston after our
discharge, when he gave us five dollars each as a token of his
sympathy. Ho was no doubt a kind hearted and generous man
by nature. Our friends from Watertown also called upon us with
supplies of books, which were exceedingly welcome. Finally in


June, 1859, wo were brought before the court again, and formally
discharged. We went back to the jail, where our irons were
taken off, and wo were supplied by the authorities with a good
suit of clothes each. Besides our board was paid for us at a
good boarding house so long as wo wished to stay in the city.
Thus, after the loss of about two years time, three-fourths of
of which I had passed in close confinement, I found myself again
at liberty with a shattered constitution and an empty purse. I
never regained my former robust strength, but liberty is liberty
to the weak as well as the strong, and hope, which had never
forsaken me in the darkest hours of a bitter experience, continued
to illuminate my future with her smile. Brooks and I came on
to Utica, where his home was. I stayed there with him some
three weeks recruiting my strength ; then bidding adieu to this
faithful companion in so many difficult and painful situations, I
continued my journey to Buffalo with the intention of sailing on
the lakes the remainder of the summer, but I found no suitable
berth, and so returned to Springville, where I passed the winter.
California was now my aim. It was no new desire to me, this
of going to California. 1 had relatives there, who from time to
time communicated with the people of Ashford and vicinity,
giving such accounts of the country as made it seem an object to
get thither, but hitherto it had been so much easier to go whaling
than to get a berth or passage to the Golden State, that before I
had got ready to try my fortune there I had fallen into the
stronger current and drifted away from my intended course.
But whaling was played out with mo now, and California had no
competitor for my affections. My plan was to go down the
Allegany and Ohio Elvers on a raft, then make my way to some
one of the starting points for the overland emigration, attach
myself in some capacity to a train and cross the plains to the El
Dorado. I carried out my programme so far as to reach Cincin-
nati, where meeting my old employer I was induced to engage
with him again, and I passed the summer at work in a livery
stable there. In the fall I returned east, and taking my native
place in my way, went first to New York, and afterwards visited
my acquaintances in New Bedford and Boston. Then retracing


ray way to New York, I there shipped before the mast for Hong
Kong, China, on board the ship “Eureka,” B. F. Cutler, master.
The “Eureka” carried the usual compliment of officers, and
twenty fore-mast hands. On the 10th of November, 1860, we
left our dock, and passed out into the open sea, where, having
discharged our pilot, we stood away southeast by east across the
Gulf Stream. We had fair winds to the trade, which are always
fair for vessels running, as we were, for the Cape Yerde Islands,
and the weather I never saw surpassed for pleasantness.
Onr freight consisted in part of a steam engine destined for
the service of the King of Siam, and a quantity of sewing
machines of the Ladd & Webster patent. Besides these things
we carried beef and pork, gunpowder, &c. Captain Cutler, as
well as myself, was an old whaler, and whenever wo passed in
sight of whales, which we did several times in the Atlantic, 1
could see he looked at them with a wishful eye, and I presume
his mouth watered at the thought of towing them alongside, and
cutting them in.
Much greater pains are taken to keep a merchantman neat
than is thought necessary in a whaler. Indeed, leaving out of
sight the desideratum in the merchant service, which, I take it,
is to keep the men always busy, and the question would naturally
arise whether some of the skippers were not more nice than wise,
and that admitting their wisdom to be fully up to the average.
The Holy stone did “yeoman service” on board the “Eureka.”
This implement of industry which I first made the acquaintance
of during this voyage is a sandstone of the shape and dimensions
of a brick, and is made use of in scouring the decks, which by the
constant use of this and other means and appliances of cleanliness,
were kept, metaphorically speaking, as white as snow. The amus-
ing occupation of scrubbing decks was pleasantly diversified by
making spun yarn and sumit; in short, what with tasks useful
and tasks somewhat otherwise, we were kept out of mischief,
and the men had no opportunity to plot treason, stratagem or
spoils, even had they been so inclined, which I think was not
the case. But when I felt impatient of the ceaseless round of
petty occupations that filled the time, I admitted that this was


infinitely preferable to my late homeward trip, in which 1 had
nothing at all to do.
In fifty days from New York we passed the Cape of Good
Hope, the third time for me, and steering well to the South in
order to catch the westerly winds, which we got in their full
force, we bore east, and in due time entered the Indian Ocean,
where we lost our favorable winds, and only got in exchange for
them a succession of tremendous thunderstorms. In some of
these it seemed from the deafening reverberations from cloud to
cloud that thunderbolts were as thick as rain drops in the air.—■
The rain storms did not help us on our way any, but if they had
been economized in a certain way, it would have saved us some
inconvenience, for as we now had for a long time no wind to
speak of except one, that as the boy said blew straight up
and down, wo ran short of water, and were kept twenty-eight days
on an allowance of only one quart a day to the person for all
purposes, which you may be sure is little enough when men are
living on salt provisions in a torrid climate.
At last we raised land, which the Captain said was Sandal-
wood Island. We were three days in getting to the island for
want of wind, during which we could see frequent showers on
and near the land, which, where we were all out of doors, would
have done very well for a powder house, as far as the rain was
concerned. But time, they say, brings all things, and it finally
brought us under the land, where we got the benefit of the showers,
which were almost constant, and heavy in a direct ratio. What
a tropical shower is, when it “lets go all holts” my readers can
judge, from the fact that we stopped the ship’s scuppers, and in
a short time collected three hundred barrels, which sufficed us
for the rest of the voyage as far as San Francisco, and farther
for aught I know.
The island of Sumba, or Sandalwood, gets its English name
from one of its productions, which also grows in nearly all the
mountain regions of Hindoostan and the East India Islands,
Sandalwood in grain and texture resembles boxwood, for which
it is often substituted in engraving, and twenty thousand im-
pressions are sometimes taken from a Sandalwood cut before it


is worn out. But its chief uses are those it is put to by the Hin-
doos and Chinese, on account of its fragrance and supposed
medicinal qualities. The former people burn it at all their fu-
neral ceremonies, and they also use a preparatian of it as a cooling
medicine. The Chinese make fans and other ornamental work
of it, and likewise reduce it to powder for a cosmetic. The sap
wood, which constitutes one half the log, is worthless, and as the
tree grows in perfection only in the most rugged and difficult
places, it is quite an object to get rid of the sap before transpor-
tation. This is accomplished by a singular process. The logs,
which are twelve to eighteen inches through, as soon as they are
cut are buried to a little depth in the earth, when the ants which
swarm in those regions immediately attack them, and in a couple
of months nothing but the heart timber is left.
On the island of Sumbawa, which lies some sixty miles north-
west of Sumba, is the volcano of Toinboro, perhaps the most ter-
rible on the face of the earth. It is nine thousand feet high,
and during its great eruption in 1815, its roaring was distinctly
audible at a distance of one thousand miles, and the ashes fell to
a considerable depth in Sumatra, more than eight hundred
miles from the volcano. Thousands of people were killed by
the eruption.
Leaving Sumba, and passing through the Arafura Sea we enter-
ed Torres Strait. The winds continued to be of that particularly
worthless and baffling variety known to sailors in those latitudes
as doldrums. When they blow at all it is generally in the direction
you don’t want to go, and they don’t last long enough to pay
you for attempting to beat. In Torres Strait we fell in with and
spoke the ship “ Izaak Walton,” of Boston, also for Hong Kong.
The next night we encountered another violent thunder storm ?
accompanied by no wind to enable us to get steerage way on
the vessel, while the current was drifting us into dangerous
proximity to the laud. We could see the lights, and hear the
roll and roar of the breakers on the rock bound coast of New
Guinea. However, a land breeze sprung up in time to save us,
and we bore away for the clear sailing afforded by the Pacific.
In the China Sea we crossed the fishing banks, which are fre-
-19


quoiited by thousands of Chinese craft. The weather was favor-
able for fishing, and the boats fairly covered the sea, swarming,
as some one observed, apparently in the ratio of two boats to
one fish. To prevent running them down, a lookout was station'
cd at the bow, to direct the men at the wheel. These fishing
boats are of from thirty to forty tons burden, and generally very
swift sailers. Nearly all the fishermen are pirates in principle,
which they putin practice at every safe opportunity, and though
generally cowardly, they have been known to exhibit sufficient
audacity in wickedness at times. From some sailor like super-
stition among them, their boats all have a large eye painted
upon their bows. When asked what it means their usual answer
is, in their broken English Spanish, “No see, no sabe,” which
being interpreted I suppose would read, “If a boat cannot sec it
will not know where to go.” Some superstitions among Ameri-
can sailors are not much better than this.
Hong Kong is a rocky and mountainous Island lying oil the
coast of southern China, near the mouth of Canton River. The
island is nine miles long by eight broad, and about two thousand
feet high. It has been in possession of the British for some
twenty-five years; and under their rule is a place of great trade,
more than one thousand European and American vessels arriving
there yearly. There is no harbor, strictly speaking, but the an-
chorage among the small islands adjacent is good, to say nothing
of the strait, nearly a mile wide, that separates Hong Kong from
the main land. The population of the island is about fifty thou-
sand, of whom, only a few hundreds are whites. Hong Kong is
forty miles from Macao, and about one hundred from Canton.
When we arrived there we found about one hundred vessels of
all nations anchored about promiscuously, and we followed suit
by mooring the “Eureka” along with them. Conspicuous among
the craft that dotted the sea in all directions, were the massive
bulks of the American, English and French war vessels. Around
these like herrings around a whale the Chinese bumboats, (ped-
dling craft) swarmed. Besides those vessels already mentioned,
probably one thousand sail of Junks were to be seen around the
island. The people who navigate these, may be said in the


strictest sense, to inhabit them. They were born on board of
Junks as were there fathers before them. They will, Providence
permitting, die in a Junk; and leave a Junk as an inheritance to
their children, so that they may, in their turn have a Junk to
die in.
All the trades and occupations, I believe, except agriculture,
are carried on in these boats. Washerwomen take into them the
soiled garments of sailors and others, and return them as clean
as soap and water will make them for fifty cents a month.
Tailors and shoemakers were there soliciting our orders at
incredibly low figures. Painters of likenesses of men, ships, or
landscapes, peddled their productions everywhere among the
“outside barbarians” as they consider Christian nations. 'Ten
dollars would procure a beautiful and correct likeness of any
ship you might designate in the offing, done to order, on the
shortest notice. In their delineations these artists follow their
original in even the most trifling particulars. This quality of
their work made it more interesting to study their pictures of
cities and inland scenery, and of pretty native women, and was
an additional temptation to buy, since you had a reasonable
assurance that the delineation of the object was done with perfect
fidelity.
The sailors of the “Eureka” had nothing to do with the dis-
charge of her cargo, for which purpose Chinese stevedores were
empdoyed. We were kept busy sending down and mending
sails, rigging and masts, and in repairing and cleaning up every
thing generally that could be construed to need “serving” as the
nautical phrase is. We also painted the ship from stem tosterm
and made her look as good as new. We had liberty nights and
Sundays, the same as farm laborers used to have before dairying
became the rage.
The principal town on the island of Hong Kong is called
Victoria by the British. It is a rather pretty place, with some
fine clean streets, but the most of them cannot be recommended
in this respect. The market abounds with every variety of
tropical fruits, the island itself lying just within the geographi-
cal limits of the Torrid Zone. The Chinese watermen use a kind


of boat called a Sampan to ferry sailors from and to their vessels,
and the charge was fifty cents each to carry the men ashore and
bring them back. We soon made the acquaintance of a distin-
guished sampan master who called himself “Willy Maloo” He
repeatedly introduced himself to us in these words, which became
a byword with us, “Willy Maloo very good pote —when you
want a good pote you sing out Willv Maloo.” In consequence
the echoes of the anchorage were often required to repeat the
distinguished name of Captain Willy Maloo.
The streets of Victoria are rocky and irregular, and no carri-
ages are used in them, nor indeed on the island, so far as I saw.
When a man docs not feel disposed to walk, a few cents will pay
for a palanquin, which is a more or less basket like conveyance
attached to a couple of poles, by which four China men carry a
passenger off with apparent ease, striking a trot and keeping it
up for a long time upon occasion.
The shops of the natives are small, having generally about ten
feet front on the street, and running back twenty feet. Over
every door is the stereotyped and everlasting sign, “Cheap John,”
which sometimes reminded me of the sign, “Cheap Cash Store,”
so often met with at home. The shop keepers, like the Jews in
some of our cities, hail every sailor that passes with a formula
something like this: “Como in John; every ting got, John.”
Clothing they offered at very cheap rates indeed. A fine pair
of silk pants, $2 ; vest of the same material, $1 50 ; fine linen
shirt, $1 ; shoes for 50 cents, and not bad shoes either. A hat
cost the same as the shoes, and a silk handkerchief a “york shil-
ling,” while you could buy pocket handkerchiefs of white flowered
silk for one dollar a dozen, and a nice silk dress pattern for three
dollars. I was offered such shawls as are sold in this country at
seventy-five to one hundred dollars for only five dollars, and
other articles in like proportion. The Chinese live on rice and
tea, and one would think a common laborer would find it hard
supplying himself with these necessaries, cheap as they are, while
his wages are only ten cents a day.
One night in Victoria the sailors of the “Eureka,” as the man-
ner of sailors is, got on a general spree, and amused themselves


with upsetting peddler’s stands, and even tearing down the China-
men’s shops, which are but slightly built. But the most delect-
able fun afforded by either hemisphere to a tar on a tear, is that
of catching two or more Chinamen, and tying them together by
their tails or queuccs. After drinking plenty of “sarashaw,”
which is a kind of rum manufactured from sugar cane, and may
be more particularly defined as “the essence of fire,” we went
into another drinking house, and as our style was none of the
most orderly the crowd of Chinese men and women within
huddled into the further corner of the room, and their spokesman
addressed us :
“You Mellican?”
“Yes, sirree ! Aint nothing else.”
“Mellican velly good man. No kick up too much bobberree.”
But this compliment we made a point not to deserve. Seizing
a Chinaman each by his “tail,” we began to dance and swing
partners. The men remonstrated volubly, and the women
screamed. The former spokesman delivered himself of his
broken English in a very laughable style, which lam not able
to convey much idea of. However, it was something like this :
“No got shame facie ? How can kick up too much bobberree
in housie? How can f n &c., &c. If the old women jawed, the
children squalled. To complete the horror of the poor Chinese,
some of us drew our sheath knives, threatening—not to cut their
throats, for that would have been nothing comparatively—but to
cut off their “tails I” This was the ounce that broke the camels
back. The Chinaman is long suffering, but there is one thing he
can’t stand, and that is to loose his darling tail, for that is what
constitutes him a Chinaman —the culminated perfection of
humanity. Our victims became desperate, and even went so far
as to defend themselves somewhat, while one escaped from the
door, exclaiming :
“Tooly muchy high ! How can get a pleecyman ?”
Taking this hint, we concluded it was best to leave, and so,
shaking our fists fiercely at them, we broke for the street. lam
afraid that we brought away a couple of tails with us that right-
fully should have adorned the heads of occupants of that house.


Before we could get to our boat the police nabbed us, and ten-
dered us the hospitalities of the town, in the shape of a calaboose,
and were so pressing in their invitations, that we finally accepted,
and accompanied them to those gratuitous lodgings, where I
suspect we were regarded by those having possession before us
as no better than intruders, for no sooner had we “retired” than
they assailed us “tooth and toe-nail,” and the outraged Chinamen
were more than avenged by the fleas and bed bugs of their
execrable calaboose. In the morning the police justice fined us
five dollars apiece, and we went on board sadder, but perhaps no
wiser, and with a vague impression that since the two tails had
been taken from us, we had hardly got the worth of our money.
We reached Hong Kong in one hundred and thirty days from
New York, and were thus too late for the first crop of tea. So
while waiting for the next crop to come in, the ship was chartered
to carry Chinese passengers to California. The parties charter-
ing the vessel engaged to pay $lO for the simple passage of each
man. The men in their turn engaged to serve these parties
three years after their arrival in California in payment for their
passage, and provisions during the same.
The contract included the returning of the bodies of such as
should die in California back to China, as no other country, in
their estimation, is fit to be buried in. The “Celestial Empire,”
the “Central Flowery Kingdom,” is to them the only consecrated
ground. So much an article of their faith is this, that
scarcely any temptation ever has operated to make a Chinaman
fail to render his three year’s faithful service, as the consequence
of default might bo no less than leaving his body to decay on
foreign and unhallowed soil.
Large quantities of rice and other provisions for the passen-
gers were brought on board and stowed in the hold. Arches
o ~
were built on the main deck to support the big kettles in which
their food was to be cooked. AVhen all was ready, six hundred
Chinamen came on board, and we got under weigh at once.
This was about the Ist of May, 1861.
Vessels have often been taken and plundered, on the coast of
China by men who first enter into a conspiracy for the purpose


on shore, and then apply separately for passage. To prevent
any disaster of this kind a strong guard was kept up until we
got out of sight of land, when the danger was small, since these
Chinamen all know that it takes science to bring a vessel to port,
and that the possession of a vessel which they could not navi-
gate on their own shores would avail them nothing.
The passengers did their own cooking, to some extent at least,
and in the use of the fires it was “ first come, first served.” One
day before we had been long out two of them disputed prece-
dence of arrival, and from words proceeded to blows. As many
ot their countrymen as saw the fight took sides as to the merits
of the case, and as is usual, even among men better brought up,
the news that there was a row brought the six hundred pouring
upon deck. The new comers reinforced one side or the other,
as inclination or accident dictated, and soon the bricks compos-
ing the beforementioned arches were brought into use as muni-
tions of war. Quarrels of this kind have also been known to
end in the capture and destruction, whether premeditated or not,
of vessels; matters were fast growing serious when the captain
summoned us all aft, a journey which we accomplished by climb-
ing along the rail or through the rigging. Having concentrated
his forces, like a good general, the captain ordered a charge in
solid column. “Quell them, men,” I think Ins words were. We
quelled them. As soon as the combatants saw a dozen or two,
more or less, of their number knocked heels over head they be-
came demoralized and broke ranks and retreated to the hold.
We secured six of the ringleaders and tied them up until night
when they were released.
The winds were rather unfavorable, and one day it fell a dead
calm which occasioned us to see a sight quite curious. A Doctor
among the Chinese is a man of great influence, and he seems to
combine with the functions we usually assign to him more or less
of those of the priest. On the occasion alluded to, the doctor
who attended to the passengers, an out and out “John China-
man,” in order to propitiate the power of the air, brought his
idol, or josh, upon deck, and went through the forms of pagan
worship, the only thing of the kind I ever witnessed. A bowl


ot samsbaw and some pork as also a liglited candle were then
brought and set before the josh. The doctor then knelt before
his God and uttered a prayer, after which he offered it the sam-
shaw, and upon its tailing to drink, he drank some of it himself.
Then came another prayer, and the offering of the pork, with the
same result as before. This form was gone through with four
several times. One of the sailors asked him what he was doing
this for. He replied, “O, by and by good wind,” and politely
offered the remaining samsbaw for our inspection. I cannot
certainly say that the article was better than common, but I
know that all he got back was the empty bowl. I could not
help comparing in my own mind the mummeries performed by
this heathen, to the style of worship in the churches of a certain-
Christian denomination. There were the image, the candle and
the offering, and I queried with myself whether the heathen had
borrowed their ceremonies from the Catholics, or the Catholics
from the heathen, or whether both had accidentally hit upon the
same, or nearly the same.
Our friend, the Doctor used to smoke opium three or four
times a day until he fell down insensible, when he would lie in
that condition until he slept it off*. His countrymen all use it,
when they can get it; but our passengers were generally too
poor to indulge in the luxury. The Chinese I believe all prefer
opium to rum or tobacco as a stimulant or narcotic or what-
ever it is, (tor it acts differently on different organizations,) and
this seems to be in accordance with the law of their nature.
The Caucassian wants something to rouse him to action. The
Mongolian wants something to lull him to sleep. The former is
ready to emigrate to new countries and engage with ardor in
risky enterprises. The latter (at least as represented by the
Chinese) seldom leaves his native land except starvation forces
him away, and he would stay and starve only that ho expects to
return again, dead or alive.
We used occasionally to go down in the hold among the pas-
sengers for a few minutes as a matter of curiosity. Once while
down there one of our fellows thought he would try a pull or two
at the opium pipe. He smoked some half dozen whiffs, and


soon after started to go on deck, but when half way up he tum-
bled head foremost to the bottom, lie was very little if at all
hurt, being protected, I suppose, by that wonderful luck which
so often saves the drunkard’s bones. When the Captain learned
what had occurred, he gave expression to his sympathy for the
sailor by saying he wished the fall had broken his neck. The
experimenter in opium smoking slept five or six hours very
soundly, and then awoke with a severe headache.
From observations I made upon our passengers, I conclude
that a Chinaman considers it his highest religious duty to clean
out his mouth every morning. And it is not a bad idea either,
when we consider what nastiness they are in the habit of swal-
lowing. Though they eat all kinds of fish, and dogs, cats, rats,
mice, &c., their principle meat is pork. In fact they not only
eat hog, but they eat anything that a hog will eat. Yet in their
case 1 don’t know what becomes of the popular theory, that pork
and dirt are unhealthy. So far as ray observation goes they are
an eminently healthy people. One would think their swarming
cities would be the very theatre for an epidemic, but I never
heard of the cholera in China. Our six hundred passengers
were crowded into a space which did not afford comfortable
sleeping room and good ventilation for over sixty. Their faro
alone I should almost say, would be death to an American, and
in the morning the stench from the hold was perfectly hideous.
I do not think they enjoyed advantages at all superior to those
afforded by slave ships to their cargoes, of which I believe over
one half usually die in crossing the Atlantic. But in our trip
across the Pacific in the middle of summer, there was not a sin-
gle death on board, and only one passenger was sick; his disease
<nive much uneasiness from its resemblance to small pox; but lie
soon recovered.
The curious things that might be related of the Chinese are
almost endless, and their ultimate destiny with relation to other
races, is a matter of much speculation. Their numbers are
variously estimated at from one-third to one-half the entire popu-
lation of the globe, and when once their restraining supersti-
tions give way before advancing intelligence, the consequences.
20


of their emigration to other countries may become serious. Al-
ready there are sixty thousand to seventy thousand, if my mem-
ory serves me, in California, and though most of them go back,
this is on the whole a misfortune to the State, since having no
women there they do not naturally increase, while every one who
returns to China, will act particularly as a missionary to preach
emigration to others, which must eventuate in their becoming a
large and permanent part of the population.
But numerous as are the singularities of the Chinese, in
nothing perhaps do they differ so much from all other nations,
as in the structure of their language, which, it seems, has not
only a character corresponding to each sound in it, but a char-
acter, sometimes with no pronunciation, corresponding to each
idea. The letters, or signs, representing the primary sounds and
combinations are about one hundred in number, or say forty
consonants and fifty vowels. In spelling, if spelling it can bo
called, every word begins with a consonant sound and ends with
a vowel sound or else with that of n , or ng. Among the multi-
tude of sounds they employ, r is entirely wanting, and I has to
do double duty. Thus, in trying to pronounce the name of Christ,
a Chinaman says Ki-li-sec, substituting I for r, and leaving off
the final t, which so combined is too much for him. Instead of
rice they say li-li-se, being obliged, by the genius of their tongue,
to put a vowel sound after the sound of c. The difficulty of
representing Chinese sounds by Roman characters is illustrated
by a word of theirs sounding somewhat like the English word
earl, meaning and and son , but which is spelled by different per-
sons in different languages, uhl, ulh, ul, Ih, urh, olr, rr, eul, rh, cl,
and ell. the Chinese lack the sounds of pure b, d, v,z
and y, hard. Yet most or all of these sounds are used in com-
binations, as g in ny, and b in an unpronounceable compound
with w. When I say b with w, of course I mean the sound of b
with the sound of w- Apart from the difficulty arising from
the sounds, there is another and greater arising from variety of
tones, and the different meanings conveyed by each, fey a word
may have half a dozen different meanings, according as it is pro-
nounced in a higher or a lower key. This renders conversation,


in some parts of China, whore tones are most in use, a sort of
singing or chanting. In other parts the same differences of
meaning are expressed by more or less intense aspirations. In
writing they indicate these different tjfncs or aspirates by inclos-
ing the word-sign in a square, and placing a particular mark in
one corner or another of it according to the sound intended.
Some idea may be formed as to how their spoken language
sounds, when it is known that the consonant combinations most
simple and frequent in it are one hundred and seven gutterals,
(while we have two or three,) one hundred and four sibilants,
(we have two or three,) and two hundred and thirty aspirants, of
which we have only one. Some syllables (or words, which are
the same thing) have forty different characters which will equal-
ly well represent their sound, but this sound has a different
meaning, according to the character used. In other cases it re-
quires forty and fifty different characters to express a single syl-
lable or word. Thus it takes fifty-two marks or characters to
spell or express the syllable pung\ yet after all the idea or ideas
it conveys is more readily written in Chinese than in English,
for it means “the reverberations after a great peal of thunder,”
which it takes more than forty of our letters to write out, and
our letters are harder to make than the simple Chinese charac-
ters.
The number of letters (word and idea signs) in the Chinese
language is variously estimated at from about half a million,
(four hundred and twelve thousand) down to a comparatively
moderate sum total. It is said that no dictionary contains over
eighty thousand. An alphabet of eighty thousand letters !
Think of that, you who found so much difficulty in learning
twenty-six. But luckily for the boys and girls of China, a per-
son may be a very fair, and even a finished scholar and yet not
know a quarter of his letters. Indeed, I have read that the pro-
fessors of history in the highest colleges of the empire are not re-
quired to cultivate an acquaintance with their a, b, c, to a great-
er extent than nine thousand, while in all their nine sacred and
canonical books there are not five thousand used; just as our
English Bible does not, perhaps, contain one tenth of the En-


glisb words in use. The Chinese code of laws only contains
about two thousand characters.
As I have said, a single word, represented by different char-
acters, may mean as many different things. Thus one charac-
acter is called sse, and means a likeness, another sse means four,
in other cases sse means to give, to send, to wait, business, thing,
temple, or magic, according to the character it is represented
by. Yet there are many characters of a single meaning for
which there is no equivalent word in English.
To further illustrate the peculiarities of this most singular lan-
guage, take the character teheu, which is itself a compound of
eight and month, and which singly means a ship, and join or
combine it with another character meaning something else. Now,
perhaps because the laws of the language, do not admit of a
word of two or more syllables, though the new sign formed by
this combination takes its signification from both of these char-
acters, it takes its name from only one of them, and is still called
teheu. So teheu, a ship with the sign for water means a basin;
with speech it means talkativenes ; with fire, flickering; with
feathers, down; with silk, a silken cover, &c. Tao, a knife, with
fish means a swordfish; with ship it means a long boat; and so
on. One reason of this may be that many of the signs onlv
convey an idea and have no name of their own ; though the Chi-
nese say their forefathers knew how to pronounce them all be-
fore one of their Emperors burnt their books, about two thousand
years ago.
In spite of the prayers or Incantations of the Chinese Doctor,
the winds continued bad for us, or rather they were poor, for
they were during several days a succession of light puffs and
calms. But “by and by,*’ which is an India rubber term, and
may be stretched to mean a century hence, we got northerly
enough to strike the trades, which, though not favorable, were a
great deal better than no wind, and in forty days from Hong
Kong we took on a pilot off the Golden Gate. Entering the Bay
of San Francisco we anchored and landed our passengers in the
boats. All hands of us were to be discharged there, but I staid
on board ship until she was laid along side of the wharf, and


then worked five days at painting her when I was paid oft,
receiving sixty dollars. This was in June, 1801.
Once on shore and free again, I remained in San Francisco
only till the first steamer left for Stockton. Furnishing myself
in the meantime with a suitable rig I went on board, and we
steamed away up the bay and river. My destination was
Visalia, in Tulare County, in which vicinity I had a number of
relatives and acquaintances, eight or ten in all. I was now
almost happy. After long desiring it in vain, I was in the Golden
State, with the whole beautiful and productive country before
me, “where to choose,” and I anticipated many years of successful
enterprise, with all the attendant enjoyments. I had had experi-
ence enough of the sea, and had learned that at least in its appli-
cability to me, the saying that “a rolling stone gathers no moss,”
was worthy of all credit and respect. I had hitherto lived an
irregular and wandering life, full of vicissitudes and extremes,
and had nothing to show lor my labor. Jmt I placed the past to
the account of “wild oats,” and being not yet old, I hoped to
retrieve the errors and misfortunes of bygone years by industry
and economy. “Man proposes, and late disposes, is an old
adage, and while I was indulging in pleasant dreams concerning
what the future was to bring mo, a calamity beyond comparison
more dreadful and irremediate than any I had ever Buffered was
impending over my head, to throw for me a shadow deeper than
night over the whole universe, and compel me to walk in dark-
ness to my grave ! The beautiful and unique scenery on which
I gazed with so much delight, and in beholding which ray whole
frame seemed to dilate with a feeling of freedom and thankful-
ness, as we ploughed our way up the Sacramento and San
Joaquin Rivers, I passed again in two short years, racked with
pain, overwhelmed with sorrow, helpless, hopeless, in one word
—blind!
Arrived at Stockton, I there received a letter from a friend
then in Marysville, requesting me to remain in Stockton until he
came, and assist him to drive some cattle to Visalia. Accord-
ingly, to pass away the time until ray friend’s coming, I hired to
Mr. J. Howland to work at harvesting on his ranch, about a
mile from the city.


Mr. Howland had lived there as a bachelor since 1810. He
had a farm or ranch of one hundred and fifty acres, of which
two-thirds was under cultivation. His crops, which were very
tine, and consisted of wheat and barley, were threshed out with
horses, by tramping on the field whore they grew, and fire was
set to the straw—barns and manure heaps not being as yet reck-
oned among the institutions of the country. The wheat, which
was particularly plump and fine, yielded fifty bushels to the acre.
This is considered a small yield there, and I have no doubt
seventy-five bushels are oftner realized than fifty on the best
lands, with a favorable season. There arc well authenticated
accounts of large fields that have averaged one hundred bushels
to the acre.
My month being up I pocketed my wages, forty dollars, and
as I heard nothing of my friend, who 1 suppose had passed with-
out finding me,l began to look around me. About this time the
copper mines in Calaveras County were discovered, and there
was what is known in California as “a great rush,” to them-
Excitements of this kind are “catching,” and I caught this one,
along with all the rest of those exposed to the contagion, and, of
course, concluded to try my luck. I took the stage for the
metropolis of the copper mining region, Telegraph City, which
consisted of one store, half a dozen gambling saloons, and a
blacksmith shop, with the horizon for walls, and the sky for a
covering, and the extra advantage of being in the shade of an
oak.
Arrived upon the scene of action, I entered into a co-partner-
ship with a man named Birdsall, and wo went to work together.
Selecting a spot from the indications most approved, we sunk a
shaft, of the dimensions of eight feet by ten, fifty feet into the
solid rock, blasting nearly the whole distance. Finding no lead,
we gave up in despair.
An opportunity now r offered to go in company with three men
named Scammon, Preston and Thomas, who were prospecting for
silver and copper. They had what they considered an excellent
show, and as Scammon and Thomas had sore eyes, they offered
me a share with them to go to work w 7 ith Preston on their pro


posed shaft. My share was to be one hundred and fifty feet.
Preston and I set to work, and at a depth of fifty feet struck a
rock full of mineral riches, including gold, silver and copper.
Our work at the depth indicated was constantly impeded by
water, which came in through the crevices, highly impregnated
with poisonous qualities, acquired by contact probably with
oxides of copper. This water it was necessary to bail, and in
doing this work I suppose 1 got some of the water in ray eyes.
Perhaps I washed my face in it without thinking of consequences.
I look upon this as the most probable cause of the inflammation
that now attacked my eyes, and laid me up for six weeks. This
water would turn black upon standing a while in the open air.
Of course I suffered a great deal, besides the loss of time.
Our company owned four span of horses, which we used for
hauling to and from the city and mountains. The freights to
the city consisted generally of lumber, and return loads were
either grain for feed, or merchandise, mostly the former. When
my eyes got better, towards the last of December, it was
arranged for Scaramon and myself to take a team and go to
Stockton and bring back a supply of provisions for winter. The
night after our arrival in the city come on the great inundation
of 1861-2, and before morning the water was four feet deep all
over town. In consequence of this I was exposed to the weather,
got wet, and took a cold, which settled in my eyes, making them
worse than ever. I thought it fortunate, however, that I was now
where I could get medical aid, and accordingly I applied to a
Dr. Langdon, of the firm of Shirtleff & Langdon, who prescribed
a solution of nitrate of silver as a wash. The rest of the story is
soon told. It put out my eyes.
During this, my stay in Stockton, I boarded with a Mr. and
Mrs. Brownell, who treated me with great kindness, and were
like a brother and sister to me. They are good people, if any
can claim to be such. My partner bought a light load of flour
only, on account of the bad roads, which were by this time so
soft and so much cut up that they were nigh impassable.
I went blind in February, and I remained in Stockton with
- the Brownell’s until the next May. At that time some friends


coming clown from Visalia to market their wool and take back a
return freight of groceries, found me out and took me home with
them, We were two weeks on the way, camping out nights.
Ihe country about "V isalia is low and flat, and has a cloggy (or
adobe) soil, and had not recovered from the winter’s drenching,
so we had a rough time of it. Part of the way we travelled
through water and the rest was through mud, which was the
worst ot the two. Sometimes it was the horses that were swamp-
ed and sometimes the wagons, but most frequently it was both.
At two streams we had to unload the wagons and ferry across
in a crazy scow, by means of ropes instead of oars. Luckily
there is not much current in these streams.
At length we reached Visalia, where we stayed over night,
and then set out again, having thirty miles further South to tra-
vel to reach the settlement where my friends lived on Tide river.
We arrived at the residence of my uncle, Mr, Izard Wilcox,
late in June, and 1 have no reason to complain of my reception
by the triends, of whom I found nine, seven men and two women
from the old home in Ashford, N. Y.
The people ot the neighborhood, those too on whom I had no
claim on the score ot kindred or old acquaintance, were very
kind and friendly towards me, and 1 remember them accordingly.
I remained a year in that country and liked it very much. Its
capabilities were very little developed when I left, but besides
pasturage and grain, the English walnut, almond, tig, grape and
several semi-tropical fruits are produced, and will undoubtedly
be abundant there. The death of Mr. Wilcox, in a great measure
broke up the settlement I have alluded to. The widow returned
to her old home in 1863, and I came with her. We left San
Francisco on the third of June, and arrived in New York after
a pleasant passage ot twenty-two days, thus completing my third
voyage round the world. The only incident of note was a little
Light we got on the coast of Mexico, probably from running
afoul ot a whale; but at first we all supposed we had run aground.
A sharp lookout was kept up for Confederate pirates, but thev
“tailed to connect,” greatly to the relief of many anxious minds.
In twenty-five days from San Francisco we reached Ashford.


When I first got back to this country, though blind to all
practical purposes, I could perceive by daylight the faint out-
lines of a tree if it came between me and the sky, and also by
close inspection in a good light, I could distinguish black from
white. But after my return I took another cold in ray eyes
while husking corn, and a fresh inflammation set in which re-
doubled my former suffering from the same source. The princi-
pal seat of this new trouble was in my right eye, which either
run out entirely or sunk back in its socket, so as to be invisible.
I was sick six weeks this time, and since the attack ray blindness
is total. I cannot discriminate between day and night, nor dis-
cern the sun at noon except from its warmth. During that ter-
rible mouth and a half, I scarcely slept at all, and but for the
relief I obtained by taking morphine, it seems I must have died.
I still retain my interest in that unfortunate mining property,
and the last I heard from my partners, one of them wrote me
that they still thought it valuable, and advised me not to be dis-
couraged. Whether the claim will ever be of any benefit to me
I cannot say, but the hope that it may creates a desire in my
mind to return to California at some future day. The winters
here are too hard for me, and to be housed up for several months
in the year is not only disagreeable in itself, but from the nature
of my disability, I am necessarily much in the way of people
who have their duties to perform about the fire. In the valley
of the San Joaquin, and the adjacent counties there is no weather
in which a man in my condition cannot wander about out of
doors in tolerable comfort, unless it may be half a dozen days
or so of each year, in case of a heavier rain than usual.
I have a great many good friends who continue to treat me
with much kindness, and for whose considerate attention and
assistance I hope lam sufficiently thankful. But it is no less
incumbent upon me to try and do something for myself, and be-
sides my manner of life has been active, and I find it wearisome
to pass the time with no occupation, and with no particular object
in view, to the attainment of which my own efforts could-in any
measure contribute.
In view of these facts I have been advised to publish a short
21


account of my wanderings, and the result is before the reader.
The writing of my book, from the nature of the case, was of ne-
cessity intrusted to another hand than my own, and the person
employed to put my narrative in shape for the printer, has ac-
complished his task with general fidelity to the ideas I intended
to convey in the oral account which I gave him, and of which
he took notes upon the spot. But almost every one knows from
personal experience how difficult it is for us to express even
our own minds in writing, and will allow for any slight shades
of discrepancy between my story as printed and as he may have
heard it, or parts of it, related by me. In the main, and as to
all the important facts and incidents of my life, the foregoing is
a true and veritable history; the perusal of which aloud in my
presence carries me back, as if by magic to the scenes which it
depicts, and when in faithful terms it portrays my conflicts with
the leviathan of the deep, or my struggles with the elements in
any of the “multitudinous seas,” that I have visited, involuntarily
I feel my muscles lighten, and my lips compress, as if I were now
to “fight my battles o’er again.”
But these things are never more for me. The world of action
and of active usefulness is closed against me by a barrier as im-
passable as the valley of the shadow of death. The hues of
Spring, the tender green of the vernal forest, the blue of the
early violet, the blush of the queen rose, the pearly white of the
imperial lily, the golden tints that steal over the ripening grain in
Summer, the cloud shadows that chase each other across the
teeming landscape, the rainbow garments that the wooded hills
put on in Autumn, and more than all the rest, the intelligence
that speaks silently from the printed page, and the smiling faces
of kind friends, are to me as if they were not, except so far as
memory and imagination can restore the bygone and body forth,
to the unseen. The beaming sunshine, the a/ure sky, the holy stars
that have looked upon me with their spiritual eyes from every
quarter of the heavens, the beauty with which the visible universe
is everywhere eloquent, from the pebbles we tread on up to its
highest development in the female form divine, I shall behold no
more in time. With the desires and ambitions common to man


hood in its prime, still strong upon me, I must accept the adjuncts
of the decrepitude of ago—the staff, the uncertain step, and the
support and guidance of my fellow men. But to repine is use-
less, and I shall endure my deprivation with what fortitude I
may.
My book is finished, and my story thus far is told. While I
shall be grateful to those who buy it from motives of charity
alone, I hope it may, even to such, prove to be worth the money
it cost.












