

RULES
OF THE
WESLEYAN METHODIST
If of al ]]rtiid|crs‘
OF
VICTORIA.
ESTABLISHED 1869.
f
As Reuised and Amended by the Annual Council at
Bendigo, February 7th, 1898.
Melbourne:
Spectator Publishing Co. Ltd., 270 Post Office Place.
1898,
_____— ' . : m
BILIC.IOUS
box e ||||
•p£; nA jp PH YlPj
<sm 3




RULES
OF THE
WESLEYAN METHODIST
Ciual prcadjm* I^onnafum
VICTORIA.
ESTABLISHED 1869.
As Revised and Amended by the Annual Council at
Bendigo, February 7th, 1898.
Melbourne:
Spectator Publishing Co. Ltd., 270 Post Office Place,


* OFFICERS, LIFE GOVERNORS, TRUSTEES, &C.
GENERAL OFFICERS:
Name. Address.
President - - Mr. J. D. MOWBRAY - Melbourne.
Vice-President - Mr. J. HOSKING - Ballarat.
General Treasurer Mr. JAMES LEWIS - Melbourne.
General Secretary Mr. A. J. DERRICK - Melbourne
(Central Mission, Wesley Church).
LIFE GOVERNORS:
Messrs. Matthew D. Morgan, James Oddie, Alexander
Miller, George Hague, W. H. Noy, Robert Bell, and
Christopher Moore.
GENERAL TRUSTEES
Messrs. W. Coltman, J. S. Kelly, A. Harkness.
TRUSTEES OF CENTRAL FUND:
Conference: The President, Mr. J. Callaghan, Mr. J. Webb,
Association : Hon. D. Ham, Mr. Thomas Peters.
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT:
Ex officio Members, with Messrs. N. Blencowe, D. P.
Capper, T. C. Camm, and T. Skewes.
AUDITORS:
Messrs. Thos. Lancaster and T. C. Camm.
BRANCHES:
No. Name. Secretary’s Name and Address.
1. Ballarat .. Mr. J. V. Kitchen, 54 Bridge Street, Ballarat,
2. Geelong .. Mr. W. H. Carr, Gheringhap Street, Geelong.
3. Melbourne .. Mr. J. D. Mowbray, Glen Street, Hawthorn.
4. Bendigo .. Mr. G. S. Rule, The Arcade, Bendigo.
Mr. G. S. Rule, The Arcade, Bendigo.
5. Castlemaine .. Mr. H. Snell, Campbell's Creek, Castlemaine.
6. Kyneton .. Mr. J. Johnston, Ebden Street, Kyneton.
7, Daylesford .. Mr. Chas. H. Green, Duke Street, Daylesford.
8. Maryborough .. Mr. R. C. H. Smith, Wellington St., Maryborough.
9. Gippsland .. Mr. Chas. J. Jones, “Crickhowell,” Warragul.
10. Creswick .. Mr. C. E. Webster, Allendale.
11. Colac .. Mr. C. Northcott, Murray Street, Colac,


•» ORIGIN
IflrsftUcUi i£oral
OF VICTORIA.
A,
N the month of May, iB6g, at Ballarat, some forty or fifty
Jr Local Preachers were gathered round the grave of a
♦ deceased brother. There they stood, bareheaded, whilst
the minister read, “We commit his body to the ground, in
sure and certain hope of his rising again at the resurrection of the
just.’’ Glancing over them you saw white-headed veterans, who,
from the founding of the colony, had preached the Gospel in bush,
township, and city, their ages now bordering on eighty years ;
others turning grey, though a dozen or score years younger, who,
with their brethren in the great rushes, had been gold-digging on
week days, and exemplifying Christianity among the thousands of
fortune seekers, and on Sundays preaching the Gospel gratuitously
in the open air or in large tents, before permanent places of worship
with ministers were established. In the absence of ministers they
baptised children, consoled the sick and dying, buried the dead,
using the Church of England services, and in some cases adminis-
tered the Lord’s Supper. Thus they permeated their excited
wandering fellow-diggers with religious thought, and gathered
former members of Churches around them. In answer to their
united prayers, the Holy Spirit was given, and a great revival
commenced in Bendigo, and spread to other goldfields ; Methodist
Societies were formed and handed over to Wesleyan ministers as
soon as they could be procured, but the Local Preachers continued
to do the work of unpaid evangelists. Among the earliest
ministers we/e the Rev. J. C. Symons and the Rev. W. P. Wells,
both now deceased.


under: —
Place.
Year.
President. President’s Residence
i
Geelong
.. 1872
.. Mr. M. D. Morgan ..
Ballarat
2
Ballarat
•• 1873
.. „ T. B. Hunt
Geelong
3 Geelong
'3-
t>.
00
.. „ H. Bell, M.L.A. ..
Ballarat
4
Melbourne
i8 75
„ R. Hodgson
Melbourne
5
Ballarat
.. 1876
,, J. Atkin
Geelong
6
Sandhurst
•• i8 77
.. ,, J. S. Kelly
Ballarat
7 Geelong
.. 1878
. A. J. Smith
Melbourne
8
Melbourne
.. 1879
. ,, A. J. Smith
Melbourne
On retiring from the cemetery, Mr. R. Tregaskis said to Mr. M.
D. Morgan. " A good many of our brethren are aged, and all are
exposed to vicissitude ; I do not know how well they are off, but
it would be a good thing if we had a Mutual Aid Association,
similar to the one in England." Mr. Morgan replied, “If you can
get them to form one I will subscribe £ 100 to the funds." Having
this promise to start with, Mr. Tregaskis called a meeting for the
Bth of June, 1869, which was adjourned to the 15th. Mr. Morgan
presided; Messrs. Bell, Frost, Hotchin, ]. D. Stocks, Kernick,
Coltman, Benney, and Tregaskis were present. The two latter
were appointed to draw up rules, which were submitted and dis-
cussed at weekly meetings, till finally adopted on September 21st,
1869,
The work was accomplished and the £lOO subscription paid;
but the first public anniversary did not take place until April 27th,
1871, when a large public meeting was held in the Alfred Hall,
Ballarat. The speakers were Mr. Sanderson, who conducted the
first public service on the Ballarat goldfield ; Mr. Pybus, one of the
founders of the English L.P. Association ; Mr. Benney, a member of
it; Mr. M. D. Morgan, who conducted the first religious service on
the Sydney goldfields; and Mr. James Jeffrey, the popular miner
preacher ; Mr. John Boots, who held the first Wesleyan services in
South Australia, and several other pioneer Local Preachers were
on the platform.
Other Branches were formed subsequently, and yearly "aggre-
gate meetings" or "Annual Councils” have been held since as


Place. Year. President. President’s Residence.
9 Ballarat .. 1880 .. Mr. G. Fizelle .. Sandhurst
10 Sandhurst .. 1881 .. „ J. Raddenberry .. Geelong
11 Geelong .. 1882 .. ,« J. Russell, M.LA. Ballarat
12 Melbourne .. 1883 .. ~ J. A. Marsden .. Melbourne
13 Castlemaine .. 1884 .. ~ G. L. Carter .. Castlemaine
14 Ballarat .. 1885 .. ~ T. Featonby .. Sandhurst
15 Sandhurst .. 1886 .. ~ J. James, M.L.A... Ballarat
16 Geelong .. 1887 .. „ W. Humble .. Geelong
17 Melbourne .. 1888 .. ~ C. Stone .. Melbourne
18 Daylesford .. 1889 .. ~ W. Burall .. Daylesford
19 Castlemaine .. 1890 .. ~ W. Coltman .. Ballarat
20 Ballarat .. 1891 .. „ Jas. Scott .. Melbourne
21 Bendigo .. 1892 .. ~ R. Balding .. Geelong
22 Geelong .. 1893 .. „ A. Harkness .. Bendigo
23 Maryborough.. 1894 .. ~ S. King .. Melbourne
24 Melbourne .. 1895 •• >» D. Ham, M.L.C... Ballarat
25 Daylesford .. 1896 .. ~ N. Wimble .. Melbourne
26 Ballarat .. 1897 .. „ T. Peters .. Geelong
27 Bendigo .. 1898 .. ~ J. D. Mowbray .. Melbourne
1




WESLEYAN METHODIST
LOCAL PREACHERS’ ASSOCIATION
OF VICTORIA.
To THE
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers of Victoria.
EAR BRETHREN,
|l Mil You have been made aware, through the Press, that in
September, 1869, the above Society was established, after a
considerable expenditure of time and money by its founders.
That their object was to unite in one society all the Wesleyan
Local Preachers of Victoria for mutual aid, so that the sudden
reverses which under Providence overtake individual members of
all communities might be provided for by funds being placed at the
disposal of the management, so that such pecuniary aid might be
rendered as should assuage the sorrow consequent upon the sick-
ness or death of its members.
You are also probably aware that a similar society has existed in
England for about half a century, and has accomplished a vast
amount of good, and that there is also one on a very large scale in
the Methodist Episcopal Church of America.
It was deemed necessary at the outset to form a Registered
Friendly Society in connection with the Association. This was formed
similarly to the Rechabite or other Friendly Society—receiving no
contributions from the public, and the funds being kept separate


from those of the Mutual Aid Department, which have here, as
well as in England, been supplemented by contributions and collec-
tions from the Methodist public.
The Friendly Society Department did good service in the past in
establishing the Association, but after mature deliberation, the
Aggregate Meeting of 1878 decided to dispense with it, and have
only one class of members. The yearly contribution was then
reduced to ten shillings (and since to five shillings) per member, so
as to enable every Local Preacher to join, and these contributions,
supplemented by outside subscriptions, were made available for
aid to such Local Preachers as the management deemed entitled to
it; the funds of each district to be dispensed locally, according to
the rules. In thus broadening the basis of our constitution we had
and still have a right to expect the co-operation of the great body
of Local Preachers in Victoria.
At the Annual Council held at Ballarat in February, 1891, a
scheme was adopted for assisting those country circuits whose
various interests were languishing from an insufficient supply of
Local Preachers. The scheme was already in operation in connec-
tion with the Melbourne Branch of the Association, The Council
was desirous of enlarging its operation, that the advantages result-
ing from it might be extended as far as possible. Up to the present
time the reports from the circuits which have been assisted show
that the services of the brethren sent have been highly appreciated
while the help thus afforded has been most beneficial to the
interests of the circuits. Ihe funds for this work are kept entirely
separate from the other funds of the Association.
The Conference of 1886 determined that one of the objects of the
Jubilee Thanksgiving Fund should be to establish a Fund for the
relief of distressed Local Preachers in Victoria, and £2850 was set
aside and vested in trustees for this purpose. The interest of this
amount is administered by this Association, and is available, as far
as it will go, for all Local Preachers in necessitous circumstances,
or their widows. The Association is required by the provisions of
the declaration of trust to hand back to the trustees, to be capital-
ised, any surplus over £IOO which may be in their possession at the


end of each year. In this way the original grant has been increased
to Applications from any Local Preacher, or Local
Preacher's widow, in distressed circumstances, may be made for
assistance from this Fund. If the applicant is a member of a
branch of the Association, or if he lives in a district where there is
a branch, the application must be sent to the Branch Secretary, in
other cases it must be sent to the General Secretary through the
Superintendent Minister of the circuit. Application forms may be
obtained from the General Secretary or from any of the branches.
We would here, on behalf of the Association, express our grati-
tude to our leading Ministers and Laymen, our Quarterly Meetings
and Congregations, who have given us their valuable support —
pecuniary and otherwise —wherever we have established our
branches, and would respectfully urge upon the brethren through-
out the colony the advisability of forming branches in their
respective Circuits. Any further information required may be
obtained by application to the Officers of the Association or its
branches.




RULES.
Revised and Amended by the Annual Council
at Bendigo, February 7th, 1898.
GENERAL RULES.
I—Name.
The name of this Society shall be the Wesleyan Methodist Local
Preachers’ Association of Victoria.
2—Constitution.
This Society shall consist of an unlimited number of accredited
Win linyrnirr Methodist Local Preachers and Honorary Members
associated together in branches, and shall be governed by a Com-
mittee called the “ Annual Council,” composed of the General
Officers, called the President, Vice-President, General Treasurer,
and General Secretary, and other Members and Representatives as
hereinafter provided.
3—Objects.
A.—To raise a fund by Periodical Contributions, Donations, Sub-
scriptions, Annual Collections, Bequests, and Interest on Capital,
and from such other sources as the Annual Council or the Com-
mittee of Management may deem expedient —
I.— From which Aged, Infirm, Sick, and Distressed
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers, who are members of the
Association, may be assisted from time to time, or in case of
death their funeral expenses may be wholly or partially
defrayed as decided by the vote of their branch.
ll.—From which, in urgent cases not otherwise provided for,
a Special Grant or Grants may be made to any duly accredited
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preacher in Victoria, or to the
widow or orphans of any such Local Preacher. (No vote under
this sub-section to be passed if not agreed to by at least two-
thirds of the brethren present when the matter is discussed.)
HI.—To defray the cost of management—expenses of the
Annual Council, and the like.


B.—To promote a fraternal feeling amongst the Wesleyan
Methodist Local Preachers of the colony, and to afford them
facilities for assisting each other in the great work in which they
are engaged.
I.—By the Annual Council, held in various centres of
population, bringing together representatives from the
different branches, and facilitating personal intercourse and
interchange of thought and views on matters of common
interest.
ll.—By the exchange of pulpits—through the courtesy of
Circuit Superintendents and Quarterly Meetings—on the day
of the Annual Collections.
11l- —By the meetings of the Branches, at which, in addition
to the ordinary routine, the reading of papers and esgays, and
other means of mutual improvement, may form part of the
business.
C. —‘ To empower branches to arrange for supplies of Local
Preachers to Country Circuits from Melbourne and other centres of
population, and to raise a Special Fund by means of Collections,
Subscriptions and Donations, for defraying the expenses
such Fund to be entirely distinct from the ordinary funds of the
Association. This fund is to be called by each branch “ The
Itinerant Fund.”
B.—To administer the revenue arising from the fund hereinafter
called “The Central Fund”—the nucleus of which fund is the
money voted by the Conference and placed in trust for distressed
Local Preachers or their widows in Victoria, from the net proceeds
of the “ Jubilee Fund,” inaugurated in the year 1886 to celebrate
the Jubilee of Victorian Methodism.
4 Members’ Contributions
I-—The annual contribution by the members shall be five
shillings, payable yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly. (There is
no entrance fee.)
ll.—Any member contributing the sum of five pounds (£5)
t® the funds of any branch shall be entitled to be elected a life
member of the same, and the name of such member shall
appear upon the roll of membership from year to year without
further payment.
HI-—Brethren whose subscriptions are 12 months in
arrears, and who fail to send a satisfactory reply to the Branch
Secretary’s official communications, shall cease to be members.


s~Management of the Funds of the Branches.
Each branch shall have the sole management and control of its
own funds, from whatever source obtained, and shall apply the
funds in all cases locally—except such proportion of the funds
which may be payable from time to time as levies to the General
Fund, as provided in Rule 8, and grants made as provided in Rule
.3, Section A 11.
6~Annual Council.
There shall be held annually, early in the month of February, a
general meeting of the Association, called the “ Annual Council,”
to be held at such place as shall be determined upon at the pre-
ceding Annual Council. It shall be composed of the General
Officers, General Trustees, with such of the Trustees of the Central
Fund as are elected from time to time by the said Council under the
provisions of the Declaration of Trust hereinafter referred to,
the Trustees of the Central Fund appointed by the Con-
ference who are Local Preachers and members of the Association,
and representatives from all the branches in the proportion of one
to every ten members (including honorary members), but the
minimum number shall be two for each branch, such representa-
tives to be elected not later than the month of December of the
preceding year. In the event of any representative, after his
•election, being prevented by unforeseen circumstances from attend-
ing the Annual Council, the branch may elect another representa-
tive in his place, and due notice of such change shall be sent to the
General Secretary. All other members are admissible as visitors
■only.
7 Powers and Duties of the Annual Council.
The Annual Council shall elect the General Officers of the
Association for the ensuing year, also three General Trustees, and
Trustees of the Central Fund alternately with the Conference as
vacancies occur, two Auditors, and four members on the
Committee of Management; shall have jurisdiction over all the
branches; shall fix the proportion of the annual income of the
branches which shall be due and payable to the General Treasurer,
as hereinafter provided in Rule 8 : shall settle disputes on appeal;
and shall make new laws, and amend or repeal existing ones, and
conduct the general business of the Association.
B—The8 — The General Fund
The Annual Council shall fix the proportion of assessment or rate
per cent, to be paid by the branches on and out of their total
annual incomes to meet the expenses of management, and for carry-


mg out the objects of the Association, which amount shall be for-
warded by the branches to the General Secretary, together with the
balance-sheet as made up to the end of December, within fourteen
days from the close of each year. Provided, however, that if it be
found at the next Annual Council that such assessment was insuffi-
cient to meet the expenses, or if from any other cause it may be
deemed necessary or desirable in the interests of the Association,
they shall have power to make a Special Levy on the branches on
the basis of membership, which shall be due and payable to the
General Secretary within one month from the day of the said
Annual Council. This fund shall be called the “ General Fund,”
and the levies shall be a charge on the income of the year for which
the balance-sheet is made.
9—President.
The President shall preside over the Annual Council and Com-
mittee Meetings ; sign Charters for the establishment of branches
in accordance with Schedule No. i, and perform all other official
acts pertaining to his office.
10~ Vice-President.
The Vice-President shall act in the absence of the President as
his representative, and in the event of the President’s removal,
death, or disqualification, he shall succeed to his office and duties.
11“ General Secretary.
The General Secretary shall attend the Annual Council and
Committee Meetings, keep correct minutes of their proceedings,
conduct the correspondence, keep a correct account of all the
receipts and disbursements of all levies made by the Annual
Council on the various branches and of all other money received
on account of the funds, receive all returns from the various
branches, and prepare annual and other returns as required, and
furnish a copy of the Annual Balance-sheet of the Association to
each branch thereof. He shall receive all moneys due from the
branches, and pay the same over to the General Treasurer without
delay.
12 —General Treasurer.
The General Treasurer shall keep a cash book, in which he shall
enter all the receipts and disbursements ; and whenever the money
in his hands amounts to fifty pounds he shall reduce that sum to
twenty-five pounds, by paying the surplus over to the Trustees
authorised to receive the same ; and also shall, when required by
the Annual Council or Committee of Management, render an
account of all moneys received and paid by him on account of the


Association ; and also, if requested by the Annual Council or
Committee of Management, pay over all moneys remaining in his
hands, and hand over all books, papers, and other property belong-
ing to the Association which he may have in his possession to the
President or any other person who may be duly appointed to re-
ceive the same. Cheques drawn by the General Treasurer shall be
countersigned by the General Secretary.
13“ General Trustees.
The General Trustees shall invest the funds of the Association as
directed by the Annual Council or the Committee of Management;
keep correct books and accounts, and furnish a report to each
Annual Council or at any other time, if requested by the Committee
of Management; and do and execute all the several duties pertain-
ing to their office,
14-Committee of Management
The Committee of Management shall consist of the General
Officers of the Association, all Trustees appointed by the Annual
Council, the Trustees of the Central Fund who are members of the
Annual Council, and four members to be elected by the Annual
Council, three members to form a quorum. They shall meet from
time to time, as may be necessary, and shall have power to
authorise the Trustees to invest the funds of the Association, or to
instruct them to recall the money invested ; and shall fill up any
vacancy that may occur among the General Officers or General
Trustees of the Association between the Annual Councils; and
transact all necessary business relating to the management of the
Association.
15-Formation of Branches.
The Annual Council, or if it be not in session, then the Com-
mittee of Management, shall have power to establish branches in
Victoria, on receiving applications as per Schedule No. 11., signed
by not fewer than five Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers. The
said branches shall be bound by the rules of the Association.
16—Dissolution of the Association.
In the event of the Association being reduced to five members it
shall be lawful for them to dissolve and determine it, and after
paying all just claims and obligations on the funds, to divide the
balance at their disposal between such benevolent objects or
societies as they may deem best.


RULES FOR BRANCHES
17" Duties of Branches.
Each branch shall elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, one or two
Secretaries, two Sick Visitors, Treasurer, three Trustees, and two
Auditors, who shall remain in office for twelve months, when their
successors shall be appointed, retiring officers to be eligible for re-
election. Correct accounts of all receipts and expenditure shall be
kept by each branch, and at the end of the month of December a
balance-sheet shall be made out for the year, which shall be
forwarded to the General Secretary, duly audited, together with
the amount due to the General Fund, as provided for in Rule 8.
Each branch shall hold meetings as may be determined upon, but
at least one such meeting shall be held in each quarter for receiving
contributions of members, reports of officers and Sick Visitors,
determining on applications for aid from its funds, and for the ad-
mission or removal of members, and also electing Representatives
to the Annual Council, according to Rule 6. Three to form a
quorum. Each branch to determine upon and pay the travelling
expenses of its own Representatives to and from the Annual
Council.
18~Chairman.
The Chairman shall preside over all meetings, sign all official
documents, have one vote as a member, and a casting vote in the
event of equal voting.
19—Vice-Chairman
The Vice-Chairman shall preside in the absence of the Chair-
man ; and, in the event of his death or disqualification, shall
succeed to his office and duties.
20~Secretary.
The Secretary shall receive all moneys on account of the branch,
and pay the same over to the Treasurer without delay ; attend
meetings of the branch ; keep a correct record of their proceed-
ings ; conduct the correspondence; keep accounts of all moneys
received and paid on account of the funds of the branch ; make up
the annual returns for the General Secretary in accordance with
Schedule No 111., and perform such other duties as the branch
may enjoin.
21~T reasurer.
The Treasurer shall receive from the Secretary all moneys, and
make all the necessary payments on behalf of the branch, and at
the end of each year forward the amount due to the General


Secretary; and when the money in his hands shall amount to the
sum of fifty pounds, he shall reduce that sum to twenty five pounds
by paying the surplus over to the Trustees ; and shall also, when
required by resolution of his branch, hand over to them or any
person they may appoint all moneys remaining in his hands, and
all books, papers, and other property belonging to the branch which
he may have in his possession.
22~~T rustees.
The Trustees shall invest the funds of the branch, keep correct
books and accounts, furnish reports and financial statements from
time to time, as requested by resolution of their branch, and also do
and execute all the several duties pertaining to them in virtue of
their office.
23“ Auditors,
The Auditors shall audit the accounts annually, sign the books,
vouchers, balance-sheet, and returns, ready for transmission to the
General Secretary, examine the securities, and report upon the
same to the next meeting of their branch.
24“ Visitors.
The Visitors shall, upon being notified by the Secretary, visit the
sick, obtain the sick allowance from the Treasurer, and pay the
same to the brethren, and report to the next meeting any matter
relating to their office.
25 Honorary Members and Life Governors.
Any person being a member or adherent of the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church contributing five shillings or upwards per annum to
the funds of any branch of the Association, may be elected an
honorary member of the said branch, and all who contribute the
sum of five pounds or upwards in any one year shall be entitled to
election as Life Governors of the Association. All honorary
members and Life Governors are entitled to attend branch meetings
and the Annual Council as visitors.
26 Settlement of Disputes.
Should any dispute arise between any member of this Associa-
tion, or person claiming on his behalf, and any officer or other
member, all such disputes shall be submitted to the Branch with
which the said parties are connected. If its decision is unsatisfac-
tory, either party may appeal to the Committee of Management ;
and if their decision be unsatisfactory, to the Annual Council’,
whose decision shall be final. Any disputes arising between
branches .shall be settled by the Annual Council.


27—Dissolution of Branch.
Should two-thirds of the contributing members of any branch
determine to dissolve the same, the whole of the funds and property
of the said branch shall be forwarded to the General Secretary of
the Association, to be set apart as a Reserve Fund for the establish-
ment of new branches, or the relief of special cases which may be
referred to the Annual Council. The General Trustees and
Auditors shall be the Trustees and Auditors respectively of the
Reserve Fund.
28—New Rules.
The above Rules shall not be altered or repealed, nor shall any
new rules be made but by a majority of legally qualified members of
the Annual Council, two months’ notice being given of the same to
all the branches by the General Secretary.
Special Rules for the Administration of the Income derived
from the investment of the Central Fund, including the
Jubilee and other Moneys particularised in the “ Declara-
tion of Trust.” Approved hy the Victoria and Tasmania
Conference of 1890.
It is provided inter alia in the aforesaid Declaration of Trust that
the net income from the above Fund shall be distributed by the
Local Preachers’ Association connected with the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church in Victoria in relief of such Local Preachers of the said
Church as shall through sickness, accidents, infirmities of age, or
other misfortune be in needy or indigent circumstances, in such
manner and in such proportions as the said Local Preachers’ Asso-
ciation shall in their discretion think best.
I.—All duly accredited Local Preachers belonging to the
said Church in Victoria, whether members of the Local
Preachers’ Association or not, and widows of such Local
Preachers, are eligible to apply for relief from the said Fund.
ll.—The Committee of Management of the Local
Preachers’ Association, as provided in Rule 14, shall be the
Executive Committee authorised by the said Association for
the carrying out of the provisions of the Declaration of Trust
for the relief of Local Preachers in Victoria.
lII.—All applications for relief from the said fund shall be
made, where practicable, through a local branch of the Associa-
tion in the form “A ’’ hereto annexed, and the statements


therein made shall be signed by the applicant himself, and
countersigned by a minister of the Wesleyan Methodist Church
or by the Chairman or Secretary of the "branch of the Associa-
tion of the locality in which the applicant resides.
IV. Every such application for relief shall be forwarded
to the General Secretary of the Local Preachers’ Association.
V. —The Committee of Management shall meet to deal
with such applications as often as the number and urgency of
the applications may require, but not less frequently than once
in every three months,
VI. —The Committee of Management shall furnish to the
Trustees of the Fund during the second week in January of
each year an account, duly audited, of the moneys received and
distributed, giving full particulars, and shall pay over any
surplus exceeding £lOO to the said Trustees, to be added to the
principal in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration
of Trust. A copy of such account shall be submitted to the
Annual Council of the Association. (The Auditors of the
“ General Fund ” shall be the Auditors of the “ Central Fund”
also.)
ANNUAL COUNCIL
Order of Business.
I. —The Council to be opened with singing, reading of Scripture,
and prayer.
11. (a) —The roll to be called by the General Secretary.
( b ) —The minutes to be read and confirmed.
111. (a)— Election of General Officers : (President, Vice-President,
General Secretary, General Treasurer), Trustees, Com-
mittee of Management, and Auditors.
(6) —Votes of thanks to retiring officers.
IV,—Correspondence to be read and dealt with.
V —Financial Statements. —i. Central Fund. 2. General Fund.
3. Itinerant Funds. 4. Reserve Fund.
VI. —Reports of branches, with balance-sheets, and special infor-
mation as to the extent to which aid has been given
during the year.
Vll.—What can be done to further the objects of the Association ?
Vlll.—Votes of thanks (1) to Friends for entertaining Representa-
tives; (2) to the Trustees of the Church, &c.
IX. —When and where shall our next Council be held ?
X. —The Council to be closed with singing and prayer.


BRANCH MEETINGS.
Order of Business.
I. —The meeting to be opened with singing and prayer.
11. The minutes of the last Ordinary Meeting and Special
Meetings to be read and confirmed.
111. —Correspondence to be read and dealt with,
IV. Contributions and donations to be received.
V. Reports of Officers and Visitors of the Sick to be heard ; and
applications for assistance received and determined upon.
VI Officers Trustees, Visitors of the Sick, Auditors, and Repre-
sentatives to be elected, when required, the votes to be
taken by ballot if called for.
Vll—New members to be admitted.
VIII. “ What can be done to further the objects of the Associa-
IX. —The meeting to be concluded with the Benediction.
SCHEDULE I.
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers' Association of
Victoria. Charter of Association.
To all to whom this shall come, GREETING. KNOW YE that
we j-jjg of the Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers
Association of Victoria, have granted and do grant unto who
signed an application for such Instrument in accordance with Rule
No 15, as set forth in Schedule 11. THIS CHART ER constitut-
ing them a Preliminary Committee, with full power to call meetings
for the election of Officers, Trustees, and Auditors, and do all other
things necessary to the establishment of a Branch. e sal
Branch to be numbered and located at s a e
entitled to all the privileges of Association as long as the
business thereof is conducted according to. and the officers and
members comply with the rules and usages of this Association
otherwise this Charter may be declared null and void by the
In witness whereof we have caused this Charter to be signed by
our President and General Secretary. ~ ,
This day of in the year of our Lord, one thousand
eight hundred and _ ~ ,
President.
General Secretary.


SCHEDULE 11.
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers’ Association of
VICTORIA.
Form of Application for Charter,
To the General Secretary,
We, the undersigned Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers, being
desirous of becoming members of the Wesleyan Methodist Local
Preachers’ Association of Victoria, hereby apply to the
for a Charter to open a new branch, to be located in
under your jurisdiction, and we hereby pledge ourselves indivi-
dually and collectively to be governed by the rules and usages of
the said Association.
No. Name. Residence.
FORMS OF BEQUESTS.
Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers’ Association of
Victoria.
“I give and bequeath to the Wesleyan Methodist Local
Preachers’ Association of Victoria* the sum of
out of my estate, to be paid , without
any charge or deduction whatever, and 1 direct that the receipt of
the Treasurer of the said Association shall constitute and be a
sufficient discharge thereof to my Executors.”
Devise, to the Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers’
Association of Victoria, of Real Estate.
“ I devise to the Wesleyan Methodist Rocal Preachers’ Associa-
tion of Victoria* (here describe the land accurately).
Note.—Such devise must be made six months before testator’s death.
Legacy, to the Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers’
Association of Victoria, of Personal Estate.
" I give and bequeath to the Wesleyan Methodist Local
Preachers’ Association of Victoria ” the sum of
to be paid, without any deduction, out of such portion of my
personal estate as I may lawfully bequeath for such a purpose.
t Or Branch of the Wesleyan Methodist Local Preachers’ Association
o!' Victoria, as the case may be.


•spunj pjjox
•2-S
|§
« ?
<U 1/
> to
C 0)
>
I ”(5 •'H
•junouiy jgqjo Xuy
I t
•junoooy
JU9J4R3 ui qußg jgqjo
Jo sSuiAHg ui junouiy
S
5
•589.1 X PUB ‘99g JO
spUßfj ui junouiy qsß3
•S99JSUJX qoußjg
jo spiit?H ui sjunoui y
‘lejox I
589.1 X JO 'O9S iO
[ojjuoo japun jo ‘spußfj
ui 9oiiH[Bg qsß3 —y
II -j
« <
0 -3 e
i —i <
7 M ss
0
h q I
2 Jz; e
o &
0 r£] s~
M
K
r - ' ri
• Q §
£ H*.
uW I
9jnqpu9dxg JoqjQ
JE3 A
aqj Suijnp jU9ui}S9Auj
IQJ S99JSII >X 01 popUBJJ
•09S ’U9O OJ JU9S
punj 18J9U90 Qj ,{A9q
sf|
111
ffl
sjußoqddy oj sjubjq
•sjdi9o9g J9qjQ
■s :
S' . u
S SvS
££) ji 0
•g _ o*s
£ ? C
o 1 53 £—
*££ fl -2 <D
O C U)“
O <U !- C
“5 . . S B’C
,s i r «)«“-
■“I 5 3«c
■2 8 £ J S “
K MCT3
|i £ .s.'ss
S : ! •gW.a
x I \ 3g 2
*» O-^XI
: C ,*■’ <5
K> M **3 ■*■*
Q i ~ °
•(spang pojsoAuj
UO S99JSIUX c l POAI9O
-9.1 JS9J9JUJ JJB 9ptqoUl
ppioqs qoiqA\) jsgjajuf
•SUOIJO9IJO3
jo ’sqng
V uuirqoQ jod sb ‘ujnjoj
jsb[ pubh ui aoußpjg
I *II°H uo JaqtmiN [E)OX
'9SB9JO9Q
'9SB9JOUJ
J
5 £*
g M
« S.S
S s £
D %
•qoußjg jgqjouy pouiof
J qj &
LA W
K ° s
oS g i
3 s * !
so
•dtqsj9qui9p\[ p 05893
l-l
W b (3
fIU «
i 53 c ~
JS'rt W)
tUO C
•XiBJOUOH
‘SJ9qoß9jg [Boog
•ujnjog jsbj jgd
se jo (bjox
tt 00
2
o -g
H
0 *
NJ SO
A r-C)


FORM OF APPLICATION FOR RELIEF FROM THE
FUNDS OF THE WESLEYAN METHODIST LOCAL
PREACHERS’ ASSOCIATION OF VICTORIA
I being* hereby submit to the
, Branch of the Local Preachers’ Association the name
ot + Local Preacher in the Circuit for
pecuniary aid, and beg to furnish the following particulars as to Ihisi present
position and antecedents:—
Signature of Minister, Chairman, or Secretary
Name in Full
Age
Married or Single
Residence—
Here state the Circuit in which his
name appears on the plan
N.B.—lf possible, attach a plan ..
What Branch of the Association is
he connected with (if any) ?
Occupation
General Health—
Here state what his present state of
health is, and if he is able to fol
low his occupation or not
What property (if any) does the appli-
cant possess ? ..
What family has the applicant ? And
what their ages ?
How many children ate dependent
upon him ?
Are any of the applicant’s children or
very near relatives in a position to
afford help? If so, who, and to
what extent ?
How many years has the applicant been
a Local Preacher? Where? If
possible, name the Circuits
Any other information regarding the
applicant which might be useful to
the Association or the Branch in
dealing with the case
Signature of Applicant
Date
Address
w " te teg'Wy the name, office held, and address of the person forwarding
fhe A^ocffitioA, Whether a MmlSter ’ 0r Chairman ’ or Seoretai 'y of a Branch of
+ Strike out the words “ Branch of the ” if application is not made through a
Branch. + Wheie necessary, insert the words “ widow of a.”
The above application was considered by the
on the
18 , and dealt with in the following manner; that
is to say :
Hon, Secretary.


, /
:
* rn„..... c . _ iv
I ■
