

THE REV. JOHN PAGE HOPPS
Old Testament Spiritualism.
“ Spiritualism in the Old Testament; illustrated by
the Book of Ezekiel,” a small pamphlet which I could
hare wished longer, is a most noteworthy publication.
The writer, the Key. Page Hopps, tackles his question
with a most refreshing directness. The key, he says,
to the enigmatical utterances of the old Hebrew prophet
has been lost. “The truth is that the only persons
who are at all likely or able to understand this puzzling
book are those who know something of what is called
Spiritualism.” " Ezekiel was what is now called a
medium. He was clairvoyant and clairaudient. He
was a seer, a trance-speaker, and a writing-medium.
, . . He was probably (if there is truth in such
things) influenced by spirits who took a passionate
interest in the affairs of the Jews, both at home and in
the captivity. He was open to all kinds of influences,
good and bad, sane and deleterious, sublime and
ridiculous. The amazing blunder was the putting
everything down to Jehovah ; a piece of folly that few
practised Spiritualists would be guilty of, who, when
communicutions come from Socrates, or Shakespeare,
or Milton, always have their doubts. ” Mr. Page Hopps
proceeds in his most Interesting analysis: —“ Ezekiel
was a spirit medium. He held regular stances. . . .
in fact, the whole book c nsists of a collection of spirit
stances and spirit messsages. and of visions and clair-
voyant and other occult experiences.” (See Ch. il., 1,2.)
Nor does the case of Ezekiel stand alone. “ The
Bible is full of records of spirit intercourse, even to the
calling up of the so-called dead, as in the case of Samuel
and the Witch of Endor. When the boy Samuel heard
the Voice it was not regarded as anything very wonder-
ful, but it was taken at once as tne voice of the Lord.
Perhaps If the Voice had spoken elsewhere, it would
have been denounced as demoniacal.” Yes: the
Spiritualism that is found within the sacred pale of the
Catholic Church is a hallowed intercourse with angels;
all else is demoniacal, or lies at least under suspicion.
Yet those who know both can see no hard and fast line
of demarcation between them. To whomsoever these
communications come there is no absolute guarantee of
purity. Evil and good, true and false, weighty utter-
ances and frivolous, are usually commingled. So it
was in Ezekiel’s case; so it is still.
“This” (says Mr. Page Hopps) “suggests oae of the
gravest considerations. What we really find all along
is a bare assumption that 1 The Lord ’is speaking. In
reality there is always a conflict between Voice and
Voice.” This the writer illustrates by citations from
the Book ef Ezekiel, and remarks that Ezekiel was
not the only prophet to whom “ the word of the
Lord ” came. He laments that we have no record of
these other utterances, and draws the conclusion that
there were then, as there are now, various claimants
to true mediumship: spirit against spirit: to be judged
by their words and not by their pretentions, which
latter are always magnificent. No instructed ob-
server of the communications which are given through
various forms of mediumship now can fail to see the
exact parallel between what Mr. Page Hopps
discerns in the case of Ezekiel and what is given
through modem mediums. The messages do not
usually emanate from a single source ; they are given
by “ a band of spirits ” under a leader, no doubt, but
still a company. So Mr. Page Hopps is inclined to
gather from a study of the Old Testament that the
“ Jehovah of the Jews was no other than a finite spirit
or band of spirits of very limited and variable power.”
This suggestion should not be deemed irreverent by
any, nor will it cause any surprise to an intelligent
Spiritualist, who has read his Bible in the light of his
present knowledge Bather will it relieve his mind
that he feels no longer compelled to attribute to Deity
commands and.instructions, such as some contained in
the writings of Ezekiel; “commands which, if they
came to a medium now, would be laughed at or recoiled
from.”
The development of the God-idea from eany days
down to the epoch of the Christ, to say nothing of its
subsequent growth, is sufficient to show us that its
early presentation must of necessity seem crude and
undignified compared with the views we now hold.
Nothing but an extreme unwillingness to see
things as they are can blind the eye to
the patent fact that Scripture, read in the light of this
conception, gains a new interest and instructiveness.
Purely it is clear that our present day experiences
throw a blaze of light on the dark places of ancient
Hebrew literature. People have had a blind reverence
for the letter, while they have missed the spirit, of
these old writings. They have resented any attempt
to treat the Bible in the same way of comment and ex-
planation as they would demand to have any other old
and obscure book dealt with. And so they have missed
their way, floundering in a morass from which they
cannot extricate themselves.
I must allow Mr. Page Hopps to speak for himself In
his final summing up. But before doing so there is
another aspect of the question which, I suspect, finds
many a modern parallel It is not an uncommon thing
to find in the earlier books of the Old Testament that
the “false prophet” has been made so by Jehovah Him-
self. An instance will at once occur. (I. Kings ch.
xxii.) Micaiah, “ the prophet of the Lord,” narrates a
vision which has been shown to his opened eye. He
has [seen “ the Lord” on His throne with the host of
Heaven before him. “Who," he asks, will persuade
Ahab that he may go up and fall at Bamoth-Gilead ? And
one said onlthis manner and another said on that manner.
And there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord,
and said I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto
him. Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and
I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And He (• the Lord ’) said, Thou shalt persuade him,
and prevail also: go forth and do so. Now, there-
fore, behold the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets.” Nothing could be
more explicit. Jehovah, whatever that name Implies,
sent forth a lying spirit to lure Ahab to destruction.
Spirit against Spirit. Micaiah against the Lying
Spirit. Truth against Fraud mixed with Fact: not
fraud pure and simple—that would soon be discovered
—but fraud cunningly mingled with truth. For the
prophets—seers, mediums—were genuine, only they
were possessed by a “lying spirit.”
Apropos. How often is this the case in our very midst ?
Who will be so bold as to say in a given case, where
spirit action is in question, “This is wholly true;
this is undeniably false?” It would be either a very
rash or a very inexperienced mind that would
venture on any such hard and fast statement. The
problems that Spiritualism offers for our solution
may well give pause even to the boldest. The true
and the false are so mingled that wisdom will say of


