

“THE PAST AND THE FUTURE.”
Inaugural Lecture
DELIVERED IN
THE THEATRE OF GRESHAM COLLEGE
NOVEMBER 18TH, 1890,
BY
J. FREDERICK BRIDGE
Mus. Doc. Oxon Gresham Professor of Music.
London :
W. REEVES, 185, FLEET STREET.
1890.


“THE PAST AND THE FUTURE ”
BY
DR. J. F. BRIDGE.


“THE PAST AND THE FUTURE.”
Immpnil Jecte
DELIVERED IN
THE THEATRE OF GRESHAM COLLEGE
NOVEMBER iBth, 1890,
BY
J. FREDERICK BRIDGE
Mus. Doc. Ojcon.y Gresham Professor of Music,
ilortOon;
W. REEVES, 18s, FLEET STREET.
1890.


LONDON I BOWDEN, HtTDSON AND CO., PRINTERS,
23, RED LION STREET, HOLBORN, W.C.


“THE PAST AND THE FUTURE”
THE INAUGURAL LECTURE
ON
MUSIC
BY
J. FREDERICK BRIDGE Mus. Doc., OXON.,
Gresham Professor of Music.
With this address I begin the active duties of the
office of Gresham Professor of Music, to which I have
had the honour of being preferred.
This Lectureship, as you doubtless are aware, is one
of considerable antiquity, having been founded more
than three centuries ago by that distinguished man, Sir
Thomas Gresham. His name must ever stand high on
the roll of eminent citizens of London. It was chiefly
by his exertions that the profits of English commerce
were secured for England, and the people of this country
delivered from their dependence on foreign merchants.
To him London owes the first Exchange, and Music-


ians the foundation of this Chair of Music. It is one
of the seven Lectureships included in the establish-
ment of Gresham College, “ the epitome of a Uni-
versity,’’ as it has been called, “ in which he seems to
have anticipated the wants and spirit of the present
age.”
A former Gresham Professor of Rhetoric * has well
said—“ the most shining part of Sir Thomas Gresham’s
“ character appears in his public benefactions. The
“Royal Exchange was a singular ornament to the
“ City of London, and a great convenience to the
“ merchants who wanted such a place to meet in and
“ transact their affairs ; and the donation of his own
“ Mansion House for a seat of learning and the liberal
“ arts, with the ample provision made for the endow-
“ ment and support of it, was such an instance of a
“ generous and public spirit that has been equalled by
“ few, and must perpetuate his memory with the
“ highest esteem and gratitude, so long as any regard
“to learning and virtue is preserved among us.” The
concluding words of this quotation suggest a question
which has been often present in my mind since I have
had the honour of counting myself a member of
Gresham College—How may we musicians, amateur
and professional, best perpetuate the memory of this
great and good man, and in what way can we shew
our gratitude for what he did for our beloved art so
long ago ? The answer is plain, though the task may
not be easy. It is by making the best possible use of
the College—on my part, by putting into my work as
* J. Ward, 1740.


a lecturer all the energy and knowledge I have; on
yours, by frequent attendance at the lectures, and an
intelligent and earnest consideration of the various
subjects set before you. I count myself fortunate in
the time at which I undertake this office. Surely at,
no previous period was there such a general desire to
acquire musical knowledge, and never has musical
education received such encouragement from those
“ set in authority over us.” To begin at the foot of
the ladder, we have now the satisfaction of seeing
music—not only singing by ear, but the art of learning
to sing by note —-taught in our schools, at the expense
of the State. We have been long in establishing this
branch of elementary teaching : surprisingly long
when we read what Dr. Burney records more than a
hundred years ago. He says “ I crossed the whole
kingdom of Bohemia from south to north, and being
“ very assiduous in my enquiries, how the common
“people learned music, I found at length, that, not
“ only in every large town, but in all villages, where
“ there is a reading and writing school, children of
“ both sexes are taught music.”
On this subject Luther (himself a musician of re-
markable power) wrote more than three centuries
ago: “ Music admonishes man, renders him mild,
“ gentle, modest and reasonable. It is also a discip-
“ linarian. Singing is the best art, and a good ex-
“ ercise. He who knows this art is ennobled by it,,
“and has aptitude for all things. He is rendered
“ happy and free from care— singing dispels the clouds
“of anxiety. Youth ought to be inured to this art, as


“it tends to make man able and refined. It is im-
“ perativc that music should be taught in our schools ,
“ and the school-master must be able to sing , or else I
“ will not look upon him. Kings, princes, and nobles
“should encourage music—it is their privilege to up-
“ hold the fine arts.”
It is our happy privilege to have seen Luther’s
wishes exactly fulfilled. Music is systematically
taught in our schools, and our princes do “ encourage
music.” Within the past few years we have seen
the establishment in London of two important
Schools of Music, in addition to the well-known
and valuable Royal Academy. One of the new insti-
tutions, the Royal College of Music, owes its founda-
tion to the energetic advocacy and support of H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales ; and the other —the Guildhall
School of Music —to the enlightenment and munifi-
cence of the Corporation of the City of London, I
believe I am within the mark when I state that in
these three important educational centres some three
or four thousand students are being yearly trained in
various branches of musical knowledge. To these
public institutions may be added the valuable and
flourishing College of Organists, which, by the devotion
of its honorary officers, no less than by its well-ordered
examinations, has established itself on a secure and
lasting foundation ; and Trinity College, London,
which is taking an active part in the cause of
musical education. To these well-known Schools and


Colleges I might add many large institutions in the
suburbs of London, for the most part founded and
managed by private individuals and committees, which
there is every reason to believe are doing good and
successful work. Besides these training schools of
music, we may note with pride the many efficient
amateur orchestras and amateur vocal associations to
be found in London and in the provinces. I question
therefore if any of my brother-professors of this college
can appeal to a larger and better prepared constituency,
and it will indeed be surprising if I fail to get an intel-
ligent and critical audience for any musical subject,
however abstruse, upon which I may venture to com-
ment.
It is my earnest desire in these lectures to do for
music what my co-professors are doing for other sub-
jects, to render some help to musical education, and
if it may be, to give some slight impulse to musical
thought.
In saying this, I would not for one moment wish to
convey the impression that the past history of
Gresham College in connection with music is a barren
or even a poor one, though certainly the names of
some of the ancient holders of my office cannot be
recognised as musical authorities. From one cause
and another those who followed Dr. Bull, the first
Professor, seem to have been anything but musicians
—three of them were clergymen, and five, medical


men. One of the earlier Professors was recommended
by the University of Oxford, where he had studied, on
the ground that he was, “ in his religion very sound, a
“ due and diligent frequenter of prayers and sermons,
and in his conversation very civil and honest.” They
added, with regard to his musical knowledge, that “ he
“ had taken two degrees in that and other good arts.”
And yet I am able to bring some interesting testi-
mony to the good work which seems even then to
have been done, as the following quotation will show.
It appears in a work published by Ravenscroft, who
was a chorister boy at St. Paul’s Cathedral about the
time the College was founded, and became afterwards
a musician of considerable eminence. This work
appeared in 1614, and is entitled, “A Briefe Dis-
“ course of the true (but neglected) use of Charac-
“ Prising the Degrees by their Perfection, Imperfection,
“ and Diminution in Measurable Musicke against the
“ Common Practise and Custome of these times:
“ Examples whereof are exprest in the harmony of
“ 4 voices concerning the Pleasure of 5 usual Recrea-
tions —1, Hunting; 2, Hawking; 3, Dancing; 4,
“ Drinking; 5, Enamouring.” The musical examples
were composed by Edward Pearse (Ravenscroft’s
master), John Bennet, and Ravenscroft himself. I
found a copy of this work in the library of the College.
The preface runs as follows ;


To the Right Woeshipfull, most worthy
Grave Senators, Guardians of Gresham
COLLEDGE IN LONDON.
[Here follow their names.]
And to the Right Woeshipfull Sir John
SwiNEETON AND SIE THOMAS HAYES, KNIGHTS
and Aldermen,
Most True and Honourable Affectoes of
Music.
As I doe account it a great portion of happiness
to have received first Instructions, Exercise, and
Encouragement of my Studies in this Auncient and
most famous City; So am I thereby bound, and doe
(willingly) endeavour my best part and power, both to
testifie and augment the Life and Honour of this
Liberall Science which I professe, to the benefit of all
Students therein, and the contentment of all Affectors
thereof in this my native country —and especially in
this the Metropolis thereof, which gave first life and
breathing to my poore endeavours. And herein I
must and doe acknowledge it as a singular help and
benefit, that I have received divers Instructions,
Resolutions, and Confirmations of Sundry Points and
Precepts in Our Art, from the Musicke Readers of
that most famous Colledge, founded and erected by
the ever praiseworthie and justly renowned Senator,
Sir Thomas Gresham, who bearing his never-dying
Name as a President and Patterne to his Co-Citizens,
to show them the right way to seternize their names
to future posteritie, by being kinde nursing Fathers
to good Literature, revived the liberall Arts and
Sciences, especially the Mathematickes, which were
somewhat neglected even in the Universities; and
endowed them with such Maintenance and Exhibition,
that (their worldly wants being more than meanly
supply’d) they have and doe continually strive with
highest Art and Industry —so to explaine them to the
World by way of Lecture, and otherwise, that much
good from thence redoundeth to many desirous of
those knowledges, and more and more will as time
and occasion shall serve. What fruits my selfe in
particular have received by that one particular Lecture
of Musicke (whereof I was an unworthie Auditor) I
dutifully acknowledge to have proceeded from that


Colledge; and doe here commend them to your
Worshipps, who are Visitors and Guardians of that
most famous Foundation, from whence I have received
such benefit in these my studies. For as I have been
encouraged by your nobleness to travaile in these
studies—so by Dutie they belong to you, from whom
they had their animation. May it therfore please
your Worships to accept this my Discourse of
Musicke with some Harmonioall Examples thereof,
as a Simple Sacrifice, in part of that devotion and
service which I owe upon promise and full intendment
by your wonted goodness and assistance, to search for
richer and riper Discoveries in this Musicall Conti-
nent. So wishing the long continuance of your
carefull Love, and loving care to all good Learning—
especially to Musicke, the earthly solace to man’s
Soule,
I ever Eemaine,
The Honourer and sincere Affector
Of your approved good mindes,
THOMAS RAVERSCROFT.
It is interesting to see such an acknowledgment of
indebtedness to Gresham College so soon after the
Chair was founded. One would like to know in what
way this chorister of St. Paul’s was enabled to take
advantage of the College lectures, and who was the
lecturer ; whether it was Dr. Bull or one of his two
immediate successors—Thomas Clayton, Doctor of
Medicine, or John Taverner, who was subsequently
Rector of Stoke-Newington. But whoever it may
have been, he had in Ravenscroft a distinguished and
grateful listener. It is singular that a musician of
real eminence and learning was not appointed to
follow Bull. There was a remarkable activity about
the time, and tor a half century after the College was.


founded, in the world of musical literature. There
were practical musicians who devoted much time and
thought to theoretical studies, and who would have been
able to give the lecture as prescribed by the ordinance
—viz., “ The theoretique part for half an hour, and
the practique, by concent of voice or instruments,
for the rest of the hour.” As an example of the
activity of learned writers on music just referred to I
may cite the great work by Morley, “A Plain and
Easy Introduction to Practical Music.” This was
the first regular treatise on music published in
England. It continued in favour for upwards of two
centuries, and was also translated into German in the
17 th century. Speaking of this treatise the late
Oxford Professor, Sir Frederick Gore-Ouseley, says :
“ It remained the chief text-book on the subject for
“ more than two hundred years, and might even now
“be studied in some parts with advantage. Every
“ library of musical works ought to possess a copy,
“ and every musical antiquarian finds it absolutely
“ indispensable.”
This celebrated and excellent work was published
in 1597, the year after the appointment of the first
Gresham Professor.
Another eminent performer, Dowland —
Whose heavenly touch
Upon the lute doth ravish human sense—
besides numerous compositions, published in 1609 a
translation of a most valuable and learned work,


entitled, “ Musicte Activte Micrologus,” by Ornitho-
parcus, a German musician, who had delivered the
substance of this work as lectures in the University of
Heidelberg and other places. I have already men-
tioned Ravenscroft’s work, dedicated to the Gresham
Committee of that time. There are also two curious
and voluminous works by Charles Butler, M.A., of
Magdalen College. One of these two, Sir J. Hawkins
says, may be considered as a judicious supplement to
Morley’s “Introduction.” A copy of thiswork has lately
come into my possession, and a most interesting and
entertaining book it is. This inaugural lecture pre-
sents no opportunity for musical illustrations. Let
me relieve .the monotony of my discourse by reading
you, as a specimen of the musical thought of this
time, a few extracts in which the author professes to
give the characteristics of various modes and their
effects upon the hearers :
THE PRINCIPLES OF MUSIC.
Of the Modes.
Music is the art of modulating notes in voice or
instrument. The which, having a great power over
the affections of the mind, by its various modes pro-
duces in the hearers various effects.
These modes are five (Dorik, Lydian, iEolik, Phry-
gian, and lonik).
The Dorik mode consists of sober, slow-timed notes
generally in Counterpoint, set to a Psalm or other
pious canticle, in metre or rythmical verse ; the notes
answering the number of the syllables. This moves
to sobriety, prudence, modesty, and godliness.
The Lydian mode is a graceful, solemn music in


Discant, for the most part, of slow time, set to a hymn,
anthem, or other spiritual song in prose, and some-
times in verse, the notes exceeding often the number
of the syllables; which through his heavenly harmony,
ravisheth the mind with a kind of ecstasy, lifting it
up from the regard of earthly things unto the desire
of celestial joys, which it doth lively resemble.
The zEolik mode is that which, with its soft,
pleasing sounds, pacifyth the passions of the mind.
The Phrygian mode is a manly and courageous
kind of music, which, with his stately, or loud and
violent tones rouseth the spirit, and inoiteth to arms
and activity. Such are marches, almains, and the
warlike sounds of trumpet, fife and drum.
The lonik mode is, contrary to the Phrygian, an
effeminate and delicate kind of music, set unto
pleasant songs and sonnets of love, and such like
fancies for honest mirth and delight, chiefly in
feasting and other meriments.
The lonic mode is also called Modus Chromaticus,
of chroma, colour ; because as pictures are beautiful
with trim, lively colours to please the wanton eye, so
this kind is, as it were, coloured with delicate lively
sounds to please the wanton ear.
The following observations on the same subject
also occur in this work :
But the story of Ericus Musician passeth all, who
having given forth that he was able by his art to
drive men into what affections he listed (even into
anger and fury), and being required by the King to
put his skill in practice, harped so long, not upon one
string (as the proverb is), but upon his Polychord
Lyre, with such effectual melody and harmony, in
variety of Proportions, Figures, Consecutions, Syn-
copes, Fugas, Formalities in his different Airs and
Modes that his auditors began first to be moved with
some strange and contrary passions ; and at last, with
his Phrygian mode he set the King into such a frantic
mood, that in a rage he fell upon his most trusty
friends, and, for lack of weapon, slew some of them
with his fist, which, when he came to himself he did
much lament.


Of this mode also (though not so violent' was the
Pythagoreans Huntsup, or Morning Music, to waken
and rouse up their spirits to study and action.
I might add other important specimens of musical
literature to my list, for “In the middle ages our
treatises on music had an European reputation* ” ;
but I have mentioned sufficient to show that there
was an activity existing among musicians during
the period, which boded well for the progress of
the art. This makes it all the more surprising that
none of these and many equally good men of “light
and leading ” should have occupied the Gresham
Chair of Music after Dr. Bull; but that it should have
been, I will not say occupied, but annexed by clergy-
men, and as Hawkins avers (though I think this is
doubtful), in one instance by a barber!
If nothing of importance to music emanated from
Gresham College itself during this period, yet 1
would remind you that among the most prominent
of the founders of the Royal Society, which has done,
and is still doing, such admirable work for science,
and, through science, for art, were the Professors of
Gresham College, comprising such names as Sir
Christopher Wren, Professor of Astronomy ; Sir
William Petty, Professor of Music; Barrow, and
Hooke. These Professors of the College, with other
* Inaugural Lecture, Oxford. Sir John Stainer.


learned men of the time, formed a voluntary scientific
association. The place where they met for fifty years
was Gresham College, and in the College the Charter
of the Royal Society was signed by Charles 11. I
should like to quote a passage from an interesting
lecture delivered by Professor Taylor, whose powers
as an eloquent and learned lecturer it would be diffi-
cult to rival. He says ; “ This was the brightest era
“in the annals of our College, which had now amply
“ realized the hopes and wishes of its Founder. Men
“of the highest attainments had been enlisted among
“ its Professors ; it had created and nurtured the most
“ important association of scientific men that the
“ world ever saw ; and it had laboured for the diffusion
“ of sound philosophy in every way and through every
“ channel. After dispensing instruction in the spacious
“ lecture hall of the College to crowds of eager and
“ attentive hearers, its Professors would retire to its
“ quiet and secluded retreats to hold communion with
“ the master spirits of the age. Thither resorted
“ Newton, the glory of his country and his times; the
“ profound, acute, and high-minded Locke ; Grew, one
“ of the earliest and most eminent of our naturalists ;
“ and Boyle, the father of modern chemistry. Thus
“ was Gresham College at once the reservoir into
“ which the various streams of knowledge ran, and the
“ source whence their copious currents flowed into the
“ different channels of society. This honourable
“ union subsisted for half a century, when it was dis-
“ solved by the removal of the Royal Society to a
“ building exclusively devoted to its own use.”
The transactions of this learned society, and offshoot
of Gresham College in its earliest days, included sub


jects connected with musical science. Dr. Wallis,
one of those who helped to found the Royal Society,
printed in the Philosophical Transactions a discourse
on the Trembling of Consonant Strings ; another on
the Monochord ; another on the Imperfection of the
Organ ; and a fourth on the Strange effects reported
of music in the olden times. One of the earliest
public recognitions of the genius of the young Mozart
was a communication to the Royal Society, written by
the Honourable Daines Barrington, when Mozart was
but 13 years old, entitled, “Account of a very re-
markable Young Musician.” The same writer also
called the attention of the Royal Society to the
youthful prodigy Crotch. Samuel Butler, the author
of “Hudibras,” in “A Satire on the Royal Society,” has
the following amusing lines suggestive of the wide
extent and musical nature of some of their deli-
berations :
These were their learned speculations,
And all their constant occupations ;
To measure wind and weigh the air,
To turn a circle to a square ;
And in the braying of an ass
Find out the treble and the bass ;
If mares neigh alto and a cow
A double diapason low.
To come nearer to our own time, and to take a
more serious and true view of the work of this society.
It is to a distinguished Fellow of the Royal Society,
Professor Tyndall, that musicians owe the delightful


lectures on Sound, delivered at the Royal Institution
and another distinguished Fellow of the Royal
Society, who is also a Musical Graduate of Oxford,
and the author of a most valuable book on “ The
Philosophy of Music ” (I refer to Dr. Pole), has ren-
dered a special service to the musical world by
advising and guiding the authorities of the University
of London in the establishment of examinations for
their valuable Degrees in Music.
In these various ways the Royal Society and its
Fellows have done continuous and excellent work for
the cause of musical science. May we not credit our
own College with at least a little reflected glory? The
child has become renowned —let us not forget the
mother who nursed it !
I have commented upon the fact that for the first
century of the existence of the College, the Professors
of Music, with the exception of Dr. Bull, seem to have
been unmusical men ; but it is noticeable that during
the past century the Professors have been musical
men, and men who in one way or another have shown
musical ability of no mean order.
Aylward, appointed Professor in 1771, was one of
the conductors of the Handel Festival in Westminster
Abbey in 1784. Stevens, appointed in 1801, held an
honourable position as a glee writer. Certainly we
do not know much about their work as Lecturers;
possibly they gave none, and this would have been no


exception to the custom of the time. The same
laxity obtained at Oxford and Cambridge. Professor
Taylor states that Dr. Crotch, who was Oxford Pro-
fessor when Taylor was appointed to Gresham College,
had not lectured in that University for twenty-five
years ; and that he had personally known three Cam-
bridge musical professors, not one of whom ever
delivered a musical lecture at the University. You
will agree with me that the distinguished men who
now fill the chairs of music at these two Universities
are not likely to take such a view of their responsibilities,
Edward Taylor, who was appointed in 1837, was
an excellent lecturer and conductor, and did much to
bring Spohr to the notice of the English public. I
may say, in passing, that I have often heard my pre-
decessor at the Abbey, Mr. Turk, speak of the
admirable lectures Professor Taylor delivered, and I
well remember the delight with which Mr. Turk
referred to one of the lectures, in which he assisted
Professor Taylor by playing the illustrations. Ido
not know the subject of the lecture, but one illustra-
tion was the well-known chant in E Flat, composed
by Lord Mornington, the father of the Duke of
Wellington. This nobleman was thought a good deal
of as an amateur musician, and Thackeray makes an
amusing allusion to him in one of the ballads of
Policeman X, when, speaking of the Iron Duke’s
•thoughts on his birthday, he writes ;


His father praps he sees,
Most musicle of lords,
A playing maddrigles and glees
Upon the Arpsichords.
However, to go back to Professor Taylor’s lecture,
Mr. Turle took a humorous view of his duty, and
played the chant as it was wont to be played by one
of his predecessors at the abbey. I wish I could play
it for your edification as Mr. Turle played it to me !
It abounded in trills and other grace notes, with a
most surprising passage of semiquavers for the left
hand, during the holding of the last recitation note.
Mr. Turle told me the effect on the audience, and, he
added with a touch of sly humour, on the lecturer,
too, was immense, and there was a vociferous encore 1
I fear the art of that style of chant playing is lost —
at any rate I dare not attempt it !
The name and acquirements of my immediate pre-
decessor in the Chair are as familiar to you as they
are to myself; but you may not perhaps remember
that to his efforts we owe the fust performance in this
country of some of Berlioz’s important orchestral
works at the netv Philharmonic Society, of which he
was the founder. He also established in the London
Academy of Music one of the first of the modern
numerous schools of music, under private direction,
to which allusion has already been made. I think we
may claim that for the past hundred years the holders
of the Chair of Music in this college have done their


part, either here, or in their public life, as musicians,
to promote the love and cultivation of the art which
they professed.
We must remember that neither Aylward, Stevens,
nor in the early years of his professorship, Edward
Taylor, possessed the advantage of this admirable
theatre in which to lecture. The grand old house,
left by Sir Thomas Gresham, had, alas ! been pulled
down in 1767 to make room for an Excise office, and
a small room in the Royal Exchange was all that
remained to which the name of Gresham College
could, by any stretch of imagination, be given.
Happily, in 1843, this building, with its excellent
theatre and convenient library was erected, and
Gresham College had once more a “ local habitation ”
as well as “ a name.”
It may interest you to know that both Mr. Goss and
Mr. Turle assisted at the musical performance given
at the opening of this building. Of the one I have
the honour to be a pupil, and of the other, his suc-
cessor at the Abbey.
And now you will perhaps be thinking we have
heard much of what Gresham College and its Pro-
fessors have done in the past; what are the intentions
of the new Professor of Music with regard to the
future ? If these be your thoughts, as they well may
be, you will, I trust, bear with me while I venture to
place before you the course I propose to adopt.


My aim will be to make the lectures valuable to
all sections of the musical world of London —that
is, if any number of the musical world of London will
honour me by attending,—to the amateur, who loves
music and is interested in its historical and antiquarian,
rather than its technical side ; and also to the student,
who strives to master its technicalities. I believe
that it will be possible to find, and to treat subjects
suitable to both these sections. Indeed, the former of
the two has been well cared for, both here and else-
where. lam not sure that the student, who desires
an insight into the more abstruse technicalities of the
art, has been equally well treated.
I am aware that a Professorial lecture is not a
Class lesson, nor should I like to undertake a class of
the dimensions of my present audience. But still I
think it will be possible for me to treat some important
subjects of musical form and construction in a manner
which, while not too minute, may yet give an audience
of well prepared students some valuable help in their
work. You will observe, I say, “well prepared
“ students, ’’—this is an important reservation, but
surely not an utopian one. Fifty years ago per-
haps no such audience could have been got together.
The state of musical education in this country was
then very different from our own time. I think it
will interest you, and it is certainly very appropriate
to the point I am now considering, if I read you one or


two paragraphs from the inaugural lecture of Pro-
fessor Taylor delivered in 1838. You will see how
he recoils from the task of conveying technical in-
struction, on the ground that, in order to be useful,
“a lecturer must speak so as to be understood.” But
I will read you the paragraphs : ‘‘ If we regard music
“ theoretically, its laws will be found to stretch into
“ the profoundest depth of mathematical science, and
“ to require for their development and elucidation
“ the attainments of the accomplished geometrician ;
“ the lightest and most graceful combinations of
“ sound, as well as the gravest and most solemn,
“ being based on the same unchanging laws and the
“ same immutable principles. Into these the practical
“ musician seldom feds it necessary to enquire ; he takes
“ them as so many undisputed truths, and, starting
“ in his pursuit where the mathematician leaves it,
“ applies the principles, of which he soon experi-
“ mentally finds the correctness, to the arrangement of
“ musical sounds under the two great divisions of
“ melody and harmony.
“ Into this extensive field of mathematical science
“ it is no part of ray duty, and certainly it is not my
“ intention to enter, belonging as it does to the de-
“ partment of my learned colleague the Professor of
“ Geometry, rather than to that of music.
“Nor do I think a lecture-room the fittest place to
“ impart or to acquire instruction in the science of
“ practical harmony. In order to be useful, a lecturer
“ must speak so as to be understood ; he must have
“ regard to the character, the acquirements, the ex-
“ pectations of his hearers, he must be careful to
“ adopt language which will not be an unknown
“ tongue to a mixed audience, and not obscure his
“ addresses by what, to many, would be a mere jargon
“of technicalities.”


“ The extensive field of mathematical science,”'
into which Professor’Taylor would not enter, has been
explored, and “ the rough places made plain ” to the
ordinary well-read musician by Helmholtz and Tyndall,
not to mention many others of eminence; and there
are few musicians who would like to admit that these
are subjects into which they “seldom feel it necessary
to enquire.” In all branches of musical study, both
theoretical and practical, we have made great ad-
vances ; while musical literature is now enriched by
the labours of men eminent for wide culture and
general attainments. Fifty years ago the Royal
Academy, with its limited number of pupils, was the
only school of music ; now we have the important
additions of the Royal College and Guildhall School,
besides the others to which I have before alluded.
Surely, among the many students yearly passing,
through one or other of these important schools, I
may with confidence look for an attentive and well
prepared audience, which will follow with intelligence
and interest details of musical composition or musical
form, and to whom I may address language that will
not be “an unknown tongue.” Again I cannot but
think that the word “ theoretique,” which is used in
the ordinances drawn up by the Gresham Committee
in 1597 to describe the character of the earlier part
of the music lecture, points to the desire that the
science of music, and not merely its historical and


antiquarian aspects, should be treated. The latter
branches are readily acquired from books. My ex-
perience shows me that the science (by which I do not
mean mere chord construction, but the power and
method of analysing a composition as to its form, its
modulation, its chief effects, its weakness and its
strength), is not easily learned from books. I hope
therefore, that in this direction at least, the Gresham
lectures may be made useful to musical students.
I may be pardoned if for one moment I ven-
ture to mention an experience of my own, which
encourages me to undertake with confidence this
branch of work in my lectures. During the time I
was organist of Manchester Cathedral I was appointed
lecturer on harmony and composition to evening
classes at Owen’s College—now perhaps better known
as Victoria University. It was an experiment in the
College,and so far as / was concerned,it was also an ex-
periment. I had never attended even a Class lesson
(in music), and was therefore as complete a novice in
the Art of speaking to a collective body of students as
was the most youthful member of that class. We be-
gan with a few students —six or eight—but I soon found
that these, being in earnest, followed my observations
and illustrations quite as readily as a single pupil in
my own study would have done. The class increased
in numbers, and the subjects we discussed advanced
in character and difficulty.


I will not weary you with details, it will be sufficient
to say that on my appointment to the Abbey, I left
a class of about seventy members, many of whom
had attended the lectures for a considerable time ;
within the last few years I have had the gratifi-
cation of seeing one, who was among the six or
eight beginners, himself appointed Professor of Music
in an important Colonial University.
This, then is what I propose. On one evening of
each Course of Lectures there shall be taken some
prominent Musical Form—it may be the Fugue—the
Sonata — the Symphony —or such a subject as Instru-
mentation, and by the aid of musical illustrations, I
will endeavour to give the well prepared student a
reminiscence of his past studies, or an introduction
into fields and pastures new. By this means will be
made provisions for one very important section
of my constituency—the student —and I may have
perhaps the pleasure of seeing around me some
of those I have in past times helped to start in
their musical career. You will gather from this pro-
posal that it is not contemplated that the lectures of
one term shall be all devoted to one subject. I can-
not hope to attract the same audience for four consecu-
tive evenings. If this were a music school and you
were under discipline, we might look forward to such
a possibility ; but desiring as I do to make the lec-
tures useful to every section of the musical world, I


cannot but think that as a rule, (although to this
it may be found necessary to make occasional excep-
tion) each lecture should be complete in itself, and
the lectures of each term should be diversified, rather
than founded upon one division of our art. Keep-
ing this purpose in view I purpose to-morrow to
devote the time at our disposal to a subject,
■which will, I think interest all alike —whether they
be amateur lovers of music, or earnest and well-
grounded students —It is to follow the footsteps of
* Mozart , as a Teacher." I have peculiar and unique
facilities for doing this, for there are in my posses-
sion the original MSS. of the exercises and composi-
tions worked by Mozart’s pupil Attwood, during two
years of study in Vienna, and corrected by the master.
The course of study prescribed by such a master,
and followed by so distinguished a pupil, cannot fail
to be of supreme interest to all: while the illustra-
tions will introduce you to some specimens of Mozart’s
genius which the world at large has not yet heard.
In this lecture we shall see that besides the rudi-
ments of harmony, Mozart took his pupil through a
•course —and a long course —of strict counterpoint ; a
subject which I may remark in passing some would
omit from the curriculum of musical education at the
present day. For my own part I am glad of this
opportunity of saying that I honestly believe such a
proceeding would be exceedingly detrimental to the


best interests of musical students. If counterpoint
be well taught, and diligently studied, it never fails
to interest a pupil and to improve the texture of his
•compositions. These manuscripts show clearly what
Mozart thought of it, even if we had not the evidence
of his own contrapuntal masterpieces; we also know that
Beethoven continued to write contrapuntal exercises
even after his first six symphonies had appeared, and
that Schubert actually comtemplated taking lessons in
counterpoint within three weeks of his death ! Again,
to come nearer home, does anyone suppose that the
most popular English composer of our own day owes
his remarkable success in Comic Opera only to his
facility for writing taking melodies and piquant instru-
mentation ? The most superficial writer of French
Opera bouffe can do these things. Is it not due
to the fact that this composer’s contrapuntal know-
ledge is turned to admirable account, even in his
lightest works ? —“ Ars celare Artem ” : but none the
less it is there.
Before going to Mozart, Attwood studied at Naples
for about two years, working with Latilla, who in his
youth had been a friend' —possibly a pupil, of Pergolesi.
It is somewhat remarkable that Attwood, who was
thus in a manner connected with Pergolesi, became a
pupil of Mozart, and was the intimate friend of Men-
delssohn. In connection with Attwood’s contrapuntal
■studies I shall be able to let you hear some delightful


little fugues written in Mozart’s hand, evidently as ex-
amples for Attwood to imitate. After this department
of work has been explored, we shall follow Attwood’s
footsteps as he was instructed by Mozart in writing
variations on an air, and minuets for strings. There are
some by Attwood —re-written by Mozart, which I hope
also to have performed.
These illustrations, and the illustrations to the other
lectures of this course, I am very happy to be able to
promise, by the kindness of the Gresham Committee.
Their desire is that my work may interest as well as
instruct, and to this end they have generously author-
ized me to obtain all necessary professional aid.
On Thursday I propose to make my first attempt to
treat a somewhat technical subject before an audience
which, I hope, may include a good many students.
I have selected for consideration “ The Development
of Fugue.” This style of lecture is an experiment,
and a move somewhat in the direction so strongly
denounced as unsuitable and impossible by Professor
Taylor ; but that was fifty years ago. “ Many things
have happened since then,” and I have already given
you some reasons which encourage me to adopt this
course. I cannot go into very minute details, or in one
hour entirely exhaust such a subject as Fugue ; but it is
possible some may be induced to look upon it with
the increased interest which knowledge begets.
Schumann mentions an acquaintance of his “ who


“ used to describe a fugue as a piece of music in
“ which each part runs away from the others, and the
“ hearer from them all,” and accordingly, he goes on
to say, “ whenever a fugue appeared in the pro-
“ gramme he always began to talk and grumble. In
“ fact, he knew little or nothing about the matter, and
“ was so far like the fox in the fable, for he could not
“ make a fugue himself, though in his heart he dread-
" fully wanted to.”
I think this story exactly describes the attitude of
the ignorant towards the subject chosen for the
lecture on Thursday. I may take this opportunity
of calling your attention to the invitation in the
syllabus of the lecture, viz., that you will kindly bring
with you for reference the first book of Bach’s 48
Preludes and Fugues.
In the last lecture of this course, on Friday, No-
vember 21st, there are two names which must be
prominent. It will be the anniversary of the death of
Henry Purcell, and by a singular coincidence, it is
also the anniversary of the death of our founder, Sir
Thomas Gresham. The latter died on November
2 1st, 1579 —Henry Purcell on November 21st, 1695.
Apart from the admiration we all must have for this
great genius, I feel that one who has the honour of
occupying his seat at Westminster Abbey will
readily be pardoned if he takes such an opportunity
of bringing the name of Purcell before a musical
audience. I do not propose, however, on this
occasion to treat of his life. That is a subject which


Mr. Cummings has enabled all to study, in the
admirable “ Life of Purcell ” which he has pub-
lished. Nor shall I treat of his vocal music, as much of
this, thanks to our cathedrals, has been familiar to
many of us from our childhood. May the day be far
distant when in them the strains of Henry Purcell
cease to be heard !
There let the pealing organ blow
To the full-voiced quire below,
In service high, and anthems clear,
As may with sweetness, through mine ear,
Dissolve me into extacies,
And bring all Heaven before mine eyes.
It is to Purcell’s instrumental music I shall devote
next Friday’s lecture, or rather to the music of a
period from the time of Sir Thos. Gresham to that of
Purcell. It will be within the recollection of some of
my audience that I chose a somewhat similar subject for
my probationary discourse. This dealt with the change
of style in the vocal music of the 17th century, the
difference, that is, between the music of Orlando
Gibbons and Purcell—the change from the contra-
puntal, to the harmonic style of writing. In the com-
ing lecture I shall be able to illustrate not only a
change of style in the music, but in the character of
the instruments employed. This period saw the violin
take the place of the viol, and the old “ Phantasies ”
and “ Divisions ” of Simpson, Gibbons and others, de-
veloping into the Sonatas of Jenkins and Purcell.


I shall be assisted by my friend and former pupil
Mr. Dolmetsch, by whose aid, together with that of
some of his pupils, we shall have the rare opportunity
of listening to this early chamber music, performed
upon the now practically obsolete instruments for
which it was written, the viols. Messrs. Broadwood
have also most kindly lent me a harpsichord for the
same occasion.
Such are my plans for the fulfilment of the duties
appertaining to this office. lam fully conscious of
the responsibility incurred in accepting this Chair
of Music, and if I do not undertake its duties, as
the French Minister undertook a war, “ with a light
heart,” at any rate I have, I hope, all necessary
courage. It is also cheering to feel assured that the
value of the musical department of the Gresham
Foundation is thoroughly appreciated by the eminent
citizens who form its governing body. In an address
“ About Music ” delivered by Sir Arthur Sullivan,
as President of the Birmingham and Midland Institute
in 1888, he animadverts upon the fact that “at any
great meeting on the subject of Music, —Archbishops,,
Judges, Politicians, Financiers, each one who rises to
speak will deprecate any knowledge of music with a
smug satisfaction ; like a man disowning poor rela-
tions.” Sir Arthur didnotspecially mention members of
Municipal Corporations, or City Companies, and very
possibly the omission was significant. The knowledge


of music may not be general among the bodies to
which I allude, (though I cannot forget that it was a
musically gifted Lord Mayor from whom I had the
honour to receive the announcement of my appoint-
ment), but the love of it is shown in the steps they
have taken for its encouragement. The sad days
which saw a venerable and historical mansion, which
had been endowed and left by its possessor as an
abode of learning, pulled down to make room for an
excise office, are happily past. On the contrary, we
see valuable sites selected, and thousands of pounds
spent by municipal and other bodies not only on
technical schools, but on Musical Colleges.
The City Companies contributed largely in the form
of scholarships to the National Training School for
Music, the pioneer of the flourishing Royal College;
and we have seen quite recently—and you will forgive
me for saying, at my own suggestion —the Worshipful
Company of Musicians awarding for the first time in
its history a Medal of Honour to the most distin-
guished pupil of our oldest Music School. With such
recognition and encouragement we musicians may
hold up our heads, and the Gresham Professor of
Music need not feel towards his learned and
eminent brother professors of this College in the
position of a poor relation. No ! Luther, whom I
have before quoted, said, “ Music is a beautiful and
“ glorious gift of God, and stands next to Theology,"


and in a touching letter written late in life :
“ There is no doubt that in the heart that can be
“ touched by music many germs of the purest virtues
“ exist; and those on whom music has no effect, and
“ who are left cold, seem to me like blocks and stones.
“ It is to evil spirits that music is hateful and unbear-
“ able. I am strongly persuaded, and I say boldly,
“ that after theology there is no art that can be
“ placed on a level with music ; for, besides theology,
“ music is the only art capable of affording peace and
“ joy of the heart like that induced by the study of
“ the science of Divinity. A proof of this is that the
“ devil, the originator of sorrowful anxieties and
“ restless troubles, flees before the sound of music
“ almost as much as he does before the Word of God.
“ This is why the prophets preferred music before all
“ the other arts, rejecting geometry, arithmetic, and
“astronomy in its favour, connecting music and
“ theology in the closest manner, and proclaiming the
“ Word in Psalms and hymns.
“ But why praise I music now ? Why do I describe,
“■ or rather disfigure, so great a thing on such a scrap
“of paper? But my heart, which is full to over-
“ flowing, has often been solaced and refreshed by
“ music when sick and weary.”
I have quoted Luther’s opinion of the relative posi-
tion to be accorded to some of the subjects for which
lectures are provided here. While refusing the posi-
tion of a “ poor relation,” I will not be so bold as
Luther, and will claim for the subject of Music in
this College nothing more than equality. May
it be my good fortune to make the Gresham
Music Lectures, if possible, not less valuable tha


they have been in times past, and may the future
■continue to afford fresh opportunities and increasing
influence for Sir Thomas Gresham’s ancient founda-
tion.
Bowden, Hudson & Co., Printers, 23, Red Lioa Street, Holbein, W.C.
