

A
LETTER
TO
FRANCIS PLOWDEN, ESQ
CONVEYANCER,
OF THE
MIDDLE TEMPLE.
On his Work
ENTITLED
JURA ANGLORUM.
BY
A ROMAN CATHOLIC CLERGYMAN.
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget.
VIRG. IENEID. Lib. 2.
Printed for J. P. COGHLAN, No. 37, Duke-dteet, Grosvenor
Square, and fold by Messrs J. DEBRETT, Piccadilly, ROBIN-
SONS, Pater-noster-Row, BOOKER, Bond-street,
KEATING, Warwick-street, LEWIS,
Russel-streer, Lo ndon ;
and P. WOGAN
Dublin.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.




A
LETTER, &c.
S I R,
X AM not infenfible of the critical fituation, in
which I muft hand before the public, when I of-
fer my remarks upon an author of fuch fuperior
abilities as yourfelf, and undertake the cenfuring
of a work, which from the applaufe it firft met
with feemed to be placed out of the reach of cen-
fure. You may fay what few writers in yourfitu-
ation can, that your bold, almoft novel produc-
tion upon a fubjeCt ever delicate to Englilh ears,
a fyltem of religious policy had for the greateft
part of a year been before the public, and not a
man as far as I heard, attempted to hate his ob-
jections to it. The caufe in which you engaged
was indeed great and generous, the fupport of an
eftablilhed government, under which millions
deem themfelves happy to live: and the happi-
nefs of millions thould never become the objeCt
A 2 eithey


either of my envy or my cenfure, if the argument?
upon which you fupport your caufe were always
proportioned in accuracy to the purity of inten-
tion, with which you feem to write.
The moil learned men however are liable to mis-
takes ; and I am aftoniflied to fee things in you,
which I am perfuaded, if you had followed the
firft impreffions of your own natural reflections
never would have efcaped your pen. But you
were engaged in embarrafling circumftances : you
had to conciliate not only the minds but the lan-
guage of different parties, that flood in oppofltion
to one another ; and glorious you thought would
be the achievement, if you could make men,
whofe principles never formed to coalefcc
in one common fyftem feem to think and fpeak
the fame thing. To this therefore rather than
any inaccuracy of your own judgment I attribute
the errors, into which you have fallen : and if I
undertake to blame thofe errors, at the fame time
I heartily congratulate yourfelf and all Englifh-
men for the happy effeCt:, which your work*had
in reprefling the furious and enthufiaflic Spirit of
reformation, which at the time you wrote feemed
to portend alrnoft inevitable deflruaion to our
country.
It,


It is not therefore your fupport of an efe
hlilhed government in what it is authorized to-
maintain, that I blame or regret; but the means
you have ufed to fupport it, and the effential
facrihces, wdiich you have made of your own and
others unalienable rights in inhancing the caufe
you undertook to defend.
Thro’ what fatality it happens I will not pre-
tend to determine, but I have often feen men of
great abilities and uprightnefs of heart abandon to
the capricious humour of the day interefts which
they molt cordially efpoufed. Ingratitude to tried
friends you know was not one of the fmalleft
charafieriftical fins of the houfe of Stuart, and
probably among many other indifcretions did not
contribute the leaf: to that revolution in govern-
ment and political principles, which took place
towards the end of the laft century. But the
downfall of that family hands I think an awful'
monument to future ages to remind men, that the
wife ft policy is always a fteady and prudent fup-
port of what is right; fince no condefcenftons
can fave thofe, whom party has determined to
deftroy.
I have obferved with regret in the contefts,
which have employed the pens of Englifti Roman
catholic


catholic gentlemen during thefe laft fix years*
that there is fcarce a writer who has not occafio-
naljy endeavoured to wind himfelf into favor with
the public by making conceffions againft himfelf
and calling blame on bis own party or his own
principles, which I am fure neither one nor the
other of them deferred. Hence all the heats and
ammofities of different fchools have been revived
among them: in reading the work of an author
not fo much the arguments of the writer have
been confidered, as the name of the univerflty or
college where he received his education: and
many be it faid to their fhame, have thought that
there was no other method of exculpating them-
felves and their religion from the afperfions thrown
out againft them, than by inveighing againft the
memory of their venerable forefathers and fpiritual
leaders of ancient days with more bitternefs, than
would fuit the phlegmatic reflections of a reform-
ing philofopker of the prefent times..
The public remembers with pleafure and grati-
tude, with what coolnefs and addrefs you ftept
forth to Hem the torrent of this ftrange infatua-
tion ; for I can call it by no other name. When
favour was intended to catholics by the rulers of
the Hate, fyftems were devifed and fet forth by
catholics themfelves, that portended nothing but
ruin


ruin and deftru&ion to their own caufe. But to
you the honour fell of firft developing in the eyes
of the public the pernicious tendency of thofe ill-
devifed fyftems, and of evincing to the world,
that to become dutiful fubjefcls of the ftate and
friendly members of fociety, it was no ways nece£
fary to renounce a fingle atom of the religious and
fpiritual obedience, which with other members
of your body you believed to be due to the fpiri-
tual leaders and heads of your church. In your
cafe fiated you put a curb upon that fanaticifm,
and you convinced the world that by dint of prin-
ciple and good fenfe you were invariably attached
to the pure religion of your anceftors, which you
&w on that occafion fo ftiamefully traduced by
the children of your own church. If therefore
afterwards I find, or if it appears to me, that you
have unwarily oppofed, and even ftruck a deadly
blow to the vitals of that church, which you
before revered and loved, I can only liken you in
jour religious fentiments to thofe zealous reform-
ers of their country, who whilfl they aim at intro-
ducing imaginary perfections into its conftitution,
deprive it of the native vigour and ftrength, by
which alone it can fubfift. The firft of your prin-
ciples, which appears to me blameable is the
pretended right you attempt to eftablifh in man to
chufe his own religion.
choice


CHOICE OF RELIGION.
iCJontroverfies it is obferved generally arife from
contending parties not understanding one another
' noF diflin&ly defining the objeft, that is at iffu
between them In difctnling your pretender
right of man to chufe his religion, I can onh
allure you, that my earned .defire is clearly to
comprehend your meanings, and I truft that
With of being underftood by you is not lefs con,
genial to tnc upnghtnefs of your mind.
I mull however premiie one observation. There
is a rule adopted among Roman catholics in all
religious cantroverfies, from which neither of us
:an pretend to appeal. The church, to which
xe both belong, challenges to herfelf a right not
>nly to pronounce on the truth or falfliood of
eligious dockings in general, but alfo to deter-
mine whether the words, in which her children
xprefs themfelves upon a religious fubjecl in
beir plain and natural fignification contain fuch
odtrines or not. You may either in print or
siting make ufe of words importing error and
ilfliood, and loudly difavow in the face of the
■orld fuch error and falfliood when objected to
)u, and yet may be juflly condemned by the
lurch for broaching error and falfliood in your
orks.


It is foreign to my prefent purpofe to difcufs
the queftion, whether the church in her primitive
initiation was actually endowed by her divine
founder with this high prerogative or not. It
fuffices that the right is generally acknowledged
by all Roman catholic canonifts and theologians:
and I prefume, that you and I, who avowedly
profefs our belief of an actually exilting catholic
church rendered divinely infallible by the affift-
ance of the Holy Gholt, would be ftrangely per-
plexed to explain the ufe of fuch an extraordinary
privilege, if it did not extend to the objefts I
mention. What would it avail the heads of any
religious fociety to claim to themfelves a right ot
pronouncing upon religious doctrines, if they
were not capacitated to point out to the members
of their body where thofe doftrines are found,
and in what words they are exprelfed? But on
this fubjea there is no controverfy fubfiftmg
between us: it is a point agreed upon among all
catholics.
The only debate therefore in examining your
‘Jura Anglorum concerning the natural right of
man to chufe his religion is, whether any words
you make ufe of in their natural and oovious
fignilication contain do£trines contrary to and
difagreeing with *he dd£rines of the Roman
B cadyd’'".


catholic church. This appears to me to be the
cafe; but if in fettling the point you find me at
any time mifquoting the words themfelves of your
text, I beg beforehand the favour of being re-
minded of my erroras nothing can be more
ungenerous than to attribute to an author,
I do not fay, what he never meant, but
words which were never uttered by him. The
meaning of words is ftri£tly within the department
of the fpiritual jurifdi£tion of the church, and in
examining the aflertions of a Roman catholic
writer upon any religious fubjeft I cannot give up
the guidance of a rule, which the Roman catho-
lic church herfelf has eftablifhed.
As it is however always defirable to abridge the
page of controverfy, when it can be done, let us,
if poffible agree on the meaning of our own words
before we refer the iffue of our debate to the
authority of that church, which has a right to
pronounce.—By choice in the philofophical fenfe
of the word I ever have and do underftand a free
and uncontrouled adoption of any objeft propofed
to the rational mind of man, or per contra, a free
and uncontrouled reje&ion of the fame. The
fpontaneous actions of brute animals are not to
be regarded as an effeft of choice ; becaufe what-
ever be the obje&s, that allure them, they are
v not


Ipropofed to free agents, nor adopted by a
ional mind, which brute animals have not.
t choice and * right of chufing are very different
ngs, tho’ you coufound the two together;
lich feems to be one of the principal fources o
ur miftakes.—Befides the exercife of that free
d rational power of man, which I have juft
mtioncd, in order to enjoy a right of chufing, it
neceffarv that fuch free power Ihould be dif-
ayed only on thofe objefts, which are made
lowable to man according to the natural and
ligious obligations, which God has impofed
pon him. For it is in no manner conceiveable,
lat a dependent creature in any poffible circum-
ances fliould have a right to do what God forbids
im to do, or a right to omit what God commands
im to do. -There cannot be a natural right to
hufe what the law of nature itfelf ftridtly forbids
o be chofen ; but in the line of morality we know
hat the law of nature and the law of revelation
jerfe&ly coincide. To the voice of reafon, which
proclaims the primitive dictates of nature, revela-
tion adds the audible voice of God in confirmation
of what nature teaches, and on the other hand
nature and reafon always demand the molt im-
plicit obedience to be paid to every known reve-
lation. Whence it follows that for man to enjoy
a natural right to chufe his religion, fuch right
B 2 muft


muft be admitted or at leaft not difapproved of by
religion itfelf, without which nature can never give
its fan&ion to it.
But to afcertain the plain and natural, and
confequently the religious fenfe of the words
choice and a right of chufmg, upon which the iffue
of our controverfy depends, let us examine the
prerogatives, which God beftowed, and the obli-
gations, which he impofed upon man, both in his
firft creation and afterwards. Before the fin of
Adam the fcripture tells us that the Lord took man ,
end put him into the paradife of pleafure to drefs it ,
and to keep it * Paradife therefore we may fay
was Adam’s property, his eftate, his domain;
it was the portion of this terraqueous globe,
which he might cultivate himfelf, and tranfmit
to his pofterity with what changes and improve-
ments he fhould think proper, and with a free
and uncontrouled enjoyment of all the fruits of
the land both for himfelf and them, excepting
one particular, which God referved to himfelf.
jdnd he commanded him faying * of every tree of para~
dife thou fhalt eat ; hnt of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil thou fhalt not eat: for in what day foever
thou fhalt eat of it , thou fhalt die the death:f The
threat mentioned in thefe words and the fub-
fequent
f Gen, 2,15.
t Ibid, 16. 17,


fequent tranfgreffion of Adam in eating tne
forbidden fruit, are undeniable proofs, that in
the fil'd formation of man God gave him a free
and uncontrouled power fuch as I defcribed above,
of chufing different objedls, of eating of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, or of forbearing from it,
as he pleafed. For an all-wife being would not
have threatened a rational creature with death as
a punifhment intailed on the tranfgreffion of his
command, if he had not left that rational creature
the free and uncontrouled power of tranfgreffmg
or not. Nor could Adam have incurred the threa-
tened penalty, as he adhially did, if he had been
bereft of a free and uncontrouled power of
doing the thing, to which the penalty was
annexed.
An entire freedom therefore of tranfgreffing
the commandment of his Creator, if he chofe fo
to do, was unqueffionably enjoyed by our firff
parent in paradife: which for clearnefs fake, I
(hall call the natural freedom of man to diflinguifh
it from the right of chufing , of which you fpealc,
and which it feems you w T ould maintain as the
grand charter of human liberty, tho’ it certainly
is not fuch. A natural freedom is requifite for
every human action, for which man can be re-
warded or puniihed : neither good can be done
, without


"without It, nor evil perpetrated; and it is as
effential to a meritorious choice of religion as it is
to every other good deed.
After the fin of our hr ft parents, we find another
inftance in holy writ of this fame natural freedom
of man. In the 30th of Deuteronomy the Al-
mighty by the mouth of his fervant Mofes accofted
the Jews in the following words.* I call Heaven
and Earth to witnefs this day, that I have fet
before you life and death, hlejfing and curfing . Choofe
therefore life , that both thou and thy feed may
hve. And that thou mayefl love the Lord thy God ,
and obey his voice, and adhere to him , &c.—Either
member, theretore, of thefe two oppolites was
certainly placed within the free power or choice
of the Jews.
But witn this natural freedom of chufinsr diffe-
rent and even contrary objeffs, will any one pre-
tend to fay, that God gave man a right to chufe
which of the two oppofites he pleafed? Adam
could not in any natural acceptance of human
words be faid to have a 7ight to do what was
to intail a feries of endlefs miferies upon himfelf
and all his pofterity; and vice verfa, if he had
a right to do the aftion forbidden him by God,
the
* Deut. 30, 13. sc*


the Almighty, who ever refpeeLs, and everr aven-
ges the rights of his meaneft creatures, could not
cither in his mercy or juftice have chadded
the tranfgreffion of his command in the fevere
manner he did. And in like manner when after
the fm of Adam life and death, bleffing and cnrfir,v
were propofed to the fame Ifraelites, it is proper
and natural to fay, that they had a power to
chufe either of the two objects, which they liked
but it never can be aborted in any propriety of
human language, that they had a right to ruin
and draw malediction on themfelves. Choice ,
therefore and a right of chafing are, as I have proved
very different things.
But as I faid above you confound tire two to-
gether. After aborting in clear terms* that
an unrefir dined freedom of thought, that all intel-
lectual rights or rights of the mind, and confequently
that the right of religion is retained by the individual,
independently of the focicty, of which he is a member ,
and after repeating and eftablifiing the fame.
doCtrine over and over again thro’ many pages of
your work, you come at length to the great
argument, upon which you think this doctrine
is grounded. “ When I fpeak of the adoption
“ of religion,” you fay, “ either by one or more
“ individuals
* Jura Angl. pag. 23.


*• individuals, I with ever to' be underftood to
£C fpeak of it, as of the free act of a free agent.
“ True it is, that our blcffed Saviour came upon
<£ earth to eftablifli the chriftian religion, and his
“ injunction to mankind to fubmit to and adopt
<c it is mandatory and unexceptionable; but then
<l it is equally true, that the aft of fubmiffion to,
£t and adoption of it, mult neceflarily be the free
44 AND VOLUNTARY ACT OF THE INDIVIDUAL;”*
that is, free and voluntary not only in virtue of the
natural freedom of man, as I fignified above, but
stlfo of the natural right, which he is fnppofed to
have to chufe his religion. Unlefs this be the
meaning of your words, your argument has no
reference to what had been faid before ; it is en-
tirely irrelevant, and proves not in the leaf! the
principle you pretended to eftablifta, and which
you exprefs in Mr. Payne’s own words, viz. that
“ amongft the natural rights, which man retains,
“ are all the .intellectual rights or rights of the
<c mind: confequently religion is one of thefe
“ rights.”f But the point to be examined is
whether this aflertion is conformable to the tenets
of the catholic religion or not. You prefume it
is; otherwife under the folemn profeffion, which
you have more than once made in the eyes of
your country of adhering invariably to the primi -
tive
* Jura Angl, pag. 85.
f Ibid. Bl*


faith of your anceftors, you never would have
adopted fuch language. I —tho’ avowedly your
inferior in other refpe6ts, yet being more inured
by my profeffion and habits of ftudy to the lan-
guage and fentiments of the catholic church, am
perfuaded, that your affertion runs counter to the
tenets of the catholic belief, and therefore that it
ought not to pafs unamended in a catholic writer,
who makes orthodoxy and found do&rine the firft
quality of the charafter he bears. When a pri-
vate individual like myfelf makes fo bold an affer-
tion, the world may claim a right to be informed
of the reafons, on which that affertion is grounded,
and I fliall endeavour to fatisfy the world and
yourfelf.
Religion then in the common acceptance of the
word I prefume means nothing more and nothing
lefs, than a particular mode of worffiiping the
Deity by an inward belief and outward profeffion
of certain fpeculative and practical truths either
actually revealed, or fuppofed to be revealed by
God. I give this latitude to the expreffion to
make room for the quoftion :• for if in its. ftridter
and more proper ffgnification religion is taken
for a belief of the actual revelations, which God
has made, and which are neceffarily one and
invariable, it is plain there can be no right nor
C even


even a poffibility of chufing different and oppofite
religions, where different religions have not a
poffibility of exifting. The unity and identity of
the divine revelations at once decides the queftion
againft you, and our debate is at an end. —But
religion, you fay, is the free and ’voluntary aft of
the individual , and on this freedom you ground a
right in man to chufe what religion he pleafes:
which freedom and right I fhall therefore ex-
amine.
I readily grant that religion is free in the
fenfe above mentioned: —becaufe it pleafed the
divine wifdom in making known the revelations
of chriftianity to us, fo to temper the certainty of
its revelations with the darknefs and impenetra-
bility of the revealed articles themfelves, as to
leave it within the free and uncontrouled power
of the human mind to affent to fuch articles or
not. If we were compelled by an irrefiftible
evidence difcovered in the revealed objefts them-
felves to give our affent to them, as we often are
in natural things, there would be no freedom,
and confequently no merit in an aft of faith ;as
our theologians univerfally teach. No man af-
fumes to himfelf a merit for agreeing, that a whole
is greater than one of its parts, or that two even
numbers added together do not form an odd one;
becaufe


becaufe the evidence of internal truth in thcle
occafions can admit of no diffent.—But it is not
fo in regard to the revealed articles of religion.
Tho’ it is abfolutely requifite, as our church
teaches, that the mind of man fhould be poffeffed
of a full and compleat certainty of the revelations
having been made before it can give tl fuper natural
and faving afent* to the revealed doftrines of chrif-
tianity, yet the articles themfelves are obfcure
and inevident to the mind of the fame man: a
natural darknefs, which envelopes them like an
impenetrable cloud, takes away the compelling
and irrefiftible force of demonftrative evidence ;
we do not affent to them for the knowledge we
have of their own internal truth, as in the fore-
going examples, but for the authority of him,
who afferts them to be true, tho’ we do not com-
prehend them to be fo. Now the combination of
thefe and other circumftances leaves it, I fay, free
to the mind of man to agree or not to the revealed
articles of the chriftian religion. Religion there-
fore in the fenfe 1 have explained is unquefhon-
ably free.
But there is a wide difference, as I before fig-
nified between freely affenting to a revealed arti-
C 2 c,e
* Affenfus fidei fupernaturalis et mills ad Talutem flat cum notitia
folum probabili revelationis, imo cum formidine, qua quis formi at,
ne non fit locutus Deus. Prop. Si. inter damnatas ab Innoe. x».


cle, and a right of chufing among many different
religions, that are at once propofed to the human
mind. To eftablilh fuch right you mull prove,
that God has no where forbidden the exercife of
the free powers of man being difplayed upon the
choice of a falfe religion, that is, upon a certain
mode of worfhip, which is fuppofed to be revealed
by God, but really is not fo. For here I ufe the
word religion in its greater latitude, without
which there would be no room for debate. The
declarations of holy writ are fo clear and unequi-
vocal againft this pretended right of man to chufe
his religion, that I am not a little embarrafled to
comprehend how any perfons profefling a belief
of the facred writings can be bold enough to aflfert
it. For the weight of fcripture authority which I
lhall prefently produce bears not only on Roman
catholics in this occafion, amongft whom you and
I rank ourfelves, but it is an equally powerful
argument againft all defcriptions of chriftians,
who from confcientious motives, and a fincere con-
vi&ion of the truth of their religion adhere to any
other branch of chriftianity. To thofe, whom
party, worldly intereft, or honour engage to be
partizans of any particular religion it would be
needlefs to fpeak of the authority of fcripture ;
fmce fuch authority is only to be propofed to
thofc


Uhofe, who claim at lead the repute of being fia
cere and upright in their belief.
To place therefore the argument drawn fronji
fcripture authority in its proper light I will fup-
pofe for a moment, that in lieu of your and my
having embraced the faith of the real and genuine
revelations of Jefus Ohrid, which we truft we
have, the contrary fliould exa&ly be the ca e >
-and that the edabliflied religion of this realm,
which I name as the mod honourable among thofe
diviiions of chridianity, which are differing from
us, fliould by the reformation have cleared away
from the old church the errors and fuperftitions,
which had crept into it, and happily have drawn
back the minds of men to a fincere belief or the
pure and uncorrupted do&rines of Jefus Chrid.
In this cafe not they, but we fliould be the real
heretics. The belief of our feven facraments, of
the fpiritual fupremacy of the Pope, of tranfub-
dantiation, of auricular confeflion and priedly
ab folution would be as alien from the pure word
of God as the contrary are at prefent. But m
this fuppofltion I aik in what language would
the learned teachers of theprotedant edabhihment
accod us?—Their natural courtefy and civility
would fird engage them to pity our midakes* as
I have known many of them do; but emg
’ fecurely


iccurely pofTeffed of the genuine books and ri-ht
interpretation of the fcriptures, and knowing that
catholics cannot elude the authority of the facrec
§vri tings, which they themfelves acknowledge
they would certainly after this avail themfelves o
the authority of thofe fcriptures to confute ou
unfortunate errors, and to convince us, that we
neither had, nor could have a right to appeal from
their decifions in religious matters in order to
chufe another religion for ourfelvas.
This I fay would be their language, and lam
authorized to fay fo from what you and I know
to lave been faid and done by them. The doc-
trine of cxclufivc falvation, which your learned
and eftimable friend the Rt. Rev. Dr. J. T.Trov *
in his late paftoral inflruaion clearly proves to be
the do&rine of the eftabßfbed proteftant church *
an undeniable argument of the truth of what 'J
here advance. For no one can attach exclufive
falvation to the belief of his own tenets without
denying all dilbelievers, that is, every other de-
fection of believers than his own a ri<dit to
chufe and a poffibility of being faved in a different
religion from his.
In
J m S ' eaPa " o,a L inßrU , a, ' on ' &C 'V John Thomas Trov, D. D. &c
from pag. 59. to 67. Second Edition reviled.


lii this fuppofition therefore an archbiihop
Laud, had we been coeval with him, would
certainly have told both you and me, however
fecure we might imagine ourfelves in our own
prefumptuous notions of religion, that without
faith , that is, the genuine and orthodox faith ot
fefus Chrift, it is impoffible to pkafe God * A
Tillotfon would have declared to us in the words
of the unerring founder of clinftianity itfelf, that
whoever helieveth not Jhali he condemned :§ A War-
burton would prefs us home with that known text
of St. Paul to Timothy, the church of the living
God is the pillar and ground of the truth aI1(a w^at
fhould we anfwer, or what could we oppofe to
thefe unexceptionable fcripture authorities? -
Whether from the mature reflection ot age,, or
from the early imprefiions of youth I may differ
from thefe great men in religious principles, 1
cannot be induced to believe that they would
a a a part fo inconfiftent with their charac-
ter, fo little coherent with common fenfe, as
to declare themfelvcs to be in certain poffeilion
of the true and genuine doctrines ot Jcfus Chrift,
and allow other men a right and privilege ol
adopting a belief contrary to theirs. They would
pity our ignorance, as I faid before: probably
they might forbear reafoning with us upon a fub-
ject
* Heb. u. 6. S Mark 16. 16. + 1 Tim. 3. 15.


je&, where reafon would not be attended to:
becaufe of the hardnefs of our heart\ they would
allow us to run on in our wanderings, but they
would never demean and debafe their own cha-
ra£ter fo far as to feem to give a fanction to error
by declaring that we had a right to chufe a reli-
gion, which they knew for certain to be erro-
neous.
Whence I will venture to aflert, that except
perhaps Dr. Rogers and fome few others, who
feem to have been more intent upon forming a
fyftem of religious policy in order to conciliate
the minds of men to an eftablilhed government,
than to fettle a reafonable and inftru&ive plan of
religious belief for the faving of fouls, you will
find it difficult to point out to me one fingle pro-
teflant author of note, who has not avowedly
held the language I mention. The principles of
exclufive falvation, which I have already obfer-
ved, they hold in common with us, demonftra-
lively prove this fa£l: and I am only aftoniflied
that you, who, from your earlieft youth were
inured to a belief of the fame doftrine in the
catholic church ffiould have adopted in your Jura
Anglorum a language fo contrary to your belief.
But as I before faid you were engaged in
embarraffing
i Mark 10.


embarraffing circumftances, and for the peace of
your country you wiffied to conciliate principles,
that were never made to coalefce together.
But I concieve that on this fubjefl: you have
imbibed notions as well as adopted a language
irreconcileable with the truths of your religion.
This miftake is eafy, and I am perfuaded happens
every day to many well-meaning and orthodox
perfons, who do not thereby forfeit their title to
remain members of the catholic church. Nay fo
great are the difficulties and intricacies generally
attending religious inquiries, that I hardly eon-
cieve it poffible for men, not thoroughly verfed
in and inured almoft all their life to the reading:
of our belt theologians to determine with due ac-
curacy and precifion many queftions, that may
daily be brought before them on the fubje£l of
religion. I confefs that the only advantage,
which I can with’ any affurance challenge to my-
felf from the years I have fpent in theological
ftudy is prudently to doubt of the nature and
import of a theological proportion, upon which i
am called to decide. And happy do I deem
myfelf if my former readings enable me to recqi-
le£t the paffiages or treatifes of thofe great, men,
who have examined the fubje&s at their leifure,
and gathered together all the lights* which-re ve-
D lation


lat ion affords concerning them. No wonder
then if in the very wide career, which you have
embraced in your Jura Anglorum concerning the
confcientious rights, liberties, duties, and powers
of men as well in a ftate of nature as in a ftate of
civil and religious fociety, you fhould have run
into infinite miftakes. To a man unexperienced
in the nicety of theological difquifition, and
inclined as is natural to reduce all things to the
rules of his own learned profeflion, error muff have
been ftri£tly unavoidable.
But to proceed to the queftion before us you
have not only, I fay, adopted an unwarrantable
expreffion in calling that a right of choice in
man, which I have proved to be only a natural
power of chafing his religion ; but you embrace the
principle itfelf imported by your words, and
openly maintain, that man has not only a right,
but is fometimes even bound by a confcientious
obligation to embrace a religion which is not
true. As I with not to miftake your meaning in
fo important a point, I (hall cite your own words,
and for further caution refer my readers to the
paffages themfelves from whence the extra&s are
made, that by examining the whole context they
may be fully fatisfied what your real opinion is
upon this fubje£t
Pag.


Pag. 83, you have the following words: “ Every
u individual human being has not only a light
“ but is under an indispensable obligation
« to adopt that religious cult or mode of worfhip,
« whic h after due deliberation in the fincerity of
« his heart he thinks his creator requires of him:
« It follows of courfe that £ fociety compofed of
« fach individuals mull colle&ively taken enjoy
« the fame right, and be under the fame duty
« and obligation.” And pag. 187 applying this
principle to the eftablifhed religion, which accord-
ing to your known profeffion of the catholic faith
you avowedly acknowledge to be falfe, you fay :
« Whenever the majority of the community ihall
« have concurred in the adoption of a religion,
“ the maintenance and prefervation of it hand
“ upon the fame principles of right and obli-
“ cation. At the time of the revolution the
“ majority of the community did, as at this day
“ they do hold the free enjoyment of the proteft-
“ ant religion as their firft and moft important
‘ c liberty;” and then you conclude with faying*
that “ if any individuals did not chufe to fubmit
to the effeas of this judgment of the majority of
« our anceftors at the revolution, they had the
« liberty to quit the fociety, but not to refill or
« oppofe the aft of the majority. Once more
“ pag 100, you fix a double obligation upon all
D 2 DiJJenters


JDijfenterj from the national church of England
io fubmit unto the eftablifhment of the fame,
becaufe they are fuppofed as you fay “ to join
“ and concur in all the a£ts of the legiflature, by
“ which the church receives the civil fanction of
“ the hate.” Such, Sir, are your words, and I
fruft that you will give me credit for not having
miftaken the meaning of them, when I attributed
to you the fentiment above mentioned.
But to examine whether this fentiment is agree •
able to the received principles of the catholic
church we muft hate what tire principles of the
catholic church are. If lor any other fhould deny
the orthodoxy of your portions on reafons, which
feem juft to us, you might difpute the accuracy of
our decifion by oppoftng other reafons, that would
appear more juft to you, and our readers embar-
rafted between the fubtleties of contending parties
would not know in whofe favour to decide the
cauie. In efteft the previous conditions of due
deliberation, fncerity of heart, and, good faith, upon
which you ground your fuppofed cafe of the
choice of a falfe religion carry with them fuch an
appearance of reafon, and fuch a Ihow of upright-
nefs of heart, that few perfons I prefume will at
firft fight fufpeft yourfelf being the dupe of that
cr ) good faith. But your perfonal orthodoxy
being


being no ways fufpefted by me, I (hall firft glva
you the clear deciiions of our church upon the
fubjeft, which to a catholic mull always be an
unanfwerable argument, and then endeavour to
unravel, I hope in a fatisfa&ory manner, the fub-
tleties that give birth to your error.
The catholic church therefore, which in defin-
ing articles of faith is accuftomed to fpeak imme-
diately to the point itfelf in debate, without con-
fidering it thro’ the medium of borrowed and
adventitious circumftances, declares to us in as
clear terms as human tongue can utter, that in
no pofiible cafe can a man be faved out of the
true catholic faith of Jefus Chrift : from whence it
“follows of courfe, that fince no one can have a
right much lefs a confcientious obligation to
damn himfelf, there can neither be a right, nor
an obligation to chufe any other than the true
catholic faith of Jefus Chrift. ‘This true catholic
faith , fays the creed of Pius V. out of which no one
can be faved , I. N. N. do at this prefent freely profrefs
and fincerely hold * And the Athanafian creed in
words equally clear and unequivocal fays, This is
the catholic faith , which if any one do uot faithfully
and firmly believe he cannot be faved .f I fhall add no
further authorities of our own church upon this
fubje£t
* See Creed of Pius V.
+ See Athan. Creed.


fubjeft, left the multiplication of texts fhould feem
rather to obfcure and confufe, than clearly and
pointedly afcertain the article in debate.
lou will allow me however to ftate to you,
tho’ from a different authority from what I alledg-
ed before, what the belief of the eftablifhed
church is upon the fame head. For as you feem
to have been drawn into error, and to have ex-
plained away the faith of your church only with a
view of removing from us certain afperfions not
unfrequently thrown out againft us, and in parti-
cular to afcertain to government the fincerity and
fidelity of our late oath of allegiance, if the faith
of the eftabliflied church and our own perfe&ly
coincide as to this point, it is plain you need not
have adopted the means of defence, which you
have, nor endeavoured to juftify us by the con-
cealment or denial of principles, which are com-
mon to us and the eftabliflied church of the
land.
Non tali diotiho, nsc doj'cYiJ'ovtbus ijlis
Tempus eget.
Befides therefore the authority of the Athanafian
creed juft cited, which creed is equally admitted
and believed in the proteftant church as in our
own


own, I beg you to turn your attention for a mo-
ment to the religious fervice functioned by the
decrees both of church and date in this realm, and
read publicly in all the eftablifhed congregations
on the firft day of lent and at other times as tlie
ordinary dial 1 appoint. Curfed , fays the mimfter ,ts
he that maketh any carved or molten image to worjhip it.
And according to the direaion of the common
prayer book the people Jh, all anfwer and fay Amen.
Curfed is he that maketh the blind to go out of his,way.
Anfwer, , Amen. Curfed is he that perverteth the
judgment of the Jlranger, the fatherlefs and widow.
Anfwer , Amen, &c.*
Now let us fuppofe, Sir, for a moment, that you
or I diould have the misfortune to make any carved
or molten image to worjhip it as our God, for that I
take to be the genuine fenfe of the expremon;
or that you by adopting in your Jura Anglorum
doarines, that are alien from the true doarines ot
Tefus Chrift, diould have made the blind to go out
of their way ; or that by a falfe expohtion given by
you of the chriftian tenets you diould have per-
verted the judgment of the Jtranggr, the fatherlefs an*
the widow concerning the merits of the true church
of Chrid ; in all or any of thefe fuppohtions you
or 1 diould as unequivocally, and emphatically
incur
* Sec comroon prayer-boot-


i incur the eenfure and reprobation of the whole'
efiablithed church, as they or any other perform
can be rejefted and anathematized by us, when
we pronounce in the creed of Pius V. that no one
can befaved out of that individual true catholic faith ,
which that creed teaches. In neither cafe do
either they or we make the fmalleft exception in
regard to perfons, who in the fmcerity of their heart,
or with greater or lefs deliberation efpoufe the tenet'
that is refpeaively reprobated by us: we fimply
condemn the doarines or practices themfelves
ully and unequivocally pronouncing them to be
ncompatible with the truth of Chrift’s gofpel
ind the falvation of men, and by a neceffary con-
squence we deny all men a right, much more a
onfcientious obligation to adhere to them.
But if any man thro’ miftake and ignorance
hich reprefents the obj e a s to him in a different
?ht, ihould efpoufe fuch tenets as harmlefs and
nocent, or even as revealed by God when they
e not r °’ futh confcience we do not pre-
nd to judge. The determination of his parti-
lar cafe is turned over to the great fearcher of
arts, who will hereafter pronounce how far his
lorance has been voluntary or involuntary: but
makers of creeds and lawgivers only regard the
leral circumftances of a point brought before
them.


them when they have pronounced upon the pro-
priety or impropriety of it, it is explicitly de-
manded of all thofe, who are fubject to their
jurifdi&ion to fubmit to the plain definition, which
they make. Psio catholic or chrifhan can hold a
language, or maintain a proportion cenfured and
condemned by the catholic or chriftian church.
Iho the mature deliberation therefore, the Jincerity
of heart and good faith , of which you fpeak, fliould
be the real caufe of the choice of a falfe religion,
which any individuals or a community adopt, ftill
it would be unjuftifiable in you to maintain a right
ana obligation in the faid individuals or community
to make the choice they do, fince the church re-
prooates tnat choice, and as I have clearly proved
to you allows of no right or obligation to chufe a
falfe religion in any cafe whatfoever.
But that you may be rather fatisfied with the
propriety, than retrained by the foie authority of
your church’s definition, you will allow me to
explain to you the cafe in point according to the
received rules of philosophy* When we fpeak of
the Choice of a thing, it is plain that in the com-
mon acceptance of human language We fpeak of
the free adoption of an object, that is known and
underftcod by the perfon, who chutes it. Ignoli
fay philofophers, nulla fit optio . That a falfe reli-
h- gion


gion therefore may be chofen, it is neccftary that
the nature of that religion, that is, its falihood
(liould in fome manner be underftood. Now the
moment the falfhood of a religion is either dircftly
or indirectly underftood, or even fufpefted by the
human mind, at leaft from that moment all fince-
rity of heart and good faith ceafe in him who
makes the choice of it; and of confequence there
can neither be a confcientious right nor a confci-
entious obligation in perfons fo circumftanced to
make choice of a falfe religion that is propofed to
them.
There may indeed as all our theologians teach
fubfift in a confcientious and well meaning chiif-
tian at one and the fame time a doubt concerning
two oppofite religions, the one falfe, the other
true ; or the bias and prepofeflion in favour of the
falfe one may even be more preponderant. In
which circumftances our divines agree, that the
doubting perfon ought not precipitately to a Dan-
don the falfe and adhere blindly to the tiue leii-
gion, without confidering the refpeftive merits of
each; fince fuch choice would be unreafonable
and imprudent, which qualities are incompatible
with the diferetion and good fenfe, which muft
always attend a fupernatural aft of divine faith.
But


But he is bound to examine and weigh the
motives on each fide of the queftion; and if it be
an exprefs article of the chriilian revelation, that
the true light of God enlighteneth every man , that
cometh into this world* or as St. Paul told Timoth),
that a merciful Saviour will have all men to be faved ,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth f we mull
infallibly conclude, that “ light and grace' to dif-
cern the truth will be communicated by Almighty
God to every fincere and upright fearcher of it,
which “ light and grace becoming perfonally
« binding upon the individual to whom they
“ are communicated” § as you acknowledge,
will of courfe fix the indelible fiain of guilt
upon the mind of that man, who rejeas. fucli
« light and grace” to adhere to a falfe religion.
But° fuppofing Hill in order to give full play to
your argument, that in the unfearchable deciees
of Providence an individual or individuals fhould oc-
eafionally be withdrawn from lite before they have
the full and compleat means granted them of fet-
tling their doubts, which is the only cafe of invin-
cible ignorance that you can imagine, is it, I fay
or is it not true, that in that given cafe a man is
faved under the choice of a falfe religion, or in
other wQrds without that true catholic faith of .>cfus
E 2 Chrift,
* John t. 9.
+ 1. Tim. 3£.
h Jura Angt. pag. 81.


Chrift, which the creed of Pius V. teaches ? I
anfwer that it is not true.
>
Either then the. party concerned, for lam
fpeaking, to a chriftian who acknowledges the
neeeflity of chriftian baptifm for falvation, has
received the facrament of baptifm, or he has not
If he has not the happinefs of having had the
merits of his Redeemer applied to his foul by
baptifm, tho’ innocent of all perfonal mifdemea-
nors as he was the moment he firft iffued from his
mother’s womb, you will acknowledge that he is
not entitled to the joys of eternal life ; fince ac-
cording to the received do&rine of our gofpel,
unkfs a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghojl
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God * But being
baptized he miftakes the true religion of Jefus
Chrift. In lieu of conforming to the tenets of
that faith, which you and I know to be genuine
he efpoufes every contrary article. He neither
admits our written creeds, our traditions, our
number or interpretation of the fcripture books,
our facraments, tranfubftantiation, mafs, purga-,
lory,praying to faints, indulgences or the fupremacy
of the Pope. But his errors concerning all thefe
points are involuntary : he labours under, invinci-
ble ignorance in regard to the divine revelation
of
* John 111. 5 .


of them, and he is aftually fo difpofed, if he
knew that they were revealed by an all-knowing
and veracious God, that he would inftantaneoufly
efpoufe the belief of them with his whole heart:
in any other fuppofition his ignorance would not
be invincible. What I afk is the real religion of
this man ?
That he received the habit of the true faith of
Jefus Chrift in baptifm you, I, and theologians I
believe of every defeription among chriftians will
readily allow ; and if any good deferring of eter-
nal life had hitherto been done by him, it is cer-
tainly only in virtue of the fupernatural habit of
faith, which he received in baptifm, that fuch
good was performed; fmee no effect can exift
without its caufe, and without faith wc know it is
impoffible to pleafe God * But according to the re-
ceived dodtrine of all divines of our church the
habit of fupernatural faith ftill remains in this
man; as it is not every crime committed-againft
good morals and the laws of the gofpel that de-
ftroys faith in the foul of a chriftian, but only
wilful difbelief or herefy, which our catechifm
defines an objlinate error in matters of faith .f ff
then this man received the genuine catholic faith
in baptifm, not having wilfully erred agatnft fuch
fpith
* He. il. 5.
+ See Do'.vay Calecli. pag. 14.


faith he undoubtedly is and to all intents and pur-
pofes remains before God as much a real catholic
as he was on the day of his baptifm, and if he is
faved hereafter he will be faved as a catholic and
only in virtue of the catholic faith.
It would be prepofterous therefore in the com-
mon acceptance of human words to fay, that fuch
perfon had changed his religion, and adopted a
falfe and viciated cult, whilft he retains in his
foul the original faith, which was given him in
baptifm. The reafon whereof is, and can be no
other, than what I affigned above viz. that all
choice necefiarily prefuppofes a knowledge of the
object chofen; the choice of a falfe religion re-
quires that the fahliood of fuch religion fliould
either be direCtly known, or indirectly fufpeCted;
a doubt or fufpicion concerning the truth of a r«c
ligion renders an acquiefcence in that religion
criminal before God, unlefs the nature of it be
duly inveftigated, and when that is done it be-
comes ftriCtly impoffible according to the efta-
-blifhed laws of providence for man to fix a confci-
entious choice upon a religion, which is not that
revealed by God.
In arguing this cafe with you I have all along
fuppofed the roman catholic to be the true reli-
gion


„ion, becaufe you and I profeffedly acknowledge
it fuch, and it is only to yourfelf as a roman ca-
tholic that I have undertaken to write. But the
force of the argument would be exattly the fame,
if the contrary were the cafe and catholics unfor-
tunately'in point of religion were die delu e
men, inftead of being true believers m Jefus
Chrift. For in that cafe if any of us were uived
in virtue of our invincible ignorance, which alone
could then fave us, we fliould be faved not as
catholics, but as proteftants, prelbyterians or who-
ever elfe might be the true profeffors of the
chriftian religion. This mull be particularly noti-
ced as mv view in writing the prefent letter is not
to engage even indireflly in religious controveny
with "any defeription of chriftians, but to bind
down yourfelf and roman catholics in general to a
iteady adherence to the principles of the religion
they profefs, together with all the neceffary con fe-
quences enfuing from them. A roman catholic
cannot harbour a moment’s voluntary doubt of
the merits of his faith, lince a full and undeniable
certainty of the divine revelation (landing exclu-
fjyely in its favour is a previous condition, as I
fignified before,* to any perfons being admitted
members of their church. If any have not this
certitude they belong not to us ; but with a clear
and
* See pag. 19.


I md undeniable mental conviftion of the truth o
tins feft we Hill are not intolerant in the abfur
and unreafonable manner, in which intolerance
generally objected to us.
J h,lt cafilollcs > wh ° know the ground of thei
re ' s '° n are 111 the fu!l and compleat fenfe of th
word intolerant of error I readily acknowledge
Nor do I conceive that men of principle and gooc
enfe, who are fatisfied of the inerrancy of any
truth can be otherwife. Proteftants as I tliowed
oefore, are fovereignly intolerant of whatever they
ook upon as erroneous in ourfelves or others: and
own, that upon no other fcore than at Jeaft a
irctcxt of the conviftion of our errors could I for-
;>ve them what during the laft two hundred and
tty years they have done to our church. For
to I am fully fatisfied in my own mind, as our
eft writers feem to be, that hurry and precipi-
mey of temper gave birth to the whole reforma-
-011 rather than cool chriftian refleaion, and a
-tire of effeflmg a rational reform* yet the crime
overturning the innumerable monuments of
our
” t hiS .': f : ° f Hen,T VIIL " ° F to f'miment.
mc ’° 'T : n °* “ r “““"able <W= in ope„i„»
mens eyes: and again “ the rapid advance of the Lnthr ■ ? j °
" trine and the violence, with which it was embraced, prove
oentiy, that it owed not its fuccefs to reafon and reflexion *>
Mr. Hume’s Hift, of Eng. VM. Vll. j,. D.blin Eton.'


Our ancedors piety, and more fo that of depriving
fo many of their fellow creatures of the fpiritual
helps which the ancient church afforded them, is
fo unwarrantable in its nature if done thro’ the
meer impulfe of a capricious humour or a 'defire
of revenge, that I fhould be unwilling to lay fo
heavy a weight of guilt to the charge of my coun-
trymen, without their having had at lead a co-’
lourable pretext for their proceeding in the innu-
merable errors, which they were falfely taught to*
believe were fubfiding among us.
But of perfonal intolerance, which is a very
different thing I believe that neither we nor pro-
tedants of the edablilhed church at lead at prelent,
are juftly accufed. The world generally attri-
butes this change of fentiment to the increaie of
philofophy and the prevalence of religious toler-
ation. But for my part as far as perfonal indul-
gence to a weak and finful brother is judinable
according to the rules of reafon, and of revealed
religion 1 think it proceeds from a very different
fource. In the fird days of chridianity we find
the head of the Apodles, Peter himfelf offering
an apology in favour of the Jews for the greated
crime that was ever committed, that of crucilying
jefus Chrid : now brethren , I know that you did it
F thro'


thro ’ ignorance, as did alfo your rulers :* and Paul
afterwards told the Corinthians, that if any of the
princes of this world had known the wifdom of God ,
they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory: f
Thefe infpired men knew that they could not
fully and entirely juftify the delinquents under the
enormous guilt they had incurred, on which ac-
count they preached to them penitence, and
converfion of heart. Repent therefore and he con-
vert ed y that your fins may be blotted outf But they
were willing that the excufe of ignorance fhould
go as far as it could; and perhaps among
who cried out crucify him crucify bim% there were
fome, who in the prefence of God had not even
an indireft fufpicion of the import of their words.
But as the unravelling of this fecret belongs ex-
clufively, as I faid before to the great fearcher of
hearts, it becomes not man to pronounce on the
demerits or merits of his fellow creatures, pro-
vided that by the patronage he gives a delin-
quent brother he does not feem to patronize error
itfelf.
But as I certainly fhould not dare to confign to
damnation for herefy any man, who is not a wilful
heretic, fo I think it highly prefumptuous and
encroaching upon the prerogative of the Almighty
to
* Afts 3.17.
+ 1 Cor. *.7.8.
§ Atts 3,19.
% John 19, 6-


to ufher immediately into his company in heaven,
•as foon as they depart out of this life thofe who
die out of the true church of Chrift, becaufe l
have not been able to determine during life whe-
ther their ignorance of his true faith were volun-
tary or not. Certainly if their error was wilful,
if in fpite of the light of grace and of a rational
inftru£tion, which were either proffered or given
them they continued in their incredulity to the
end, fearing not to give the -lie to the unerring
word of God during the whole courfe of their
trial, that man muft be fuperlatively bold, who
fhould pretend to people the Almighty’s heaven
with fubje&s, with whom he would havedifdained
to keep company here on earth, if they had fhown
a fimilar contempt of, and offered a fimilar oppo-
sition to his own word. Hence St. Paul and the
fcriptures in general are fo fevere on the crime of
herefy, and fo emphatically exclude the heretical
man from the enjoyment of eternal life: if any one
preach to you a gofpel befides that, which you have re-
ceived, let him be anathema *
Thus Sir I have endeavoured thro’ forne length
to examine your pretentions for upholding in man
a right to chufe his religion; which as it is the
leading principle of your work, fo it feems to be
F 2 the
* Gal. 1.9. et St. Paul, paffim.


the chief fource from whence your other miftakes
have proceeded. With a catholic the authority
of his church is fufficient to engage him to difavow
any unwarrantable expreffion, which may have
been uncautioufly advanced in oppofition to her
tenets; and I truft that the authorities, which I
cited, are fufficient to make known to you what
the unalterable decifion of your church is upon
this head. If any reafons, which I have added
in confirmation of Tier do&rines have the good
fortune to meet with your approbation, it will be
an additional pleafure to me to find, that the
world will have no longer occafion of faying ; that
only upon religious matters you are contradi&ory
to yourfelf.
In doling this debate however I mull: remind
you and all other catholic gentlemen, that what-
ever poffibility there may be of forming a diffe-
rence of judgment in favour of different religions,
that poffibility cannot fubfift at once in the mind
of one and the fame man. This is an undeniable
corollary following from the above premifes;
which if true, ought to ferve as a corre&ive to
that inconfiftent liberty of thought and expreffion,
into which fo many are uncautioufly betrayed.
Tho’ various men may form various opinions, yet
no Angle man convinced to a degree of the molt
perfeft


perfect moral certitude of the inerrancy of his
own church, as is, and always mult be the cafe
of roman catholics, can admit a probability or
even a polhbility of the divine revelations being
found in any other, and therefore he is bound, if
he is confident to himfelf to exclude from all other
churches whatever can only be the effect of a
divine belief in a divine revelation, fuch as chrif-
tianity teaches, is the enjoyment of eternal life.
A learned judge difeovering a flaw in a will or
deed, that induced a wrong heir to take poffeflion
of an eftate, may in proportion to the intricacy
of the cafe and plaufibility of the error difculpate
ihe wrong pofieflor from intentional malice in in-
vading the property of another man ; but what-
ever may have been his good faith, he nevvU will
allow that he had, much lefs after the detection
of the flaw, and publication of it by his lawful
deciflon, that he has a right to remain in the pof-
feflion of a property belonging to another. The
cafe in regard to the choice of and right of chuflng
a falfe religion is nearly the fame.
ESTABLISHMENTS OF RELIGION.
In the foregoing part of my letter I fpoke of
ithe natural right of man to chufe his religion and
I denied the exiftence of fuch right. Hitherto
however


however I have chiefly fpoken of the right of man
confldered in itfelf meerly in relation to God and
his own confcience without applying my princi-
ples to the fan&ion or difapprobation which fuch
choice may receive from the powers of this world,
whether fuch powers be thofe of the church or
Hate. For to avoid all quibbling upon this fub-
je£f, I muff remind you that by human powers I do
and always fliall mean thofe, which are exercifed
over men by men as vicegerents of God, whether
their authority and commiflion be given them for
the regulation of purely fpiritual or purely tem-
poral concerns. I am more particular in fixing
this meaning to my own words, as it is the known
language of our canon-law, where the authority
given by the almighty to men is conftantly divi-
ded into ecclefiaftical and civil in oppofition to
and in contradiftinfiion of the divine authority,
which was immediately exercifed by Godhimfelf
in the old law, and by Jefus Chrift, when he per.
fonally appeared amongft us in the new.
In this fenfe you know that it is generally faid,
that our Popes have not a power to alter the di-
vine laws, tho’ according to the opinion of all
Theologians they may agreeably to the exigency
of circumftances change the human inftitutions of
their ecclefiaftical predeceffors in the papal fee,
and


and in the fame fenfe it is not unfrequehtly ob-
jected to us, that in regulating our falls, devo-
tions, hearing mafs, frequenting the facraments
&c. we lilten rather to the voice of men, that is,
our Popes, than to the divine ordinances recorded
to us in holy writ. Such therefore being the re-
ceived meaning of words it behoves yourfelf and
me to be particularly attentive to it, as the more
fcrupulous authors are in adhering to the known
language of their anceltors the more eafily they
are underltood, and the lefs liable to oe incauti-
oufly betray’d into miftakes. That both the eccle-
fiaftical and civil powers among men have within
the limits of their rcfpetlive jurifdi&ion an autho-
rity to enaft laws, that are ftri&ly binding the
confeiences of their fubjects, no catholic pre-
fumes to deny*
But
* This dofirine does notjfeemto be as univerfally admitted in the
proteftant church. The learned commentator on the Englifh laws Sir
Win. Blackflone allows of no confcientious obligation to arife from
human laws, except where the object of the law is already comprifed
under fome natural or divine precept. See 2d Se£L on the nature of
Laws in general. Pag. 57* Oti the contrary' tho’catholic theologians
acknowledge many human laws to be purely penal which depends
chiefly on the tenor of the words, in which fuch laws are exprefTed and
on the known fenfe of the legiflature, yet they univerfally maintain,
that a power to make laws, which are ftriftly and confcientioufly obli-
gatory in the eyes of God and religion, is granted by God to ruati
both of church and flate. In regard to the former the two following
propofitions were condemned by the church in John Httfs and Martin
Luther.


But before I enter upon the examination of
your particular tenets on the nice fubjefi of reli-
gious eftablithments you will allow me, as in the
foregoing occafion, to premife fome general prin-
ciples, to the truth and juftice whereof I truft you
will not objefl.
Whatever be the fource of authority among
men, whether legiflative powers arife immedi-
ately from divine appointment, from the choice
of the people, from a fuperiority of natural
talents, hereditary right or a right of conqueft, as
different authors imagine, there cannot in any
poffible formation of human fociety be generated
a power, that is entitled to oppofe any of the
great
tufcr. OkdtmUa oodqfiajlka e JI dbodkntkt ficundan admion'm
facerdotum ocokfia,, frader exprojam aatoritatem fcripturat. Art , t
Joan. H„s. Variant Chrijli ad Prtrant, quodcunqu, folvcrk filer
TT:, Niigata at ipfo Petra. An. a 6.Lu.h
And Alexander VII. on M , h of Sep t e,„ber ,66, in „ r der „n,ai„
. ° tcentioufiiefs of the reformer* of thofe day*, v.ho were lhaking off
the confections tie of obedience, which they owed thei, temporal
fovereigns, condemned alfo the following unwarrantable affertfon of,
loofe divine t Popular non poccat. qfanji alfqao alla caafa non recipiat
Irgtma p nn c,p, prmalgatam. Prop. 2 g. inter damn, ab Alex VII
andhts condemnation has lince received the gene.,l f,„aion of ,he
church. A* .. is the church therefore ,ha, declares a confcientiott*
obligation to be impofed upon chriflians by the laws of men, of eourfe
it belong* ,o.thechurch to determine when and by what kind of laws
the ft' X“7“ r r d ' efpeCla " yaSaCOnrd ™ i »u* obligation in
ftnOell fenfe of the word is a purely fpiritual and religious concern


great rules of conduct clearly made known to
man either by the voice of nature or by the ex-
plicit revelation of God. For all power being
from God, God cannot poftibly give a power
contrary to another eftabliftied by himfelf.
It may feem that this principle is fully and
unequivocally admitted by you in your Jura
Anglorum when you fay that “ no power on earth
“ can enadt what is contrary to the law of God
“ and reafon or what is commonly called malum
“ in fe-,"* but this great principle of truth in my
opinion is much more clearly and ftrongly expref-
fed by the learned commentator on the Englifh
laws, Sir Wm. Blackftone in his fecond fedtion
on the nature of laws in general, where he fays :
“ upon thefe two foundations the law of nature,
“ and the law of revelation depend all human
“ laws: that is, no human laws fho.uld be fuf-
££ fered to contradidt thefe.” I lhall
fliow notwithstanding your apparent admiflion
of this principle, where you clearly deviate
froni it.
A fecond thing to be noticed are the condi-
tions requiiite to render all laws juft and binding.
As all power whether fpiritual or temporal is in-
G difpenfably
* Jura Aagloiunt pag. 105, 106.


difpenfably ordained for the good of the commu-
nity over which it preiides, all human laws muft
of neceffity have for their obje6t, ift. that
which is juft and allowable in itfell as aforefaid,
it not being within the limits of human jurif-
diftion to forbid virtue or to injoin the practice
of vice. 2dly, that which of its own nature
may, and which at lead in its primary intent is
actually diretded to the good of the community.
3 dly, All human laws muft proceed from thofe,
who have a power given them to govern, it being
effential that they be directed only to fubje6ts.
4 thly, Laws being the afts of men can only be
impofed on men according to thofe forms and
modes, in which the legiflative power itfelf has
agreed to make them known: in default therefore
of any of thefe four conditions a law is unjuft,
effentially null, and no ways binding the con-
fciences of men. “ Unjuft laws” as St. Auguf-
tine teaches, “ are not properly to be called
laws.f
The learned Bellarmine in his treatiie on the
power of the Pope exprefslylays down thefe prin-
ciples and in the heart of Rome fear’d not to make
the application of them to the papal authority
itfelf. Citing the Bth book and ioth chapter of
Ariftotles
+ Aug. Lib. I. delibeio Arbitrio,cap. 5.


Ariftotles Ethics he fays, « As a king differs from
« a tyrant, becaufe the one feeks the common,
“ the other his own private intereft, fo does a
« juft from a tyrannical law.—A law mull keep
« the fame proportion in the diftribution of
'« honours, and impofition of burdens, which
« fubiefts bear to the community. If the Ponti
« fhould command all men, children, and grown
“ upperfons, weak and ftrong, fick and healthy
« to fall alike in lent, the law would be unjuft :
« or if he flrould decree that only noble or rich
“ men (hould be promoted to the dignity
“ hilhops to the exclufion of the poor and plebeians
« tiro’ more worthy and learned, the law in its full
« ' ex tent would be unjuft, tho’ on account of par-
“ ticular circumftances in fome places fuch a law
« m i K ht be juft. An unjuft law is no law, nor has
« it of its own nature ex vifua a powder of binding
W the confcience.”* When theologians of our
own church, and of the firft note publicly deny a
confcientious obligation to anfe even from church
laws, which are not juft agreeably to the .our
conditions before mentioned, it fhould, I tlnn
be deemed rather extraordinary for lay-men, or
theologians of a different religious perfuafion
from ours to fix upon us a religious and con u-
• q 2 entious
« Bell arm. Lib. 4- Rom. Pont. cap. 15.


icntious obligation, which we ourfelves do not
acknowledge. It is only of the confcientious
obligation that I fhall fpeak hereafter.
Another mconteflable confequence follow-
ing from the nature of human laws, which I faid
mull always be direfted to the good of the com-
munity, is, that it appears highly abfurd to allow
my human power, whether veiled in a fmgle
x-rfon, or in a coileaive body, an unlimited right
o prefcribe to its fubje&s what regulations it
neafes concerning all things, that “ are not con-
£ traiy to the law of God and reafon, or what is
commonly called malum in je” This right how-
ver feems to be pointedly alferted by you as an
nly means of infuring “ the obedience of thefub-
to lawful government * But you certainly
rer-reach the mark. « Thereare it is true,” fey,
ie learned judge above quoted, “ a great num-
ber of indifferent points, in which both the
divine law and the natural leave a man at his
own liberty, but which are found necelfary for
the benefit of fociety to be refrained within certain
limits. And herein it is, that human laws have
their greatell force and efficacy.”§ The wife
mmentator did not pretend to make all indiffe-
rent
* J ura Anglorura, page 105.
Sir Wm, Black. Cojnm. page 42,


rent points objecls of human laws, but only fucli as
can bear the limits of a rejlraiut for the benefit of
human fociety \ which end therefore agreeably to
what I faid before muft be efientially regarded in
all human laws whatever.
I am more particular in infilling on this point,
as the contrary fyllem would have the moll perni-
cious effects by introducing at once the doctrine
and practice of paflive obedience, which at all
times are known to be hurtful both to governing
and governed. Every atom of human liberty
would be extinguifiled by allowing legifiative
powers an unlimited right to reftrain every thing,
<< in which the divine law and the natural have
** left man at his own libertyand on the other
hand legifiative powers by inforcing as confcien-
tious obligations, every capricious fancy of their
own would inceffantly break afunder the ties of
regard and affe&ion, by which fubje&s are bound
to their fuperiors, fo that in lieu of fubordination
and obedience, which you fuppofe, every con-
trary effefl would follow.
True it is, that in doubt either of the lawful-
nefs or ufefulnefs of an impofed reftraint the indif-
penfable duty of a fubjeft whether in church or
Hate is to fubmit to the command of his fuperior,
without


without which no fubordination and order can be
maintained. The fathers and doctors- of the
church univerfally maintain this dodtrine and
in doubtful cafes always form a prefumption in
favour of the head ; but it is a falfe and pernicious
maxim, that the power of rulers extends to every
objedt, that is not evil in itfelf, or that their Jaws
are confcientioully binding, when it is clearly and
certainly known that they have no reference to
the general benefit of the fociety, over which they
are appointed to prefidc. Even our religious re-
clufes are not bound by fuch laws. That other
maxim of yours that “ every adt of the reprefen-
“ tatives of a community is not neceffarily ac-
tc ceptable in the fight of God, nor flridtly con-
“ fonant with the principles of juftice or mora-
“ lity,| is ftill more exorbitant and fo evidently
contrary to whatever our theologians teach con-
cerning the nature and effedt of human laws, that
it would require entirely a new code of divinity
to give credit and repute to fuch a principle.
Whatever may be the private views and in-
tentions of legidators, every adt of theirs mull nc-
cejfarily be acceptable in the fight of God, firiElly
confonant with principles of juftice and morality, or
elfe it fails of having the binding quality of a law,
fo as to impofe a confcientious and religious
obligation
+ Jura Anglorum, pag. 105.


obligation upon any fnbjeft whatever.- And■ of
the acceptability of a law in the fight of Go and ot
its perfeft confomncy with jujliee morality aiu v
je£t without difturbing the order ot fociety oi m-
croaching upon the right of his foveretgu may
oftentimes form as clear and decided a judgment
as any other perfon. In doubt, aslfaid before, the
preemption is always to be formed m favour ot
the fuperior.
Tho’ an unjuft law be no law, and by its
own force be not binding in confcicnce as
Bellarmine before cited told us, yet a dithnc-
tion, fays that learned author, is to be made
between laws and laws. I thall give you Jus
fentiments in his own words. Laws unjr
« t heir objett, that is, which contradia the ngh.s
“ 0 f God made known to us either by the voice
« of nature or by the politive voice of revelation
arc not only not binding,' but muft on no account
« be obferved, agreeably to thofe words: we
“ ourbt to obey God, rather than men. * And the
“ fame is taught by St. Jerom, St. Auguftine, and
« st. Bernard-t But laws, which are unjuft m
« their end, or in their fource” (by not proceed-
ing from an authority duly conftituted over a fun-
* Afls 5. 09.
+ Hie , c ,p 6. ad Ephes. Augult, In pWm .«!, «&»■•*
„,bis Don Bern, iibro de precepto « difpenfationc.


jea} « or in their forms, or modes of publication
are to be obferved, when fcandal would follow
“ from the non observance of them. This may
be drawn from thofe words of our Saviour:
if ft man will contend with thee in judgment , and
“ takeaway thy coat , let go thy cloak alfo to'him.
And whofoever will force thee one mile go with him
two. Not that we are always bound to adopt
“ this mode of condua, but that we Ihould be
“ ready to follow it, whenever the honour of God
" requires it of us.”
It would demand the extent of a treatife and
the genius of a St. Thomas to determine with true
theological precifion when this maxim of our
Saviour, which in its full extent is a coun-
fel and not a precept, ought to be put in
praaice. It is a wrong inference becaufe a thing
has been done by wife and virtuous men either
under the written law, or the law of grace, or
even. by our divine Saviour himfelf, that there-
fore it was confcientioufly obligatory, and necef-
fary to be done by them* The fatal eff e a S of
fcandal
* I. is remarkable that in the , ;,h of St. Matthew onr Saviour b,
one and the fame a fl paid the tribute the tax-gatherers of an heathen
Emperor.! Capharnaum for himfelf and Peter, tho- both had not the
fame reared, nor were under the fame eo„fcie„,i„ us obligalion of
doing it. The fovereign of the nniverfe eonld not be in duty bound to
par


fcandal oftentimes flow as much from too great
an acquiefcence and condefcenfion to the errors
and encroachments of others, as from an open
oppofition to themj And as the fmalleft varia-
tion of circumftances may change the whole
nature of a cafe, in lieu of attempting to eftablidi
H a
pay tribute to his own valfal, as he clearly intimated to Peter, when
he fignified, that if the children of Kings were free, much more he who
was Lord and mailer of Kings. But faid he, that we may not fcan-
dalize them, go—thou Jhalt find a fiater: take that and give it to them,
for me and thee. v. 24. 25. 26. But Peter had not the fame reafon to
refufe payment: for tho’ the ferviceof hisdivine mailer deprived him of
all lharc in the emoluments of the Hate, which are the natural means
of railing taxes, and therefore was a jull reafoil for the fovereign to
exempt him from payment, yet till that exemption was granted he
could not by divine right claim to be free. The immunity of the
Clergy from taxes, and other burdens of the Hate, tho’ granted in moll
chriftian kingdoms for the reafon jull mentioned, is only the effeEl of
the conceflion of the temporal legillature, and not of divine right, as
our bed canonifts teach. See a Lap. hie et Lefs. de JuQitia, Lib. 2.
Cap. 33. Dub. 4.
+ Mr. Hume in his hiftory of Henry VIII. confirms the truth of
this obfervation. Speaking of Adrian VI. who thro’ the intereft of the
Emperor Charles V. was promoted an. 1522 to fucceed LeoX. in the
papal fee he rays: “ This man was fitted to gain the reformers by the
“ integrity, candour, and fimplicity of manners, which diftinguiftied his
“ chara&er; but fo violent were the prejudices againft the church, he
“ rather hurt the caufe by his imprudent exercifc of thofe virtues He
“ frankly corifeffed that many abominable and deteflable practices
« prevailed in the court of Rome” (which might have been the cafe
without there being a necelfity of reforming the doflriries of the church
of Rome) “ and by this fincerc avowal he gavd oc'cafion of much
“ triilrtiph to the Lutherans.” Hume’s Hill.- of England, Vol.
pag. 34*


a general lyftem, which our theologians hitherto
have found almoft impracticable, it is incumbent
on all thofe chriftians, who believe that God has
given them fpiritual direftors to regulate the con-
cerns of their confcience, to refer doubtful and
intricate queftions to their determination : and
even on account of the general danger, which
there is of mens’ being deceived, where their
worldly intereft or pleafure are concerned, it
oftentimes becomes an indifpenfable duty in
fpiritual dire&ors themfelves to referve to the de-
cifion of their own tribunal thofe cafes, in which
they think their fubjefts are liable to be led
aft ray.* I fhall perhaps exemplify to you after-
wards
* isa prevailing notion among many cbriftians, becaufe the con-
cerns, in which they engage feem in their primary and direft view to
be earthly and temporal, that therefore they are entirely exempt from
the rellraint and controul of the fpiritual jurifdi&ion of the church.
For the eclairiffment of this intricate point, which at times has occa-
fioned infinite difputes between the refpeftive abettors of the fpiritual
and temporal prerogative, it may not be improper to confider the natural
import and meaning of thofe noted words of our Saviour in the 18th of
St. John, My kingdom is not of this world ; upon which all the uphold-
ers of temporal power ground themfelves, when they pretend to ex-
clude from the concerns of this world the fpiritual interference and
dire&ion of the miniflers of Chrift’s church. It is certain that in thofe
known words our bleffed Saviour did not tell Pilate, that he was not a
King, nor even that his kingdom was not of or over this world. On
the contrary in that awful moment, when he declared that he came into
this world to give tefimony to the truth, he alferted that he was a king,
and agreeably to the meaning of Pilate’s queftion, which he could not
alfo


wards fome inftances in which this unerring truth
of religion is made maniieft: but as I am not
writing a general monitor for the direftion of your
confcience for all poffible cafes, but only endea-
vouring to point out to you where the heat of
H 2 your
wifh to evade by an equivocation, his anfwer could import nothing
elfe, than that he was king of this world. In any other fcnfe it would
not have been a fatisfa&ory reply to Pilate’s demand. Art thou a king
then? Jefus anfwered, thou fay eft that lam a king. v. 37. 1 hofc
other words therefore by the plained rule of grammar bear a very dif-
ferent meaning. The prepolition of does not (land as a fign of the
poffefGve cafe denoting only a fecond fubdantive following another in
the order of condruflion, but it expreffes a dependence upon, or deriva-
tion from another in the manner that Pilate’s authority was derived from
Tiberius Casfar, and Casfar’s own power from the people, or whoever
made him Emperor. Jefus Chrid even as man, was king of this
world, as the feripture clearly teaches. He hath on his garment, and
on his thigh , that is his humanity, written king of kings and
LORD OF LORDS. Rev. 19. 16. HE IS THE PRINCE OF THE
kings of the earth. Rev. 1.5. All power is given to him
in heaven and in earth. Matt. 28. 18. Chrid did not deny thefe
truths : he only fignified that his power and authority were not from
this world, otherwife his condiments would rife, up in his defence ;
they originated not in earth, but came from heaven; which is the
natural fenfe of the expreflion. A Ample infpe&ion of the Greek and
Latin texts, will fully clear up this point. >5 Baftteta y ipA Sz efts' tz
“ tS tstB : de hoc mundo, that is, from this world. «U t 3
*« xApa Tara ijv y y If A &c. fi ex hoc mundo ;if my kingdom
“ were of, that is, from this world tvv HI 'y BctqiXnci n \pcy tsz efts'
“ sflevfhv nunc autem regnum meum non ed hinc : but now my
*• kingdom is not from hence." The learned judge above quoted cer-
tainly underdood thefe words of our Saviour in a more orthodox fenfe,
when he edablifhed it as a rule, that no human lawsJhould befajfered to
amtraditt the revealed laws of Jefus Chrid, whofe kingdom is para-
mount to all the concerns of this earth.


your imagination has uncautioufly hurried you
into miftakes, I fhall now proceed to apply to the
corredtion of thofe miftakes, the principles I have
fet down.
But it will be neceffary firft to give a fair and
jfliort detail of your principles, that my readers,
who have not your work at hand may know of
what we are treating. That you maintain a right
and obligation not only in every individual man,
but in the major part of every community to adopt
that religious cult, which in the lincerity of their
hearts they think their creator requires of them is
clear from the citations I gave before :§ and upon
this principle you build the dodhme of your fourth
and fifth chapters, in which you maintain that a
community has a right to fupport with its civil
laws and fandtions whatever religion is adopted
by the majority of a hate. This bufinefs, not to
mention other parts of your work you eagerly
pi rfue in the above chapters thro’ forty-feven
pages, where no argument or authority are omit-
ted, which feem ferviceable to the eftablifhment
of your pretenfions.
Pages 87 and 88 you declare in unequivocal
terms that “ whatever that mode of worfhip may
ct be, in the free and confcientious adoption of
“ which
$ Sec page 27.


« which the majority (hall concur, the commu-
te nity has the u-nimp each able right ofcoun-
« tenancing and fupporting it by civil (auctions,
« or i n other words of making it the eftabhlhed
« religion of the country ; for the adoption of a,
« particular church eftablifhment by the (late has
« precifely the fame binding obligation upon the
“ community, as the enabling any other civil re-
« gulation or ordinance whatfoever; but a relu>
« gious eftablijhment“ you add, with the Rev. Mr.
Paley, £C is no part of chriJUanity •, it is only the
<( means of inculcating it.”* Ibis is your grand and
general principle; and that we may have no
doubt how far it ought to be extended you
inform us elfewhere in the words of your favo-
rite author Dr. Rogers, “ that the magistrate or
“ fupreme civil power in Turkey has juft the
« fame uncontrolled civil right to estab-
£< lish the religion he approves, as a chriftian
<£ magiftrate has to eftablilh his choice j chuftianity
££ made no alteration in this cafe ; but left the
“ civil power, as it found it: and if it was before
« the judge what religion it (hould eftabliih, it
££ continues fo ftill. ’ J
You
* Jura Angl.pag. 87, 88, and Paley’s moral acd political pbilof.
2 vol. C.—X. pag. 303.
f Jura Ang. Pag. 83, 84.


I You were not infenfible however that this doo
tiinc might raife home alarms and uneafinefs in
the minds of perfons not aecuftomed to fee things
in the fame point of view as yourfelf and Dr.
Rogers, from whom you have chiefly tranfcribed
thefe fentiments; and therefore in order to footh
their rcmorfes you take care to inform them that
“ the fame learned author is remarkable for per-
fpicuity and ftrength of argument” hoping that
lis authority would do away all the idle fcruples,
hat might remain in their breafts. Pag. 99 there-
ore the Doctor introduced to render this
ignal fervice to mankind. « Thefe falfe preten-
tions or calls of confluence” you fay, « to difap-
prove, refift or oppofe the religion fandtioned or
eftablifiled by the flate are more pointedly repro-
bated by the learned divine, whom I have fo often
quoted: (then follow the do&or’s words) “A pre-
tence of confcience foroppoting the right of the
. giftrate, or fupreme fovereign power, to eftab-
li{h ar T at all, cannot be fupported by
the plea of a fpecial miflion from God; becaufe
a dodtnne fo abfurd and deftructive to human
fociety, reafon cannot admit to be from God:
and he who pretends to come from God with
fuch a meflage brings with him fuch an internal
°f his miflion, as would over-rule any
outward proofs of it, and he may as well pre-
tend
ttlA~


“ tend a revelation requiring him to tell us, there
<f is no God.”* This firong and perfpkuous reafon-
ing fhould, it feems, eftablifh your doftrine upon
a folid and immoveable' footing ; but either frill
apprehenfive for its fafety, or fearing at lead; that
fome weak or clouded minds would not be capa-
ble of admitting the clear and ftrong light of the
Dodfor’s reafoning, in the following paragraph
you add another argument of your own, which to
fome perfons may perhaps appear nearly as ex-
traordinary as the reafon ing of the Doctor.
“ Every mail,” you fay, “ is prefumed to be
ce affe&ed towards his religion, in proportion as
“ he thinks and feels, that it is the pure efreft of
“ his own voluntary choice. From hence,”
that is, from his own voluntary choice, “ arife the
“ love and reverence, which the majority of the
cc Englifh nation bear to their church and from
hence, that is from their own voluntary
choice, “ alfo is redoubled the obligation upon
“ all diffenters from that church to fubmit unto;
“ becaufe they are fuppofed to join and concur
" in all the a&s of the legiflature, by which the
cc church receives the civil fandtion of the ftate.”
* I fhould proceed in citing the remaining part of
your arguments, if from w T hat has been already
tranfcribed
* Jura Angl. pag. 99, 100.


tranfcribed I did not think myfelf enabled to Hate
to the public what your real fentiments are on this
fubjea, and to place before my readers, without
danger of mifconception, the opinions in which
you and I difagree.
You feem then to be of opinion, ift, that all indi-
viduals of every human fociety and communities
compofed of fuch individuals, have not only a
a right and obligation to chufe that religion, which
appears to them molt eligible, but that every
community has an equal right, and is even bound
to pieferve and maintain by its civil laws and
fanffrons the determinate religion, in the adop-
tion of which the majority of its members concur.
sdly, That this right and obligation of fup-
porting by the civil fan&ion of the ftate the reli-
gious choice which is made by the major part of
a community, extend not only to a choice of any
of the different fefts of chriftianity, but even of
paganifm and idolatry themfelves; for as it is
perfpicuous, that thefe were objeas of the civil
magiftrates choice before the introdu&ion of
chriftianity, by ftrong and undeniable argument
it follows, that they muft remain fo ftill • efpeci-
ally fince your learned matter tells us, that « chrif-
“ tianity made no alteration in this cafe/’ §
3%.
S Jura Angl, pag. 83,


3<ily. That, it being avowedly out of the power
of any magiftrate to order, and beyond the liber-
ty of a fubje£l to obey laws, which ena£i things,
that are “ contrary to the law of G od and reafon,
« or what are commonly called mala'infe”% agree-
ably to the fentiment of Dr. Rogers neither the
civil fan£lion of paganifm and idolatry when clio-
fen by a majority of the ftate, nor the ci\ il fupport
of the fame on the part of the people in obedi-
ence to the laws of the ftate can oc counted
among thofe things which are u contrary to the
“ i aw of God and reafon, or what are commonly
called mala in fe .”
4 thly. That as it is declared by yourfelf, or the
faid Dr. Rogers to be out of the power of God to
fend a miftionary, at leaft under the direction of an
upright confcience, or even an earthly power to
# difapprove, refill and oppofe” the civil fan&ion
of paganifm and idolatry when freely adopted
by the majority of a ftate, not only all oppofition
on the part of chriftian minifters, but all wars on
that fcore, whether in the old or new teftament
mull of courfe have been elfentially criminal and
unjuft, iince things which are evil of their own
nature, mala in fe, are not changeable according
to times and circumftances, as all divines teach,
I but
% Jura Angl. pag. 105.


but if evil now, muft alfo have been evil hereto-
fore.* And further, that if a legiflative power
has a right to impofe upon any part of a commu*
nity, viz. that which in the fmcerity of their heart
look upon paganifm and idolatry the molt eligible
mode
* As it is fafhionable to deny the minifters of Chrift’s church a right
oF interfering even fpiritually with “ the faith, morals, inftruflti'pns
“ and punifhment of any excepting thofe, who fubmi: voluntarily to
“ their jurifdi&ion” (fee Jura Ang. pag. 256) fo it is more fo to deny
thejufticeof all wars undertaken on account of religion. But chrifli-
ans of every denomination, profefling a belief in the feriptures ought
to recolleft the folemn approbation, which the Holy Ghofthas given
of the innumerab e glorious achievements performed bv the Jews in
almoft every period of their hiftory in defence of their religion and
the fignal vengeance which the Almighty enabled, oftentimes ex-
prefsly commanded them to take of thofe, who had no other crime
than oppofing and overturning the religious worlhip, which he com-
manded to be maintained amongthem. From a Phinces, Num. 25. 7.
down to his glorious rival in zeal the elder of the Macchabees,
1 Macch. 2, and thro’ the whole government of the Macchabean race
there want not almoft in every page of feripture glaring inftances to
prove how acceptable fuch feats and wars were to God. And tho’
the mild fpirit of chriftianity does not demand at prefent, that the gofpcl
fhould be propagated by the fword, yet it is an undeniable philofo-
phical truth that more chriftian blood hasftreamed unjuftly thro’ a fup-
port of ill grounded earthly pretenfions, than all the holy wars under-
taken for religion ever occafioned to be fpilt. Roman catholics in
particular ought to remember that religion alone may at leaft occafio-
nally afford temporal fovereigns a juft caufe to difplay the dreadful
weapons of vengeance, which Providence has placed in their hands, as
the contrary tenet contained in the 34th article of Martin Luther is but
too clearly cenfured by their church. “ Praeliari adverfus Turcas eft
“repugnare Deo vifitanti iniquitates noftras per illos. ’’Art, 34. Mart.
Luth, dam. ann. 1520,


I ode of worfhiping the Deity, a law in favor ot
e faid paganifm and idolatry, it muft be
pially binding upon all other fubjeas of the date 5
nee temporal powers make no diftinthon be-
jveen their fubjefts, and the church herfelf allows
f no confcientious obligation to arife out m a
;uman law (which is effentially a general direc-
ion to the whole) that {hall reft upon ot
he members of a community and not bear in
iqual proportion on the reft.
It is from Dr. Roger’s Vindication of the civil
tjlablijhment of religion, that you have borrowed tire
above principles, and it is plain that m inhancing
his doctrines the Doaor all along means to in-
force a confcientious and religious obligation in chnf-
tians to fubmit to whatever religious eftablilliment
is made in any ftate ; fince he teaches, that God
liimfelf has not the power to give a facta* miffion
to any of his creatures to oppofe the right of the
magiftrates to efiahlifh any religion at all* Thefe
words of the Doftor could not in any. manner be
true, if fuch oppofttion were one among “ the
« great number of indifferent points, in which
« both the divine law and the natural,” as Sir
Wm. Blackftone fpeaks « leave man'at his own
l a “ liberty; §
* Jura Angl. pag. 99, xoo.
Sir William Blackftone, &c. pag. 42.


c liberty, ’ and therefore we are ftriaiy reftrained
to fet it down among thofe things, which are
either mala in fe , or which at leaft the law of
nature or the law of revelation “ forbid as being
deftruflive to human fociety, and too abfurd to
" be directed or enjoined by that Deity, whofe
juft ice and confiftency are equal with all his
otiici infinite perfections.”* It is certainly in
this light alone that you viewed the tenets of the
DoCtor, when you undertook to recommend them
to your catholic brethren; but however defirable
an objeCt the peaceful fubmiftion of fubjeCts to
their fovereign may be, and always is, I am per-
fuaded you would not have functioned fuch
ims with your approbation, if you had known the
venom contained in them.
In effeCt to me it appears aftonifhing, that a
learned dignitary of the church of England, who
naturally mult have had the interelt both of chrif-
tianity and of his own eftablifhment at heart
fhould have advanced principles, which eventu-
ally at leaft may tend to and end in the civil eftab-
hlhment of paganifm and idolatry as well as of
chriftianity itfelf. Ex vero non nifi verum. Only
truth can he engendered by truth: and were there no
other exception againft the Doaor’s pofitions than
the
*Jura Angl.pag.9g.


(he bare poflibility of fo ftrange an effect follow-
ing from them, this alone would put me on my
guard againft them, without confidering the oppo-
fition they bear to the revealed word of God in
fcripture, which wilLbe hated afterwards.
Beguiled then by thefe impofmg reafons of ths
Doctor, by the fpecie refti you fet forth another te-
net, which if the principles you fupport were juft,
I fhould not fo vehemently condemn. You are
then of opinion sthly that in all laws, which enact
a religious eftablilhment of what kind foever,
the will of the minority or of thefe, who are
diffenting from the eftablilhment is comprifed
in the will of the majority, who approve of it;
in as much, as “ diffenters,” you fay “are fuppo-
« fed to join and concur in all the a&s of the n>
« o-iftature, by which the church receives the c*-
« vil fanftion of the ftate.”* I (hall examine
the nature of this general propofition more mi-
nutely afterwards. In the interim I cannot help
obferving, that to me it appears a paradox, that
men who are diffenting from the eftablilhment of
* religion Ihouid join and concur in giving their will
to the legijlature for the enacting of fuch an eftab-
lilhment. Nor do the reafons you alledge con-
vey
Jura Angl.pag. ioo.


v-ey to ms any part of the mental conviftion, which
you feem to have of the truth of your affertion.
Nor can their confciences,” you fay be in
‘ an 7 manner affected by fuch concurrence, al-
though they fhould difapprove or CQndemn the
icnets ot tnat church ; fince, as Dr. Rogers ob-
ferves, a religion becomes not one jot the more true
“ for being efiabUJbed. ”f Happily on this occafion
I fall in entirely with the affertion of your fa-
vourite Doctor, as nothing can be more true.
A religion becomes not onejot the more true for
being eftablifhed:” but I prefume that it will
hardly be regarded as a remarkable inftance of the
Doctor s per jpicuity and firong reafoning, if he infers
fiom thence, therefore Diffenters, who cither know
or believe an ejiablijhed religion to be falfe join and con-
cur with the legiflature in its eftablifhment ; which
was the point, that caded for proof. Apparently
there is no more connexion between fuch reafon
and fuch inference, than there is truth in your
own theological affertion ; viz. that " the con-
“ fciences of Diffenters cannot in any manner be
affeaed by concurring to the eftabliihment of
“ a church, whofe tenets they difapprove of and
“ condemn.”* Moft catholic divines I believe,
•would teach diametrically the contrary.
But
d Jura Angl.pag. 100.
* Supra.


But be that as it may, certain at leaf! it is, that
the feritime*>, which is known to be uppermott
in the breaft of all gentlemen diffentmg from an
eftabliihed church is, that as far as their wills
might be confulted, the faid lliould not exift. A
confcientious Diffenter, who knows the truth or
his own religion, will always forely regret to fee
the powers of this world employ’d m fupporting
an eftablifliment, which is a bar to the introduc-
tion of truth, and a clog upon the free exercile of
that religion, which he knows to be more bene-
ficial to himfelf and others. And tho he will
demean himfelf as a peaceable and fubmiftive
in all things unconne&ed with religion, and
will dread every attempt of innovation, left greater
evils and diforders fhould be incurred by it, yet
bis conftant and unfeigned prayer is that the lefter
evil fhould not remain. And thofewho diilent
from an eftablifliment- upon other motives are
known every day to exprefs their greateft repug-
nance, that the eftabliihed power fhould deal out
the emoluments of the church, as they think in
an unjuft proportion in favour of fome, and to
the exclufion of others, who appear in their eyes
to be equally or more deferving of them. \V htnte
I conclude that the natural wifh, deftre and will
of all diflenters from an eftabliihed church is,
thatfueb eftablifliment fhould not exift, at leaft as


i far as it contradias their refpefiHve pretenfions, i*
lieu of. joining and concurring as you in the
a£l of the legijlaturt , by which fuch church receives
the civil fanttion of the ft ate *
I think, Sir, that under the above five heads I
have fairly ftated to my readers your fentiments
concerning religious eftablifhments. lam not at
leaft confcious of having altered or mifreprefented
them in the leaft degree, as my will always is to
curtail, rather than extend the odious matter of
iccufation. If however by miftake you find, that
have mifeonftrued your words or your meanings,
t will be a lingular fatisfaftion to me to have the
mblic apprifed by what method {hall appear moft
efirable to yourfelf, that the above ftated fenti-
ients are not the opinions, which you adopted
1 y° ur Jura Anglorum. My next bufmefs muft be
> examine how far fuch fentiments, whether
knitted by yourfelf or not, are agreeing with
e chriftian and catholic faith, which you
ofefs. 3
It muft be a fingular fatisfa&ion to yourfelf and-
'to remember, that in difeuffing this point we
e under a government, which as it does not
ogate to itfelf the privilege of commanding its
fubje&s
* Jura Angl.pag. ioo.


fubje£ts what itfelf believes to be contrary to ttie
revealed word of God announced in the ferip-
tures, fo it does not exact of roman catholics a
confcientious and religious obedience to any
points, which they themfelves believe tobeincoa-
fiftent with the true faith of Jefus Chrift.* This
tingle circumftance muft neceffarily infpire every
confcientious writer with a juft and reafonable
freedom : happily however on the prefent occa-
fion there is no kind of neceffity, that the gende-
men of the proteftant church andx>urfelves fhould
appear (liy of one another, or keep at the fmalleft
diftance, fince it will be found upon examination,
that on this head what fentiments are adopted by
one are admitted by the other, and that the un-
deniable
* I cannot on this oceafion fufficiently deplore and reprobate the
fondnefs, which feme catholics feem to have to juftify ami
excufe, and even as it were, incorporate with their own creed tic
religious tenets either of the eftablilhed church or of any other, which
feemsto them to approach nearer to the ftandardof that purity oflife
and doftrine, which the gofpel exafts of all. The oath of allegiance,
which they lately took to government certainly demands no tusk
thing of them, nor does it in any manner even imUreeUy countenance
fo unnatural a coalition. On the contrary the wife legiflature of this
kingdom being fully convinced, that the principles of reform and
irrtforrnakUiiy ik doßrinal matters, which make the two foundation
ftones of the refpe&ive churches, muft dfentiaHy and for ever be
irreconcilable oppofites, would not tender an ouh even of temporal
allegiance to catholics in this kingdom, till the form, i» which it
fliould be prefented was cleared from all obje&ions on the fepre of
religion, viz. theviuftlv believed, that an oath, which is only a reli-
gion


deniable authority of holy writ, which both
acknowledge tends to the utter reprobation of
thofe principles of civil latitudinal ifm, which
you unfufpicious of their confequences have en-
deavoured to eftablilh. Your fyft-em is calculated
ultimately to produce the deftru£tion both of one
religion and the other.
The learned commentator on the Englifh law's
fo often quoted teaches, that “ in companion to
" the frailty, the imperfection, and the blindnds
“ of human reafon divine Providence hath been
“ pleafed at fundry times, and in divers manners
“ todifeover and inforce its laws by an immedr-
“ ate and dire6t revelation. Thefe doctrines,”
fays
gious tie would never fafely bind thofe men, who fhould even thro*
ignorance forefwear any of their own principles of religion, or by
forced and unnatural interpretations fet afide any religious truths what-
ever, to which the fuperiors of their church would always have a right
to call them back, when it fhould be clearly difcovered that the doubt-
ful and uncertain words, in which they had forcfworn certain points
contained errors, that are generally reprobated by the catholic church.
Not only a certain form of oath prefentcd by fome catholic gentlemen,
but as I fignified in the beginning of my letter, almoft all the writings of
roman catholics fince the commencement of their prefent controverfies
occafionally teem with expreffions, that appear derogatory to their
church, and are at lead of uncertain and doubtful faith ; which it be-
comes the interefl both of the catholic church and of the (late itfelf to
have cleared up as far as poffible. It is on this account that I venture
to fend you the few remarks, that have occurred to me in reading
your work of the Jura Anglorum, upon which lam commenting at
prefent.


fays the learned judge 'we call -
* divine law, and they are to be found, l e adds,
« only in the holy fcriptures.” Except this laft
reftriaive claufe, which confines the divine reve-
lations to the fcriptures alone, every par o ■
doftrine is acknowledged by you m the catholic
church. Tho’ your religion embraces more o -
iecls, yet whatever the facred books do contain is
equally admitted as a rule of faith by you, y t e
learned judge, and by every proteftant. In exa-
mining therefore your tenets by the fcnpture,we
(hall know whether they are admiffible by you. Elf,
by Dr. Rogers, or any other man. I (ball cde
two cafes in point from fcripture, which relate
vefpeaively to the two fafliionable principles,
which are adopted at prefent m almoft all poll c
focieties; viz. that chriftianity allows of a con-
fcientious and religious toleration of every known
error, and that it grants a right to communities to
fupport with their civil fanaion whatever religion
is adopted by the majority of their members. As
to the political expediency or convenience of
kingdoms either in tolerating error, or ,n fuppo. -
ino a religion, whiclfis not that revealed by
Jefus Chrift, I (hall not prefume tofpeak of them,
as the determination of fuch points is as foreign
from the concerns of a churchman, as t c gui
ance of confidence is from the bufinefs of a m.n.ftcr
R z


of {late, I fhall even wave the intricate and impor-
tant queftion, which I faid before can hardly be
determined by one fettled and general rule-; viz.
when a chriftian fovereign agreeably to the dic-
tates of an upright confcience may fuffer and con-
nive at the exiftence of error, and when he is
bound by the duty of religion to make head againli
; it. For aright I will take upon myfelf to deter-
mine, our fecond James may have been confcien-
tioufly abfolved by Father Petre after engaging to
promote only proteftant biftiops to the vacant
fees of this realm j and it may be reafonably pre-
fumed, that our prefent gracious fovereign George
111. took the fpiritual advice of his molt learned
theologians, before he allowed an idolatrous mafs
to be publicly faid in his kingdom of England,f
or his heretical fubje&s, the roman catholics of
Ireland to be adnfitted to the right of ele&ive
franchife in that country. But I fhall always
maintain it to be an unjuft inference, when you
conclude from what has happened, or from what
m particular circumftances may have been done
confcientioufly, or to fpeak more properly con-
feientiouftv
+ In virtue of an aft of the ift of William and Mary, the Lords
fpmtual and temporal of this realm cannot take their feat or vote in the
houfe till they have fworn, that there is not any tranjubjianhation in the
Jacrament of the Lord's /upper, or in the element of bread and wine at or
after the confecration thereof by any perfon whatfoever ; which if true
the adoration of an untranfubftantiated hofl is ftriflly idolatrous.


fcientioufly tolerated and permitted, thaj the
fame things are in themfelves juft and allowable,
not mala in fe, agreeable to the divine or re-
vealed law of Jefus Chrift, to which every muni-
cipal law muft conform, as the learned Judge fo
often quoted teaches.
The fcripture then informs us that when Solo-
mon was grown old his heart was turned away
from God by ftrange women. He admitted ma-
>ny into his houfehold as his wives or his concu-
bines contrary to the law, which the Almighty
had iffued to the children of Ifrael: you fto all not go
in unto them y neither Jhall any of them come intoyour's :
for they will mojl certainly turn away your hearts to fol-
low their Gods. And to thefe was Solomon joined with
a mojl ardent love A There wanted not piaufible
reafons of ftate to juftify this proceeding of the
king of Ifrael. At a time when by a particular
permiffion of the Almighty a plurality of wives
was allowed, it was the intereft of a great fove-
reign to unite in friendfhip with the neighbouring
nations around him by efpoufing the lifters and
daughters of the rulers of tnofe lands. Solomon
therefore took to himfelf a daughter of Pbarao the
king of Egypt, a country where the fine arts
fLourifhed, and which afforded him an opportu-
nity
* 3 °f Kings, ii, e.


•mtv of introducing them among his own people.'
Sidon gave him another wife, and together at lead
the free ufe of a convenient port in the mediter-
ranean, from whence the kings navy mice in three
years ‘went with the navy of Hr/am by fea to Tharfisy
and brought from thence gold and Jilver , and elephants
teeth and apes and peacocks. § Moab and Ammon had
hitherto been at conftant enmity with the Jews,
but by the amours of the king were at this time
reconciled to them. Egypt fent him horfes and
chariots, and all the kings of the Heihites and of
Syria fold him horfes of the firft blood, and at no
trifling price, for thofe days a (ingle horfe for a hun-
dred and fifty fickks of filver% between eleven and
twelve pounds of our money. And thus worldly
politicians wmuld have imagined, that all the
riches and conveniences of the earth flowed abun-
dantly into the dates of this wife prince, becaufe
he adopted a fydem, which they imagine wife,
that of admitting all religions into his date. p
But as tis the Almighty, who determines the
rights and duties of man upon this point; fo his
fcripture (hall inform us in what light this con-
duff of Solomon was regarded by God. The
Lord was angry with Solomon , fays holy writ, becaufe
his mind was turned away from the Lord the God of
Ifrael
s 3 Kings, it, I.
+ Ibid. 10. 29.


Iff del, , who had appeared to him twice,: and hjid—Cimz-
founded him concerning this thing , that hejhould not fol-
low Jlrange Gods , but he kept not the things , t whicv
the Lord commanded him * W hatevcr exceftes he
became guilty ot afterwards, his fir ft crime how-
ever which drew down the lingular vengeance of
heaven upon him, and was the fource of ah his
other misfortunes, feems to have been nothing
elfe than too great a complaifance in tolei.aiing,
and indulging his concubines in the woriliip of
their falfe Gods.' For it is not to oe imagined,
that fo wife a prince, as St. Augulcine oblerves,
believed any life or virtue to be exrfting in duino
idols,f but out of a weak condefcendence to his
wives, having allowed temples to be built to tneu
Gods, he himfelf was afterwards induced to fre-
quent them and to offer incenfe in prefence of
their idols at a time when lie knew and believed
the God of Ifrael to be the ruler of the univerfe -,
tho’ fome commentators are even of opinion, that
Solomon was not perfonally guilty or idolatry
himfelf, but only finned by allowing it to beprac-
tifed by his waives. But whatever be the meaning
of the texts, the fcripture at leaft tells us, that
either by himfelf or them in the end, he worfhipped
Ajlarthee , or V enus the iioddefs of the Sidonians ,
and
* 3 Kings, li, 9, 10.
+ Aug. Lib. 11. de GencG ad littciam Cap. 42.


and Moloch the idol of the Ammonites. He built a
temple for Chamos, the idol of Moab—and for Moloch
the idol of the children of Ammon. And he did in this
manner for all his wives , that were fir angers, who
burnt incenfe, and offered facrifce to their Gods. And
as the facred text immediately adds, that the Lord
was angry with Solomon , becaufe his mind was turned
away from the Lord the God of Ifrael , who had ap-
peared to him twicef we know that for this con-
duct, the difpleafure of heaven was incurr’d.
At the fame time it is certain that Solomon did
not fo totally turn his back upon the God of his
forefathers, as to deftroy the religious worfhip,
which had been eftablifhed in Ifrael; he neither
fhut up the temple nor curtailed any part of the
religious fervices which the Almighty had com-
manded to be obferved in it till the coming of the
Meffias; nor do we. even find, that he profaned
the adoration of the true God within the precinCts
of the temple by the mixture of any alien or fu-
perftitious ceremonies, fuch as abettors of modern
toleration often attempt to blend with the practi-
ces of the true faith. On the contrary the fervice
of the Jewifh temple feems to have been kept up
with all its dignity and purity to the very end.
For after efpoufitig the daughter of Pharao, and
building
* 3 Kings, li, 5, 7> 8, 9-


building a palace for her, it is (till faid, that
Solomon offered three times every year holocaufts, and
victims of peace offerings upon the altar , which he had
built to the Lord, and he burnt incenfe before the Lord:
and the temple was fini/hed* Whatever therefore
afterwards were his weaknefs or his irreligion in
adoring falfe Gods, his firft crime was only a con-
nivance at or civil toleration of religious errors,
which naturally faps the foundation of religion,
and will always infallibly end in infidelity, where
the principles and maxims of it are cherifhed to
the full.
But our bufinefs is to know ftill more clearly
in what light this crime of tolerating religious
error was regarded by the Almighty. I fhall
tranfcnbe the words of fcnpture as they lie. Ltoe
Lord therefore Jaid to Solomon : becaufe thou haft done
this , that is, haft ereaed temples, and (perhaps)
even thyfelf offered incenfe to falfe Gods, and
haft not kept my covenant and my precept % which I have
commanded thee , 1 will divide and rend thy kingdom ,
and will give it to thy fervant. Neverthelefs in thy
days 1 will not do it, for David thy Father’s
Sake j but I will rend it out of the hand of thy fon.
Neither will J take away thy whole kingdom, but I will
L gi™
'*3. Kings, g, 25,


give one tribe to thy fon for the fake of David my fer~
vanty and Jerufalem, which I have chofenf
In this fcripture example we have therefore
1 ft, The clear prohibition of God to admit alien
religions into a ftate, on account of the danger
of corruption eflentially attending them.
11.) 2dly. The glaring trefpafles, which Solo-
mon committed againft this commandment of
God : and 3dly, The fevere punifhments infiitted
on him by the Almighty on account of thefe tref-
paffes. The text is clear, that if he had walked
in the ways of God to do jujlice before him, and to
keep his precepts and judgments as did David his
father : J if he had fully followed the Lord in fim-
plicify of heart and uprightnefs without the mixture
of other religions, his kingdom would not have been
divided from him, but the Almighty would have
ejtablifhed the throne of his kingdom for ever , as he
promifed David his father. Nay even in balancing
the fcale of earthly empires we find, that the
Almighty laid fuch ftrefs upon thefe religious
confiderations, that the puniihment, which Solo-
mon juftly merited for his own perfonal mifde-
meanors was in part mitigated, and the full and
rigorous execution of the reft delay’d till after his
death.
t Kings 11. 11, 12, 13.
+ Ibid. 33. Ibid, 9,4, g.


death, on account of the previous merits of his
father David, who pleafed God.
I cannot upon any fcore acquiefce in the per-
fuafion, that the mailer of religion and of empires,
fhould at this day be lefs jealous of and lefs atten-
tive to the fupport of his own chriftian religion,
than he formerly was of the eftablilhment, which
for a certain time he commanded to be kept up
among the Jews. Chriftianity we know is the
great and favourite work of his hands, and cluif-
tians of every description believe, that the ancient
prophecies and revelations from the beginning of
the world all tended and were directed to this.
It would be needlefs to examine at prefent, which
of the different fpecies contained under the com-
mon genus of chriftianity be the true one, as the
force of the fcripture argument in eftabliftnng a
nec.effity of Supporting that alone will be equal-
ly ftrong, whether it be of the eftablilhed
church, the roman catholic or any other. No
honeft man can difguife his own, of the truth
whereof he is fully convinced; and no fenlible
man, who knows the nature of divine revelation
can admit of two. On which account I ever
have and ftiall maintain, that in a religious and
confcientious light, which is the only one tha L
regards a churchman, the approbation or admif-
JL 2 fion


fion of different religions is not only to be deemed
Sinful and criminal before God, as the fcripture
has fhown, but abfurd and contradi&ory in the
higheft degree. For here truth and falfhood are
feparated by an indivifible line: tho’ one falfe
religion, when the line is paffed, may drive men
into greater exceffes and extravagancies than
another, yet |no religion unrevealed can be
the true and faving religion, in which God
commands all men to live. A mode of worship-
ing the Deity that is erroneous in a Single point,
is as ftri&ly and as philofophically falfe, as a fyftem
that Should fet forth a thoufand errors and
miftakes.
Tho’ this example does not diredtly fpeak of
the civil eftablifhment of an erroneous cult, fuch
as was afterwards introduced by the fucceffor of
Solomon among the Ifraelites, but only of a tole-
ration of or connivance at error among a few;
yet if toleration, which is the leffer crime and ex-
tended to fewer perfons was fo pointedly re-
proved, and fo Severely punifhed by Almighty
God, an eftablifhment, which is more general
and has naturally a more baneful influence on the
public mind muft have been more difpleaSing to
him, and would have merited a more rigorous
chaftifement. An eftablifhment does not make
a


rt religion a jot the wove true* as you tell us fioiu
Dr. Rogers, but it is a means of inculcating it, \ as
you alfo teach from Rev. Mr. Paley ; on which
fcore alone an erroneous eftablifhment ought to
meet with the difapprobation of every lover of
chriftian truth; or tho’ it fliould not, at leaft it
will certainly be Severely chafifed by God after-
wards, as the prelent ftory fufficiently Ihows.
The other example, which I fliall produce
from feripture to demonftrate the criminality of
civilly eftablifhing a vicious cult, is taken from
the hiftory of the kings of Ilrael after the di\ifon
of the ten tribes from Juda, which took place in
confequence of Solomon’s crime. Before the
death of that unfortunate prince, but when his
unrepented fins were fummed up in the fight of
the Almighty, a prophet by the name of Ahias
from Silo one day meeting Jeroboam a valiant and
iadu/lrious fervant of Solomon in the way addreffed
him by the command of heaven in the following
manner. The prophet taking his new garment
wherewith he was clad divided it into twelve parts, and
f,aid to Jeroboam , take to thee ten pieces : for thus
faith the Lord the God of Ifrad: behold 1 will rend
the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon and wiL give
thee ten tribes. But one tribe Jhall remain to him for
the'
* Jura Angl. pag 101.
f Ibid, pag. 88.


the fake, of my fervant David. And fo forth nearly
as I related above. The event fully anfvvered the
prophet’s prediction; but what makes particu-
larly to my prefent purpofe is, that the fame pro-
mife of a fpecial protection from heaven, which
had been formerly made to Solomon himfelf, was
repeated to his fucCeffor Jeroboam on the prefent
©ccafion: if then thou wilt hearken to all , that I
Mil command thee , and wilt walk in my ways , and do
what is right before me keeping my commandments , and
my precepts as David my fervant did: I will he with
thee and build thee up a faithful houfe , &c. - Thou
Jhalt reign over all that thy foul deftreth and thou fhals
he king over JfraeU*
it does not appear that Jeroboam was ftrictly
a ibeocratical or divinely appointed prince, as
Se n and David were before him: for tho’ the
prophet accofted him as above, his commitlion
teems to have been purely private; and the fuc-
cefr-ott of Jeroboam upon the death of Solomon to
the ter tribes of Ifrael was brought about by that
chain of human events, which always ferves as
an infallible inftrument in the hands of an
Almighty ruler to effeft whatever he dcfigns.
The
* 3 Kings l r, eg, 30, £0.37, 38.


The people during the reign of Solomon, tho’
raifed to the fummit of worldly glory were loaded
with heavy taxes to fupport the luxuries and ex-
travagancies of the faithlefs king, efpecially in
the maintenance of his idolatrous wives and con-
cubines ; and they refolved upon the death of
Solomon to petition his fon Roboam to eafc them
of part of their burdens. As good and faithful
fubjeffs they firft tendered him their allegiance ori
provifo, tha the would acquiefce to their petition :
but Roboam being beguiled by the evil counfel of
the young men , who had been brought up with him J
and leaving the advice of the elders returned a
rough and imprudent anfwer, which revolted the
people; and immediately making an open feflion
they chofe Jeroboam to reign over ten-tribes,
leaving only Juda and Benjamin, which were in-
termixed together to the lot of Roboam. The
young heir of the whole kingdom, as was natural
immediately flew to arms to recover his birth
right, but having affembled his armies one Semeias
a man of God came to them faying: Thus faith the
Lord ; you Jhall not go up nor fight againfi your bre-
thren the children of Jfrael: let every man return to his
houfe , for this thing is from me. They hearkened
fays the text, to the word of the Lord , and returned
from their journey , as the Lord had commanded themfi
by
+ 3 Kings, 12, 10.
+ 3 Kings, 12, 22, 54.


by which means Jeroboam was peaceably fix’d on
the throne of Ifrael, and the land was at reft.
And tho’ by this extraordinary interpofrtion of
heaven in his favour the new prince might have
underftood what he had to expe£i forhimfelf and
his pofterity, provided he hearkened to the com-
mandments of God as he had been inftru&ed, yet
this was the leaf! of his 'concerns: he paid no
regard to the directions of heaven, and became
more unfaithful to the interefts of religion, than
his predeceffbr had been before him.
Jeroboam was not of that religious turn of mind
to remember, that empires rife and fall at the beck
of an Almighty ruler, and that whatever power is
given to man is given only for the fupport and
maintenance of thofe great and unalterable truths,
which God has revealed to the world for the
general benefit of mankind. He did not under-
hand that important and unerring rule of govern-
ment now fo clearly and unequivocally acknow-
ledged by chriftian judges even in their temporal
courts, that all civil and municipal laws muft be
made conformable to the revealed law of God* in
whatever time or manner the revelation of heaven
is announced to them.
Perceiving;
©


Perceiving therefore that in the divifion of the
empire, the temple, which was a centre of union
for all thofe, who profeffed the Jewifh religion,
fell to the lot of his rival and adverfary Roboam,
as being fituated in the tribe of Juda, he con-
ceived a particular jealoufy at this circumftancc,
and in lieu of trufting in the God, who had placed
him on the throne, he betook himfelf to human
expedients and'devices to prevent the defection
of his people, which he apprehended might arik
from thence. I fhall relate the tranfadion in the
identical words of holy writ, jeroboam faid in bis
heart: now Jhall the kingdom return to the houfe of
David. If this people go up to offer facrifices in the
houfe of the lord at Jerufalem: and the heart of this
people will turn to their lord Roboam the king of Juda ,
and they will kill me and return to him. And
finding out a device, he made two golden calves , and
faid to them , go ye up no more to Jerufalem : behold thy
Gods, 0 Ifrael , who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. And he fet the one in Bethel , and the other
in Dan, the two extremities of his kingdom. And
this thing became an occafion of fin: for the people went
to adore the calf as far as Dan . And he made temples
in the high places, and priefis of the lowcft of the people,
who were not of the fons of Levi. And he appointed a
feafi in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the
month after the manner of the feafi , that was celebra -
M ted


ted in Juda. And going up to the altar, he did in like
manner in Bethel, to facrifice to the calves , which he
had made t \ and he placed in Bethel priefis of the high
places , which he had made. And he went up to the
altar , which he had built in Bethel on the fifteenth day
of the eighth month , which he had devifed in his own
heart: and he ordained a feafi to the children of Ifrael,
and went up upon the altar to burn incenfe*
In this manner was a change of the Jewhh efiab-
lifhment effected by Jeroboam throughout the ten
tribes, over which God had appointed him gover-
nor, and as the fyfiem he divided, was regarded as
a mafterpiece of politics, in ferving as a counter-
poife to the religious and political influence of the
tribe of Juda, it was univerfally without excep-
tion adopted by his fucceflors, till the final deftruc-
tion of their empire bySalmanafar the king of
Aflyria. Two hundred and fifty three years paf-
fed in this open political and religious fchifm, and
of all the fovereigns, that fway’d the feeptre of
Ifrael during that long period not one, except
perhaps Ofee the fion of Ela, the laft who reigned
among them, ever allowed his fubje&s to go pub-
licly to the temple of Jerufalem for the difeharo-e
of their religious duties, tho’ they were exprefily
fo commanded by the law of God, at leafi: three
times
* 3 King s > »6, &c,


i'mes every year.\ Ofee the fon of El a, fays the
facred text reigned in Samaria over Ifrael nine years.
And he did evil before the Lord ; but not as the kings
of Ifrael , that had been before him.% For we find in
the fecond of Chronicles, that he at lead: allowed
fome men of Afer, and of Jrlanaffes , and of Zabulon to
accept of king Ezechias’ invitation to go to the
houfe of the Lord :* and it is a tradition of the
Jews, that the like liberty was generally granted
the Ifraelites in his reign, tho’ he himfelf as all
his predceeffors remained dill attached to the
idolatrous edablidiment.
I would here clofe the account of Jeroboam s
change of religion with the fevere condemnation,
which the fcripture pafles againd it, if fome fur-
ther particulars did not intervene, which more
pointedly mark out and reprobate the drange
doflrine of paflive obedience and non-refidance
to every civil edablidiment of religion, which
Dr. Rogers pretends to maintain. The fcripture
then, from whofe authority the Doftoi cannot
appeal, fliall explicitly determine whether it is in
the power of God to grant a fpecial mijfion to lus fer-
vants to difapprove rejijl and oppofe the religion fantti-
oned or eflablijhed by the fate , or whether fuch mu-
don necedarily carries with it its own internal dif-
M 2 proof, ,
t Exodus 23, 14.
$ 4 Kings, 17, 2.
* Chron.3o, 1, 11


proof, that muft overrule any outward proofs of itf\
as the Doftor withes to perfuade us. But firft I
lhall obferve that the change of the religious efta-
blithment under Jeroboam, tho’ chiefly attributed
by the facred writers to himfelf was the work of
the whole country over which he prefided, as the
fcripture and reafon itfelf evidently fhow.
For tho’the fcheme of fetting up a new religion
> m oppofition to the religion of the temple in
Jerufalem, was firft devifed by Jeroboam himfelf,
and afterwards copied by his interefted fuccetfors,
who thought that the falvation of their earthly
crown was involved in it; yet it is evident, that
without the fan£tion and approbation of at leaft
the majority of the ftates, he never could have
effected the evil purpofe he had in hand. He
was chofen by theirvoice to reign, as I before fig-
nified, and muft of courfe have ruled according to
the laws, which they eftabliflied, or which at leaft
they confented to approve. Hence the fcripture
clearly charges the crime of idolatry againft the
whole country : in fumming up the caufe of their
deftruction, for which the Lord at length removed
tfrael from his face , as he had fpoken in the hand of all
his fervants the prophets , and for which Ifrael was
carried away out of their land to AJfyria , where they
remain
+ Jura Angl. pag. 99. 100.


remain unto this day , this crime is alledged againft
them, and imputed to the whole people as a nati-
onal guilt, from which few could claim exemp-
tion. The Lord cafi off all the feed of Jfrael fays the
text, and affixed them , and delivered them into the
hand of fpoilers, till he cafi them away from his face :
even from that time, when Ifrael was rent from the
houfe of David , and made Jeroboam the son"
of nabat their king : for Jeroboam feparated
Jfrael from the Lord, and made them commit a great
fin. And the children of Israel walked
in all the sins of Jeroboam, which he had
done : and they departed not from them.*
I am more minute in rehearfing thefe particu-
lars, becaufe according to the prevailing ideas of
the age, which make popular election and popu-
lar approbation the foie fource both of lawful
government, and of all binding laws, not only the
great prerogative of the Deity omnipotency , but even
rectitude and impeccability are fuppofed by fome
perfons in the paroxifms of their republican
frenzy, to be elfential attributes of the reprefenta-
tives of a ftate, equally as they are of God ;
fo that juftice neceffarily accompanies, at lead: all
their civil affs and deeds, as it does the a£fs of
God himfelf. You will certainly allow, that in
regard
* 4 Kings, j 7, 20, &c.


xeoard to DoCtor Rogers wliat I lieie advance, is
not in any manner exaggerated, fince he flatly
denies God the power of fending a deputy info
this world to oppofe or refill the eftablifliment, which
ibe magiftrate {hall make of any religion at all ; and
makes the pretenfions of fuch a million as abfurd
and criminal, as if an impious blafphemer fliould
pretend a revelation , requiring him to tell us , there is
no God* Could the act of a civil magiftrate be
unjuft, there would be no incongruity in GcdV
oppofing it, by himfelf or his deputy.
Happily however for the world thefe ftrange
eftervefcences of the human genius do not neccf-
farily make a certain and irrefragable rule of con-
duct for man : but c< in compaftion to the frailty ?
“ the imperfection, and the blindnefs of human
“ reafon divine Providence has been pleafed,” as
Sir William Blackftone before told us, to give us
another rule of conduct, viz. its own “ revealed
law” exprefied in the feriptures, to correct our
errors and miftakes, when we unfortunately fall
in o them. Dr. Rogers certainly could not make
an exception againft being fet right by this rule,
if he himfelf errs.
1
* Jura Angl. pag. 99, 10».


I fhall then further cite to you from fcripture
two remarkable inftances of oppofition, which the
new eftablifhment of Jeroboam met with from
holy men divinely comimflioned for that purpofe,
which examples are more pointed againft the
tenets of the Dodtor, as the choice of this new
eftablifhment was not made by the Angle will of
one independent ruler, as would have been nearly
the cafe, if our fecond James had fucceedcd in
introducing popery, but had the divine and uner-
ring fandtion of a popular approbation, as much
as any other innovation in religion can have. For
neither the introdudtion of proteftantifm in this
kingdom under Henry VIII. and Elizabeth, tho*
fandtioned by repeated adts of their parlia-
ments, nor the prefent reformations carrying on
in France could have been more the adts of the
people and of whole nations, than the change of
religion was in Ifrael, as I proved before.
The firft opponent of Jeroboam’s eftablifhment
was a man, not his own fubjedt, but an inhabi-
tant of J uda, which makes his interference in the
religious concerns of the kingdom of Ifrael ftill
more extraordinary. Behold fays the feripture,
there came a man of God out of Juda by the word of
the Lord to Bethel , when Jeroboam was ft an ding upon
the altar , and burning ineenfe. And he cried cut
againft


ao-ainll the altar in the word of the Lord, and ('aid ,
O altar, altar, thus faith the Lord : behold a child
(hall be born of the houfe of David, Jofias by name, and
Jhall immolate upon thee.* And he gave a fign the
fame day, faying: this pall be the fign, that the Lord
hath fpoken: behold the altar pall be rent and the apes
poured out. And when the kmg had heard the word
of the man of God, which he had cried out againfi the
altar in Bethel, he ftretched forth his hand from the
altar, faying: lay hold on him. And his hand which
he ftretched forth againft him withered: and he was
not able to draw it back again to him. Lhe altar alfo
was rent and the apes pGured out from the altar,
according to the fign, which the man of God had given
before in the word of the Lord. And the king faid
to the man of God: intreat the face of the Lord thy
God, and pray for me, that my hand may be reftored to
me. And the man of God befought the face of the
Lord, and the king's hand was reftored to him, and it
became as it was before. And the king faid to the man
of God: come home with me to dine, and I will make
thee prefents. And the man of God anfwered the king :
if
* This remarkable prophefy huttered three undred years before the
birth of the perfon, of whom it was made, was accomplifhed in Jofias
the fonof Aman king of Juda, who after the deftruftion of the king-
dom of Ifrael endeavoured to efface all marks of idolatry in the country
formerly occupied by the Ifraelite9, and dug up the bones of the devo-
ted priefts, who had once facrificed to the calves of Jeroboam, and
burnt them upon the altar at Bethel .


if thou wouldjl give me half thy houfe , I will not go
with thee , nor eat bread , nor drink water in this
place .f
The fecond remarkable oppofition that was
made to the eftablifhment of Jeroboam was from
the Prophet Ahias himfelf, the fame who in the
name of the Lord foretold him, that he was to be
king, and promifed him a fucceffion of lading
profperity, if he conformed to the pleafure of
God in fupporting the religion, which he received
from his predecelfor. Jeroboam’s fon Abia was
ill, and the king ordering his wife to feign herfelf
another perfon, fent her with prefents to the Pro-
phet in Silo, who at that time thro’ age was be-
come blind : but being warned of the event from
heaven, as foon as he heard the found of the queen’s
feet coming in at the door he faid to her : come in thou
wife of Jeroboam: why doji thou feign thyfelf to be
another ? But lam fent to thee with heavy tidings.
Go and tell Jeroboam : thus faith the Lord the God of
Ifrael: for as much as I exalted thee from among the
people , and made thee Prince over my people Ifrael , and
rent the kingdom away from the houfe of Davids and
gave it to thee , and thou haft not been as my fervant
David , &c. —but haji done evil above all that were
before thee, and haji made thee Jlrange gods and molten
N Gods
+ 3 Kin S s > , 3-


Gods, to provoke me to anger , and haft caft me behind
thy back : therefore behold I will bring evils upon the
houfe of Jeroboam and will cut off from Jeroboam —him
that is fhut up, and the laft in Ifrael: and 1 will
fweep away the remnant of the houfe of Jeroboam , as
dung is fwept away till all be clean. Them that fhall
die of Jeroboam in the city , the dogs fhall eat: and
them that fhall die iti the field the birds fhall devour :
for the Lord hath fpoken it. Arife thou therefore and
go to thy houfe : and when thy feet fhall be entering into
the city , the child fhall die. And all Ifrael fhall mourn
for him, and fhall bury him ; for he only of Jeroboam
fhall be laid in a fepulchre , &c.§ The events hap-
pened literally, as the Prophet predicted, and
Jeroboam’s own wife became the meflenger of
this fevere reprehenlion, which the Lord fent by
his fervant Ahias to the king, on account of the
alteration he had prefumed to make in the reli-
gious eftablifhment of his country.
It may feem almoft ridiculous to comment on
thefe paflages : but as Dr. Rogers is fo very pofi-
tive in reprobating every pretence of confcience for
oppofing the right of the magiftrate to eftablifh any
religion at all , even when fupported by the plea of a
fpecial miffion from God , &c.£ You muft allow me
to alk whether the cafes I have cited, are in point
or
S 3 Kings 14.
+ Jura Angl. pag. 99,


or not. To me they appear to be evidently fo ;
but as according to Sir William Blackftone’s
remark, the law of nature tho’ itfelf identically the
fame as the revealed law, is yet of lefs authenticity
than the latter ; “ becaufe one is the law of
nature expreffly declared to be fo by God him-
“ felf: the other only what by the affiftance of
“ human reafon we imagine to be that law fo
in regard to thefe plain fcripture examples per-
haps it may be found, that under different com-
ments and different interpretations diametrically
oppofite confequences will be drawn from them.
To the DoCtor indeed, and to all thofe, who like
himfelf do not believe in a living church commif-
lioned by Jefus Chrift to explain the fcriptures to
them, I can oppofe nothing but the dead letter,
and the bare words of the text; which contain
the flatted: poffible contradiction to the pofition,
which the Do&qr wifhed to eftablifh. By Jero-
boam there was a new religious eftablifhment fet
up in Ifrael: it had the civil fanCfion of his dates;
it was looked upon to be the fafeguard of his
crown, and even the protection of the people
themfelves, who muft have dreaded Roboam’s
refentment, if he could have reduced them again
to fubjeCtion. Two glaring oppositions were
made to this eflablifhment by men divinely com-
N 2 miffioned,
+ Sir Win, Black, pag. 42.


miffioned, as their miracles and predictions evi-
dently evince. One by a perfon not his own fub-
jeCt, but whofe reproof was fo feverely felt by the
king, that he ftretched forth his hand, and com-
manded him to be laid hold of on the fpot, in-
tending to wreak his fevereft vengeance upon
him; till the omnipotence of God interfering, he
was compelled to deflit, and at once changed all
his bitternefs and threats into careffes and pro-
mifes of reward. The other was from a man, to
whom of all perfons he feemed the molt indebted,
the very Ahias, who had prophefied to him, that
he fhould be king of Ifrael; but upon his flighting
the inftruCtions, that were given him, Ahias be-
came to him the meffenger of heavy tidings. Every
evil was pronounced by him againft Jeroboam, for
the change of religion which he had introduced
in Ifrael; and the verification of the Angular pre-
dictions, which were feverally made by thefe two
holy men clearly evinces, that they were not
impoftors, nor impioufly pretended to ground
themfelves on the plea of a fpecial miffion from God %
when fuch miffion had not been given them. To.
men, who are guided by the dead letter of fcrip-
ture, a ftronger conviCtion of the falffiood of
Doctor Roger’s tenets, I think cannot be
offered.
But
* Jura Ang. fupra.


But to yourfelf as a roman catholic, and to
roman catholic gentlemen in general, it will
always be fair to cite the authority of the church as
an additional argument, and in further confirm-
ation of the revealed truth, which the fcripture
eftablifhes. Nothing can be more ftrongly and
more clearly inculcated by all catholic authors in
the conftitutions of Popes, the paftoral inftruc-
tions of billiops, books of piety and devotion, and
directions of confidence, than the abfolute and
indifpenfable obligation of not favouring, fup-
porting, or countenancing herefy and error in any
manner whatever. And as every civil eftablifti-
ment of religion is efientially and from its very
nature a means of inculcating that religion , which it
eftablifhes and no other, in proportion as the
choice and adoption of herefy and error are for-
bidden by the law of God, in the fame degree
muft the civil eftablilhment of herefy and error be
forbidden and reprobated by him. It is evident to
reafon that there cannot be in individuals a right to
fupport or inculcate a religion, which they have
not themfelves a right to chufe: and as the whole
right and power of legiflative bodies is derived
from, or rather is only the collection of the rights
and powers of individuals, as you yourfelf teach,
by individuals being excluded a right to fupport
with their temporal means any religion, which is
not


not revealed by God, legiflative bodies of
eourfe muft be debarred the fame right.
In examining this queftion, I have chiefly at-
tended to motives of religion, as thefe are the
only ones, which ftriftly fpeaking, regard a
clergyman, and indeed which ought to be upper-
moft in the mind of every chriftian. For what-
ever religion exach of all, men cannot in any pof-
fible fuppofition be injurious either to fovereigns
or their fubjefts; and it would be paying a very
bad compliment to a ruler of a chriftian ftate, to
fuppofe him capable of exacting what the law ot
chriftianity evidently forbids him to demand. On
this account, as the caufe I have fupported is a
general caufe of chriftianity, and not merely of
the catholic church, fo the arguments I have
ufed have been moftly common, extracted from
feripture or taken from proteftant authors them-
felves. The maxim is inconteftable, that only
the truh revealed religion of Jefus Chrift can
have a right to be eftablilhed ; and whatever laws
or ftatutes may be enadted through the erroneous
devices of men in favour of a non revealed faith,
thev are no ways binding and obligatory upon the
confcience of men, nor can the tranfgreflion of
fuch laws make a crime before God. In the cafe
of an eftablilhed government differing from the
true religion of Jefus Chrift, there may indeed.


as Bellarmine before quoted taught, from a tear
of fcandal or fuch other accidental caufes arife a
a fecondary and indirect obligation in chriftians to
comply with fome unjuft demands, that are
made of them ;f provided that their compliance
does not import a tacit connivance at or appro-
bation of the error and injuftice themfelves,
which the law eftablifhes. For by this there
would be more fcandal given than, by oppofmg
the law itfelf, and fubmiffively bearing the pe-
nalty, which is annexed to the breacn oi it ;
which is the only confcientious obligation, that
Sir William Blackftone apprehends can ariie
from human laws, even when they are juft and
not contrary to the revealed law of Jcfus ChrifL*
I fignified to you before, that my intent in wri-
ting the prefent letter is merely to fupport a pro-
per confiftency of character and principle in roman
catholics, and not to engage in religious contro-
verfy with perfons of any other perfuafion. Fho
all the errors, that are obje&ed to us fliould be
real
+ See before, pag £6.
* In relation to thofe laws, which enjoin only pofitive duties, or
forbid only fuch things as are not mala in fe, but mala prohibita , merely
without any intermixture of moral guilt, annexing a penalty to non
compliance, here I apprehend confcience is no farther concerned,
than by directiug our fubniiltion to ths penalty, in cafe of our breach
of thofe laws. Sir Wm. Black, comment, jjag. 57.


real, {till the world will look for and judly de-
mand of us a confiftency of thought and prim
ciple ; and I own that my nerves feldom experi-
ence a greater irritation, than when I fee men
valuing themfelves for the fuperior merits and
fan&ity, yea abfolute inerrancy of their own
church, and yet abetting every tenet and
maxim, that tends to its vilification and de-
ftruction.
There is not as 1 have ihown a right in dates to
cftablith any other than the one religion of Jefus
Chrift, as there is not in individuals a right to
chufe any but that one : and as roman catholics
avowedly profefs to the world their firm belief of
being in the foie poffeflion of the genuine doc-
trines of Jefus Chrift, they cannot confidently
with their principles approve of any meafures,
which tend even indirectly to edablith and incul-
cate a different faith from their own. In your
popular fydem of religion, which makes the con-
fidence of every man the fovereign umpire in all
religious controverfies, at lead for himfelf, a right
in communities to edablith is certainly a natural
confequence of a right in individuals to chufe
their own religion: but as agreeably to catholic
principles neither of thofe rights can be admitted,
many of the inferences which you have drawn
from


from them in your Jura Angjorufn arc greatly ex-
ceptionable ; and tho’ I do not pretend to offer
the public a complete criticifm upon every cen-
furable propofition of your work, yet there are
fome fo remarkably erroneous, that I cannot help
giving you my further obfervations on them :
which will make the addition of a few fiiects more
to the prefent letter.
CONSISTENCY OF CHARACTER AND PRINCIPLE
A corollary that I drew from my obfervations
in the firft part, was that whatever judgment diffe-
rent men may form of the merits of different reli-
gions, no fingle man convinced to a degree of
perfect moral certitude of the truth of his own,
can admit a probability, or even a poffibility of
truths fubfifting in any other. And as fuch is the
cafe of roman catholics, by the fame rule no
catholic can confcientioufly give his fandlion and
approbation to the civil eftablifhment of any other
religion, becaufe he knows fuch eftablifhment to
be a means of inculcating error and falfhood,
which in no circumftances is man allowed to for-
ward and promote by a pofitive a£t of his own
concurrence.' So far the general rule of con-
fcience appears clear and unexceptionable.
O But


But as to a paftive toleration of, or a material
co-operation with error, as our divines generally
call it, it is fo nice and intricate a point in chrif-
tian morality, that I fhould dread a theological
examination of the queftion, left on one hand I
fhould run into too great a laxity of morals, or on
the other reftrain the confciences of men beyond
the due tenor of the law, which is always known
to be hurtful to the interefts of chriftianity, by-
multiplying the tranfgreflions of weak men, rather
than curtailing the number of their fins. On this
account I have hitherto carefully avoided dif-
cufling that point.
But by the general law of confcience a civil
eftablifhment of error never can be approved of
by thofe, who know the tendency of it; nor can
any part of fuch eftablifhment of its own nature,
ex vi fua be binding on the confcience of men.
The reafon whereof is drawn from the nature and
acknowledged principles of all human laws:
i ft. becaufe all obje£ts comprifed under fuch an
eftablifhment are either of their own nature unjuft
and unholy, or directed to an unjuft and unholy
end. 2dly. becaufe the countenancing and in-
culcating of error never can tend to the effential
good of a community. 3dly. becaufe under the
delegation of heaven no power can be enjoy’d hy-
men


men, to enact laws to lead their fellow creatures
aftray. Neverthelefs agreeably to the fame gene-
ral principles of human laws, which I before
cited from Bellarmine, there may occafionally
from particular circumftances arife a fecondary
and indirect obligation binding the confciences
of men to fubmit to certain parts of the civil efta-
blifliment of a falfe religion ; as we dial l fee.
The only rule to be given upon this fubjetft,
which feems reafonable and juft is, that the
things which are commanded by the civil efta-
blifhment of an erroneous religion fliould be
ift. of their own nature indifferent, that is appli-
cable to good or bad purpofes according to the
different difpofitions, that may be made of them;
and 2dly. that in the application, which is made
of them to an evil end, no direft: and voluntary
co-operation ftiould be given on the part of thofe,
who know the evil purpofe, to which they are
dire&ed. In any other circumftances I do not
conceive, that fubmiflion to the civil eftablillunent
of a falfe religion can be free of moral guilt, in the
fight of a juft and all-righteous Cod. But to
avoid all miftake on this fubjefl, you will care-
fully notice, that by the civil eftablithment of a
falfe religion are meant only thofe regulations of a
ftate, which are directed to the immediate fup-
O 2 port


port and maintenance of error, not laws that are
enadted in favour or for defence; of governors or
other perfons, who chance to be involved in an
erroneous belief. Thus our Saviour paid tribute
for himfelf and Peter to Tiberius Casfar, who to
the dignity of Emperor joined that of Flamen, or
high pried of the Gods of the Romans; tho’ his
providence would never permit his bittered ene-
mies, to devife the malicious dratagem of procur-
ing taxes to be demanded of him for the fupport
of the heathenifh temples and miniders of Rome,
whatever expences were annually incurred by the
date on thofe accounts.
I believe that dnce the reformation catholics
have uniformly, at lead with the exception of
very few, paid tithes and other burdens impofed
by the date for the fupport of the edablifhed
church and its miniders, whom in their own con-
fcience they knew to be erroneous. Neither the
divine law, nor the inditutions of men agreeably
to the received principles of human laws before
dated, could lay a confcientious obligation upon
them fo to do. The money exadted of them
however was applicable to good or evil purpofes,
as men fhould chufe, and their concurrence to
the fupport of error was known not to be volun-
tary and free. They difcharged the burdens
m erelv


merely to exempt themfelves from the opprefiion
of other more violent and fanguinary laws, that
flood forth againft them, and which not unfre-
quently were rigoroufly put in execution. What
they paid, apparently on the fcore of fupporting
the eftablifhment, was the price of purchafmg the
fmall freedom, which they enjoy’d of practifing
their own religion in barns and garrets, whither
the magiftrates of the ftate would have oftener
purfued them, if it had not been for the pra£ticai
demonftration, which they gave by their pacific
behaviour, of being difpofed to be fubmifiive
fubjefts, as far as confcience would permit
But as to a direct and intentional co-operation
with error, they always held it in abhorrence. A
catholic from the days of the reformation would
no more of his own accord, have contributed to
the fupport of the religious eftablifhment of the
ftate, than a confcientious Jew in the days of
Solomon would have laid down his voluntary
quota for building a temple for Chamos the idol of
Moab or for Moloch the idol of the children of Ammon •*
and if individuals occafionally have been feen to
depart from this conduct, it has only been from a
mifconception of the principles of their religion,
and not knowing what confcience demanded of
them.
* 3 Kings, u, 7.


them. Far my part Ido not conceive, thatPro-
tenants, or any other defcription of chriftians
living in foreign parts under catholic govern-
ments, and confcientioufly convinced of the truth
of their own religion .could, as long as their in-
vincible ignorance continues, adopt any other
rule of condudl than this. If bigotry and enthu-
fiafm, the effe&s whereof are very different from
what proceed from a confcientious conviftion of
truth, were to engage them in difturbances againft
the date, in order to favour their own religion,
they would be highly blameable: and I fliould
cenfure catholics, for ufing improper and il-
legal means in this kingdom, to recover the
rights of their church, and the free and uncon-
trouled exercife of their religion. But a free and
intentional concurrence to what is known to be
erroneous, is at all times blameable.
•3
It was neceffary to date thefe general principles
of duty, before I could point to you where you
appear to be inconddent to the chara&er of a ca-
tholic, which you profefs. There are three par-
ticular points in your Jura Anglorum, in which
you feem to have trefpaffed more remarkably, and
you will allow me to date them to you. Your
firft inconddency is in approving the principles of
the revolution, by which the catholic religion is
banifhed


baniihed forever from this kingdom: the fecond m
making the catholic canon law dependent on the
authority and will of the temporal legiflature.
The third in attributing to the rulers of the realm
powers over the church and its property, which
God never granted them. Under thefe three
heads* I hope to mark out to you the chief mif-
takes, into which you have fallen.
It is become fafhionable w r ith fome catholics at
prefent to fpeak in raptures of the famous revo-
lution of 1688. Till late years however Ido not
recoiled! hearing either laymen or clergymen
amongft us, launch out in praife of that extraor-
dinary epoch; not thro’ a blind attachment to
Jacobitifm, as fome may imagine ; but becaufe
they knew the principles fetforth and eftablifhed
at the revolution to be inimical to their ov> 11
religion. When men are ftrongly attached, efpe-
cially thro’ a rational and confcientious convic-
tion to any obje6l, it is natural for them to efpoufe
the intereft of thofe, whom they think mod
capable of promoting the concern, which is
neareft their heart: and the fecond James being
the only catholic fovereign, who fmee the reign
of Elizabeth had fway’d the feeptre of this realm;
by many catholics his welfare and profperity were
deemed to be the ftandard hope ol tne wtUaic
and


and profperity of their own church. Whether
this judgment was formed prudently and wifely
or not, is not my prefent bufmefs to examine :
but if any catholics efpoufed the caufe of James,
which I am inclined to think was far from being
a general fentiment among them, it was with a
view to their religion, rather than thro’ an attach-
ment either to his perfon or family, that they fol-
lowed his party. ”Jhe hope of recovering under
the government of the Stuarts the rights of their
church, of which they thought themfelves un-
juftly deprived, was the motive, that had the
greateft influence on thofe, who are known to
have adhered to them.
It would be ridiculous in attempting to explain
the duties of confluence to fo enlightened a gen-
tleman as yourfelf, to pretend to make the caufe
of religion, and the caufe of any one Angle man
the fame. James may have adted prudently or
imprudently in fupporting the catholic religion,
which he himfelf had embraced, and the juftice
of the caufe will remain identically the fame ; as
on the other hand, tho’ the people fliould have
had reafons to revolt againft the hereditary fove-
reign of the realm, and call in the aid of a foreign
prince to fettle their government for them, before
he had abdicated the throne; yet in making the
fettlement


fettlement they may have eftablilhed principles,
which are contradi&ory to the true religion of
Jefus Chrift, and of courfe are inadmiffible by
catholics. In examining therefore this point it is
plain, that I am neither engaged to declare myfelf
an advocate of all King James’ conduct, nor ne-
ceffitated to reprobate every meafure, that was
taken by his rival William 111. in oppolition to
Him. But where the principled of the revolution
are pointedly dire6ted againfl: the catholic church,
it is unjuftifiable in any catholic to approve of
them, and on this fcore I think, that manypro-
pofitions in your Jura Anglorum are ftri&ly Cen-
furable.
To know your general opinion upon this fub*>
je£t, it is only needful to refer my readers to the
citations, which I gave from your work in the
twenty-feventh page of this letter, where your fen ti-
ments are clearly and unequivocally hated. You
aflert there in as ftrong language, as can be ufed
by man, that at the revolution there was a certain
and undeniable right to eftablilh the proteftant
religion in this kingdom, in virtue of the free
choice of the people; and in winding up the ar-
gument, by which you endeavoured to prove
this affertion, you have page 192 and 193 the
following words, which I (hall add to the above
P citation:


citation. ‘ The immediate caufe of the revo-
« lution in 1688 was the diflike, which the nation
« had to the religion of their fovereign. But
« THE INHERENT RIGHTS AND INCUMBENT
« DUTIES OF INDIVIDUALS, AND OF THE
community, of which I have before fpoken,
« WILL WHEN CANDIDLY VIEWED, I HOPE
“ SUFFICIENTLY JUSTIFY, AND FOR EVER
*• ESTABLISH THE PRINCIPLES, UPON WHICH
“ OUR ANCESTORS EFFECTED THE REVOLU-
c* TION, AND THEIR POSTERITY TO THIS DAY
‘ CHERISH AND SUPPORT IT IN ITS CONSE*
j
QUENCES AND EFFECTS.
Any impartial man, who reads thefe words
cannot harbour a moment’s doubt, but that you
fully and unequivocally approve the civil eftab-
lifhment of the proteftant religion, made at the
revolution, together with all “ its confequences
and effeftswhich approbation I faid before, is
only a natural confequence flowing from the pre-
tended rights of men to chufe and eftablifh their
own religion, which you had laboured before to
make good. But as I demonftrated the inadmiffi-
bility of fuch rights by a catholic, I mull of courfe
deny the confequences flowing from them. —In
ffeft I do not conceive, even independently of
delicacy
ra Anglo rum, pag. 198, 198


delicacy of confcience, how any mail of principle
and honour can acquiefce in them. You have
heard of peevifh and ill-natured matrons, who
after feverely corredting an innocent babe for a
fault no otherwife cenfurable, than becaufe it
withftood the high pleafure of the venerable mif-
trefs, have impofed upon the child a more humi-
liating penance afterwards, by obliging him
to kifs the rod, with which he was chaftifed. I
Ihould beforry to fufpect our rulers of harbouring
fo unmanly a difpofition, nor do I think it credi-
ble, after profcribing the catholic religion in the
Severe manner in which they did, that it fhould
have entered the breafts of our legiflators to de-
mand of catholics themfelves to “ cherifli” and
give their approbation to the high adf of their
power together “ with its confequenees and
“ effedts,” by which the catholic religion was
profcribed.
Such bafe and unbecoming Sentiments are not
thoSe of a generous and enlightened government j
and if of late we have heard expreffions to that
tendency uttered in public, or Set forth in pam-
phlets, it is from the mouths or pens of roman ca-
tholics, that they have dropt: who certainly
were either infenfible of the dignity of their own
character, in having Supported the primitive re-
P 2 ligion


ligion of their country, thro’ all the trials it has
undergone, or elfe like yourfelf, had been in-
duced to imagine, that the civil regulations of a
temporal government are obje&s of the confcien-
tious obedience of a chriftian, even when they are
ordained to inculcate a religion not revealed by
Jefus Chrift. For my part I never can acquiefce
in believing, that a fimple and unqualified appro-
bation of the principles of the revolution, which
banifh the catholic religion for ever from this
realm, can be given by a catholic, confiftently
with the duties either of honour or confcience ;
tho’ 1 no ways judge it neceffary for catholics to
reprobate every meafure, that was taken by the
nation at that time.
But it is impoflible to fpeak with any degree of
precifion on fo intricate a fubjeft, without de-
fcending to particulars. When James 11. mounted
the throne in 1684 violent were the prejudices
entertained againft the catholic religion. James
was not excluded by law from the right of fuc-
celfion on account of his religion, tho’ various
attempts had been made by different parliaments
in the preceding reign to effe£t his exclufion. But
Charles, who loved his brother, either by art and
ftratagem eluded the defigns of his enemies, or
more openly fruftrated their intentions, by ob-
taining


laining a majority of votes in the houfe of Lords
gainft the bill of exclufion, which had paffed the
ommons fo that James 11. fucceeded to the
hrone, as lawful fovereign of thefe realms. His
iddrefs to the privy council on his acceffion, and
epeated afterwards to his fir it parliament was
hong and pointed : ££ I am reported,” faid he,
f to be a man fond of arbitrary power; but that
c is not the only faldiood reported of me. I fhali
c make it my endeavour to preferve this govern-
c ment both in church and date, as it is now by
‘ law eftablidled. I (hall invade no man’s pro-
« perty, &c.” J. Thefe were the two delicate
points with the Englidi nation; and whatever
was afterwards objedfed to the character of James,
probably at his firft acceffion he intended faith-
fully to keep his word, as no overt act of violence
occurs, at lead in the beginning of his reign,
which feems to give the lie to this affertion. That
he wiflicd well to and intended as far as he could
to favour thecaufe of catholics, I make no doubt %
but under the declaration which he made, I am
inclined to believe, that he alfo intended no alter-
ation in the laws of the realm, but what dioukl
meet with the approbation of the nation thro’ the
fan£tion
* See memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, by Sir John Dalrytn-
pie. Pag. 43.
+ Ibid. Pag. 107.


fandtion of parliament, which he was in hopes of
difpofing by degrees to favour the religion, which
he himfelf had embraced.
But immediately after his accelfion to the
throne various circumftances intervened to difturb
the counfels, and perhaps alter in part the pri-
mitive intentions of the fovereign. The Duke of
Monmouth a natural fon of his brother Charles
by the Duchefs of Portfmouth, and his fon-in-law
William Prince of Orange married to the Prin-
cefs Mary, were both artfully intriguing to pro-
cure the crown for themfelves; and the intentions
of the two young noblemen were fo well known
at court, that Charles in his amorous ftrain ufed
to fey of them, that he wondered how they were
fo fond of one another , when they both aimed at the
fame mijirefs * meaning, that both afpired to the
crown of England. Monmouth immediately be-
gan intriguing, and his rebellion broke out in
1685 ; but mifcarrying thro’ his defeat by Lord
Feverfham, it only increafed James’ danger by
throwing the united interefts of the different dis-
contented parties in the kingdom into the hands
of one man, who had more art and addrefs to
turn them to his own purpofes, than what fell to
the fhare of the gallant but unfortunate Mon-
mouth
* Ibid. Pag. 69.


louth. William in delpite of the pleafure of
harles 11. had already vifited England in
)Bi, where he paid court to the popular party,
ys Sir John Dalrymple, and even then, tried the
rength of the nation in order to effect the exclu-
3ii of James from the crown on account of his
digion : but tho’ his firfh attempts proved unfuc-
efsful, certain it is, that the feeds of the revolu-
on were fowri from that day.
It is beyond the reach of human forecalt to
oretell ail poffible confequences, that may fol-
ow from any determinate meafures adopted by
nan. The generals and friends of James dieadmg
i repetition of the woeful difafters, which had be]
alien his father, brother, and in them the nation
at large, and imagining that they might be pre-
vented by ftriking a deadly terror into the people*
upon the defeat of Monmouth exercifed cruelties
upon the rebels, who fell into their hands, which
form an interefting part of this hiftory. -Lord
Feverfham hung up twenty pi doners without
trial, Colonel Kirk nineteen, but with fuch marks
of outrageous infult, that his name is handed
down, as a proverb of cruelty like that of a Nero
or Caligula; and the noted Jeffries, who to his
judicial capacity added tne character of an officer
in the army, making ufe at lea 11 of the appear-
ance


ance of juftice, condemned to death with an
unrelenting feverity a thoufand rebels, aiders or
abettors in the rebellion - 9 a fourth part of whom
perifhed by the hands of the executioner.* Such
meafures were rigorous in the extreme, and in
gieat part illegal, tho’ not unprecedented in
hiflory gf and nothing but the imminent danger.
to
* Memoirs, &c. Pag. 137.
f The accufation brought again# King James of taking away the
lives of his fubjccls contrary to law, feems to be either wholly groundlefs,
or in a great manner exaggerated. He knew nothing of the military ex-
ecutions made by Lord Feverfham and Colonel Kirk in the firft heat
of viQory : as the Bifhop of Bath and Wells was the firft perfon, who
warned Feverfham of his illegal proceeding, before the court knew it.
And if the violent Jeffries was afterwards fent down to try the prifo-
ners, it mull be remembered, that he was not a judge of James’ cre-
ation, but had been in office during the preceding reign. All the
cruelties however exercifed on that occafion arc little in comparifon of
what we read of in other parts of, the Englifh hiftory, Of eighty prin-
ces of the blood, and almoft all the ancient nobility of England, who
periffied in the wars between the houfes of York and Lancafter, num-
bers were taken off by military executions, as foon as they fell into the
hands of the viftor; as may be feen in the detail of thofe wars by Mr.
Hume ; particularly in his life of Henry VJ. And as at thofe times
there was often hardly the appearance of a trial, fo the treachery ufed
towards a vanquifhcd enemy was on fome occafions unparalleled.
After the fecond battle of St. Alban’s, Lord Bonville going over with
Henry VI. of whom he had care during his captivity, to join the
Queen was ordered by Margaret herfelf to be beheaded, ootwithftand-
ing thefolemn pledge, which the King had given of his own word to
Bonville, that he ffiould be fecure. Henry VIII.’s Minifter at Rome
at the beginning of the reformation being defirous to give the Pope an
idea of his mafter’s unlimited power, let him know, that there was not
a'


to which the fovereign and Hate itfelf were expo-
sed, can afford even a colourable pretext at
lent, to jollify what was then done by the fervants
of James. But thefe violences thro’ the addrefs
of the Prince of Orange, were all retorted on the
head ot the unfortunate Monarch, tho’ neither
Feverlham, Kirk, nor Jeffries, were Roman Ca-
tholics.
James was not infenfible of the dangers, that
encieafed every day around him. But whether
from an indolence of temper, a too implicit con-
Q fidence
a Tingle fubjeft in the kingdom of England, who dared depart a line
from his pleafure without incurring deflation : par namque illis,fivcl
parvo momentoab illitts voluntate reef derent. And the king himfelf on t e
'aid publicly before the council, that if any one fpoke of him or his
afhons in terms, which became them not, he would let them know,
that he was rnafter : and that the kandfcmcjl head in his realm fiould be
Jlruck off. Hume’s life of Henry VIII. pag . 112 . That dreadful
engine of oppreflion devifing of Popifk plots, and then executing
innocent men for being concerned in them, was but too fatally diL
play’d by defpotic minilters from the days of Elizabeth to the latter
end of the lad century. When the Earl of Shaftfbuty in 1680 was
reproached by a certain Lord on going into the houfe of parliament,
with the abfurd inconfiflcncy of the Popilh plot of that time, which
was either devifed or countenanced by him, his anfwer was; “ It is
no matter; the more nonfenfical the better: if wc cannot bring
“ them to fwallow worfe nonfenfe than that, we {ball never do any
“ good with them yet parliament “ difgraced” itfel-f as Sir John
Dalrymple obferves, “ by getiing the blood of the old and innocent
“ Lord Stafford fhed for this Popilh plot,” Memoirs, &c. pag.
43. 58.


jidence in the loyalty of his fubjedls, or from the
.evil fuggeftions of Sunderland and other treache-
rous counfellors, by whom he was befet, proba-
bly from all thefe joint caufes, he adted a part the
moft unaccountable, that a fovereign in fuch cir-
cumftances could adt.
His letters during this period publifned in the
appendix of Sir John Dalrymple’s memoirs, ex-
prefs an indolence and infenfibility, that are un-
pardonable in the ruler of a great ftate, fuch as he
governed. Even the laft, which he wrote to the
Prince of Orange, after he was apprifed of his in-
tention of dethroning him, are on the common
topics of the weather, the diverfions of the field,
the turkifh war, and whatever other trifling objedl
occurred to him. But in particular the pitiful
and unavailing claufe, with which all his letters
to the Prince finifh at this time, be ajfured that I
(hall be as kind to you , as you can exp eft* whilft it
evidently fhows that he was not unapprifed of his
fon-in-law’s undutiful behaviour, befpeaks rather
the chiding of a doating parent, than the vigour
of an adtive Prince bound by his fituation to de-
fend his ftate; and the few and ineffedtual means
adopted by him at length, for his own defence
demonftrate the implicit confidence, which he
placed
Sec James’ letters in appendix, particularly Pt. 1, from pag, 289


placed in the loyalty of his own fubje&s. And
againft a fovereign fo ill-prepared to repel an at-
tack, it was that various heavy accufations were
laid by his own people.
The chief crimes alledged againft James are his
re-alfuming the difpenfing power in order to in-
corporate catholics in the army, contrary to the
tenor of the teft act pafled by parliament in 1672 5
his forming the catholic council, of which Father
Petre a Jefuit was made a member-, his attempt-
ing to intrude fome catholics into church bene-
fices, chiefly the deanery of Chrifl: Church and
Magdalene College, Oxford; his laying an in-
junction upon the eftablilhed clergy not to preach
on controverted points, and forming anew of the
fame clergy, and of fome proteftant temporal
Lords the high court of eccleflaftical comrhiffion
abolilhed in the reign of Charles I. and now re-
vived for the particular purpofes of the King; his
fending to and receiving an ambaflador ivom
Rome; finally the famous declaration of indul-
gence, which being the chief hinge, on which
the revolution is fuppofed to have turned, de-
mands our particular attention. All or molt of
tliefe meaiures were contrary to law, fiho’ in the
cafe of the catholic Colonel Hale’s fervirig in the
army without'having taken the tell aCt, the Lord
Q 2 Chief


Chief Juftice Herbert, and all the Judges, except
Judge Street, gave a verdiCt in favour of James’
conduct, which feemed at lead for thofe necefli-
tous times to give a kind of fan&ion to his ufing
the difpenfing power. Parliament itfelf alfo after
the defeat of Monmouth was preparing a bill to
authorize Janies to employ Papids, and indem-
nify thofe already employ’d; but the king, thro,
what motives can hardly be conceived, procured,
that the bill fhould be reje&ed; tho’ this fin-
gle legal a£t in all probability, would have given
more relief to, and more. effectually removed the
prejudices of the nation from his favourite cathor
lies, than all the follies he attempted.
On the 17th of April 1688 James publifhed the
known a£t of indulgence, or declaration of liberty
of confcience in favour of all chridian fe£ts, where-
by catholics, as well as others, if the aft had
been adopted, would have become admiffible in-
to the army and other places of truft, notwith-
ftanding their non compliance with the teft a£t,
which excluded them from fuch pods: but no
direct change in the edablilhed church govern-
ment was made by the tenor of that aft, nor was
the church property taken by it out of the hands
of the prefent poffeffors. It chiedy tended to
enable the King to avail himfelf of the fupport of
all


all his liege fubjects of whatever religion they
might be; a right of which Sunderland and others
believed no law could deprive a lawful fovereign,
and which feemed already to be adjudged to the
King by the decifion of the Lord Chief Juftice
Sir Edward Herbert, and the bench of Judges in
the above cafe of Colonel Hales.
James fent his declaration to the Bifhops with
a mandatory letter to publilh it in all the chur-
ches: but Sancroft, Archbilhop of Canterbury,
Lloyd of St. Afaphs, Kenne of Bath, Turner of
Ely, of Chichefter, White of Peterborough,
and Trelawney of Briftol, drew up a petition
againft it, grounded on the non-power of the
king to difpenfe, and fix of them, the Archbilhop
being ill, prefented it to the king, whilft all the
Bilhops of the kingdom refufed publiihing the
declaration in their churches. On the eighth of
the following June the petitioners were fummoned
before the council, reprir aided and committed
to the tower ; and on the 20th of the fame month
brought to their trial, and acquitted; about
which time the queen was brought to bed of a
lon to the great fatisfadtion of the king and his
friends.
As


As this perhaps is the moft remarkably infence
In Englifh hiftory, of oppofition made by Bilhops
of the efeblifhed church to the ruling power of
the fete, it is neceffary to note the verdiX palled
in their favour, as it was fuggefted by the counfel,
who pleaded their eaufe> and approved by the
jury, who acquitted them : viz. that the petiti-
oning “ Bilhops as Peers of the realm,' had a
“ right to give counfel to the king, and as Pre-
“ iates, it was their duty to attend to the jnte-
“ refts of that religion, which was committed to
“ their charge ; v on which ground all the char-
ges of libel and fedition, which were brought
againft them were at once done away.
From this moment the dilturbances in the
nation became every day greater, the difetisfac-
tion of all parties encreafed, the breach was
widened between the king and the church, and
frefh applications being made to the Prince of
Orange, he a fecond time fent over Dykvelt to
form new connexions in England, in order to for-
ward the plan, which he had long before fecretly
formed in conjunXion with his allies, of dethron-
ing James, and procuring the crown for himfelf.
Every meafure was adopted to attach all branches
of protefents in the kingdom to his caufe ; and
the expedition was carried on with the greateft
vigour


vigour, tho’ with the utmoft diiguife and fecrccv
pofnble.
But what naturally caufes the greatefi aftoniflp
ment on this occalion is, that among the friends
and allies of a proteftant Prince of Orange againft
a catholic king of Great Britain, appeared Inno-
cent XI. the then reigning Pope at Rome, inno-
cent, a nobleman of the name of Odefchaicni
from Como near Milan “ was engaged in a vio-
“ lent quarrel with the French Monarch” Lewis
XIV. who was James’ ally concerning feme ot his
patrimonial rights, “ a quarrel, which interested
<e him more nearly, than the converfion ot Eng-
<c land” fays Mr. Ilume, and on that account,
« he bore little regard to James, whom he be-
« lieved too clofely connected with his capital
« enemy.”* Hiftorians have remarked a parti-
cular fhynefs in this Pontiff towards the catholic
king of England, which is generally attributed by
them, according to the judgment which they
themfelves formed, to the Pope’s own difappro-
bation of the imprudent meafures, which James
was then taking to re-eftablifh the catholic faitn
in his kingdom. But till the difpatches of Car-
dinal D’Etrees to Monf. Louvois and Lewis XIV.
were publiflied in the appendix of Sir John Dal-
rymple’s
* Mr. Hume, VIII. Vol. Li'fc of James 11. pag. «61.


rymple's memoirs, the particulars of this tranfac*
ti° n were little known, and as little fufpefted by
the world. The Pontiff forely refented the treat-
ment of Lewis, and the Prince of Orange, who
watched every opportunity to improve and
ward his favourite fcheme, determined to avail
himfelf of the refentment of the head of the catho-
lic church to promote his own defign.
He difpatched the burgomafter Ouir to Rome
in quality of a private ambaffador, to treat with
the Pope and his minifter Count Caffoni. At
tvhat precife time Ouir arrived at Rome is not
known; but when he was firft difcovered there
in the latter end of 1687 b 7 the French Cardi-
nal, he was already fo fuccefsful in his negotia-
tions in the papal cabinet, that he had engaged
the Pope to join the league of Augfhourg, by
which the Emperor, the Duke of Lorraine, Spain,
Holland, and the whole empire were united
againft France, and whoever fhould be allied to
the French king. As James was in this predica-
ment, and there appeared little probability of de-
taching him effectually from his alliance with
Lewis, he was regarded by the Roman Pontiff as
an enemy; which accounts for the very cool re-
ception or rather “ many negleas and affronts”*
which
* Ibid.


Which the Earl of Caftelmaine, whom James fent
this year as his public ambaffador to Rome, met
with from the papal court. The Dutch negotia-
tor in procuring the Pope’s agreement to the
league of Auglbourg, obtained of him at the fame
time a promife of conliderable fums of money for
promoting the common intereft, but of what pre-
cife amount the fums were is not known, no
more than the individual fervices, to which the
money was deftined, are fpecitied.
Sir John Dalrymple is of opinion, that thefe
fums were drawn from the papal exchequer by a
mere fineffe and ftratagem of the Prince of
Orange. “ The fined ftroke of the Prince’s
“ policy,” fays this hiftorian, “ was in deluding
“ the Pope Innocent the nth. Taking advan-
“ tage of that Pontiff’s animofity againft France
“ he made him believe, that the Emperor was to
c - fend a great army to the Rhine, that he was to
“ join it with one equally great from Holland,
<c and march at the head of both into France.
“ For the advancement of this projefif: great fums
“ were remitted by the Pope to the Emperor, and
e ■ the fums thus got from the head of the roman
<c catholic world, were employed in the dethrone
£t ment of a roman catholic king.”* But tho’
R fume
4 Memoirs of Great Britain, Pag. t g 3.


fome of thefe fa£ts feem to be detailed in Car-
dinal D’Eftrees’ letter to Monf. Louvois, yet it is
faid in the fame letter, that the Minifter Caffino
writing to the Duke of Lorraine told him, that
“ what gave the holy father a good deal of pain
“ was to hear, that the Englifh were refolved to
“ dethrone the king, if he would not take a firm
“ refolution to make war againft France, abolifli
“ the catholic religion entirely, and Join himfelf
“ to the league of Augfbourg.”-]* Which expref-
lion fhows, that the Pope knew at leaft in general
what fchemes had been concerted by the Prince
of Orange and his Englifh friends, before he paid
down his quota to the ftipulated alliance: but
other parts of the Cardinals difpatches intimate,
that as to feveral particulars the Pontiff was left
in the dark.
D’Eftrees not fatisfied with the difcoveries he had
made from Caflino’s letters to the Emperor and
Duke of Lorraine, which were feized upon the
Dutch brugomafter as he was going from a pri-
vate audience of the minifter, employ’d Petit
another fpy to fearch Caflino’s own private clofet,
where the papers, which he had not yet ufed,
were kept. Petit difcovered there a writing, in
which it was faid “ that the Englifh had agreed
with
t Letter of Cardinal D’Eftrees, &c. Appendix, pag. 227.


££ with the Prince of Orange to dethrone James 11.
(< and place the Princefs of Orange upon the throne,
<£ and confequently her hulband William; that
« the Engtifh were alfo refolved to take away the
« life of the king, and of the Prince of Wales, if
“ the queen Ihould bear him a fon ; and that the
« Prince of Orange was not to go into Germany
« to command the Emperor’s troops, but that it:
« was only a mere pretence to amufc the Pope,
« and the public in order that they might have
“ no fufpicion of the prince’s wanting to raife
“ himfelf to the crown of England,” Petit judged
« for certain, that the holy father knew nothing
“ of this fatal intrigue againft James ; for he had
u been only made to believe, that the Prince ot
<£ Orange was to go to Germany, upon the plan
« of which expedition the fecretary himfelf was
££ then working in order to lay it before the Pope ”
££ D’Eftrees’ letter adds that “ thefe memorials,
££ which Petit fell upon were not ranged with
££ thofe, which the Pope had feen and appro-
£t ved.”t However comparing the contents oi
them with what I noticed before, it is at lead pro-
blematical at the prefent day, whether the ger-
man expedition were not a ftratagem known and
approved of by the Pope himfelf, in order to fave
the honour of the papal chara&er, without our
R 2 being
+ Appendix, pag. &c.


being neceffitated to believe, that he was ignorant
of the Prince of Orange’s intention, to dethrone
Janies, which according to the foregoing part of
the Cardinal’s letter was made known to him.
But tho’ the roman Pontiff was perfonally more
innocent of the blood of the juft man * than his minifter
CaiToni, who certainly at lead: connived at the
fcheme of the Englifh deftroying their king, the
fubftance of Petits intelligence feems to be but
too true. Sir John Dalrymple for the honour of
his country, does not give credit to the ftory of
the Englifh refolving to murder James and his
royal iflfue, but fuppofesit to have arifen from the
fearful and ungenerous ideas of foreigners : at the
fame time however he gives not only ffrong, but
undeniable proofs of the bafe principle of king-
killing being cherifhed at that time among the
great men of the nation, as much as it had been
halt a century before : to fuch violences and ex-
ceffes did their animofities proceed. No lefs
a man, than the Earl of Nottingham, whilft he
frequented the court of James to the end, in order
the better to difguife his treachery, privately
“ acknowledged to his friends,” fays exprefily
this hiftorian, “ that they had a right to
“ TAKE AWAY THE LIFE OF THAT PERSON,
“ WHO
* Matt. 27, 24.


WHO WAS NOW BECOME MASTER OFTHEIRS.”f
alluding, viz. to the execution of Monmouth’s
foldiers ; not one of whom however, as I fhewed
before, is proved to have been illegally put to
death by James’ order, or with his knowledge
and confent. As to William’s defign of affuming
the crown Sir John makes lefs fcruple of acknow-
ledging it.
For tho’ in his laft letter to the emperor imme-
diately before his embarking, the Prince pofitively
difavows any fuch intention, yet the letters of his
friends, with whom he communicated more
freely, give almoft unexceptionable evidence
againft him. The Elector of Brandenbourg wrote
to him from Berlin, as foon as he mounted the
throne in date Feb. 27, 1689. <c I cannot but
« exprefs the greatnefs of the joy caufed in me by
ct THE COMPLETION OF THE WISHES, WHICH
« SOME YEARS AGO I HAD FORMED, AND PAR-
TICULARLY SIX MONTHS AGO AT MINDEN”
(where the two princes then had a conference)
« FOR YOUR ELEVATION TO THE THRONE OF
“ England ; which is due to you equally by
“ blood, and by the advantage, which England
“ and ALL THE PROTESTANTS TOGETHER, CVeil
« all
+ Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, pag 105.


“ all Europe receives by your means.”J The
words of this letter plainly indicate, that the
fcheme had been fomeyeyrs in agitation, and that
the fuccefs of it was ardently wiihed for, only
within two months before the Prince embarked
upon his expedition. There is another letter alfo
in Sir John Dalrymple s collection, of as early a
date, as the 30th of May, 1687, from Mr. Fitz-
patrick to the Prince of Orange, in which “ Pro-
“ teftants of all parties are faid to have opened
“ themfelves to Dykvelt ;”* who was the inti-
mate friend of the Prince employ’d at that time
in England for carrying on his private concerns.
If thefe faCts are genuine, of which there can be
little doubt, the revolution feems wrongfully to
be attributed by hiftorians to a feries of events,
which had their exiftence long after the real
caufes of it.
But to return to Cardinal D’Eftrees’ letter, as
foon as Petit had informed him of the difcoveries,
which he had made in Caffino’s cabinet, which
was on the 14th of December 1687, he immedi-
ately fent for the young Duke of Norfolk, who
at that time was at Rome on private bufinefs for
James, and laid the bufinefs open before him.
Norfolk without delay difpatched two meffen-
gers
* Appendix, pag. 354.
* Ibid. pag. 193,


gers to his fovereign, one by fea, the other by
land, that the king might receive the earlieft and
moft fecure intelligence pofiible of the defigns of
his enemies: which whether real or feigned
mull upon opening Norfolk’s letters, have thrown
the mind of the unfortunate monarch into the
utmoft confternation. Every law of policy and
confcience authorized James on this occalion to
guard againft the impending evils ; but the con-
duct of the King from this day to the clofe of
his reign, feems if pofiible, to be more unaccount-
able, and lefs reducible to any known maxims of
government than what even his former behaviour
had been.
If he had been by principle that tyrant, which
he is reprefented, he would not have refufed the
offer made by Barillon Lewis XlV’s mini her of
men and money to reduce his people to fubjec-
tion; and the pretext of fubduing them and of
entirely extirpating his enemies would have been
more plaufible in the eyes of all Europe, as no
civilized nation at that day, would have counte-
nanced fubje&s in revolting againft their fovereign ■
under the pretext of religion. James, who is-
faid generally to have afted by fyfteni, muft have
been greatly overfeen on this occafion, if his real
intentions were to enflave his people, and force
popery


popery upon them, in defpite of their owft
choice : as on the other hand, if he had been
a truly wife and patriotic prince, no more favour-
able opportunity could be offered of bettering the
condition of his country, and of extending the
benefits of the Englifh conffitution, than the pre-
fent was.
for after fubduing his opponents, in which
every law of nature and confcience would have
juftified him, he might have propofed a more
general and comprehenfive plan of pacification to
the nation, than what was finally adopted by
William and his adherents. In lieu of depriving
the fovereign and the ltate of the afliftance of any
part of their peaceful and fubmiffi ve fubje&s, if
would have been eafy for him to propofe a com
mon teffc difcharged of all clogs of religion, which
would have united well-difpofed men of every de-
nomination in the fupport of one common caufe,
and in the defence of their country againft any
foreign powers. And if the eftablifhed church
in that fuppofition, had not triumphed as power-
fully over their adverfaries as it did, the annals
alfo of Englifh hiftory would not have been
ftained for another century with the bloody and
perfecuting ftatutes, which have difgraced our code
of laws, till the prefent happy reign. Nor can it
be


be doubted, but what James, if lie proved fue-
cefsful would eafily have obtained this redrefs
from his parliament; feeing that after the defeat
of Monmouth they voluntarily offered him, tho’
probably with an infiduous view on the part of
fome, to pafs a bill to indemnify him for having
employ’d catholics in the fervice, and to enable
him to employ them in future. The Prince of
Orange alfo would have no longer hood in his way
to oppofe invincible obftacles againft. repealing
the teft a£f ; for with all James’ blunders and the
difficulties, with which he was furrounded, we
find from undoubted teftimonies, that it was
owing only to his addrefs and influence, that the
fchemes which the king had formed for that pur-
pofe proved in the end abortiye. When Dykvelt
returned to Holland at the end of May 1687,
James condefeended to court the favour of that
minifter, to engage the Prince of Orange to con-
cur with him in the abolition of the teft act; and
he wrote alfo to the Prince himfelf by the fame
occafion in a fuppjiant ftile to afk the fame favour
of him. But William who knew, that he could
have no pretext to dethrone his father-in-law,
if his friends once condefeended to incorporate
catholics into the date, anfwered with his ufual
cunning, that he would concur in any icheine of
toleration for proteftants, but could not agree to
S the


the propofal made by James: e< I can never re-
“ folve” faid he, “ to do any thing contrary to
“ the intereft of the religion 1 profefs.”* So
great was his fway and fo uncontroulable his
power in this kingdom, even before he became
the fovereign of it.
In taking an impartial view of this affair, with
truth I think it may be afierted, that James could
no longer remain king of England. Whatever
acquiefcence, and condefcenfions he might have
fhown, ftill new demands would have been made
of him; and whatever in the end fhould have
been his own condu£l, a lefs juftifiable pretext
could not be invented to drive him from the
throne, than what was made ufe of, when a for-
mal invitation was at length fent to the Prince of
Orange thro’ Count Zuyleftein from the chief
nobility of this country to come over with “ an
“ armed force to call the legitimacy of the young
“ prince of Wales in queftion.”f As if a foreign
Prince, interefted in fetting afide the reigning
family, could in the midft of a difeontented
nation and at the head of an armed force be in
any manner regarded, as an impartial judge of
the delicate queftion, which thefe gentlemen
thought proper to refer to him. The invitation
however
* Appendix, pag. 183, 184.
t Memoirs, &c.pag. 19^.


however was either figned or approved of by
almod all the leading men of the realm.
Sir John Dalrymple gives a long lid: of the
noblemen and gentlemen, of the Lords fpiritual
and temporal, who upon the decifion of the affair
of the Bifhops in June, tendered their fervices
either in perfon or by deputy to the Prince of
Orange. He is fearful indeed of naming indivi-
duals, led others who had taken as active, tho’
perhaps a more fecret part in the revolution,
diould feem to be deprived of the commendations,
which he thinks that a£t deferves. So irreproach-
able and jud did he deem all the meafures, that
were adopted by the nation at that time againd
James; and the fame is nearly the dile of all our
other hidorians. Henry Compton brother of the
Earl of Northampton and Bidtop of London, is
particularly noticed by him as the perfon, who
undertook “ to manage the intered of the Prince
“ with the church and in general fays this his-
torian, “ the mod preding invitations came
“ from the tories, who upon this occafion difco-
“ vered, that they and their opponents in party
“ had hitherto differed, not fo much about the
“ right, as about the degree of provocation,
f< which judified reddance.f
S 2 The
t Memoirs, Bcc. pag. J 93, — 4.


The names of moft of thefe gentlemen were
not known till the arrival of William in England,
when both their perfons, and their principles be-
came more confpicuous , and to apply the re-
mark which Mr. Hume makes on this occafion
upon Lord Churchill to the generality of the
nation, fo “ fignal were the facrifices made at this
“ time of every duty in private life to public vir-
“ tue,” that “ they required ever after the moft
“ upright, difinterefted, and public fpirited be-
“ haviour to render juftifiable” in the eyes of the
world the firft fteps, that were taken by them.*
The Prince of Denmark trampled over the ties of
nature, which bound him to his father-in-law;
Lord Churchill forgot the favours of his fovereign
in being the inftigator of the Prince of Denmark’s
defection, and in going over himfelf in perfon
to William •, the Princefs Ann, the darling
daughter of the unfortunate monarch, fled away
for the protection of her religion to Nottingham,
under the fhelter of the Bifhop of London ; and
this zealous prelate himfelf, who remembered
the double prerogative, which had been attached
to his character by the jury on the 20th of June of
being councellor to the king, as peer , and guar-
dian of the interefts of religion, as prelate , deter-
mined to do honour to both capacities, by appear-
ino-
* Mr, Hume, Vol VIII. pag. 295.


mg at the head of a thoufand men in favour of the
Prince of Orange, in lefs than a month after his
landing. He wrote to William from ISottting-
ham on the 2d of December: “ we fliall march
« a thoufand, and increaTe every day much.”
Briftol alfo tendered his fervices to the Prince on
the sth of the fame month, and oil the 17th St.
Afaph wrote a letter, which if his religion had
been pure as the primitive faith of chriftianity, I
think could not be excufed from treafon. It relates
the manoeuvres he praftifed upon his brother tne
Bifliop of Ely, to detach him from his allegiance
to his fovcreign, and what muft ever be abhorred
in a churchman, rejefts all idea of accommoda-
tion with the king, tho’ he ffiould “ be willing to
“ do all, that could be required of him, and even
« to be reduced to the ftate of a Duke of Venice,
44 committing all the power oi war and peace
« and of making all officers, ecclefiaftical and
“ civil, to the prince for his life time, or that he
44 would confent to bills in parliament for that
« purpofe, and to all other bills, that ffiould be
offered for the fecurity of religion and civil
rights.” But none of thefe cautions were fuffici*
ent to content the Biffiop of St. Afaph.
Thus the whole nation rofe againft James, and
oppofition like, a violent torrent bearing him
down, he found nothing to ftem the force of the
impetuous


impetuous current, but a fcanty handful of roman
catholics, who were the only perfons, on whom
he could venture to rely. But their drength was
nothing againft fuch powerful opponents. I be-
lieve that from the firil intelligence that James
received of the dedgns of the Prince of Orange,
agreeably to his fyftematical difpofition, which
was the prevailing turn of his mind, he was con-
dantly devidng and contriving plans to bring his
catholic fubjedfs into power, and to make them
fcrviceable for his own derence. Which accounts
for the meafures, which he took during the lad
months of his reign to pudi them forward on ail
occadons, in violation of the law *and contrary to
the inclinations of his people. But if this con-
duct be regarded only as an intended means of
juft defence, fuch intention mud take greatly
from the guilt of tyranny, fo wantonly imputed
to the unfortunate monarch 5 even in the eyes of
thofe, who give the preference of their choice to
the proteftant religion.
But the cool philofopher, whofe mind is not
warpt by any party confiderations, if fuch a 011 c
is to be found —will regret in reviewing the trapf
a&ions of a pad age, that the claims of religion
fhould ever have been made ufe of, as an inftru-
ment in the hands of a foreign prince, to de-
throne


throne a lawful fovereign of this realm ; and it he
rejoices at any advantages, which may have ac-
crued to the Hate from the change, he will con-
demn the author of it, for a (Turning power to
himfelf thro’ ways and means, which mull be
effentially dangerous to every fettled government,
of whatever denomination it be. But in
comparing the vancjuithed with the concpneror,
whilft his mind revolts at the praftices, thro’
which one forced himfelf into power, he will
pity and compaffionate the other for ufing io few
and ineffectual means for his own defence, after
receiving certain intelligence of the defign of his
enemy. Perhaps on further and more cool re-
fleCtion, fentiments of aftonifhment and even ad-
miration will rife in his bread, when conducting
the fall of a great king, he finds, that rather than
call in the affiftance of a foreign power to compel
his people to fubmiffion, he chofe to abandon at
once all the projeas, which partiality itfelf al-
lows, he was confcientioufly perfuaded were
formed for the benefit and good of his fubjebts.
When James was dethroned, he had no more
than three national catholic regiments at his com-
mand fupported by French pay, and containing
about 2000 men,* a force fufhcient to cxafpcrutv
his enemies, but not to defend bis per ion ; but
he
* Appendix, from pag. 2*7.


he preferred yielding to circumftances, to the con-
tinuation of a reign, which could only be upheld
by a force not natives of the land, over which he
was to rule. Lewis XIV. r s offers of a French
navy and army to fupport him againft the invafion
of the Prince of Orange were rejefted ; and even
rather than involve his country in the expences of
a foreign and unpopular war, he refufed to con-
cur in another plan propofed by the French
monarch, of making a diverfion in his favour by
fending an army to invade Holland, which pro-
bably would have prevented the expedition of the
Prince, and proved his falvation. James retired
from the kingdom on the 23d of December, and
whatever right the nation might have to claim or
eleff another fovereign, when by withdrawing the
executive power he interrupted or diffolved the
fettled form of government; before that date I
never can, as a chriftian theologian acknowledge
the fmalleft degree of equity and juftice to be
found in any of the a£ts of violence, which were
praftifed againft a lawful fovereign by his own
fubje&s. If evils exilted, the law which was be-
coming every day a more powerful weapon in the
hands of the difcontented, was to give redids,
not the force of a foreign Prince, even where
religion was concerned.
In


In drawing out this fhort {ketch of the revo-
lution of 1688, I have endeavoured to ground
myfelf on known fa£ts of hiftory, and to fpeak of
them with all the impartiality I could. If the re-
prefentation, which I have given of thofe times
feems unlike the common portraits,that are drawn
of them, let experienced judges fet the different
pieces before the original, and fee where the
molt natural likenefs appears. My bufinefs is
not to write hiftory, but only to comment, as a
divine on fa£ts, which hiftory prefents to us ; and
if I have been miftaken in etching the figure, it
will be a matter of indifference to me, whether
James and William be called real or fictitious
names, and whether the principles they refpec-
tively abetted, were difplay’d in favour of the ca-
tholic or proteftant caufe.
As to your part the world will hardly believe, that
you are ambitious of having a ftatue erected to your
memory in the temple of Fame on the fide of Arif-
tides, for being more juft to others, than your-
felf; and if the principles, upon which you juftify
the revolution, are not fuch as are compatible
with the peace and fafety of every well ordered
government, there will be reafon to refute them,
whatever accidental bleflings may on one parti-
cular occafion have enfued from them.
T The


The point therefore to be examined is whether
in the given cafe, or in any other poflible circum-
ftances, it is lawful for a people to dethrone their
fovereign, merely on account of the difference of
his religion, which is the principle, upon which
you fupport the revolution. In effect whatever
was the addrefs of William in drawing the people
of this kingdom to efpoufe his intereft, no other
caufe is aihgned by you for the fteps they took,
than a general predilection for the and
a general hatred of the catholic religion, with
which the majority of the nation Was actuated at
that time.
“ The immediate caufe of the revolution of
1688” you tell us, * c was the diflike, which the
“ nation had to the religion of their fovereign
and again, “ imagination cannot conceive a
“ greater ftretch of human power than to make
“ the king’s choice of his own religion (a right
“ which every man poffeffes independently of the-
“ community) the immediate caufe of his depri-
<c vation of all thofe benefits and advantages,
“ which the community had fettled upon him,
rt and which he and his anceftors exercifing that
“ fame religion, had for many centuries enjoy’d in
<e confequence of fuch fettlement: nay even to
“ fuch extent did they carry their power, that
they


they excluded the whole line of his immediate
“ fucceffors, not for the actual exercife of this
“ firft right of man, but becaufe they might poffi-
<e bly exercife it in the manner, in which their
progenitors had chofen to do it before them.”
Anti this ftretch of human power, no greater than
which can be imagined, you juftify on the mere
fa6l of its having been exercifed, “ The abfo-
lute deviation from the conftitutional rule of
<£ hereditary fucceffion—was the most irre-
<c FRAGABLE PROOF, THAT COULD BE GIVEN
* OF TIIE RIGHTTO ALTER THE SUCCESSION.”*
But as in the capacity of a catholic divine, 1 can-
not poilibly give my fandtion to a thing done, nor
acknowledge a right to do it, merely becaufe it
has been done, you will give me leave to invelfi-
gate the nature of your principles, and examine
how far they are agreeing with the rules of chrif-
tian morality.
That you maintain it as a truth, that the people
had a right to depofe James their hereditary and
lawful fovereign on account of the difference of
his religion, there can be no doubt. Ido not
even conceive, that the deposing power (at lead
for that fingle cafe) could be afl'erted in Wronger
terms, than thofe, of which you make ufe. Now
T 2 whether
* Jura Angl, pag. 192, 198, 199.


whether fuch power be allotted to a proteftant
Archbifhop of Canterbury and a convocation of
proteftant Biffiops, calling over a proteftant Stadt-
holder of Holland to fupport their religion ;or
whether it be granted a Pope of Rome, enlifting
into his fervice a Spaniffi Armada, to import
Popery into thefe realms, or finally whether it be
depofited in the hands of the populace of a
nation, who by riling to a majority of votes to day,
which yefterday they had not, fliall make that re-
ligious eftablifhment juft and lawful, which be-
fore was treafonable and unjuft > in whatever
hands fuch power is entrufted, I cannot help
looking upon it, as a dangerous weapon to every
well-ordered ftate, and to what no good fubje£t
agreeably to found principles can give at leaft an
implicit and unqualified afient. There is more-
over a peculiar difficulty in catholics admitting
this do£lrine at prefent; fince they are known to
have folemnly abjured in the eyes of the nation
the following general propofition, viz. that Princes
excommunicated by the Pope and council , or by any
authority whatsoever, whether for herefy
or other crimes, may be deposed, or murdered by
their subjects or any perfons whatfoever. The
general expreffion of which propofition, not only
a s to the claufe of murder , but alfo of depofition
is unqueftionably of the moft dangerous tendency,
and


and fuch, as whether it be aflerted in favour of a
catholic or proteftant eftablifhment, I am fully
of opinion, never can receive the fanction of a
found and orthodox divine among chriftians of
any defcription.
I take not upon me to determine the ftriff lo-
gical fignification of that abjured propofition.
Experience has taught me, that the addition or
fubtraftion of a fingle particle either in a philofo-
phieal definition, or a theological conclufion
oftentimes creates an effential difference. And
if by the drifted rules of dialect 1 could prove to
demonftration, that your commendations of the
revolution coincide exaftly with the principle of
the abjured doctrine, ftill 1 fhould not exult in the
victory, nor harbour the fmalleft iulpicion of your
loyalty, which is known to be fix’d on fo firm a
bafis, that nothing on this fide of heaven can
fiiake it. It tranfcends all rule, and triumphs
over the refiftance of all laws. I fhall only fpeak
what common fenfe feems to dictate on the
fubject: and I believe without danger of
incurring the cenfure, either of my eccle-
fiaftical or temporal fuperiors, I may fay with
truth, that every roman catholic who has
taken the oath, has fworn not to admit or uphold
in


in any cafe a right in fuhje£ts, or even in other
perfons non-fubje£ts to depofe an excommuni-
cated Prince, merely on account of his excom-
munication, for whatever crime, or by whatever
authority fuch excommunication fliould be im-
pofed.
This I take to be the plain and natural fenfe of.
the expreffion, and if in this fenfe it has been
adopted in an a£t of Parliament incorporated at
prefent into the ftatute law of this land, it is not
at the option of any individual, to add to or to
detract from the meaning of the legillature, what-
ever his perfonal opinions may be concerning the
ufe of fuch a power. In this fenfe it is plain, that
an excommunication impofed either for herefy or
other crime muft be made the formal caufe of the
fuppofed depofition: for if that is not the mean-
ing, it would follow, that no Prince, whatever
afts of violence and tyranny he Ihould be guilty
of, having been once excommunicated, could be
depofed by his fubje£ts; which is a doctrine, to
which I believe no man in this kingdom would
readily fwear.
I


I Shall exemplify the principle in the cafe of
James. Let us fuppofe that befides other rnea-
fures adopted by the clergy of this realm againft
the unfortunate monarch at the revolution, another
meeting Should have been held at Lambeth, and
in lieu of forming again a petition, which was
agreed upon the firft time, that the Right Rev.
Prelates for the preservation of their flocks from
the contagion of popery, Should have deemed it
neceflary to cite the prevaricating fovereign to
their Spiritual tribunal, and on legal proofs of a
continued and repeated contumacy, Should have
judged themfelves confcientioufly bound to pro-
nounce excommunication againft him, in all the
forms and rites, in which the church of England
can excommunicate. In this cafe James in the
plain meaning of the word, would have been tin
excommunicated Prince, and if any man at that
time, bound by a Similar oath, to that, which
catholics have taken at prefent, fliould have main-
tained the lawfulnefs of depofing him on account
of Such excommunication, he would to all intents
and purpofes have been guilty of perjury before
God and man.
But if in addition to the crime of popery, which;
was the caufe of his excommunication, the obfti-
nate fovereign Should by various and irremediable
ads


acts of oppreffibn have compelled his people to
join with him in the fuperftitions and idolatrous
pra&ices of his own religion, or at any rate made
ufe of his royal authority to prevent peaceable
and well difpofed men from adoring God in the
true and genuine fpirit of chriftianity, the idea of
being governed by an orthodox chriftian Prince,
or at lead one, who does not oppofe the pra&ice
of orthodoxy, I will venture to fay, is fo native to,
and inbred in the Englifh conftitution, that what-
ever oath the people might have taken not to de-
pofe an excommunicated Prince, they would not
have been guilty of perjury, by haring recourfe to
the meafure of depoling their king, when no
other remedy could procure them relief. For in
that cafe James would not have been depofed for
herefy or excommunication, but for breaking the
compaft, by which a chriftian fovereign is bound
to his fubjefts in all chriftian dates, to grant them
liberty of ferving God in the purity of the chrif-
tian religion. And I fear not to aflert* that a
grant of fuch liberty is an eftential condition,
upon which the tenure of the crown is ever undqr-
ftood to have been held in this kingdom, fincefhe
converfion of our ifland to chriftianity. If autho-
rity is required to prove this aflertion, the known
fentence of Sir William Blackftone, fo often
quoted in this letter, “ no human laws
“ SHOULD'


u SHOULD BE SUFFERED TO CONTRADICT THE
“ LAW OF NATURE AND THE LAW OF REVE-
“ lation,” without having recourfe to any
other, hands an irrefragable proof of it.
But men you will tell me have, and it is to be
fear’d, ever will difpute, which is the genuine
religion of Chrift. Whence it is natural to in-
fer, that a right to have the free exercife of that
religion granted them, muft be a maxim oi per-
o o .
nicious tendency, in arming chriftian febts agamic
-one another, and affording them every da}, at
lead a fpecious and juftifiable pretext to wreft
authority out ot one another s hands. I readily
agree with vou in your inference, if on one nand
no rule were given by the Deity to determine the
true religion of Jefus Chnif, and on the other
no limits fixt amongft men, beyond which, diffe-
rent claimants cannot be allowed at any time to
extend their pretenfions. I fhall not attempt to
fpeak of the firft on the prefent occafion, as it
would be engaging direftly in religious contro-
verfy, a fubjea, which I have determined utterly
to decline: but the latter ought to be peife6tl}
underftood and agreed upon among men ; and
it is only upon fuch conditions, as are acknow-
ledged juft by all parties, that 1 fhall examine at
prefent whether the depofition or deprivation of
U J ames,


James, by which ever name it be called, can be
accounted conformable to the chriftian law.
\ Iho no doubt then be harboured of the truth
of that maxim, that chriftians oufrht to be <ro-
- only by fovereigrts, who will not impede
the exercife of the true chriftian religion, yet it is
another incontefted truth among divines, that
this right of the people is not to be exercifed
wantonly, nor inforced at any time or in any cir-
cumftances merely thro’ the capricious humours
and fancies of men. Even in the days when the
papal depofing power was in its higheft repute,
there were certain terms and conditions, upon
which alone the Pontiff was allowed to declare a
chriftian people difcharged from their allegiance
to an excommunicated or heretical Prince, and
to place themfelves under the protection of ano-
thci governor : and lefs, you muft certainly allow,
can not be demanded at prefent, wftien the with-
drawing of the natural fubmiffion, which is due
to a lawful fovereign from his people, is left to
the free option and determination of the people
themfelves. The depofing doCtrine I am per-
fuaded, never could in any age be lawfully carried
into praCtice, but on the following conditions.
Fir ft.


Firft, the Prince, who was depofed was not
only to be excommunicated or a heretic, but it
was neceffary, that he fhould be convicted ot ex-
erting his royal authority for the deftruTion of the
true faith, by inducing his fubjecfs to embrace
his own heretical*principles. This is the doctrine
of many catholic theologians of the firft note, and
namely of Cardinal Bellarminc himfelf, who
taught it in Rome under the eye of the Pope : and
of courfe if any thing of a different import, and
tendency was afferted at other times by men oi
different fchools, it cannot have been the rccei\ ed
opinion of all catholic theologians, fo as to be
attributed as a common fentiment to their church.
« If fuch princes,” fays the learned Cardinal,
“ do not endeavour to pervert the faithful from
<c their religion, I am not of opinion, that
« they can be deprived of their king-
<k dom, tho’ St. Ihomas was of the contiai y leu
* timent : in 2. 2. quacft. 10 art. id.”
A fecond condition for inforcing this right of a
chriftian people is drawn from the general prin-
ciples of human laws, which I expounded in the
fecond part of this letter from the fame author.
You recolledt, that Bellarmine informed us
in that place, that “ laws, which aie unjult m
■« tlieirend, or in their fource, 01 in then fotna
U 2 and


fC and modes of publication, provided that the
“ obje6t itfelf commanded, be not contrary to
the rights of God, made known to us either by
“ the law of nature, or by the pofitive law of
“ revelation, ought to be obferved, when fcandal
tc would follow from the non-obfervance of
“ them,” to which general rule it is certain, that
all particular opinions, which he maintains thro’-
out his work, ought carefully to be reduced. For
it is a fallacious and unfair mode of judging of
the fentiments of any man, to fingle out a folitary
propofition from one part of his writings, with-,
out referring it to other known principles, which
he eftablifhcs and maintains elfewhere. This
obfervation is neceffary, in order to know how
far Bellarmine judged, that the deputing do&rine
could at any time, or in any circumftances be re-
duceable to pra&ice. That he laid a very great
reftraint upon the exercife of that power in the
hands of the Pope, to which other theologians
had given greater freedom and latitude, is evident
from his own words, which I cited in the
going paragraph. And when the principle of
the depofing do6trine fo reftrained, is ftill further
adjufted to his general maxims of laws, it is plain
and undeniable, that he never would have the
depofition of any heretical or excommunicated
fovereign, let his religious perfecutions and op-
preffions


preffions be what they may, be attempted by men
of his communion, when greater evils, and fcan-
dal would enfue from the attempt, than benefit
could be expefted from the people’s afferting
their natural right of being allowed the free exer-
cife of a religion revealed to them by God.
Certain at leaft it is, that the opinion of this
learned controvertift and of cotemporary theolo-
gians concerning the right of a people to depofe
a fovereign, who (hould attempt to change their
religion, was fuited to the times and circumftan-
ces, in which they wrote. In the feudal fyftem,
where the will of an independent chieftain mane
an abfolute and irrefiftible law to all his fubje&s,
it was impoffible for individuals to preferve the
invaluable treafure of their faith, if their Prince
endeavoured to debauch them from the piofeffion
of it. He was armed againft them with “ a two
edged fword,” as the great Sir Xhomas • • *o,c 00~
ferved in regard to Henry VIII, when the quef-
tion of that king’s fupremacy was propofed to
him: “ if a perfon anfwer one way, it will con-
« found his foul; if another, it will deftroy his
body * And as at that time there was no
room either for law, expoftulation, or the inter-
ference of the representatives of a nation, the
Situation
* Mr. Hume’s Life of Henry VIII. Vol. IV. pag. 122.


fit nation of a people was then very different from
what it is in the prefent age, under any well
ordered government whatever; where at leaft
fome balance of power is always held, and fome
redrefs of grievances may be obtained thro’ legal
means, without running to the extremity, to
which our ancefiors from their fituation were’in a
manner compelled. Whence it is a very falfe
inference, becaufe the depofmg power was judged
neceffary for the prefervation of the people’s effen-
tial liberty in former ages, that therefore the fame
measure can be adopted by us now; a diftinaion,
to which I think moft authors, who have treated
this fubjecf, have not fufficiently attended.
t or my part as far as I comprehend the princi-
ples and doarine ot Bellarmine, whatever
his notions concerning the depofmg power for
the times, in which he wrote, 1 am fully perfua-
ded, that il he lived in this kingdom in the pre-
jent age, he would readily enter our courts of
judicature to lwear allegiance to our gracious
fovereign in the very words, in which the oath is
now propofed to us; becaufe the circumftances,
to which his doefrine evidently relates arc now
no more.
For


For tho’ catholics Hill believe the fame pro fd-
fion of faith to be orthodox and the fame profef-
fion of faith to be heretical, which weie reflec-
tively deemed fuch in the days of Henry Vlil.
and Elizabeth, yet' it is clearer than noon day light
that where an heterodox eftabliihment, thro’
whatever means, has been once firmly fettled in
a large and powerful nation, fuch as ours is; a
violent fubverlion of the fame could not at any
time lie attempted, without the moft grievous
fcandals enfuing both to the believing and unbe-
lieving party, tho’ even fuch attempt were pro-
jected by apoflles themfelves.
Whence we fee, that during the reign of the
Pagan emperors no oppofition was thought ot by
chriftians to the eftablitlied powers. When Con-
ftantine the great embraced chriftianity, the faith-
ful rejoiced and flourithed in full liberty under the
protection of that orthodox, emperor. The reli-
gious diffentions, which took place in the reigns
of his heterodox fucceflbrs, whether they favoured
the Arian, the Iconoclaftic, or other herefies,
convinced the faithful of the neceffity there was,
and of the right they bad to be governed by a ca-
tholic Prince ; but the temporal power at that
time being either equally divided, or ftronger in
the hands of unbelievers than believers, it de-
monftrated to the latter tire utter impracticability
of


of averting their natural right, without incurring
the mod grievous fcandals both in church and
date . which cauie prevented them from attempt-
ing at any time the hazardous undertaking. And
where fimilar circumftances occur in whatever
P ai 1 world, the fame forbearance ought to
be obfcrved, and tne fame fubmiliion fhown to the
pi evading powers of a date in all temporal con-
cerns j however greatly the fird right of man.
which is to be allowed the free exercife of the
hue chridian religion, lliould be infringed bv
them, dms at lead w r as Bellarmme’s opinion as
I befoie fhewed, and he maintained that opinion,
not only for wrath hut for confciencefake, * as St. Paul
fpoke to the Romans.
lienee till the decline of the roman empire,
when different fmaller dates began to be formed
in Europe, chridians never thought of making the
profedion of the true faith a formal condition,
upon which their fovereigns fhould be allowed
to reign over them. But having it at that time in
their power, the condition wms adopted • and as
the roman Pontiff in thofe days was regarded as
the general and natural judge of religious doc-
trines, the difpenfation of the depofing power
was of courfe lodged in his hands: not executively ,
las if the Pope were to raife an army and fight
again#
* Rom, 5.


againft an heretical prince, but judicially, by deter-*
mining when the faithful might, when they might
not, when they ought, when they ought not to
oppofe an heretical fovereign.
However monftrous this papal prerogative is .
deemed by fome perfons, yet certain it is, that
whilft the whole chriftian world was yet of one
tongue and of the fame fpeecti* before the reformation,
it often had the molt falutary effects. Quarrels
of ferious moment, which now are decided by
the point of the fwotd, were either totally pre-
vented, or adjufted by the interference of a Pope.
Sovereigns were hindered thro’ a fear of being
cenfured or depofed by the fpiritual head of the
church, from invading the religious rights and
liberties of their fubje&s, and fubje&s were kept
m awful deference and refpeff of their temporal
fuperiors, tho’ perhaps grievoufly injured by them,
till the evil becoming at length beyond remedy,
the common umpire of their differences contented
to allow them the free exercife of their natural
right, (which they had indeed independently of
him) but which they had agreed not to avail
themfelves of, till he who from his ftation was
fuppofed to be moft interefted both in the peace
X of
* Gen. ii, 1.


of chnftendom and the welfare of religion, judged;
it fuitable for them fo to do..
I believe it is of little confequence to mankind,,
whether this power of the Pope be faid to derive
bv com million from the divine founder of the
chriftian church, as fome theologians imagined,
or whether it originated folely in a ftipulation
formed between fovereigns and their people for
their mutual good. For as even in the former
fuppofition the right never could be practically
alferted without grievous fcandal, where a fove-
icign and his people were averfe to the ufe of it;
their foie dilfent, from whatever motives it aroft 1 ,
muft have put as effe&ual a bar to the exercife of
that power in the hands of the Pope, as if it
never had been committed to him by Jefus Chrift •
he not being allowed to claim the ufe of it, as 1
before proved, where real fcandal Ihould enfue.
Under w hich reftri&ion I do not conceive how
the attributing fuch power to the Pope, in whom
it was acknowledged during feveral ages of the.
church, could have given a juft occafion to thofe
violent broils and diflentions, which are known
to have arifen from it.*
From,
* We have a remarkable inftance in our own memory of the fatal'
conlcquence of proscribing from catholic univerfities all opinions fa 7
vowing the prerogatives of the Pope. When Jofeph 11. meditated a
religiou


From all that 1 have faid on this fubje£t it ap-
pears undeniable, that in no cafe whatever can a
Tight of depofing a fovereign be claimed by chrif-
■tians of any denomination, when it is poffible foi
them to obtain relief, even from the moft grievous
and tyrannical oppreffion, by peaceable and leni-
ent mcafurcs. A hcad-ftrong empiric might with
more plaufibility infift upon amputating a wound-
ed member of the human body, which experi-
enced practitioners judge can be cured, than a
people reject their fovereign, who is either ufelefs
or hurtful to them for a time, whiMany probabi-
X 2 %
religious reform in the low countries, he knew,, that he could not
e ff c a his purpofe without banifhing from the fchools of Louvain all
men, who upheld the Spiritual authority of the fee of Rome, to wh.ch
he forefaw, that hisfubjeas would have recourfe the moment he fnould
invade their religious liberties. As the deppGng doQnne had been
banilhed, I believe,, near a century from that Univerfity, it was no
that particular power, of which he flood in dread. Notwithflanamg,
when the ill-advifed Monarch by realizing h.s plan had driven fc.s peo-
ple into rebellion, and their armies began to prefs upon h* he
thought proper to implore the mediation of the Pope, whofe charafler
hehad fo greatly undervalued, to pacify the minds of his fubje-fts. But
the prefent Pontiff, as every man of fenfe muft have done, anfwere ,
that the quarrel being deemed an affair -of date he was not allowed
meddle with-it. How long.the fatal efTefts of that difpute will cor.. -
nue is uncertain; but a lover of mankind, 1 dunk muft forely
regret, that fo large and well difpofed a portion of the human fpccr«
fllld be compelled either to give up their religious liberties into >
hands of a defpotic fovereign, or owe the prefervation o* their rights to
the fhedding of their own beR blood, which under a more pacific and
left perilous fyflem would in former days have been entirely fpared.


Yity remains of his being rendered again fervice-
able and beneficial to his community. In one
cafe only an individual of the human fpecies
would fuffer in a part of his exigence, whereas in
the other, millions are rendered miferable and urn
happy for a continuation of ages. For the fatal
.enmities and diftentions, which generally enfue
from fuch changes, feldom have an end.
Mr. Hume reafoning upon the reformations,
which took place in religion in the fixteenth cen-
tury, I remember has the following remarks.
As foon as a new opinion was advanced, fup-
“ ported by fuch an authority, as to call up the
attention of the multitude, they felt their capa-
“ city totally unfitted for fuch difquifitions ; and
they perpetually flufluated between the con-
“ tending parties. Hence the quick and violent
movements, by which the people were agita-
“ ted, even in the moft oppofite direftion^.
“ Hence their feeming proftitution, in facrificing
“ to prefent power the moft facred principles;
“ an d hence the rapid progrefs during fome time,
“ and the fudden, as well as entire check foon
“ after, of the new do&rines. When men were
“ once fettled in their particular fe&s, and had
“ FORTIFIED THEMSELVES IN AN HABITUAL
_ DETESTATION AGAINST THOSE DENOMINA-
TED


TED heretics, they adhered with more
« OBSTINACY TO THE PRINCIPLES OF THEIR
« EDUCATION ; AND THE LIMITS OF THE TWO
« RELIGIONS REMAINEDTHENCEFORTII FIXED
<c and unchangeable."* I believe that an
impartial philofopher will feldom find any other
-eflfe&s following from fuch alterations, than thofe
mentioned in this paffage by the learned hifto-
rian ; and upon a clofe infpefiion of the revolu-
tion of 1688, I am inclined to think, that the
amiable and benign efFefts of chriftian chaiity
were not more happily propagated by the changes
of that day, than they had been during the varia-
tions of the foregoing century.
This confideration alone gives me fo fovereign
and utter an averfion to all violent change* of go-
vernment on account of religion, that tho’ I cer-
tainly wifh well to my own church, becaufe I
believe it the right one, and ardentlylong for the
day, when the humanity of our legators ilia
entirely emancipate us from the remaining (lavery
of penal laws, becaufe I am confcious, that we.
are deferving of it, and that our freedom would
be of no detriment to our country ; yet it is not
at the hazard of a religious revolution, that I am
defirous of feeing thofe happy effcas brought
about
* Mr. Hume, Life of Henry VIII. Vol. IV. pag, 111.


about in tills, or any other of his Majcftvs
realms. '
Much lefs can I look for freedom thro’ the
medium of your principle, of a majority of the
votes in a nation grounding a right to eftabliih any
particular religion; for tho* the principle is evident-
ly * n ollr favour in Ireland, where at leaf! two thirds
of tlie people profefs the roman catholic faith, yet
I know it the plea was brought forward by them,
it might be claimed in return by a body of
enterprising reformers drawn from a firkifh Con-
vention, a Whig Society, and a Society of the
Friends of the People, where all religions enter ;
and the pretext of a joint majority might be made
tife of to lay this nation in wade, as it has already
been, to carry ruin and devaflation thro’ the once
fi’ourifhin'g kingdom of France. The caufe both
of Englith and Into catholics hands upon a better
footing : their known loyal and pacific behaviour
entitle them to every freedom, and a generous
and enlightened Jegifiature it is hoped, will in a
fhort time become ambitious of the glorious tri-
umph of treating a large proportion of their fellow
fubjeas, not any longer as a conquered and fub-
dued people, to ufe Mr. Burke’s obfervation, but
in the literal fenfe of the expreffion, as thei/bro-
£hers and friends. On the principle of the peo-
ple’s


pie’s being endowed with a right to be governed
by a fovereign, who will not impede the fie<e
exereife of the chriftian religion, as hitherto ex-
plained, I fhall now examine how far you ought
to commend the revolution of 1688.
If James was that incorrigible tyrant, who pre-
sented his fubje&s from following the genuine
faith of chriftianity, or ufed his royal authority to
wreft out of the hands of orthodox mini lie rs of the
church, all the power and property, which the
piety of the faithful from time immemorial had
allotted to them, and no poffible remedy for the
faid evils could be procured thro lenient and
pacific meafuresy I readily agree with you, that
the people had a right to proceed to the violent
means of deposition, which was the only expedi-
ent left to aflert their freedom in points, in which
it is moll effential for men to be tree. Upon
thefe terms, but on no other I will fubferibe your
propofition, that “ the inherent rights and in-
« cumbent duties of individuals and of the com-
« munity will fufficiently juftify, and I hope, for
« ever eftabliih the principles, upon which our
“ anceftors effected the For in that
fuppofition the principle oi the revolution would
be, not the del olive voice of an injudicious mul-
titude.
* Jura Angl. pag. 193.


tltude, but a primitive «. law or right of nature
cxpreillv declared fo to be by God himfelf,” as
Sir Win. Blackftone fpeaks, and which from the
untoward obftinacy or delufion of an unhappy
monarch it became neceffiary to inforce by violent
and coercive means, that in other circumflances
would be wholly unjuftifiable. Now the ftyle of
moft ot our hiltorians feems to give ample credit
to your approbation of the revolution in this
light.
• Mr. Hume, in humming up the character of
James, on whom he bellows great praifes both as
a man, and as a fovereign, yet thinks the oppref
lion of his fubjedfs on account ot religion to have
been fo great, that the people were fully authori-
fed to dethrone him. And Sir John Dairymple
in the extatic tranfports, which he feels at the-
triumph of liberty, and of the proteftant religion,
difcovers in almoft every word and adtion of
James fettled plans of arbitrary and tyrannical
power, which more than juflify both the men and
meafures, that were employ’d again!! him. The
commendations, which he bellows on his coun-
trymen, who engaged in the revolution, rife
almoft to enthufiafm. But as it is difficult to
draw the nice line of truth, where the mind of
authors is warpt by any prejudices whatever, I do
not


not think, that cither of thefe hiftorians, efpeci-
ally the latter does impartial juftice to the evi-
dence of hiftorical fafts, which they themfelves
llate ; when they attribute the revolution to a
feries of conduft in James, which they knew to
be long pofterior in date to the real caufcs of it.
The illegal proceedings- of James in the affair of
the bifliops, and in other concerns of the church
during the laft year of his reign, are the chief
fa£ts, by which Mr. Hume endeavours to fubftan-
tiate his proof of James’ having broken the pro-
mife, which he made not- to alter the religious
conftitution of his country; but both he and Sii
John Dairympie let us know from undeniable
evidence, that the prince of Orange’s fehemes
againft him were formed at a much earlier period,
and grounded on different pretenfions, than the
violation either of law or promife, of which
James was latterly accufed. The firft breaches
of faith feem to have come rather from his oppo-
nents, than himfelf, tho’ his own irregular con-
duct was certainly made ufe of as the immediate
pretext, for carrying the revolution into execution.
As to Sir John Dalrymple’s judgment upon this
,tranfa£fion, Ihave impartially examined the detei-
minate words of James,by which that author pre-
tends to convince his readers, that thever) hill
Y “ view's


views of this monarch were to fettle arbitrary
“ power and popery”* in this kingdom. If words
have a meaning, thofe of James appear to me to im-
port dire&ly the contrary. Barillon the French am-
baffador writing to his mafter Lewis XIV. on James’
firft acceffion-to the crown, informs him what the
fentiments of the new king were. “ He told me”
fays that minifter, cc that without your majefty’s fup-
“ port and protection he could undertake nothing
“ of what he defigned in favour of the catholics :
that HR KNEW WELL ENOUGH HE SHOULD
“ NEVER BE IN SAFETY, TILL A LIBERTY OF
tc CONSCIENCE WAS ESTABLISHED FIRMLY IN
“ THEIR FAVOUR IN ENGLAND; AND THAT IT
“ WAS TO THIS HE WAS WHOLLY TO APPLY
“ HIMSELF, AS SOON AS HE SAW A POSSIBI-
“ LTTY.”t A man, I think of lefs penetration
and fagacity, than the learned hiftorian, mi«ht
eafily perceive, that the certain intention of the
prince of Orange to exclude James from the
throne, on account of his religion, being well
enough known to the king, he might without intend-
ing to fettle arbitrary power and popery in his king-
dom, have been immoveably fixt upon procuring
liberty of confcience for his catholic fubjecls, on the
very firft poffible opportunity. For that meafure
alone
* Appendix. Contents , ift part, pag. XIII,
t Ibid, pt, ift, pag. 104.


alone, if once made legal, would have effeftua is
defeated all the fchemes of the prince of Orange,
and firmly fettled his own perfon and his offspring
on the throne, notwithftandmg the unc * al V- a
refolution he had taken never to abandon the ca-
tholie religion.
As the prefervation of the crown upon his own
terms was naturally James' firft concern, I do not
conceive that any argument can be drawn from ms
words to Barillon to fhoW, th'athe origina y m-
tended fettling arbitrary power m the °‘
forcing his fubjeas to embrace popery, wl.ilfi t. w
Ihould remain averfe to it. Nor have I been able to
difeover any convincing proof of Ins honouring
fuch intentions afterwards. On the contrary n.
conftant rejeSion of the arbitrary and compuli.ve
meafures propofed by Barillon
his difavowal of D’Avaux memorial to the ■
of Holland a little before the prince of Orange s
expedition, his friendly and confidential icar-
ment of the few proteftants, who attendn nm
L exile, all concur to pevfoade me, that at no
time of life he ever formed filch fchemes.
affeveration of. which fact, he * M to
levered till his death. The irregular atwm *
therefore, which he made to promote cathpu«
during the laft months oHus re,gn, ougntto^


iconfidered rather as the a a S of an enemy provo-
ked to open war (for the intentions both of the
prmce of Orange, and of his people, as I before
proved, were then known to him) than the difpo-
htions of a pacific fovereign ruling his kingdom
by the laws of peace: which again would natu-
rally have been allowed to take their proper
:ourfe, the moment the obj e a he had in view,
vhich was nothing more than liberty of confci-
mcc 'for his catholic fubjeas, fliould have been
ibtained. If this is the fafit, which feems highly
ob.--.ole, one or the ftrongeft, and almoft only
rgument of our hiftorians for juftifying the revo-
rtion in a religious light, at once links into
othing.
But fuppofing, that James really was the arbi-
ary and defpotic prince, which he has been re-
efcnted, and that every fpecies of injuftice and
ipreflion were attempted by him on his protef-
i: fubjeas on account of their religion, tlill it
ms difficult agreeably to the principles of the
oofing doarine, as taught formerly in catholic
ools, to give a theological approbation to the
afures, that were taken againft him. For tho’
great charter of the people, the annihilation
he difpenfing power was not then as fully and
rrevocably fettled, as it afterwards was by the
revolution;


revolution , yet it is certain that for half a century
before the prerogative of the crown had begun to
be greatly retrenched, and no fovereign from the
commencement of the grand rebellion dared at-
tempt what had formerly been done not onl) with
impunity, but triumphantly by an Henry VIII.
and Elizabeth in their changes of religion. James
himfelf, as the event (bowed was ready to fign
any ftipulation in favour of the proteftant eftab-
lifhment, another magma charta , if it fliould be de-
manded of him. Under which circumftances I
do not conceive, that it could be allowable for
the people to deprive him of Ijiis crown, merely
out of diflike to his religion, as you contend. For
where a fovereign does not endeavour, or what is
the fame thing in the line of chriftian morality,
has it not in his power to pervert his fubje&s from
the true faith, they cannot natural!) claim aright
to alter their government under pretext of reli-
gion, ms I before (bowed: but mud bear with
the difagreeablenefs or inconvenience of their
fovereign’s profeffing a different religion from
themfelves ; ns the evils arifing from a (late being
o-overned by fuch a tenant for life, are infinitely
jefs in a moral eftimation, than what would fol-
low from altering a form of government, every
time the fickle mind of man faultcrs in it princi-
ples of the chriftian faith.
Hence


Hence if my zeal for the catholic religion was
<vS aiaent, as the Bifhop of St. Afaph s was for the
proteftant, I ftill fhould not look upon myfelf
entitled to make the confcicntious decifion for
any catholic fubjech againft a proteftant ruler,
which he did in favour of the eftabliihed church
againft James.* \ our “ principle,” you tell us
is to allow to your neighbour the fame
liberty and right of following the dictates of
“ his confcience, which you claim to yourfelf/’t
and I think mine (not improperly) may be, “ not
to allow my neighbour any liberty or right of
dictating to the world upon confcicntious mat-
ters, which 1 do not think the law of nature
and the law of the gofpe! allow to me.” In
this light your commendations of the revolution
muftatleaft be injudicious and ill-timed, as J am
perfuaded you would not give the fame decifion
to your catholic brethren in limilar circumftances,
or if you did, that you would be called to an ac-
count by the fpiritual heads of your church for
holding a tenet, which is not congenial to the
pacific doarines, which they fanaion and ap-
prove.
But confidering the two great principles de-
monftrated before, viz. that only the one revealed
religion
* See Letter of the Bifhop of St. Afaphs, pag. 14 1.
+ Jura Ang. pag. & 7 .


ligion of Jefus Chrift, can at any time have a
jilt to be eftabliflied, and that it is- evidently
ipoflible for any tingle man to approve of two
ntradictory faiths as' revealed by Jefus Chriit;
appears incontefcable, that as a catholic you
tnnot in any fuppolition give your approbation
, the civil etfablitliment of the proteftant religion,
y whatever means it was introduced into this
iilgdom, and tho’ the meafures ufed to cftabhfh
, tho id d have been as peaceable and little dif-
uieting, as tbofe, which the apoftles themfelves
dopted to plant the chriftian church. This ts an
mdeniable corollary following from the above
principles, which if fatisfaftorily proved muftin-
bree their own confequence with, all orthodox
md judicious catholics, among whom you cer-
tainly are not entitled to the leaft diftingmthed
,place and l thoukl not pretend to make an ex-
plicit repetition of this truth on the prefent occa-
hon if it were not for the ftrange and numberiefs
incongruities, which fo many of our gentlemen
are daily difpenfing in all companies on different
fubjeas of their religion ; litterally without know-
ing the import of the words, of which they make
ufe. Such inconfdlencies I am fure, cannoi be
approved by the heads.of our church, and lam bold
to affert, that they are not at any time expe&ec
trom


from us by our wife and enlightened temporal
governors.
I figniiiecl to you in the beginning of this third
part of my letter, that one of your inconfifteneies
is, making the canon law ot the catholic church
dependent upon the authority and will of the
temporal legiilature ; which I (hall now examine
in its turn. lam rather aflonilhed at fome of your
proportions upon this fubjeft, becaufe the direct
intent of your work apparently being to draw a
clear line of demarkation between the fpirituaj
and temporal powers, left a confufion ot jurifdic-
tions Oiould engender difTentions among the faith-
ful, you ought, one would prefume, to give at
leaf! as diftinef and independent an autho-
rity to the rulers of the church for the government
of chriftians in their own fpiritual department, as
you do to temporal governors for the management
of their earthly concerns, and yet the contrary
feems to be the cafe.
I wifli not to alledge any thing againft you on
this fcore, which is not avowedly acknowledged
by yourfelf. In your tenth chapter “ of the fu-
“ preme head of the church of England” you
have feveral propofitions, which, whether they
efcaped your pen thro’ inadvertency, or that you
miftook


mi (look the fubjeft, upon which you were wri-
ting, run diametrically counter to defined articles
of the catholic faith. In general you tell US', that
tc it is very evident that our anceftors never did
“ give a general unlimited fubmiflion to the
“ whole canon law, as appears,” you fay, * c Iron!
<£ the firm and heroic anfwer of the Barons at
“ Merton, in the reign of Henry 111. A D. i 2 35 : ”
which tranfa&ion you detail at length “ to prove
that whatever force or authority the canon law
<c had acquired in this country, it was folely
u owing to the free affent and adoption of it by
<c the reprefentatives of the nation.”* But as
your affertion is arbitrary, fo your proof of it as
will be feen, is evidently null.
Oppofition indeed may fometimes have been
made by the catholic legiflators of England to
certain points of the canon law, as being either
contrary to particular privileges formerly granted
tile nation by the heads of the church, or as pecu-
liarly hurtful to and oppreffive of the people on
account of local circumftances, which the Pontiff
at a diftance could not underftand. And the like,
I believe,' lias occafionally happened in aTI catho-
lic kingdoms of Europe. But as an oppofition to
a particular law of a temporal ftate is no proof of
Z a
* Jura Ang. 836, 237, 238.


a people’s denying or calling in queftion the legi-
flative power of that ftate; fo it is in regard to
the church: or to fpeak more properly, with
flronger reafon does the authority of the church
to make laws ftand unimpeached by fuch oppofi-
tion, fince it is an incontroverted opinion among all
catholic theologians,, that a power to govern,
direct, and even chaftife fpiritually all, who are
fubjeffed to her authority by chriftian baptifm,
Was granted by jefus Chrift to the church, inde-
pendently of any content of the people. I will
be bold to affert, that till the 24th year of Henry
VIII . never did this nation in its collective capa-
city, or by its reprefentatives, pretend to call in
queftion the Roman Pontiff’s right to legiflate fpi-
ritually in this kingdom, whether they thought
proper to fubmit to all his canonical ordinations
or not.
It is a favourite opinion of fome writers, that
both a power of making laws, and a right to de-
cide upon religious doCtrines are derived to the
Pope from the confent of inferior clafles of chrif-
tians; the former part of which aftertion feveral
of your propofttions feem evidently to favour.
“ One part of the canon law,” you fay, “ cannot
“ propria vigor e, have a more binding quality than
t£ another: they therefore, who may rejeft a part
r P t, , , M Of*


of it” (which you crrorieoufly foppofe to h ave
been done by the Barons at Merton) “ mav
- the whole.”* Again, “as no law can be eri-
afcted in a ftate without the free affent of the
« people, which neceffarily attends the exercife
“ of the legiflative powder, much lefs can any
'«.< foreign law enacted by another ftate or com
« munity acquire any binding or coercive effect
« without the voluntary adoption ot the commu-
« nitv, which admits or receives it. As there-
<« fore upon this ground certain canon
« LAWS, DECRETALS, AND ECCLESIASTICAL
« ORDINANCES FROM THE COURT OF ROME
“ HAD, FOR ABOUT ONE THOUSAND YEARS,
BEEN RECEIVED AND SUBMITTED T °. 1N
« THIS COUNTRY, THE MOMENT THIS CONSENT
GF THE nation was WITHDRAW n, the\
- IMMEDIATELY TOST WHATEVER ENERGY,
“ FORCE OR BINDING EFFECT, THEY HAD
« DURING THAT TIME ACQUIRED. t nLC
.more, “ it appears therefore clear, that even upon
- ecclesiastical or spiritual matters,
« THERE IS NO OTHER LEGISLATIVE POWER
« IN THIS STATE, BUT THAT OF
« MFNT.J You elfewherc tell US, that a re,
“ **» >"« F *s2mm
* jura Ang. paS’ 2 37*
+ Ibid. 236.
+ Ibid. : 84’


punilhment of those, who Submit volun-
tarily TO THE AUTHORITY AND JURISDIC-
“ TION OF THE COURT, OR RATHER, WHO PRO-
FESS THE RELIGION UPON THE PRINCIPLES
“ OF WHICH THE COURT IS ESTABLISHED: for
St. Paul, fpeaking of the idolatrous Gentiles of
* his time, who did not fobmit to or profefs the
“ chnftian religion, and writing thereupon to the
lay Corinthians, who had embraced chriftia-
c nity, fays: For what have Ito do to judge them
“ al f°' that are without ?Do not you judge them, ,
that are within ? But them that are without, God
“ judgethF f The words of this laft citation as
effecbaby refolve all the power and authority of
the moll fyiritual court upon earth into the foie
choice or voluntary fubmiffion of the people ; as
the power and authority of any eleftive monarch,
or of the deputy reprefentatives of a nation are
refolved into the fame. Such, Sir, are fome of
the exprefiions, in which you deliver yourfelf up-
on this nice and intricate fubjea: and if they are
taken in their literal fenfe as they Hand, without
£*ny corre&ive, certain it is, that a roman catho-
lic cannot find the faith of his own church in
them.
But
* Jura Ang. 256, and ift Cor. 5 , 12, 13.


But as your ideas feem rather confufed upon
the fubjeft, I am inclined to think, that your
words exprefs much more, than what you really
meant, ift. By * legijlative power in general, you
feem to underhand nothing but the fupreme power
of a fate to enatt and prefcribe rules of civil conduct to
their fubjebis ; as if it were impoftible for an ad of
legijlation to proceed from, or an authority of legi-
dating to refide in any other, than a tempoial and
civil power. Thus after the words juft cited -
it appears dear , that even upon ecclefiafical or fpiritual
matters , there is no other kgijlative power in this fiate ,
but that of parliament \ you. immediately add ; and
no power can civilly bind the people but the legijla-
tive ; as if binding and civilly binding were fynonn
mous terms, importing the fame thing. And a
few lines below fpeaking of the right, power, pie-
eminence, dignity , jurifdidion, and authority trans-
ferred by the 24th of Henry VIII. from the Pope
to the King, you again Subjoin the following
words, which couldpoffibly produce any civil effed in
this country :* which feem to lliow, that you un-
derftood the words legijlating and legijlative power
in the fenfe I have explained.
But tho’ this diftinftion Satisfactorily clears you
from the imputation of intentional error, as
nothing
* Jura Ang. pag. 284.


nothing can be more evident than that civil, tem-
poral and municipal authority do not of 'divine
right belong to the Pope, yet it does not juftify
your modes of exprellion, which fome perfons
lefs inclined to favour the papal power than your-
felf, make ufe of to uphold their oppofition to
Undeniable rights and prerogatives, which the
catholic church teaches were granted to the Pope
by Jefus Chriib
A fecond thing, in which there appears great
confufion and indiftin&ion in your ideas relates to
the relpedive limits of the canon and civil law,
The line between thefe two great points, which
has created fo frequent and fuch inveterate dis-
putes among chriftians, is wrongly drawn by
placing on one fide all objects, which are of their
own nature temporal, and on the other thofe,
which are of their own nature fpiritual. For it is
certain that a temporal regulation may be made
by the fupreme power of a Hate concerning
things, which are of a fpiritual kind; as were all
the laws formerly enaded in this kingdom againft
the Lollards, and other innovators in religion ;
and it is equally certain, as I fhowed in the fecond
part of this letter from the authority of Judge
Blackftone himfclf, that the fpiritual powers of
the church extend to regulating the ufe and en-
joyment


I 'meat of temporal things ;in fo much, that no
41 or municipal law is to be fuffered to contra-
a the natural or revealed law of God. By
hich words the learned judge certainly did not
can, that civil laws contradiQing the revealed
w of God mould not be fuffered, merely by the
,vil law-givers themfelves, (who in religious con-
;rns cannot be the natural judges of their own
roceedings) but that they ought not to be fuffered
,y thofe, who, according to any fyftem of ten-
ion, are regarded as the lawful difpenfers of the
evealed doctrines of lefts Chrift.
Thus the Bithops of this realm, whatever de-
ference and fubmiffion they (how to the ruling
powers of the ftate; whenever there is a queition
of religion, and of moral duties, affume to them
felves the right of determining from feripture,
what the law of God requires, even from fove-
reigns themfelves. This is evinced by the com
du a of the Bithops in 1688, when they would
not fuffer king James’ declaration of indulgence to
be publithed in the churches, and you recoUcc-
tire verdia paffed by the Jury, that acquitted the
fix bithops, who petitioned agamlt turn ac .
“ that as prelates it was luei R nu -nr to atten < -
«intereftaof that religion, which was commuted


to their charge.” The catholic church in like
manner challenges a right over all thrift, who
have once been incorporated in the church of
Chnft by baptifm in all things, where theirfpiri-
tual welfare JS concerned; becaufe (he believes
j'r PK E / ole d ' rpCnfCr ° f ' he truC m - v(?cr!es °f
Jefus Chnft, and (he even exereifes this' her fpiri-
tual authority over thofe, who have ftray'd from
ber fold j much in the fame manner, as we fee
ft rels and renegadoes judged every day by the
Jaws of their county after they have fled from
. r ,C th ° fe ’ Wh ° were never fubjetied to her
junfd.aion by baptifm, flie afferts no fuch autho-
rityknow,ng from the apoftle’s text cited bv
your e , that (lie has not received - the fame
power over them, that are without. But it is -
wrong inference, becaufe Pagans and Infidels
were never made fubjefts of the church of Chrift
that therefore chriftians of whatever defeription'
are exempt from her power, unlefs they
n y fubmt to the authority and yurif diction of her >
courts hy profeffing the religion upon the principles of
which fuch courts are efiablifhed, as you contend *
But you know this is not the firft nor only inftance
m which difficult paffages of the great St. Paul
have been wrefted to an improper and erroneous
A
* Sec pag. iBo.


A third point, in which you do not ufe fufficien
diftinftion, is in regard to the laws themfelves ol
the church. Many church laws, tho conceived
in general terms, and directed to the faithful in
general, are known according to the intentions ot
the church itfelf to be dependent on particular
perfons and ciftrcumances ; and what may appear
more extraordinary, even fometimes upon the
capricious and untoward fancy of a fingle man.
I fliall inftance two particular cafes, which 1 hope
will contribute to throw light upon the fubject.
The firft is the law of the council of Trent, for-
bidding and annulling clandeftine marriages.
The fathers of that council weighing in their
minds, as other lawgivers have fince done, the
many difadvantages accruing to the faithful from
the practice of marrying clandeftinely; tho fuch
marriages were at all times forbidden in the
church, yet knowing the further powers given,
them by Jefus Chrift according to the faith of the
catholic church, to enaa laws annulling the con-
traa itfelf of marriage* determined to avail them-
A a felves
* Si quis dixerit ecclcfiam non potuifle conftituere impedimenta
matrimonium dirimentia, vel in iis conftitucndis erraffe, anathema fit.
Trid. Sefs. 24. Can. 4.
Si quis dixerit eos tantum confanguinitatis et affinitatis gradus, qui
Levitico exprimuntur, pofle impedire matrimonium contrahendum,
et diriraere contraQum, ilCc pofle ecclcSam in nonnullis eorum difpen-
fare


felves of this gofpel power, to render clandeftine
man lages in future null. (e Whofoever otherwife”
fays the council, “ than in the prefence of the
“ parifli pneft, or other prieft authorized by the
fame parifli prieft or ordinary, and of two or
thice witneftes fhall attempt to contract marri-
thole the council renders entirely in-
capable OF CONTRACTING IN SUCH MAN-
fc NER, AND DECREES SUCH CONTRACTS TO BE
invalid and kuLL, as by this prefent decree
“ it invalidates and annuls them.” But then con-
fidering the inconvenieneies that might arife from
Enforcing fuch a law, before it fliould be duly
notified for a certain time in every particular
place, the council “ further ena&ed, that the faid
" de cree fliould firft begin to have its force in
every parifli at the end of thirty days, to be
counted from the day of the firft publication in
“ the faid parifli.*
In virtue of this laft claufe, without having any
regard to the acceptance or non-acceptance of
the
fare, aut conllituere, ut plures impediant et dirimant, anatfcema fir.
Ibid Can. 3.
Si quis dixerit Clericos in facris ordinibus conflitutos, vel regulares
caflitatera folemniter profeffos poffe matrimonium contrahere, con-
traftumque validum effe non obfiante lege ecclefiaflica, vel voto* Ana-
thema fit. Ibid, Can. 9.
* Trid.Sefs. 24, Cap. 1, de ref. Matf,


I decree by the temporal rulers of a ftate, tlie
ncil makes its own law, tho’ in a matter oi
higheft importance, dependent on the will and
afure of particular perfons, whoever ihould
re it in their power, directly, or indirectly, to
t an hinderance to the promulgation of the law.
leen Elizabeth prevented its taking place in
gland, not by interpofmg her Veto , which you
ipofe fovereigns always can objeft to canonical
lcs of church difcipline ; efpecially fuch as m-
nge the natural rights and liberties of their fub-
fts, as this did; but by having baniflied the
ocefan and parochial clergy of the catholic
lurch, who were appointed to make the publi-
ition of it, before the decree of the council was
rought into this country. And every bifliop and
iarifh prieft in chriftendom might m like manner
ave rendered the fame canonical law of no avail,
>y refufmg to publhhjtin his refpeaive diocefe
>r parifh, whether the rulers of the hate thought
iroper or not to adopt the fame, or any other
imilar meafure for the civil direftion of their fub-
jeas To this caufe alone is the validity ol clan-
deftine marriages in this kingdom, without obferv-
in<r the forms preferred by the council of 1 rent,
owing at this day, and not to any refufal of Eli-
zabeth to admit the decree as-we have evident
proofs under our eves.
* Aaz For


For tho’ the dehruaion of the catholic parifhes
in this country prevented the decree from being
pubJifhed here, yet it is certain, that in Ireland,
where the hierarchy was preferved, it has been
admitted; not univerfally, but only in fome
ticular diocefes, as the refpe£tiye bilhops of each
place thought proper. Where it is received, the
clandeftine marriages of catholics are now null;
where it is not, they are reputed valid by the
venerable bilhops of that kingdom, and by all
doftors of the catholic church. An evident proof,
that without paying regard to the interference of
any temporal power, a canonical law of its own
nature, and from its primitive inhibition is fome-
times binding, fometimes not, as the fituation of
times and circumftances may require: a nicety,
to whicn thofe, who would fpeak accurately
upon the canon law, ought certainly to attend.
You will allow me to notice in this place two
propofitions in your two hundred and fifty-feventh
page, which deviate in a remarkable manner
horn thefe catholic truths. The firh, that “ when
“ the bilhops of the church diredl, recommend, or
“ enjoin matter of ecclefiahical difcipline, they
“ know > tk at their judgments or decrees can
“ only obtain force and take effea by the confent
of the civil power of different hates, and there-
fore


** fore they enforce them not by anathema ; other
£C means they have not.” Ihe fecond, that ££ it is
notorious, that the difcipline of the council of
££ Trent was never admitted by France, and fome
££ other roman catholic ftates of Europe, and in
< £ thofe ftates, into which it was admitted, it ac-
££ quired its force and efficacy from the adoption
££ of it by the civil power, without whofe confent
it could not have been adopted at allboth
which affertions are notorioufty falfe.
The nullity of clandeftine marriages in fome
diocefes of Ireland, and heretofore thro’ the whole
kingdom of France , as well as in other roman ca-
tholic ftates of Europe, is an evident demon lii a lion,
that the difcipline of the council of i rent, at leaft
as to that particular point, was received in all
thofe kingdoms. For no power under that of the
Pope, or of a general council can enact an annin
ling impediment of matrimony, as our canonifts
generally teach. It is referved from ordinary
bifhops, much more from the fecular pow er;
, who, whatever regulations they make concerning
the appendages of marriage, mch as am the
dowry, or maintenance of a wife, fucceffion of
offspring, inheritance, and the like civil effects,
never can make a law invalidating any natural
contract of marriage, which the chinch pronoun
ces


C€s to be valid ; nor a law healing and ratifying
any marriage contra#, which the church pro*
nounces to be invalid: fo that this impediment
could only be introduced by the council of Trent.
It is a defined article of the catholic faith, as we
faw before, that a power of ena#ing annulling
impediments of matrimony was given the church
by Jefus Chrift: and as nothing can be more pre-
poiierous thar; to make two fovereign judges
en dernier refort upon the fame obje#, it is plain,
that catholics cannot confidently with their prin-
ciples admit any temporal power to be judge of
what their faith teaches them, is placed under
the guidance of their church. Hence it is another
explicit article of the catholic belief, that matri-
monial caufes belong to the ecclefiadical judges-
f( one,” decreed the council of Trent, “fay
that matrimonial caufes do not belong to
fiaftical judges, let him be accurfed.”*
I he church, as I have proved, has and to this day
itill exeicifes her fpiritual power upon thefe ob-
je#s in Ii eland, independently of any confent of the
civil 'power of the ft ate; f which fince the days of Eli-
zabeth evidently never could be given. And as
the lame effects in all places eifentially require
the fame caufes, what is done by her foie fpiritual
and
* Si quis dixerit caufas matrimoniales non fpeflaread judjceseccle-
Gafticos, anathema fit. Trid. Scfs. 24, Gan. ia. tj ur3 Aug. pag. 25;.


and canonical power there, cannot bo introduced
by any other authority elfewhere, nor rejected by
any other power, if Hie infills upon her own fpi-
ritual law taking place. The natural confluence
of which is, that if any variation appears m tins
particular point of church difcipline in difaerent
parts of the catholic world, it is owing only to the
agreement and conceffion or the church her e ,
*pt to any other caufe whatever. And as ‘ one
“ part of the canon law cannot, propria vigor a,
« have a more” (clefs) binding quality than,
« another what is faid of “ part of it, mu t
« of courfe be faid of” the whole * viz. that it is
ever fpiritually binding the confidences of men,
unlefs the church herfelf abrogate or Impend m
feme manner the effefts of her own laws.f
* Jura Ang. pag. 237.
t As it is known, Ant roman catholics in this kingdom do not &-
becnrnade by the catholic church concerning the nature and do.tes «
been mad y 0 fits being raifed to a lacrament of the
the marriage contr , religions niceties
£ss^«5Sk&ss
civil effeBs of matrimony, which P P tbe 'moS
, this apparently ought to be none 1 1


The fecond cafe, which I fhall hate to you in
order to fhow the nature of our laws, relates to a
point, which as it has been a particular fubjeft of
conteft between the temporal and fpirituai pow-
ers, I fhall be happy to have an oportunity of ex-
plaining. It is the immunity of ecclefiaftical per-
lons and property from the controul of civil laws,
and the temporal power of the hate ; a
which has created the greateft diffentions amon#
chrifhans.. Some writers are even fo violently
averfe to it, that they look upon this alone, as a
fufficient caufe to juffify the whole reformation.
But k will be impoffible to underhand the nature
of this exemption, without confidering the diffe-
rent.
Co„Wer,-„g theiifperfcj of ro'fcan catholics io this Bngdom.
there hardly bang a poblrc congregation in any fpor, bn. .vhat extend,
thro’ many d.fferent parifhes : and moreover the conftant praftice of
catholics inter-marrying with one another on account of their religion,
from the mod diftant parts of the kingdom, it fcarcely feems praQica-
ble for every prieft, who under an aft of parliament ffiould be licenfed
by h,sown biffiop to marry, to regifter the refpeaive members of his
congregation, much lefs thofe of diftant counties, each one in their
own parilh. And tho' this could be eifcaed, the intent of the law
(which IS to make certificates of marriage, when required, eafily
attainable by the public) in fuch a mixture of local yurifdiQions, would
with the greateft difficulty be obtained. On which accounts it fhould
feem advifeable, that either a common regifter be kept in the hands of
each cathohc biffiop, who licenfes’ priefts for marrying (being only
four in number they may be eafily reforted to from any part of the
kingdom) or that the regifter of each prieft be fent yearly or oftener to
the court of the diocefan biffiop of the eftabli&ed church, or tp any
tther public office, to which the public may have free acccfj,


rent powers, which catholics believe to be read-
ing in their ecclcfiaftical fuperiors, to lay com-
mands upon them
Firft, the heads of the church can command
the aftent of our underftanding to all thofe arti-
cles, which they declare to have been primitively
revealed to the Apoftles by Jefus Thrift ; and the
diffent of, our underftanding to every article,
which they declare to be oppofite to any of the
primitive chriftian revelations. I his power re-
iides not only in the body of biihops gathered m
council, or difperfed thro’ the world, but alfo in
the roman Pontiff, as univerfal head ot the church,
and proportionably, in due union with him, in
every catholic biftiop within the limits of his own
jurifdidtion. There is this difference however be-
tween their refpeaive judgments, that only the
decifion of the church or whole body of biihops
either affembled or difperfed, is in the firft m-
ftance, neceffarily, looked upon as infallible : it
beino- in no article of catholic faith, that the firft
determinations of the Pope upon doarinal mat-
ters are always effentially fuch, as the gofpel re-
quires them to be. But they, who deny his in-
fallibility, are ftill bound to liften fubmiflively to
his doarinal decifions, whenever he fpeaks as
head of the univerfal church, upon a controverted
B b P om *


point either of faith or morals, and if no oppoft-
tion to his decrees is raifed from the difperfed
bifhops of the church, (I do not fay merely from
private individuals) his determinations then ac-
quire that degree of inerrancy and infallibility,
which all catholics believe was promifed by Jelus
Chrift to his Apoftles and their fucceffors to the
end of time. And the like is proportionably to
be faid of the decilions of bifhops, when they
fpeak and a6t in union with their head; not if
they broach and abet novel opinions unheard of
before in the church, as fometimes has been the
cafe. The plain and fimple reafon of which aflfer-
tions is, that it is an incontroverted article of the'
'catholic faith, that both Pope, and bifhops are
appointed by Jefus Chrift to guide the faithful in
the paths of eternal life.
A fecond thing, in which the church has a
right to command the fubmiifion of our under-
standing is, what our theologians generally call
dogmatical fafts: that is, certain determinate ob-
jefts, which of their nature are fo connected with
the dogma, or fpeculative decifions of faith, that,
the church cannot poflibly err in the one, without
being fubjeft to error and miftake in the other.
This is generally explained by heretical and erro-
neous books, and the fame is rigoroufty to be un-
derftood


Itood of every other inftrument or deed, tvhe-
- written or printed, containing here y or
ir f which the church cannot approve to the
hful, without recommending the here y an
;,rs contained in them. Hence all catholics
ee, that fuch objefts are ftriflly proper objeCds
the fpiritual jurifdiaion of the churc , an
it her decifions concerning them are refpettive y
infallible or binding, as any other decifions
ion the moft fpeculative and general pnncip es
chriftian faith or morals. I fliall exemp 1 )
is doftrine in our own concerns.
All catholics believe, that the council of Trent
id not only a right, in virtue of matrimony being
,ade a facrament of the new law, to make thofe
eneral decifions upon the nature of the matrnmn
ial contrast, and matrimonial caules which I
ted above j but that if it had deemed, meet it
night have taken into its confederations and paffe
fentence upon the determinate aft of the 24* 0
Henry VIII. which treats of matrimony ( and m
S V„» tell « If. i. b “
, cml p ufiammtary, causes of matrmony, and
“ divorces, rights of tytbes, oblatms, and obve
« tions (hould be in future beard, emmned, chfcuf-
« fed, dearly, finally, and definitively adjudged and
« determined within the king's jurifd,it ton
B b 2


" where > "otwithftanding any foreign inhibitions, ,
“ appeals, fentences, fummons , citations , fufpenfsons ,
“ interdictions, excommunications, rejlraints, judg-
“ any other procefs or impediments from the
“ fee of Rome, &c.” What the determinate deci-
fion of the council would have been upon the
whole of this aft, is not my prefent bufmefs to de-
clare, or even to examine : but if in one fmgle
claufe of it, for example, that which regards
caufes of matrimony and divorces , or in any other it
had found herefy or error, its fpiritual authority
without the leaft queftion, would have extended to
the condemnation of the whole deed, as containing
herefy or error ; and no catholic maintaining or
juftifying fuchdeed after this unerring condemna-
tion of the church, would have been exempt from
the refpeaive imputation of herefy or error, which
Ihould have been fix’d upon the aa itfelf. In
general the catholic faith teaches, that every aa,
whether emanating from a fovereign temporal
power or not, where doctrinal matters are involved,
is the proper objea of the fpiritual jurifdiaion of
the catholic church; and an oecumenical council,
a Pope, and bifhop in their own departments,
have a right to pronounce upon them in the man-
ner before explained.
<
Befide*


Befides thefe two adts of fpiritualpporer,w r er, which
the church exercifes immediately upon the un-
derftanding ot chriftians, like all other fovereign
and independent powers, fhe has a right, where
the fpiritual welfare of her fubjecls is concerned,
to enadt laws, that impofe alfo a reflraint upon
the will. She cannot indeed no more than tem-
poral fovereigns, lay an univerfal prohibition upon
all “ indifferent points, in which both the divine
« law, and the natural leave a man at his own
« liberty,” as I faid before fpeaking on the nature
of human laws in general 5* but fhe may fully
exercife
* What 'is here faid of the church not having power to reftrain all
indifferent points by ecclefiaflical laws and precepts, I believe is pro-
portionably to be underflood, as well of thofe things, which are the
immediate objeft of the human undcrflanding, as of the will. It
would be ridiculous to fuppofe, that the church can prohibit every
opinion, that can be abetted by man on indifferent fubjefts. Her au-
thority unqueftionably extends to invefliga'ting all i dM'nnat matters,
which can in any manner affefl the purity of the gofpel revelations, the
prefervation whereof is entrufled to her care. But even upon thefe
fhe does not pronounce in an arbitrary and irrational manner, without
ufing means to examine the truth ; nor can flic at once condemn all
opinions, which have at any time been held by her theologians on
doubtful and uncertain points. Nay even feme doctrines by the ver-
dict of ages, tho’ not abfolutely ranked among defined articles of faith,
are found to be fo congenial to, and agreeing with the chriffian reve-
lation, t%we jufllv hold it to be out of the power of the church to
condemn them. Thus Bellarmine before cited pag. s t, maintained,
that the Pope cannot enaft certain laws of falling and upon other indiffe-
rent things, which do not bear a fuitable proportion to the members of
the community; and he fear’d not incurring any ccnfute for main-
taining


exercife her fpiritual authority over her fubje&s,
in all fuch determinate points, as confidering the
end of her inftitution, which is to forward fouls to
eternal lire, can be directed to the fpiritual wel-
fare of the community over which die prefides.
It is on fuch points of indifferency as thefe, that
laws of canonical difcipline are chiefly eftabliflied.
To deny a power in the church to make fuch laws
or
taining fuch doctrine in Rome itfelf. In ajfimilar manner the catho-
lics of this kingdom clofe their prefent oath of allegiance with the fol-
lowing words , without thinking, that I am, or can be acquitted before
God, orman, or abfolved of this declaration, or any part thereof, altho *
the Pope, or any other perfons, or authority whatfoever JhalL difpenfe
with or annul thejame, or declare, that it was null or void : bccaufe they
certainly and confcientioufly believe, that there is no power left to the
church to annul any part of their prefent oath, or to cenfure the abjura-
tion of the determinate doftrines, which they abjure; which would
not be the cafe, if the faid doctrines according to the opinion of catho-
lic theologians, were even doubtfully conneded with faith. For in
fuch a fuppofition the claufe would evidently go to rejc£i the authority
of the church to pronounce on fuch doubtful points, which no catho-
lic can do. This I believe among many other fubflantial reafons,
was one caufe why our anceflors refufed fubmittingto the oath of alle-
giance propofed in the reign of the firft James : becaufe, befides the
opinion of Paul V. it being the judgment of many able and impartial
divines, that the faid oath contained many things incompatible with
the catholic faith, and the falvation of chriflian fouls, to deny the power
the church to pronounce on fuch doubtful points would be manifeft
herefy. And the fame mud be faid, if any bold man at prefent, under a
Mar claufe, Ihould pretend to take the oath of the king’s fupremacy,
which catholics hitherto have regarded as contrary to their
faith.


Ito maintain, that her “ decrees can only ob-
tain force, and take effect by the confent of the.
civil power of different Hates, 1' is a notion,
aich you feem to have imbibed from feme of our
odern writers, but what is abfolutely erroneous,
he idea is manifestly reprobated by the authority
' fcripture, and practice of the Apofties, in en-
ding the primitive chriftians to abfiain ftom y/ings
icrificed to idols , and from blood , and from Ming'S
rangled* matters entirely indifferent in them-
»lyes; by the conftant pra6tice of the catholic
hurch, lead two days every week, not
o mention other ftated feafons of the year, with*
lolds from the faithful the ufe of the moft harm-
efs, and even wholefome foods; by occasional
mandates of biihops, who throughout the catho-
lic world in moments of public calamity fad not
to impofe on the faithful, as matter of bounden
duty, the exercifes of prayer and And
fuch commandments being univerfally received by
the church, are alfo univerfally underftood to be
binding on all its fubjefts, whatever rank and
dignity they hold in life. You could not,
fume, have attended to thefe lirnple
when you deny the church the power of rigor-
oufly commanding matters of ecclefiaftical difci-
pUne that are indifferent in themfelves, and not
1 othepvm-
+ Jura' Ang. 257*
* ABs, 15. «9-


otherwife connected with religion, but inafmuch
as they are commanded. Nor are you more
happy in your obfervation, that the church never
enforces fucb matters by anathema: §as “ there
“ has hardly been a council in the church/’ as
cardinal Bellarmine obferves, “ which does not
“ command or forbid under pain of anathema,
“ or deposition fome one thing,” which it has
“ made an objeft of its laws *
Having premifed thefe obfervations, I tliall
now examine how far the church.has at any time
either defined as a matter of belief, or enjoined
as a point of canonical difcipline, the immunity
of ecclefiaftical perfons and property. Firft it
feems a notion of fome perfons, that this tenet was
for a while a received article of the catholic belief;
but the notion is' erroneous. The accurate Sir
Wm. Blackftone himfelf appears to lean towards
this opinion, when fpeaking of ecclefiaftical im-
munity he complains of the papal encroachments
having run fo far, as to make this article be
regarded in the world as of “ indefeafible divine
“ right :”f but if thereby he meant a tenet of the
catholic
Jura Ang. 257. * Rellar. de Rom. Pont. Lib. 4. Cap. 16.
+ It foon became aneftablilbed maxim in the papal fyftem of policy,
that all ccclefiaftical perfons, and all ecclefiaftical caufes fhould be
fokly. and entirely fubjeft to ecclefiaftical jurifdi&ion only: which
jurifdiQio*


catholic faith, his ufual precifion on this occafion
abandoned him. For in the fame paragraph he
relates the known faying of Conftantine the greats
« Ye are Gods conftituted by the fupreme God;
“ it is not fitting, that man ftiould judge Gods j”
upon which the immunity of ecclefiaftics was
firft fuppofed to be grounded. Now as no hu-
man authority can be the motive of believing a
divine revelation, if ecclefiaftical immunity is faid
to have originated in this faying of Conftantine it
is plain, that it never could be made an article of
the catholic belief, which only has for objeas
thofe things, which the church declares to have
been primitively revealed by Jefus Chrift.
Neverthelefs many divines have taught that
ecclefiaftical immunity is grounded on or rather
let me fay, implied from the divine law. There is
no explicit text of fcripture importing fuch a
divine precept, as even Bellarmine himfelf ac-
knowledges on this fubjea j but the example of
the old teftament, where the Levites were made
free, and the words of our Saviour in the new;
Then the children are free . But that we may not
C C SCANDALIZE
iurifdi&ion was fuppofed to be lodged in the firft place and
ip the Pope, by divine indefea/Me right and invefliture fromChnft
hitnfelf, and derived from the Pope to all infenor tribunals. Hence
the canon law lays it down as a rule, that Sacndotcs a regibui honorandi ,
ncnjudicundi. Sir W». Black. Vol. 111. pag. 6s.


scandalize tHEM — go — take that and give it tv
them for me and thee,* feern to imply, that
what was granted the levitical order in the old
law, with ftronger reafon ought to be allowed the
more dignified chriftian priefthood of the new.
But as there is no declaration of the church an-
nouncing fuch a divine precept to us, we mult
fpeak of the real divine commands and of this
opinion of theologians nearly, as Sir Wm. Black-
Hone does of the law of the gofpel and of the
natural law, or moral fyftem framed by ethical
writers: the one is a divine command, “ exprefily
“ declared fo to be” by the authority of the
church, the other is only what by the afliftance
“ of human reafon we imagine to be that” com-
mand. Hence it is certain that this doftrine,
however ftrongly countenanced and approved by
the oecumenical councils both of Lateran and
Trent,J never had its place among the defined
articles of any catholic creed, and when thd
fathers of thofe councils grounded their refpe&ive
laws of immunity upon it, they referred to what
was generally taught by divines 5 but did not
pretend to make a decifion of faith concerning an
article, which was not then fubje&ed, in that
light, to their examination. This inference how*
evs
* Matt. 17, 85, 16.
% Coocil. Latcran, V. Sefs. 9, et Trid. Scfs fj, ca. ao, dc Ref.


ever juftly follows from the decrees themfelves,
and it is what no catholic can deny, that as it is
out of the power of the church to make a general
law for the faithful concerning a thing, which is
in itfelf evil or unjuft, the objeft of this law could
not have been a real violation of the inalienable
right of fovereigns, as fome imagine,, but muft
be counted among the number of indifferent
things, concerning which Providence allows all
lawful fuperiors to iffue their commands, when
an impofed reftraint is judged conducive to the
benefit of the community, over which they pre-
fide. And the fame might be proved from the
levitical law, as God himfelf would not have
taken the whole race of Aaron, and their cattle t
from under the controul of eleven twelfths of the
community, and made them his owns if d h ; ld
been an inalienable right of the majority ot the
people to have every thing, within the limits ot
their country, fubjeaed to their own fovereign and
independent jurifdiaion.
But as the diftinaion of a defined article of
faith and of a church precept grounded on a the-
olomcal opinion may not at firft fight be clear y
underftood by my readers, you will give me lea\c
to fubioin a citation from an author, who wrote
Ccz a- fter
+ Num. 3, 41.


after the two councils of Lateran and Trent,
and whofe known orthodoxy, and abilities entitle
him to be believed, when he declares what is a
defined article of his religion and what not. The
Jefuit Cornelius a Lapide explaining the above
text of the 17th of St. Matthew, Then the children
are free, &c. has the following remarks. “It is
a wrong inference of fome of our canonifts, be-
caufe Chriffc and his family” (of whom Peter
was then one,) “ was exempt from paying tax,
that therefore the clergy by divine right are ex-
empt fiom the fame. Not only clergymen, but
“ all chriftians are the adopted children of God
“ by grace; who however are not exempt, as the
“ Apoftle to the Romans, and the whole church
teaches : for their adoption is to a higher rank
“ and inheritance, not to this earth. So thought
St. Hilarius, St. Chryfoftom, Euthymius, and
others. With due and juft reafon notwith-
“ ftanding have kings and princes, paying regard
“ to thefe words of our Saviour granted the privi-
“ lege of exemption to ecclefiaftics, who are as it
“ were, of the houfe and family of Chrift. And
“ this is all that St. Hierom and the canons
ini end, when they fay, that clergymen are
“ exempt from taxes not only by the human, but
by the di\ ine law, becaufe there is a foun-
dation in the divine law for princes granting
them


« them fuch exemption. Leffius.in his 2d book
« on juftice fliows that the immunity of the clergy
is an human, not a divine command.” So far
this learned interpreter, and his words evidently
prove, that the immunity of the clergy, concern-
ing which fuch clamours have been ratted, is no
article of catholic faith, nor has the church at
any time, laid her commands upon us to believe,
that it is of divine right. She can only therefore
have made it a point of canonical difcipline by
commanding fovereigns to grant this privilege to
their fubjefts, of which I ftiall nowfpeak.
As certain as it is, that the immunity of the
clergy is not a defined article of catholic faith, fo
certain is it, that it has been repeatedly enjoined,
and enforced in the firongeft manner by the
church. To fay that anathemas have not been
employed to compel fovereigns to receive and fub-
mit to thisecclcfiaftical law, would be prepoftefous.
The noted Bulla Can*, which, within our own
memory, ufed to be regularly publiflied every year
in Rome on theThurfday immediately preceding
Eafter Sunday, is an mcontefiable proof of this
f a a In the 14th, Is tb > i 6th > T 7 th > and l3th
paragraphs of this bull it is faid, We excmmumcate
and anathematize all (here all invaders of ecclefialh-
cal immunity, trefpafibrs on their perfons, tad
property,


property, and co-operators in the fame, See. are
defcribed at length) of whatever pre-eminence y dig-
nity y rank , condition , or fiate they he , tho they Jhould
he exalted to the imperial , or royal dignity , & c . which
woids plainly (how, without recurring to the de-
crees of councils, that the church has made this a
fevere point of ecclefiaftical difcipline, and even
directed her orders concerning it to fovereigns
themfelves.
But it is wrongly inferred from thence, that it
is the intent of the church to inforce the praftice
of this law among chriftians, whether princes
agree to it or not. However ftrong the terms are,
in which fovereigns are commanded to grant im-
munity to their ecclefiaftical fubje&s, clergymen
are not ordered or licenfed to challenge fuch im-
munity to themfelves in oppofition to their
reign’s command; and if they have not a right to
it by the divine law, which is an uncertainty, they
can only claim it, it fhould feem, dependently of,
or at lead with the confent and agreement of their
Princes. For the church does not intend making
refraaory fubjeas to any temporal government,
nor exhort the faithful to invade their temporal
rights. What the law of God allows her to com-
mand, ihe commands when die judges it condu-
cive to the end of her own government, which is
the


the benefit of religion ; and the immunity of ecclc-
fiaftics both from the example of the old law, and
from many inftances in the new, might be proved
to be occafionally of fingular fervice m promoting
the honour of God and religion. Whether the
church has always ufed this power with difere-
tion, and never inforced her commands beyond
the rules of prudence, I do not pretend to exa-
mine : for in fuch matters of fa& the church her-
felf may err, as well as individuals; but we know
from the promifes of Chrift, that it is not in her
power to command a thing evil in itfelf, or what
is contrary to the natural or divine law; from
whence it is juftly concluded, that the immunity
of the clergy is not fuch. Certainly if it is granted
' with the confent of the temporal government, as
atleaft in great meafure it has been* there can-
not
. The Emperor Jultiman by hie 79*, 83d and , , Z i Novella, e«-
empts all clergymen and monlca from the ju..fd.a.on of tempera
judges in civil caufcs, tho' not in crim.nal ; and nnwitMan , g
he commands cognisance of criminal caufes to be taken oy the tempo-
ral judge, he does no. allow him .0 pafs fentencc agatnft any ecc e -
aftic till he be degraded by his bilhop. The laws both of d heodo-
t and Jutlinian ctcmp. the clergy from uses, the- before the day
or the lall named emperor, the privilege regarded only the,r pe.fo ,
, • nrnnertv. Hence St. Ambrofe fa«d, the ejiates of tic
Zurchpay'Ls : and the elder Valentinian in his letter to the Whop.
of Aha: food PV ,riUu " hn °‘' S “ B ' ““ , ’
Uh ict x«ii Many were the priv,leges granted the clergy by
4tptfovereign.of.hu realm, effect all, after the concur ,


n.ot oe the 3 mallei! femblance of reafon for oppo-
fmg it. and confidcring the general views as well
as mtereft of the church, which are to unite with,
an d Support the temporal power of chriitian prin-
ces, not to divide troiti them ; it feems reafonable
to pi efume, that where her own laws run beyond
the limits, which fovereigns have allotted, die
only means to lay a religious obligation upon fo-
vereigns themfelves to proceed further, but not to
authorize fubjecls to a (fume the privilege to them-
independently of their will. Such at leaf!
is the opinion of the Jefuit Cornelius a Lapide,
which 1 before cited.
Now what I willi you Sir, to notice is, that
the canonical law of immunity confidered in tho
light I have mentioned, is not that inftrument of
ufurpation, and tyrannical oppreffion, which it is
generally represented to be. And what I inftance
in this cafe, I am convinced holds good in regard
to many other papal laws ; which are not injurious
and
Blackftone fhows, Vol. 111. pag. 63 : on which account the clergy on
their fide agreed often to fufpend the effeas of their own canonical
power, or only to exert it in conformity with the will of their fovereicn.
In the days of our Saxon anceflors great were the advantages accruing
from abilhop and Iheriffs fitting in one common county court, and en-
forcing each others afts; but on breaking up that union the refpeaive
powers muft have reverted to therr original fources; and as a fiieriffor
judge is now independent of a bifhop, fo is a bifhop of a judge, and ex-
crcifes his authority independently of the confent ofany. civilfate.


and oppreffive in themfelves, but only as they are
mifreprefented by certain men of our own church.
The cry of papal tyranny and opprejfion , rather than
fc reafon and reflexion,” as I fignified in a fore-
going part of this letter from Mr. Hume, was the
caufe of “ the rapid advance of the Lutheran
“ doctrines,’ ”* and of the religious reformations,
which took place in the fixteenth century> And
tho’ I no ways, even indirectly, fufpeCt you of
malicioufly intending to overturn the authority of
our church, yet your principles are certainly ini-
mical to the fpiritual and religious obedience
which we owe to it. ,
But what is molt to be regretted is, that fome
bold men among us fancying, that they fee a
commendable freedom and independence in your
writings, whether really intended by yourfelf or
not, earneftly recommend your work to the peru-
fal of their catholic brethren, in order to diffipate
at once the whole charm of their religious preju-
dices, and reftore Britifh catholics to the molt
valuable of their privileges, the enjoyment where-
of, at lead till this day, they have certainly chofe
to forego, for confcience fake. I own, confidering
rhe tendency and import of ihofe gentlemens
doCtrines, aim the dole connection, which they
D d feem
* Mr. Hume’s Life of Henry VIII, Vol, IV. pag. gs.


fccm to have with many of your principles, that
l am not without my apprehenfions, that a fcheme
is in agitation among them, which, if carried into
execution, mult tend to the difgrace and ruin of
our church. What I fliall obferve of thefe gentle-
men is, that true to the maxims of the firft reform-
ers, now after a lapfe of two hundred and fifty
years they haughtily difpenfe doftrines, which
tend to fubdivide the fmall remainder of catholi-
city in this kingdom. If then inftigated by
their example, and precepts, fome men in high
and indignant contempt of ecclefiaftical au-
thority, fliall make their choice, and if that
choice prove fubverfive of a religion, the pro-
felfors of which can fuffer their mintfters fo to
think, or fo, at leaft, to fpeak, I may be forry,
but I fliall not be furprifed.
But, that you may not imagine that my fears
on this fubjeft are exaggerated, to fliow the
fimilarity there is between fome modern doc-
trines, and the principles of the reformers of the
fifteenth and fixteenth century, I fliall fet down
fome of their primitive fentiments, and leave you
and my readers to judge, whether there are
grounds for my apprehenfion or not. Bcfides,
then, the two condemned propofitions of John
T w* ond Martin Luther, which I cited in the


note of the 47 th and 48 th pages of this work, whep
fpeaking on the fubjeft of ecclefiaftical obedience, I
find that the principles of the reformers were deli-
vered to their difciples in the following words.
Temporal Lords can at their pleafure take
away temporal goods from the church, when
the poffeffors are habitually delinquent, that
is, if they fail’ not only by a Angle aa, but from
habit. Art. 16, John Wicleff*
The decretal epiftles are apocryphal, andfe-
duce from the faith of Chrift, and clergymen,
who ftudy them, are fools. Art. 38, John
Wicleff. t
The papal dignity was brought in by Cafar,
and the perfeaion and inftitution of the 1 ope
proceeded from the power of Caffar. Art. 9,
John Hufs.J
D d 2 The
, Domini temperate polTunt ad arbitrium foum aufefre bon, tern
poraliaabeccteia, poMonaria'
Lbim, non Hum aßu delmquennbus. Art. .6, Joan
+ Deere,aiea epriioiar «
et Clerici funt ftulti, qui ftudent eas. Art. 3 J
iPapaUadigniraaaC.farc inoievir. er Pa^prfeaioerinmurrroa
Cocfaris potentia eroanavit. Art. 9. Joan


The Roman Pontiff the fuccefTor of Peter is
not the vicar of Chrift over all churches of the
whole world, inftituted by Chrift himfelf, in the
bleffed Peter.- Art. 25, Mart. Luther*
It is certain, that in the hands of the Pope or
church there is no authority to fettle articles of
faith ; nor even enaft laws of morals, or good
works. Art. 27. Mart. Luther.f
If the Pope with a great part of the church
fhould think fo or fo, nor fhould even be miftaken,
ftill it is not a fin or herefy to believe the con-
trary, efpecially in a thing not neceffary for fal-
vation, till by a general council the one fhould
be reproved, the other approved. Art. 28,
Mart. Luther.J
Thefe
*Romanus Pontifcx Petri fqcceflbr, non eft Chrifti vicarius fupef
omnes totius mundi ecclefias ab ipfo Chrifto in B. Petro inflitutus,
Art. 25. Mart. Lutheri.
+ Certum, in manu Papa* aut ecclefiaeprorfus non effe ftatuere articu-
los fidei; imo nec leges morum, feu bonorum openin'. Art. 27,
Mart. Luth.
tSi Papa cum magna parte ecclefiae fic vel fie fentiret; nec etiam
erraret, ad hue non eft peceatum aut harefis contrarium fentire, p r!C .
fertim in re non necefTaria ad falutem, donee fucrit per concilium uni.
verfale, altcrura reprobatum, ilterum approbatum. Art. s 8 Mart
iuth.


IThefe doarines, you know, have been foiemniy
ndemned by the catholic church. But without
etending to draw an exaa parallel between
em and the fafliionable tenets of the day, from
hich, I faid, I apprehended danger to the purity
- the catholic dogm, I only beg my readers to
[k themfelves the following queftions.
How far is it allowable or prudent in catholics
o acknowledge an arbitrary and independent au-
hority in temporal Lords over all the goods of
he church ?
How far may the ftudy of the decretal ophites be
jfeful to clergymen, to prevent them from mif-
prefenting the laws of councils and Popes, which
in lieu of terrifying and feducing, are ordained
to ftrengthen and confirm the people in their
faith ?
How far was the papal dignity as acknowledged
in this kingdom before the reformation, introdu-
ced, or had its inftitution or perfeaion from the
power of the fovereign?
How far is the roman Pontiff, the. fucceffor ot
Peter in the bleffed Peter, inftituted by Chnft
bis vicar, over all churches of the whole world ;
even


ieven thofe, who do not voluntarily fubmit to the
jurifdidion of his courts ?
How far has the Pope authority to fettle
articles of faith, and even enact laws of morals
and good works ?
Finally how far is it a fin or herefy to contradi&
the opinion of a Pope in things not neceifary for
falvation, even though he ihould not be miftaken
concerning fuch things, until a general council
las ratified, or condemned his judgment ?
I apprehend that this examination maybe of
ervice to our modern reformers, and may, perhaps
ccafionally prevent fome gentlemen of real abb
ties, and of the moft upright intention, from ap-
earing in the eyes of the public, to contradict
lemfelves. What I have hitherto faid upon the
cond head of your inconfiftencies, l truft, with-
it defeending to further particulars, will fuffice
' fllow ’ that in beating the fubjetl of the canon
w, you have made it more dependent on the au-
ority and will of the temporal legiflature, than
e principles of your faith allow.
As to the faa, upon which you principally build
ur argument, viz. the anfwer of the Barons in
the


the BHhops, 1 ie ma clearly evince
ftances of that tranfachon wd cle J
that nothing can be proved by
did not aflc the o^eß«on
or ohferve “7 ; accor-
guided b y the ‘ r °"! 1 red aU ecc lef,aftical caufes
ding to which the) ju „ uniformity of
bro ught before
thetwoftates, tic pi , f ru ieof judgment,
ed the Barons to adopt
which had been go ftio n which was
J‘ b '" bom before «*f
“ Aer one bem„ is bom after ma-
•< herit in like manner, as of the
«* trimony InhCritanC -,dfdi"aud
biihops cognizance or J wbe aga inft the
they all anfwered, that for , hem
common form otu ag a they-only entreated
, otp “ d « „ te p,O.
the magnates or Lords to 0 ls
pofah*
* By a la« of the church,
and -no, be admitted to W, .bohave .Wed
fa,ion. Botjo.otdet ,0 enco „ by a fabfequent man,age le-
in a criminal habit to “tty, -' ‘ eife a,. The b,(hop*
at Merlon withed the o i
refufed.


Is this Sir, I beg, an inftance, of “ bid,.
- t- «» H \"
they had chofen fo to do' the’ lf
would not have b een anv of thT
but a civi] f..\ f . . ™ e canon law,
canons, much in the famTm^ner‘as'the ‘V*
aft invalidatingTandeft ne "
P 7 -c^etaiSToT^
But to fet this article in a clearer point of view
baf US Z VVhi ' ft the < l ue ‘ }ion was de-
bating at Merton, that fome unfortunate off'
%ing born before marriage, diould have been
dcrs’ of m l(h ° P ‘r promoted ‘o holy or-
a or to an ecclefiaftical benefice \
’ the Un & ma n was duly qualified
and had all the requires to be incorporated with
dignity into the church, would the PrM f i
rejeaed his fuit, becaufe the Lords at Merton did
not think proper to acknowledge his levin t
or would he have thrown offhL
the end of the conference, in order tcf expedite in
private
" See *“ W “ < ’ ftott “ ,6ai "* J ura Angl. pag, J3/


private in the mean time by the hands-of his focre-
tary a difpenfation for the yOung man’s receiving
orders, or being promoted to a, living; left' by
feeming to. follow a canonical law without the
content of the toons, he feald be indicted at
their tribunal for a contempt of the temporal- au-
thority of the ffate ? No the bhhop would have
known his rights; or rather obligation topromote
all fuch whom he' found worthy, Where tile church
interpofes no canonical impediment; and as the
law of the church had decreed- the young man to
be legitimate, he would have forwarded hint
without delay, and I Will venfmA* to fay that not
a Lord at Merton would have tdfccw exception at
the conduft of the prelate*
This tliows, Sir, how eafy it is for men- of the
keened underftandiag: t-o turn the- molt indifferent
things to the prejudice of the-' rights of their
church, when- they are not duly acquainted with
the fpirit and practice of the laws,, by which- th«
church is accuifomed to jud-go. Tiro catholic
bifhops of this realm-before- the- meeting of tho
parliament at Mbrtojp fiwm- that- time to- tile re-
formation, and at the ; dayf dee-kkr ad
ecc-leliaftical caufes by their- own Canonical la#,
and will continue fo to- do independet#ly of s any
oonfent of the ftate to the end of time : than
b c* which


which plain fa£t, there can hardly perhaps be a
more irrefragable proof of the canon laws being
in toto independent of the civil.
On the third article of your inconfiftencies I
(hall be as brief as poffible. It regards the appro-
bation, which you give to the transfer of the au-
thority, powers, dignities, &c. conveyed by the
famous a£t of the 24th of Henry VIII. from the
Pope to the King, in whom the fupreme headfhip
of the church of England, in whatever it confifts,
is now by law eftablifhed. You imagine that
“ by the firft part of this a£t the community’ 5
only “ reclaimed thofe rights, and privileges,
“ which they had permitted the court of Rome
to enjoy for fo many centuries, which it was
“ competent for them to do and that at
prefent, if the fmall falvo of civil were inferted in
the oath of fupremacy, catholics might at this day
with a fafe confcience fwear, that our gracious
fovereign is by right “ the fupreme head of the
“ civil eftablifhment of the church of England.”*'
I certainly fhall not attempt to difcufs in full this
important matter, which would demand a treatife,
and from more able hands than mine; but in con-
formity to the principles I have fet down in this
letter, I fhall not fail to obferve to you, that even
in
* JutaAngl, pag. 276, 293.


I that part of the aft, which you look upon to be
Dffenfive, and to contain nothing but what re
:es to “ the direft creatures of the civil efta-
blilhment of the roman catholic religion in this
nation,there are at lead two articles, which
ilitate againd incontroverted points of doctrine,
hicli no catholic denies. It is not my bufinef*
» examine whether our church has a right to ex-
a the fubmiflion of our underdanding to thofe
id articles ; as that would be engaging in the
ufinefs of controverfy; a fubject which I have
etermined not to touch; but I maintain, that as
catholic you cannot confidently with your clm-
after and principles hold the language you
lo upon thefe two points. In fuch cafes fome-
hing more than the knowledge of the catho-
ic catechifm is required in a writer to enable him
;o fpeak with accuracy: theologians themfelves
:annot always at firft fight determine, whether
the affertion of an author is compatible with faith
or not.
The firft point regards the power, which you
o-ive the temporal legiftature oyer the perfons of
chriftians in relation to marriage ; the fecond, the
fovereign and independent fway, which you
affign to the civil magiftrate over ecclef.aft.cal
tythes and all other goods of the church ( e
J E e 2 cauons
t Ibid pag. 250.


canons of ifhe council of Trent, which I cited’be-
fore evidently place marriage under ‘the--indepen-
dent-power and controul of the church ; not onlv
as*to its ratie faeramenti, 'em-unmeaning dill-motion,
Which was never invented by the council of Trent;
but certainly -at lealft, as to the matter and form
of the facrament, which all theologians agree to
be the natural contract itfelf, and tire ligns by
which fuch contract is ex-pre fifed, whoever be the
minifter of it; as to the nullity and validity of the
contract; the duties and -obligations enftiing from
it, the right of a party’s feparating m feme ocGa-
bon s, or the obligation of cohabiting, &c. upon all
which points ‘St. Paul himfelf -judged, and the ca-
tholic church, after his example has ever aflerted
a right of doing the fame. No catholic confid-
ently with his faith can deny the church this right,
and therefore I fha’ll only obferve, that if you, or
any other bold gentleman under your patronage
fliould proceed to a court ofWeftminfter, and
under a new projected form fliould fwear allegi-
ance to our gracious fove reign, as d fupremc
“ head of the civil eftab.lifnment of the catholic
(C church of England ;” upon coming forth from
the court, and finding a conflict of the two jurif-
dictions (which upon this matter mud happen
everyday) he would be neceffitated either to make
m open renunciation of his faith, or give up the
imprudent


imprudent oath he had taken, without knowing
what he fwore. Man, thou kno weft not what
thou fay eft :* who hath appointed thee prince and judge
over us ft and over the dogms of our chuich r
On the fecond point the councils both general,
and particular, and doctors of the catholic church
are again decided and unanimous. JVhatcver be
the quantum or whatever the mode of levying a
proper fubfiftence for the minifters of the church,
no catholic pretends to fay, but that fuch main-
tenance is due to them in ilfidt juftice, and by the
divine law. Know you not , that they, who work in
the holy place , eat the things , that are of the holy
place: and they that ferue the altar , partake with the
altar? so also the lord ordained, that
THEY WHO PREACH THE GOSPEL, SHOULD Ll\ E
JSY THE GOSPEL.£
And you muft obferve, 'that not only the main-
tenance of evangelical preachers, but alfo dona-
tions granted by the faithful either for the poor,
or other religious fervices are, by the clear autho-
rity of the holy -feriptures, made facred and invi-
olable. This appears'from .the punlfhment of the
unfortunate Ananias and Saphira, who defrauded
only a part of what they had offered to the Lord
J on
* Luc. 22, 60.
+ A£ls, 7, 27.
+ i Cor. 9, >3- H'


on fuch accounts. All thefe things, a*, our theo-
logians teach, are the portion of God, as tributes
and taxes are the portion of Cas far. If therefore
you render to C<efar the things that are C<efar's , ren-
der to God the things that are God's.
How far thefe doftrines, and any confequent
laws of the church grounded upon them, afFeft
politically , legally , philofophically , and theologically the
truth of your affertion: viz. “ the kingdom of
<c England acknowledges no independent right
“ either in the Pope, or any other bifhop, to ex-
iS ercife any authority whatever, that can pro-
<c duce, propro vigor e, a civil effect upon the fub-
“ je6ts of this realm,”* I take not upon myfelf to
determine, becaufe I don't know what fenfe you
attach to the words civil effedl, upon which the
truth or falfhood of your propofition depends.
But this as a theologian I will affert, that inde-
pendently of any civil power, in virtue of the foie
commiffion of Jefus Chrift the church has a right
to depute any miffioners fhe thinks proper, into
any part of the world; that fuch miffioners
preaching the gofpel to any portion of the faithful
have a right in ftrift juftice to be maintained by
them: that their tythes, or by whatever name
fuch maintenance is called, are not pure alms,
which
+ 1 Matt. 28, 21.
* Jura Ang. pag. 29 1,


which parijhioners on account of the fins of their fa ft on
can take away at pleafure -,]! a tenet, which }on
know to be maintained by Dr. Prieftley and an
honourable gentleman of our church; that what-
ever alms, donations, oblations and obventions aie
given to the church for the fervicc of God, the
affiftance of the poor, and other religious ufes are
by divine right inalienable from the intended pui-
pofes, and therefore, in whatfoever hands and
they be lodged, the church as general fpintual fu-
perintendant of the obfervance of the law of God,
has a right to command application of them to the
intended fervice; and that in cafe of difobedience,
the can inforce her commands by fufpenfons, inter-
dittions, excommunications , Szc. as (lie thinks pi open
N ow if the exercife of any part of this fpintual au-
thority can produce in the date, or in the pockets
of individuals, what you call proprio vigor*, a civil
effect % I muft beg leave flatly to deny your propofl-
tion, as it is diametrically contrary to the
pies of a religion, which I revere and uphold.
1 mean not however by this affertion to take
upon me the determination of thofe intricate
queftions, in what manner a civil dominion of
ecclefiaftical goods is to be acquired m this or
r •; , any
4- Deem* font pane elccmofyn*. et poffunt parochiani propter pee-
cata fuorum preiatorum ad libitum fuum eas auferre. Art. 18. Joa*
Wicleff.


any other kingdom : hoW ecclefiaftical corpora
tions are to he formed: how far the temporal
power has aright to defend itfelf againft the ufiir-
pations and abufes of churchmen and againft a-
general engroffment or monopoly of landed or
monied property, to the prejudice of individuals;
(upon which grounds the laws of mort-main, and
Other reftridive laws upon the church feeni to
have been formed in this and other countries) to
what determinate fervices a principle of ecclefi-
aftical goods is to be applied, when it can no
longer be directed to its firft intended purpofe,
with many others of the fame kind, which exceed
mv abilities, and the intended fhortnefs of a fami-
liar letter.
But if any one maintains, that a civil power
either with the free confent of the majority of a
nation or without it, can take to itfelf an univer-
fal command over all the goods of the church,
and pious donations, under pretext of their being
applied to idle and fuperftitious ufes, and difpofe
of them to different fervices at its pleafure, that
man’s dodrine I deny, becaufe it is a dodrine
oppofite to that of my church. Now as the pri-
mary, immediate, diredf, clear, and unequivocal
intent of the ad of the 24th of Henry VIII. is to
lodge an incontroulable fupremacy or headfhip
over


over all the goods of the church of England in the
fovereign, and allow him the difpofal of them, as
Henry VIII. in virtue of that aft, difpofed of the
goods of the catholic church at the reformation,
tho’ your falvo of civil lhould be inferted in the
form, no catholic could take that oath. You
will not queftion the truth of the contradictory of
WiclefFs proportion condemned by the council
of Conftance. Temporal Lords can not at their
pleafure take away temporal goods from the church,
when the pojfeffors are habitually delinquent, that is,
when they fail , not in a ftngle aft, but from habit*
The reformer of the fifteenth century alledged,
at leaft fome colourable pretext for his doarine,
viz. the habitual delinquency of the poffeffors:
but I do not recollect, that in your Jura Anglorum
you afiign any, and therefore your principle being
more unlimited, muft ofieeurfe be more diverging
from the catholic truth.
I am with fincereft regard, tho’ with the utmoft
difference of opinion upon theological fubjetls,
Sir,
Your mofl obedient humble Servant,
A ROMAN CATHOLIC CLERGYMAN.
Ff
Feb, 17, 1794*
* Supra.


POSTSCRIPT.
I was doling my Letter, your publication
on The Hifiory of the lafl twenty months was delivered
to me, which I had been expecting for fome days.
I eagerly embraced the firft leifure moments to
examine the contents, which I fuppofed to relate
to the fubjedts, I had been treating; but on read-
ing your work, how greatly was I furprifed that
you had touched upon fo few of thofe topics ? I
could not help however foon remarking, that
there appeared a very confiderable difference of
opinion in your prefent and former work. In
your former, catholics with the whole body of
their clergy at their head, were threatened with
your fevereft political and religious anathemas,
and even judged guilty of blafphemy before God,
if under any pretext of confcience they dared
disapprove, resist, or oppose any religion
fandtioned by the Hate : and a general unlimited
fubmilfion of fubjedls in all things not mala in fe yon
maintained to be at all times elfential to the wel-
fare and peace of kingdoms. As this dodtrine
appeared to me to be the greateft ftretch of pallive
obedience and non-refiftance, that I ever re mem-
ber


ber to have feen, I ventured to contradift your
principles : whether fuccefsfully or not, my read^-
ers not I, muft judge.
In your prefent work, however, our conftitu-
tion not only allows members of parliament differ-
ing from the majority of the houfe on any fubjetf
freely to deliver their fentiments in debate, but
authorizes individuals to difapprove , rejiji, and op-
pofe the conduct of the executive government, and
the general refolutions of the whole legiflative
body, in whofe will, I before underftood that
the will of every fubject is included. Am l, laid
Ito myfelf, right in my obfervation or not ?
I did not venture pofttively to ailert it; becailfe
I recollected having iomclimes met with authors,
who never imagined I underftood any thing they
faid, and as nothing can be more unfortunate
than to miftake the words of a gentleman, which
are written to be underftood, 1 chofe no. lO
engage on a topic, which might produce argu-
ment, but not procure either honour or benefit,
provided even 1 fliould prove the contradiaions,
into which you feemed to have fallen. Nec habet
vitloria laudem. 1 determined therefore to aban-
don my fufpicions on this head to my readers
better judgment, and waving the examination of
F f 2 your


your contefts with your new adverfaries, to en-
trench myfelf in a fafe poft behind a maxim of our
divine faviour, which better fuits my profeffion:
Man who hath appointed me Judge , or divider over
you * Hither I retired, yet not without my appre-
henfions, that if your principles are not more
accurate upon policy, than they are upon theo-
logy, you will hardly make a fortune in your new
profeffion.
I find that upon thfe fubjefl of the Unitarian bill
you again give into your former principles con-
cerning the free choice of religion, which I exa-
mined in the firft part of my letter. If what I
then faid upon the fubjeft was not grounded,
what I ffiould now add, would be of no avail.
But while you regret the lofs of Mr. Fox’s bill,
you will allow me to indulge a fatisfa&ion, which
I am fure is chriftian, and I hope not illiberal,
that on that occafion the majority of our fenators
refufed to break down the boundaries, by which
French philofophy, and a contempt of the divine
authority of the old and new teftament are ltill pre-
vented from entering this ille. Whether, before
this important quejlion received what I believe mqft
chriftians hope, is its final decifion, our legidators
completely divefied themfelves of the Jiern compulfion of
confcientious
* Luke 12, 14.


conscientious morality , which you feem to think will
be neceflary to make a final adj ailment of the
ilave trade, J know not: but on that proud day of
triumph to the eloquent Mr. Burke , whatever were
the arguments he difplayed,lcannotbuteXult, that
a very large majority gave into his arguments , and that
the motion was loft.* For you know, me to be of
the opinion, that not only eccleiialtical, but tem-
poral governors as delegates of the Almighty,
may at all times make ufc of the authority com-
mitted to them by God to uphold the chrillian
revelation. The church commands a fubmiffion
of the underftanding to the revealed truth*. the
temporal power gives protection to the believing
phriftian, and wards off external attacks.
Thefe few remarks will fliow that I do not
look upon your theological reflections in your
late work to be entirely accurate. But I cannot
fufficiently commend the paflage, in which you
give an account of the conduCt and principles of
the - French clergy, which does honour both to
your underftanding and heart. If you had been
a candidate for the popedom, you could not have
fpoken with more orthodox propriety. I equally
admire your addrefs and zeal in expofmg the illi-
berality of thofe, who flill make a merit of hold-
ing
* Short Iliflory, &c. pag. 63, 71, 72.


mg a rod of religious reftraint over the backs of
thoufands of Irifli roman catholic foldiers and
failors, to whom the ftate at this moment is in-
debted for its prefervation. It is hard that thofe
brave champions, who ftorm the batteries of our
enemies, and fweep the feas of their fhips, fliould
be prevented by fome means or other, the moment
they enter the royal fervice, from appearing in
their uniform before the altar of God, to pray for
the falvation of their country. Your ftaunch
catholicity in thefe two points, fullv convinces
me of what I have all along believed, that the
errors of your Jura Anglorum are the flights of an
exuberant imagination, but in no manner a de-
viation of heart from catholic principle and
re&itude.
F I N I 5.


ERRATA.
Page 24 — Line 22 —for were, read havcbeen
28 21 —for read deliberation .
81—. 6—for were, read was.
14 4 3 —for natives* read native .






