





*




CHARGE,
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OE THE DIOCESE OE TASMANIA,
AT THE
VISITATION,
HELD IN THE
CATHEDRAL CHURCH OE ST. DAVID, HOBART TOWN,
ON THURSDAY, 22nd MAY, 1851;
AND IN
THE CHURCH OE THE HOLY TRINITY, LAUNCESTON,
ON THURSDAY, 27th MAY,
FEANCIS-RUSSELL NIXON, D.D.,
BISHOP OF THE DIOCESE.
HOBART TOWN:
H. & C. BEST, PRINTERS, “ COURIER" OFFICE, COLLINS STREET.
WALCII AND SON, HOBART TOWN: DOWLING, LAUNCESTON,
1851.




They who can thoroughly appreciate the varied anxieties of a Bishop’s
office, in days, when private judgment seems disposed to over-ride the
Church’s teaching,—they, too, who have carefully studied the relative
positions of a Bishop, and the Clergy, and are familiar with the details
of the existing constitution of our Church, —can well understand the
painful regret, with which the greater portion of this Charge was
originally composed, subsequently revised, and then committed to the
press.
In inscribing it, affectionately, to the Clergy and Laity of the Church
of England in this Diocese, I can urge upon them no better counsel than
that penned by a venerable father of the Church of Christ, and prefixed
to the primary Charge of one, who, in his own person, labours, and
teaching, has carried us eighteen centuries back, —and led us to realize,
by his example, the worth and work of the primitive missionaries of the
Gospel,—George Augustus Selwyn, Bishop of New Zealand.
Quisquis haec legit, übi pariter certus est, pergat mecum ; übi pariter
haesitat, quaerat mecum ; übi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me ; übi
meura, revocet me. Tta ingrediamur simul caritatis viam, tendentes ad
eum, de quo dictum est, “Quaerite faciem ejus semper.” —Augustin :
de Trinitaic, lib. 1. chap. 3.


• - - • • -


CONT E N T S.
Existing troubles of the Church, 1; Address to the Bishop on the Conference
of Bishops at Sydney, 2; Formation of the “ Protestant Association,” 4;
Misapprehensions respecting the Minutes of Conference, 5—13; Restric-
tions put upon the Church of England, 13; Lay participation in Church
matters considered, 15—22 ; Lay assistance and gifts to the Church, 22—26 ;
Value and importance of Lay co-operation, 26—29; What is a faithful
Laity? 29—30; Questions concerning the status of the Clergy, and licences
considered, 31—36 ; Objections to the Bishop’s discretionary disposal of
candidates for Holy Orders considered, 37—42 ; The Gorham case, 42—48;
Effects of the decision of the Privy Council, 48—50; -Teaching of the
Church of England on the Sacrament of Holy Baptism, 51—57. The
question considered as a test for Ordination, 57—61; The “ Papal Aggres-
sion,” 61—65 ; Its probable causes, 65—70; Conclusion.
APPENDIX.
Note A.—Address of the Archidiaconal Chapter to the Bishop, 73; Notice of
this Address by the “ Protestant Association,” 75; Letter to the Archdeacon
of Hobart Town from the Bishop, accompanying his reply to the Address, 75;
The reply, 76 : Address to the Bishop from Archdeacon Marriott, and others
of the Clergy, 77; The Bishop’s reply, 78.
Note B.—Requisition to the Bishop to convene a public meeting of the Laity of
the Church of England, 80; The Bishop’s reply, 81—82; Resolutions
adopted at the meeting, 83—84; Speech of Mr. Barnard, 84—88; Of
Mr. Dobson, 88—93.
Note C.— Minutes of the Conference of Australasian Bishops held at Sydney,
93—106; Memorial addressed to the Bishop by some of the Clergy, respect-
ing the Minutes and the Charge, 106—108; The Bishop’s reply, 108—116;
Letter from Rev, Dr. Browne, 116—117 ; Rejoinder to the Bishop’s reply,
117—120.
Note D.—Circular convening the Archidiaconal Chapter, 121; The Archdeacon’s
protest against the Address, 121—122.
Note E.—Gifts of Laymen to the Church in Tasmania, 122.
Note F.— Rev. W. Tancred’s remarks on the Circular of the “Association”
with reference to the existing form of Licence, 123; Rejoinder of the “Asso-
ciation,” 123; New form of Licence, 123; Old form of Licence, with the
endorsements, 124—126; The new form, now adopted, 126; Opinion of
the law officers of the Crown in England as to the Bishop’s authority, 126.
Note G. Form of the Royal Warrants, 127.


APPENDIX.
Note H—Bishop Ryder on Baptismal Regeneration, 128; Mr, Simeon on
same, 128—129 ; Scotch “Confession of Faith” on same, 129.
Note I.—Archbishop Sumner on same, 129; Bishop Blomfield on same, 130.
Note K —Address from the Committee of the Hobart Town Branch of the
Society for promoting Christian Knowledge to the Archbishop of Canter-
bury, on the “ Papal Aggression,” 130—131; The amendment proposed,
132,
Note L.—Jesuits’ doings in the reign of Elizabeth—proceedings of “Faithful
Commin,” 133; Letter from Archbishop Bramhall on the Jesuits’
doings in Paris in 1654, 134—136.
Note M. —On the alleged Romanizing teaching in the Diocese, 136; The
Warden’s letter respecting the charges brought against the College by the
“ Protestant Association,” 137,


CHARGE,
My Reverend Brethren, —
If, at the most peaceful period of the Church’s History,
a Bishop must he filled with an anxious remembrance of his
responsibility, when addressing the assembled body of the
Clergy of his Diocese, —how painfully must that feeling be
deepened, when thus we meet, in times, confessedly, of no
ordinary trouble; —and when, from the too manifest difference
of opinion that prevails amongst us, he has good cause to fear,
that there are things, which a sense of duty urges him to say,
which may, haply, jar upon some, at least, of his hearers’
minds; and awaken sentiments, I do not say of displeasure,
but possibly, of dissatisfaction.
We are fallen on evil days, indeed, dear brethren, for the
Church, and for ourselves : —for our Church, in that we behold
her children, not as they were of old, —when they that believed
c ‘ were of one heart and of one soul —but rather as a house-
hold divided against itself; some, rejoicing at a supposed,
perhaps a real increase of permitted latitude of opinion on
the most vital doctrines ; —others, trembling, lest such a falling
away from her real Reformation principles should endamage
her fair name as a keeper of, and witness to, the truth; some,
reviving, and clinging to practices, which the good sense of
three centuries has dropped, as more akin to the usage of the


Church of Home, than that of England;—others, in blind
zeal, denouncing as unclean all that has been even touched by
Rome, —forgetting the while, that it may he, that much that is
condemned as savouring of Popery, is, after all, but a portion
of primitive teaching and usage, and, as such, the common
heritage of the Church of Christ; —and others, again,—alas,
that we should have to say it, —deserting the Church’s ranks, in
the hour of her extremest need, and seeking in other commu-
nions that rest and peace, which they are too impatient, or,
it may he, too desponding, to look for in their own.
And they are troublous times, dear brethren, for ourselves as
well; —for not only has the bruit of clamours at home reached
us even here, —but their natural effect has been visible amongst
us, also.
Clouds of suspicion and disunion seem gradually thickening
around our horizon, whilst there should he nothing seen hut
the bright sun of mutual confidence and Christian concord.
Rut, to leave general remarks, and to come to matters which
more immediately affect ourselves. It cannot he, hut that I,
as the Chief Pastor amongst you, must sincerely regret, when
I see some of the most earnest and pious amongst our laity,
not only mistaking the nature, and misapprehending the plain
words of the “ Report of the recent Conference of the Aus-
tralasian Bishops,”—but entertaining I know not what fears,
that ‘ c the principles of the Reformation” are in danger, here ;
—and that teaching and practices of a Romish tendency are
on foot amongst us.
And how must this regret be strengthened into heavy sorrow,
when I find, that there are even some amongst the shepherds
of Christ’s flock, who hear their part in contributing to, instead
of allaying what ferment may exist; and who practically, I
do not say wilfully, mislead the unwary, by so perverting their
Bishops’ plain speech—as to ascribe to them dogmatic decision,
where, at most, as the Fathers of the Church, they have but
honestly expressed, to their children in the faith, the opinions
that they conscientiously held.
So large a portion of the Clergy in the Archdeaconry of
Hobart Town have conveyed to me their opinion upon these
matters, in the shape of a public Address, that the whole


question assumes a more than common importance, —and con-
strains me to enter at greater length into explanations than I
should otherwise have thought necessary; and to canvass,
thus publicly, some questions, which I should have preferred
reserving for mutual counsel, or for private admonition.*
For the sake of those who signed this document, I must
ever regret, —not the frank avowal of their opinions,—but
that, in despite of the remonstrance of the Archdeacon
of Hobart Town, —an Address to the Bishop, adopted by a
majority of the Clergy assembled at the Archidiaconal Chapter,
should have been first submitted to the supervision of a newly-
formed “ Association,”f composed, as I understand, principally
of laymen;—and, then, forwarded to the newspapers, with
most unfortunate, if not unseemly haste, —weeks before any
communication on the subject was entered into with myself.
As the Clergy themselves have brought their opinions before
the whole Colony, and judged it to be within their sphere thus
publicly to pass sentence upon the proceedings of the Austral-
asian Bishops, so, my answer must be as publicly conveyed, at
least to the whole body of the Church of England in the
Colony; not in the brief shape that custom has prescribed to
formal replies to such Addresses, —but so much at large, as to
leave no point, without, at least, an attempt at explanation.
You will, then, I venture to hope, bear with me, if I should
detain you at a somewhat inconvenient length ; and receive
my words in the same affectionate spirit, in which, if at all I
know myself, they are offered.
On reperusiug the Minutes of our Conference, it seems
strange to me, that the plain language in wiiich they have been
drawn up should have been so singularly misunderstood. Of
course, we must have expected to meet with diversities of
opinions, in various quarters, as to the nature, the tendency,
and the expediency of some, at least, of the suggestions which
we put forth. But I must confess, that I, for one, was not
prepared to find imputed to us intentions, which were, to my
knowledge, as foreign to our thoughts, as they are, to my
belief, irreconcileable with our statements.
Note A, Appendix.
f Note B, Appendix.


The long interval which has elapsed between the publication
of the Minutes and the present time has been so far beneficial,
that it has enabled me to see where the most prominent of
these misapprehensions lie; and has given me the opportunity
of thus publicly meeting and correcting them.
It would seem, that, with reference to these Minutes, some
of your own body, and several of our lay friends, have taken
considerable alarm, as though the principles of the Reforma-
tion were endangered in this Colony.
It is not needful now to enquire what, in their and your
estimation, are those principles, —how defined, —by what rule
tried, —or by what standard estimated : —the fact remains the
same; an “ Association” (to which I have before briefly
adverted) has been formed for the purpose of “ maintaining
in Van Diemen’s Land the principles of the Protestant
Reformation.”
If I seem to step out of my way to notice the published
opinions of this body,—it is, partly, because I am well aware,
that thus, in effect, I am addressing some amongst yourselves,
who have taken no small share in their deliberations and pro-
ceedings ; partly, because I have too sincere a respect for the
lay members of the Church of England, generally, —and too
strong a personal regard for some, who, as I understand, have
sitjpified their adherence to the Association, —not to desire to
furnish every information in my power, as to those points in
which I see that they are in doubt, and believe them to be
in error : —and, partly too, because I feel it to be my duty, as
their Chief Pastor, not to stand upon forms, when the oppor-
tunity is before me, of clearing up those misapprehensions,
into which, I doubt not, a too hasty perusal of the Minutes
has betrayed them.
So far back as on the 13th of March last, the draft of a
requisition from this Association appeared in the newspapers, —
calling upon me, as Bishop of the Diocese, to convene a public
meeting of the lay members of the Church of England, for the
purpose of considering the proceedings of the Conference of
the Bishops at Sydney.*
Note C, Appendix.


This requisition has been, subsequently, forwarded to me,
and the reply has been before the public. I have ventured
therein to express my belief, that a careful perusal of the
“ Report ” would have rendered it impossible for those who
signed it, to have arrived at the conclusions which they had
drawn, respecting its objects and intentions, —as the avowed
result of their observation. I have every desire to give due
weight to a document so numerously signed; but its real value
may, perhaps, be better estimated, —when I am in a position
to state, that some of the subscribers, when they affixed their
signatures to it, had never read the “ Minutes ” on which they
profess to comment.
They tell me, however, that they have observed in the report
of our Conference, “ many resolutions concerning the faith,
worship, and discipline of the Church, which, if enforced,
would be equivalent to new Articles of Faith.” As one of the
six Bishops concerned in deliberating upon the various subjects
contained in this Report, I can most truly say, that nothing
was more remote from our intentions, than so far to exceed
our Commission, as to lay down any one “ new Article of
Faith.” We could not conceive ourselves open to the distinct
assertion, that we had virtually endeavoured to lay down many :
nor could we imagine, that the frank delivery of an honest
opinion on any matter could be regarded as implying even a
wish to enforce that opinion.
We have, indeed, as Bishops of the Church of England,
delivered our “ opinions ” upon many matters connected with
the ordinary discipline of that Church ; —upon points relating
to the celebration of Divine Service, and the just interpretation
of her formularies. We have ventured, also, to suggest some
measures, whereby, as we believed, the general efficiency of the
Church might be promoted,' —a more systematic co-operation
of her lay members secured, —and a spirit of real union
amongst all her children engendered. In so doing, we have,
as it seems to me, only acted upon that liberty of opinion,
which is claimed by the Priest, the Deacon, and the humblest
layman.
If, by them, this liberty is so freely exercised, it, surely,
will not be denied to the Chief Pastors of Christ’s Church,


upon whom rests the painful responsibility of her Spiritual
Government; and to whom, even yet, some of her children
are content, as of old, to look for counsel, —and, it may be, in
part, for guidance. But, so far from having desired to “ mag-
nify our own office”—or to take too much upon ourselves, —•
a comparison between the “ Eeport,” and the Eubrics and
Canons of the Church, will satisfy any dispassionate enquirer,
that, on some points connected with the ordinary discipline of
the Church, we have been content to express an opinion, where,
in virtue of our office, we might have spoken with authority ;
and to convey a recommendation, where it was open to us to
issue an injunction, without overstraining our legal powers,
or even overstepping the bounds of the Church’s usage.
And, if in the preface to our “ Eeport” the word “ decisions”
be found, —the man who is familiar with the Prayer-book of
his Church, —the man who has even read her Ordination
Services, will know, that there are questions on which Bishops
are called upon to pronounce a decision. He will see, too,
that the Australasian Bishops have, in no respect, with refer-
ence to those questions, gone one jot beyond their sacred and
responsible Commission.
I am further told, that, by the “ dogmatical determination
of questions hitherto considered open,” we “ would virtually
narrow the terms of Communion with our Church.”
Language, equivalent in effect, is used in the Address adopted
by the Archidiacoual Chapter. In each case, the allusion is,
of course, made to the Minute upon Holy Baptism.
I can understand, how those, whose minds are not habitually
turned to the consideration and study of theological questions,
might come to the hasty conclusion, that the delivery of an
opinion, or the expression of a belief, was pretty much the
same as a dogmatical decision.
But, I must confess, brethren, that it surprises me, when I
find that a body of ecclesiastics should have fallen into such
a serious—indeed I may even say, injurious—error.
The Minutes were placed in the hands of the Clergy ; suffer
me, then, to express my belief, that had they bestowed upon
them that patient and calm attention which “ the deep import-
ance of the subject” (I use the words of the Address)


demanded, —they could not but have seen, that we “ dogmati-
cally determined” nothing, whilst we contented ourselves with
simply recording our belief.
We felt, as we all must feel, —that we had arrived at a “ time,
when the minds of pious and thoughtful men were in per-
plexity: ” we knew, —as we all must know, —that the question
which had agitated men’s minds at home, respecting Holy
Baptism, was not that “ open one,” of which we have heard so
much in these latter days,—l mean, —as to the degree of grace
imparted to infants in that Sacrament; —or whether all infants,
as they are, by Baptism, brought into covenant with God,
receive, then, the germ of His Grace, which, when matured, can
alone enable them to fulfil the conditions of that covenant; —
we knew that it was not this that had aroused the spirits, and
awakened the fears, of men, habitually quiet, but earnestly
devout:—not this, that had made even uncontroversial Church-
men start forth from their peaceful retirement, to bear renewed
testimony to the “ faith once delivered to the Saints,” —the
“ one Baptism for the remission of Sins.” But, we knew, that
the real question at issue was, whether an utter denial of the
blessed truth embodied in this clause of the Nicene Creed, —
the bold abjuration of any sacramental grace whatever, as given
in Baptism, —could be reconcileable with the plain teaching,
and explicit language, of the Church of England.
We were aware, that the highest ecclesiastical authorities at
home had been made cognizant of the fact of our intended
Conference. We thought,—and, surely, we were justified in
thinking, —that the Clergy and the Laity of the Church of
England, in our respective Dioceses, had a right to expect,
from their Bishops, an honest declaration of the belief that
they entertained respecting a vital doctrine of the Gospel, that
had been so fearfully impugned ; and the open denial of wliich
had been so strangely sanctioned.
And we w T ere not altogether mistaken : for there are those,
I thank God, amongst the Clergy,—and I know, too, amongst
the Laity, —who can appreciate their Bishops’ honesty of
purpose ; and who, so far from “ deeply regretting” the
introduction of the question of Holy Baptism into their
Minutes, can see, that, with the attention of the Church at


home directed to their Conference, they would have shrunk
from their duty had they withheld their testimony.
True, they might possibly have escaped a difficulty, by their
silence : but they must, certainly, have cast aside all remem-
brance of the Apostolic command, “ contend earnestly for the
faith once delivered to the Saints.” These are days, when the
fathers of the Church, at least, must, at any hazard, and at
any personal sacrifice, —speak out, —not dally with the truth.
But, in so speaking, mark, I pray you, the total absence of
all pretension, or of all desire, on our part, to force our opinions
upon others, which characterizes the result of our long and
anxious deliberation on this momentous point. “We do not
presume,” are our words, “ to think that we can inform or
guide the judgment of the Church at large; but, at a time
when the minds of pious and thoughtful men are in perplexity,
we cannot remain altogether silent; nor refrain from stating
what we believe to be the just interpretation of the Greed,
Articles, and Liturgy of the Church of England, respecting
the Regeneration of Infants in Holy Baptism.”
Was it well, Reverend Brethren, for ecclesiastics, with these
plain words before them, to charge the Australasian Bishops
with “ dogmatically determining a previously open question ?”
Five Bishops expressed their belief in one way : one Bishop
dissented from their views, and put forth a different opinion :
each, and all, acted according to the best of their judgment,
and the dictates of a well-tasked conscience.
Dogmatism on this question has never, as far as I am aware,
been imputed to the good and able Bishop, who stood alone in
his belief: and yet, you see, if a decision is to be ascribed to
the five, —it must equally be so to the individual Bishop.
There seems to be no need, then, to advert more at length to
the declaration, that the “ construction put by” the Australasian
Bishops “ upon the Creed, Articles, and Liturgy, with respect
to Holy Baptism, would, if imposed, be equivalent to a new
Article of Faith.”
No ordinance or article is imposed, or put forth, as obliga-
tory ; and the idea of such a proceeding, on our part, is
altogether a gratuitous assumption, existing only in the
imagination of those who have advanced it. Nor is it necessary


to dwell longer upon the assertion, that the “ dogmatical
determination of a question which has ever been practically
considered an open one, virtually narrows the terms of
communion with our Church I have declared, with, I should
conceive, sufficient explicitness, to satisfy any reasonable mind,
that nothing has been “ dogmatically determined” upon the
question at all.
I cannot quit this subject for the present, —(for there will
he more to say upon it, before we part),—without recording my
belief, that a forgetfulness of the ordinary respect, which custom
and duty have hitherto united to pay to a Bishop’s counsel,
has been practically evinced in the unhappy wording of the
Chapter’s Address. Not an “ opinion,” merely, has been
expressed, but a “ judgment” has been passed, —that the very
fact of the Australasian Bishops having introduced into their
Minutes the question of Holy Baptism, is “ deeply to be
regretted.”
Surely, it is somewhat out of order for the Clergy thus,
virtually, to dictate to the assembled Bishops of the Province
on what subjects they should, or should not, deliberate, and
pronounce an opinion.
And to the thoughtful member of Christ’s Church, it will
appear still more unseemly, that, not the priest alone should
have allowed himself to pronounce this judgment; but that
four deacons should have regarded it as compatible with their
duty, to have concurred in it.*
I will venture to say, with an honourable jealousy for the
fair fame of our Tasmanian Church, that, what has been thus
publicly said on this matter, both here, and in a neighbouring
Diocese, can reflect no credit on us, when known, as it must
be, in the mother-country. If twenty Clergymen are found to
give in their adherence to such a declaration, it must make
grave men pause, and ask, whether there is not something
wrong in our ecclesiastical constitution, when such things are
done, and gloried in : —when the servants of the Sanctuary
can prevail upon themselves prematurely to publish such a
judgment,—and, by that publication, to leave their Bishop no
Note D, Appendix.


other course than, as publicly, to remonstrate with them in
earnest sorrow, as I am now compelled to do.
It cannot he, that the Clergy have fully considered, to what,
in a most unhappy moment, some of them have thus committed
themselves. In times of doubt and wavering, when strange
doctrinal opinions were afloat, did you know that there was but
a probability of the mind even of one of your respective
congregations being unsettled, or led astray, —were you aware
that others were pausing to listen to your instructions, with
that loving teachableness, which, I thank God, is not yet
banished from the Church, —which of you, in all mindfulness
of your ordination vows, would not esteem it, I do not say
your privilege, but your sacred duty, to put forth his honest
belief, as to what was the doctrine of the Church upon the
point at issue ?
Which of you abstains, Sunday after Sunday, from preaching,
to the best of his belief and skill, on the leading principles of
the Christian faith, —from declaring what he receives as the
Church’s teaching on the “ whole counsel of God ?”
Why, the self-same thing, with regard to the self-same
doctrine, was done, upon that very principle, in this cathedral,
weeks before the assembling of the Bishops of the Province.
The aged Pastor did his duty in declaring to his flock what
was his belief upon the Regeneration of Infants in Holy
Baptism : and he has his Bishop’s thanks for this his fidelity
to his ordination covenant. Will there be found, then, those
amongst your own body, who will pronounce that what they
themselves may do, and rightly do, is to be denied to the
assembled fathers of the Church, —under the penalty of the
expression of their regret ? Indeed, they have been over hasty.
Something beyond a mere fear appears to have been enter-
tained, that it is the intention of the Australasian Bishops
to procure legal sanction to the measures suggested, and the
opinions expressed in their Report.
You are aware, that it has been distinctly and publicly
stated, that we have transmitted it to England with a view to
“ Imperial Legislation.” By this, I presume, I am to under-
stand —(nay, I am assured, that some even so regard it) —that
the whole of our opinions, suggestions, and proposals, are to


aware that we proposed to enter. It was, I conceive, with a
strict reference to the best interests of the Church, that we
sought the benefit of their advice, before suggesting or under-
taking any further step. We desired, and, I doubt not, we
shall receive, their calm and deliberate judgment upon our
Report.
This course seemed, more especially, their due, when our
suggestions went to the length of proposing the establishment
of a new form of administration of Church affairs ; one, which
might be more adapted to our real position, and actual wants,
than the system which has been the gradual work of centuries
in England ; and has grown out of the admixture of temporal
rights and spiritual functions, which belong to the incumbents
of the United Kingdom.
Cumbrous as is the machinery of this system, even when
applied at home, it is not only, as a whole, ill adapted to our
own Missionary Church, —but so uncertain is its application
here, that it would be a difficult matter to decide, upon what
particular part or parts we may depend, as of legal force in
this Province.
Bearing in mind, too, that the suppression in England of
“ Convocation,” (the Church’s legitimate Parliament) for
upwards of 120 years, has rendered men’s minds unused to
regard the solemn assemblies of the Church as a reality, —we
could not conceal from ourselves, that, in recommending the
practical revival of Convocation here, in the shape of Diocesan
and Provincial Synods, we were bringing forward a startling
proposal, that required the most thoughtful attention at the
hands of those in whom we must naturally, and necessarily,
confide, —before the question was canvassed elsewhere.
And we were, further, well aware, that it was but seemly in
us to refer to their consideration, in the first instance, our
avowed desire, so far to innovate upon the hitherto established
practice of the English Church, as to introduce representatives
of the Laity, as a constituent element of her Ecclesiastical
polity, under the form of Diocesan and Provincial Con-
ventions.
After carefully reviewing the measures that we adopted, I


still think that our course was both becoming and correct, in
referring to the Prelates at home the first consideration of these
important matters, —involving, as they do, novel principles,
and fraught, as they must he, with most important results to
our Colonial Church. Your own good sense and candour will
suggest to you, that this is a widely different thing from trans-
mitting the Report for “ Imperial Legislation.”
It will he time enough to lay the whole matter before the
Clergy and Laity for consideration, when we see our way more
clearly than at present; —and feel ourselves really at liberty to
act, instead of being confined to recommendations and sug-
gestions.
But, for that very liberty to act —for the very power to
deliberate authoritatively, at all, upon the framing and details
of such an adaptation of our ancient Church Government to
our own Diocese, as may suit its peculiar exigencies and
position, —we may ultimately have to seek at the hands of the
British Parliament ; and this, as far as I know or can see, is
all that we shall have to do with “ Imperial Legislation.”
Other communions, as you know well, are free, in conse-
quence of their absence from all connexion with the State, to
amend, alter or suspend, their own internal discipline, at their
pleasure. No courts of law adjudicate, or even presume to
deliberate upon, their doctrines; no alien to their faith is
permitted, for one moment, to prescribe to them, “ thus far
shalt thou go and no further.” The National Church at home,
comprising, as she does, within her pale, the overwhelming
majority of the people of England, is, because she happens to
be the Established Church of the Nation, subject to restric-
tions, and met at every turn by checks, which are not
attempted to he inflicted upon, and would not for a moment
be tolerated by, any religious body whatever within the realm
of England. Nay —these restrictions are not imposed upon
the members of the Established Church of Scotland, who,
very properly, are allowed, without let or hindrance, to hold
their Synods, frame their laws, and, through their Presbytery
and General Assembly, to determine all weighty questions that
may arise, whether of doctrine or of discipline, of censure or


receive the consideration of the civil legislature; in the hope
and desire, on onr part, that they may come back to us clothed
with the full majesty of the law, and so become binding upon
the Clergy and people of this Province.
I am perfectly at a loss to imagine what can have given rise
to such apprehensions; or on what facts such a statement is
supposed to rest. In the Report itself, there is not so much as
an allusion to “Imperial Legislation:” all that is there proposed
is, to “ transmit the Report to the Archbishops and Bishops of
the United Church of England and Ireland.” It has, of course,
been freely forwarded to others, in the same open manner in
which it has been largely circulated here.
Doctrinal as well as practical questions are, as you will
remember, handled in the Report; and assuredly, no one, who
jealously loves the best interests of the Church, would desire
to submit grave matters of faith to the consideration even,
much less to the decision, of the mixed body, of which our
Houses of Parliament are now composed.*
I, at least, may refer to the past ; and remind you, that
when, in a watchful regard for the privileges of the Clergy
attached to the Convict department, I strongly remonstrated
against the Secretary of State for the Colonies being the
ultimate referee on questions of discipline which affected them,
I am not very likely to he a consenting party to referring
questions of faith to the Imperial Legislature.
But it was manifestly due, even as a mark of becoming
respect, to the Prelates of the United Church at home, that
we should, without delay, communicate to them the result of
those deliberations, on which some of them, at least, were
* I may here give the valuable testimony of two gifted brothers of a most
honoured sire:
“ In all temporal matters, no assembly can be more fair and sagacious than a
British House of Commons; but with spiritual questions, its very nature
disqualifies it to deal.’’ —Archdeacon Wilberjorce on Church Discipline, p. 148.
“ For the Church to allow a body alien to herself, such as is the Legislature of
this land, to settle for her what should be her symbols or her doctrines, would
be to abdicate her highest office, to abandon the charter given her of God, and to
declare herself to be a mere creature of human institution.” —Bishop Wilberforce’s
Charge, 1848, p. 16.


of acquittal. It is their right; and I, for one, cordially rejoice
that they possess it.*
But it is not so with the Church of England. Recent events
have shewn the startling —I must use most honest speech,
and say, —the humiliating fact, —that, even what practically
amounts to an authoritative interpretation, may he put upon
her very teaching, not by the Convocation of her Bishops and
Clergy, which would seem to he the natural Court where such
trials should he conducted to their issue, —hut hy six laymen,
not one of whom, as it happened, was required to he of her
communion; and one of which six was, in fact, a member of
the Church of Scotland. If there he any members of the
Church of England who rejoice in this vasalage, mainly, it
would seem, because it appears to favour the views of a particu-
lar party, —I must openly confess my entire disagreement with
them.
So crippled is our Church at home,’ that she cannot, as a
Church, legally meet, for the purpose of entering into solemn
deliberation upon points connected with her doctrines or her
discipline, without the express permission of the Sovereign.
And this permission, it is well known, is entirely dependent
upon the recommendation of fhe Prime Minister of the day.
So that, in strict point of fact, to strip off the disguises that
now surround that Royal supremacy, which, when the compact
between the Sovereign and the people was first made, was
indeed a reality, —it will he found in these days to he prac-
tically hut the will of the Minister, —himself virtually the
nominee of Parliament, —one who need not even he a Pro-
testant, still less a member of the Church of England.
It has been truly, hut painfully said, that “ the age makes
an exception in our disfavour to the received principles of
English toleration. We are the one religious body in the
Queen’s dominions, to which the following privileges are
expressly denied:—to declare our own doctrines ; to confirm,
vary, and repeal our own canons; to have a voice in the nomi-
nation of our own chief pastors ; to grant or withhold our own
* Since this was written, I have been informed by an intelligent member of
the Church of Scotland, that their freedom from all restrictions is not so complete
as I had imagined it to be.


sacraments, according to our own proper rule as a religious
body.” It was, we may be sure, no light or impatient sense of
the true nature of our bondage, that could have wrung such
words of earnest complaint from the thoughtful, gentle spirit of
the author of the “ Christian Year.”*
It may be a matter of grave consideration, how far these
galling restrictions, that at present press so heavily upon our
Church at home, avowedly because she is the Established
Church, may legally extend to, or affect her members in these
Colonies, where she is, as avowedly, not established.
The time is not far distant, when these questions must be
mooted. They too deeply concern our free and well working,
to be much longer avoided or evaded. Unless lam much
mistaken, the proposal of the Australasian Bishops to secure
for the Clergy and Laity the same religious independence which
is conceded to and enjoyed by every other communion but our
own, may fairly be regarded as the first step towards bringing
matters to an issue. In the meanwhile, we ecclesiastics must
not be forgetful of our vows and our subscriptions. We, at
least, are bound in conscience and in honour, until the law
shall set us free.
And this brings me to the consideration of the first measure
proposed by the Clergy at the recent Archidiaconal Chapter;
and adopted, as I perceive, by the “ Association”—viz : “ that
in the Assembly for administration of Church affairs, the
Bishops, Clergy, and Laity should have an equal participation
in all deliberations and judgments.”
Now the question for us to ask is, whether this proposed
measure be consistent with the time-honoured usages of Epis-
copal Christendom ; and whether it be in accordance with the
received principles of the Church of England, as established at
the Reformation, and acted upon since that period. If it be
not so, I hardly see how we can, without presumption, arbitra-
rily lay down a rule for our own guidance, which, as essentially*
novel, must be regarded by the thoughtful mind, as of a question-
able, perhaps even of a dangerous character.
Disposed, as I am, to believe, that the propounders of this
* Church Mailers in 1850, No. 2, p. 12.


proposal themselves intended to convey some modification,
or to attach some restriction to this profession of what they
believe should be, in all cases, and under all circumstances, the
constituent elements of a Church assembly, —I must yet take
the words as I find them, and point out their necessary
construction, as well as the errors, with which they appear to
me to be fraught.
If it be seriously meant that, in every deliberation upon
ecclesiastical matters that may take place, whether it be con-
cerning questions of doctrine or of discipline, of principle or
of practice, the Bishop’s voice is to go for no more than that
of the Priest, the Deacon, or the Layman ; —if, too, the same
rule is to be adopted in every judgment that is pronounced,—
then, with the canons, formularies, and usages of the Church
of England as my guide, 1 can have no hesitation in expressing
my conviction, that such a state of things would amount, not
to a remodelling, but to a revolutionizing of that Church, as it
was ordered and settled at the Reformation.
Her Clergy have entered into a voluntary engagement, that
they will “ reverently obey their Ordinary and other chief
Ministers, unto whom is committed the charge and government
over them; following with a glad mind and will their godly
admonitions, and submitting themselves to their godly judg-
ments.” It were to do them an injustice to suppose that men
thus pledged should so far desire to escape from an obliga-
tion, voluntarily and thoughtfully undertaken, (and upon the
faith of keeping which they were admitted into holy orders), as
deliberately to desire that not only they, but that also the lay
members of the Church, should be sharers in the Bishop’s
"admonitions,” and co-deliverers of his "judgments.” And
yet this is the necessary inference from the words of the
declaration.
Again, —there are peculiar judgments appertaining to a
Bishop’s office, which he is personally pledged to execute, and
which, until the constitution of the Church be legally altered,
he cannot be called upon, or expected, to share with others :
nevertheless they come legitimately under the head of " admi-
nistration of Church affairs.”
I do not now speak of those acts of discipline, which, whilst


was required, the very form of subscription marked out the
difference of the office ascribed to them. “ Ego definiens
suhscripsi,” was the Bishop’s form, # “Ego consentiens
subscripsi,” that of the Layman.
This, then, appears to have been the interpretation put, by
the common consent of the Church of Christ, upon the rule
laid down in, or the example set by, the first Apostolic Council.
I am not ignorant that some have impugned the judgment
of the Church in this respect; whilst others have drawn a
different deduction from the account of this Council, as given
us in Scripture.
It has been argued, that, because others of the brethren were
present, and because the decision was given in the name of the
whole Church, —Laymen, therefore, took a share in the deli-
berations. For my own part, I can hardly see that the plain
words of Scripture warrant us in assuming anything beyond
their presence at the debate, and their assent to its conclusions.
You are, doubtless, aware, that, in saying thus much, I am not
delivering a new, still less my own unsupported, opinion.
“ I remember,” says Bishop Jeremy Taylor, “ that this place
is pretended for the people’s power of voicing in Councils. It is
a pretty pageant, —only, that it is against the Catholic practice
of the Church ; against the exigence of Scripture, which bids
us require the law at the mouth of our spiritual rulers ; against
the gravity of such assemblies, for it would force them to be
tumultuous; and, at the best, are the worst of sanctions, as
being issues of popularity; and, to sum up all, it is no way
authorized by this first copy of Christian Councils, f We are
not either to forget, when referring to this primitive model,
that we are speaking of times, when the “ multitude of them
that believed were of one heart, and one soul; ’ when they all
“ continued stedfastly in the Apostles’ doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers —when they “ had
all things in common when “ great power was with the
Apostlesand “ great grace upon them all.”
* Archbishop Bramhall’s Replication to the Bishop of Chalcedon, part I ,disc. 3
sect. 3.
•J* 4 ‘Episcopacy asserted,” sect, 41,v01. vii, p 209—Heber’s edition. See
also, Hammond in loc.: and on Acts »i.


they are by law imposed upon a Bishop, are yet, believe me,
the most painful portion of his anxious duty. But I would
rather turn your attention to matters of a more administrative
character.
If, for example, any doubt should arise, “ concerning the
manner how to understand, do, and execute the things con-
tained in the Book of Common Prayer” —it is provided, that
“ the parties that so doubt, or 'diversely take any thing, shall
alway resort to the Bishop of the Diocese; who, by his dis-
cretion, shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the
same; so that the same order be not contrary to any thing
contained in that Book. And if the Bishop of the Diocese
be in doubt, then he may send for the resolution thereof to the
Archbishop.”*
Again, it is enjoined by the 51st Canon, that in case any
doctrine should be preached, especially in Cathedrals, either
strange, or disagreeing from the word of God, or from any of
the Thirty-nine Articles, or from the Book of Common Prayer,
notice should be given to the Bishop of the Diocese, “ that
he may determine the matter, and take such order therein, as
he shall think convenient.”
I adduce only these two instances, because they will be
sufficient to remind you, that, if, according to the proposed
constitution of a new Church Assembly, all deliberations and
judgments are to come before it, —the Bishop having no more
authority than the Layman or the Priest, —this body would
virtually deliver, or at least assist in delivering, judgment in
cases, which the existing law of our Church has reserved for
the consideration of her chief Pastor.*
But there is a still greater hindrance to the introduction of the
Laity, to the extent proposed, into a Church Assembly, for the
purpose of deliberating and judging upon matters connected
with the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England.
Preface to the Book of Common Prayer.
f “If there be any weight in the concurrent testimony of the Apostolical
Canons, of the General Councils of Nice, and of Chalcedon, of the Councils
of Antioch, of Sardis, of Cartilage, then it is evident, that the Bishop is the
ordinary judge in all matters of spiritual cognizance, and hath power of censures,
and, therefore, a superiority of jurisdiction.” —“Bishop Jeremy Taylor's Episco-
pacy asserted sect. 3G, vol. vii. p. 162. Ileber’s edition.


This hindrance arises from the wording of the Eoyal Decla-
ration, which, since the days of Charles 1., has been prefixed
to the Thirty-nine Articles of religion; and to which we, at least,
who have subscribed to those Articles, have equally given in
our adhesion.
“If any difference”—it is there said “arise about the
external policy, concerning the injunctions, canons, and other
constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy in their
Convocation is to order and settle them, having first obtained
leave under our broad seal so to do ; and we approving their
said ordinances and constitutions : providing that none be
made contrary to the laws and customs of the land.”
Again it is provided, in order that the “ Churchmen may
do the work which is proper unto them, that the Bishops and
Clergy shall deliberate and do all such things as
shall concern the settled continuance of the doctrine and dis-
cipline of the Church of England.”
It would be to affront your good sense, —nay, it would be
to suppose you, if not ignorant, at least forgetful of the whole
tenor of ecclesiastical history, —were I to do much more than
remind you, that the Church of England has but adopted the
unbroken practice of fifteen centuries, and more, in confining
to the ecclesiastics of her communion,* the consideration of
the delicate questions of doctrine and of discipline; whilst, as. a
matter of course, the consent of the Laity is clearly required to
any matters which may directly or indirectly affect themselves.
“In all the ancient Councils of the Church,” says Arch-
bishop Cranmer, “in matters of the faith, and interpretation
of Scripture, no man made definitive subscription but Bishops
and Priests; for so much as the declaration of the word of
God pertaineth unto them.’ t
And, you are doubtless aware, that, in those cases, where
the consent of the Laity to the decrees of a Council or Synod
* “ Valentinian I. calls himself a Layman, when he refused to preside in a
conference between the Catholic Bishops and the Arians. ‘ For me,’ saith he,
‘ who am but one of the Laity or people, it is not lawful to examine such
things ; but let Priests, to whom the care of those things appertain, meet, to
determine them, where they please.’”— Hickes's Treatises , vol. ii. 337.
f Cranmer’s Remains, p.p. 46, 7.


When the same state of things shall he manifested again ;
when, once more, that same real, stedfast spirit of love and
unity shall he found amongst ourselves ; when no such anomaly
shall exist as faith without duty, profession without practice, —
then, in all its even supposed principles, the same example
may, with safety and consistency, be followed.
I have brought these things forward, with the desire to shew
you, that if in all deliberations and judgments, the Bishops,
Clergy, and Laity are to have an equal participation, it is not
only that an innovation will he effected upon the established
order of the Church of England, hut upon that of Episcopal
Christendom itself.
The example of the Protestant Episcopal Church of
x\merica may? possibly, he pleaded as an exception to this
remark.
It must, however, he borne in mind, that, when her Clergy
and Laity assembled together for the purpose of framing an
ecclesiastical constitution, and adopting, or adapting, a Liturgy,
it was under circumstances which can have no parallel in any
part of the British dominions.
They met, not as subjects, who had assented to the supre-
macy, and were under the civil rule of the British Sovereign;
hut as independent citizens of the American republic. As
such, they were free to act, think, deliberate, and decide as they
pleased, without any reference —had they been so minded —to
any Law, Canon, Article, or Formulary of the Church of England,
or of any other Church.
We can scarcely be surprised, if their ecclesiastical polity, as,
from time to time, settled, should take its tinge from the poli-
tical institutions of the republic. In the preface to the American
Book of Common Prayer, the assertion of their entire freedom
in all causes ecclesiastical is most unequivocally asserted.
“ When, in the course of Divine Providence,” it is there stated,
“ these American States became independent, with respect to
civil government, their ecclesiastical independence was neces-
sarily included; and the different religious denominations of
Christians in these States were left at full and equal liberty to
model and organize their respective Churches, and forms of
worship, and discipline, in such manner as they might judge


most convenient for their future prosperity, —consistently with
the constitution and laws of this country.”
We Clergymen of the Church of England must abjure our
allegiance, repudiate our subscriptions, and set aside our oaths,
before we could of ourselves act upon this model, or plead
this example, as, in all respects, a precedent that should he
followed.
But, after all, Episcopal Christendom seems only to have
taken the common sense view of the matter, in restricting to the
ecclesiastical Members of the Church that peculiar portion of
her work, to the elucidation of which they seem more imme-
diately, by their sacred office, to he called; and with the details
of which, as Ministers and Stewards of God’s mysteries, from
their training, study, and daily avocations, they may reasonably
he supposed to he, more than other men, familiar.
It is to their own dishonour, if this he not so; to their own
shame, if others he more conversant with the message of sal-
vation than Christ’s own ordained ambassadors ; yea, —a very
scandal to the Church itself, if any thing be suffered to intervene
between fhe Priests of the' Gospel, and the accomplishment of
that character which marked the servants of the Jewish Sanc-
tuary. It is not less important now, than it was under an
earlier dispensation, that “ the Priest’s lips should keep know-
ledge nor less the duty of the Laity to give good heed,
that, in the same passage of Scripture, they are reminded, that
“ they should seek the law at his mouth : —for he is the mes-
senger of the Lord of Hosts.” Theirs, indeed, should he the
testimony, that even an evil spirit was compelled to pay to
holy Paul and his fellow-labourer Silas : “ These men are the
servants of the Most High God, which shew unto us the way
of salvation.”!
But when I thus point out to you, that, as there are, by
God’s appointment, divers orders in the Church of Christ, so,
of necessity, there are divers functions, —do I therefore imply
aught of disrespect to her lay members ? When I declare,
that it has been the practice of every Episcopal Church, until
towards the close of the 18th century, to entrust her ordained
ambassadors with all deliberations upon questions of doctrine,
Mai. ii. v. 7, t Acts xvi. v. 17.


and with all Judgments upon matters of discipline, so far as
they may affect themselves, do I deny to her other faithful
children here, their own peculiar dignity; —rob them of
any privilege that they possess; —or debar them from their
own especial work in the Church’s general polity ? Not so. —
I speak no new thing —I put forward no narrowing judgment
of my own : I simply state the recognized rule of that branch
of Christ’s Catholic Church, to which they, and we, belong.
Little must that man love his Church, and little must he
regard what’ has been wrought by human hands for her
outspreading and support, —if he, but in thought, undervalues
the holy zeal which her lay members have, times out of num-
ber, displayed in her most holy cause.
Were they all ecclesiastics who sold lands and houses, and
laid down the price at the Apostles’ fbet; so that distribution
might be made to every man, according as he had need ?
Not one of them.
Were they all ministering Priests, —that noble army of
martyrs, —which, in days of sore trial, bare witness to the
Gospel’s everlasting truth, and to their own burning love of
Christ, that constrained them, rather to welcome the stake,
the faggot, or the cord, —than to blaspheme the Captain of
their Salvation; to curse Christ, and live? Nay, —you will
find amongst that glorious band, even the gentle shrinking
maiden, who could so far forget her sex’s fears and weakness,
as to set an example to our sterner nature, —and to witness as
good a confession before God and man, as the stoutest frame
and bravest heart amongst them all.
In every Christian age, in every Christian Church, the Chris-
tian Priesthood are, so to speak, but the voice and hands of
the whole redeemed body. The main strength, the thews
and sinews, —rest with her lay members. Pew errors are
more fraught with practical mischief, than that which would
regard the Church as merely a body of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons; and which, when the “ Church’s work,” the “Church’s
interests,” or the “ Church’s progress” are spoken of, would lead
men to look to these things as only belonging to, or identified
with, the small body of ecclesiastics, to whom is consigned the
custody of her sacred mysteries.


The Laity are as much the Church, as the Bishops them-
selves ; though their work and functions may he of another
order.
We, of the Church of England, have, both in our native
land, and here, good reason to hear in grateful remembrance
the pious zeal by which the lay members of the Church have
so nobly proved, that membership, with them, has been some-
thing more than a mere thing of words.
To speak of some few of their good works in time past, —
it was by the godly thoughtfulness of Laymen that our Church
of England was mainly endowed at home. The men, who
girt them to this labour of love, were rude in mere worldly
learning, and unskilled in art and science ; and yet they were
men of such a sterling stamp, that, in their rough honest hearts,
the love of souls burnt so brightly, that they were constrained
by that love, to alienate for ever, from themselves and their
posterity, the tenth part of the produce of their lands; in
order that Christ’s gospel might be preached to their children’s
children, so long as England’s polity endured on earth.
It is to Laymen that we chiefly owe the foundation of those
collegiate institutions, those public establishments, and many
grammar schools, which, at once, grace and ennoble our
native land.
And Laymen, in modern days, have shewn, that the old
spirit of their forefathers has not forsaken them. The hos-
pital, the asylum, the alms-house, and the house of refuge,
may tell many a tale of the Layman’s bounty, and his Christian
benevolence.
It is mainly to them that we owe, if not the uprising, at
least the sustentation, of our two great Church Societies.
And it was a Layman’s thought that devised, and a Layman’s
energy that matured, the noble system, by which the little
lambs of Christ’s fold are gathered together on God’s holy
day, to be taught the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus.
And it is not only that, thus, to a Layman’s zeal we owe the
Sunday School, but Laymen have been pre-eminent in the
determination, with which they have promoted the glorious
cause of National Education in England; recognizing a truth,
as sound in politics as it is in morals and religion, that


will impose a greater check on crime, by the erection and sus-
tentation of the School, than ever you can hope to do by the
Penitentiary, or the Gaol.
But the time, indeed, would fail me, were I to attempt to
remember, or recount, the many deeds of Christian love that
Laymen have wrought, as proofs of their allegiance to that
Church, of which they are such important members.
And, God knoweth, that, in this our adopted home, we,
brethren, have abundant cause to be mindful of these things;
and to entertain a grateful remembrance of the many bounties
that we ecclesiastics, as well as the Church at large, have
received at the hands of Laymen, both at home and here.
We cannot forget the rich gifts that have been poured into
our laps, as proofs of the untiring affection of lay England for
these her distant children. We must keep ever in view, as
well, the labours of love that the Laymen of this Colony have
so freely worked. My own testimony to their worth has been
recorded : I repeat it, —“ We have in the Colony a body of
free settlers, who, I am bound to say, will yield to no class of
men in high-mindedness, intelligence, and uprightness of
principle. In more prosperous times, they contributed to
every good and Christian work, with a generosity seldom
equalled ; perhaps, never, in these days, exceeded. And even
now, in the midst of their losses and depression, they arc
ready to answer, according to their means, to every call for
Christ’s sake.”
They have proved their claim to this character, not merely
by many a public act, —but also, to my knowledge, by many a
good deed so done in secret, that it may be truly said, that
the loft hand knew not what its fellow had accomplished.
To the generosity of a lay Legislature we owe our own
means of living, and by far the greater proportion of Churches,
Schools, and Parsonages in the land. By Laymen, chiefly,
have our College and Church Grammar Schools been fostered
into maturity. By Laymen’s contributions, principally, have
our Church Societies been supported. It is mainly through
them, that the collections at the Offertory, throughout the
Diocese, amounted, during the last year, x to a sum exceeding
ill 200; a convincing proof, one would think, that there is a


wholesome wisdom in resorting to the good old practices
established, or continued, by the Fathers of the Reformation in
England : for I need hardly tell you, Reverend Brethren, that
the collection of the alms of the faithful at the Offertory is a
rule laid down by them, —let the economical gainsayers of the
present day say what they please.
It is to a Layman’s Christian zeal that we must ascribe the
impetus which, within these last few years, has been given to
the mighty work of Education here ; and were I to single out
one instance in which, more than in any other, that same
untiring energy has been beneficially displayed, I should point
to the complete re-modelling of the Orphan Schools; an insti-
tution, that now may take its place amongst the best conducted
and most efficient, even of our native land. It is a gladdening
sight to witness the springs of hope and of affection awakened
amongst its forlorn inmates; —they were but dormant, not
extinct; awaiting only a loving touch to bring them forth to
life and vigour.
And I may speak gratefully, too, of individual gifts; and say,
how one Layman has even gone beyond the example set him
by our forefathers, and alienated from his family, for the Lord’s
service, not the tithe of his land’s produce, but the tenth itself
of his whole possessions.
I may tell also of another, who, at his individual cost, built,
and in part endowed, a Church; and who is even now erecting
a commodious house for the residence of a minister.
It may here be permitted to me to record the good work of
a third lay member of the Church ; one in a less wealthy
class of life ; from whom, whilst yet on the vessel’s deck that
first brought me here, I received the earliest promise of assist-
ance to such works, as I might desire to accomplish, for the
outspreading of the Gospel; —a promise which has been amply
redeemed ; for he, too, has, from his slender means, built,
completely furnished, and endowed with a glebe, a small but
commodious Church.*
I, then, am not one to forget, or even to think lightly of, all
that the lay members of the Church have done in her behalf.
Appendix E.


I am not one either, so to set aside their claims, or so to under-
value their services, as to say, that they are not to be fellow-
workers with us in the Church’s common welfare. On the con-
trary, I fully believe that their co-operation would he most
desirable, and their experience most valuable, when the time
shall come for the Synodical consideration of the wants and
difficulties of our Tasmanian Church ; and for the adoption of
such measures, as may ensure, with God’s good providence, its
stability and efficiency.
I only pause, —and desire to call your attention to the
extreme character of the innovation, when it is proposed to
invite them to take an equal share in those peculiar delibe-
rations and judgments, which the voice of Episcopal Chris-
tendom, concurrent with the usages of our own Church, has
reserved for her ecclesiastics.
But, I pray you bear in mind, Eeverend Brethren, how, again
and again, I have besought you to seek the co-operation of
your lay brethren within your several parishes. Openly,
publicly, before them and you, have I declared my opinion,
that, if you trust them, they will be found worthy of your
confidence; that, if you find work for them, their work will
be done both heartily and zealously.
And they have important privileges belonging to them, as
well as important works before them. I need not speak now,
at length, of the peculiar functions which are secured to them
here by the Act of Council; which vests in them the property
in the several Churches and minister’s dwellings; which hands
over to them the general management of the temporalities of
every place of worship ; the appointment, removal, and suspen-
sion of all Church officers and servants—(the minister’s clerk
alone excepted.)
Nor need I do more than allude to the authority of Church-
wardens, as laid down in the Canons and common law of
England : such, for example, as their right to exercise a
general care over the fabric of the Church ; their power to seat
the parishioners ; their duty to see that all things appertaining
to Divine Worship are done “decently and in order;” their
privilege to have a voice in the disposal of the alms collected
at the Offertory; and the like.


Looking upon the Churchwardens as the representatives of
the great body of the parishioners, these, amongst others, would
seem to be hut the common-sense rights of the Laity, with
which the law invests them; and which they can scarcely lay
down or forego, without at once forfeiting their legal privileges,
and neglecting their duty as members of the Church.
But there are other ways in which the Laity may afford us
most efficient help, besides merely availing themselves of what
the law has pronounced to he their own.
Sensible, as I am, of the extreme importance of attaching
the Laity to the Church of their fathers, by making them feel
that they are valued and trusted —not as nominal members, to
he used for the pastor’s convenience—but as working members,
to be employed for the Church’s general weal; —few things
would give me more sincere delight, than to witness the organi-
zation of a general system of lay co-operation in the several
districts of the Colony, in connection with the Church, and
in harmonious concert with their ministers.
From the large field over which the country Clergy have
to travel, and from the extent and population of our town
parishes, the strength, even of the most iron-framed pastor, is
inadequate to the due exercise of that constant, special over-
sight, which is the very essence of the parochial system.
True, —much may he done by a clergyman, who so metho-
dizes his work, and parcels out his time, that his visits may
assume the character, rather of regular, than of intermitted
intercourse ; who so regulates his parochial ministrations, that
the poorer members of his flock may gradually learn to know
on what days, and almost at what hours, they may reasonably
expect his presence amongst them. But lam not insensible,
from my own experience, when Curate, at one time, of a large
town, —and, at another, of an extensive agricultural district, —
how often the most regular plan of action is broken in upon
by those occasional demands upon our time, which we can
neither foresee nor yet provide for. I know, too, how the
retrospect of the day’s work of the most indefatigable and
systematic parish Priest will bring (in proportion to his
estimate of what that work should he) more of sorrow, for
that which, of necessity, has been left undone, — thnr.


comfort, for what, with God’s blessing, he has been able to
accomplish.
It is here, if I mistake not, that the co-operation of the lay-
members of your congregations may be, most advantageously,
called into action. Much of these difficulties would, as it
seems to me, disappear, were your parishes subdivided into
districts, —each containing so many houses, —with one or
more Laymen placed in a certain sort of charge over them;
with general instructions from yourselves to guide and regu-
late their work. It would be theirs to acquaint you with such
cases as may immediately require your spiritual counsel, your
warning, or your intervention.
Were it, further, a regular rule, that, once at least, in every
month, you met your lay friends at an appointed hour, to
receive their several reports of the houses and families under
their charge, —you w r ould, thus, not only secure a more sys-
tematic and entire supervision of your respective parishes, —
but gain a more accurate knowledge of them, than the strongest
and most experienced amongst you could obtain, without such
help.
It would be superfluous to dwell, at length, upon the advan-
tages that would accrue from such a system. You would
strengthen the bonds of affection between all parties. A
mutual good understanding, founded upon mutual knowledge,
could scarcely fail to spring up between the pastor and his
lay agents. The former would feel the value and the comfort
of the most pious and trustworthy of his flock being associated
with him in one common holy work. The latter would soon
learn to cling more closely to their pastor, from a sense of
their own usefulness to him ; nay, from the very fact of feel-
ing themselves not only employed, but trusted : —whilst the
social and religious condition of the poor could not but be
improved, by constant intercourse with their more gifted
neighbours; and, above all, by the consciousness, that both
their pastor, and their fellow-parishioners, were so alive to
their necessities, and so determined to relieve them, that no
real want, whether of body or of soul, remained uncared for.
There is yet another, and a most extensive field, in which
the Laity might find for themselves work of a singularly


honourable and useful character. I mean, in the promotion
of education amongst all classes, more especially amongst the
poor; who, as numerically the largest, cannot be regarded as
the least important portion of the community.
It is well for the pastor to take good heed to our blessed
Lord’s injunction, “feed my lambs.” It is well for him to
bear in mind, that he has their souls in charge; and, that, as
he has been instrumental in ushering these little ones into the
privileges of the Christian Covenant, by administering to them
the Sacrament of Baptism, —so, he must strive, to the utmost
of his power, to keep an ever-watchful eye over their future
progress ; that baptismal grace be not sinned away by an
utter forgetfulness of baptismal responsibilities. But, whilst
this is the pastor’s ordinary duty, —it is well for him also to
remember, that, inasmuch as his own multifarious occupations
may, in many cases, prevent him from paying that daily close
attention to his schools, which is the very essence of all pro-
fitable teaching,—it behoves him to place them upon such a
footing, that his occasional absence may cause no break in the
lessons of Christian truth delivered to them.
Experience has proved, that it is idle to expect that the
master can invariably supply the defect. The best of us want
looking after. And I feel confident that those schools will be
found most efficient, for all purposes of Christian education,
in which the Laity of the district take a systematically super-
vising interest.
Here, then, if the Laity desire to occupy it, is a noble field
for their honourable exertions. Here they may do much for
generations yet to come, by giving their personal aid in training
and developing the moral and religious character of the exist-
ing young community. Here, indeed, may a faithful Laity
work hand in hand with, comfort, support, and strengthen, a
faithful Clergy.
But what is a faithful Laity ? If we are to take the judg-
ment of the ancient Church, —nay, brethren, if we are to take
our common sense, purified by a prayerful study of God’s
Holy Word, (is our guide,—w T e should say that no man was
accounted a complete Layman, but he that was in full commu-
nion with the Church, —he that had the right —(and exercised


it) —of participating with the faithful in all holy offices,
especially in the Holy Eucharist, which is the consummation
of all; and that which makes a man a perfect and complete
Christian.* We should understand by the term a “ Christian
Laity,” not, merely, all who are not ecclesiastics, —not a body
of men, who would virtually take upon themselves the Priests’
office, and preach Christ of contention, supposing thereby to
add affliction to the pastor’s bonds. We should not speak of
men, who, by engendering suspicions, propagating idle reports,
and fomenting divisions, so rend the seamless coat of Christ,
as to split up His Church into sects and parties, teaching men
to say, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas, I of Christ.
We must not include amongst the ranks of a faithful Christian
Laity those, who would realize to themselves the character that
God’s Israel obtained of old, —“ Thy people are as they that
strive with the Priest,”f but rather, those, who would so emulate
the loving faithful spirit of them of old, as to be content to be
well-read disciples, without being captious critics ; those, who
would take to heart the awful warning which the unchange-
able God hath conveyed in the solemn words, —“ The man
that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
Priest, that standeth to minister there before the Lord thy
God, or unto the judge, —even that man shall die, and thou
shalt put away the evil from Israel/’J
The true Laity of Christ’s Church are not merely the Laity
of wealth, of talent, of influence, of position ; but only they,
who have somewhat of Christ’s temper; men, who, whatever
may be their grade in life, —be they high, or be they humble, —.
keep ever as their guide the soul-stirring description that
Christ’s Apostle has given of the privileges and duties, of
Christ’s people. “ Ye,” says the holy man, “ are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar peo-
ple ; that ye should show forth the praises of Him who hath
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.”!
Between the work, the feelings, the sympathies, and the
affections of such a faithful Laity, and their faithful Pastor,
Bingham, vol. 8, p. 266. f Hosca iv. 4. J Deut. xvii. 12.
|| 1 Pet. ii. 9.


there can be no more substantial difference than between the
echo and the sound that it repeats.
An opinion has further been recorded, that “ the Licences of
parochial Clergymen in these Colonies should be similar to
those issued to incumbents in England.” In effect, this
opinion amounts to a desire, that the Chaplaincies in this
Colony should be on the same footing as English incum-
bencies.
Whatever may be my own, or your anxiety, that the paro-
chial Clergy in this Diocese should legally enjoy such a position,
we cannot alter the state of the law, nor set aside facts, so as
pronounce that to be an incumbency, in the English sense of
the word, which has neither a fixed inalienable monetary stipend,
nor any thing which can be regarded as a freehold.
In the forms connected with your appointments, there is
nothing analogous to institution to an incumbency. You
are not “ bodies corporate, with perpetual succession.” Your
Churches, your grave-yards, your parsonages, your glebes, are
all, by the Church Act, vested, not in your own persons, but
in the hands of Trustees. The late Attorney-General of this
Colony, in a legal document, —communicated to me by desire
of the late Lieutenant-Governor, and which has subsequently
been laid before Parliament, —expressed his opinion that the
“ Chaplains of this Colony were very nearly in the same position
as that of a Chaplain to certain lunatic asylums in England.”
Erom this opinion, whatever may be its legal accuracy, I must
express my very strong dissent; at least, so far as lam con-
cernedin the recognition of your ecclesiastical position.
Whether this, or any thing approaching to this, be indeed,
in strict point of law, your status, my own desire and intention
remain the same, —practically to regard the Colonial Chaplains
as nearly as possible in the light of “ perpetual curates” in Eng-
land ; to which class of incumbents they so far bear a resem-
blance, in that they each require the Bishop’s licence to enable
them to officiate. My desire, however, is substantially recorded
in the Sydney Minutes; and, I should conceive, in sufficiently
intelligible terms, when an opinion is expressed by myself and
my brother Bishops, that “ no clergyman, who shall have been
duly appointed and licensed to any Church or permanent cure


of souls, should be removcable therefrom, except hy sentence
pronounced, after judicial inquiry before the Diocesan Synod
or, of course, until such a form of Church government shall
have been sanctioned by competent authority, after due inquiry
and trial by his peers.
But, whilst I say thus much for my own desires and inten-
tions, it must not be forgotten, that the integrity of your
position does not entirely —and that the security of your
incomes does not at all —depend upon myself.
In the despatch of Lord Bathurst which accompanied the
appointment of the first Archdeacon of New South Wales,
whilst it was therein provided, that the Bishop of Calcutta,
then the Diocesan, should exercise all needful authority over
the Clergy of the Colony for ecclesiastical causes, —a power
was expressly reserved to the Governor, of “ animadverting
upon the conduct of any Clergyman whose offences or mis-
conduct may be merely of a political nature.”
So, too, such Chaplains as possess a Koyal warrant, under
the Sovereign’s sign manual, are reminded, in the document
itself, that they hold office during the Koyal pleasure, and no
longer. Thus, there are cases, in which others, besides the
Bishop, or Ecclesiastical Law, are empowered to decide upon
the integrity of a Colonial Chaplain’s position.
You must, also, be perfectly well aware, that the repeal of
the Church Act, by the same power which passed it, would, at
once, deprive you of the greater portion of the incomes which
you enjoy.
But we may surely look for the coming of better things ;
and fondly entertain the hope, that the day is not far distant,
when we may witness amongst the members of the Church of
England, here, the up-rising of that same devout spirit which
induced our forefathers to regard their civil polity as incom-
plete, until they had provided for the stewards of God’s
household ; and to look upon the permanent endowment of the
parochial Clergy as, at once, their privilege and their duty..
The “Association,” lately formed, has adopted, as one of
its main objects, the principle, that the “ appointment of the
Colonial Clergy in their parishes should be rendered as per-
manent as that of incumbents in the Mother-country.”
\


I hail this declaration as an honest avowal of a well-con-
sidered determination, on their part, to carry their wishes into
effect, by furnishing such endowments, as indeed may place the
Clergy of this Diocese in a position as independent as that of
Rectors in our own native country.
The determination is upon record; it has gone forth to their
fellow-colonists; many have given in their adhesion to it. I
will not doubt its sincerity, until it be, practically, repudiated
by themselves.
I cannot but regret, that so much misapprehension should
have existed with regard to the form of licence at present in
force in this Diocese. It is virtually argued, as though I had
made some strange innovation, or singularly exceeded my
powers, in adopting a form different from that which was
before in use.
A Committee of the “ Association” has put forth its opinion,
that, “ to attribute to the Bishop the power of setting aside the
regular and prescribed form of licences, and of issuing such
other form as he may think proper, is to sanction the imposi-
tion upon the Clergy of the most arbitrary form of Church
government; and one which would destroy their independence,
and subvert the exercise of their private judgment.”*
It is one thing to assert, another to prove. You yourselves,
who possess this licence, can best testify whether your independ-
ence is thereby destroyed, or the exercise of your private judg-
ment impeded ; and so many of you as have really enquired,
even superficially, into the question of Church discipline, must
be perfectly well aware, that there is no “ prescribed form of
licence,” though there may, for convenience sake,' be an
ordinary one in certain Dioceses ; but that each Bishop is
legally empowered to, and does, adopt such form of licence, as
may seem to him most desirable. The same remark will apply
to other ecclesiastical documents —such as testimonials, letters
of orders, and the like.
It is further assumed, that this licence subjects its holders
to “ removal, suspension or dismissal, at the will of the Bishop.”
Read it, and you will find no such sweeping stipulations. Read
* Appendix F.


the “ minutes” of the conference at Sydney, and you will see,
that we disclaim all wish to exercise the “ arbitrary power”
to “ suspend, or revoke, at our own discretion,” the licences of
the Clergy. On the contrary, we have declared, that “in all
cases of doctrinal error, or other ecclesiastical offences, the
Diocesan Synod should he the court for the trial of a Presbyter
or Deacon in one word, that he should be tried by his peers,
before sentence is pronounced.
There is, in every community, a class of people determined
not to be convinced, either by argument or by fact,, when once
they have taken up, and published, their own view of a ques-
tion. It is hopeless to appeal to such as these. Put enough,
I trust, has been said, to satisfy any candid mind, that the
fears, which have given rise to the assumption just alluded to,
are but imaginative. I, at least, cannot more emphatically
repudiate the injurious notion, which has been so industriously
circulated, that I have the disposition to put in force, “by
steps of the most autocratical character,” that “ arbitrary and
unbalanced power,” which a grave authority in the House of
Commons has ascribed to the Australasian Bishops ; or that I
propose to act, “ without the forms and guarantees of justice.”
The words “ suspension and dismissal” are not found at all
in the licence : the expression “ removed” is in conjunction
with “ appointed ;” and any fair judging mind would interpret
the word “ removal” by the declaration in the “ minutes,”
which I have before quoted, viz.:—“ that no Clergyman who
shall have been duly ‘ appointed ’ and licensed to any Church
or permanent cure of souls, should be removeable therefrom,
except by sentence pronounced, after judicial enquiry, by the
Diocesan Synod.”
If the Bishop’s power of revocation is set forth in the form
of licence, it is a power which the law gives him, under due
restrictions ; —nay, you see, we ourselves have proposed restric-
tions. Its assertion implies no innovation on his part; no
assumption of any authority, that has not been, times out of
number, distinctly recognized.
Suppose it were expunged from the document; suppose, that
the old form of licence were restored; nay, suppose its terms
were merely “ I, Bishop of Tasmania, licence you, A. 8., as a


Clergyman of the Church of England, to the cure or Chaplaincy
of C. D.,” —the Bishop’s legal powers would remain precisely
the same ; neither more nor less : and I can scarcely imagine
how the fact of its being set forth in the Bishop’s licence,
guarded, as it is, by such avowed restrictions, can he a greater
stumbling-block to any well-regulated mind, than the assertion
of the absolute and irresponsible power of dismissal, claimed
by the Sovereign, and laid down in the Royal warrants, to which
I have alluded.
It is, moreover, asserted, that it is not possible for the holder
of such a licence “ safely to exercise his office according to the
dictates of his own conscience or judgment.” Surely, you have
not found the safe exercise of your office, the dictates of your
conscience, or your judgment, in the slightest degree, interfered
with, by the terms or operation of this licence! Why, the
unchecked freedom, with which even the Deacon has signified, —
not his opinion, but his “ judgment,” —that the bare fact is
“ deeply to be regretted,” that six Bishops (of whom his own
Diocesan was one) should have taken into consideration, and
put forth their opinion, upon an important doctrinal question,
may be fairly regarded as a sufficient answer.
But it is further declared by this Committee, that the pos-
sessor of this licence “ becomes the slave of another in the
most sacred exercise of the highest faculties of his mind, —and,
by the deepest spiritual degradation, is rendered unworthy of
being a public teacher of religion, or director of the spiritual
concerns of others.”
Such is the estimate of the position and deserts of those
who have accepted this licence, as publicly put forth by certain
members of the Church of England.
Strange, that I should have heard nothing, from any one of
the Clergy, of this “slavery,” this “deepest spiritual degrada-
tion,” this “ unworthiness,” this “ impossibility of exercising
their office according to the dictates of their conscience and
judgment.” —Strange, too, that, notwithstanding the unrestricted
freedom of intercourse which has hitherto marked the relations
of the Clergy with myself, not a whisper of complaint should
have reached me from themselves, but that my first knowledge
of the existence of any dissatisfaction on the subject should
n 2


have been gathered from the result of the meeting of the
“ Association,” as published in the newspapers. Stranger
still, — if all these allegations he founded both in fact and
reason, —that the great body of the Indian Clergy should, for
so many years, have been in a similarly degraded and incapable
position ; and that neither Layman, Priest, nor Prelate should
ever, to this hour, have suspected or discovered it. Most
strange, that a form of licence laid down by a Middleton, —
continued by a Heber, and a Daniel Wilson, —should only be
found to be of such a fearful character, when adopted, mu tat is
mutandis , —by a Bishop of Tasmania.* Most strange, too,
that such men, whose form of licence I have done no moro
than copy, should, by the exercise of their judgment, in the
mere wording of this ecclesiastical document, have incurred the
charge of erecting “ such a dominion over the faith and prac-
tice of the Clergy,” as “is contrary to the principles of the
Protestant Church ; and establishes that spirit of servile sub-
mission to authority, and the judgment of others, which
constitutes the peculiar character of Romanism.”
You will perceive, then, that it is no new form, invented by
myself, respecting which so much misapprehension exists ; but
one laid down by due authority. Indeed, when we bear in
mind, that this Colony was, upon its ecclesiastical foundation,
a portion of the Diocese of Calcutta, it might seem to be the very
form which, from the first, should have been adopted here.
* It lias been asserted at a public meeting, since the delivery of this charge,
that the licences alluded to “ were in the form formerly used in India, and that
they were issued to itinerant gentlemen, who, when travelling about the country,
from business or inclination, had no objection to act as the Company’s Chap-
lains, receiving, in return, payment for the same.
Wy brother-in-law, T. P. Woodcock, Esq , (himself a Judge in India), tells
me, that, during his five and twenty years’ residence in that country, he never
met with, or even heard of, these “ itinerant gentlemen ; ” nor does he believe
that any such ever existed. In Abbott’s “ Practical Analysis of the several
Letters Patent of the Crown relating to the Bishoprics in the East Indies’’ (a
work well known to every ecclesiastical lawyer,—and now lying on my table),
all the forms in use in those Dioceses are laid down at length. In p. 180,
(edition 1845), is the ordinary form of a Chaplain’s licence, precisely as I have
described it. At p. 183 is the form of a Missionary’s licence, with the usual
words inserted, “hereby reserving to us, and to our successors, Bishop of ,
the power and authority of revoking these presents, -<ind all things herein con-
tained, whenever we shall see just cause for the same.”


If I have seemed to dwell thus long upon this subject, it is,
because I am not ignorant that the opinions of the Association
have been sedulously disseminated throughout the Colony; and
that there are those, of your own body, who have taken a
prominent part in these proceedings.
I seem, then, to owe it both to the Clergy and to the lay
members of the Church, that such explanations should be
given, as may prevent them from being carried away by vague
declamation, or led astray by the unproved assertions, and
hasty misconceptions of those, by whom they have been so
perseveringly addressed.
Another opinion has been put forth by a portion of the
Clergy, in their Address, which demands a more serious con-
sideration, —in that it seems to me to involve a more important
principle.
It is said, that “ the proposed plan of placing Clergymen in
charge of parishes or districts, entirely at the disposal of their
Bishop, for some definite term of years, and of leaving to him
the responsibility of appointing and changing their stations
during such period, would, under present circumstances, be
injurious to the maintenance of mental independence, doctrinal
purity, and pastoral fidelity, among the junior Clergy; and
would be inimical to their domestic comfort and general use-
fulness.”
I do not pause to enquire into the precise value of the
qualification, “ under present circumstances,” but take the
principle, as I find it laid down, in general terms.
Permit me, first, to observe, that, in speaking of “ parishes
or districts,” expressions have been used which are not even
alluded to in the “ minute,” to which a reference is made : and,
secondly, allow me to remark, that an important part of the
“ minute” itself has been, unfortunately, suppressed.
The framers of this Address have forgotten to state, that
the Bishops expressed their opinion, that it is “ most desirable,
in the present state of the Church of England in their Dioceses,
that candidates for Holy Orders should devote themselves to
the service of the Church, in that willing spirit which would
induce them to place themselves at the disposal of their Bishop,”
in the manner to which you allude.


And who, might it not be asked, may be reasonably supposed
to be the fitting judge, as to where, and for what time, these
candidates for Holy Orders might be most advantageously
employed ? The Clergy ? —who, as they commonly travel but
little over the more remote districts of the Colony, cannot well
be expected to be very competent judges of its local spiritual
wants ? The candidates themselves ? whose powers and capa-
cities are as yet untested ? or the Bishop, who has the respon-
sibility of examining, ordaining, and providing for them ; and
whose duties lead him, for a considerable portion of the year,
throughout almost every habitable district of the Colony ? We
are not now talking, remember, of Colonial Chaplains, whose
position is fixed, and whose duties are clearly marked out, —
but of candidates for ordination, —for whom no regular parishes
are provided; and who, in seeking Holy Orders at the Bishop’s
hands, are, surely, not to dictate to him the terms upon which
they will be pleased to accept them. We are speaking, not of
parishes, already formed, but of stations ill-defined ; —in short,
of Missionary labour. That this is the real meaning of the
“ minute” is plain enough, I should think, to any one, wdio is
content to regard it as a whole; not in that spirit of cavilling,
which is determined to find fault, because it is the opinion of
six Bishops ; but, rather, with a fair and candid judgment.
Surely.no reflecting man, whether he be Priest or Layman,
would esteem it a wholesome practice,—or one calculated to
promote the real welfare of the Church, —that young candidates
for Holy Orders, all untried and inexperienced, as they are,
should, as a general rale, immediately upon their
be sent forth to settle down, at once, upon their several stations ?
Surely, you would not have them thus rendered so independent
of their Bishop’s judgment, that he is to be deprived of all-power
of removing them to another station, if found inefficient in their
first sphere of duty, or if the exigencies of the Church should
require their ministrations elsewhere ?
The Deacon is upon his trial, —a fact which must ever be
borne in mind; and, assuredly, not kept out of view in these
Missionary Dioceses. And who is to watch his trial, to mark
bis course, to guide his labours, if not his Bishop ? Surely,
then, it is neither well nor wise for you, my brethren, still less


for the Deacons themselves, thus practically to protest against
his real supervision of the younger portion of the Clergy ; or
to find fault with him, for devising means to test their qualifi-
cations, to prove their usefulness, and to take good heed, that
their services are rendered, where their talents may best he
exerted to advantage.
I esteem it of the highest importance in a Diocese, where
the candidates for Holy Orders have, very rarely, had the
advantage of an University education, and of that regular
training, which is of such peculiar value in the Mother-country,
—that they should he kept longer on their probation than is
customary at home ; or, at least, more closely under their
Bishop’s eye ; so that, if deficient, they may be retained in, or
sent to, a post, where their deficiencies may he less harmful. It
is of some moment, too, that, if “ found worthy to he called to
the higher ministries of the Church,” their Bishop might feel
himself justified, from his personal knowledge, to advance them
to more settled districts; and he enabled to reward them, in
that they have shewn, that their oversight of souls is not a thing
of words, but of deeds, —not a matter of profession, hut a living
working reality.
From the manner in which the desire expressed by the
Bishops, in this respect, has been condemned, it would almost
seem as though an opinion existed, that they had contem-
plated some new measure, foreign to the Church’s usage, and
as yet unheard-of in our Colonial annals. A very slight
acquaintance with ecclesiastical history will remind you, that
there were days, in which this “ willing spirit” was no stranger
to the Church of Christ. But let us come nearer home.
The authority, -which you so much deprecate in a Bishop,
when proposed to he exerted over those who present themselves
to him for ordination, was actually given by the Sovereign to
an Archdeacon, over ordained Clergymen, sent out from England
to this very Colony.
In the Pioyal warrants, to which I have before alluded, it is
expressly provided, that the Archdeacon of New South Wales
for the time being (and, of course, the-Bishop, as his lawful
successor), should have the power of authorizing them, so long
as they retain their office, to officiate at such places, or place,


within the Island, as he shall, from time to time, appoint.*
Thus, this same principle has heen established from the
earliest period of our own ecclesiastical annals ; and the older
Chaplains, who possess these warrants, have laboured under
this contingency from then till now.
However much I may regret the necessity, —the publication
of the opinions of some of the Clergy, on this subject, weeks
before they were transmitted to me, renders it a duty on my
part, briefly to advert to the grounds on which they rest.
It has been advanced, that “ the proposed plan would, under
present circumstances, be injurious to the maintenance of mental
independenceas though the powers and energies of the devoted
Missionary’s mind would be dwarfed or crippled, in conse-
quence of his being directed by his lawful spiritual superior,
where best his services might be employed in the Lord’s
vineyard.
It is said, too, that it would be injurious to “ doctrinal
purityas though soundness in the faith, or a bold honesty
in declaring the whole counsel of God, depended upon the
place, rather than on the man.
It is considered, also, that it would be injurious to their
‘ c pastoral fidelity as though the pastor would be unfaithful
to his flock, a recreant to his ordination promises, and peevishly
cast aside vows, obligations, declarations, oaths, simply because
he might be warned, before entering upon his office, that,
possibly, it might, as far as the mere place was concerned, be
of a temporary nature.
It is urged, further, that it would be “ inimical to their
domestic comfort and general usefulness.” Of their usefulness
in their several posts of duty, I must, as their Bishop,—with
all due respect to the Clergy, who may differ from me on this
point,—claim to be the fitting judge. I hope, nevertheless, to
be always thankful in receiving, from any one of you, such
suggestions as you may offer, for the advancement of tire
usefulness of yourselves, or others.
But, when “ domestic comfort ” is spoken of, as a privilege
which will be invaded by the Bishop’smxercise of his discretion,
in stationing the junior clergy, whilst yet upon their probation,
Appendix G.


—I cannot but sorely grieve, that any clergyman should have
prevailed upon himself, —unwarily, as I would fain hope, —to
put forth such a declaration.
Dear brethren, are these the days, or is this the place,
wherein Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, —Chaplain, or Missionary, —
the aged servant of the altar, or the ordained of yesterday, can
place “ domestic comfort ” in the forefront, or venture to look
upon it, as a something, which shall weigh in the balance,
against the general weal of Christ’s most Holy Church, —and
the salvation of the souls of men ?
Domestic comfort! Alas, my brethren, where, in the records
of the Primitive Church, will you find those words put forth, as
they stand here ? Which of that devoted band of Gospel
messengers, who carried the banners of the Cross from East to
West, from South to North, ever spoke, ever thought, of home,
and its many endearing blessings, as things which should inter-
pose between them and their most glorious work ?
And even in these latter days, there was no advancement of
the claims of domestic comfort, in the spirit, that led forth a
Schwartz, a Martyn, or a Wesley, from place to place, from
shore to shore, for the one privileged purpose of winning souls
to Christ.
I dare to hope, that this bright spirit is not dead within us
yet: Put that there will be found, even here, many a devoted
servant of his Lord, who will present himself for ordination, —
not as one desiring to choose his own sphere of labour, —or to
stipulate for how long, or how short a period, he is to remain
here or there; but, as one content to trust his Bishop, as his
“ Lather in Christ ” —with the humble willingness of those of
old, whose only words were, “ Here I am —send me.”—The
race of Timothys is not yet past.
God forbid, that so dark a shadow should ever rest upon our
Church, as that even the younger, among her ministering
Priests and Deacons, should deliberately take their stand upon
this mere worldly ground; and, after due consideration,
repudiate the principle, that it is well for the Bishop, in testing
those who are still upon their probation, to have the power of
sending them, from time to time, to such places, as, in his
knowledge of their capabilities, or of the wants of the Church,
he may, to the best of his judgment, deem most desirable.


I am more than willing, —most anxious to believe, that many
have given in their adhesion to the “ opinion ” on which I have
thus commented, —without heedfully regarding the real nature
of the principle to which they have committed themselves.
But, brethren in the Lord, if this he no hasty opinion, hut,
rather, the calm expression of a well-weighed and reconsidered
judgment, —then, —I say it in all love, hut in all truthfulness,
—then, must I mourn indeed over the fallen honour of the
Church of England in this Diocese; and, whilst I how my
head in very shame, —in all humility, confess, that here, at least,
for a season, she has forfeited her claim to the self-denying
character of a Missionary Church.
The third position laid down in the Chapter’s address,
relating to the minute of the Australasian Bishops upon “ Holy
Baptism,” has been already incidentally noticed.
I revert to the subject, —partly, from a desire to consider
some doctrinal points connected with the Sacrament itself;
and partly, because a sense of duty to that Church, over whose
spiritual interests in this Colony I am called upon to keep
watch, constrains me to speak my full mind respecting the
recent decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council,
in the case of “ Gorham v. the Bishop of Exeter.”
If the Bishops are still, as in earlier days, to be regarded
as “ Fathers of the Church,” her children have a right to
expect, that, in times of gainsaying and rebuke, they should
not be backward in lifting up a warning and a faithful voice,
even as the Lord may give them light or knowledge.
We must all be painfully conscious, how divided are men’s
opinions upon the justice or injustice, the expediency or
inexpediency, the soundness or unsoundness, of this decision.
We are not at one amongst ourselves, even here ; removed, as
we are, from the immediate sphere of party disputation.
Of course, I am aware, that in the Cathedral of this Diocese,
it was openly held forth to the congregation, by the senior
Chaplain, as a matter of thanksgiving, that the decision had
been such as it was. Ido not conceal from myself, how many
there are who think, that the general peace of the Church has
been secured by this act of the Privy Council.
I am not ignorant of the full persuasion of some, that any
other decision would have “ excluded from the Church a large


body of evangelical ministers and people;” (I use words which
have been made public here) —and would have been detrimental
to her holiest interests.
Whilst differing widely from this expression of thankfulness
and satisfaction, I am most desirous to give full credit for the
sincerity of the motives, under which it was put forth. But I
claim for myself the right, that every Englishman possesses,
of recording his honest opinion regarding any existing law, or
any legal decision, which may seem to him to be a grievance
to his conscience. And lam yet to learn, that there is aught
of disrespect to the powers that be, in such a statement. The
reiterated remonstrances of the dissenters worked out the repeal
of the Test and Corporation Act. The unwearied perseverance
of the Eoman Catholics ushered them, at last, into political
privileges. In each case, it was the law, as it stood, that
formed the grievance ; that was the ground of complaint; that
was eventually abrogated ; because the urgency of the dissatis-
fied was too powerful to be resisted. In neither of these two
instances, was disrespect for the law imputed, by any sound
thinking men, to those, who, either for conscience sake, or for
political reasons, sought to have it altered.
I must disclaim, then, all want of dutiful respect to the
laws of my native land, if I protest against the decision given
by the Privy Council, as being the law of Church; and if I
decline to recognize their interpretation of her formularies, as
being binding upon the conscience of any one of her children.
The opinion of five laymen must not be confounded with, or
taken for, the judgment of the Church, even though it should
happen to be fortified by the concurrence of two of her prelates.
I am the more disposed to enter somewhat at length into
this unhappy subject, from the persuasion that, neither the real
character, and necessary results of the decision itself, nor yet
the true nature of Mr. Gorham’s heresy, (as I venture to regard
it), have been adequately considered by many, who so cordially
rejoice at the increased latitude of opinion, now conceded to
the Clergy of the Church of England.
But, here, let me take this opportunity of reminding you,
that, in alluding to these questions, I desire to express no
censure upon the theological tenets of any who difier from our


Church. Ido not seek to impugn their doctrines, nor to pass
sentence upon their belief. I have no wish to offer an affront
to their consciences, hy regarding as heresy, what they might
look upon, as, if not truth, —at least, an open question, or an
allowable opinion. I must earnestly beg you to remember,
that, in what I have to say, my observations will be limited to
what I conscientiously believe to be the Catholic doctrine of
the Church of England. If I venture to express a conviction,
that this or that is contrary to God's truth, it is with an exclusive
reference to her standard of orthodoxy, and to her interpretation
of that truth. I am not desirous to affect a wisdom, beyond,
or opposed to, the plain common sense language of her
teaching.
But let us look to the history of this memorable case, which
has convulsed the Church of England to her very centre; and
let us examine the real merits of that decision, which has
shaken the allegiance, and destroyed the affection, of some at
least of her children, who unjustly regard her as committed to
a heresy, because the bondage, under which she lies, disqualifies
her from doing more than repudiate it, through the lips of indi-
viduals. It may be a wise, but it is surely a worldly wise
policy, which refuses her the permission, to say aye or no, to a
denial of a portion of the Creed, through the legitimate voice of
her Convocation.
A clerk in Holy Orders, the Kev. Mr. Gorham, offered him-
self to his Diocesan, the Bishop of Exeter, for institution to a
living, to which he had been presented by the Lord Chancellor.
The Bishop had grave reasons to doubt his soundness upon
certain points of faith. As the lawful guardian of the ortho-
doxy of his Diocese, and as one answerable to God and the
Church, for the teaching of those to whom he gave his autho-
ritative sanction, he decided upon examining into Mr. Gorham’s
theological fitness, before institution. You are not ignorant,
that, in acting upon this decision, charges of tyranny and oppres-
sion were freely levelled against the Bishop, as though he had
done some strange, if not illegal, thing.
“It was a duty, said Sir H. J. Fust, in delivering judgment
upon this preliminary point, ‘‘absolutely incumbent on the
Bishop to satisfy himself, that the clerk was fit, and properly


qualified, to be a minister of the benefice to which he sought to
be instituted. The examination was not a mere right or privi-
lege enjoyed by the Bishop, but was a duty binding on him.”
A protracted and searching examination satisfied the Bishop
that the doctrines held by Mr. Gorham were irreconcileable with
the express teaching of the Church, as put forth by our
reformers; and embodied in her articles, liturgy, homilies, and
canons. The particular question, as you know, turned upon
the sacramental efficacy of infant baptism.
So much misapprehension has existed, as to the real views
propounded by Mr. Gorham on this point,—and that misap-
prehension has, as it seems to me, been so much increased by
the summary of them, given in the judgment of the Privy
Council, that it is obviously the only fair course to let him
speak for himself. His own words are, “ our Church holds,
and I hold, that no spiritual grace is conveyed in baptism, except
to worthy recipients : and as infants are, by nature, wwworthy
recipients, c being born in sin, and the children of wrath,’ they
cannot receive any benefit from baptism, except there shall have
been a prevenient act of grace to make them worthy. Baptism
is the sign or seal, either of the grace already given, or of the
repentance and faith, which are stipulated, and must be hereafter
exercised.”*
The Bishop felt the impossibility of virtually deposing to the
orthodoxy of these sentiments, by signing the mandate for Mr.
Gorham’s institution. Proceedings were, in consequence, com-
menced against his Lordship, in the Arches Court of Canter-
bury; the Dean, or Judge, of which is the official principal of
the Archbishop.
The Judge pronounced that the Bishop had shewn sufficient
cause for his refusal to institute; and from this sentence, the
case was carried, by appeal, to the Queen in Council; and
referred, by Her Majesty, to the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council, which had succeeded to the Court of Delegates,
as the highest tribunal of appeal within the realm. The com-
mittee consisted of six lay members,! —the Archbishops of
Gorham on Baptism, p. 83.
f Right Honourables Lord Langdale, Lord Ca’mpbell, Baron Parke, Vice-
Chancellor Knight Bruce, Sir S. Lushinglon, Pemberton Leigh.


Canterbury and York, together with the Bishop of London,
attending, by Her Majesty’s direction, to hear the arguments,
but without any direct voice in the judgment itself.
The Court, at the outset, distinctly stated, that it “ had no
jurisdiction or authority to settle matters of faith, or to deter-
mine what ought, in any particular, to be the doctrine of the
Church of England.” It regarded the only point for it to
decide, to be, whether the retention of the views in question
“ was repugnant to the declared doctrine of the Church of
England, as bylaw established.” As a passing remark, I must
express my inability to discover, how any judicial decision in
matters of doctrine is not, practically, a decision on doctrine
itself.
After hearing counsel on both sides, the Privy Council
reversed the decision of the Arches Court, and, with the excep-
tion of the Vice-Chancellor Knight Bruce, agreed in opinion,
“ that the doctrine held by Mr. Gorham was not contrary or
repugnant to the declared doctrine of the Church of England,
as by law established ; and that Mr. Gorham ought not, by
reason of the doctrine held by him, to have been refused
admission to the Vicarage of Brampford Speke.” In this judg-
ment the Archbishops of Canterbury and York concurred ;
whilst the Bishop of London refused his assent.
A painful sense of duty constrains me to point out to you
some remarkable features in the judgment thus delivered. <e I
cannot help thinking,” says an eminent legal authority,* “that
this judgment will prove as unsatisfactory to any legal, as it
must be to every theological, mind : —for I find in it no
balancing of the arguments on either side, no question can-
vassed, no proposition met, no authority impugned. No notice
is taken of the evidence adduced ; although, in the opinion of
many persons well qualified to decide, that evidence was amply
sufficient to remove any doubt, if doubt there could be, respect-
ing the meaning which our formularies are intended to express.
In short, for anything that appears in this judgment, it might
have been written just as well before the case was argued, or
by some person who was unconscious of anything that had
• Edward Badeley, Esq., one of the counsel for the Bishop. See Preface to
his Speech, p. 7.


been urged. But more than this, —the judgment of the Court
of Arches is altogether passed by ; the principles on which it
was founded are not considered; it is not even mentioned,
except in the formal statement of it at the commencement, —■
and the reversal, at the end."
“ Again, when the judgment of an inferior Court is reversed
upon appeal, its errors are generally specified, its defects ex-
plained, and the law is rendered clearer and more certain for
the future.” But this judgment has “followed a different
model, from those which are most approved in the records of
our jurisprudence.”
You have heard the words of Mr. Gorham, in which he
denies that infants receive any benefit from baptism,—except
there shall have been a prevenient act of grace to make them
worthy; a doctrine, that distinctly contradicts the teaching of
the catechism, which tells us, that it is by baptism that we
are made “ children of grace being previously “ children of
wrath.” A reference to his printed account of the examination
will satisfy you, that he reiterates, that regeneration is, in no
case, imparted to infants by baptism ; but, that that filial state
is given to the worthy recipient before baptism, and not in
baptism. “And if,” he continues, “there seems to be any
ambiguity in my former reply, I wish this to be considered
as my explanation.”*
No denial of sacramental grace being conveyed in, through,
or by baptism, can be more explicit. It would seem, that the
Judicial Committee, in deciding whether Mr. Gorham’s pub-
lished opinions were, or were not, repugnant to the received
doctrines of the Church of England, might as well have taken
them in his own words; but they have substituted for them,
doctrines, which he nowhere affirms, which his own counsel did
not urge as deducible from his book, and which would convey
different views from those which he has really published as his
own. The Arches Court said truly, “ that Mr. Gorham’s
position is, that it is not by baptism, or through baptism, that
grace is conferred.”
The Privy Council says, that “ the doctrine held by Mr.
Gorham appears to us to be this, —that baptism is a sacrament
Gorham on Baptism, p. 113.


generally necessary to salvation, but that the grace of regenera-
tion does not so necessarily accompany the act of baptism, that
regeneration invariably takes place in baptism, but that the
grace may be granted, before, or in, or after baptism.*
Upon this assumption of their own, judgment was pronounc-
ed; and Mr. Gorham invested with the highest sanction of the
law, to teach his flock, that, though their catechism tells them,
that it is in baptism they are made “Members of Christ,
children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven,”
yet all this is but nugatory, unless they have had that “preve-
nient grace” of which he speaks, but on which God’s unerring
Word is silent.
No clear-sighted man can conceal from himself the real
result of this most unhappy judgment. True, the Privy
Council has disclaimed, as well it might, both the right and
the intention of pronouncing an authoritative interpretation
upon any doctrine of the Church of England. That is still
the province of the Bishops and her Clergy, assembled in
Convocation. All that they have taken upon themselves to do
is, to declare, whether a person, holding or denying certain
opinions, can legally be debarred from institution to a benefice.
Nevertheless, the practical consequences of this decision
are, indeed, of a most important character. It has been
decided by five laymen, that a virtual denial of the “ One
Baptism for the remission of sins,” so unequivocally asserted
by 150 Bishops at the completion of the Nicene Creed, in
the second Council of Constantinople, is not repugnant to the
doctrine of the Church of England, which accepts that Creed,
and declares, that “ it may be proved by most certain warrants
of Holy Scripture.t
* “ On the last day of the trial, Lord Langdale actually threw out the hint to
Mr. Gorham’s counsel, that he might express his opinion in these terms. Lord
Langdale said to Mr. Turner, (we were in Court and heard it), ‘ You mean,
then, that regeneration may take place before, in, or after baptism ?’ That was
an opportunity for Mr. Gorham to have adopted the favoured formula. The
learned and eloquent counsel hesitated, coughed a little, and blandly bowed to
the Court, as if unwilling to discourage so merciful a tribunal, and instantly
went to another point, without taking up the hint.''—The Judgments on Baptismal
Regeneration ,” by Rev. W. I. Irons, p. 41.
f Article viii.


Henceforth, then, it is fully open to the Minister of the
Church of England, not only to warn parents, when they bring
their children to the baptismal font, that it is a doubtful
matter, an open question, whether or not their children receive
any . grace from Christ’s most Holy Sacrament, but to tell them
more, —to declare, that if they be at all God’s children, that
filial state is imparted at some previous period, dreamt of
indeed by him, but of which Scripture, primitive antiquity,
and the universal teaching of the Church, have left neither
trace nor record.
Henceforth, so long as this decision shall remain intact, it
will hold, that the Articles and Formularies of the Church are
to be understood in a sense compatible with these strange
novelties ; “ that any Bishop,’’ to use the language of the same
legal authority which I have before quoted, “ or any Ecclesi-
astical Court, which interprets the Articles and Formularies
otherwise, interprets them wrongly; and if any Bishop or
any Court should hereafter put the same interpretation upon
them, which the Bishop of Exeter and the Court of Arches
have put lately, the sentence will be reversed, and the heretical
Clerk admitted” to a benefice.* It matters little what may be
the conscientious scruples of the Bishop, or however firmly
he may believe that such opinions are amongst those erroneous
and strange doctrines contrary to God’s word, which it is at
his soul’s peril if he forbears to drive away. And who shall
say, that some new fancies may not arise, and that other doc-
trines, less clearly insisted on, than is the regeneration of
infants, in our baptismal service, may not be questioned and
denied ? Where is our protection, that such doctrines, for
example, aa.the inspiration of Scripture, the Unity in Trinity,
and the Trinity in Unity, and the like, may not be as boldly
impugned, and as strangely sanctioned ?
If this, then, be the ultimate Court of Appeal, before which
such questions are to be discussed, there is no safeguard to the
Church, that five more laymen may not be found, who would
pronounce such doctrines to be not repugnant, in a legal
sense, to the possible meaning of our Articles and Liturgy.
What assurance can we have, that some ingenious casuist in
* Preface to Mr. Baddy’s speech, p. 25.


holy orders may not possess a conscience so accommodating,
as to render such heretical pravities perfectly reconcileable
with what he may be pleased to term “honest subscription ?”
Why, it is a well-known fact, that, in old times, the heretic Arius,
who denied the Lord that bought him, was willing to subscribe
to the very Creed that denounced his errors. He reserved to
himself the right of interpreting it in his own, that is, in a
“non-natural sense.” But the voice of the Church rejected
the heretic, and condemned the hypocrisy.*
And is such a state of things a matter of rejoicing ? Can it
be, that grave and holy men would look with something more
than complacency, with very triumph, upon such practical bond-
age as this ? Nay, then, if the Church herself, in her collective
capacity, is content, that, thus, one truth after another should
be left an open question,—a question, that is, upon which, as
a Church, she has no distinctive teaching, —let her take heed
that her high place in Christendom be not lost; let her pause
in time, lest she be no longer regarded as the keeper of, and
witness to, God.’s everlasting truth, —lest men, hereafter, should
be compelled to say of her, as we must say of many a Church,
where Apostles preached and Saints discoursed, —she is num-
bered with the things that are not.
So many attempts have been made to mystify this whole
question, that it becomes especially needful for us to bear in
mind, that the peculiar doctrine on baptismal grace, condemned
by the Bishop of Exeter and the Court of Arches, is widely
different from that which is commonly called the evangelical
view of the question.
It has been truly said, that there are not, probably, six
men, calling themselves churchmen, who partake of Mr.
Gorham’s special heresy.
It seems a groundless apprehension, therefore, that a con-
trary decision would have condemned, or excluded from the
Church, “ a large body of evangelical Clergy and people.”
That any such attempt at exclusion has been made, could
never have been declared by those, who have carefully read the
documents connected with the subject.
* Socrat. Hist., Lib. 1, c. 19.


I feel persuaded, that the great mass of the evangelical
Clergy would, unhesitatingly, repudiate the position, that the
“ inward and spiritual grace” which our catechism regards as
given in baptism, namely, “ a death unto sin, and a new birth
unto righteousness,” is never conveyed in that Holy Sacra-
ment, unless there shall have been a prevenient act of grace.
I am assured, that they would, as a body, look upon such a
doctrine as directly opposed to the plain teaching of the
Church for centuries, —hostile to the interpretation of Holy
Writ, as laid down by our Eeformers, —hostile to the letter
and the spirit of the articles to which they have subscribed, and
to the Liturgy which they have covenanted to receive and use.*
They, at least, will not deny the teaching put forth by good
old Cranmer, though they may, perhaps, demur to the univer-
sality of its application. “ Our Saviour Christ,” said this
venerable martyr to the faith, “ ordained the water of baptism,
to signify unto us, that, as water washeth our bodies outwardly,
so we he spiritually within washed by Christ from all our
sins. And as the water is called the water of regeneration,
or new birth, so it declareth unto us, that through it we he born
anew, and begin a new life towards God, and that Christ is
the beginning of this new life; and as the body that is new-
born, although it have life within it, yet can it not continue
without meat and drink, even so cannot we continue in the
spiritual life towards God, except we be continually nourished
with that spiritual food, and that food is Christ also.”f
A precious truth, this, which has been virtually embodied
by the late learned Bishop Jebb, in one of those graceful
and comprehensive sentences, which are so peculiarly his own.
“ It is certain, that we do not retain the grace or privileges of
our Christian baptism, except so far as, in the beautiful
language of the office, ‘ we are stedfastin faith, joyful through
hope, and rooted in charity.’
And it is the forgetfulness of such wholesome cautions,
that has been the fruitful cause of so many heartburnings and
divisions amongst members of the Church of England, who,
had they been careful to meet each other in the spirit of love.
Appendix H. f Cranmer’s Remains and Letters, p. 176.
t Practical Theology, vol. i. p. 81,


to see where haply they might agree, would, possibly, have
found, that, after all, much of their differences (I do not say
all) were upon words, rather than upon things; upon terms,
rather than upon truths; upon the old error of confounding
regeneration with conversion.
With reference to this subject, I may, perhaps, he permitted
to quote from a work published by me some years ago ; —for I
do not desire to be amongst the number of those who are
compelled, in after life, to suppress or repudiate the recorded
principles of earlier years.
“ Since the common-sense interpretation of Holy Writ is
so obvious, and the voice of Catholic antiquity so explicit,
that baptismal regeneration must be acknowledged by all who
will not wilfully shut their eyes against the clear evidence of
Scripture, —whence is it that so many do shut their eyes
against that evidence, and persist in condemning the Church
of England as heterodox, because she teaches the doctrine ?
It is chiefly because her opponents confound regeneration
with conversion : it is because they use the word c regenera-
tion’ in a sense never contemplated, and never employed, in
earlier days. It is because they forget, that terms of similar
import with regeneration, such as ‘ new birth,’ f new crea-
ture,’ born again,’ and 6 created anew,’ are almost invariably
employed to distinguish the state of a person admitted into
the Christian covenant from that of one not so admitted,
t Regeneration,’ says Bishop Van Mildert, ‘in the scriptural
usage of it, means only our initiation, or entrance, by baptism,
into that covenant, which gives us new privileges, new hopes,
and a new principle of spiritual life; placing us in a totally
different state from that, to which by nature only we could
ever attain. The expression, therefore, cannot, without a
direct violation of the verbal analogy of Scripture, be applied
to any operation that takes place subsequent to that baptismal
change, with which alone it perfectly corresponds.’
“ If the Church of England, following both the analogy of
Scripture, and the common consent of Catholic antiquity, uses
the word regeneration in this sense, are others justified in
affixing a new sense to the word, in ascribing novel and
unheard-of effects to the act, and then to say, that the Church


teaches thus or thus, and to pronounce her heterodox, —
merely because they take up new opinions themselves, and do
not choose to enquire into the real principles upon which she
decides and acts ? It is convenient for objectors to forget,
that, whilst the Church teaches us (as well she may) to
thank God, in that, through baptism, we are ‘ made His
children by adoption and grace,’ she leads us as well to pray,
that we may f daily be renewed by His Holy Spirit.’ ”*
It would be superfluous to tpll you. Reverend Brethren, that
the words just quoted are in conformity to the doctrinal posi-
tions laid down by our leading Reformers. You will, naturally,
have made yourselves acquainted with their writings, in days,
when we hear so much of the principles and practices of the
Reformation,
The language of Becon,f Archbishop Cranmer’s Chaplain,
is, as might be expected, in strict accordance with that of our
own formularies. In answer to the question, “ What is it to
be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost ?” —the child is instructed to say, <f It is to
be admitted and received into the family and household of
God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and from
henceforth to be reckoned, yea, and also to be, the son and
heir of God, serving Him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life.”
To use, once more, my own words, —“ Multitudes of pas-
sages of a similar description might be quoted from the
Homilies, and other writings of that period; and the testimony
of their venerable authors to a great Catholic truth is the
more valuable, in that they did not blindly follow in the track
of those wlio had gone before them, but calmly and dispas-
sionately weighed each doctrine before it was propounded, and
uniformly deferred to the voice of primitive antiquity. Is the
well-matured judgment of such men to go for nothing ? Who
are we, despite of such evidence to the spiritualizing effects of
baptism, rightly administered, to lower the ordinance, and to
rob it of its sacramental dignity, by denying the presence of
, the regenerating power of the Holy Ghost, absolutely in the
* Lectures on the Church Catechism, p. 6io.
f Baton’s Catechism, p. 203. Parker edition.


case of infants, and conditionally in the case of adults ? It is
melancholy enough to see the Laity idly foregoing, and wan-
tonly casting aside, their baptismal privileges; hut, with
regard to the ordained Priest of the Church of England, who
has promised, in the sight of God, to give his faithful dili-
gence ‘ always so to minister the doctrine and sacraments,
and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded, and
as this Church and realm hath received the same,’ —it is a
deeper feeling than that of mere sorrow, with which we must
regard a man, thus solemnly pledged to abide by the Church’s
teaching, endeavouring to explain avray her formularies, or, in
some cases, to gainsay and to curtail them, instead of rever-
ently receiving them, as founded upon most certain warrant
of Holy Writ. It is with pain, akin to awe, that we behold
such a man setting at nought the judgment of the imme-
diate successors and disciples of the Apostles, of Fathers, of
Councils, of Catholic antiquity, of the most learned divines
of his own Church, —and for what ? That he may follow in
the wake of the Puritans and Non-conformists of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries ; men, many of them, certainly of
much piety, hut few of deep learning; men, who thought that
they could as well, or better, draw truth from the streams
muddied by the prejudices and superstitions of fifteen centu-
ries’ accumulation, than from the Apostolic fountain-head.”*
No declaration can he more simple, or more explicit, than
that of our own Church, as to the fact, of God’s grace being
given to us, in, through, and by, holy baptism. We, -who are
her ordained Ministers, are pledged to teach it to her children.
The first truth which we place before them, in their earliest
years, is, that it is in their baptism that they are made “ mem-
bers of Christ, children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom
of Heaven.”
We are to teach them, that our Church sums up the posses-
sion of these precious gifts in the single word “ regeneration
selecting it, as significative of baptismal blessings, simply
because the Primitive Church of Christ so used it, and because
she recognizes that it is indeed equivalent to a new birth, to
* Lectures on the Catechism, p. 608.


be taken out of the world’s great family, and brought into the
special household of Almighty God.
And are we to teach our little ones this blessed truth, with
stammering lips, and faltering tongue ? to give them, our-
selves, their first lesson in the bitter knowledge of mistrust, —
by compelling them to doubt our own honesty, or the Church’s
wisdom ? We must do so, if we tell them that these simple
words are not to be taken in their plain honest sense, but are
to be interpreted hypothetically, hopefully, charitably, as the
phrase is. We must do so, if we are to warn them, that all
this may be true; but that we must wait until the after life
gives evidence of the fact. We must do so, if we refuse to
carry on the work of their Christian education in the firm belief,
that they have received in baptism the grace of regeneration.
But we must teach them not so to rest upon their baptismal
privileges, as to suppose, that their retention is compatible with
unholiness of life, God’s children have their duties and their
responsibilities, as well as their gifts and blessings. And so,
whilst the bare fact of our having been bom again in baptism
can be no more undone, than the bare fact of our having been
born of our natural parents, not only may every blessing
resulting from that fact be lost by our apostacy, but “ it adds
to our sins, if, although brought into God’s family by baptism,
we shew by our conduct, that we have had no desire to act as
His children, no wish to live and die, with any recognition of
our heavenly relationship.”*
By baptism we are made ‘‘Members of Christ.” But, just
as in human societies, we retain the privileges of membership,
only so long as we are content to abide by their rules, and to
fulfil their-conditions, —so is it with our spiritual membership.
We lose the privilege, if we forego the duty. But, in each
case, the fact, that we were once members, remains unaltered
by any subsequent misconduct.
By baptism we are made “ Children of God.” But in His
household, even as in human families, there may be (and,
possibly, is, more frequently than our blind self-love would
induce us to believe) a disinheriting process. If the
child casts olf all love and duty, —if he rejects a parent’s
* Lectures on Church Catechism, p. 22.


counsel, scorns liis reproof, consorts with his enemies, defies
his authority, does dishonour to his name, casts off, in short,
all trace of sonship,—he forfeits the privileges of a child,
though the hare fact of his birth can never he undone. The
prodigal in the parable, though a wanderer from his father’s
house and guardianship, and doing dishonour to his father’s
name, lost none of his relationship, though, for the season, all
his blessings.
Once more, —by baptism we are “ Inheritors of the Kingdom
of Heaven.” It is with our heavenly, as with an earthly
heritage. Were it ours to be born to the future possession of
an estate, —that estate being charged with peculiar conditions
and stipulations, —we know well, that, in law, it would pass from
us if we deliberately refused to fulfil the terms, upon which
it was originally bestowed. Yet, the fact, that we were born to
the inheritance, w T ould be unaffected by the loss. Esau was
still his father’s eldest son, though he so despised his birth-
right, as to sell it for a sorry mess of pottage. “We c know
that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he
was rejected.’ His trial was past: the forbearance of God
was exhausted ; he ‘ found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears.’ It may be so with us : and
bitter will be our agony, and heavy our self-reproach, if the
consciousness of what we might have been, but for our disobe-
dience, draws from us hereafter the mournful cry of the
disinherited Esau, —‘ hast thou but one blessing, my father ?
bless me, even me also, omy father !’ The Scriptures every-
where represent our ultimate claim to our inheritance as
dependent on our fulfilling the conditions, upon which we were
received into the congregation of Christ’s Church; namely,
that we should not be £ ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified ; and manfully to fight under His banner against sin,
the world, and the devil, and to continue Christ’s faithful
soldiers and servants unto our lives’ end.’ The very nature of
a covenant implies thus much; for it is always revocable,
where one of the contracting parties refuses compliance with
its stipulations.”*
Lectures on Church Catechism, p. 22.


Well, then, may we pray, in the words of our Liturgy, “ that
we, being regenerate, and made God’s children by adoption
and grace, may daily he renewed by His Holy Spirit.”* Thus,
only, can the grace confided to us at baptism be a growing,
an abiding, and so, a saving grace. These, I believe to be, in
substance, the chief doctrinal positions fairly deducible from the
formularies of the Church of England ; and I need waste no
time to prove that, of which, I trust, your own reading will have
satisfied you ; namely, that they are in accordance, not merely
with her most approved expositors, but with that judgment of
the “ ancient fathers” of the Church of Christ, to which she so
constantly, and so lovingly, refers.
The question has been pointedly put to me, whether it is my
intention, “ for the future, to exclude from the ministry in this
Diocese, and from Holy Orders, all who cannot conscientiously
subscribe to the declaration of the five Bishops concerning
baptism; or to make the opinion therein expressed, a test of
qualification for ordination.”
To decline giving any definite answer, would scarcely be
consistent with those terms of perfect frankness, on which
I have ever desired, and striven, to be with you all.
A Bishop, at his consecration, is called upon to make the
declaration, that he will (with God’s help) be “ faithful in
ordaining, sending, or laying hands upon others.” It is an
awful pledge ; one that he must redeem to God, as well as to
the Church. In the fulfilment of this pledge, he cannot con-
sent to be fettered, as to the mode, or subjects, of his examina-
tion of candidates for Holy Orders ; nor can he be restricted as
to the peculiar points of theology, on which he thinks fitting to
ground his enquiries. In this, and all things else, he must be
permitted to act, and decide, according to the best of his know-
ledge and judgment,—neither swayed by caprice, nor kept back
by timidity.
In the full belief, that soundness in the faith, with regard to
the Sacraments of Christ, is a protection against Romanism on
the one hand, and Puritanism on the other, I have, as is known
to most of you, invariably put forth questions upon them, as an
* Collect for Christmas Day.


integral part of examinations, whether for Priests’ or Deacons'
orders. With God’s blessing, I shall continue to do so. It is
not mine to inquire, whether this is a popular, or an unpopular
course; hut whether, by so acting, I am in the path of that
duty, which is prescribed to me by the Church, to which we
all belong.
Believing the course itself to he correct, no notions of policy, —
no compliance with the humour of the day, —no consideration,
whether it may, or may not, give a greater amount of temporary
satisfaction, —will ever so weigh with me, as to turn me, for one
instant, from it. It is, beyond a question, mine, to take good
heed, that I do tread in the Church’s course, and not carve out
a new path, after my own fancy or devising.
Assuredly, then, I shall not take my stand upon any mere
private opinion, nor pin any man down to this or that formula
of my own, or of others’ devising. But, if lam called upon
to send forth one, with a solemn commission, not only to
preach the Gospel, hut also to administer God’s Word and
Sacraments, after the teaching of the Church of England, I
am hound to see, to the best of my discretion and ability, that
he is not likely to gainsay, mystify, or explain away that
teaching.
As to the Church’s real teaching upon holy baptism, it has
been contended by some, that the language of her Articles is so
vague, as reasonably, and even purposely, to admit of a two-
fold, and diametrically opposite, interpretation. Even could I
accord with this position, as a question of argument, I should
be compelled to repudiate it, as a matter of principle. It would
be to charge the framers of those Articles with deliberate pains-
taking dishonesty, were we to suppose that, whilst they pro-
fessedly drew them up “ for the avoiding of diversities of
opinions, and for the establishing of consent touching true
religion,” they studiously endeavoured so to word them, as to
sanction those diversities, and to render consent an “open
question.” It would be a very scandal to the memory of the
illustrious dead, to regard them as not in earnest, when they
subscribed to the Royal declaration, that the Articles were to be
taken in their “ plain and full meaning,” “ in the literal and
grammatical sense.”


But we have a test, besides that of the Articles, to appeal to.
The 57th Canon declares, that “ the doctrine both of Baptism
and of the Lord’s Supper is so sufficiently set down in the
Book of Common Prayer, to be used at the administration of
the said Sacraments, as nothing can he added unto it, that is
material and necessary.” Even the Privy Council saw, and
admitted, the force of this position; they say, “if there he
any doctrine, on which the Articles themselves are silent, or
ambiguously expressed, so as to be capable of two meanings,
we must suppose that it was intended to leave that doctrine to
private judgment, unless the rubrics and formularies clearly
and distinctly decide it. If they do, we must conclude that
the doctrine so decided is the doctrine of the Church.”
If, then, it is argued, that the Articles speak ambiguously
respecting the doctrine of holy baptism, the Canonsends us
to the formularies.
Upon referring to the public office for baptizing infants,
I find not merely certain general doctrinal truths, respecting
baptism, laid down, —but certain particular doctrinal facts, with
respect to the individual infant brought to be baptized, so
plainly asserted, that I cannot, as it seems to me, deny their
relevancy to that infant, unless I am, at the same time, to
explain away as plain speech as ever the wit of man devised.
It is “ for this child,” for “ this present infant,” that prayer
after prayer is offered: for him, specifically, is the petition
raised, that he “ may receive remission of his sins by spiritual
regeneration.” It is of “ this present infant’s” reception, by
Christ, that the congregation is called upon not “ to doubt,”
but “ earnestly to believe.” The exhortation to the sponsors,
who brought him there, refer to him, and not to another; and
when that present little one is baptized, and received into the
congregation of Christ’s flock, it is of him that the priest is
bidden to pronounce the declaration, that “ this child is regene-
rate, and grafted into the body of Christ’s Church; ” for him,
for “ this infant,” does he call upon the congregation to give
thanks, “ that it hath pleased God to regenerate him with His
Holy Spirit,” to receive him for His “ own child by adoption,”
and “to incorporate him into His holy Church.” Now, it
seems to me, that if you or I had been commissioned to draw


up a service, in which the ancient faith of the Church was to
be so distinctly affirmed, as to guard against the possibility of
it’s being regarded as an “ open question,” —we could not have
succeeded better, than the great fathers of the Keformation
have done, in this most simple, yet comprehensive formulary.
I need hardly remind you, that the fact of baptismal regene-
ration is, as unequivocally, set forth in the office for private
and adult baptism, and for confirmation.
In the language of one, who held a prominent position in
the religious world during the last century, —“ It is certain, our
Church supposes that all, who are baptized in their infancy,
are, at the same time, horn again : and it is allowed, that the
whole office of Baptism for infants proceeds upon this sup-
position. Nor is it an objection of any weight against this,
that we cannot comprehend -how this work can he wrought in
infants ; for neither can we comprehend how it is wrought in
a person of riper years.” Had these words been penned by
a living writer, he would infallibly have been reproached by
some, as being, what is called, a “ Tractarian,” or a “ Puseyite.”
But, unsparingly as these new-coined appellations have been
used, I presume that few would he found, who would venture
to apply them to John Wesley.*
When, then, a candidate for Holy Orders demands of me a
commission, to teach and preach the doctrines of the Church of
England, —is he gravely to tell me, that he questions or dis-
believes her words ; that, though she has used the most explicit
language upon the subject, he cannot receive it in its plain
common sense meaning : that he does doubt: does not earnestly
believe: that he cannot take upon himself to pronounce a
baptized child <£ regenerate,” though the Church declares that
he is so : —that he cannot give God thanks that he has regene-
rated the child, —but that he only hopes it may be so ?
If one, who seeks to enter into the Ministry of the Church
of England, feels himself called upon thus to exercise his right
of private judgment, and to explain away the ancient doctrine
of the Church of Christ, and the express language of our own
formularies, he can scarcely find fault with the Bishop, if he
too exercises his right of private judgment, and rejects him, as
See his Sermon on the “ New Birth.”


one, who, whatever may he his zeal, or piety, gives hut little
promise of steadfast adherence to the received principles of
evangelical truth, as set forth hy our Church, and expounded
hy her most approved divines.*'
It is perfectly incomprehensible to me, how the denier
of baptismal regeneration can make up his mind to use
the services, in which the fact is so positively insisted on.
He must, as it seems to me, speak with doubting lips,
and a misgiving heart. He must surely use the Church’s
words, not in that literal and grammatical meaning, which
she so evidently enjoins; hut rather, in that non-natural
sense, through the application of which, an attempt was made,
some years ago, so to explain away the Articles, as to render it
possible for a man to hold any doctrine of Rome, and yet to sub-
scribe to them, in that peculiar sense. The principles of Tract
90, (for it is that to which I allude), are, in my judgment, so
essentially dishonest, that I have no mind to wink at the
adoption of their system of interpretation in this Diocese,
whether they lean or lead to Rome, or to Geneva,
In such a case, I pray you mark, that it is not the Bishop,
but the “ litera scripta” of the Church, which pronounces a
man unqualified to teach her doctrines. It is no private stand-
ard of his own that he sets up; he is but the deliverer of the
Church’s own award.
Our attention has been called, in a most startling manner,
to the recent act of the Pope, by which, (I use his own words),
he, “in the plenitude of his Apostolic power,” decrees what
he calls “ the re-establishment, in the Kingdom of England,
and according to the common laws of the Church, of a hier-
archy of Bishops, deriving their titles from their ow r n sees,”
which, by that instrument, he constitutes “in the various
Apostolic districts ;” reserving to himself and his successors,
“ the right to divide” his imaginary provinces “ into several,
and to increase the number of its bishoprics as new ones may
be required ; and in general to settle their boundaries as it may
appear meet before the Lord.”
In this document, he speaks of the Reformation as the
“Anglican schism,” and practically regards the whole Protestant
Appendix I.


people of England, as having hitherto been out of the pale of
Christendom, until now, —when he has been pleased thus to com-
plete the endeavours of his predecessors to “ use all the means
their authority gave them to console the Church of England
for its immense disgraces, and to work for its resurrection.”
He ignores the very existence of our Church, by talking of
these prelates of his own creation, as “ the Archbishops and
Bishops of England,” —to whom he commits “the integral
power to regulate all that belongs to the execution of the
common law, or which are left to the authority of Bishops by
the general discipline of the Church.” And, “as for us,”
continues the Pope, “ most assuredly, they shall never have to
complain that we do not sustain them by our Apostolic
authority.”
Respecting this assumption of supremacy over our Sovereign,
our fellow-countrymen, and our Church, the Bishop of London
has justly said, that it is “ a schismatical act without precedent,
and one which would not be tolerated by the Government of
any Roman Catholic Kingdom.” A fact, to the truth of which,
my own experience (as having formerly held a chaplaincy in
the Mediterranean), enables me abundantly to testify.
Nevertheless, harmless as are the thunders of the Vatican
now, —and well as we may afford to smile at the efforts of
Rome to bring our National Church once more under her
spiritual sway, —we must not conceal from ourselves, that an
infringement on the rights of nations has been committed by
a foreign potentate, and the common law of England invaded
by a foreign prelate.
To use the language of a distinguished Roman Catholic
nobleman,* “ the Pope, by his ill-advised measure, has placed
the Roman Catholics in this country, in a position, where they
must either break with Rome, or violate their allegiance to the
constitution of these realms; they must either consider the
papal bull as null and void, or assert the right of a foreign
prince to create by it his bishoprics.”
Though the Act 9 and 10 Viet, repeals the Act passed in
the 13th of Elizabeth, imposing the penalties of high treason
on the introduction of the Pope’s bulls into England,—it
• Lord Beaumont.


expressly provides, that <c nothing in this enactment contained
shall authorize, or render it lawful for any person or persons to
import, bring in, or put in execution within this realm, any
such bulls, writings, or instruments ; and that, in all respects,
save as to the said penalties or punishments, the law shall
continue the same, as if this enactment had not been made.”
There is, again, the oath of supremacy, whose provisions and
declarations, you are well aware, form part of the statute law of
the land. In this, we repudiate the possession de jure, and the
exercise de facto, on the part of “ any foreign prince, person,
prelate, state, or potentate,” of that very jurisdiction, which the
Pope has claimed, and professed to put in force.
The civil authorities in England have long, and knowingly,
allowed the law to he set aside, and the Sovereign’s prerogative
to he trampled under foot, by the Pope, throughout her Colonial
empire. In vain have Colonial Bishops remonstrated; in vain
have they, by open protest, and by official communications,
called the attention of the advisers of the Crown to the
dangerous precedent thus established. Had they been
supported, at the time, by those, who are now so ready to
come forward, because the very same aggression has been
committed in England, that has passed here under their eyes
for years, —possibly, these representations might have had
some effect.
More than six years ago the self-same act, that the Pope has
now repeated in England, was done in this Diocese. Your own
Bishop openly protested against it; called the attention both of
the government here, and at home, to the infraction of the law ; *
and, in compliance with a request made to him by many of the
constant worshippers in this cathedral, preached upon what he,
in common: with all true members of our Church, must regard
as the errors and corruption of Borne. It was not the work of
hours, nor of days, hut of weeks of anxious thought and toil.
Your Bishop stated, too, the grounds on which he was com-
pelled to step forward; that he was hound, by the oath which
he had taken, to repudiate the Pope’s jurisdiction ; and he did
so : —that he was pledged, by his ordination and consecration
vows, to “ banish and drive away all erroneous and strange
doctrine contrary to God’s wordand he did so. Not one


of tlie clergy then came forward to support their Bishop, or to
express their sympathy with him, in his most painful work,
(for to what thoughtful mind is not controversy most painful ?)
No lay .member of the crowded that then
assembled within these walls, hade him “ God-speed,” in
contending earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints.
I stood alone ; and even now, —hut two weeks since, when the
question of the Pope’s aggression in England came under the
review of the Committee of the Branch Society for promoting
Christian Knowledge in this city, —though the attention
of those present was pointedly called to the facts to which I
have hut this moment alluded, —an address to the Archbishop
of Canterbury was adopted, and published, by the majority,
containing much, as it appears to me, entirely irrelevant to the
question in hand, —yet making not the most distant allusion
to the Pope’s proceedings here, nor to the methods adopted
by the Bishop, in vindication of the outraged rights of the
Sovereign, and of the Church.*
The Pope has now boldly planted his standard in the very
heart of the metropolis; and, for the first time within these
last three centuries, issued his bull, claiming the whole realm
of England, as a portion of his spiritual dominions. We
pause now to see, whether Her Majesty’s advisers will deem it
needful to step forth, to prove their own hearty recognition of
the existing law, and to vindicate the insult that has been
offered, not to the Sovereign only, but to the whole Protestant
people of England, (of whom the Sovereign is, at once, the
head and the representative ;) —or whether, by their counsel,
their Koyal Mistress is to succumb to the Pope of Rome, and
permit him to complete an enterprize, which, as he tells us,
“ from, the commencement of his pontificate,” he “ set himself
in the most serious manner” to accomplish.
To my mind, the very comprehensive and bold character of
the attempt is a cause of thankfulness, rather than of alarm.
It has, at last, aroused the British nation to a sense of the
natural and necessary effects of a policy, begun in 1829, and
carried steadily onward, from that time till now; a policy,
which, as it seems to me, has confounded the distinctions
Appendix K.


between Christian toleration and liberalizing concession. I
am content, for my part, to say with the Bishop of Oxford, “ It
will, I trust, lead to such firm and temperate measures being
taken, as will, while they maintain the utmost toleration for
our Roman Catholic fellow-subjects, effectually check what, I
think, has been of late too far allowed among us, the arrogant
and hostile claims of alleged Papal jurisdiction.”
It would seem to be evading the subject, were I to pass by,
altogether unnoticed, an important point connected with it, —I
mean the degree of encouragement that the Pope has received,
to induce him to act as he has done.
He tells us himself, in effect, that he has bided his time. —
And that now, “reflecting on the considerable number of
Roman Catholics, which keeps still increasing,” and “remark-
ing that every day the obstacles are falling off, which stood in
the way of the extension of the Catholic religion,”—he thinks
that “ the time is come, when the form of ecclesiastical govern-
ment should be resumed in England;” —but he is mistaken.
That the lamentable defection of many, both amongst the
clergy and laity of the Church of England, must have raised
exaggerated hopes in the mind of the Romish Pontiff, as to the
real state of public feeling in the country, there can be no
question. There can be as little doubt, but that these hopes
have been increased by the notorious tendency, in certain
quarters, to revive forms and usages, obsolete, or forgotten,
mainly because they bore a closer resemblance to those of the
Church of Rome, than was consistent with the simplicity of our
own reformed ritual. The transition from a familiarity with
the forms of Rome, to a secret yearning for her doctrines, is not
so very difficult a matter, as some would induce us to believe.
But we have the testimony of no common authority to the
truth of some painful rumours, that, from time to time, have
reached us, respecting doctrinal and practical perversions
amongst a few of the clergy of the Church of England. The
warning voice of the watchful Bishop of London has truly
asked, in his recent charge, “ What can be better calculated to
lead the less learned, or the less thoughtful members of our
Protestant Church, to look with complacency on the errors
which their Church has renounced, and, at length, to embrace


them, than to have books of devotion put into their hands by
their own clergymen, in which all but divine honour is paid to
the Virgin Mary ? a propitiatory virtue is attributed to the
Eucharist; —the mediation of the Saints is spoken of as a
probable doctrine; prayers for the dead urged as a positive
duty; —and a superstitious use of the sign of the cross is
recommended as profitable ; add to this, the secret practice of
auricular confession, the use of crucifixes and rosaries, —the
admiration of what is called the sacrament of penance; and it is
manifest, that they who are taught to believe that such things
are compatible with the principles of the English Church, must
also believe it to be separated from that of Eome by a faint
and almost imperceptible line, and be prepared to pass that
line, without much fear of incurring the guilt of schism.”
Were this all, we should say that the Pope has chosen his
time well, according to mere human appearance; although
experience has proved how singularly he miscalculated his
prospect of success.
There are other peculiarities in the religious aspect of
England, that might, just as reasonably, as it appears to me,
have excited his hopes, that the way was being paved for the
reception of his dogmas.
One, so deeply interested in watching the temper of the
times, could not but have observed, that, whilst in some
amongst the lay members and clergy of the Church of England,
there was a leaning to the doctrines and discipline of Eome,
there was, in others, a tendency to the latitudinarianism of
Germany, or the narrow principles of Geneva. He could not
but have marked, in one place, a growing indifference to the
true principles of the Church of England, as established at the
Eeformation; in another, a desire to evade or defy the plain
letter of the rubric, and the time-honoured teaching of the
Church; and he must have been cheered, too, by the knowledge,
that there were many of her members, who not only acquiesced
in, but rejoiced at, the decision of a lay tribunal, that the
strange doctrine of an entire denial of all grace, as concurrent
with Christ’s Sacrament of Baptism, was compatible with the
honest exposition of the received doctrines of the Church of
England. The Eoman Pontiff must have known full well, that


no surer plan could have been devised, to prepare the way for
tempting the- unwary and the unstable to join his communion,
than that which some members of our Church have unhappily
adopted,—l mean, by cutting down her real principles, by pro-
nouncing grave matters of religious truth “ open questions,” and
by so unsettling the faith of the Church’s children, by raising
doubts as to what are, or what are not her principles, as to
leave them to he blown about with every wind of doctrine, an
easy prey to the cool and wary emissaries of a Church, which
invites the restless and unsatisfied to her bosom, by the promise
of unity, certainty, peace, and safety.
It is not a new system of tactics, this engendering doubts
and suspicions, on the part of the people, as to the soundness
and orthodoxy of their pastors, as well as of the Church’s claims
to integrity and catholicity. It was tried in the earlier days
of the Reformation, and partially succeeded. If history has
her examples, she has her warnings too.*
When last we met, upon a similar occasion to the present,
now some five years ago, my words to you, then, were, “ My
knowledge of you all is sufficient, I thank God, to assure me,
that there is no real Romeward leaning amongst any of your
number.” A colonial Bishop has this peculiar advantage over
his brethren in England. From the smaller number of the
clergy in his Diocese, he is enabled to form a more intimate
acquaintance with, and, perhaps, a more accurate estimate of,
their work and teaching, than is possible to be gained respect-
ing the large number that minister in our Dioceses at home.
It is with peculiar thankfulness that, in these unsteady days,
when, elsewhere, we must tremble for the safety of some even of
our best and holiest, —here, at least, your Bishop can repeat
his words, from a more extended knowledge of your respective
practices and teaching.
I know well, that something more than suspicions have been
awakened respecting some of you ; I know well, that not only
have the whisper, the inuendo, and the rumour, assailed your
fair fame, and impeached your very honesty in the faith; but
that the direct charge has been made of the existence of
Appendix L.


Romanizing teaching and practices amongst you. As your
Bishop, lam hound to acquit, or to condemn you. With the
full remembrance of my own responsibility, and with an awful
sense of the account that I must one day render of my every
word, I express my deliberate belief, that the charge is utterly
without foundation. That it has been advanced at all, upon
mere opinion, or misconception, or suspicion, or hearsay, is a
matter of deep regret; that it should have been countenanced
by some of our own body, upon no better grounds, (as it seems
to me), cannot be otherwise than a sore scandal to the Church.
I have examined into the alleged facts, —I have well weighed
the arguments that have been brought forward. With no desire
to sit in judgment upon motives, and with due allowance for
the fears of some, the scruples of others, and the peculiar views
that many will, too hastily, entertain upon the most grave and
difficult subjects, I cannot but mournfully declare my conviction,
that it has been forgotten in some quarters, that there is such
a virtue as the “ Charity that thinketh no evil,” and such a
command as “ Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbour.”*
But, brethren, before I quit this subject, let me remind you,
that, whatever might have been the encouragement held out to
the Bishop of Rome, by the many conversions to his Church,
there was another point to be ascertained, and another end to
be secured, before he could have ventured upon the step, that he
has been prevailed upon to adopt.
Say, that hundreds of our own Church have signified their
adherence to him and to his creed; say, that hundreds more
were ready, on the first favourable opportunity, to do the like ;
where would have been his security in all this, unless he had
been certain that the temper and spirit of the ruling powers
would have been such, as to assure him of the impunity of his
attempt ?
Can you suppose, that he regarded the history of the last
quarter of a century with an incurious eye? Can you believe,
that his best hope was not the fact, of which he himself informs
us, i{ that, every day, the obstacles were falling off, which stood
* Appendix M.


in the way of the extension” of his religion in England ? Yes,
he had a right to think that something more than an indirect
encouragement had been held out, when these, amongst many
other similar facts, were before him ; —ten Protestant Bishoprics
in Ireland, at one blow, were swept away ; a titular Archbishop
of Ireland had corresponded with one of the chief ministers of
the Crown, under his assumed title, and that minister had
declared that it was not his province, nor yet his intention, to
put in force the provisions of the Roman Catholic Relief Bill,
that had provided against such a contingency; the grant to the
College at Maynooth had been increased ; diplomatic relations
with the Roman see attempted; the question of endowing the
Roman Catholic priesthood in Ireland had been contemplated;
whilst a minister of the Crown expressed his regret that the
Protestant Church was ever made the established church of
Ireland, and pronounced the measure “ a great and fatal mis-
take,” which he wished had never been committed. The same
authority had also used these words in his place in Parliament,
“ You must recognize the Roman Catholic Hierarchy even more
distinctly than in the Charitable Bequests Bill ; I carry my
view on this subject so far as to wish the prelates of the Roman
Catholic Church to take their places in this house on the
episcopal bench. That any danger can follow from admitting
to your Lordships’ house, an equal number of Roman Catholic
prelates, with the prelates of the Irish Church, who sit here, I
cannot imagine.”
The Pope knew also, that rank and precedence had been given
to Archbishops and Bishops of his creed in Ireland, —that he
had been allowed, without let or hindrance, to establish an
archiepiscopate in Sydney, and bishoprics in almost all our
Colonial Dioceses.
We must suppose him, too, more slenderly informed, than it
was his interest to be, if he was ignorant, that the protest of
the venerable Bishop of Sydney was disregarded; and that
a similar document from this Diocese was not even acknow-
ledged by the Secretary of State, to whom it was officially
transmitted.
It has been also stated openly by one of his newly-created
dignitaries, that “ the Ploly See, so far from .wishing to outrage


the feelings of the country, has studiously avoided any infraction
of the laws, has merged a portion of its own direct power, and
has taken pains to ascertain that those appointments would
give no outrage to the British Government.”
The Ministers of the Crown, then, as the advisers of the
Sovereign, —the British Parliament, as the representatives of the
People, by their recorded words and acts, would seem, during the
space of twenty-five years, to have given the Eoman Pontiff good
reason to believe, that he was not acting otherwise than in
conformity with the permission of the civil authorities, and with
the general sense of the nation at large, in taking the step on
which we now are commenting. We may blame the boldness
of the measure, we may smile at its impotence,—but we have no
right to speak of it as that which has taken us by surprise. It
has been the natural fruit of England’s indifference to those
signs of these latter days, which watchers and warners have,
from time to time, pointed out.
And now, I must bring to a close this protracted trespass on
your forbearance; I should not have • thus long detained you,
dear brethren, had the circumstances of the Church been less
full of trouble and anxiety than they are just now, both to you
and me ; hut it could not well he otherwise.
If there has been aught that I have said which may have
jarred on an over-sensitive mind, I pray you pardon it. I
believe I am not one wantonly to give offence, nor to carry
matters with a high hand, as one desiring to “ lord it over
God’s heritage.” I would fain ever hear in mind the prayer
breathed forth for me at my consecration, that I might use the
authority given me, not to destruction hut to salvation, not to
hurt but to help ; so that, as a wise and faithful servant, giving
to God’s family their portion in due season, I may, at last, for
Christ’s sake, he received into everlasting joy.
We have met for the purpose of public prayer, and Christian
counsel. Let us part, with the settled resolve, to hear one
another’s burdens, and so to fulfil the law of Christ ;to
strengthen each other’s hands, and so to advance the Church’s
common weal. Let us part, as men resolved to labour, not for
individual schemes, or private ends, hut for the one steadfast
purpose, of winning fresh souls to our Eedeemer’s Kingdom;


that so, when we are called upon to render up an account of
our ministry here on earth, we may he found watchers of such
a stamp, and workers after such a sort, that, let the awful call
be near or distant, the heart may leap instinctively to the
summons, with the willingness of the loved and loving apostle
John, “ Even so, come Lord Jesus.”




APPENDIX.
Note A. —Page 3.
It is necessary to the clear understanding of this Charge, that the
Addresses, to which reference has been made, should be appended.
ADDRESS OF THE CLERGY OF THE ARCHDEACONRY
OF HOBART TOWN,
Adopted at the Quarterly Meeting of the Chapter, on the 18 th March, 1851.
To the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Tasmania.
Hobart Town, 1 9th March, 1851.
My Lord, —
Minutes of the proceedings of the Conference of Bishops at Sydney
having been brought under our consideration at a meeting of the
Clergy by the Venerable the Archdeacon of Hobart Town, for the
purpose of addressing you on the subject,—we avail ourselves of the
opportunity to express the sense of personal attachment and respect
which we entertain towards your Lordship, and our desire to uphold
the authority of your episcopal office, and to preserve the full exercise
of its important functions.
We feel great satisfaction in being enabled to express our full con-
currence with your Lordship and the other Bishops in the two chief
objects of the Conference, —the establishment of a form of adminis-
tration of Church affairs, and the adoption of plans for the propaga-
tion of the Gospel among the heathen races of Australasia and the
adjacent islands according to the principles of the Protestant
Reformation.
While we acknowledge our grateful sense of the exertions of your
Lordship and brethren, and our conviction that you were animated by
a sincere desire for the advancement of the interests of Religion and
the Church, we are compelled, by the deep importance of the subject,
and by the duty we owe to the people over whom we are placed as
spiritual instructors, as well as by our solemn obligation to maintain


evangelical truth, to express to your Lordship our candid judgment
on some of the decisions and opinions of the Conference, promulgated
for our guidance and direction, which appear to us so materially to
affect the interests of the Church, as to attach great responsibility to
us should we pass them over without expression of our opinion of their
correctness and results :
Ist. We are of opinion, that in the Assembly for administration of
Church affairs, the Bishops, Clergy, and Laity should have an equal
participation in all deliberations and judgments.
2nd, We are of opinion, that the Licences of Parochial Clergymen
in these Colonies should be similar to those issued to incumbents in
England; and that the proposed plan of placing Clergymen in
charge of parishes or districts, entirely “at the disposal of their
Bishop for some definite term of years, and of leaving to him the
responsibility of appointing and changing their stations during such
period,” would, under present circumstances, be injurious to the
maintenance of mental independence, doctrinal purity, and pastoral
fidelity among the junior Clergy, and would be inimical to their
domestic comfort and general usefulness.
3rd. In our judgment, the introduction by the Australasian Bishops
of the question of Holy Baptism into their “ Minutes,” is deeply to
be regretted ; and the construction put by them upon the “ Creed,
Articles, and Liturgy,” with respect to this subject, would, if imposed,
be equivalent to a new Article of Faith ; and the dogmatical determi-
nation of a question which has ever been practically considered an
open one, virtually narrows the terms of communion with our Church.
Signed by the Chairman,
FITZHERBERT A. MARRIOTT.
The following Clergymen who were present at the Archidiaconal
Chapter signified their adhesion to this Address :
Rev. William Bedford, D.D.
Rev. Henry Phibbs Fry, D.D.
Rev. Philip Palmer, M.A.
Rev. Edward Freeman, M.A.
Rev. Wickham M. Hesketh, M.A.
Rev. Ed. Patrick Durham, M.A.
Rev. John Burrowes, B.A.
Rev, Joseph G. Medland.
Rev. Thomas J. Ewing.
Rev. George Wright.
Rev. Wm, R. Bennett.
Rev. Robert Wilson.


The following Clergymen subsequently desired that their signatures
might be attached to the Address :
Rev. James Norman.
Rev. Rochfort B. Grange, M.A.*
Rev. Charles M. Bardin, B.A.
Rev. ¥m. Bedford, Junior, B.A.
Rev. John R. Gurney.
Rev. Joseph Mayson.
In these lists the names of two Clergymen are omitted, who have
written to me signifying their desire to withdraw their signatures after
having heard the Charge.
The above Address appeared in the Courier newspaper of the 22nd
March; at which time I was engaged in visiting the more remote
districts of the Diocese, on the shores of Bass’s Straits. In the same
paper the following notice of the Address was published :
A Meeting of the Committee of the Association of Members of
the Church of England for maintaining in Van Diemen’s Land
the principles of the Protestant Reformation was held yesterday,
at No. , Macquarie-street,
Nigel Gresley, Esq., in the Chair.
The Address of the Chapter of the Clergy of this side of the island
having been read, it was resolved unanimously,—
Ist. That the Clergy by whom this Address was adopted are entitled
to the gratitude of this meeting and of the Protestant community ; as
having by this measure asserted principles of the highest importance
to the interests of religion and of the Church. *
2nd. That the following measures required by the Clergy in their
Address be adopted among the objects of this Association:—
First, —That in the assembly for administration of Church affairs,
the Bishops, Clergy, and Laity should have an equal participation in
all deliberations and judgments.
Second, —That the licences of parochial Clergymen should be
similar to those issued to incumbents in England; and that the
appointment of the Colonial Clergy in their parishes should be
rendered as permanent as that of incumbents in the Mother-country.
A copy of a letter to the Archdeacon of Hobart Town, accompany-
ing my reply to the Address, is subjoined:—
Bishopsiowe, 10 th May, 1851.
My Dear Archdeacon, —
I take an early opportunity, after my return from the Channel, to
forward to you, as the Chairman at the Archidiaconal Chapter, a
* Mr. Grange relinquished his chaplaincy in October, 1850; holds no cure whatever in the
Diocese ; performs no duty; and is now resident on his farm.


reply to the Address, which was adopted by a majority of the Clergy
assembled on the 19th of March ; and which, as I am given to under-
stand, has been subsequently signed by seven other Clergymen in the
Archdeaconry. You are aware, that it was not until the 18th ultimo,
that I received this Address from you, which had been inserted in the
Courier newspaper of March 22nd, by the Rev. Dr. Fry, after having
been previously submitted by him to the newly-formed Protestant
Association.
My answer to this document would not have been thus long delayed,
had I not desired to know, to whom so strange a proceeding was really
chargeable. It was only yesterday that the information reached me.
I very frankly tell you, that, had the whole body of the subscribers
been consenting parties to the premature publication of the Address,
I should have felt extreme reluctance in making any reply to so public
a document, beyond what would have been conveyed in my forth-
coming Charge. As it is, I hope that no want of courtesy, or of due
consideration to the Clergy, will be imputed to me, in even now,
deferring until the Visitation, the detailed and full examination of the
momentous matters which they have brought under my notice.
I remain,
My Dear Archdeacon,
Very faithfully yours
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Venerable The Archdeacon of Hobart Town.
REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ADOPTED BY THE CHAPTER.
Reverend Brethren, —
In acknowledging the receipt of the Address adopted “by a
majority of the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Hobart Town, in
Chapter assembled, on the 19th of March last,” permit me to thank
you for the expression of your “ personal attachment and respect,” as
well as for the intimation of your “ desire to uphold the authority of
the Episcopal office,” and to “ preserve the full exercise of its im-
portant functions.” Had I not been certified, that it was the unau-
thorised act of an individual amongst you, to submit this Address
(weeks before it came under my notice) to the consideration of a
newly-formed Association, in despite of the Archdeacon’s remon-
strance, —and to forward it to the newspaper,—in forgetfulness of the
promise made to him, that it should not be published without my
answer, or without my leave, —it would have been difficult for me to
have received your assurances of attachment and respect, with any
degree of satisfaction.


But I must not hold you all responsible for the act of one ; though
I may, and must regret, that you have not openly repudiated so novel
and so indecorous a proceeding.
The topics, to which you have adverted in your Address, demand a
more lengthened consideration, than would be compatible with the
limits, to which, at present, I desire to confine myself.
It is my intention, therefore, to reserve them until we meet at the
Visitation, to which you have been already summoned.
I trust, upon that occasion, to be able to bring forward such infor-
mation, as may serve to convince you how singularly you have mis-
apprehended the Minutes of the Australasian Bishops, on which you
have passed your judgment.
In the meanwhile, I pray God to take you into His Holy keeping,
and abundantly to bless your several ministrations, to the one great
end of all our thoughts, and words, and works, —the winning souls to
Christ.
I remain,
Reverend Brethren,
Your affectionate friend and Brother,
F. R. TASMANIA.
Bishopstowe , 1 Oth May, 1851.
ADDRESS TO THE LORD BISHOP.
The following is the Address to the Bishop from those Clergymen,
who, whilst they desired to acknowledge the Minutes of the Episcopal
Conference lately held at Sydney, felt themselves unable to adopt the
document which has been published in the Courier as emanating from
the Chapter:—
Right Reverend Father in God, —
We, the Archdeacon and undersigned Clergymen of the Archdeaconry
of Hobart Town, desire to record our deep sense of the importance of
the Episcopal Conference recently held in the Metropolitan City of
this Province, and to express our appreciation of the frankness with
which its results have been communicated to the Church at large.
In acknowledging our obligation to yourself more immediately, as
our Diocesan, we feel that it is neither necessary nor expedient, in an
Address like the present, to declare our individual opinions upon the
several important questions embraced in the Minutes of that Conference.
But we thankfully refer to that which appears to us to be a principal
characteristic of its whole proceedings, namely—the anxious desire of
the assembled Bishops (with whom such counsels naturally and duly
originated) to unite, in harmonious co-operation, the several orders in


the sacred ministry, and the lay members of the Church, We rejoice
that a great law of the Christian brotherhood has been thus prominently
recognized and re-asserted; and we earnestly trust, that all those towards
whom such a desire has been felt, will meet it in a corresponding
spirit of affectionate confidence.
We cannot disguise from ourselves, that the times, in which our lot is
cast, are especially troublous, and demand of all men, and chiefly of the
Ministers of Christ, an increase of zeal, tempered with wisdom, and of
earnestness, guided by humility and love. While, therefore, we are
thankful to see our Spiritual Fathers taking counsel together for the
welfare of the Church, we cannot but recur to the remembrance of much
that is lacking to ourselves. We need to be as a city at unity in itself;
and so far as we come short of this, we beseech you to guide, help,
admonish, and pray for us, that we may be faithful stewards of the
Household of God. And our prayers shall not be wanting, that that
particular Church to which we owe our baptism, our early training,
our ordination, and which has the ever-deepening allegiance of our
hearts’ best service, may be greatly strengthened against all the assaults
from without or from within, and sheltered from the waves and storms
of this world by the indwelling presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Fitzherbert A. Marriott, Archdeacon of Hobart Town.
Frederick H. Cox, 8.A., Minister of St. John Baptist’s, Hobart Town.
Charles Dobson, Minister of St. John Baptist’s, Prosser’s Plains.
Thos. Hat Forster, Minister of St. Augustine’s, Broad Maish.
John E. Buckland, 8.A., Head Master, Hutchins School, Hobart Town.
W. Tanored, A.M., Curate of St. David’s Cathedral, Hobart Town.
D. Galer, Chaplain Female House of Correction, Hobart Town.
Geo. Eastman, Chaplain Boss Female Factory.
A. Davenport, 8.A., Minister of St. Luke’s, Kichmond.
Samuel B. Ffookes, Missionary Chaplain at Colebrook Dale.
E. H. Bryan, Chaplain at Green Ponds.
Egbert W. Gibbs, M.A., Chaplain at Invalid Station, Impression Bay.
J. L. Ison, 8.A., Minister of Oatlands and Jericho.
THE EEPLY OF THE LOED BISHOP.
Bishopstowe, 14 th April, 1851.
Eeverend and Dear Brethren, —
The Christian tone and spirit, in which your Address to me is framed,
demand my cordial and affectionate acknowledgments.
To you, who know well the terms of perfect confidence with which


I have ever striven to regard and treat the Clergy of the Diocese, it
were needless to dwell, at length, upon the anxiety, which, from the
commencement of our Episcopal Conference at Sydney, I entertained
to communicate its results to you, and to the Church at large.
It was an anxiety, I may truly say, which was most abundantly shared
by each one of my brother Bishops.
No mistakes or misapprehensions, that have been the consequence
of this frankness, make me, in any way, regret the line of conduct
that we adopted.
We could not conceal from ourselves, that differences of opinion
would ensue, as to the nature or expediency of the conclusions, to
which, after most prayerful search, and most anxious deliberation, we
arrived.
Upon one important point, you, at least, have not misjudged us—
I mean, our desire to secure not only the affectionate co-operation of
the several orders of the sacred ministry, in the Church’s work, but
also the zealous assistance of her lay members, in carrying into effect
her practical love for her children’s souls.
I, at least, have more than once expressed, in, I venture to conceive,
no doubtful terms, my anxiety to find for our lay brethren their own
proper functions in the Church of Christ; and have not been back-
ward in inviting them, in the spirit of Christian love, to take them up.
You have, many times, heard the declaration of this anxiety from my
lips, both publicly and privately ; and I will entertain the hope, that,
with God’s blessing, it will not be frustrated; but that such efforts will
be made by all who love the Lord Jesus, as will do somewhat to stem
the torrent of infidelity and false teaching, with which these troublous
times are so peculiarly fraught. Let us so strive to bestir ourselves in
the cause of Christian truth, as one united brotherhood, that the awful
warning given of old to the Church of Ephesus may speak no note of
accusation to ourselves—" Remember from whence thou art fallen, and
repent and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly,
and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.”
May God, in His infinite mercy, grant, that the righteous judgments
executed of old against nations, cities, churches, and individuals, may
convey to us their own peculiar counsel; that so, Christian history
may be to Christ’s disciples, what the world’s history is to its own
children—“ Philosophy teaching by examples.”
May it be ours to cultivate that spirit of affectionate unity which was
so near our Blessed Lord’s heart, as to form a most important feature
of His last intercessory prayer.
And may this spirit of unity be developed in us all, by deeds—not
put forth in talk, and in professions only. Yea, brethren, let it be our
especial prayer, for ourselves, and for each other, that we be so filled
with Christ’s own Spirit, that we, who have dedicated ourselves to His
more immediate service, may take good heed, to be “ Gentle unto all
men, apt to leach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose


themselves; if God, peradventure, will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth.”
I remain, Reverend and dear Brethren,'
Your affectionate Friend and Brother,
F. R. TASMANIA.
Note B. —Page 3.
Church of England Association for maintaining in Van Diemens Land
the •principles of the Protestant Reformation.
At a Preliminary Meeting of the Members of the Church of
England, held at Capt. M'Kay’s residence in Macquarie-street, on the
evening of Thursday, 13th of March, T. J. Knight, Esq., in the chair;
it was unanimously resolved, “ That a Church of England Association
should be formed ‘for maintaining in Van Diemen’s Land the prin-
ciples of the Protestant Reformation,’ and that the gentlemen present
should constitute the Provisional Committee, with power to add to
their number.”
It was also unanimously resolved, that Mr. Barnard and Mr. Thos.
Dobson be requested to act as Honorary Secretaries pro tempore to the
Association, and to publish the proceedings of this meeting, together
with the following Requisition to the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, to
convene a meeting of the Laity of the Church of England for the
purpose of considering the proceedings of the Conference of Bishops
at Sydney.
J. Barnard, ) Honorary Secretaries
Thomas Dobson, j pro tem.
Hobart Town, 13th March, 1851.
Hobart Town, March 1851.
My Lord, —
We, the undersigned Members of the Church of England, have
observed, in the published Report of the recent “ Conference of the
Metropolitan and Bishops of the province of Australia,” many resolu-
tions concerning the Faith, Worship, and Discipline of the Church,
which, if enforced, would be equivalent to New Articles of Faith, and
by the dogmatical determination of questions hitherto considered open,
would virtually narrow the terms of communion with our Church,-


and as such report has been transmitted to England with a view to
Imperial Legislation, without being previously submitted to the Laity
and Clergy for consideration, (although our consent is clearly necessary
to any Ordinances or Articles sought to be imposed upon us or put
forth as obligatory), we request that your Lordship will convene a
public meeting of the Lay Members of the Church on
at , for the consideration of the Report in
question, and of the general questions connected with it.”
On the 3rd of May, this requisition was forwarded to me, (with 503
signatures, collected from different parts of the country), appointing
the evening of the 23rd of the same month for the proposed meeting.
My absence in D’Entrecasteaux’ Channel prevented me from returning
the subjoined reply until the 10th.
Bishopstowc, 10 th May, 1851.
My Christian Friends and Brethren, —
Believe me, I am far from undervaluing the importance of the
Requisition, with which I have been recently favoured, calling upon
me to convene a public meeting of the lay members of the Church of
England, for the purpose of considering “ the Report of the recent
Conference of the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province of
Australasia,” and of the general questions connected with it.
May I be allowed to hazard an opinion, that a careful perusal of that
Report would have rendered it impossible for you to have arrived at
the conclusions, which you have drawn respecting its objects and
intentions.
You say, that you have observed in it “ Many resolutions concerning
the faith, worship, and discipline of the Church, which, if enforced,
would be equivalent to new Articles of Faith.”
I must confess my inability to discover any one of our opinions,
recommendations, or suggestions, to which such an interpretation can
be affixed, without misconstruing their plain and simple language.
Permit me to suggest, that it might have been as well to have
inquired, whether, in the Report itself, there was the slightest intima-
tion of any desire on the part of the Australasian Bishops to enforce
their opinions upon others, to impose any new ordinance or article, or
to put forward any strange thing as obligatory upon the members of
the Church of England in this colony.
No desire could, in these days, exist in the minds of any thoughtful
ecclesiastics to frame laws, or to compile regulations for the Laity, as
binding on them, without their privity and consent. Nor can there be
any wish to place upon the Clergy any further restraint, than that
which is self-imposed by their own voluntary declarations, subscrip-
tions, and oaths. In each case, however, as long as they remain in
communion with the Church of England, they are bound by her
existing laws and usages.


You refer, I presume, to our “minute” upon Holy Baptism, when
you state, that “ by the dogmatical determination of questions hitherto
considered open,” we “ would virtually narrow the terms of communion
with our Church.” If you will do me the favour to turn to the report
itself, and to judge for yourselves, you will find that we have dogmati-
cally determined nothing.
The simple fact is this five Bishops have stated what they
“ believed to be the just interpretation of the Creed, Articles, and
Liturgy, respecting the Regeneration of Infants in Holy Baptism.” An
individual Bishop has preferred stating his views separately. There
can, surely, be no “ narrowing the terms of communion with our
Church,” nor any dogmatism, in the expression of an honest and
sincere belief. And I presume that you will not, as members of an
Episcopal Church, so entirely disregard all recognition of the Bishop’s
office, as to deny to him the undisputed right of holding and putting
forth his belief, on this or any other point of theology, with, at least, the
same freedom, as is claimed by all other members of the Church.
You further state, that this Report has been “ transmitted to England
with a view to Imperial Legislation.” I am really perplexed to discover
what portion of the Report can have given rise to such an opinion.
All that the Bishops have themselves said upon the subject is, that
they propose transmitting it “ to the Archbishops and Bishops of the
United Church of England and Ireland.” You will, upon reflection,
admit, that this is a widely different thing, from submitting it to
“ Imperial Legislation,” or courting the supervision of the two Houses
of Parliament.
It seems to me, therefore, that you have requested'me to convene
this meeting, upon either a too hasty perusal of the Report in question,
or upon an entire misconception of ite real tenor.
But it would be dishonest in me, were I not, in all candour, to say
that, —even had this not been the case, and even had you not (as it
appears to me) prejudged the whole question, by passing the sentence
on the Report, which is virtually contained in the Requisition,—l
should, as I do nowq most respectfully have declined adopting a proposal,
which, in my judgment, is more calculated to endanger, than to subserve,
the ends of that Christian peace and mutual good-will which we must
all be so anxious to secure.
I desire, most distinctly, to disclaim all want of respectful consideration
for your opinion in this matter, if I prefer leaving to the lay members
of the Church of England themselves, the undivided responsibility of
bringing into the arena of public discussion, the delicate and grave
subjects, both of doctrine and of discipline, which are adverted to in
the Report of the Australasian Bishops.
I remain, my Christian Friends and Brethren,
Your faithful and affectionate Pastor,
F. R. TASMANIA.
John Dunn, jun., Esq., and the other Members of the 1
* Church of England who have signed the Requisition, j j


The meeting took place on the 23rd of May, when the following
Resolutions were proposed and adopted :
1. “ That it is the right and duty of the Laity to express an opinion
on the decisions of the Australian Bishops put forth in the Minutes of
Conference concerning the faith and practice of the Church; and that
in any assembly for administration of the affairs of the Church the lay
members are entitled to express their opinions—to propose measures
for adoption—and to deliberate and vote with the Clergy ; and that
the restriction by the Conference of all deliberations and resolutions
respecting ‘ rules of practice and ecclesiastical order ’ —and also respect-
ing ‘the processes necessary for carrying such rules into effect’—to
Synods composed exclusively of Clergymen, is practically to exclude
the Laity from the exercise of their right of being consulted in, and
of giving their consent to, all rules and decisions concerning the faith
and practice of the Churcli of which they are members.”
2. “ That this Meeting regards with apprehension the Minutes of
Bishops on the subject of Holy Baptism, put forth as the ‘just inter-
pretation of the Formularies of the Church of England respecting the
Regeneration of Infants,’ as tending to narrow the terms of communion
with and admission into our Church.”
3. “ That, in the opinion of this Meeting, the resolution of the Con-
ference, which takes upon itself to dispense with the obligation upon
the Clergy to perform religious services to persons who are not members
of the Church of England, is irreconcileable with Christian charity.”
4. That this Meeting deprecates, as injurious to the mental independ-
ence and pastoral fidelity of the Clergy, and as contrary to the princi-
ples of the Protestant Church, the change which has been made in the
form of licences under which the Clergy in this Diocese hold their
appointments, by the introduction of clauses, by one of which the
Bishop reserves to himself the power to appoint and send any Minister,
whom he may direct to read, take part in Divine service, and preach in
any Church or at any station to which the holder of the licence may
from time to time be appointed and removed; and by the other of
which the Bishop reserves to himself the power of ‘revoking the
licence, and all things therein contained, whenever he shall see just
cause for the same.’”
5. “That the Address respecting the Minutes of Conference, which
was adopted by the Chapter of the Archdeaconry of Hobart Towm atthe
Meeting held in March last, is a vindication of the rights and independ-
ence of the Clergy and lay members of the Church; and that the
moral courage displayed by the Ministers under their peculiar position
in the adoption of that Address, entitles them to the gratitude, respect,
and support of this Meeting, and of the Church in general.”
6. “ That the alarming prevalence of teaching and proceedings of
a Romanizing tendency, and the numerous defections of Ministers of
the Church of England, have rendered necessary the formation of the


‘ Church of England Association for maintaining in Van Diemen’s
Land the principles of the Protestant Reformation; ’ and that this
Meeting, and the Members of the Church generally, are called upon to
afford their zealous support to the Association, especially in the most
important objects of maintaining the proper independence of the
Clergy, and of obtaining for the Laity an equal participation in the
administration of the affairs of the Church.”
7• “ That, in the opinion of this Meeting, the adoption in this Diocese
of the following propositions is necessary to the peace and well-being
of the Church, namely :—lst. That in the proposed Assembly for
administration of the affairs of the Church, a number of lay members
of the Church—being themselves communicants, and chosen by the
congregations of which they are members—shall form a component
part of such Assembly; that such lay members should not exceed
in number that of the Clergy, and should equally with them exercise
the right of proposing measures for adoption, and of deliberating and
voting upon all subjects submitted to the consideration of the Assembly.
2nd. That the clauses lately introduced into the licences under which
the Colonial Clergy hold their appointments should be erased, and the
old form of licence be restored.”
8. “ That the thanks of this Meeting be presented to Thomas J.
Knight, Esq., for his zeal and attention to the important objects of this
meeting, and for presiding on the present occasion; and that he be
requested to transmit copies of the Resolutions now adopted to His
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Eight Honorable the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, with a request that their lordships’
influence may be afforded to carrying out the objects of this Meeting.”
A correct estimate may be formed of the tone and manner in which
these resolutions were discussed, from the perusal of the following
speeches of the two secretaries of the Protestant Association. They
are extracted from the report of the proceedings of the Meeting, as
given in the Courier newspaper of the 28th May :
JAMES BARNARD, Esq., in proposing the third resolution, said—
The resolution, Sir, which I have the honour to propose, is second to
none in practical importance; for it at once pointedly and emphatically
condemns that passage in the Minutes of the Conference of the Bishops
of Sydney which would seek to release the Clergy from the obligation
to perform religious services to persons who are not of our own com-
munion—who are not members of the Church of England!
But before proceeding with further comment, 1 will place the meeting
in possession of the “ decisions and opinions ” of the Bishops to which
my resolution applies :
“(9.) Marriages.— (b.) We are of opinion that Ministers of the
Church of England oiujhl not to solemnize marriage between persons,
neither of whom is of our own communion—except in cases where the


marriage cannot, without extreme difficulty, be solemnized in any other
way.”
“ (11.) Ministbyto Dissenters. — We are of opinion that the general
principle of colonial legislation, by which the equality of all religious
denominations is recognized, releases the Clergy of the Church of
England, in these Colonies, from the obligation to perform religious
services for persons, who are not members of our own Church.”
There is another significant passage which it is also necessary to read
in connection with these, and which is deserving the most serious
attention of every member of the Church of England:—
“ (4.) Church Membership. — We acknowledge, as members of the
Church of England, all persons who, having been duly baptized, are
conformable to the doctrines, government, rites, and ceremonies contained
in the Book of Common Prayer; it being understood, that they are
entitled to claim at the hands of its Ministers the rites and ceremonies of
our Church, so long as they shall continue conformable to the extent above
required .”
Sir, I confess that I am altogether at a loss to comprehend the
grounds for the adoption of such an uncharitable—l might say, of
such an unchristian—resolution on the part of the Conference ; for it
certainly breathes nothing of the principles of Christianity—nothing
of the spirit of the Divine founder of our religion ; but savours
altogether of that peculiar school of anti-Protestant theology from
whence it evidently emanates. To my mind, Sir, it affords proof—-if
additional proof were wanting—in support of the soundness of the
principle which has this evening been contended for—the right of the
Laity to participate in the administration of the affairs of the Church;
for sure I am, Sir, that the Laity would never have concurred in, never
have sanctioned, an evident violation of all Christian charity. No, Sir,
nor would the Clergy, I am convinced, have joined in this gratuitous
outrage upon Christian feeling, if they had been called upon to “ pro-
nounce ” upon them; and lam borne out in this declaration by the
recorded sentiments of the Clergy of South Australia in their address
to the Bishop of Adelaide upon this very subject. With your permission,
Sir, I will quote the passages :
“ Liturgy —Marriage of persons neither of whom belongs to the Church.
—l3. That whereas, up to a recent period, no marriages of Dissenters
in England were legal, unless celebrated according to the riles and
ceremonies of the Established Church; and whereas, at the present
time, the majority of Dissenting marriages are so celebrated in the
Mother-country, we are of opinion that no Australasian clergyman
ought to refuse any parties who may apply to him, though they be
not members of our own communion.”
“ Ministry to Dissenters. — l 4. That, while we are relieved from


any legal objection to perform religious services for persons who are not
members of our Church, yet, to guard against any misconception, we desire
to express our readiness to afford our ministerial offices, as far as in us lies,
to any one who may need or desire them”
Sir, these are proper, Christian sentiments ; and I am bold to
affirm, that they are shared by the whole body of the Clergy of this
Diocese, with, perhaps, here and there, a solitary exception.
Having made these preliminary observations, I will now confine my
remarks to the resolution as it applies—lst, to Dissenters ; and 2nd, as
it affects members of the Church of England.
As to the first of these respects, I would observe, that I had always
understood that the “ Church of England ” was essentially catholic in
her services, and evangelical in her doctrines—that she comprehended
all, and excluded none from her doors ; that the responsibility of those
who joined in her worship rested not with the Minister, but upon the
worshippers themselves. And lam here reminded, Sir, that if there is
one of the institutions more than another of the Mother-country which
is endeared to an Englishman, it is the parochial system, the poor man’s
Church —the right which every man has, however low his condition in
the social scale, to command the services of his parish Minister—who
is at once “ his guide, his counsellor, and his friend.” Such, Sir, at
least has been the theory. But now it seems that the Church of England
is, by these “ decisions and opinions,” to quit this vantage-ground—to
lose this distinctive character in these Colonies for “nationality and
universality,” and to descend into the position of a mere sect; and
should she become so, then, depend upon it, she would become the
puniest and paltriest of sects ! But, Sir, lam induced to ask, does not the
Church of England possess within these Colonies analogous arrange-
ments as to “ parishes and districts ?” Are there not Clergymen ap-
pointed to certain fixed localities ?—and are these Clergymen to be ex-
empted from the responsibility of attending to the spiritual necessities of
those who reside within the sphere of their ministrations ? and are they
to be at liberty to repulse any who desire to share in those ministrations?
Has not our blessed Saviour himself graciously declared, “ Him that
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out ?”—and shall it be said that on
account of some minute shade of difference on unimportant opinions,
the Saviour’s Minister shall be held justified in refusing to any. of his
people the holy rites of religion ? Is it because a fellow Christian may
not agree with us as to the exact distinction between a presbyter and
a bishop, that the Minister of the Gospel is to deny him those spiritual
consolations which our common humanity requires in its transit from
the cradle to the grave ? Sir, is it not strange, passing strange, that
those who attribute such efficacy to baptism as to hold that by the opus
operatum spiritual regeneration is conveyed to the soul by that sacra-
ment, and that the Ministers of their Church—and they alone—are the
authorised channels for the communication of this blessing ; I say, Sir,


is it not strange that these persons should themselves cast impediments
in the way of so important a ministerial duty ? In one word, Sir, is not
the spirit which gratuitously comes forward to restrain the exercise of
charitable and Christian offices, on account of mere differences of
opinion, at once narrow-minded, intolerant, and bigoted ?
And now, Sir, to consider this resolution as it affects members of
the Church of England. I will again read the definition of a Church
member, that its stringency may be discerned in all its length and
breadth:
“ (4.) Church Membership. —We acknowledge as Members of the
Church of England all persons who, having been duly baptized with
wat£r in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are conform-
able to the doctrine, government, rites and ceremonies contained in the
Book of Common Prayer; it being understood that they are entitled
to claim at the hands of its Ministers the rites and ceremonies of our
Church so long only as they shall continue conformable to the extent above
required.”
Had we not this in black and white, it would seem incredible that
such a spirit as is herein manifested could reign within the bosom of
our reformed Church ! What! Sir, —is the Clergyman, when called
upon to minister to a dying penitent, to begin by cross-questioning him
as to his “ conformity to the doctrines, government, rites and ceremo-
nies” of the Church?—The Conference tells us that those alone who
have thus conformed are entitled to claim religious services at the
hands of its Ministers. Then, Sir, if this regulation were enforced, a
person requiring spiritual consolation would be under the necessity of
furnishing proofs of ritual observances, which few even of the Minis-
ters themselves, I venture to say, could afford. Why, Sir, I will take
upon myself to say, without fear of contradiction, that there is scarce
one single layman in our Church who would not be unchurched by
these “decisions and opinions.”—Nay, Sir, but I may go farther, and
say, that there is perhaps not one Clergyman in the whole Diocese who
could show that he had complied with all the “ articles, liturgies,
formularies, rubrics, and canons; ” and, consequently, not one who, by
this definition of Church-membership, could maintain any claim to be
considered a member of the Church of England! For instance, Sir,
take the Prayer Book, the very first page of which prescribes that the
whole of the Morning and Evening Prayer should be read daily. Now,
my Reverend Friend Dr. Fry (the distinguished ornament of our
Colonial Church), only, I believe, fulfils half this direction; and there
are very many who neglect this altogether. Well, Sir, Igo further
still, and would very much question whether my lords the bishops
themselves would not be deprived of Church-membership by their own
definition!
“ They would make a solitude, and call it Peace !
In conclusion, Sir, I believe I speak the sense of the Laity in express-


ing the deepest regret that the Bishops should have framed and
promulgated such “decisions and opinions;” for if the Conference had
wished to furnish an excuse for intolerance, vindictiveness, or indolence
—if they had designed to insult our Protestant brethren —if they had
desired to bring odium upon the clergy, and fill every parish and
district with religious discord, they could not have taken a more
effectual means than by the adoption of these “ decisions and opinions !”
Sir, I beg to move the third resolution—“ That in the opinion of
this Meeting, the resolution of the Conference which takes upon itself
to dispense with the obligation upon the clergy to perform religious
services to persons who are not members of the Church of England is
irreconcileable with Christian charity.”
(The various points of Mr. Barnard’s speech were greeted with
uproarious tokens of approbation.)
T. DOBSON, Esq., M.A., St. John’s College, Cambridge, Mathe-
matical Master of the High School, rose and submitted the sixth
resolution.
The observations, he said, which I have to make on this resolution
I shall as much as possible subject to condensation, in order to save the
time of the meeting, although they may probably become a little stronger
by the process. In opposing teaching and proceedings of a Romanizing
tendency, I am not going to fall foul of the Pope and the avowed
and conscientious professors of the Roman Catholic persuasion. This
is a trick of the Puseyites, who have incited the people at home to do
so, in order to divert attention from their own pernicious practices and
doctrines. (Cheers). I think the Pope has really done a good work
by supplying a strong antidote to the poison administered to the
Church by the Oxford quacks. Neither do we quarrel with the
Puseyites merely because they hold opinions different from ours. We
accord freely to them the exercise of the same right of private judg-
ment as we claim for ourselves. But their offence consists in this—
that, while they are in heart Roman Catholics, they prefer to be
members of the Church of England, retain her livings, and, by their
insidious teaching, try gradually to undermine and supplant her good
Protestant principles. An open opponent we may respect; but to a
skulking enemy who sails under false colours and shows false lights,
we cry “no quarter.” I hope the next news from home will convince
us that Lord John Russell’s letter was not a mere flash in the pan, but
that it has been followed by some good heavy shot. (Cheers). I feel,
Sir, that I have a difficult duty to perform, and therefore I bespeak the
forbearance of the meeting. I have to show that good grounds existed
for the formation of the Association mentioned in the resolution ; and
it is not easy to do this without giving personal offence. We have to
deal with principles and not with men; but it is difficult to separate
them. It is true I might convey my meaning by vague and indistinct


allusions, but I have resolved to stand the consequences of plain
speaking. My daily avocations convince me that the most direct way
from one point to another is a straight line. I understand that the
Bishop in his Charge yesterday assailed our Association with a storm
of virtuous indignation. This is unaccountable. Are Protestant prin-
ciples unpalatable to a Bishop of the Church of England ? Are they
at a discount here ? Or are they unworthy of being maintained ?
(Cheers). Every man I meet and converse with seems to believe that
Puseyism, either latent or open, exists amongst us. But yet the
Bishop denies that any proceedings and teaching of a Romanizing
tendency are to be found amongst his Clergy, and by letter calls upon
the Association for proof. Now this denial amounts to nothing, unless
the Bishop and we are agreed upon what constitutes such proceedings
and teaching. Does he deny the existence of Puseyite principles and
practices amongst us P Does he repudiate Apostolical Succession,
that key-stone of the arch of Tractarianism P Does he acknowledge
the right of private judgment in the Clergy and Laity? Does he leave
Baptismal Regeneration an open question? Does he throw overboard
the Fathers and tradition, and take Holy Scripture as the sole rule of
faith and practice, in accordance with the 6th Article ? Lastly, does
he denounce Theophilus Anglicanus? No! Then this denial is a
gratuitous insult to our understanding and judgment. Now, what is
the cause of the unseemly squabbling and contradictory teaching in
our Churches ? Why are the sheep of the fold scattered ? Is it not
the Chief Pastor himself who has brought the plague among the flock?
(Cheers.) I will now, with your permission, read an extract or two
from the Bishop’s charge delivered to the clergy, in Hobart Town, at
the Primary Visitation in April, 1846. Ah! I was at Cambridge then,
and know 7 w r ell what the Puseyites were doing at home. The Bishop
says:—“ It has often happened, that the Colonial Clergy have been
slenderly experienced in the ways, and usages, and discipline of our
Mother Church. Wherever and whenever this has been the case, is
it the part of a Colonial Bishop to complain, if haply he should find,
upon his arrival, that all things are not quite as he would wish to have
them ? Is it his, to find hasty fault, if few amongst the Clergy have
kept even pace with the extraordinary energy that has latterly marked
the efibrts of the Church at home ? if few have gone hand in hand with
that revived attention to the too long dropped usages of a strictly Catholic
character, which has recently distinguished it ?” Here I would remind
you of the mummeries recently practised at St. Barnabas, Pimlico.
Again, speaking of his anxiety that the real discipline of the Church
should be gradually carried into practice here, the Bishop says:—“l
have used the word ‘ gradually,’ from the conviction that much mischief
may be done here, as has been the case in England, and that the cause
of ecclesiastical reform may be not merely retarded, but absolutely
brought into disrepute, by indiscreet or over-hasty zeal. I am per-
suaded that thus many angry feelings may be excited, wdiich a gentler


course would never have brought into play; nay, that the jealousy,
not of weak consciences only, but even of strong minds, may be aroused,
by endeavours on the part of the Clergy to make that reform the ill-
arranged work of weeks, which should be the growth of circumstances,
the result of patient, watchful, systematic teaching; in one word, the
work of years.” Now, calling to mind the great activity of the Trac-
tarians in England at that time, what could the assembled Clergy think
of these directions P and when we consider how much their licences
place them in the power of the Bishop, is it not wonderful that they
are not all Puseyites? Very soon after this, Puseyite books began to
be circulated in the Colony; the book I hold in my hand is inscribed
to a friend of mine, “with the Bishop of Tasmania’s kindest regards,
July, 1846,” or about two months after the delivery of the Charge.
(Loud cheers). Its title is Theophilus Anglicanus, or Instruction for
the Young Student concerning the Church, and the Anglican branch of
it; by C. Wordsworth, D.D., and late Head Master of Harrow School,
third edition, 1845. The three branches of the true Church, we shall
see, are the Anglican Church, and the Greek and Romish Churches !
This book is so full of rank Popery, that it ought to be publicly burnt
by the common hangman. Harrow School fell off so rapidly under
Wordsworth, the author of it, that he was speedily replaced by a better
man. Theophilus Anglicanus is one of the chief text-books of the
Puseyites, and has been very efficient in making converts to Rome.
Observe that the Puseyites abhor that name. They call themselves
Anglicans. The principles of the sect were first set forth in ninety
Oxford tracts, making five volumes—hence the name Tractarian.
These tracts were suppressed by authority on the publication of the
90th. These men are remarkable for shuffling and explaining away
any inconvenient charge. One of the great principles advocated in
the tracts is “ Reserve in the communication of religious truths.” This
renders direct proof difficult—they elude you, you don’t know where
to have them. (Renewed cheers). I shall now read a few extracts
from Theophilus Anglicanus. Bear in mind that what is here called
“the Church” is composed of three branches, —the Anglican, the
Romish, and the Greek Churches. “ Question. —How is the Church
thus Catholic or universal? Answer. —ln respect of time, as enduring
throughout all ages, from the beginning till the end of the world. In
respect of place, as not limited, like the Jewish Church, to one people,
but as comprehending those of all nations who are in the main points
of religion one and the same. In respect of Faith and Practice, as
teaching all truth; as requiring obedience alike from all; and as
administering, by God’s appointment, all his means of spiritual grace.
Q. —Are the members of any particular Church (for example, of the
Church of Rome) rightly called Catholics; and is the Church of Rome
rightly called the Catholic Church P A. —Being members of the
Church of Christ, the members of the Church of Rome are Catholics,
{is the Members of the Greek Church, or of the English Church, are


Catholics, and no more ; and not as opposed to either. The Church
of Rome is a part of the Catholic Church, as the Church of Greece
and the Church of England is ; but neither the Church of Rome, nor
the Church of England, nor the Greek Church, nor any other par-
ticular Church, is the Catholic or Universal Church, any more than a
branch is a tree, or a hand is the whole body.” Now, I ask, what is to
become of all Christians who do not belong to one of these three
Episcopal Churches ? Where are they to go? it's of no use mincing
the matter ! Again—“On salvation only in the Church. Q.— lf we
desire to be saved, is it necessary that we should be members of the
Church P A. —lt is ! Q. —But may there not be more than one
Church in which salvation is offered ? A. —No!” That clinches it!
Talk of Christian charity after this! Now for the right of private
judgment. “ Q. —But authorized expositors may err; am I then to
follow them in their error? A. —No. Q.— Am I then to make my
own mind the judge, whether they are in error; and if not, to what
tests of doctrine am Ito appeal ? A. —lt is not our own private judg-
ment, but first Holy Scripture as received, guarded, and interpreted by
the Catholic Church, from the beginning, ‘ according to the propor-
tion of faith; and next, the consent of the Church herself, speaking
in her Public Expositions, Creeds, Councils, Liturgies, Confessions,
and writings of her early Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, in the Rule
of Faith to which the teaching of individuals is to be referred.” No, I
say, Holy Scripture is the sole Rule of Faith, for I stand by the 6th
Article, “Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation,
so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not
to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of Faith,
or necessary to salvation,” Away then with the Fathers and traditions
too, until their authors can be shown to be infallible! (Continued
cheers). He then claims for the Priests of the Church of England,
(or, I would say, for her Ministers, for I am no believer of Apostolical
succession), the power of the keys, of binding and loosing, of admitting
into and excluding from the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, the “ Church
of England as a Church is as old as Christianity. She became Pro-
testant at the Reformation, in order that she might be more truly
Catholic; and if Rome will become truly Catholic, then the Church
of England will cease to be Protestant. The Church of England did
not separate herself from the Church of Rome. Q.—Was the Pro-
testant Church visible before the Reformation ? A.—Yes, the Church
of England has been always visible, not indeed as Protestant, but as a
branch of the Catholic Church.” Now, this is the hook which the
Bishop distributed, then, as a present to his friends! Couple these
facts and doctrines with the directions given in the Charge to the
Clergy, and we may easily and truly infer what were the Bishop’s
views and wishes at the time. Moreover, in a letter to the Association,
the Bishop asserts that “ his opinions and teaching have undergone no
change since that period.” This book stands at the head of the list of


works given by the Archdeacon to Candidates for Orders, to be pre-
pared by them for examination. It is a text-book put into the hand
of youth at the College, How then can the Bishop say that no
proceedings or teachings of a Romanizing tendency exist ? I can’t
believe the denial: it is an insult to my common sense, of which I
don’t profess to have a smaller share than others, for you may observe
that every one is well satisfied with the equal distribution of this
article! I shall now, Sir, say a few words respecting the independence
of our Clergy. A residence of four years in the largest Divinity
College of the University of Cambridge had led me to believe that
there was much truth in the assertion of the good Dean Collet, that
“ the gate of ordination w r as too wide but at the Antipodes I find
this is reversed—the gate of admission into the ministry of our Church
is much too narrow for any but pseudo-Protestants to enter thereat.
(Cheers.) For what are the obstacles that stand in the way of an
honest Protestant candidate for orders ? He must prepare with
Theophilus Anglicanus ; and I have reason to believe that no homoeo-
pathic doses of this drug will satisfy Archdeacon Marriott. He must
give up his private judgment, and believe by proxy, although he knows
that perdition is to be endured in person. (Cheers.) He must give a
satisfactory answer to the question,' “ Do you hold the Gorham heresy ?”
And when he has squeezed through Dean Collet’s gate in spite of
these obstacles, he still has to submit to take a licence liable to be
revoked whenever the Bishop is offended by him. This arbitrary
licence accounts for the fact, that at a recent meeting of the Chapter
summoned by the Archdeacon, some Clergymen were found prepared
to assure their Bishop that they regarded the Minutes of the Sydney
Synod as “God’s holy admonitions ! ”
The Rev. A. Davenport here said, “ I deny it.”
Well! my impression is, that these words were in the address sub-
mitted to the Clergy by the Archdeacon; but if not, the assertion merely
goes for what it’s worth.
The Rev. W. Bedford informed the speaker that the phrase used
was “ Godly admonitions.”
Oh! what is the difference between “ God’s holy admonitions” and
“ Godly admonitions?” (Cheers.) I repeat, shuffling is the mark of a
Puseyite! (Long continued cheering followed this remark.) Now,
Sir, when we see such cringing sycophancy as this, how can we
possibly respect Clergymen placed in so degraded a position ? (Cheers.)
I have never regarded with much favour what is called the Voluntary
System of supporting Ministers of religion—it smacks too much of
pure democracy for my taste : but it is infinitely preferable to the
unchecked despotism under which our Clergy perform their ministerial
functions. Our Association was told in yesterday’s Charge, “ not to
bear false witness against our neighbour.” As a set-off against this
admonition, I would remind the pretended Successor of the Apostles,


not to infringe the injunction given by Peter, in the first Epistle
General to the Elders of the Church, “ not to lord it over God’s
heritage.” With these remarks, Sir, I beg to move the resolution
which I have read, (Enthusiastic cheering followed Mr. Dobson’s
speech.)
Note C. —Page 4,
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS AT A MEETING OF THE
METROPOLITAN AND SUFFRAGAN BISHOPS OF
THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALASIA,
Held at Sydney , from October Isf to November ls£, a.d. 1850.
EEPORT.
The Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province of Australasia,
having, by the good Providence of God, been permitted to assemble
themselves together in the Metropolitan City of Sydney, on the first
day of October, in the year of our Lord 1850, and having consulted
together on such matters as concern the progress of true Religion, and
the welfare of the Church in the said Province and in the several
Dioceses thereof, did agree to the decisions and opinions contained in
the following Report.
ORDER OF SUBJECTS
I. Objects of the Conference.
11. Canons of A.D. 1603-4 .....
111. Future Synods and Conventions, Provincial and Diocesan
IV. Church Membership
V. Discipline. (1.) Bishops and Clergy. (2.) Laity
VI. Status of Clergy
VII. Liturgy
Decisions and Opinions concerning—
(l.) Division of Services
(2.) The Administration of Holy Communion
(3.) The Occasional Offices
(4.) Service for Saint’s Day falling on a Sunday..
(5.) Persons Prayed for
(6.) Persons Returning Thanks .
(7-) The Offertory
(8.) Sponsors


(9.) Marriage, (a.) Within prohibited degrees...
(h.) Of Persons not Members of
the Church.
(c.) Irregularly Solemnized
(d.) Caution to be used
(10.) Churching of Women
(11.) Claim to the Offices of the Church
VIII. Holy Baptism
IX. Education. (1.) Schools. (2.) University
X. Board of Missions
I. OBJECTS OF THE CONFERENCE.
We, the undersigned Metropolitan andMishops of the Province of
Australasia, in consequence of doubts existing how far we are inhibited
by the Queen’s Supremacy from exercising the powers of an Eccle-
siastical Synod, resolve not to exercise such powers on the present
occasion.
But we desire to consult together upon the various difficulties in
which we are at present placed by the doubtful application to the
Church in this Province of the Ecclesiastical Laws, which are now
in force in England; and to suggest such measures as may seem to be
most suitable for removing our present embarrassments; to consider
such questions as affect the progress of true Religion, and the preser-
vation of ecclesiastical order in the several Dioceses of this Province—
and finally, in reliance on Divine Providence, to adopt plans for the
propagation of the Gospel among the Heathen races of Australasia,
and the adjacent islands of the Western Pacific.
We request the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle to
act as our Secretary, and to embody our Resolutions in a Report, to be
transmitted to the Archbishops and Bishops of the United Church of
England and Ireland.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. T ASMANIA,
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
11. CANONS OF A.D. 1603-4.
We are of opinion that the Constitutions and Canons agreed upon
with the King's Majesty’s licence, in the Synod begun at London A.D.
1603, and published, for the due observation of them, by His Majesty’s


authority, under the Great Seal of England, form part of the estab-
lished constitution of our Church, and are generally binding upon
ourselves, and the Clergy of our respective Dioceses.
Where they cannot be literally complied with, in consequence of the
altered state of circumstances since the enactment of the Canons, we
are of opinion that they must be, as far as possible, complied with in
substance.
We concur also in thinking that a revisal and fresh adaptation of the
Canons, to suit the present condition of the Church, is much to be
desired, so soon as it can be lawfully undertaken by persons possessing
due authority in that behalf.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
111. FUTURE SYNODS AND CONVENTIONS, PROVINCIAL
AND DIOCESAN.
We are of opinion that there are many questions of great importance
to the well-being of the Church in our Province, which cannot be
settled without duly constituted Provincial and Diocesan Synods.
Without defining the exact meaning of the word Synod as used in
the Church of England, whenever the words “ Provincial Synod” or
“ Diocesan Synod” shall be used in the following resolutions, we
understand a body composed of one or more Bishops, with represen-
tatives chosen from among the Clergy, meeting at such times, and in
such manner, as may not be inconsistent with any law of Church or
State.
We understand the functions of Provincial and Diocesan Synods to be
these:—
1. To consult and agree upon rules of practice and ecclesiastical
order, within the limits of the Province or Diocese.
2. To conduct the processes necessary for carrying such rules into
effect. But not to alter the Thirty-nine Articles, the Book of Common
Prayer, or the authorized version of the Holy Scriptures. t
(2.) Sub-division of Dioceses , and Consecration of Bishops.
1. We are of opinion that it appertains to a Provincial Synod, with
the concurrence of the Diocesan Synod, from time to time, to decide
upon plans for such sub-division of Dioceses, as may be necessary for
the more efficient discharge of the Episcopal duties, and to recommend


those plans for adoption, in accordance with the laws which shall be
in force at the time.
2. We submit that no sub-division of any Colonial Diocese should
be determined on in England, without previous communication with
the Bishop of that Diocese, in order that the proposed measures may
be laid before the Diocesan and Provincial Synods, before they be
finally adopted.
3. We would further express our opinion, that if the Provincial
Synod should recommend a Colonial Clergyman for appointment to fill
a new or vacant See, the recommendation should be favourably con-
sidered by the authorities in England, and that the person designated
to such See should, in conformity with ancient practice, be consecrated
by the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province, unless grave incon-
venience be likely to ensue.
(3.) Provincial and Diocesan Conventions.
1. We are of opinion that the Laity, acting by their representatives
duly elected, should meet in Diocesan and Provincial Conventions,
simultaneously with the Diocesan and Provincial Synods, that the
Clergy and Laity may severally consult and decide upon all questions
affecting the temporalities of the Church, and that no act of either order
relating thereto should be valid without the consent of the other.
2. That any change of constitution, affecting the whole body of the
Church, should be first proposed and approved in the Provincial Synod,
but should not be valid without the consent of the Provincial Con-
vention.
W. G. Sydney,
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
IV. CHURCH MEMBERSHIP.
We acknowledge as Members of the Church of England all persons
who, having been duly baptized with water, in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are conformable to the Doctrine, Government,
Rites, and Ceremonies contained in the Book of Common Prayer ; it
being understood, that they are entitled to claim at the hands of its
Ministers the rites and ceremonies of our Church, so long only as they
shall continue conformable to the extent above required.
By a Member of the Church of England in full communion, we
understand every one who, being conformable as aforesaid, is a


partaker of the Holy Communion, as required by the rules of the
Church.
While we would leave the Synods and Conventions which may here-
after be appointed, to fix the qualification of electors, we would express
our decided conviction, that all persons elected to serve as members of
Diocesan and Provincial Conventions should be Members of the Church
in full communion.
W. G. Sydney,
G. A, New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
V. DISCIPLINE.
(I.) Bishops and Clergy .
In consequence of statements which have been made in various
places, of the arbitrary power possessed by Bishops to suspend or
revoke, at their own discretion, the licences of Clergymen, we disclaim
all wish to exercise any such power, and we are of opinion, that in all
cases of doctrinal error, or other Ecclesiastical offences, the Bishops
of the Province should be the Court for the trial of a Bishop, and that
the Diocesan Synod should be the Court for the trial of a Presbyter
or Deacon, and that the Metropolitan and the Bishop of the Diocese
respectively should be ex-officio Presidents of such Courts, either in
person, or by their Commissaries.
Further, it would appear to be necessary, that any Bishop or other
Clergyman suspended or deposed by due sentence of the Court should
be legally incapable of continuing to hold possession of any Church,
Chapel, Stipend, House, Glebe, or other temporalities, which he may
have held by virtue of his office.
We are also of opinion, that the form of procedure in all cases of
Appeal requires to be defined.
(2.) Laity.
Bearing in mind the wish expressed in the Commination Service,
that the Godly discipline of the Primitive Church may be restored, we
are of opinion,
1. That it is the duty of every Church to seek, by spiritual admo-
nitions, to reclaim those of its members who are living in notorious sin.
We therefore hold it to be the duty of every Clergyman having cure
of souls, privately to admonish all evil livers among those committed
to his charge, “ as need shall require, and occasion shall be given/


We would also remind the lay members of the Church, that the Clergy
are required by the Rubric to repel from the Holy Communion all
persons who are living in sin, so open and notorious, as that the con-
gregation is thereby offended, and who, after due admonition, shall
continue impenitent, and without amendment of life.
Provided always, that every Minister, so repelling any, shall give an
account of the same to the Bishop of the Diocese, within fourteen days
after, at the farthest. And we are of opinion, that it is the duty of the
Bishop earnestly to admonish every person so repelled to qualify
himself by repentance for re-admission to Holy Communion.
Until the establishment of a form of process by a Provincial Synod,
with the concurrence of a Provisional Convention, we are of opinion,
that in cases where all spiritual admonitions have failed to reclaim
members of the Church who are living in notorious sin, it may become
the duty of the Bishop, with the aid and concurrence of his Presbyters,
to* pronounce such persons excommunicate, so far as to release any
Clergyman from the obligation to use the burial service, if they should
die without sufficient proof of repentance.
But remembering the solemn charge which we have received at our
consecration, to “ bind up the broken, to bring again the outcasts, to
seek the lost, to be so merciful as not to be too remiss, and so to
minister discipline that we forget not mercy,” we are of opinion, that
it is our duty, as in every case, so especially in those which have been
here noticed, to use faithful and affectionate admonition, before we
proceed to any strict exercise of the discipline of the Church.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
VI. STATUS OF CLERGY.
L We desire to express our opinion, that no Clergyman who shall
have been duly appointed and licensed to any Church, or permanent
cure of souls, should be removable therefrom, except by sentence pro-
nounced, after judicial enquiry, before the Diocesan Synod.
2. lhat this rule should not apply to those Clerg3 7 men who have
been appointed and licensed by the Bishop to any charge expressly
understood to be of a temporary nature.
3. At the same time we consider it to be most desirable, in the
present state of the Church of England in our Dioceses, that candidates
for Holy Orders should devote themselves to the service of the Church,
in that willing spirit, which would induce them to place themselves at


the disposal of their Bishop for some definite term of years, and leave
to him the responsibility of appointing and changing their station
during such period.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand,
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
VII. LITURGY.
(1.) Division of Services.
We are of opinion, that the Bishop of each Diocese, as Ordinary, has
a discretion to authorize Clergymen, in cases of necessity, to divide the
Morning Service, by using either the Morning Prayer, the Litany, or
the Communion Service separately; but that each of the services so
used should be read entire.
(2.) The Administration of Holy Communion.
In parishes where the number of communicants is very great, the
Communion Service may be used separately, and the Lord’s Supper
administered at an early hour, besides the usual administration at the
Morning Service.
In places where there is no Morning Service, the administration
of the Holy Communion may be in the afternoon, if necessity so
require.
When the Holy Communion cannot be administered in a Church,
or other building duly licensed for the celebration of Divine Service,
it may be administered in such places as necessity shall require.
(3.) Occasional Services.
We are of opinion, that no Clergyman has authority, at his own
discretion, to abridge or alter any of the occasional services of the
Church.
(4.) Rules for Service on Saints' days falling on Sundays, fyc.
Should a Saint’s Day fall on Ash Wednesday, Goqd Fnday, e
Easter Eve, or on Easter Sunday, Ascension Day,
Trinity Sunday, or on Monday or Tuesday in EastoFepd V hitsu
weeks, the Lessons, Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for those days are f
be used.
When a Saint’s day shall full on any other Sunday, the Lessons


of the Saint’s Day (unless they be from the Apocrypha) are to be used,
and the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the Saint’s Day, with the
Collect for the Sunday.
5.) Of Persons for whom the Prayers of the Congregation are desired.
It is convenient, that the names of the persons, for whom the prayers
of the congregation are desired, should be mentioned either before the
Litany, or before the Prayer for all conditions of men, as the case
may be.
The words, “ especially those for whom our prayers are desired,’’
may be inserted in the Litany in their appropriate place.
(6.) Thanksgiving Service.
It is convenient, that the names of the persons, who desire to return
thanks, should be mentioned before the General Thanksgiving.
The words, “ particularly to those who desire now to offer up their
praises and thanksgivings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them,”
may be used for persons who have not been specially prayed for.
(7-) Offertory.
We are of opinion, that no Clergyman can justly be suspected of
holding opinions at variance with the sound teaching of the Church,
in consequence of his complying with the Rubric, which directs, “ that
upon the Sundays and other Holy Days (if there be no Communion)
shall be said all that is appointed at the Communion, until the end of
the General Prayer, [for the whole state of Christ’s Church Militant
here on earth], together with one or more of the Collects, concluding
with the blessing.”
(8.) Sponsors.
Being aware that the Clergy have felt the great importance of having
duly qualified Sponsors at Holy Baptism, we recommend that the most
earnest endeavours' be used by them to convey correct impressions
upon that subject to their several flocks, in the hope that suitable
persons may be in all cases provided to discharge the duties of that
office.
(9.) Marriage.
(a.) Within prohibited Degrees ,
as it is directed by the 99th Canon, that “no person shall
iriarry within the degrees prohibited by the laws of God, and expressed
;n a Table sbt forth by authority, in the year of our Lord God, 1563
we are of opinion, that any Clergyman of the province who shall
solemnize matrimony between persons so related will be acting in
violation of the law of the Church.


Referring also to Canons 26 and 109, and to the Rubrics prefixed to
the Communion Service, we are further of opinion, that persons, so
marrying within the prohibited degrees, are liable to be repelled from
the Holy Communion, until they have repented and be reformed.
(h.) Of Persons neither of whom belongs to the Church.
We are of opinion, that Ministers of the Church of England ought
not to solemnize marriage between persons, neither of whom is of our
own communion, except in cases where the marriage cannot, without
extreme difficulty, be solemnized in any other way.
(c.) Irregularly Solemnized.
While we recognize the validity of all marriages contracted in con-
formity with the laws of the State, provided that they be not contrary
to the laws of the Church, we would earnestly impress upon all
members of the Church of England the duty of having their marriages
solemnized according to the rites of the Church, and in no other way.
(d.) Caution to he used.
I. We desire to draw the attention of the Clergy to the necessity of
exercising due caution, before they proceed to solemnize marriage.
2. We therefore recommend that the banns be thrice published,
except in case of marriage by licence, once at least in the licensed
place of worship, which is nearest the residence of the parties desiring
to be married.
3. And that the Registers of Marriage, Baptism, and Burial be
accurately kept, and copies sent at the times required by law.
(10.) Churching of Women.
We are of opinion, from the Rubric at the end of the service for the
Churching of Women, that that service is not intended to be used for
persons who are living in such a state, as would justify the Minister in
repelling them from the Holy Communion.
(11.) Ministering to Dissenters.
We are of opinion, that the general principle of Colonial Legislation,
by which the equality of all religious denominations is recognized,
releases the Clergy of the Church of England in these Colonies from
the obligation to perform religious services for persons who are not
members of our own Church.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.


VIII. HOLY BAPTISM.
As Bishops engaged in the charge of extensive Dioceses, and de-
barred from frequent opportunities of conference, we do not presume
to think that we can inform or guide the judgment of the Church
at large; but at a time when the minds of pious and thoughtful men
are in perplexity, we cannot remain altogether silent, nor refrain
from stating what we believe to be the just interpretation of the
Creed, Articles, and Liturgy of the Church of England, respecting
the regeneration of Infants in Holy Baptism.
We believe regeneration to be the work of God in the Sacrament
of Baptism, by which infants baptized with water, in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, die unto sin and rise again unto
righteousness, and are made members of Christ, children of God,
and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
We believe this regeneration to be the particular grace prayed for,
and expected, and thankfully acknowledged to have been received,
in the baptismal services.
We believe that it is the doctrine of our Church, that all infants
do, by baptism, receive this grace of regeneration. But, remembering
the words of our Lord instituting the Holy Sacrament of Baptism,
(Matt, xxviii. 19, 20), which enjoin, that they who are baptized are to
be made disciples and to be taught, we are of opinion, that whensoever
an infant is baptized, an assurance ought to be given, at the same
time, on its behalf, (by some one or more baptized persons), that it will
be brought up in the faith of Christ.
We do not recognize in the infant itself any unfitness which
disqualifies it from receiving, in baptism, this grace of regeneration,
for our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny His grace and mercy unto
such infants, but most lovingly doth call them unto Him.
We do not believe that unworthiness in Ministers, Parents, or
Sponsors, hinders this effect of the love of Christ.
We believe that a wilful neglect of the means of grace does not
prove that the gift of regeneration was never received ; but in those
who so fall away after baptism, we believe that the consequence of
their having been regenerated is to aggravate their guilt.
Finally, we would express, first, our cordial and entire agree-
ment with the Articles and Formularies of our Church, in their
plain and full meaning, and in their literal and grammatical sense.
Secondly, our willing disposition to accept and use them all in the
manner which is appointed; and, with especial reference to our
present subject, to carry on the work of Christian education, in the
firm belief, that infants do receive in baptism the grace of regene-
ration. Thirdly, above all, we would express our unfeigned


thankfulness to Almighty God
for the gift and preservation of
these inestimable blessings.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand.
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
W. Newcastle.
HOLY BAPTISM.
Upon this subject the Bishop of Melbourne preferred to state
his views as follows;
The doctrine of our Church concerning the nature and efficacy
of Holy Baptism may, in my opinion, be stated in the eight
following propositions.
1. Regeneration is that operation of the Spirit of God upon the
heart, which produces a death unto sin, and a new birth unto
righteousness. By regeneration we are made members of Christ,
children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
2. Baptism is the sacrament of regeneration, which is the par-
ticular grace prayed for, expected, and thankfully acknowledged to
have been received in the baptismal service.
3. The work of regeneration is wrought in all, whether they be
adults or infants, who receive baptism rightly, (Art. xxvii.), but in
none others. (Art. xxv.)
4. The Church in her office for the baptism of infants, and in
that for the baptism of adults, uses the language of faith and hope,
and is not to be understood as declaring positively a fact which
it cannot certainly know, viz., that every baptized infant, or every
baptized adult, is regenerate.
5. The statement put into the mouth of a Catechumen, that he
was in baptism made a member of Christ, &c., is to be understood
in the same qualified application as the declaration which almost
immediately follows, that by God’s help he will do as his god-
fathers and godmothers had promised for him, and that he heartily
thanks his Heavenly Father that He hath called him, &c.
6. Repentance and faith are required of those who come to be
baptized, but the. Church is silent as to the fitness, or unfitness, of
an infant, who is incapable of repentance and faith, for receiving
regeneration in baptism.
7. The unworthiness of a Minister does not take away the effect
of baptism, either in the case of adults or infants. (Art. xxvi.)
8. Parents are nowhere mentioned in the Articles, or in the
baptismal service ; but infants are baptized, because they promise
repentance and faith by their sureties. These sureties or sponsors


are to be duly qualified persons, and no one is to be admitted god-
father or godmother before the said person so undertaking has
received the Holy Communion. (Canon xxix.) The Church, how-
ever, has not positively affirmed that the unworthiness of sponsors
disqualifies an infant for receiving the grace of baptism.
The truth of the following four additional propositions may also,
I think, be gathered from the Scriptures, and is perfectly consistent
with the general tenor of the Articles and formularies of our
Church, viz. :
9. Sponsors, who themselves repent and believe, may and ought
to expect most confidently the grace of regeneration for the children
whom they bring to be baptized.
10. While the Church may, and ought to, use the language of
faith and hope respecting all infants brought to be baptized,
impenitent and unbelieving sponsors are not entitled to expect any
blessing from an ordinance which they only profane.
11. Children who have been baptized are to be taught to regard
God as their Father, and to love and trust in Him as having
redeemed them by His Son, and sanctified them by His Spirit—to
pray that, being regenerate, and made the children of God, by
adoption and grace, they may daily be renewed by the Holy Ghost,
(Collect for Christmas Day), to consider the guilt of any sins
which they may commit against God, as aggravated by their having
been baptized, and brought up in the faith of the Gospel.
12. Our own personal repentance and faith are the only sure
evidence of our being spiritually the children of God.
Having thus stated my own views of the doctrine of our Church
concerning Holy Baptism, I would unite with my Right Reverend
Brethren in expressing,
I. My cordial and entire agreement with all the Articles and Formu-
laries of our Church in their plain and full meaning, and in their literal
and grammatical sense.
2. My whiling disposition to accept and use them in the manner
which is appointed; and (with especial reference to our present
subject) to carry on the work of Christian education, in the firm belief,
that infants do receive in baptism the grace of regeneration.
3. Above all, my unfeigned thankfulness to Almighty God for the
gift and preservation of these inestimable blessings.
C. MELBOURNE.
IX. EDUCATION.
(!•) Schools.
We cannot incur the responsibility of seeming to countenance any
system of erroneous, defective, or indefinite religious instruction, by


incorporating ourselves with the Boards, either general or local, which
have the regulation and superintendence of schools so conducted.
But wherever a Church of England School cannot be established,
the Clergy, after communication with the Bishop, should consider it
their duty to remedy, as far as possible, the evils or defects of any schools,
to which Church children may be sent by their parents.
(2.) University.
We are of opinion, that the establishment of the University of Sydney
may promote the growth of sound learning, and may in many ways
assist the Collegiate Institutions of the Church of England in our
respective Dioceses.
But while we are not unwilling that the Students in our Diocesan
Colleges and Schools should compete with all other classes of Students
in such public University examinations, on general literature and
science, as may be established by a Senate, appointed under ordinance
of the Colonial Legislature, we should decidedly object to any Univer-
sity system, which might have the effect of withdrawing from our
own Collegiate rule the Students educated in our separate Diocesan
Institutions.
W. G. Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand,
F. R. Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. .Newcastle.
X. AUSTRALASIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
The objects of the Australasian Board of Missions are twofold—
Domestic and Foreign.
1. Domestic. —The conversion and civilization of the Australian
Blacks.
2. Foreign —The conversion and civilization of the Heathen races
in all the Islands of the Western Pacific.
The difficulties to be expected in this work, perhaps to a greater
extent than in other Missions, are —
1. The low state of barbarism in which these races now are.
2. In the Australian blacks, the unsettled habits of the race.
3. The multiplicity of languages and dialects throughout the whole
field of operations.
4. The unhealthiness of many of the Australasian Islands, in certain
seasons of the year, especially from January to April.
These peculiar difficulties must be met by a plan of Missionary action,
deviating in many respects from the practice of other Missions.


1. The low slate of barbarism, in which these races now are, seems
to require, that a select number should be brought under the most
careful training, at a distance from their own tribes.
2. The unsettled habits of the Australian blacks require the same
corrective, and further suggest the necessity of providing religious
instruction for them, rather by means of visiting Missionaries, than by
fixed Mission stations.
3. The multiplicity of languages makes it necessary to conduct in-
struction in some one language common to all, which must be English.
4. The unhealthiness of many of the islands makes it advisable that
Missionary action should be carried on rather by long visits of the
English Misionaries during the healthy season, than by the occupation
of permanent Mission stations.
W. G, Sydney.
G. A. New Zealand,
F. R, Tasmania.
Augustus Adelaide.
C. Melbourne.
W. Newcastle.
Two days after the delivery of the Charge in Launceston, the fol-
lowing memorial was placed in my hands. The whole correspondence
has appeared in the newspapers in the shape of an advertisement,
inserted by the subscribers.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, FRANCIS
RUSSELL, D.D., LORD BISHOP OF TASMANIA.
My Lord, —
We, the undersigned, Presbyters of the United Church of England
and Ireland, having cure of souls in the northern division of the
Diocese of Tasmania, beg leave respectfully to approach your Lordship
with an expression of our carefully-considered opinions, on some
matters of great importance to the welfare and advancement of our
Church in this Diocese, referred to, and brought before us in your
Lordship’s Charge delivered to us yesterday, in connection with the
minutes of the Metropolitan and Bishops of the Australian Dioceses.
1. We fully agree with the spirit of the minutes, indicating the
necessity for an ecclesiastical constitution* suited to our circumstances
in these Colonies.
* By the term “constitution,” we mean a body of rules and regulations agreed to, and
acknowledged hy the Bishops, Clergy, and by their representatives, the Laity, for the practical
working of our Church, assigning to each order and class concerned in their operations, its
place, rights, and privileges,


2. We are of opinion, that there exists no reasonable cause to prevent
the Bishop, Clergy, and representatives of the Laity, from assembling
together to consult and deliberate upon a future constitution for our
Church in this Colony.
3. We are of opinion, that it would tend greatly to promote the peace
and well-being of the Diocese, if your Lordship would take early steps
for the calling of an assembly of the Clergy and representatives of the
Laity, towards the carrying out of this object.
4. We are of opinion, that the circumstances of this Colony, with the
deficiency of clerical assistance, warrant your Lordship in exercising
the “ discretion ” which the assembled Bishops, according to the
minutes, are of opinion they possess, as Ordinaries, “ to authorize a
“ Clergyman, in cases of necessity, to divide the Morning Service, by
“ using either the Morning Prayer, the Litany, or the Communion
“ Service separately : but that each of the Services so used should be
“ read entire,” with the assent of the churchwardens and three-fourths
of the congregation.
5. We feel it due to ourselves and our people, respectfully to express
our decided opinion, that an immediate return to the ordinary form of
licence existing at the commencement of your Lordship’s episcopate
would very much tend to the peace, good order, and efficiency of our
Church in this Colony.
6. In reference to the minutes on the status of the Clergy, we feel,
that, however desirable and becoming it may be, “ that candidates for
“ holy orders should devote themselves to the service of the Church,
“ in that willing spirit which would induce them to place themselves
“ at the disposal of their Bishop for some definite term of years,”—yet
that this should refer only to those who offer and devote themselves
to direct missionary labours ; and, whilst we disclaim all desire to dictate
to your Lordship the particular qualifications requisite for admission
into priest’s orders, we beg respectfully to express it as our opinion,
that, unless under some proved disqualification, the period of the
diaconate should not be extended beyond the term of one year usual
in England,—the candidate’s fitness for the office of the ministry having
been well tested previous to his admission to deacon’s orders, —the cir-
cumstances of this country precluding the opportunity of much study,
after entering upon clerical duties.
7. We could have wished the subject of Holy Baptism had not been
introduced into the minutes, and we hope that it may not be made in
this Diocese* a test for admission to holy orders; but that the usual
declaration of honest adhesion to the Articles and Liturgy of our
Church may be deemed sufficient.
8. With respect to the minute headed “ Ministering to Dissenters, ’
we understand it as having been framed only with a view to liberate
the Clergy from the fear of legal penalties, in cases, where they should
*“ I mean, in this or any other neighbouring Diocese.” —A. C. Thomson.


conscientiously feel itnecessary to refuse “ to perform religious services
for persons who are not of our “ Church.” And we are of opinion, that
the ordinances of religion should be readily administered to all such as
are desirous of them, and would he counted worthy recipients, if of our
own communion.
9. We deprecate any thing like a separation from the Mother Church
at home, and are of opinion that an appeal should lie direct to the highest
ecclesiastical authority in England, in all cases of doubt and litigation.
Praying for the Divine blessing upon the exercise of your Lordship’s
episcopal functions, and for the spread of true religion throughout the
Diocese, we remain, your Lordship’s most obedient servants,
W. H. Browne, LL.D., Senior Chaplain, Launceston.
Alfred Stackhouse, M.A., Chaplain, Perth.
Wm. Richardson, A. 8., Chaplain, Avoca.
Geo. Wilkinson, A. 8., Chaplain, Evandale.
Thos. N. Grigg, A. 8., Chaplain, Circular Head.
A. C. Thomson, Chaplain, Windermere, (with the exception
of the word “ direct” in par. 9.)
John Bishton, M.A., Chaplain, Westbury.
Launceston, 30th May , 1851.
Bishopstotve, 24th June, 1851.
Reverend and Dear Brethren, —
The importance of the subjects which you have brought under my
notice, in your memorial or address of the 30th ultimo, seems to require,
at my hands, something far beyond a tnere cursory notice, in reply.
I am desirous to treat this memorial with the same respect in which
I believe it to have been offered; strange as some of the proposals
appear to me to be.
If my answer has been deferred thus long, your own knowledge of my
many duties will induce you to impute the delay to the inability of one,
somewhat overtasked at times, rather than to any want of consideration
for the open avowal of your “ carefully-considered opinions.”
The first three paragraphs of this document may be fairly treated of
together, relating, as they do, substantially, to the same subject, viz.,
the convening an assembly of the Bishop, Clergy, and representative s
of the Laity, for the purpose of deliberating upon “ a future consti-
tution for our Church in this Colony.” You express your opinion, that
there is no reasonable cause to prevent such an assembly, and that it
would tend greatly to promote the peace and well-being of the Diocese,
if I would take early steps to convene it.
Upon the expediency, or non-expediency of this proposal, I desire,
at present, to oiler no opinion. As Bishop of the Diocese, I speak, now i
in the character of the exponent of the Church’s recorded decision upon
the subject.


There are points, upon which every member of any society whatever
has resigned the exercise of his right of private judgment, namely, the
rules of that society to which he belongs. If this holds good with
regard to any secular association, how much more stringently must it
affect the ministering priests of God’s most holy Church.
We members of the Church of England possess a rule, with regard
to this very point, by which, as it seems to me, we are bound, until
expressly released by the same authority which put it forth.
In the Royal declaration prefixed to the Thirty-nine Articles, it is stated
on behalf of the Sovereign, “ that We are the supreme governor of the
Church of England, and that if any difference arise about the external
policy, concerning the injunctions, canons, and other constitutions
whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy in their Convocation is to
order and settle them; having first obtained leave under Our broad
seal so to do, and We approving their said ordinances and constitutions:
providing that none be made contrary to the laws and customs of the
land.” It is further declared, “ that out of Our princely care that the
Churchmen may do the work which is proper unto them, the Bishops
and Clergy, from time to time, in Convocation, upon their humble
desire, shall have licence under Our broad seal to deliberate of, and to
do all such things, as being made plain by them, and assented unto by
Us, shall concern the settled continuance of the doctrine and discipline
of the Church of England now established; from which We will not
endure any varying or departing in the least degree.”
These questions, as you well know, have been mooted in the
“ Sydney minutes,” and referred for the consideration of the Arch-
bishops and Bishops of the United Kingdom. We shall manifestly be
more in the path of duty, by waiting quietly for their opinion, than by
taking any premature step, in a matter of such importance to the
welfare of our Church.
In making the proposal, that the Bishop, as ordinary, should “ au-
thorize Clergymen, in cases of necessity, to divide the Morning Service,
by using either the Morning Prayer, the Litany, or Communion Service
separately,” “ with the assent of the churchwardens and three-fourths
of the congregation,”—you appear to have forgotten the express injunc-
tion contained in the preface to the Book of Common Prayer ; —“ for
the resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand,
do, and execute the things contained in this book; the parties that so
doubt, or diversely take anything, shall alway resort to the Bishop of
the Diocese, who, by his discretion, shall take order for the quieting
and appeasing of the same ; so that the same order be not contrary to
anything contained in this book. And if the Bishop of the Diocese
be in doubt, then he may send for the resolution thereof,” —not to the
churchwardens and three-fourths of the congregation,—but “ to the
Archbishop.”
You can scarcely seriously expect me to be a consenting party to a
departure from so wholesome a provision.
Pardon me, in further expressing my belief, that, even were not this


proposal in direct opposition to the recognized rule of the Church, few
schemes would he more calculated to subvert that uniformity in our
public worship, which is, or ought to be, one great end of every eccle-
siastic to secure.
To say nothing of the singular vagueness of the term “ three-fourths
of the congregation,” it being quite undefined, whether by that you
mean three-fourths of the communicants, —or of the pew-renters,—or
of the congregation at large, including women and children, —permit
me to point out to you, that the practical effect of your proposal would
be, to poll your congregations, from time to time, as to how much, or
how little, of the Liturgy, they would be content to receive. I have
used the expression “ from time to time,” because, in consequence of
the necessarily shifting character of many congregations in the Colony,
what three-fourths might regard as advisable at the present moment,
three-fourths might desire to have altered, six months, or a year hence.
You further express your “ decided opinion, that an immediate
return to the ordinary form of licence, existing at the commencement
of” my “ episcopate, would very much tend to the peace, good order,
and efficiency of our Church in this Colony.” lam really very r desir-
ous to satisfy the Clergy in any reasonable request, but I cannot
forbear from pointing out to you, that, though much condemnatory
declamation has been expended upon the form of licence in use in the
Indian Dioceses, (where the chaplains are, substantially, upon the
same footing with yourselves), and which licence has been, for the
last three years, adopted here, —no argument has been brought forward
to show, that its provisions are really contrary to the legal powers vested
in a Bishop: neither has any proof been adduced, that it has, in the
very slightest degree, interfered with the comforts or efficiency of a
single Clergyman in the Diocese.
Much of what has been said against this form has been manifestly
founded upon the hypothesis, that the Bishop desires to be an autocrat,
who holds his authority but to oppress, and hurt, at his pleasure, or
caprice.
It seems to have been forgotten, that no form, hovrever stringent,
can add one jot to a Bishop’s legal powers ; none, however vague, can
detract from them. They rest upon a higher authority than the mere
wording of a licence.
Two out of the seven, whose signatures are affixed to this address,
have, I presume, as chaplains in India, held this very licence; lam
not aware, 1 that they felt themselves called upon to express their “ de-
cided opinion” to their Diocesan, that it should be forthwith exchanged
for another. A third has officiated in the Diocese of Norwich. His
licence contained the words, “to continue only during our pleasure,
and revocable, summarily, without process.” Ido not suppose that he
felt his conscience thereby so sorely aggrieved, or his efficiency so
compromised, as to feel himself constrained to address a remonstrance
to his Bishop on its wording.
I am given to understand, that two specific objections have been


raised to a form of licence, which has been, without complaint, for so
many years, issued in the Diocese of Calcutta; of which, this Colony,
at its institution, was an integral part. The first is, that it assumes the
Bishop’s power to authorize the Archdeacon and other ministers, to
read and take part in Divine Services, and to preach in the several
Churches and Chapels, “ upon all proper occasions.”
To any one familiar with the usages of our Church, I should have
thought, that this clause carried its own meaning with it. But lam
mistaken; and find it needful to endeavour to set at rest the imagi-
native fears of those, who, whatever may he their personal worth and
piety, are manifestly but slenderly informed as to those usages. It never,
for one moment, crossed my mind, that the most lively fancy could affix
such an interpretation to this clause, as to suppose, that the Bishop
reserved to himself, thereby, the right of, arbitrarily, at any time, or at
any occasion, with reason, or without reason, to eject a chaplain from
his pulpit, and to substitute preachers of his own selection and appoint-
ment. The words are, “ upon all proper occasionsupon such occa-
sions, that is, as those, whereon custom and privilege have united in
authorizing the Bishop to appoint the reader or preacher for the day—or
to instruct his own chaplains to take their usual part in Divine service:—
such, for example, as consecrations of churches and chapels, ordinations,
confirmations, and the like, —when held elsewhere than in the cathe-
dral. If the assertion of this every-day authority exists in the wording
of the licence, there can surely be no very great grievance on the part
of the Clergy, to whom it is issued. And it is scarcely fair for parties
to conjure up, I know not what fears of intended oppression on the
Bishop’s part, and then to argue upon them, as though they were well
proven facts.
The second objection is, that the Bishop’s power of revocation is
asserted in the licence. Every one, but moderately versed in eccle-
siastical law, will tell you, that it is a power legally vested in the
Bishop, “ whenever he shall see just cause for the same.”
You are aware, that the Australasian Bishops have, virtually, defined
the term “just cause,” by disclaiming all desire to revoke a licence,
“ summarily and without process.” They propose, substantially, that,
in all cases, due examination should be entered into, and that the
revocation of the licence should depend upon the result of such exa-
mination. Until we receive permission to conduct this process before
a Diocesan Synod, our discipline, in this respect, must, of necessity, be
somewhat imperfect.
I may, however, take this opportunity of laying before you the
existing state of the law.
The published opinion of the Crown lawyers in England, with
reference to this diocese, is—“ That no formal trial is necessary; that
the Bishop, however, should not act but upon what he deems sufficient
cause, or without giving the party accused an opportunity of answering
the charge against him ;.... that he must proceed judicially, with the


assistance of such officers as are created by the Letters Patent, and
decide according to the best of his judgment. There must he a
distinct charge ; the accused must have due notice; and a fair oppor-
tunity of answering and defending himself; and of examining and
cross-examining the witnesses against him.”
In my primary Charge, I endeavoured to show you how imperfect,
and even unsatisfactory, any examination must he, from the fact, that
all evidence is purely voluntary, and none taken upon oath. Never-
theless, upon the spirit of this opinion, and as far as is practicable, upon
its letter, I not only desire to act, but, in a recent case, have acted.
In this instance, certain grave offences, alleged to have been com-
mitted by a chaplain, were brought under my notice by the local
Government, accompanied by the desire of the Lieutenant-Governor
that they should be incpiired into.
Although the 3rd and 4th Yict., chapter 8, commonly called the
“ Church Discipline Act,” does not extend to the Colony, I judged it
better, in conformity to legal advice received in England, to act, as
nearly as was possible, upon its provisions.
A commission of inquiry was, therefore, issued to the Archdeacon,
and the two nearest Clergymen, that they might ascertain the real
facts of the case. The number was limited to three, instead of five,
as in England, from no preference on my part for a smaller body, but
from a sense of the obvious difficulty of bringing together to one spot,
for an indefinite term, five chaplains, residing, as is generally the case
in this Colony, at some distance from each other. I was desirous, also,
to avoid the obvious evil of leaving five parishes, at once, without any
responsible person to take charge of the ordinary, and occasional
weekly, duties.
Every facility was afforded to the accused; he had the usual notice;
all documents, connected with the case, were laid before him; legal
advice was allowed him, for the purpose of examining and cross-
examining such witnesses as attended. He had ample time to prepare,
according to his desire, a written defence; upon which, in connexion
with all the documents that had accumulated, and upon the report of
the commissioners, I framed my decision. This decision was, of
course, open to an appeal to the Metropolitan, had the accused consi-
dered it more severe, than the proofs, brought before me, warranted.
If any one of you will point out a more fair, or, under existing circum-
stances, a more satisfactory mode of conducting such an examination,
it will receive from me the most careful consideration; for I have no
desire to act otherwise, than with you, and for you. It would give me
considerable satisfaction, if the arbitrary, and almost irresponsible
power, ascribed to Bishops in these Colonies, were so restricted and
defined, that there should be no room, on the one hand, for the possi-
bility of oppression; and no fear, on the other, for the deprivation of
independence. I sought, when in England, but in vain, to have such
restrictions and definitions laid down.


When you recorded your opinion, that, “ unless, under some proved
disqualifications, the period of the diaconate should not be extended
beyond the term of one year, as usual in England,” I scarcely think
that you took into careful consideration the peculiar circumstances of
a Colonial Diocese.
“ I am well aware,” writes the Bishop of New Zealand to his own
Clergy, “ that the present state of the Diocese allows but little time for
theological study; and I have abstained, on that account, from exacting
the full standard of acquirements, which I may hereafter expect, from
candidates for holy orders. For the order of deacons, especially, I
have relaxed the usual qualifications; to make the way to holy orders
open to many faithful men, who, by the very nature and sphere of their
duties, were not likely to have made much advance in literature, or
speculative theology. But I must not, on this account, be supposed
to undervalue the knowledge of the original languages of the Bible, or
to believe, that a clerical education can be complete without them.
In the examination for priests’ orders, I am not prepared to relax the
English standard of qualification.”
I am more and more convinced of the soundness of these observations,
as a general rule; and recent occurrences have satisfied me of the
paramount importance of securing, for all the Clergy, the means of a
solid theological education. Should there, however, be cases, in which
an extreme necessity, or a peculiar state of circumstances, might render-
some relaxation of this rule advisable; if I cannot have scholarship in
the candidates for the priesthood, I must, at least, expect to find that
matured experience in the practice and details of their holy calling,
which time, and well-tested work, alone can give.
Were I to adopt your proposal as my rule, it would involve the
immediate necessity of raising the standard of qualification, for deacons’
orders, to that which is usually recognized in England. It would be
my only protection against a lower average amount of qualification,
than I should desire to see amongst the Clergy generally.
It is not my intention to give any pledge whatever on the subject;
but to exercise my discretion, to the best of my ability. I should hope,
that your own knowledge of me is, by this time, sufficient to assure
you, that such discretion would not be exercised capriciously, but with
a due remembrance, to whom, in this, and all things else, my account
is to be rendered.
The Minutes themselves state, with sufficient clearness, the motives
which induced the Australasian Bishops to put forth the expression of
their belief on the subject of holy baptism. No remarks that have
been passed upon them have made me, for one moment, regret our
course, or regard it as “ uncalled-for, or injudicious.” Justice will be
done to our motives elsewhere, if not here.
With regard to the examination of candidates for holy orders, every
Bishop must hold himself at perfect liberty to adopt whatever line may


seem to him most in accordance with his own vow, to be “ faithful in
ordaining.”
It is not because strife, dissension, and heresy have, in these latter
days, accompanied the consideration of one of Christ’s most holy
sacraments, that he is, therefore, to exclude it as a subject of exami-
nation, or to neglect to ascertain, that there is, on this point, soundness
in “ the faith once delivered to the Saints,” on the part of those who
present themselves for admission to holy orders.
If a Bishop is not to be the judge of soundness in this, as well as in
other theological questions,—if his discretion is to be fettered, on this
one point, in deference to the popular feeling or fancies of the day,
why is he called upon to examine at all ?
It is indeed reducing the episcopal office to a mere nullity, if the
Chief Pastor of the Church is expected to measure his theology by
the conventional standard of this or that generation.
I fear that I must disappoint your hope, that the “ usual declaration
of honest adhesion to the Articles and Liturgy of our Church” may be
deemed by me, in these strange days, a sufficient test for admission to
holy orders.
Mr. Gorham, on the one hand, has professed his readiness so to
subscribe ; on the other, but very few years have passed, since a most
disingenuous attempt (as I regard it) was made in one of the “ Tracts
for the Times,” to reconcile an honest subscription to the Articles of
the Church of England, with adhesion to the doctrinal decrees of the
Council of Trent.
Suffer me again to quote the sound language of one, whose words
must carry weight with them, wherever the singular nobility of his
mind and character is known. “It is little to say,” writes the Bishop
of New Zealand, “ that we have a uniform standard of agreement in
the Articles, the Liturgy, and the Homilies, unless we are prepared to
sacrifice every point of private feeling and judgment, to make our
assent to those formularies both practical and sincere. If we have
views of our own opposed to them; if we promise to use them, and
then find a conscientious objection; if we invent for ourselves some
gloss and sidelong meaning, by which we can assent and dissent at the
same time, it is no uncharitable censure to say, that we might still
have been good and useful laymen within the Church, but that we
ought never to have offered ourselves as candidates for the Ministry.”
1 have to thank you for the candid fajrness with which you have
affixed the right interpretation to the Minute, headed “ Ministering
to Dissenters.” Could anything now surprise me here, it would be,
that members of the Church of England should have exercised their
ingenuity so to overstrain our words, as to twist them to any other
meaning.
If there are members of that Church, who desire her ministers to
be compelled, by Jaw, to perform religious services for those, who seek


them, as a matter of strife and perversity, and not for the comfort and
edification which they may afford, —if there are those, who wish to see
the Clergy, here, bound under heavy legal penalties, to administer the
Church’s rites to those, who have spent their lives in maligning and
deriding her, and in scouting the very rites for which they seek, —
and this, too, when their own ministers are at hand, to administer
them, after their own fashion, —I must confess myself to be not one
of the number.
Yet to all this are our brethren in England subject; “ a grievance,”
as the late learned Bishop of Llandaff justly observed, “far beyond
any which sectaries complain of, as imposed upon themselves.” We
remind you, that this “ grievance” is not legally imposed upon you
here; and, because we have so done, our suggestions are regarded
as the emanations of a spirit, “ at once narrow-minded, intolerant,
and bigoted.”
For myself, Lmay thus publicly (as I have done privately, to many
of the Clergy in this Diocese), earnestly advise and entreat you, in
these, and in all your dealings, with those who dissent from our com-
munion, to show the utmost tenderness and charity towards them. It
is ours to remember, that to their own Master, they stand or fall; and
that we are not in the path of Christian duty, in bringing a railing
accusation against those, who love the Lord Jesus equally with our-
selves, as we are bound, in hope and charity, to believe.
With reference to your opinion, that “an appeal should lie to the
highest ecclesiastical authority in England, in all cases of doubt and
litigation,” I can but refer you to the Letters Patent, recently issued,
with their consent, to all the Australasian Bishops. It is provided by
those instruments, wisely, as I think, that an appeal from a Bishop’s
judgment should lie to the Metropolitan of the Province.
To my mind, it is equally advantageous to the Bishops, and to the
Clergy, that points of misunderstanding should thus be settled, with
greater expedition, than would have been possible, under the old
system of referring them to the judgment of the ecclesiastical authori-
ties at home. I cannot but regard it, also, as better for all parties,
that colonial experience should thus be brought to bear upon colonial
difficulties; for it somehow comes to pass, that the keenest minds in
England are frequently puzzled, when they come to the consideration
of such perplexed ecclesiastical questions, as may, from time to time,
arise amongst us. They cannot place themselves in our peculiar
position; they judge of it by their own; nor, in my opinion, can any-
thing short of personal experience of colonial practice, enable them to
form a thoroughly accurate estimate of it.
And now, dear Brethren, I conclude, with the earnest hope and
prayer, that, though we may differ upon some points, we may still be
permitted to work together for the Church’s common weal.
It is mine, to demean myself, not as one, desiring to lord it over


Clod’s heritage,—but rather as an elder brother, to the elder amongst
you;—as a father in Christ to the younger;—as the friend and coun-
sellor of all.
It is your’s,—and let me earnestly and affectionately entreat you, for
the Church’s sake, to bear it in mind, —your’s, not to strive how you
may most safely thwart your Bishop in his many anxious toils, but to
seek how you may best work with him, and for him. So only, by mutual
forbearance, and by mutual love, can we hope that our Church may be
borne up unharmed and unchastised, throughout the perils of days,
which may well be deemed by the thoughtful and far-sighted observer
of these unsteady times, days “ of trouble, and rebuke, and blasphemy.’ ’
I remain, Reverend and dear Brethren, your faithful and affectionate
friend and Brother,
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Rev. Dr. Browne, and the Clergy )
who signed the Address. j
Launceston, 27ih June, 1851.
Mv Lord Bishop,—
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s letter
of 24th instant, in reply to an Address of 30th ultimo, from myself and
six other Clergymen. I am not aware whether it will be possible to
convene them again, or if they will think it any use to offer any
explanation; but I am unwilling that the public should lose sight of
the true state of the case: which is, in truth, very simple, and may be
comprised within very narrow limits. Ist. All that your Lordship has
said in respect to a future Constitution for our Church in this Colony,
is as applicable to the step taken by the Metropolitan and Bishops at
Sydney ; yet they did deliberate and “ consult together on the varied
difficulties in which we are placed,” and did declare that a change is
necessary—did express an opinion as to what, in some respects, it
should be; and other matters equally affected by the arguments
brought forward by your Lordship : and did send their “ Report” for
the consideration of the Archbishops and Bishops in England. Now
the great majority of the Clergy and Laity in this Diocese, whose
rights and liberty are deeply interested in the question, do not fully
agree in some of the opinions therein contained; and are anxious,
and certainly entitled, to have their opinions submitted to the same
authority, ere any thing be legislated respecting or affecting them;
but your Lordship has declined to facilitate so reasonable an endeavour,
while the Bishop of Melbourne has freely assisted it in his Diocese.
2nd. With respect to “division of services,” your Lordship has gone
wide of the question. “ The Minutes” state, “ that we are of opinion
that the Bishop of each Diocese, as Ordinary, has a discretion,” etc.


Your Lordship has written largely to me to show there is not that
discretion. We, therefore, felt it necessary to express our opinion ; but
we did not say, that “ the Bishop should refer to the churchwardens,”
etc., but intimated that their assent should accompany the application
of the Clergyman for the Bishop’s consent, in order to leave no room
for the imputation that he only wished to spare himself. 3rd. With
respect to the form of licences, we said nothing of, and have nothing
to do with, “the Indian Dioceses,” and think reference to the practice at
home or the adjoining Colonies would be more just; we cannot believe
that your Lordship has, without motive, departed from the form given
us by your immediate predecessor, the highly-gifted Bishop of Sydney.
That your Lordship should suppose, that “the comfort and efficiency
of a single Clergyman in the Diocese is not in the slightest degree
affected,” is one further proof of their helpless position, when they
hesitate to tell you, what is in every one’s mouth. On the other
matters contained in our Address, I am afraid we must also conclude,
that it is your Lordship’s determination to yield nothing to the wishes
of the Clergy and Laity; but, as hitherto, to entrench yourself behind
“ the legal powers vested in the Bishop.” I am glad, however, that
your Lordship has at length made public the mode in which you will,
“ in conformity to legal advice received in England.” proceed against
offending Clergymen; though, considering their dependent position,
I do not think that sufficient protection, for the accused is yet secured,
especially when the number of his jurors has been made less than in
England.
I have the honour to be, your Lordship’s most faithful and obedient
servant,
W. H. BROWNE.
The Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Tasmania.
REPLY OF THE NORTHERN CLERGY TO THE
BISHOP’S LETTER.
Launceston, 3rd July, 1851.
May it Please Your Lordship,—
We deeply regret that your Lordship’s reply to our Memorial obliges
us to trouble your Lordship again with an expression of our sentiments.
Far be it from us to “ strive how we may most safely thwart our
Bishop in his many anxious toilswe can say, wdth truth, that we
would rather “ seek how we may best work with him and for him.”
But as our first expression of opinion was drawn forth by your Lord-
ship’s Charge, in connection with the declarations contained in the
Sydney Minutes, so now your Lordship’s reply to our Address has given
occasion for some explanation on our part.


!. With reference to your Lordship’s answer, concerning a future
constitution of our Church in this Colony, we beg to suggest, that the
reasons which your Lordship has adduced, to prove the impropriety of
our proposal, might, with equal justice, have been urged against the
Australasian Conference. Since, therefore, “ the Royal Declaration,”
quoted by your Lordship, was not considered to present an impediment
to the assembling of the Metropolitan and Bishops, to consult together
on “ such matters as concern the progress of true religion and the
welfare of the Church in the said Province and in the several Dioceses
thereof,” there seems to be “no reasonable cause to prevent” a meeting
such as we have proposed, and such as is being held, at this time, in
Melbourne, consisting of the Bishop, the Clergy, and the representa-
tives of the Laity. We cannot but regard the practice of the Metro-
politan and Bishops as the best “ exponent” of “ the Church’s
decisions” in this matter.
2. We cannot but feel surprised, that your Lordship should have so
strangely misunderstood us, in reference to the fourth paragraph in
our Memorial. Your Lordship had (with the other Australian Bishops)
recorded and published your opinion, that, as Ordinary, you “have a
discretion to authorize Clergymen, in cases of necessity, to divide the
Morning Service.” We stated our opinion, that the circumstances of
this Colony warrant the exercise of such discretion; but, in order to
prevent misunderstanding amongst our people, we contemplated that
no application from a Clergyman, for such permission, should be
forwarded, until he had ascertained that such “ division” would be
agreeable to the great majority of the flock. We are by no means
ignorant or forgetful of the rubrical directions of our Church, as your
Lordship would seem to insinuate ; and we are much grieved at your
Lordship’s remarks, that “ the effect of our proposal would be to poll
our congregations, from time to time, including the women and
children,” —regarding them as unsuited to the grave subjects upon
which we have addressed your Lordship.
3. With reference to the information with which your Lordship has
favoured us in respect to the mode of enquiring into charges against
an accused Clergyman, we would respectfully observe, that, considering
the serious consequences which result from the deprivation of a Clergy-
man in this Colony, the reason for your Lordship’s diminishing the
number of commissioners seems to us insufficient, and we think that
this proceeding ought to be view 7 ed as only preliminary to a further
trial.
4. With respect to the form of licence, your Lordship appears not to
be aware of the peculiar circumstances of the Indian Dioceses. When
missionaries to the heathen were required to officiate as chaplains at
stations where no chaplain was appointed, and the chaplains were
under military orders, a peculiar form of licence was necessary; but
w ? e have yet to learn, that a similar necessity exists among ourselves;


and we submit, that the fact of the adoption of this form of licence, in
place of that which was previously in use, is sufficient to justify our
respectful objection to the change, and our earnest desire for a return
to the original usage.* We consider it to be detrimental to the efficiency
of the Clergy, that they should be regarded in the light of removable
curates; and, without reference to any personal apprehensions, as a
general principle, we feel bound to protest against the appearance, as
well as the reality, of despotic authority.
5. We beg to remind your Lordship, that we expressed no desire to
lower the qualifications for the ministry; but, for the reasons that we
have assigned, and others affecting the liberty and independence of the
individual, we think it would be better that the general fitness for holy
orders should be fully tested previous to admission to the diaconate.
Concerning the examination for holy orders, we would refer your
Lordship to the 35th Canon, which requires, that ‘‘the Bishop, before
he admit any person to holy orders, shall diligently examine him in the
presence of those ministers that shall assist him at the imposition of
hands ; and, if the said Bishop have any lawful impediment, he shall
cause the said ministers carefully to examine every such person so to
be ordered: provided that they who shall assist the Bishop in examin-
ing and laying on of hands shall be of his Cathedral Church, if they
may conveniently be had, or other sufficient preachers of the same
Diocese, to the number of three at the least.” We quote from this
Canon, only to show, that,.by the law of the Church, the Bishop is not
at perfect liberty to adopt whatever line may seem most in accordance
with his own individual views.
6. Our reason for regretting the declaration concerning Holy Baptism
in the Sydney Minutes, was, that it revived a dispute which we hoped
had been set at rest by the decision of the Privy Council, with the
sanction of the two Archbishops; and we equally regret, that, after
that decision, your Lordship should have allowed yourself to regard
the views of Mr. Gorham, and those of Tract 90, as the extremes of
departure from honest adhesion to the Articles and Liturgy of our
Church.
7. Your Lordship has referred to the “ Letters Patent,” recently
issued, in which it is provided, that an appeal from a Colonial Bishop
should lie to the Metropolitan of the Province, whose decisions should
be final; but we beg to state, that,however the Bishops have consented
to such an arrangement, it was made without the consent, and, as far
as we are aware, without the knowledge, of those most concerned, the
Clergy ; and we do most distinctly enter our solemn protest against
this act, whereby we have been unconsciously, and, as we think, most
unjustly, cut off from all connection with the highest ecclesiastical
authorities in England. However convenient it may be, that “ points
* See Note, p. «6,


of misunderstanding should be settled with greater expedition than
would have been possible under the old system,” recent events have
taught us to foresee that “ colonial difficulties” may arise, which it
would not be safe to leave to the irresponsible decision of “ colonial
experience.”
8. We would here, in the most respectful manner, represent to your
Lordship, that the frequent general imputations of ignorance and in-
experience in those Clergymen who may venture to address your
Lordship, on matters, in which your judgment happens to differ from
theirs, are calculated to lessen their rightful influence, and to depreciate
the character of the Church in this Colony. On consideration, your
Lordship must, doubtless, feel, that, generally speaking,’such remarks
are not just.
In conclusion, we beg to assure your Lordship, that it is our earnest
desire, “by mutual forbearance and by mutual love,” to “bear up
the Church unharmed,” though we can hardly expect “unchastised,”
throughout the perils of these latter days ; and that, “ though we may
differ upon some points, we may still be permitted to work together
for the Church’s common weal.”
We have the honour to be, your Lordship’s most humble and
obedient servants,
W. H. Browne, LL.D., Senior, Chaplain, Launceston.
Alfred Stackhouse, M.A., Chaplain, Perth.
Wm. Eichaudson, A. 8., Chaplain, Avoca.
Geo. Wilkinson, A. 8., Chaplain, Evandale.
Thos. N. Grigg, A. 8., Chaplain, Circular Head.
A. C. Thomsoo, Chaplain, Windermere.
John Bishxon, M.A., Chaplain, Westbury.
I did not consider it necessary to forward a reply to this commu-
nication: it appeared in the newspapers as an advertisement. No
Bishop, I apprehend, would select the public press as the fitting
channel for conducting an official correspondence with the Clergy
of the Diocese.
Without entering into details, I desire to do no more, at present, than
point out the obvious difference between the Metropolitan summoning
his comprovincial Bishops to confer upon matters concerning “ the
progress of true religion, and the welfare of the Church within the
several Dioceses of the Province”—and an individual Bishop taking
upon himself the responsibility, in the present state of the law, of
convening a meeting of “ the Clergy and the representatives of the
Laity,” “ to consult and deliberate upon a future Constitution for our
Church in the Colony.”


Note D, —Page 9.
It has, as I understand, been considered somewhat harsh, that the
Deacons should have been censured, for thus passing their “judgment”
upon the subjects of deliberation entered upon by the Australasian
Bishops,—in that, (as it is contended), they were summoned, in common
with their brethren, to express that “judgment.”
It was stated at the public meeting, to which reference has just been
made, that the “ meeting of the Chapter was convened by the Arch-
deacon of Hobart Town, to consider the Minutes of the Conference at
Sydney.”
The circular, convening the Chapter, is as follows :
New Norfolk, 7th March, 1851,
Rev. and Dear Sir, —
The next meeting of the Clergy will be held, (D. V.), on Tuesday,
March 18th.
I shall take that occasion of proposing, for the consideration of the
Clergy, a short Address to the Bishop, in reference to the late Conference
at Sydney, such as, I trust, we may all be able to adapt unanimously,
without compromising the principles of any among whom there may
be some difference of opinion on questions connected with it. The
Clergy will meet at St. David’s Cathedral, as usual, at 11 a.m.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) FITZHERBERT A. MARRIOTT.
So far was it from the intention of the Archdeacon to propose “to
consider the Minutes of the Conference at Sydney,” that, in the
original draft of the Address, as prepared by him, and submitted to the
Chapter, the following words occur : “We feel that we are not notv
called upon to discuss, in detail, the minutes of that Conference ; nor
shall we be expected, in an Address like the present, to declare our
opinions upon the several important questions which they embrace.”
It is due to the Archdeacon, to annex his protest against the Address,
which was finally adopted by a majority of the Chapter.
Protest.
I put the adoption of this to the vote under protest, —protesting,
(irrespectively of any objections I have to its contents) against a docu-
ment, containing matter of such grave importance, being pressed to a
division, after one single reading, without any calm consideration of its
contents in detail.


I am the more constrained to record this protest, when I consider
what was due to the Bishops of the Province, and those of the Clergy
who were absent from the meeting.
1. It appears to me unseemly in a body of Clergymen, to adopt and
record, without mutual and patient deliberation, decisions upon Minutes,
which are (with one only exception) the unanimous voice of six
Bishops of the Province, sitting for a whole month in solemn con-
ference.
2. The Address, thus hastily carried by a majority of the Clergy
present, is of an essentially different character from that which,
according to the notice given, we met to discuss. The object of which
the Clergy of the Archdeaconry had received notice in my circular,
was to consider “ a short Address to the Bishop in reference to the late
Conference at Sydney, which I trusted that we should be able to adopt
unanimously, without compromising the principles of any among whom
there may be some difference of opinion on questions connected with
it.” The result of the Address now adopted, without notice, or time
for consideration, has been to record, as the voice of the Chapter, de-
cisions on those very questions of grave importance, which it was not
intended, on the present occasion, at least, to bring forward.
It appears to me, therefore, that it was due to the absent Clergy, and
indeed to all, that matters of such deep concern should not be brought
to a decision, without their having an opportunity, by notice given, of
both affording their counsel, and recording their vote upon them.
FITZHERBERT A. MARRIOTT, M.A.,
Archdeacon of Hobart Town.
Note E. —Page 25.
It is a pleasing task, to turn from questions of dispute, to record the
spontaneous bounty of the lay members of the Church within the
Diocese.
Long after Sir William Denison’s rule over us shall have ceased, his
name will be gratefully remembered for many a deed of public gene-
rosity, and private benevolence, —beyond the encouragement that he
has so constantly afforded to every means by which a sound education
may be secured to all classes.
The three laymen whose gifts to the Church I am glad, thus pub-
licly, to acknowledge, are, Edward Dumaresq, Esq., of Illawarra;
his brother-in-law, Robert Y. Legge, Esq., of Cullenswood; and
Mr. Lawrence, the indefatigable pilot of Bruni Island. Would that
the example, thus nobly set, were more generally followed.


Note F. —Page 33.
The objections to the existing form of licence in this Diocese, noticed
in the Charge, were put forth by the “ Association,” in reply to the
answer sent to their Circular, by the Rev. Wm. Tancred. He had ob-
served, “ Another serious objection which I entertain to the designs of
“ the proposed Association, is the unwarrantable interference which it
“ purposes in the functions of the Bishop’s office. I must be permitted
“ to believe, with deference to those of the Clergy who think differently,
u that in such a purely administrative proceeding as the issuing of
“ licences, the Bishop of the Diocese is the person most capable of
“ judging of the form in which they should run. And if any Bishop
" deems that the circumstances of his Diocese require a form different
“ from that which is in use in England, I must doubt the propriety of
“ any Association takin upon itself, as one of its fundamental objects,
“ to dictate its views on such a matter to the Bishop.”
“ It is the opinion of this Committee,’’ was the rejoinder, “ that the
Laity are directly interested in the form of licence issued to the Clergy ;
and have aright to express an opinion thereon, and to co-operate with
their Ministers in obtaining such a form of licence, as may most con-
tribute to the efficient discharge of the duties of their office.
“ It is not possible for a Minister who holds his office under a licence
or stipulated engagement, subjecting him to removal, suspension, or
dismissal, at the will of the Bishop, safely to exercise his office accord-
ing to the dictates of his own conscience and judgment. He becomes
the slave of another in the most sacred exercise of the highest faculties
of his mind; and, by the deepest spiritual degradation, is rendered
unworthy of being a public teacher of religion, or director of the
spiritual concerns of a congregation.
“ It is the opinion of this Committee, that to attribute to the Bishop
the power of setting aside the regular and prescribed form of licences,
and of issuing such other form as he may think proper, is to sanction
the imposition upon the Clergy of the most arbitrary form of Church
government, and one which would destroy their independence, and
subvert the exercise of their private judgment. Such a dominion over
the faith and practice of the Clergy is contrary to the principles of the
Protestant Church, and establishes that spirit of servile submission to
authority, and the judgments of others, which constitutes the peculiar
character of Romanism.”
The form of licence alluded to is annexed.*
FRANCIS RUSSELL, by Divine Permission, Bishop of
Tasmania.
To our beloved in Christ Clerk,
Greeting—
WE do by these Presents give and grant unto you, in whose Fidelity,
Morals, Learning, sound Doctrine, and Diligence WE do fully confide , our
♦ See Note, p. 156,


Licence and Authority to perform the Office of
in the in the County,
of within our Diocese and Jurisdiction,
or at any other place within our said Diocese to which you shall from time
to time he appointed, with our written consent , in reading the Common
Prayer, and performing other Ecclesiastical Duties belonging to the said
Office, according to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer,
made and published by authority of Parliament , and the Canons and
Constitutions in that behalf lawfully established and promulgated, and not
othenvise, or in any other manner, and also to preach and expound the Word
of God ; (you having first before subscribed the
Articles, taken the Oaths, and made and subscribed the Declaration, which
in this case are required by Law to he subscribed, made , and taken). And
WE do by these Presents assign unto you all and singular the Emoluments
and Allowances already belonging thereto, or granted and annexed, or which
shall at any time or times hereafter belong to or he granted or annexed to
the same, for performing the Duties and Functions thereof: Provided
nevertheless that nothing in this Licence shall extend, or he construed to
extend, to abridge our Episcopal Authority and Office, or the Episcopal
Authority and Office of our Successors, in administering Holy Ceremonies
and performing the Functions belonging to us; or to prevent at any time
the exercise of our Episcopal Authority in specially appointing and
authorizing the Archdeacons and other Ministers by us directed and
authorized to read and take part in Divine Service at the said Church and
Station ; or at any other Church or Churches, Station or Stations, within
our Diocese, to which you may from time to time he appointed and removed
as aforesaid, and to preach therein on all proper occasions as we may order
and appoint, hereby reserving to us and our Successors, Bishops of
Tasmania, the Power and Authority of revoking these Presents, and all
things herein contained, whenever we shall see just cause for the same.
IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused our Episcopal
Seal to be hereunto affixed. Dated this
day of in the Year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and
and of our Consecration,
The following is the form in use upon my arrival: —
me FRANCIS RUSSELL, by Divine Permission, Bishop of
Tasmania.
To our beloved in Christ Clerk,
Greeting—
WE do by these Presents give and grant unto you, in whose Fidelity,
Morals, Learning, sound Doctrine, and Diligence We do fully confide, our


Licence and Authority to perform the Office of
in the Church of
in the County of
within our Diocese and Jurisdiction, in reading the Common Prayers, and
performing other Ecclesiastical Duties belonging to the said Office, accord-
ing to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, made and
published by Authority of Parliament, and the Canons and Constitutions
in that behalf lawfully established and promulgated, and not otherwise, or
in any other manner (you having first before
subscribed the Articles, taken the Oaths, and made and subscribed the
Declaration, which in this case are required by Law to be subscribed,
made, and taken) : And WE do by these Presents assign unto you
and WE require and appoint that you reside
IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused our Seal,
which we use in this case, to be hereto affixed : Dated
the day
of in the Year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and
and of our Consecration,
The subjoined endorsements were appended to the document: —
Note. —“ The Bishop will revoke the Licence, and will not counter-
sign the Testimonials of any Curate, who accepts a smaller Stipend
than the Sum assigned in the Licence, or who undertakes the Duty of
another Cure, without the Bishop’s sanction ; or who resigns the
Curacy to which he is licensed, without giving the Bishop notice of
his intention.
“ In ordinary cases, three months’ notice will be required.”
EXTRACT FROM LETTERS PATENT, 21st August, 1842,
(6th Victoria).
“ And, for a declaration of the spiritual causes and matters in which
the aforesaid jurisdiction may be more especially exercised, We do by
these Presents further declare, that the aforesaid Bishop of Tasmania,
and his successors, may exercise and enjoy full power and authority by
himself or themselves, or by the Archdeacon or Archdeacons, or the
Vicar-General, or other officer or officers hereinafter mentioned, to give
institution to Benefices, to grant Licences, to officiate to all Rectors,
Curates, Ministers, and Chaplains of all the Churches or Chapels or
other places within the said Diocese, wherein Divine Service shall be
celebrated according to the Rites and Liturgy of the Church of


England; and to visit all Rectors, Curates, Ministers, and Chaplains, and
all Priests and Deacons in Holy Orders of the United Church of England
and Ireland resident within the said Diocese , with all and all manneb op
jurisdiction, power, and coercion ecclesiastical that may be requisite
in the premises; as also to call before him or them, or before the Arch-
deacon or Archdeacons, or the Yicar-General, or other officer or officers
hereinafter mentioned, at such competent days, hours, and places, when
and so often as to him and them shall seem meet and convenient, the
aforesaid Rectors, Curates, Ministers, Chaplains, Priests, and Deacons,
or any of them, and to enquire by witnesses sworn in due form of law,
and by all other lawful ways and means, by which the same may be
best and most effectually done, as well concerning their morals, as their
behaviour in their said offices and stations respectively.”
It may be as well to observe, that before my departure for England,
in 1846, the Registrar of the Diocese had suggested the adoption of a
new form of Licence, expunging the endorsements, and embodying the
simple declaration of the Bishop’s ordinary legal powers in the docu-
ment itself. Some new Licences were, in consequence, drawn up in
M.S. by him, and issued, —as they were, from time to time, required.
In printing fresh forms, on my return in 1848, I omitted the extract
from the Letters Patent, containing, as the reader will see, a far more
stringent and extensive assumption of power, than exists in the form
so much complained of. The basis of the new Licence was that, which
has been so often referred to, as having prevailed in India, for years;
and which was, in fact, the groundwork of those which had been pre-
viously prepared by the Registrar.
The existing state of the law, as it affects the Bishop and Clergy of
this Diocese, is laid down in the following letter from the law officers
of the Crown to the Right Hon, Lord Stanley, ordered by the House
of Commons to be printed, 25th March, 1850.
Doctors' Commons, 27th December, 1845.
My Lord, —
In compliance with the request contained in the letter of Mr. Under-
secretary Stephen, of the 18th of October last, we have referred to the
letter of Mr. Under-Secretary Hope, of the 28th of August last, and to
the several Acts of the Legislature of Van Diemen’s Land now laid
before us, and with reference to the questions submitted to us, touching
the proceedings adopted against certain Clergymen in that Colony, and
the status of Clergymen there, we have the honour to report to your
Lordship, that, having also considered the points suggested by Arch-
deacon Marriott, we are of opinion, that upon the appointment of a
Chaplain to officiate in Yan Diemen’s Land, whether by the Govern-
ment here, or in the Colony, he cannot lawfully act without being
licensed by the Bishop of Tasmania.
That upon refusal by the Bishop to license, an appeal lies to the


Archbishop of Canterbury, and to him only ; that a licence may be
revoked by the Bishop; that upon the revocation of the licence, no
formal trial is necessary; that the Bishop, however, should not act
but upon what he deems sufficient cause, or without giving the party
accused an opportunity of answering the charge against him.
That there is no form of institution or induction analogous to either
in Van Diemen’s Land. The appointment and the licence are all that
can take place; that the Bishop may try, convict, and punish for
ecclesiastical offences, without the aid of any new Court to be created
by the local Legislature, or otherwise; but he must proceed judicially,
with the assistance of such officers as are created by the Letters Patent,
and decide according to the best of his judgment; there must be a
distinct charge ; the accused must have due notice, and a fair oppor-
tunity of answering and defending himself, and of examining his
witnesses, and cross-examining the witnesses against him; that the
3 and 4 Viet., c. 86, does not extend to the Colonies ; that therefore, if
either of the Clergymen in question was unlicensed, he could not
legally officiate at all; and that if any licence had been granted, the
revocation of it by the Bishop was valid.
We have, &c.,
f J. DODSON,
(Signed) J FREDERICK THESIGER,
I FITZROY KELLY.
The Right Hon. the Lord Stanlev, )
&c. &c. &c. j
Note G. —Page 40.
The following is the form in which the Royal Warrants are drawn
up:
William R.
Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. We reposing
especial trust and confidence in the loyalty, integrity , and ability of our
trusty and well-beloved Clerk, do hereby nominate and appoint him
to be one of our Chaplains ivithin our Island of Van Diemens Land, he
the said being a Priest in Holy Orders of the Established
Church of England and Ireland, and it is our will that the said
shall hold such his office during our pleasure and no longer. And
we do further direct and command that the said so long as he
shall retain his office, shall officiate as a Minister of the Established Church
aforesaid at such places or place within our said Island as the Venerable
the Archdeacon for the time being of New South Wales shall from time to
time appoint. It being our will and pleasure that the said Archdeacon shall


commit to the said
Island, as the said
such spiritual charge within our said
shall appear to him best qualified to
execute; and as may most effectually tend to the advancement of religion
and virtue within our said Island.
Given at our Court at Windsor this day of
in the Year of our Reign.
By His Majesty’s Command.
To Our Trusty and Well-beloved
Our Governor and Commander-in-Chief of our Island of Van
Diemen’s Land and its Dependencies, or, in his absence, to our Lieutenant-
Governor or Officer Administering the Government of our said Island for
the time being.
Note H. —Page 51.
“ The question of regeneration, as far as it regards the use of the
term, is, in my opinion, satisfactorily determined by the Articles and
Offices of our Church, and by the meaning uniformly annexed to it in
the four first centuries of the Christian era.
“ I would, therefore, wish generally to restrict the term to the bap-
tismal privileges ; and considering them as comprehending not only an
external admission into the visible Church, not only a covenanted title
to the pardon and grace of the gospel, but even a degree of spiritual aid
vouchsafed and ready to offer itself to our acceptance or rejection. At the
dawn of reason, I would recommend a reference to these privileges in
our discourses, as talents, which the hearers should have so improved
as to bear interest; as seed, which should have sprung up and produced
fruit.” — Bishop Ryder’s Primary Charge, page 1 7.
“ In the baptismal service ice thank God for having regenerated the
baptized infant by his Holy Spirit. Now from hence it appears that,
in the opinion of our Reformers, regeneration and remission of sins did
accompany baptism. But in what sense did they hold this sentiment ?
Did they maintain that there was no need for the seed then sown in the
heart of the baptized person to grow up and to bring forth fruit; or
that he could be saved in any other way, than by a progressive reno-
vation of his soul after the divine image ? Had they asserted any such
doctrine as that, it would have been impossible for any enlightened
person to concur with them. But nothing can be conceived more
repugnant to their sentiments than such an idea as this ; so far from
harbouring such a thought, they have, and that too in this very
prayer, taught us to look to God for that total change both of heart
and life which, long since their days, has begun to be expressed by the term
“ regeneration.” After thanking God for regenerating the infant by His
Holy Spirit, we are taught to pray, “ that he being dead unto sin, and


living unto righteousness, may crucify the old man, and utterly
abolish the whole body of sin and then, declaring the total change
to be the necessary mean of his obtaining salvation, we add, ‘so that
finally, with the residue of thy Holy Church, he may be an inheritor
of thine everlasting Kingdom.’ Is there (I would ask), any person
that can require more than this ? Or does God in his Word require
more ? ” — Simeon’s Works , vol. 2, page 259.
“What is Baptism?” is asked in the “Larger Catechism of the
Church of Scotland: ’’ —the answer is, “ Baptism is a Sacrament of the
New Testament, wherein Christ hath ordained the washing with water
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to
be a sign and seal of ingrafting into Himself, of remission of sins by His
blood, and regeneration by His Spirit, of adoption and resurrection
unto everlasting life; and whereby the parties baptized are solemnly
admitted into the visible Church, and enter into an open and professed
engagement to be wholly and only the Lord’s.”
And again, the question is, “ How is our Baptism to be improved
by us ? ” The reply is, “ The needful but much neglected duty of
improving our Baptism, is to be performed by us all our life long,
especially in the time of temptation, and when we are present at the
administration of it to others; by serious and thankful consideration
of the nature of it, and of the ends for which Christ instituted it, the
privileges and benefits conferred and sealed thereby, and our solemn
vow made therein ; by being humbled for our sinful defilement, our
falling short of, and walking contrary to, the grace of Baptism, and
our engagements ; by growing up to assurance of pardon of sin, and of
all other blessings sealed to us in that Sacrament; by drawing strength
from the death and resurrection of Christ, into whom we are baptized,
for the mortifying of sin, and quickening of grace ; and by endeavour-
ing to live by faith, to have our conversation in holiness and righteous-
ness, as those that have therein given up their names to Christ, and
to walk in brotherly love, as being baptized by the same Spirit into
one body.”— Confession of Faith, pages 358, 360.
Note I. —Page 61.
The present Archbishop of Canterbury, when speaking of the
earnestness with which the Apostle Paul “ insists on the necessity of
regeneration,” says, “ On the authority of this example, and of the
undeniable practice of the first ages of Christianity, our Church con-
siders Baptism as conveying regeneration, instructing us to pray,
before Baptism, that the infant ‘ may be horn again, and made an heir
of everlasting salvation;’ and to return thanks, after Baptism, ‘that
it hath pleased God to regenerate the infant with His Holy Spirit, and
receive him for His own child by adoption.’ ” — Archbishop Sumner’s
Apostolical Preaching,


“ I have" already observed,” says the Bishop of London, “that in
the interpretation of the Articles which relate more immediately to
doctrine, our surest guide is the Liturgy. It may safely be pro-
nounced of any explanation of an Article which cannot be reconciled
with the plain language of the offices for Public Worship, that it is
not the doctrine of the Church. The opinion, for instance, which
denies baptismal regeneration, might possibly, though not without
great difficulty, be reconciled with the language of the twenty-seventh
Article; but by no stretch of ingenuity, nor latitude of explanation,
can it be brought to agree with the plain, unqualified language of the
offices for Baptism and confirmation.”— Charge of the Bishop of London,
1842, p. 23,
And again, “ Holding it to be unquestionably the doctrine of the
Church of England, that infants receive remission of original sin in
Baptism, through the merits of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
applied to them by that Sacrament, and finding in Mr. Gorham’s
answers to the Bishop of Exeter’s questions, a distinct denial of that
doctrine, I could not bring myself to concur in the reasons assigned by
the Judicial Committee for recommending Her Majesty to reverse the
judgment of the Court of Arches.
Mr. Gorham holds, that the remission of original sin, adoption into
the family of God, and regeneration, must all take place, in the case
of infants, not in Baptism, nor by means of Baptism, but before
Baptism ; an opinion which appears to me to be in direct opposition to
the plain teaching of the Church, and utterly to destroy the sacra-
mental character of Baptism. I cannot admit that this opinion is to
reconciled, by any latitude of interpretation which can reasonably be
claimed, with the Church’s Articles and Formularies ; nor do I believe
that it is an opinion which is held by more than a very small number
indeed of our Clergy.”— Letter of the Bishop of London to the Scottish
Bishops.
Note K. —Page C 4,
At the Monthly Meeting of the Committee of the Hobart Town
Branch Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, and the Propa-
gation of the Gospel, held in Hobart Town on May Bth, 1851, the
following Address to the Archbishop of Canterbury was proposed by
the Rev. Dr. Fry, seconded by James Barnard, Esq :
TO HIS GRACE THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTER-
BURY, PRIMATE OF ALL ENGLAND, &c. &c.
May it please your Grace, —
We, the Committee of the “Hobart Town Association for the
Promotion of Christian Knowledge, and for the Propagation of the


Gospel,” having heard of the recent division of Great Britain into
Roman Catholic dioceses, and the appointment of Romish ministers
as Bishops of such dioceses, feel called upon to convey to your Grace
our strong protest against such an assumption of authority by the
Pope and Court of Rome over the Realm of Great Britain, as a viola-
tion of the rights of the Crown, and as an attempt to subvert the
Protestant Church and religion of England.
It is with deep thankfulness that, in a period of such difficulty and
danger, we are enabled to address in the Primate of our Church, not
only a Prelate zealous for the maintenance of evangelical truth, but
one whom we belieye to be directed by Divine Grace as the instrument
of the Lord in opposing Romish error, and in promoting the salvation
of the people of England, by rendering the Church more effective in
its administration, and more evangelical and zealous in its spiritual
offices.
We have to express our grateful concurrence in the judgment of
your Grace and of the Archbishop of York in the Privy Council, as
rendering abortive an attempt to condemn and exclude from the Church
a large body of evangelical ministers and people, and as averting a
great calamity. While, in the recent apostacy of so many ministers
of the Church of England to the communion of the Church of Rome,
we deplore the delusion to which those who love not the truth as it is
in Jesus are always liable to be given up, we remember that the
judgments of the Lord are designed in mercy; and we trust that
from the present evil great and permanent good will be educed. It is
not from the open attacks of Popery that we apprehend injury, so
much as from the teaching and influence of those who, in our Church,
inculcate principles adverse to the Protestant Reformation. To
remove this evil, and prevent its recurrence, is the great object which
we trust your Grace and the faithful members of our Church will be
enabled to fulfil; and we are happy to assure your Grace that the great
majority of the Clergy and Laity of Van Diemen’s Land are sincerely
attached to our Church in its Protestant and evangelical character;
and we trust that, in the proposed form of Church government for the
administration of the affairs of the Church in these Colonies, we shall
be enabled to adopt such measures as will greatly increase its vitality
and efficiency, and effectually oppose the progress of Romanizing
teaching and proceedings in this Colony.
Signed, on behalf of the Committee, by the Chairman,
PHILIP PALMER, A.M.
The following was moved as an Amendment by the Rev. F. H. Cox,
seconded by the Rev. W. Tancred ;
May it please your Grace, —
We, the Committee of the Hobart Town Branch Society for the
Promotion of Christian Knowledge, and the Propagation of the Gospel,


having recently heard of that act of the Pope of Rome, by which, in
the close of the past year, he assumed to himself the right of portion-
ing out England into dioceses, and nominating to them Bishops with a
supposed territorial jurisdiction, deem this a fitting opportunity for
addressing your Grace, not only as President of those Societies which
in this land we represent, but as by God’s Providence Primate of all
England, and a chief protector of her ancient liberties.
We have, indeed, a near and particular interest in the subject of this
Address, in that our own diocese witnessed, six years ago, an attempt
on the part of the Pope of Rome, similar in kind to that which he has
now ventured upon our Mother Church ; when a Bishop was intruded
into the See of Tasmania, not, however, without protest from the
lawful occupant of that See.
But upon wider grounds, as English Churchmen, we are desirous of
claiming a share, even from these ends of the earth, in the repudiation
of the more recent and more startling act of unwarranted aggression.
For, whatever may have been the tendency of State policy, we believe
certainly, that our Church, at least, has given no warrant for such an
act; but, on the contrary, has never ceased to protest against its
principle.
We are persuaded that the Papal supremacy in England, always an
assumption, was, at the period of the Reformation, as justly, as it was
distinctly, rejected ; and we rejoice to know, that, ever since that period,
the Church of England has constantly reasserted that rejection, as of
a claim which the ancient and undivided Church, no less than herself,
would have refused to recognize or allow.
But we cannot regard this aggression of the Pope as simply an act of
schism. We cannot forget the many corruptions of faith and practice
which are embodied in the system of the Roman Church; nor refuse
to see, in the Papal measure, a renewed and bold attempt to give
dignity to that sj T stem, and so to spread its corruptions in the bosom
of the Reformed Church of England.
While we earnestly trust that this attempt may be frustrated, we
cannot but lament that there should have been any ground for hope
that it might be successful. We deplore especially those defections
which have been reported to us, of many members of our Church to
the Romish communion ; defections, which may well have encouraged
in the See of Rome an expectation, that the people of England were
not averse to her system. It is our hope, that this expectation may be
at once and for ever disappointed, not only by a strenuous resistance to
the overt movement of this aggression, but still more by a faithful and
consistent attachment, on the part of her members, to the spirit of the
Reformed Church of England, and a firm adherence to that sure
ground, which has been occupied for the last three centuries, by the
wisest and holiest of her sons.
To your Grace we would offer, together with these expressions of


our hope for the Church, the assurance of our respect for your high
office, our thankfulness for the earnestness with which you have ever
devoted yourself to promote the Church’s well-being, and our prayer
that you may be guided with all wisdom, and strengthened under the
burden of your most responsible charge.
On a division, there were found, for the Amendment, three ; for the
iginal Address, eight. Dr. Fry’s Address was therefore adopted by
e meeting.
It was resolved subsequently, that this Address should be engrossed,
and sent by the Chairman to the Lord Bishop of Tasmania, the Presi-
dent of the Society, with a request that His Lordship will have the
kindness to transmit it to His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.
At a subsequent meeting of the Committee, held on the 23rd of the
same month, —It was resolved, by a majority of 20 to 12 members pre-
sent, on the motion of the Rev. A. Davenport, “ That the Address to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, adopted at the Committee Meeting of
the Bth instant, does not represent the sentiments and wishes of the
Committee at large/’
Note L. —Page 67.
“ The part which Jesuits and other Roman Catholics acted, in the
reign of Elizabeth, for the purpose of creating schisms and opposition
to the Church in England, is well authenticated matter of history. In
Parr’s Life of Usher there are some very interesting documents on this
subject, detailing the manner in which Jesuits, who had been instructed
to personate Presbyterians, Independents, and other protestant dis-
senters, ‘ and under a puritanical dress, ‘ disseminated tenets dangerous
and prejudicial to the Church of England.’ And in Strype’s Life of
Parker, there is an account of Faithful Commin, a Dominican friar, who
was one of those who professed to wish to make the Church purer than
it was, and had a congregation that followed him, which he termed men
of tender consciences; and with them he prayed, and preached, and
administered the Sacraments. When he preached in public, he would be
absent till prayers were over, (for the Liturgy he could not away with),
and then he would preach. Having been summoned to answer for his
practices, he escaped abroad, leaving these his last words to his con-
gregation, that the set form of prayer was but the mass translated.
He went to Rome, and informed the Pope, that he had done him more
service than he supposed. And when the Pope asked how, he said he
had preached against set forms of prayer, and had persuaded the people
to pray spiritually and extempore ; and this had so taken with the


people, that the Church was become as odious to that sort of people
whom he instructed, as mass was to the Church of England. Where-
upon the Popp commended him, and gave him a reward of 2000
ducats.”*
Similar measures were adopted at the time of the Great Rebellion,
as will appear from the following letter, written by Bishop Bramhall,
(of Derry), afterwards Primate of Ireland, —to the then Primate, Arch-
bishop Usher:—
Most Reverend, —
I thank God, I do take my Pilgrimage patiently, yet I cannot but
condole the change of the Church and State of England. And more in
my pilgrimage than ever, because I dare not witness and declare to
that straying flock of our brethren in England, who have misled them,
and who they are that feed them. But that your Lordship may be
more sensible of the Church’s calamities, and of the dangers she is in
of being ruined, if God be not merciful unto her, I have sent you a
part of my discoveries, and it from credible hands, at this present
having so sure a messenger, and so fit an opportunity.
It plainly appears, that in the year 1646, by order from Rome, above
100 of the Romish Clergy were sent into England; consisting of English,
Scotch, and Irish, who had been educated in France, Italy, Germany,
and Spain; part of these within the several schools there appointed
for their instructions.
In each of these Romish nurseries, these scholars were taught several
handicraft trades and callings, as their ingenuities were most bending,
besides their orders or functions of that Church.
They have many yet at Paris a fitting to be sent over, who twice in
the week oppose one the other; one pretending Presbytery, the other
Independency; some Anabaptism, and the others contrary tenents,
dangerous and prejudicial to the Church of England, and to all the
Reformed here abroad. But they are wisely preparing to prevent their
designs, which I heartily wish were considered in England among the
wise there.
When the Romish orders do thus argue pro and con, there is ap-
pointed one of the learned of those Convents to take notes and to judge :
and as he finds their fancies, whether for Presbytery, Independency,
Anabaptism, Atheism, or for any new tenents, so accordingly they be to
act and to exercise their wits. Upon their permission, wdien they be
sent abroad, they enter their names in the Convent registry, also their
Licences; if a Franciscan, if a Dominican, or Jesuit, or any other
order, having several names there entered in their Licence: in case of
a discovery in one place, then to fly to another, and there to change
their names or habit.
* Fulford's “ Progress of the Reformation in England."— p, 45.


For an assurance of their constancy to their several orders, they are
to give monthly intelligence to their Fraternities of all affairs, wherever
they be dispersed ; so that the English abroad know news better than
ye at home.
When they return into England, they are taught their lesson, to say
from whence they come), that they are poor Christians
beyond sea for their religion sake, and are now
i news, to enjoy their liberty of conscience. The
; over in 1646 were most of them soldiers in the
Parliament’s army, and w r ere daily to correspond with those Romanists
in our late King’s army that were lately at Oxford, and pretended to
fight for His Sacred Majesty; for at that time, there were some Roman
Catholics who did not know the design of a contriving against our
Church and State of England.
But the year following, 1647, many of those Romish Orders who
came over the year before, were in the consultation together, knowing
each other. And those of the King’s party, asking some why they
took with the Parliament’s side, and asking others whether they were
bewitched to turn Puritans, not knowing the design: but at last, secret
■itans, not knowing the design: but at last, secret
3 being produced by those of the Parliament’s side,
ween them, there was no letter design to confound the
Church of England, than hy pretending liberty of conscience. It was argued
then, that England would be a second Holland, a Commonwealth; and,
if so, what would become of the King? It was answ T Would to
God it were come to that point. It was again replyed,yourselves have
preached so much against Rome, and His Holiness, that Rome and her
Romanists will be little the better for that change; but it was answered,
You shall have Mass sufficient for a hundred thousand in a short space,
and the governors never the wiser. Then some of the mercifullest of
the Romanists said, This cannot be done unless the King die; upon
which argument, the Romish Orders thus licensed, and in the Parlia-
ment Army, wrote unto their several Convents, but especially to the
Sorbonists, whether it may be scrupled to make away our late
godly King and His Majesty his Son, our King and Master; who,
blessed be God, hath escaped their Romish snares laid for him? It
was returned from the Sorbonists, that it was lawful for Roman
Catholics to work changes in Governments for the Mother Church’s
advancement, and, chiefly, in an heretical kingdom; and so lawfully
make away the King.
Thus much, to my knowledge, have I seen and heard since my
leaving your Lordship, which I thought very requisite to inform your
Grace ; for myself would hardly have credited these things, had not
mine eyes seen sure evidence of the same. Let these things sleep
within your Gracious Lordship’s brest, and not awake but upon sure
grounds, for this age can trust no man, there being so great fallacy
amongst men. So the Lord preserve your Lordship in health, for the


nation’s good, and the benefit of your friends; which shall be the
prayers of
Your humble servant,
J. DERENSIS.
20 th July, 1654;
The whole of Archbishop Bramhall’s statements
be seen in detail in P. du Moulin’s “Vindication of the Protestant
Religion,” pp. 58, 60. —BramhalVs Works , Oxford ed., vol. 1, p. 95.
Note M. —Page 68.
With the most sincere desire to give due weight to the opinions of
those whose fears have, not unnaturally, been excited by the numerous
defections from our ranks, that have taken place in England, I cannot
at all accord with their estimate of what is “ I
We may, indeed, mourn over the strange
“ Romanizing teaching.”
ige perversity, whilst w
condemn the flagrant dishonesty of those, who, under the mask of
adhesion to the Church of England, as her ministering priests, use
their position in order to introduce the peculiar doctrines of the Church
of Rome amongst their flocks. But I cannot consent to abandon, as
peculiarities of that Church, truths, positions, and doctrines, which have
been handed down from primitive times, as a part of the orthodox
teaching of the Church of Christ; and which have been perpetuated
by the Hookers, and the Hammonds, the Pearsons, and the Medes,
the Barrows, and the Taylors, the Beveridges, and the Bulls, of our
own branch of that Church,
And yet, we have lived to see Baptismal Regeneration, the Apostolic
Succession, a respect for the primitive Traditions, and the ancient
Fathers of the Church, together with many other received dogmas of
the Church of England, looked on with suspicion by some, regarded
as Popish figments by others.
In this diocese, my esteemed friend Dr. Chr. Wordsworth’s “Theo-
philus Anglicanus ” has been denounced as “ so full of rank popery,
that it ought to be burnt by the common hangman.” It would, pro-
bably, be on the “ Index expurgatorius” of Rome for a far different
reason.
Two little tracts called “ Steps to the Altar,” and “ Spiritual Com-
munion,” are included in the general objections raised against
“ Theophilus Anglicanusand all are condemned as “ works wherein
the most dangerous errors and corrupt practices of the Church of
Rome are inculcated, or sanctionedand as “ having a direct and
powerful tendency to undermine the Protestant faith, and to pervert to


Romanism the minds of such members of the Church as may adopt
their principles, and yield to their influence.”
Every true son of the Church must lament that such a construction
should have been put upon these, or upon any w T orks, in use by her
members. The English reader will probably be acquainted with them,
and form his own estimate as to the danger that may be apprehended
from their teaching. I desire, also, to turn his attention to Archdeacon
reader will probably be acquainted wdth them,
as to the danger that may be apprehended
>, to turn his attention to Archdeacon
iott’s Sermon,
which this Charge w 7 as delivered. He will there see what teaching
;ached in St. David’s Cathedral, at the Visitation
is regarded by some e 1
ing Popery and denoui
A direct charge has
‘ Romanizing teachin
puerile, grounds, on which
' the Clergy of the Diocese, as “ uphold-
Protestantism.”
;en brought against the “ College,” of
practices.” The slender, and indeed
tas been advanced, will be better under-
stood by a perusal of the following letter from the Warden :—•
Christ's College, 10 th June, 1851.
I have to acknowledge the receipt, from your Lordship, of the Letter
of the “ Association for maintaining in Van Diemen’s Land the princi-
ples of the Protestant Reformation,” dated April 25th, and proceed to
1 I ll 1 1 * C 'i. Li m.l .T n AHVI n +li
in Van Diemen’s Land the princi-
reply to that portion of it which more particularly concerns the
College and myself.
The first statement is, that “ auricular confession was imposed upon
some of the students, other persons being required to withdraw during
the proceedings.”
This, I do, most distinctly and emphatically, deny, as being utterly
false; nor can I conceive what can have been the grounds of the
charge, except it be the gross perversion of a fact, which I shall
presently relate to your Lordship.
The second charge is, that “ some of the students were excommu-
nicated, and debarred from the communion; and, after some time,
were absolved, and readmitted.” How much of truth there is in this,
your Lordship shall judge.
On my return home, one holiday, I was informed by the Divinity
Fellow who had been left in charge, that he had discovered that several
of the boys were in the habit of going out at night, when all the
establishment was in bed, and plundering the orchard ; and that they
had done so on the preceding night.
I must inform your Lordship, that the fruit of the garden is used
solely for the students themselves, in providing them with pastry; and
is never otherwise appropriated. Immediately after the evening
chapel service, when all but the students were desired to withdraw, I
told them what I had heard, and asked them all this question, “ Have
you, directly or indirectly, been concerned in this matter ?” This, my


Lord, is the nearest approach to auricular confession, accompanied by
the order to other persons to withdraw, of which I have been guilty.
Whether it quite amounts to the Roman practice, or not, I will leave
others to judge.
But to proceed : to my surprise, and deep mortificat:
their answers, that every boy, with only two exceptions, was guilty. I
addressed them, in consequence ; and denounced, in strong terms, the
sinfulness of such conduct. And inasmuch as there were some boys,
(may I not rather call them young men ?) of about 18 years of age
among them, and who were habitual communicants,—l told these,
that I would not receive them at the Lord’s Table, on the following
Sunday, unless I had sufficient evidence of their repentance; and
warned them, therefore, that they were, pro tanto, excommunicate. I
further declared, that I spoke in the double capacity of their master
and their spiritual teacher; and that as what I said, I said, not of my
own authority, I doubted not that God ratified my sentence, viz.:—in
denouncing such conduct.
On the following morning, I addressed them again, and told them,
that, if they were sensible of the improper character of the act they
had committed, and would make a suitable apology for it, I would
willingly forget it; as I could well conceive, that some, at least, of
their number, might have acted from boyish thoughtlessness, and not
have been actuated by worse motives. Within an hour, the first class
came, and made every necessary apology. . I asked them if they were
speaking for themselves, or for the whole of the boys. They answered,
for themselves ; but they might, no doubt, answer for all, as they knew
that all were coming with the like intent. I said, that, in that case, I
would consider their apology as that of the whole ; as it was a painful
thing for me to have had occasion to speak or think of such a matter ;
but that now I should forget it, and that it should be as though it had
never happened.
This was all that passed; there was no excommunication, as the
word is generally understood ; and as to absolution, it certainly never
entered into my mind; nor did it occur to me, that it could have been
suggested to any one, by what had taken place.
I may state to your Lordship, that the Holy Communion was
administered on the following Sunday, and that all my usual Com-
municants received it.
I have been thus explicit, and perhaps tedious, in detailing to your
Lordship, all that really did occur; —because I have recently learned,
that my very words, on that occasion, have been misrepresented, and
made to bear a meaning totally distinct from that in which I used
them.
Whether in this I exceeded my authority, as a Priest of the Church
of England, is for you, as my Bishop, to determine. But that I have


deserved the charge of Romanizing can, I presume, be entertained only
by persons who are utterly unacquainted with the doctrines and usages
of the two Churches of England and of Rome.
H. AND C. BEST, PKINTEES, “ COURIER -OFFICE, HOBART TOWN.
J


