

A
DEFENCE
OF THE
New SOPHONISBA,
A
TRAGEDY.
In Anſwer to a
CRITICISM on that Play.
By a Friend of the AUTHOR’S.
In Scenatn mijfus magno cum pondere Verfus
Aut opercs minium celeris, cur ague careniis t ■
Aut ignoratcc premit Artis Crimine turpi.
LONDON:
Printed for F.Cogan, at the Middle-I’an]?k-
Gate, in Fleet-fireet. M.dcc.xxx.
(Price 6 d.)
Where may be had, juft Publilh’d,
A Criticifm on the New Sophonhba, a Tragedy, as it is a£Ud
at, Theatre Royal in Drury-Lam.


ADEFENCE of the Tragedy
of SOPHONISBA, in Anſwer
to a ſcurrilous Criticiſm,
&c.
Shall not give myfelf the trouble
to enquire into 'Tim. Birch’s real
teg loathe, nor the means by which
he was enabled to quote fo manyr
Lines out of Sophonijba before it
was publifhed ; fince his Criticifm
* is fo incorrcft, we ought to grant
he had never feen it. And I dare be as bold in
affirming as he, that had the Tragedy itfelf bcerf
publifhed four Days fooncr, that Barn of his
would have been ftifled e’er its birth. ’Tis in-
deed the moft ill-fhap’d unlickM Monfter of Wit
that ever was produced, Like the reft of his Bro-
ther Cynical-Brood, by jumping into the World
e’er its time, ’tis no wonder it ihould be blind
and imperfedfc. I fhall dwell no longer on the nu-
merous Faults with which it is crowded, fmcc they
are fo vifible, that fomc Perfor.s have even doubted
whether it was not written by one of the Author’s
Friends to prevent a good one, and make the Play
fell.
I need not tell the World that the Hiftory of Sc-
fhonhha is taken from Livy, but fo lame and imper-
fect are his Works tranfmitt.’d, that the Author
B found


found it neceffary not only to deviate from him,
but to contradict him in feveral Places,, wherein
the Author is not alone. Have not Dryden, Shahe-
fpear, Row and Otway done the fame ? Whom but
fuch Heroes of the Drama ftiould the Author have
imitated ? Should a Poet whofe Name is borrow-
ed from, and whofe BulTnefs is FiCtion, be confin’d
to Truth ?—Pißorihus atque Poetis — Quidlibet, &c.
Poets in all Ages have had a Privilege of being
Outlaws, And it has generally happened, that
They have rais’d themfelves on the Stage by tread-
ing under foot its Rules. Whence we may with
fome reafon conclude, that the propereft ufe Ari-
Jloile’s Art of Poety can be put to, is to make Buf-
kins for the ACtors, inftead of Curbs for the Poet.
The Story, as k is Cold us mLivy, is this;— Lcelius.
m&MafimJfa having defeated,with very little Slaugh-
ter on either fide, the Forces of Syphax, and taken
him Prifoner, divide Armies: La Hus and Mafu-
niffit march towards Cirtha > but Mdftnijpi thinking
it prudent to give the Enemies no Refpite, haftens
before to the Capital, where he finds the Gates
Ihuc againft him, but by ftiewing them Syphax in
Chains, he mows them to furrender, every one
driving to ingratiate himfelf with his future Sove-
reign. Sophonisba, Wife to Syphax , prefents herfelf
to Mafimjfa , and begs his Protection from the Ro-
mans. He falls in love with her, and marries her
the fame day. Lelius comes, finds what has paft,
and fmartly reproves Mafimjfa-, but his Reproofs not
finding their defir’d Effect, he ccnfents to leave it to
Scipio who comes foon after, and taking Mafiniff#
afide, partly by the Perfuafions of a Friend, and
partly by the Authority of a Roman General, fi>
far moves the young Prince, that he immediately
fends her a Bowl of Poifon, which fhe drunk and
died. . Scipio the next day in a full Aflembly' makes
an Oration in praife of Mafinijfa v adorns him with
all


all the Eniigns of Majefty, and fees him on the
Throne of his Anceftors.
But the ingenious Author of Sophoni/ha has varie4
moft of thefe Circumftances with a peculiar Happi-
-nefs.
i ft, Syphax refolv’d to lofe the Horfe, or win
the Saddle, ventures all on one decifive Battle ; and
like Alexander the Great, who burnt his Shipping
to take away all Hopes of a Retreat, leaves his
Gates open, to Ihew his Soldiers their only Hopes
lay in the Field of Battel. But I fuppofe the Au-
thor of the fore-mention’d Criticifm will fay, that to
leave the Gates open, was the fureft way to make his
Soldiers retire, fince they might have hopes to fhelter
themfclves in the Town; and that to have engag’d
his Troops to conquer or die, he fhould have Ihut
’em, and carried the Keys himfelf: and let him tell
tne which is more abfurd, to make a Porter of
the King, or a Flying Poft of Colonel Chartres.
The Battle is represented in Livy as won by the
confpiring Forces of the two Generals 1 : but may not
a Poet make his Hero do as much as half a dozeri
■common Fellows ? What do the Aftors tread in
Bulkins for, but to appear above the common Size
of Men ?
Livy tells us, the Victory was great, the Slaugh-
ter fmail, and not one half taken Prifoners, minus
Jimidhm , fays he. But our Author is rcfolved to
go thro’ wickit, ,and kills or takes ’em all but one,
whom he wS obliged to fave to run of Errands •, and
even he is fo wounded, that his Life is defpair’d of.
Has not our Author in this given us a fignal Proof
of his poetical Power ? How would Sdpio ftate, if
News Ihould be carried him over Styx , that a fingle
Briton with no other Arms than aGoofe-quill, had
given the Numidians a much more bloody Over-
throw than he and all the Roman Legions ? Livy
fays nothing of Mafniiffa's, former Love
B 2 <?r


or Death, of Sjj hax’s Enlargement. Then have
we not Fidtion in abundance ? The Author .of the
Criticifen would infinuate, that where Mr. Tbomfon
has had Rivy in his Eye, he has funk in Language.
If there be any Fault in this,’tis in having kept too
clqfely to his Words. He would likewife have us
believe, that where he has left bis Guide, he has
■loft his way. Have not the ableft modern Pens
found it; too difficult a Tsßk to endeavour a fkq>
plenjent to Livy ?
The Author needs little Juflafieation for his de-
bating from the Ordinal, fujee the Authority of
Racine, and his own Preface, have made it almoft
.unneceffary •, he has thereby ftruck out fome (and
prevented many more conlequential) Incidents that
Would have crowded his Play, and made it like a
Bartholomew- Fair; by this means he has freed the
Audience from the trouble of Attention, the Adtors
from the Hurry of Aft ion, and the Directors from
the Charge of Scenes. Can any thing be more un-
natural than to imagine, that one Day could pro*-
iduce above one Incident or one Adlion ? Some Tra-
gedians have indeed as many Springs conducive to
their main Defign, ?s there are Wheels in Pinchbeck’s
mufical Clock : but do the Affairs of little Kings
and Queens move on as many Springs as an Orrery ?
Or if they do, muft they not have longer time than
twenty-four hours to revolve in?. Befides, is not he
the greateft Artift that ufes tfr&lf|)yet? Is not Air
gchra admired for the ibortnefs' of me Method?
and is not the Dodtrineof Fluxions ftill more noble,
becaufe more compendious ? Are not our modern
Mechanicks juftly prefer’d to the Antients, in having
found out more Ample Movements •, and why fliould
not Play-wrights be encouraged for the fame reafon?
efpecially fince Arijlbtle, Racine , and M. Dacier,
have by their Rules reduced Poetry to a fort of
Mtchanifm ? If this does not appear to be a Ef-
ficient


fidast Anfwer to.theAuthor .of the CriticHm, he dc-
fefves none. He makes a hugeOuccry about aPioT
or no Plot, If be will take the Word of a greats
Wit than we have reafon to chink he will ever make,
there is a Plot. Farquhar fays, That where there is
U Woman and French Gold, there rauft be a Plot.
Now every Englijhman cannot but know that French
Gold is the moft proper Emblem of Poifon, they
both alike have a Power to confound the Senfcs.
The Truth of this has been confirm’d by coo ma-
ny Experiments, to want further Proof; but we
have a Woman, and, by fubftttuting Poifon for
its Emblem, we have all that is neceflary to form
a Plot i He fays iikewifr, that there is nothing
in it furprifing! Now I fay boldly, as he does, that
every thing in it is furprifing: Is not every Charac-
ter furprifing ? He fays there’s no Spirit not Ge-
nius in it. Why, is not that furprifing?
As Hurlo-thrurabo fays, for all bis canting.
Pray what Ingredient of a Play is wanting ?
Mufick,Lvue,War,Death,Madnefs without fham.
Done to the Life by Perfons of the Dram.
Critick. Pray Sir , which is the Hero of your Play ?
Author. Hero! why they*re all Heroes in their
Way. ,
However, he arraigns ’em all, and even tell*
us, that Sophonijba did not love her Country, tho’
as often almofb*s,fhe (peaks, fhe tells him plainly
the contrary.
He accufes Mafmiffa of high Crimes and Mif-
demeanors, tho’ Scipio himfelf is Javjfh in his
Praife, Utri credilis , Quirites?
He calls Narva a petty Don Pylades, tho’ he is
as much unlike him as Sophonijba is to the Diflrejl-'
Mother.
Infhort, his whole Harangue upon the Charafters
is nothing but Scandalum Magnalum, without either
Hu-


Humour or Judgment, for which he ought to he
try’d in a Court of Wit call’d for that purpofe, in
Crubjlreet, the Temple, or one of the Inns of Court %
and if he be found guilty, as no doubt he would, he
fhould be fine’d a Recantation, and a Copy ofVerfes
in praife of Sophonijha , under the penalty of being
debat’d from Ink and Paper for three Months,which
I am perfuaded would be a Punifhment fuitable to
his Crime. He has divided his Remarks into three
Heads ; Defign, Thought, and Language, The
Author’s Defign, as he confeftes, both in his Preface
and Prologue, was to recommend the Love of our
Country, an Averfion to Slavery, a publick Spirit,
and heroick Virtues. Thefe are all moft notorioufly
vifible, in Sophonijha. his Heroine. For. thefe fhe
drove Syphax, in oppofition to Honour and the moft
folemn Treaties, to plunge his Country in a bloody
War. For thefe fhe confents againft her own Ho-
nour to wed Mafimjja and what diftinguifhes her
Character the in oft, is, fhe does it when there is not
the leaft Profpsd; of benefiting her Country by it •,
for fhe is convinc’d the Romans would never furren-
derher, and that Maftnijfa could not defend her.
What can his fmgle Arm againft the Roman Pow’r,
'That very Pow’r by which he Jtands rejlor’d ?
Whence it plainly follows, that what Tim. Birch
has remark’d is merely Cavil, and t£at fhe lov’d her
Country even to Madnefs.
Before I quit the Preface, give me leave to re-
mark the Author’s peculiar Modefty, who does
not aferibe to himfelf that Happinefe of creating
fomething out of nothing, or of engaging his Spec-
tators for five Acts together, by a fimple Aftion
fupported by the Violence of Paffions, the Beauty
of Sentiments, and the Noblenefs of Expreffipn,
tho’ he might juftly have faid he had engaged an
Au-


Audience for three Hours together, by a Simple
ACtion, without any fupport at all. This I hope
will fatisfy the Critick, in anfwer to his long Ha-
rangue on the Defign, Characters and Plot. I fhall
therefore leave him till I come to his Obfervation
on the Prologue. Indeed it does feem as tho’ it
had been pretty much curtail’d ; but I do affirm,
that as it is now publifh’d, there is no fuch thing in
the lead;, as a Squint upon his Friends at Court.
ACT I. SCENE I.
No fooner is the Curtain drawn, but 'Tim, Birch
falls to hacking and hewing all to pieces; in a
violent Paffien he asks, Whyfhould Madam come
tamely calm from the Tower, where Ihe had
feen Syphax * Jaft fuccefslefs decifive Effort, with no
Signs of Emotion, but a foolifh white Handker-
chief ; and there begin a Difcourfe as tho’ fhe had
never feen it ? Should we not have feen her in all
the Agonies of Grief, Defpair and Madnefs ?—with
two or three other Queftions not much more to the,
purpofe.
I will only give one Specimen of his Blunders.
He affirms, that from five or fix of the firft Lines,
no-body can difeover Ihe has feen fuch a fhocking
SpeClacle; whereas he fhould have faid, from fe-
ven or eight: and, if a Man cannot count Twen-
ty, you may eafily judge how well he is cut out
for a Critick !
The Author of that Criticifm has induftrioufly
pafs’d over all the Beauties: but, ’tis my bufinefs to
mention ’em.
But fay, thou Partner of my Hopes and Fears!
Phosniffa, fay!
Befides the beautiful Periphrafis, you may fee how
the Queen’s Spirits are in a flutter. She bids her
anfwer twice before Ihe has once propos’d the Que-
ftion.


ftiotiv ’Twas requiftte the Lady Ihbuld be in fottfe
Diforder, and don’t we conclude Pcrfofcs to be fb»
when they alk a Qiteftion that has been twice an-
{iwer’d? But may we not with more Reafon con-
clude the fame, when they call for an Anfwer to we
know not what ? Thus Tim'. Birch's Objcftioiv
which he had built s^/-high, tumbles to the
(pTound: Sic tranfit Gloria Mmdi
I wonder how he could pads over fo beautiful a
Parenthefts,
He /corn’d the Roman FHendfhip , {that fair Name
for Slavery.)
For, fo beautiful, fo ftrong ahd lading it is, that it
bears turning and dying, and dying and turning a-
gain. Since it would be both laborious andufelefs
to mention every Beauty as often-as they are repea-
ted, I flhall content my felf with only faying. This
is beautiful. Nor will I lay roundly- that any thing
is lb, becaufe it once, or twice, or thrice met with'
Applaufe •, but becaufe it fhines ; in ten'-, twenty,
thirty, forty, &c. Places. Such art One'is this,
———Carthage, wbofe Defence alone-
Enga/d my lovelefs Marriage-VoWs with his!
SoPHONiSBA lays —Had my Heart been
As all pojjfeft, and fift as hers who fits
In fecrel Shades , or by the falling
Stream ,.
And wajles her Being in mutter'd Pangs ,
I would have broke or cur’d it of its
Softnefs.
That is, tho’ her Refolution had been quite funk,
and Spirits exhaufted, Ihe would have had Courage
enough to recover it; or, if it was almoft broke,
to break it outright. Heroic Sophom/la! follows
iudly after. I wonder why the Author of the Cri-
ticifm Ihould condemn this Thought,
A


A Heart high-beating in her Country's Caufe,
Meant not for common Aims and Houjhold Cares’,
Since it is Rowe's , and bears repeating twice, and
nearly in the fame Words.
In this Scene Mr. I’homfon has Ihew’d us how great
a Mafter of Nature he is. Sophonijba having juft Rea-
fon to expert the lofs of her Husband, like our
Modifh Wives in England , comforts herfelf with the
Hopes of another, and fets her Wits to work to
mark him out: Well, Mafniffa's the Man! This is
the Hrft Inftance of that great Affection ftie bore her
Country, and of her fteddy Soul, fince amidft the
feveral fhocks of Fate fhe ftands unmov’d, and can
think and talk of Love !
The Idea we conceive of MafmiJJa is voftly rais’d
by the long Eulogium of Pbcenjfa j but fhe
only fpeaks by Hear-fay: and what is falfer than
Fame ? He that draws a Picture of a Perfon he
never faw, will undoubtedly miftake fomething in
every Feature. Don’t he know that fome Things
differ prodigioufly from their Character ?
This Tragedy may fupply the Place of a Tex-
tor's Epithets , or Gradus adParnajfum , for its Num-
ber of Synonomies, Periphrafes and Epithets, ap-
plicable not only to Rome or Romans , but any
prevailing People,. Thefirft Scene ends beauti-
fully : As foon as Sophonijba again refledls on her
Danger, and happily gueffes, that her dying Coun-
try bleeds in every Vein, a Meffenger comes and
confirms her in what fhe fear’d. This is the Mef-
fenger Mr, Birch is fo merry upon : but if he will
allow Homer to make his Achilles as ftrong as a
Dozen modern Beaus, and Virgil his Camilla fkim
o’er th’ unbending Corn, why may not Mr. Phomfon
make his Meffenger, tho’ he was wounded and
bleeding to death, with much ado , outftrip a Par-
cel of Romans , who carried too many Arms to be
able to run fall ?
C The


The Author of the Criticifm finds fault with
Flafties o’er my Soul ; tho’ Hurlo-Thrumbo us’d it
before.
Amongft the other Beauties T. B. has left unob-
ferv’d, this is one.
Sophonifba’-J fo firuck ’with this Relation the Mef-
fengep tells her, that had not the Soldier acci-
dentally mentioned the King , fhe had forgot him.
Can any thing be more natural than this ?
Mess. The King—
Soph. Ah! what of him?
Here T. B. tells us foraething of Fearlefs Hope ;
Shew me but fearlefs Hope. And is very merry up-
on it.
But here’s. no fuch Expreffion, the Phantom’s
gone, ’tis now,
Shew me the fmcdleft Hope. I fmell a Rat—Gentle-
man. [Exit Soph, and Phoen.
Enter Masinissa and Sy phax.
Notwithftanding the little Remarks of T. B. Ido
affirm, that the Scene in Rowe, between Tamerlane
and Bajazet, ought not to be compared with this.
And whereas he objcfts, that fome things too ab-
ftrufe have flipt the Author; to convince him
erf his Error, I’ll Ihew him that the Author has ex-
plain’d and paraphras’d fome of the plaineft things
in it. To inftance in one or two.
All the Rage ,
The noble Fury that infpir'd this Morn,
Is funk to foft Compassion.
This follows in the fame Speech.
Now fieeps the Sword, the Pajfons of the Field
Subfide to Peace , and my relenting Soul
Melts at thy Fate.
Again Mafiniffa thus explains what he means by
Ruffian Arts, in the next Line;
The


The Villain's Dagger, bafe Affaffi nation \
And for no Reafin all.
T. B. feems to doubt, whether there be any thing
new. Would not any Perfon imagine, that a fal-
ling Sword portends Deftruftion ? But if that be
made an Emblem of Peace and Softnefs *, is not that
new ? Again,
Life cannot hold us both! Unequal Gods!
Did you ever fee two more remarkable Notes of
Admiration, or more uncommon ?
ACT II.
The firft Speech in this Aft is truly beautiful , but
the following Lines particularly deferve our Notice.
Masjn. 'Tis true , my Friend,
I own , ’tis true , that Sophonifbas Image
Lives in my Bofom fill, and at each
Glance
I take in fecret of the bright Idea,
A ftrange Diforder feizes on my Soul,
Which burns with Jtronger Glory
Had not the Author taken particular Care, in fe-
veral Places, to explain what he means by ftronger
Glory , the Criticks would have faid, a ftrange Dif-
order had feiz’d his Senfes too ; but he has tanta-
liz’d ’em with a witnefs!
And this, for the Newnefs of the Diftion, and
the Politenefs of the Language, deferves to be di-
ftinguilhed;
Applauding Afric OF thy Choice approv'd.
Now follows the Story on which Tim. Birch en-
deavours to be witty. One Objeftion which he
makes, is, againft the Length of it. On the con-
trary, I think ’tis an Inftanee of the Author’s In-
vention, or at lead of his fpinning Faculty, who
thereby proves, that he was doubly a Son of Pal-
C 2 las ,


las, a Poet and a Spinfter: and this TB, fcems to
be aware of, when, inftead of faying the Author
had drawn it Ninety Lines, he only fays Fifty.
Tm. Birch fays fomething of bating the Author a
few Anachronifms; (if he means any thing,) he
rauft mean, his confounding the firft and laft Ac-
tions of Scipio, and Mafmiffa' s calling Narva’s Sto-
ry a faithful one before he has heard it, or can tell
whether it be fo or not; but thefe are little Cavils,
and don’t merit an Anlwer. There are a great
many more of the fame nature, which I fhall not
give my felf the trouble to reply to.
Tm. Birch mentions a fine Piece of Anatomy.
Wounds every Bleeding Nerve, &V.
Tim. by this would flily infinuate a Hyfteron and
Proteren, that the Author puts the Cart befqre the
Horfes,in making the Nerve bleed before ’tis pierc’d;
and perhaps he’ll fay, that ’tis equally abfurd to talk
of bleeding Flints, as bleeding Nerves. The Au-
thor mentions in another place, the bleeding Rack!
Why did not Tm. find fault with that too ? But I
will allow this is fomething more daring. What
then ? Mud a Poet be an Anatomift or Mathe-
matician ? But I’ll grant him once what I need not
do, namely, that he fhould be fo; and that the
Author is, will plainly appear from the following
Lines.
Bleed every Vein about me, every Nerve
With anguijh tremble, every Sinew ake.
Who but a Graduate Phyfician could have been
fo cxa£t and particular ?
Tm, Birch makes it a Qucere, what the Author
means by this ?
What Man of Soul would live, but to difftpate
An ardent Being in Heroick Deeds ?
Whereas it is not Heroick Deeds, but Heroick
Aims! Befides, ’tis the Bufinefs of a true Critick,
to


to explain an Author into Meaning, and not to ex-
plain his Meaning away: but in this Place I think
it was impoflible.
Enter Sophonisba.
The Author, from the cold Remains of about
fix Lines in Livy, has raifed the warmeft Scene in
his Play, partly by animating it with fome Thoughts
of his own, and partly by tagging it together with odd
Scraps and Ends of other good Poets: fuch as thefe ;
Oh lijien, Mafinifla, let thy Soul
Intenfely lijien !
But the Tranflation of thefe Words in Livy deferves
a Note of Admiration ; Quite melioribus accipiant
ominihus quam Sypbacem hinc miferunt!
—By our Native Gods, who may I wifh
With better Omens take thee to this Palace,
*Than they fent Syphax hence !
If there be any thing mean or ungenerous in thefe
Words, let the Author not be condemn’d, ’tis a
verbatim Tranflation!
Masinissa aflcs, What means this Conflict with Al-
mighty Nature,
JVtth the whole warring Heart ?
Tim. Birch afks, What means the Author ? when
he fliould not have aflc’d, but have explain’d the
Author’s Meaning, as I mention’d before. Had he
done this, not only the Author, but the Town
in general, would have been oblig’d to him.
Sophox. JVhofe Love was Glory.
This would have bore repeating more than thrice.
Mas. ■ '■ ' The Scene
Is full of Horror to a tainted Eye.
Which juftly contradidls the old Parasmia, ’tis too
late when the Steed’s ftolen to fhut the Stable-gate.
i Here


Here follows Sopbomjba' s Pifture, which is truly
poetical, and the numerous Paintings would em-
bellifli any Poem, and are the very Eficnce of this.
Thefe Lines efpecially:
Mien' *~— ■■ floe walks
As when a tow’ring Goddefis treads this Earth ,
Bat when hr Language flows •, when fitch a one
Defitends to fetth, to figh, to weep , to grajp
the tottering Knee, oh Narva, Narva, oh!
Expreflion here is dumb!
Compare this with a Line or two in the fecond
Aft, and you may fee how happy the Author is in
varying his Expreflion.
1 She look'd ,
And talk'd , and mov'd a Pallas or a Juno,
Accomplijh'd even in Trifles.
Which the Criticks may call an Accomplilhment
too trifling to be mention’d !
The fir ft part of the former Quotation is an Im-
provement upon Dry den, the laft of Otway.
To touch her's Heaven, hut to enjoy her! oh!
Had Otway added, Expreflion here is dumb, what
an Addition, or rather Alteration would he have
made in the Senfe!
Tim Birch that blundermaking Blundermonger
finds fault with the Sallies of a Heart at eafe, and
fays'tis the Pifture of a dumbfounding Bell, or ra-
ther of a Critick’s Skull full of Emptinefs.
He likewife finds fault with this Expreflion ;
And twines her Charms around our Soul.
Gan any thing more naturally reprefent the pro-
greflive motion of Love, and the force wherewith
it engages ? Can it be imagin’d more unnatural to
talk of a Man’s Soul’s being twifted about with fe-
male Charms, than to deferibe a Malefaftor tied
neck


neck and heels yrkh a twopenny Halter. And if
the Thought be not fo common, may we not fay
’tis new and bold?
This Act concludes with a beautiful Hyperbaton,
which confxfts in the quaint placing the Words, fo
as to ring together, and may be bcft difcover’d by
throwing ’em back into Grammatical Conftruftion.
So when the Warrior elate in Heart Jcorns to yield
the Field , &c.
This jumbling Words together till they jingle, puts
me in mind of Boys fhaking Halfpence in a Hat,
and when they hear’em chink one againft another,
tofs ’em out for a lucky Throw!
ACT III.
Mas in. folus. -In my Breafi
Some bufy Thought, fame fecret-eating Pang
Throbs inexpreffible , androwls—from what?
From Charm to Charm.
The Beauty , of that Interrogation, What ? is in-
expreflible.
The Poetical Comparifon between the Power ©f
Love and Sophonifba’s Charms has been the Subject
of feveral fine Epigrams in the Hive ; but there
feems to be one Thought in it new, and not a jot
the worfe for being fnarl’d at by Tim Birch.
And dull thy bare infinuating Arts ,
To the fweet Mazes of her flowing Tongue.
Which gives us a lively Idea of Sophoni/ba’s power-
ful Tongue, .and the captivating force with which
Ihe fpoke. The flowing Mazes may be explain’d
by a Spider’s artful weaving his Web to decoy and
entangle the buzzing Flys in its circular Folds.
Tim. Birch Ihews his teeth feveral times in, this
Scene between Narva and Mafiniffa ; but ’tis only
as Wolves howl at the Moon, becaufelhe fhines fo.
bright.
Narva


Narva tells Mafinijfa that his Vow was rafh;
that when he vow’d, he vow’d what was not in his
power to grant, and therefore ’twas not binding.
Masinissa. Never , never ,
Oh never will I faljify that Vow :
E’er then Defiruhion feize me — Tes, ye Romans,
If it be fo , there-, take your Kingdoms back , &c.
’Twas much T. B. mifs’d asking.
If what be fo, where
‘Then if they fpare her not —not /pare my Queen!
Perdition on their ftuhborn Pride call’d Virtue ,
Be theirs the World, and Sophonifba mine.
I have heard thefe two foremention’d Sentences
carp’d at in a publick Coffee-Houfe. The former
as being confus’d and unintelligible, the later as be-
ing contradictory to itfelf. I have pointed out in
what manner they objected to the ftrft : and to the
laft, they fay, how fhould Sophonijla be his, if they
fpared her not? But every one knows, that a Lover
may lay down falfe Maxims, if they carry a Ihew
of Reafon; or that he may talk incontinently to
Reafon. And fince Lovers are Mad-men, Ido not
fee but they may talk contradictory to themfelves,
without any juft Cenfure to the Poet.
The next Sentence has not efcap’d the Cenfure of
the Sons of Clay.
Can Mafinifia in his Pride of Touth —
He take a Woman to the Nuptial Bed ,
Who fcorn’d him for a Tyrant, &c.
They fay it is moft likely that he Ihould do it
when his youthful Blood beat high. So be it, and
no doubt the Author meant it as an excufeto foften
his Hero’s Crime ; ’tisnot that Argument, but the
others that are level’d to diffuade him.
Masinissa’s next Expreffion is arraign’d,
—Horrid Friendship !
’Tis bold, and new ! Tim,


Tilth Birch in feveral Places makes a fplutter about
the Perfons of the Drama appearing when their Names
are call’d upon 5 and concludes, that our modern
Poets muft be a fort of Conjurers, fince they can
make whom they will appear by a Word’s fpeaking.
The moft fuitable time for any Actor to appear, is,
when the Author may juftly conclude the Audience
wants ’em; hut the Spectators at ourA«£/i/£Theatres
are feldom fo intent, as not to require Monitors,
(fomething like the Flappers in Laputa,) Now would
it not be very odd to fee a Perfon come upon the
Stage to give notice her Majefty was coming. Room
for her Majefty, or to alk the Audience whether they
wanted her Majefty ? What muft be done then ?
Let the Adlor, the only Perfon privileg’d to fpeak,
inquire for her. Won’t the Audience then look out
for her ? And this, as I have fhew’d before, is the
moft proper time for her Appearance. I put this
Remark here, becaufe as foon as Mafmijfa has en-
quir’d for Sophonijba, Ihe enters. {Exit Narva.
Enter Sophonisba.
Tim. Birch., the laft Son of Zoilus , would infiniiate,
that Sophonijba had not the leaft Tendernefs for the
unhappyS^ax,which is as true as his other Remarks
are juft. She had indeed forgot to mention him,
but Rage, Confufion, andfuch like mingled fo.fuons
may plead her juft Excufe ; but ftie makes a quick
Return, in lei's than two hours : tho’ fotne of the
four Race of Criticks may objeft, that ’twas very un-
feafonable to alk Mafmijfa fo extraordinary and even
unreafonable aßequeft,as theLibertyof Syphax,when
Ihe found his Looks alter’d, fcowling a Denial, and
Repentance frowning on his contracted Brow. But
does not this inhance the Merit of her ViCtory, does
not this give us a greater Idea of Sophonifba' s Power ?
And that beautiful Battle between Rome and Car-
thage, tho’it lies under the Lilli not only Oi Tim,Birch,
D but


but of all his envious Tribe, has bore the Examina-
tion of greater Judges, as well as the whole Scene.
Some Perfons cavil at fuch Expreffions as thefe:
Heat cf Anguifi ! down! down f
Impatient Spirit down !
Out Jlubborn Nature!
And the like •, to which I reply, had not the Author
thought them good, he would not have ufed them fo
often.
Some again fay, that if Captivity deftroy’d her for-
mer Marriage, the reftoring Syphax all again reduc’d
her to he former State, and then ’twas notorioufly
bafe to marry another i but this reftoring Syphax
all, is only on condition the Lady be left to her
pleafure: and who can condemn the Author for
making her perfer a young blooming Hero to a
wither’d old impotent Hunks ? What Lady in Eng-
land., think you, would not have done the fame ?
Tun . Birch is very ungenerous in this, as well as
other Places, in condemning the Author for bor-
rowing from others, fince what he has taken is only
fuch as any Perfon, on fuch Occafions, could not
have efcaped thinking on.
Crowns, Gewgaws , Balls, Globes, Rattles, Toys and
Trifles,
Crowns, Kingdoms ; all, all, all again but thee.
But thee, thou more than all!
Sophonijba modeftly confents with thefe Lines;
Gain’d by thy Gocdnefs,
I may be thine ; Expeii no Love, no Sighing :
Perhaps hereafter I may learn again
To hold thee dear. If on thefe Terms thorn canjl.
Here take "ine, take me to thy Wijhes.
If Tim. Birch has made ever a juft Obfervation,
that on the Smile which eoncludes this A£l is one.
A CT


ACT IV.
. Sepboni/ha, in the Beginning of this Aft, tells her
Friend Phceniffa , Ihe was already fick of the Mar-
riage. What, fays a Critick in my Hearing, has fhe
got Qualms already, ’tis rather too foon to be breed-
ing, or did not the young Lover behave himfelf to
her liking? Says another, what did fhe marry for ?
Could fhe not fee that Mafmiffa had not Power to
fave her before as well as now ? What could fhe
propofe ? I anfwer’d, if there be a Fault, ’tis Livy’s
and not the Author’s, who in this particular has fol-
low’d him. They deny’d the Fault to be Livy’s.
Mr. Thomfon, fay they, by fixing Scipio’ s and La-
tins’ s Arrival fo near, by making fuch an univerfal
Havock in the Battle, and reprefenting Sophonijbct
as the only Objeft of the Romans Vengeance, has
taken away all Profpeft of Hopes, which Livy ne-
ver thought of. I told ’em, I thought it was all
mere Spight, and that they condemned becaufe they
could not equal, or even imitate. The only An-
fwer I received, was, a Sneer, which had the effeft
upon me it fhould have produc’d in themfelves.
Phoen. And had the white Occafion
NeglePlcd flown , where now bad been
your Hopes ?
Tour Liberty ? Tour Country ? Where
your all ?
Think well of this, think that, think eve-
ry way.
Didyou ever fee more Thought in one Line ? The
Reafon that the Word think is fo often repeated, may
be this •, Sophonijba was a Lady not much given to
the Fatigue of thinking •, wherefore Phcsniffa ,
like a dutiful Girl, inculcates it the oftner. Or
the three Injunctions may regard the three grand
grand Articles in the foregoing Line, fince they fo
aptly fquare with ’em , as thus, Tour Liberty ? Think
D 2 well


well of this , Your Country ? Think that , Your All ?
Think every way.
Tim. Birch finds fault with three Expreffions of
our Author.
It kills my very Soul!
For whom my Soul could die!
My Soul itfelf Would die /
As tho’ it was neceftary for a Hero or Heroine, to
have read Plato 1
Soph, fays t 6 Sypbax 1 married thee
Becaufe to Carthage deem'd a fironger Friend.
The Criticks, who only deal in Blunders, and will
find or make lome, (tho* generally the latter) muft
be fleering : they fay our Author has tied fuch a
Gordian-Knot in the Hiftory of the Drama, as they
can neither cut nor unravel. Sometimes he fays,
that Mafinijfa quitted Sophmijba for Rome ; fome-
times, that Sypbax (which muft: be after his Mar-
riage with Sophonijba, for many Realbns men-
tion’d in the Play) drove him from his Crown, and
made him feek Protedion under Scipio. In one
Place’ris faid, Ihe married Sypbax becaufe he was a
Friend to Rome. In another ’tis faid, after fhe mar-
ried Sypbax , fhe drove him, in fpight of Honour
and facred Leagues, againft fhe Romans. Should
I reply, that Virgil, the moft judicious of Epick
Poets, has been guilty of Anachronifms, they would
fay, that neverthelefs he is confident with himlelf:
But fince it puzzles the Criticks, I lhall only fay, I
rejoice. ’Tis pity but they were always ferv’d fo;
and I don’t queftion but the Author will always
ferve ’em fo.
Mr. Thomfon is fo far from ufing Words without
any Meaning, (as Tim. Birch would infinuate) that
moft of his Sentences will bear two i for Inftance,
Soph, afks Sypbax,
—-Why cam'fi thou here ?
Syph,


Sy ph. . STo ftab thee—‘and /fringing from thy Heart
To quench me with thy Blood.
Where fpringing from thy Heart may agree either
with me (Syphon) or Blood. But the Criticks fay
the Order of the Words will not allow the latter, and
that if Sypbax had intended to have quench’d him
with her Blood, the way was not to have fprung
from her.
I iKall conclude this Scene with a Refledkm of
Tim. Birch* S, by which you may judge of his Can-
dor. He feems to be furpriz’d that Sophsmjba
fhouid fay.
This is my Support, my Joy, my Glory,
The Confcience that my Heart abhors dl Baftnefs i
And of all Bafenefs moft. Ingratitude:
Since Sypbax at her Inftigation had embroyl’d him-
felf in all the Miferies of War, and plunged himfelf
from the Height of Regal Pomp, to the loweft
Pitch of Contempt, to become a Slave to the l\£an
he hated f and his loving Spoufe had never been to
fee him or comfort him in his fallen State.
Enter LuELius to Syphax.
Tim. Birch begifis this Scene with a Hue and Cry
after Mafmijfa, where is he ? what can be become
of him? why did he not wait on Ledins? Why,
fay the Criticks, he might be about his private
Occasions, or tired with amorous Parley, taking a
refrefiling Nap. But might he not be giving t>rders
to Narva ? Nay, ’tis plain he was, he fays fa
hitnfelf.
Lselius fays of Sophonijba 5
Her Charms are only turn'd to whet Us cruel Point,
That is, thePointof Wac,whence the Criticks would
infer, that the Poet has made a fort of Grindle-
ftone of Sophonijba*i Face, for the God War to
fharpen his Sword on.
Leslie s


Lcslius fays. To-morrow comes the Proconfitl.
Here the Criticks again object, and fay, this is the
fecond or third time we have been told that Scipio
Comes to-morrow. They would have us believe,
that he fliould either have come fooner, or unex-
pected. They ask, were Maftnffa, Lcelius and
Scipio all Prophets? How could they tell that Sci-
pio would come to Cirtha ? How could Scipio know
infuch a Ihort fpace that Cirtha was taken? Scipio
muft be at fome diftance, otherwife no doubt his
Prefence being fo neceflary, would not have been
wanting in the Battle. But have we not greater
‘Wonders reported for certain Truths in the Roman
Hiftory! Did not Cajior and Pollux ride into the
Roman Forum after a Battle near 200 Miles di-
llant, and relate what had paft ? Might not Fame
blow her Trumpet, and fpread the News over A-
fric in an Inftant ? Or might not Scipio and Maftnijfa
have fuch fympathetick Loadftones as the Spectator
deftribes, by which they might converfe at the
greateft diftance ?
I need not remark on Lcelius's Character •, for
fome Perfons fay ’ds too ftiort by half, and others
fay *cis as much too long.
Tim. Birch fnarls at a Smile of Maftniffa' s, which
one would think would make a whole Audience
laugh:
For while I fee thee meditate thy Charms ,
1 fmile as cordial as the Sun in May!
"Which the Author beautifully explains by the fol-
lowing Lines :
Deep from the Heart in every Senfe of Joy
I fondly fmile.
Some Criticks fay, that every Senfe of Joy no more
allows a Smile, than every Senfe of Grief will per-
mit a Tear. But I no more regard what fome Cri-
ticks fay, than I do what fome Men write.
Sopho-


Sophonisba. Tou lore his 'Threats, and tamely ffilent
heard him:
Oh Utter !
Ob bitter bad, fays the Critick ; which I Ihrewdly
fufpedt to be Tm. Birch, from a peculiar four Look j
but I attribute all this to the overflowing of his own
Gall. And the Author having faid, in another place,
Ob bitter! bitter!
The fame Perfon reply’d, the Author’s Bitters ra-
ther turn a Perfon’s Stomach, than whet his Appetite.
From this laft Scene the Criticks tell us, they are
big with Expeditions of fome Adtion; but lam
heartily pleas’d they are difappointed.
Mas. —— 1 vow'd my Life,
My laft Maflylian to the Sword, e'er he
Should touch thy Freedom with the leaftDiJhonour.
Againj With all Maflylia in one Field expire.
Again, iVbrßome, nor Scipio, nor a World combin'd
Shall tear thee from me, till out-ftretch'd I lie
A namelefs Wretch. Sine nomine truncus.
Again, Oh Gods! Oh Patience! as foon, fiery Roman,
As foon thy Rage might from her azure Sphere
'Tear yonder Moon ; the Man who feizes her
Shall fet his Foot firft on my bleeding Heart ;
Of that be fure.
How ill other Poets have fucceeded in repeating
their Thoughts, and how well our Author, is matter
of Surprize to fome ; but it can be owing to nothing
but his fupcrior Genius ; and I think ’tis fo far from
being a Fault, that ’tis one of the greateft Beauties in
the whole. For have not Virgil and Homer repeated
the fame Lines in the fame manner ?
Thus our Author,
My happier Eyes are turn'd another way.
Behold it not, or if they do behold it.
Shrunk up far off a vijionary Scene,
As to the waking Man appears a Dream.
In


In another place,
Ceafe thus to talk.
My fofter Thoughts thofe rugged Scenes refufe,
Can turn alone to Love .—-All, all hut thee y
All Nature is a pajfmg Dream to me.
Tim. Birch fays this A£t concludes with four Lines
ofRhime. Oh Envy! why are there not eight of
them ?
Mas. Thou the high Pajfms, I the tender prove.
Thy Heart was form'dforGlory, minefromLove.
Did youeverfeca more tragical Couple? Would not
any one imagine that her Hand was cut out for a
Sceptre, and his for a Diftaff, or that he Jhould not
have worn the Petticoats, Ihe the Breeches ?
A Spirit thine, which Mortals might adore,
Defpijtng Love, and thence creating more.
Some Perfons may imagine, that the Author meant
creating what they defpis*d •, but take ray Word
for it, that is not the Author's Meaning.
A C T V.
The Author of the Criticifm would infinuate, that
Scipio, a Perfon fo immediately concern’d in the Play
flionld have made his Entrance fooner. I am fo far
from looking on this as a Fault, that I take it to be
an Inllance of the Author’s Addrcfs-and Skill: who
in order to inhancc our Efteem of that great Hero,
has only given us a Glimpfe of him, as Virgil, fpeak-
ing of Marcelhs , fays ;
Hum tantum terris oflendunt fata, neque ultra
Effe finunt.
Which is indifputably the greateft Complement he
could have paid him.
Scipio returns Mafinijfa’s Joy in thefe Words ;
My Heart heats back thy Joy.
Which


Which Image, however banter’d by Tim. Birch , is a
lively Representation of a Tennis-Ball beat to and fro
by two Rackets ; and I am fure at lead Mafinijfa’s
Heart may bejuftly compar’d to one. A mongft
theArgumcnts which Scipio ufes to recover Mafintffay
I cannot but mention one, not for the Newnefs of the
Thought, for it has been us’d before ifarua had it,
but for the Newnefs of one Expreffion which the Au-
thor has himfelf diftinguilh’d in Italick Characters,
as tho’ it was not of a piece with the reft, but a Frag-
ment of golden Tiflue clapp’d on a piece of Crape.
Shall then the DEAD SERENE ofPleafure come.
And lay thy faded Honours'in the Dufi?
What Idest to fix to this Dead Serene may not
appear at firft fight, or how any thing that is
dead, may be allow’d a power of moving and act-
ing : Again, thdfe being two Adjuncts, how can we
draw a SubjeCt from ’em ? Befides, there fefems to be
an Oxymoron, a Figure in Rhetorick much in vogue
amongft Poets, call’d Nonfenfe. The difficulty
is further confirm’d by the Genus of thfe Serene
Dead, namely of Pleafure. Now the Reader will
fay 1 am dreffing up a gigantick Difficulty in the
moft formidable Armour, that I may reap the
greater honour in defeating it. Was I lure of that
Cenfure being pafs’d upon me, I would let it alone.
Yet if I do retreat, the Criticks will accufe me of
Cowardice, that from a Shadow I rais’d a Bugbear,
and run away from it. Come’tis high time to en-
ter the Lifts. By a Metonymy any thing may be
call’d Pale that creates Pafenels, Cold that Caufes
Coldnefs, thus Farnaby it, pale Famine and
cold Death i and why may not any thing be call’d
dead that caufes Death?, By dead then underftand
deftruCVive; Serene by a Metonymy of the Ad-
junct, may be put for Serenity ; and then this Dead
Serene may fignify the deftruClive Serenity of Plea-
E fure.


furc. But then fay the Criticks, how does this a-
gree with what went before ?
Shall then in prof per ous 'times, when all is fair,
All vernal mild~
Shall then the Dead Serene of Pleafure come.
Yes, fboner, fay they, than at any other time,
"What Anfwer can one give to Men that will rea-
fon fo?
The Author has very learnedly fliew’d his Skill
in feveral Arts and Sciences befides Poetry, in the
following Lines.
thro ' what enchanted Wilds have I been wandring,
But the Divinity which breathes from thee
Has broke the Charm
Late, a pure joyous Calm o'erfpread my Soul,
And Reafon tuned my Pafftons into Bit/s,
When Love came hurrying in, and with rajh hand
Min'd them dilirious, 'till they now ferment
to Mifery ; there is no reafoning down,
this deep, deep Anguijh.
1. Necromancy.
2. Navigation,
3. Mufick.
4. A Paffion—Cooper’s Trade.
5. Chymiftry.
6. Philofophy.
’Tis faid that that if all the Books in the World
were burnt but Virgil and Homer, the Arts and
Sciences would ftill remain in their Works, but
with how much reafon and wonder may it be faid of
a few Scenes, nay of a few Lines in this Play ?
tim. Birch would infinuate that our Author is
to be blamed for ufmg the fame Arguments three
limes over by Narva , Lcelius and Scipio. But how
could it be avoided ? Since the Arguments are fo
common, they muft have been blind not to have
feen, and unpardonable not to have us’d ’em. And
the


the repeating of’em, as Tim Birch is oblig’d to con-
fers, is the ftrongeft Argument of their goodnefs.
Tim. Birch fays Sophonijba is at length purg’d front
thofe Vapburs thac the Author had caft over her*
Eyes, and fees her Error : I hope he does not mean,
’tis too foon !’ And I affirm ’tis not too late, fines-
fhe muft be undeceiv’d at laft, the longer it is de-
ferf’d, the better. Well the Enchantment’s broke..
The fancied Realms of Pleaifure, the gay Utopian.
Scenes of Blifs are vanifh’d, and fhe finds herfclf a.
real Slave, but fach fhe difdain’d to live, and there-
fore prepares for Death, and lo! a Meffenger comes
(as Tim. Birch has it) with a Letter in one hand,
a Bowl of Poifon in the other, and Nonfenfe in
his Mouth, all which is highly juft and natural!
This, Madam , from the King. , and ibis
The Confufion which fhe difeovers at the receiv-
ing it, the frequent Contradictions are far from be-
ing criminal. The Thoughts upon Eternity are
fine, and tho’ Tim. Birch fays they came cheap tc.»
the Author, there is one for the peculiarity of the:
turn, may be juftly call’d the Author’s own: fhe fays.
Death appears not in a dreary light ,
Seems not a Blank to me a lofing all ,
Thofe fond Senfatlnns , th'fe enchanting D"ra>ns\
Which cheat a toiling World from day to day.
And form the Whole of Happinefs they know.
Had Death appear’d in this light, there was no-,
thing terrible in it, but- rather pleafant •, fome Ids!
judicious Authors would have made a Contrail:
between a frightful and pleafant Appearance, but
both parts of our Author’s Contraft have fomething
pleafant in ’em, Whence we may conclude ’tis a ve-
ry pleafant Contraft.
Tim. Birch ’is obliged to confefs that the manner
in whch fhe fets out is truly Cotburnian j
Ye


Ye Gods of Death, who rule the Stygian Gloom,
Ye, who have greatly dy* and, I come! I come!
We are tdd that a Swan, the facred Bird of Phce-
hus, being about to make her Exit, daps her
Plumes and fings a funeral Ode. Hence we fee how
natural it is for Poets, as being Retainers to the
fame Deity, not only to quit the Stage of Life
themfelves, but even to make their Creatures depart
in Rhime, or a Half-jingle at leaft.
As foon as Sophonjbba has drank her dofe of Nec-
tar, and is convey’d to her Couch, Mafmijfa enters,
who not willing to believe his Eyes, afks, whether
Jhe has drunk it or no ? Well, he perceives Ihe has,
Oh! Horror! Horror f what aJightis here!
If there are any Faults in this dying Scene, I que-
ftion not but every one will be as willing to look 'em
overasl am ! Let the Critick confider, it requires
more Skill for a Poet to murder a Hero or a He-
roine cleverly, than it does for a Phyfician to kill
half a fcore common Fellows. Our Author is but
ii young Praditioner in the Killing Way; it is hoped
:in rime he will become a very dextrous Executioner.
TheCriticks objed, that from the Tenor of the
Hiftory it was intirely improper for Mafmijfa to ap-
pear again on the Stage, That what had related
to him fhould have been declared by Narva or Lce-
iius to Scipio.
Again they fay, the laft Hopes mention’d by
Mafmijfa were intirely unnatural •, which the Au-
thor feem’d fenfible of, otherways we fhould have
been inform’d what they were.
That his real or imaginary Death are , equally ab-
furd and contradidory to Reafon as well as Hiftory.
They defend Tim. Birch , in calling the Prophecy
which concludes the whole abfurd, I anfwer’d, that
'the Author of the Siege of Saguntum, and Denham
in his Britifh Inchamrefs , had introduced the like.
They


They reply, that both thefe Perfons were declared-
ly infpir’d at the time, but that Lcelius had given
no marks of his being a Conjurer. A parcel of
fad Fellows thefe Criticks!
Some Perfons that feem to be Friends of the
Author, fay they could wiffi he had lopp’d off
fome unneceffary Branches, and reduced the five
Afts to the Compafs of one : Whence the Fire
which is diffus’d thro’ the whole, by being reduced
into a lefs fpace, would have had a more forcible
Effeft. This may feem a Reflection at firft fight,
but view it nearer, and it becomes a handfome Com-
pliment, fince there are few Pieces, efpecially fuch
as are copied from French., but what may be reduc’d
into a much lefs than a fifth part of the whole.
However I am not for this Chymical Extra ft ing the
Quinteflence from Plays. And as for the Teeming
Faults, I think they are fo far from being a juft Ob-
jection to the Author’s Merit, that I look upon ’em
as an inftance of the Author’s Conduft and Fineffe
in having judicioufly plac’d ’em as Shades to the
reft.
I'm. Birch fays, Thus with much difficulty I have
cut my way thro’ all the Acts and Scenes of Sopho-
nijba. Indeed Ido believe he did it with much diffi-
culty; for he feems to write in fpite both of Wit and
Nature. I have anfwer’d him, tho’ not fo much with
a Defign to humour him as to pleafe my felf, and
wipe off thofe Reflections he has endeavoured (and
but endeavoured) to call upon the Perform ance.
If he has fliew’d any Faults, I have fhew’d. him
double the Number of Beauties. As to his. little
Cavil about Expletives, I think’em not exceptio-
nable, fince they often perferve the Harmc.ny of
the Numbers, and fupply the fame Place in Poetry,
as broken Bricks do in Buildings, fill up Cavities,
and render the whole Structure more firm and du-
rable.
I


I fhall conclude thefe Remarks with clearing the
ingenious Author of Sopbonijha, from an Imputa-
tion he may pofilbly lie under, on account of ’em:
for the Town, no doubt, upon reading this Pam-
phlet, will conclude, that either he or fome of his
Friends haVe wrote it: the latter I cannot deny,
but I, allure ’em, the Author is fo far from being
concern’d in it, that he never faw it before it was
publiih’d, and that I had not fo much as one Remark
communicated by him. I mull confefs ’twas prin-
cipally owing to my not having the Happincfs of
being pcrfonally known to him, that I did not con-
fide him Upon feveral material Articles, which I have
induftrioufly omitted: and fincel have been fo in-
genuous in my Confeffion, I hope that heandothers
that fhall do me the Honour to read this Anfwer,
will readily excule what little Slips I may have been
guilty of.
As I have endeavour’d to do Juftice to Mr.
Thomson’s Play, and clear’d him from being
thought the Author of this Anfwer, I am likewiie
willing tofaveMr. Joseph Mitchel the trouble
of another Advertifemenr, (tho’ hereby I difappoint
the Town of a little Mirth ;) and therefore do pro-
teft, That Mr. Joseph Mitchell, Authorof the
Shoe-Heel a Rbaffody, and other Poetical Works,
bp which he has greatly diftinguilh’d himfelf a-
mongfl; the Sons of Parnajpus , had no hand in this •,
ami to rids Proteflation, I believe all who are ac-
quainted with his Character, and Spirit, (as
the.se are few who are not) and confider how well he
Knows Himself, will fubferibe. I fhall conclude
■with a Piece of friendly Advice to T. B. tho’ he
does not deferve it, That the next time he writes,
he would Jake more Time and ufe lefs 111-nature.
FINIS.
