

Sociology in Australia
i PLEA roil ITS TEACHING
FRANCIS ANDERSON
I’BOriiSSOB OF PHILOSOPHY, TJNIVIiKSITT OF STDHSY
SYDNEY
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, Dm,
89 CASTLBEEAQH STREET


FOREWORD
I here publish notes of an address delivered at the
last meeting of the Australasian Association, for the
Advancement of Science. The subject is of special
interest at the present moment to- Sydney University,
since the Government of New South Wales has Just
increased the annual grant to the University, in order
that provision may be- made for the institution of
certain new departments of study, iiicliiding
Bconomies,
Now, the subject of Economies cannot he taught
properly, apart from instruction in the more general
sciences of Sociology and Polities. This is acknow-
ledged, both in theory and practice, in American,
German, and French Universities, and also, although
to a lesser extent in British Universities. At present,
some instruction is given in Sydney University, in the
elements of Political Science by the Professor of Law,
and in the elements -of Sociology and Political Philos-
ophy by the Professor of Philosophy, hut there is a
crying need for the establishment -of separate chairs
in these subjects. The new courses of instruction
would be largely attended by students in the Faculties
of Arts and Law, and by students drawn from the
general public, as well as by members of the Depart-
ment -of Economics,
It would he wiser, in my opinion, to institute a
School of Economic, Social, and Political Science,
than to limit the new department! to a somewhat
narrow semi-professional training in Economies and
Commerce. The three main branches in such a school
would he Sociology, Economies, and Politics. Of
these, Sociology is the most fundamental. The teach-
ing -of Economics in British Universities has suffered
greatly in the past, because of its divorce from the
study of: the general phenomena of social life and the


laws of social development. All the latest and most
important work in Economies presupposes a scientific
acquaintance with the more general and fundamental
science of Sociology.
As for the science of Politics, a lectureship on that
subject might for the present suffice, the main business
of the lecturer being the discussion of theories of the
State and of Government. But it is, in my opinion,
of vital importance that a professorship rather than a
lectureship be established in the Science of Sociology.
It is very unlikely that a competent man could be
obtained if only a subordinate lectureship in Sociology
were instituted.
In a young University in a new country, the subject
of Sociology cannot he neglected without danger to
the usefulness of the University to the community.
It is perhaps unnecessary to emphasise further the
scientific importance of the subject in the interest of
knowledge, but I may remind readers that, as Professor
Biddings says, “ No other subject calls for such serious
attention from teachers and students of educational
philosophy at the present time, as that of the best
preparation for an intelligent and responsible citizen-
ship.’!
FRANCIS ANDERSON.
University of Sydney,
January, 1912.


SOCIOLOGY IN AUSTRALIA
A PLEA EOE, ITS TEACHING
In a country which claims to be a pioneer in the field
of social and political practice, no place is found in
the head centres of the national education for the
teaching of the science of society. In no University
in Australia is there a Chair of Sociology. There is
none at Oxford. There is one at Chicago. And some
people have no doubt as to which example we should
follow. In an English University, however, a new
subject has to go through a long period of probation
before it is admitted to the academic sanctury. There
are some countries in which the Universities lead. In
England the tendency is in the main the other way,
the Universities follow. An original thinker like
Herbert Spencer is first ignored by the official teachers
of Philosophy, then attacked, and finally admitted as
a proper subject of examination. A new science like
Sociology is left to the outsider, the free lance, the
popular press. Only when it has been made respect-
able by public recognition and foreign example, is it
regarded as a safe subject for University teaching.
Have we forgotten the old ideal of a University, that
it should be a place for learning as well as for teaching,
that it exists not merely for the inculcation of the
known and accepted, but for the advancement and
extension of knowledge.
Our Australian Universities share some of the
defects of the English type of University, an excessive
adherence to tradition, and a disinclination to adapt
the academic organisation to the demands made by
changing social conditions. They are farther handi-
capped by the inadequate supply of funds. The funds
available are not sufficient for the maintenance of
efficient instruction in the recognised standard sub-
jects, or for the establishment of new chairs in depart-
ments of knowledge, of a more directly utilitarian


nature. Only in the last year, for example, has
provision been made for University instruction on a
subject so important to the economic welfare of
Australia, as agriculture. One unfortunate result of
the financial -cramp, a result perhaps unavoidable in
a new University in a new country, is that the time
and the energies of the teacher are overburdened by
the routine work of class teaching, examination, and
the reading of innumerable exercises and essays. He
becomes a wheel in a great examination machine until
worn out, he is removed to be replaced by another
Happily, there are signs -of improvement and hope for
the future. Our greatest hope lies in the awakening
of the Australian democracy to a consciousness of the
immense importance of the higher education in the
national life, and in the decay of that old academic
jealousy which drew a mystic ring round certain
favoured subjects, and opposed the admission of others
as unworthy of a place in an institution which yet
claimed to be a national University. Little more than
a generation has passed since the representative
spokesman of Sydney University declared in the great
hall, that “ there would never be a nrofessor of
manures in the University of Sydney.” A great
many changes have taken place since the date of that
foolish utterance, changes in the academic situation
and temper, and changes in the political situation, and
temper as well. Perhaps the greatest change is one
which is not mei’ely local, or national, but universal,
world-wide in its sweep and significance. Human
society has been roused to a sense of its own- importance,
and of the need, of social -security through social
efficiency and social justice. Customs, laws, institu-
tions have lost much of their sanctity. Even when
the new values are simply the old rewritten, with a
popular or utilitarian sanction substituted for the
traditional class, ecclesiastical, or theological sanction,
the fact remains that we are passing through a-stage
of social criticism and reconstruction, and that in such
criticism and reconstruction, knowledge and wisdom
are often lamentably lacking. Now, wisdom may be a


gift of the gods, but knowledge conietli not by prayer
and fasting. Wisdom may not be communicated. It
is the fair flower of life, or the bitter fruit of experi-
ence. It is always personal, incommunicable, and
although it is not independent of knowledge, it does
not always follow from it. Otherwise our politicians
would not so abound, and our statesmen be so rare.
Otherwise our schools and universities would not turn
out so many fools. Therefore Ido not plead for the
admission of Sociology among subjects of University
instruction on the ground that it will provide a gospel
of social regeneration. Sociology, like any other
science, may have a more or less direct bearing on
practice, but its first concern is with knowledge, with
the facts and the explanation of the facts. The fact
to be explained is simply society itself, its genesis and
growth, and the laws by which it lives and'moves and
Ims its being". Sociology is the latest and least devel-
oped of the- sciences, partly because the sciences on
which it most closely depends, biology and psychology,
are not yet sufficiently advanced to furnish principles
which can supply a valid basis for deductive explana-
tion, The greatness and complexity of the task tempt
the investigator as they tempt the social reformer .to
oversimplify the problem. Sociology is identified with
statistics, or economics, or applied psychology.
Statistics, however, is not a science at all. It is a
■method not peculiar to any science, which provides
material for investigation and explanation to all the
sciences. Sociology is just as much or as little applied
biology, or applied psychology, as biology is applied
chemistry, or chemistry applied physics. Economics
is one of the social sciences, but is not Sociology. It
deals with a fragment, and not with the whole. Its
results are valid and intelligible only when brought
into connection with the larger life of society, of which
they form hut one partial aspect. To put it shortly,
Sociology is a “mother science,” just as the funda-
mental sciences of physics, chemistry, biology, and
psychology may be described as mother sciences.
They are general studies, which are capable of sub-


division and ramification, inclusive of many special
departments, but each dealing with certain general or
fundamental facts, and issuing in the discovery of
general laws which govern in subordinate and
apparently independent departments. In the history
of scientific discovery, it often happens that the
subordinate department is investigated and attains
the dignity and name of science before the mother
science itself. Thus botany and zoology were
advanced subjects of study before biology, of which
they are both special branches, had even been given its
name. Economies, in like manner, has been developed
for generations, as if it were 'a separate and indepen-
dent study, with no filiation to the general science of
society, the science now known as Sociology. This
general and fundamental science, this mother science,
Sociology, is now in main outline firmly established.
There -are schools of Sociology in many of the Univer-
sities of Europe and America, all doing excellent
work. In Cambridge and in London, advanced work
in Sociological research is now being carried on with
successful results, and various scientific journals of
Sociology, both English and foreign, need only to be
consulted for evidence of the great and growing impor-
tance of the new science.
As pragmatists would say, the new science has come
into being in response to the demands of practical
life, rather than to complete an ideal scheme of
perfect knowledge. The ideal social schemes of the
past were the visions of prophets or the a priori eon-
strnetions of philosophers. The Sociology of the
present is not a scheme at all, but a science. It has
arisen, not to provide a. new heaven and a new earth,
but to enable ns to understand the earth on which we
stand, and the laws of man’s actual habitation. If
it is true, as I said, that the greatest change of
modem times, is the fact that human, society has been
roused as it never was before, to a sense of its own
significance, and of the need of social security through
social efficiency and social justice, we: need not be
surprised at the claim made for the new science in


the old. world as in the new. Biology has been called
the science of the nineteenth century. Sociology
seems destined to be the science of the twentieth
century.
To the great protagonist of modern socialism, Karl
Marx, belongs the merit of having formulated the
problem of Sociology in a way which forced it upon
public attention. The importance of Marx’s epoch-
making work, like that of Spencer’s, was recognised
outside University circles long before it was treated
with any respect from within. Unfortunately, the
scientific problem, was soon lost sight of, by both Marx
and his followers, in the heat of revolutionary zeal.
The scientific thesis was transformed into a political
dogma. The creed of collectivism was preached with
the fervour, and its almost invariable accompaniment,
the intolerance of the religious devotee, It is probable
that the emphasis on the political element, while it
served to stimulate party and popular interest, has
helped to delay the admission of Sociology within the
serene abodes of academic research, where? none is for
a party, but all are for the truth. I am, Md that the
establishment of a Chair of Economics in Sydney
University was blocked for twenty years, because it
was thought in certain quarters that the Professor of
Economies would think it his duty to preach the
doctrine of free trade. To such uses can polities
.descend! It may be that similar objections will be
made to the establishment of a Chair of Sociology. It
may be urged that it is tampering with socialism,
playing with fire. Better keep to the safe ground of
algebra and Latin, prose. Yet such objections proceed
from the same lips which utter laments over the insig-
nificant part played by the national Universities in
the national life, and over the small number of
University graduates who enter the field of politics.
As for the charge of partisanship, all I can say is
that in my reading of the works of European and
American Professors of Sociology, I have never met
with. any signs of it. There may be differences of
opinion on many fundamental questing not yet settled,


but it is the scientific spirit which prevails through-
out, and not the spirit of the political or the religions
propagandist.
What is the fundamental problem of the Sociologist!
It is to ascertain the natural laws which are manifested
in social growth. The collectivist picks out one factor of
the complex social process, selects a single motive from
the intricate web of human psychology, and explains
all history on the basis of material interests, economic
struggle, and class consciousness. The science of
Sociology likewise simplifies the problem, but it does
so, not hi the service of any political gospel, bat solely
in order to satisfy the requirements of scientific
research. When we tiy to arrange human motives
and forms of social life in any kind of order, we find
that some are simpler, more fundamental than othera.
There is, it is said, a law of urgency in human effort,
through which man waits to satisfy his less urgent
needs until, he has made some provision for the more
urgent. This does not mean that religion is less vital
to man than food or rainment, or that a fine sunset is
of no importance to a man as compared with a good
dinner, or his trade union ticket. It does not mean
that the Scottish character has been formed more by
oatmeal porridge than by the shorter catechism. All
kinds of exceptions and qualifications .may be
admitted. We may give the utmost importance to the
working of the economic motive, and still ask, “ What
shall it profit a man though he gain the whole world
and lose his own soul?” All that is meant is that in
the present state of our knowledge, Sociology, like
every other science in its earlier stages, has to simplify
in order to govern. It has to search for causes and
laws, and if it is not to lose itself in the complexity
of, special problems, it must look first of all for the
simpler and more fundamental causes which dominate
in the intricate interplay of human motive and outer
circumstance, social man and his environment. At
the basis of all social phenomena, there remain the
great causes which are to he referred to the nature
of the territory and population, the mode of the for-


mation of each in given eases, the particular forms of
production and national economy, the stage of
economic development of communities in conflict with
each other, and the part played by such -economic
development, the biological and psychological con-
sequences at each stage for individual and social
efficiency. These are, of course, not all the factors to
be taken into account, and made the subject of special
and subordinate study, but they provide the primary
and most fundamental elements to which we must look
in our attempt to explain the varied life of nations,
their hostile or friendly relations, and the psycholo-
gical, social, and political results of such relations.
Has such a programme of study no interest or
importance for those who are concerned with the
■organisation of the higher education in Australia!
Is this island continent, set far apart in. southern seas,
to be also intellectually remote, as far as its Univer-
sities are concerned, from one of the greatest living
interests which arc exciting older civilisations! We
need not go to those older civilisations for the material
of investigation. The material is here in abundance.
It is so abundant, that every year students from the
Tlniversiti.es of England, Europe, and America come to
Australia for the special purpose of investigating on
the spot the special problems of a new community in
course of construction, But so far as I know, there
is not a single expert in any Australian University,
who is capable of taking charge of a School of
Sociology. We are engaged in the making of a nation,
a new nation. Surely after a hundred years of nation
building, the time has come when the national govern-
ments should provide in the national Universities for
the •teaching of the science of society,
Note. —. Following on the discussion of the subject
of this address, a resolution was unanimously passed
recommending the institution of a Chair of Sociology.
The resolution was adopted at the meeting of the
General Council of the Association, and transmitted to
the Universities of Australia.
