



■' ■ - . V -
'
-
/ ! .
■ / •


A # J ,
.
■' ■■ :>",7..»'
“AN ERRING SISTER’S SHAME,”
The Giaour.




“AN ERRING- SISTER’S SHAME.”
The Giaour.
To the Editor of the Church Chronicle.
Of course Mr. Vidal was perfectly correct.
In the sense of the Byronio feet above quoted,
Rome is doubtless an “ erring sister.” There
are two representative women mentioned in
the Apocalypse. One is the “ Bride, the
Lamb’s wife.” The other is the Harlot. The
Bride adorned for her husband is the Church
who says repeatedly “ come, whosoever will
and drink of the water of life freely.” The
other is “ Mystery,” and makes men drunk
with her sorcery, with the fascinations of her
gesthetic and meretricious adornments and im-
posing pretentions; and Mr. Vidal, being a
gentleman of refinement, intended doubtless
to soften down the hard word in the sacred
text (for even the Holy Ghost is now-a-days
too plain for our sensitive nerves) and for this
end chose the conventional synonym —“The
Erring Sister.”
The great indignation of the Synod was not
therefore perhaps wholly due to the speaker,
although deservedly bestowed on the idea,
which he could not have entertained, of any
other kind of supposed sisterhood.
Had the Synod had time to reflect, it would
have seen how impossible it was, that the
Sister or Rome to Sister oe England.
“But as this one Church, because governed
by the Holy Spirit, cannot ere in faith and
morals, it necessarily follows that all other
societies, arrogating to themselves the name
of Church, because guided by the spirit of
darkness, are necessarily sunk in the most
pernicious errors both doctrinal and moral.”
Cat. of Council of Trent.
“ offensive ” sense of the word sister could
have been intended —for of course as the re-
lation of sisterhood as applied to Churches
cannot be literal or primary, it must imply
some likeness, communion, sympathy, mutual
understanding, or, at the very least, a mutual
recognition; although this last would be but
a cool kind of adelphian tie.
Now Mr. Vidal vvas quite aware that the
positions of the two bodies are diametrically
opposed. Of course he knew it, because the
authorised dogmatic formula; were in his hands,
and familiar as household words —especially
those to which he himself had subscribed, and
which leave no ground for question. I there-
fore again conclude, that the word erring sister
must have been applied in the sense of the
same words at the heading of this letter, and
as we have come to say “ the social evil,” to
avoid a harsher term.
That we may more readily see the impossi-
bility of any other sisterhood, I jot down here
in parallel columns, a few of the mutual
greetings of the so-called sisters, taken only
from their authorised deliverances.
Sister op England ;to Sister of Rome.
“As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria
and Antioch have erred, so also the Church
of Rome hath erred, not only in their living
and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters
of faith.” Art. XIX.
Whosoever shall affirm that the sacraments
of the new law were not all instituted by Jesus
Christ our Lord, or that they are more or
fewer than seven, namely, Baptism, confirma-
tion, eucharist, penance, extreme unction,
orders, and matrimony; or that every one of
these is not truly and properly a sacrament —
LET HIM BE ACCURSED. Counc. Trent,
Sess. VII. Can. 1.
Two (sacraments) only, as generally neces-
sary to salvation, that is to say, baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord.” Church Catechism.
There are two sacraments ordained of Christ
our Lord in the Gospel, that is to say. Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord. These five
commonly called sacraments, that is to say,
confirmation, penances, orders, matrimony and
extreme unction, are not to be counted for
sacraments. Article XXV.


Whosoever shall affirm that grace is not
always conferred by these sacraments, and upon
all persons, as far as God is concerned, if they
be rightly received, but that it is only bestowed
sometimes and on some persons' —-LET HIM
BE ACCURSED. Comic. Trent, Sess. YII.
Can. 7.
“ Whosoever shall deny that in the most
Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there are
truly, really, and substantially contained the
body and the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
together with his soul and Divinity, and con-
sequeijtly Christ entire, but shall affirm that
He is present only in a sign, or by a fighre, or
by His power, LET HIM BE ACCURSED.”
Counc. Trent, Sess. XIII, Can. 1.
“ Whosoever shall affirm that in the most
holy sacrament of the eucharist, there remains
the substance of the bread and wine, together
with the body and blood of our Lord. Jesus
Christ, and shall deny that wonderful and
peculiar conversion of the whole substance of
the bread into His body, and of the whole sub-
stance of the wine into His blood, the species
only of bread and wine remaining, which
conversion the Catholic Church most fitly
terms Transubstantiation—LET HIM BE
ACCURSED.” Counc. Trent, Sess. XIII,
Can. 2.
“ Whosoever shall deny that Christ entire
is contained in the venerable sacrament of the
eucharist, under each species, and under every
part of each species when they are separated,
LET HIM BE ACCURSED.” Counc. Trent,
Sess. XIII, Can. 3.
“ The wicked, and such as he void ofalively
faith, although they do carnally and visibly'
press with their teeth, as St. Augustine saith,
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ,
but rather to their condemnation do eat and
drink the sign or sacrament of so great a thing.”
Art. XXIX.
“The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the supper, only after an heavenly
or spiritual manner, and the mean whereby
the body of Christ is received and eaten in the
supper is faith.” Art. XXVTII.
“ Transubstantiation, or the change of the
substance of bread and wine in the Supper of
the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ,
but is repugnant to the plain words of Holy
Scripture, over throweth the nature of a
sacrament, and hath given rise to many
superstitions.” Art. XXYIII.
“ Whosoever shall say that the H. C.
Church had no just and reasonable cause to
give to the Laity and even to the non conse-
crating Clergy for the communion of the
eucharist under the species of bread alone, or
that it erred therein —LET HIM BE AC-
CURSED.” Counc. Trent. Sess. XXI, Can. 2.
“Whosoever shall affirm that the eucharist
is not to be carried out in processions . . .
nor publicly presented to the people for their
adoration, and that those who worship the
same are idolaters, LET HIM BE AC-
CURSED.” Counc. Trent. Sess. XIII, Can. 6.
“The cup of the Lord is not to be denied
to lay-people : for both the parts of the Lord’s
Sacrament, by Christ’s ordinance and com-
mandment ought to be ministered to all
Christian men alike.” Article XXX.
“ For the sacramental bread and wine re-
main still (after consecration) in their very
natural substances, and therefore may not be
adored, for that were idolatry to be abhorred
of all faithful Christians, &c. Rubric after
Communion.
4


“ The sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was
not by Christ’s ordinance, reserved, carried
about, lifted up, or worshipped.” Article
XXYIII.
preceding paragraph.
If any one shall say that a true and proper
sacrifice is not offered to God in the mass, or
that what is offered is nothing else than giving
Christ to eat, LET HIM BE ACCURSED.”
Counc. Trent. Sess. XXII, Can. 1.
If any one shall say that the Mass is only
a service of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare
cormnemorator of the sacrifice made on the
cross, and not a propitiatory offering, or that
it only benefits him who receives it, and ought
not to be offered for the living and the dead
&c.—LET HIM BE ACCURSED.” Counc.
Trent. Sess. XXI, Can. 3.
“ The offering of Christ once made is that
perfect redemption,propitiation, and satisfaction
for all the sins of the whole world both original
and actual, and there is none other satisfaction
for sins but that alone. Wherefore the sacri-
fices of Masses, in which it was commonly
said that the priest did offer Christ for the
quick and the dead, to have remission of pain
or guilt, were Blasphemous Fables and
dangerous deceits. Art. XXXI.
“ Whosoever shall affirm that the entire
punishment is always remitted by God to-
gether with the fault, and therefore that
penitents need no other satisfaction than faith
whereby they apprehend Christ who has made
satisfaction for them, LET HIM BE AC-
CURSED. Counc. Trent. Sess. XXII, Can. 1.
“ And there is none other satisfaction but
that alone ” as above.
“ I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory
and that the souls therein detained are helped
by the suffrages of the faithful.” Creed of
Pius IV. Art. IX.
Upon which Bellamime comments. “He
who does not believe there is a Purgatory will
never arrive at it, but will be tortured with
eternal burnings in Hell. De. Purgatorio Lib.
11. Cap. 15.
“ The Romish Doctrine concerning Purga-
tory, pardons, worshipping and adoration, as
w’ell of images, as of reliques, and also invoca-
tion of saints is a fond thing, vainly invented
and grounded on no warranty of Scripture
but is rather repugnant to the word of God.
Art. XXII.
“ I also affirm that the power of indulgences
was left by Christ to the church, and that the
use of these is most wholesome to Christian
people.” Creed of Pius IV. Counc. Trent,
Sess. XXV.
“ Likewise (I believe) that the saints reign- See the whole of Homily on Peril of Idolatry,
ing together with Christ are to be honored and
invocated, that they offer prayers to God for
us, and that their relics are to be venerated.”
Creed of Pius IV. Counc. Trent, Sess. XXV.


“ Whosoever shall affirm that the conjugal
state is to be preferred to a life of virginity or
celibacy, and that it is not better and more
conducive to happiness to remain in virginity
or celibacy than to be married,—LET HIM
BE ACCURSED.” Counc. Trent, Sess.XXIY.
The corollary of which canon is the prohibi-
tion of the marriage of Priests.
“ Whosoever shall deny that sacramental
confession was instituted by divine command,
or that it is necessary to salvation; or shall
affirm that the practice of secretly confessing
to the priest alone, as it has been ever observed
from the beginning by the Catholic church,
and is still observed, is foreign to the institution
and command of Christ, and is a human
invention,—LET HIM BE ACCURSED.”
Counc. Trent, Sess. XIY, Can. 6.
Rule of faith. 1. Scripture, as interpreted
by unanimous consent of Fathers. 2. Apoc-
rypha. 3. Traditions. 4. Acts and decisions
of the Church, many volumes of Pope’s Bulls.
Ten folio volumes of decretals. Thirty-one
folio volumes of Acts of Councils. Fifty-one
folio volumes of Act a sanctorum. 5. Thirty-
five volumes of Greek and Latin Fathers
whose unanimous consent is required. In all
135 folio volumes written, besides unwritten
traditions without count. Creed, Pius IY.
“ Bishops, priests and deacons are not
commanded by Hod’s law either to vow the
estate of a single life, or to abstain from mar-
riage, therefore it is lawful for them, as for all
other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to
serve better to godliness. Art. XXXII.
“What need we then to tell forth our sins
into the ear of a priest saith they be already
taken away. . . We ought to acknowledge
none other priest for deliverance from our sins
but our Saviour Jesus Christ. It is most evident
and plain that this auricular confession hath
not his warrant of GrOD’S word.
Moreover, these are Augustine’s words
‘ What have I to do with men that they should
hear my confession as though they could heal
my diseases. Why do they seek to hear of me
what I am, who will not hear of thee what
they are.’ It is against true Christian liberty
that any man should be bound to the number-
ing of his sins as it hath been used in the times
of blindness and ignorance.” Homily on
Repentance.
“ Holy Scripture containeth all things neces-
sary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not
read therein, nor may be proved thereby is not
to be required of any man that it should be
believed as an article of the faith, or be thought
requisite, or necessary to salvation.” Art. YI.
The Immaculate conception of the blessed
Yirgin, or her rescue from the stain of original
sin at the precise moment of her conception by
her mother. Done at Rome 13 years ago, of
which doctrine Pius IX decrees that “ whoever
shall presume even to think otherwise shall by
thevery act incur the greater excommunication.
“ Original sin is the fault and corruption of
the nature of every one naturally engendered
of the offspring of Adam.” Art. IX.
Enough of these contradictions, which could striking by comparing the practices, and
be prolonged indefinitely, and made far more devotional exercises of the two churches,
6


especially if we included the awful acceleration
of Mariolatry since that last thirteen
years—old article of faith (?) an acceleration
which has already reached the point of defend-
ing the doctrine of the eternal pre-existence of
the virgin (see Abbe Gerbet, Lily of Israel) and
of the reception of the blood of the virgin in
the eucharist (see Dr. Pusey’s eirenicion and
Mr. Oakley’s defence.
Now, Sir, Mr. Tidal has these two columns
before him as well as I, and he has sol-
emnly pledged himself to the dogmas
of the right hand. Of course he does
not see any sisterhood; to believe it
would be an insult to his understanding.
Black or white, yes and no cannot be called
like. One of these columns is the direct
negation of the other, therefore Mr. Tidal has
been misunderstood, he evidently meant in
the term “erring sister,” to use the strongest
reprobation, in perhaps an unnecessarily deli-
cate appellation.
Now I will ask you to look down the right
hand line again, and endeavour to find one
point in which the great Protestant denomina-
tions differ with us. They would as heartily
subscribe every doctrine as we, and as heartily
repudiate every one at the left. In sober
seriousness then, I ask, why we do not rather
call these ‘ sisters ’ than that other ? Are
people who disagree, more sisterly than those
who agree? Is one who, having left
her first love and uncovered herself to idols,
pronounces all the protestant sections of the
Church “ Accitesed,” more a sister to us,
than those who are cursed in company with us
for precisely the same truth ?
I say that if I could recognise any sisterhood
whatever between the Church of England and
the apostate, anti-catholic Church of Home,
painful as the separation would be, I would
leave her communion to-morrow. Episcopacy
I love, it is apostolic order; but there is
one thing even better than apostolic order,
and that is Apostolic doctrine and practice.
Thank God we can combine both, if we could
not I should have no alternative but to keep
the better. This is the alternative to which
this toying and dallying with the “ erring
sister ” is trying to lead us. The special art of
the harlotistoallureandthento destroy. Thank
God her painting and mincing and decoys are
being made patent here. The paint once off,
who will care to call her sister.
Tery faithfully, yours,
ZACHAEY BAEEY.
7


