

)-
6io r
5 Lx.
Reprinted from The Medical Journal of Australia, April 21, 1928.
William Balmain, M.D., R.N.: Surgeon on the First Fleet.
By John MacPherson, M.A., B.Sc., M. 8., Ch.M. (Sydney),
Lecturer in Therapeutics and Materia Medica ,
University of Sydney.


WILLIAM BALMAIN, M.D., R.N.: SURGEON ON
THE FIRST FLEET.
By John MacPherson, M.A., B.Sc., M. 8., Ch.M. (Sydney),
Lecturer in Therapeutics and Materia Medica,
University of Sydney.
William Balmain was born in Dunmow, Essex,
England, in 1764 and entered the Royal Navy as
Surgeon’s Mate in 1780. He was appointed Assist-
ant Surgeon to the New South Wales Corps in
1786. Later he was Second Assistant Surgeon on
H.M.S. Alexander of the First Fleet, in charge of
two hundred and ten male convicts consigned to
Botany Bay. On April 8, 1787, Balmain attended
the birth of the first child of the Fleet, the mother
being a hapless convict awaiting transportation.
One’s imagination can scarcely comprehend the
misery and horror of such a child-birth. Arriving
in New South Wales in January, 1788, Balmain
early came into conflict with Surgeon-General
White. Balmain was a man of great personality,
decided and fearless in his opinions. An illiterate
scribe writes to the effect that on the night of
August 12, 1788, Surgeon-General White (“Wight”)
and Dr. Balmain (“Belmain”) fired their pistols
at each other in a duel, both combatants being
slightly wounded. White’s bitter resentment against
Balmain never ceased. Nevertheless Balmain
became Surgeon-General himself in 1796 and I have
seen it stated that he was also in that year Chief
Magistrate for Sydney. Family tradition assigns
him the position of Naval Officer for New South
Wales in 1800. He became also Commandant of
the Loyal Associate Corps of Volunteers in 1800
or 1802. He was as well a member of the Gaol
Committee.
Natives Attack the Governor.
On September 7, 1790, Governor Phillip was
speared and seriously wounded by an aboriginal
at Manly. The spear struck him a little below the
shoulder and pierced quite through the fleshy part
of his chest wall, protruding four or five inches on
the other side. His Excellency was immediately
taken down to the boat and brought home to Sydney.
As Surgeon-General John White had gone away
that morning on an exploring expedition, Dr.
Balmain extracted the spear and dressed the wound.
The Governor was in great agony, but the record
2
April 21, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.


of the day stated that “it is thought he will
recover, though, at the same time, His Excellency
is highly scorbutic.” In 1794 Balmain was Assistant
Surgeon at Norfolk Island. In 1795 he was First
Assistant Surgeon and Acting Principal Surgeon
at Sydney. In this year he received a land grant
in Sydney of three-quarters of an acre and four
rods." Early in 1796, White having left New South
Wales and not returned, Balmain who had under-
taken his duties, applied for the full salary of
Principal Surgeon. Writing to Governor Hunter,
Balmain asserted that White who was present when
this demand was made by his agents, objected to it
and insisted that he had engaged a person at his
own expense to assist him in his duties as Principal
Surgeon. Balmain wrote:
I appeal to your Excellency whether such an affirmation
is true and whether Mr. White is endeavouring to prevent
me receiving what, in common justice is my due, has
not artfully cast an unworthy reflection on my ability.
The actual facts of the case are not quite certain;
the upshot was, however, that White was requested
to return at once to New South Wales and, as he
did not do so, a commission was issued on August
16, 1796, appointing William Balmain Surgeon-
General to the settlement.
Balmain Challenges to a Duel.
In 1796 Balmain had a violent quarrel with
Captain MacArthur and the military officers. He
considered MacArthur to be truculent, litigious and
quarrelsome and challenged him to a duel, which
challenge was not accepted. In this year Governor
Hunter placed on record his great approval of
Balmain’s character and appreciation of his
services.
Balmain and the Governor.
Under the direction of Governor Hunter and
Balmain the original hospital was demolished and
reerected on a stone foundation near the site of
Argyle Cut. A dispensary and hospital store were
also built. About two acres of land were appor-
tioned to the hospital. For the surgeons, suitable
brick quarters were erected north of the hospital
grounds on Dawes Point. But still the accommoda-
tion was overtaxed. For until 1797, when a special
hospital was built for their own treatment,
invalided soldiers of the New South Wales
Corps were accommodated in the General
Hospital and also sick sailors received attend-
ance there. Special fees were assigned for
the cure of His Majesty’s seamen. In these con-
ditions all kinds of serious illnesses were treated,
without any means of isolation. Deaths resulted
from “dysentery, cholera morhus, fevers, consump-
tions, lues venerea, epilepsy, iliac passions and
locked jaw.” In 1798, Balmain, still Chief Surgeon,
corresponded with Governor Hunter and his epistles
showed that he had the courage of his opinions and
fearlessly stood up to constituted authority. One
letter, dated July 81, 1798, has a delightful human
touch. This letter directs His Excellency’s attention
to the fact that, in addition to his official duties as
Chief Surgeon to the settlement, he was called
upon to treat such members of His Majesty’s Navy
as were ill. For such attendance he was entitled to
the sum of thirteen shillings and sixpence for every
cure effected. But this sum had to be collected in
England by an agent from the Sick and Hurt Board.
One can readily imagine the difficulties of collection.
Balmain therefore asked that, instead of this pre-
carious gratuity, he be granted an extra five shillings
per diem to his pay to cover all his professional
activities. A further letter to Governor Hunter on
August 1, 1798, reiterating what he had already
written three years previously, detailed the inade-
quacy of medical supplies, equipment and personnel
and demanded punctual attendance on his request
for various articles for the sick. He pointed out
that on the River Hawkesbury, in the growing
settlement there, the only person available to per-
form medical duty was an unskilled convict. The
number of qualified medical men in the various
settlements, including Norfolk Island, was far too
small. The doctors of that time frequently had to
travel many miles on foot through the night.
Balmain specially recommended that Surgeon
Arndell who had retired from the Service, be
appointed Apothecary.
Balmain’s Land Grants.
In those days grants of land were made to
military and civil officers. A small grant had
already been given to Balmain and under Governor
Hunter’s regime he received further grants. On
September 3, 1797, lie was awarded one hundred
acres, on July 1, 1798, one hundred and five acres
and on August 3, 1799, a further two hundred and
twenty acres. All these were on the Field of Mars,
adjoining the Parramatta River, north-west, west
and south-west of the present Ryde railway station,
the first mentioned being between Ryde and East-
wood railway stations. On November 12, 1799,
Balmain received, also from Governor Hunter, a
grant of two hundred and seventy acres at Mulgrave
Place on the Hawkesbury River. This was called
the Sister’s Farm and is situated on what is now
known as Magrath’s Hill, Windsor. Balmain
resided, but did not practise in the Hawkesbury
district and he still continued in the discharge of
his official duties. On April 26, 1800, a further
Crown grant was accorded to Balmain, namely five
hundred and fifty acres including the whole of the
peninsula now called after the original grantee the
suburb of Balmain. I have somewhere seen it
stated that he altogether possessed seven hundred
and fifty acres in this locality, including an area
formerly occupied by Major Ross. For this I have
no definite authority. Balmain subsequently sold
this grant to Dr. Gilchrist at the price of £5 16s. 6d.
per acre. Dr. Gilchrist later subdivided and resold
the land. In the Sydney Gazette of April 17, 1823,
was an advertisement of one James Elder, a well
known identity of the period, who had followed
many callings, including those of baker, educational
and religious bookseller and estate agent. The
advertisement reads:
3
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
April 21, 1928.


Gilchrist Place. To be let, for such a term of years as
may be agreed upon, that very desirable Estate, Gilchrist
Place, better known by the name of Balmain’s Point,
the property of Dr. John Borthwick Gilchrist, and con-
sisting of 550 acres. All further particulars will be
learned on application to Mr. James Elder, George Street,
Parramatta.
It has been stated that in all Balmain received
nine grants of land. In 1902 he was stated to have
possessed one thousand two hundred and fifty-five
acres of land granted and two hundred and twenty-
five acres of land purchased from settlers. Of these
one hundred and eighty acres were cleared. He
was also in possession of twelve cattle. In 1800
Balmain was declared indebted to the Crown for
the sum of £476 13s. 4d. for the hire of eleven
convict servants. Balmain admitted the use of
eight convict servants only and successfully claimed
that they were assigned to him as a reward for his
services. In 1802 he sold his livestock to the
Government.
Balmain’s Other Activities.
On October 1, 1800, Surgeon Martin Mason, who
had arrived in 1798, was appointed assistant to
Balmain who, though still Principal Surgeon,
engaged in other activities. In 1800, together with
Mac Arthur and James Williamson, he imported
clothing, tea, sugar and spirits from India. During
the rule of Governor Hunter the traffic in rum had
increased in the Colony. Captain Phillip Gidley
King was appointed Governor on September 26,
1800, with special instructions to suppress the
traffic. All who possessed large quantities of rum
were required gradually to dispose of it. Amongst
these were Principal Surgeon William Balmain and
Assistant Surgeon D’Arcy Wentworth (who had been
appointed in 1796). These had amassed nearly one
thousand four hundred and three thousand gallons
respectively. In 1801 Balmain temporarily left
Sydney. In 1802 he wrote in England to Sir Joseph
Banks, recommending reforms in the administration,
legal and other, of the Colony. The first volunteers
in Australia were the Sydney and Parramatta Loyal
Associate Corps, two Volunteer Corps of fifty men
each, formed as a result of a rumoured outbreak
amongst the political prisoners in December, 1800.
Later the services of these corps were partially
dispensed with. On October 22, 1802, Balmain was
Commandant of both Corps. In 1804 the Principal
Surgeon received a salary of £365 per annum, his
senior assistant £lB2 10s., two assistants
£136 17s. 6d. and the junior £9l ss. The Service
was still grossly underpaid and the surgeons in the
country asserted that they were unable to maintain
a horse for their work. The Principal Surgeon
superintended the hospitals and made daily and
occasional reports to the Governor. The Surgeon-
General and one assistant surgeon resided in Sydney
and had a staff of twenty convicts working at the
hospital as overseers, dressers, wardsmen, gardeners
and boatmen. Nurses were also selected from the
convicts.
Balmain was on leave in England in 1805 and he
died either in that year or the following one.
Balmain had not the scientific enthusiasm of Wl\ite
or Considen, but he was efficient, zealous, fearless
and humane. He was one of the founders of the
City of Sydney, a noteworthy and respected citizen,
who did much to ameliorate the lot of his fellow
human beings, both free and convict. His descend-
ants are with us still. His grandson, Mr. Hope
Balmain was a licensed surveyor in the Cooma
district and his great-grandsons, Messrs. A. and W.
Hope Balmain, are now residing at Bega and Cooma
respectively and are members of the Australasian
Pioneers’ Club. Thomas Jamison, who had acted as
Principal Surgeon and Surgeon-General in 1801
to 1802, definitely succeeded Balmain as Surgeon-
General in 1805.
Acknowledgements.
Much of the matter contained in these notes has
been taken from Henniker Heaton’s “Australian
Dictionary of Dates,” the “Historical Records,” the
writings of Dr. Fred Watson and articles by Mr.
Henry Selkirk and Mr. J. F. Campbell in the
Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society
and the Journal of the Parramatta and District
Historical Society.
THE AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED
4
April 21, 1928.
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA.
