

THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RAILWAY SYSTEM
Read by:
J. FRASER, ESQ., C.M.G., M. Inst. C.E.
Chief Commissioner
New South Wales Government Railways.
Interstate Gathering,
Institute of Civil Engineers,
October, 1919.
RAILWAY PRINTING OFFICE, SYDNEY.


THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RAILWAY SYSTEM
Read by:
J. FRASER, ESQ., C.M.G., M. Inst. C.E.
Chief Commissioner
New South Wales Government Railways.
Interstate Gathering,
Institute of Civil Engineers,
October, 1919.




THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES RAILWAY SYSTEM.
The development of any Railway System can only be intelligently
studied by consideration of the progress under three main headings ; —■
(a) The track.
(J) Rolling stock.
( c ) Traffic.
Each of these would provide material for a lengthy paper, and in
endeavouring to depict the development of the New South Wales System from
its infant stage in 1855 to the present date, the effort to secure reasonable
brevity may entail the history being recorded somewhat tersely.
The safe, convenient, and economical operation of any Railway System
depends in the first instance upon the design of the Permanent Way and
associated works, that is, that quite marked variations in safety, convenience,
and economical operation may be found in systems, having the same track
gauge, but varying structure and load gauges. For example, the Railways of
the United States and Canada, although of the same gauge as British and
European Railways generally, have such liberal load and structure gauges that
their passenger coaches may be built to give far greater comfort to travellers;
their locomotives may be designed to so much larger dimensions than is possible
in Britain or Europe, that haulage costs can be reduced to figures lower than
less favourably designed system can approach, and have the further
advantage of being able to construct Goods Stock of great carrying capacity
with a minimum of tare. The original design of the New South Wales
Railways followed British practice, and our load and structure gauges have been
an impediment to substantial progress towards the greatest economy in haulage
up almost to the present day, although during the past ten years much work
has been done in reconstruction to permit at no very distant date the adoption
of the American load gauge with all its potential advantages.
Broadly, the Railways of this State have grown from a route mileage of
14 miles to miles in the period of 63 years lying between 1855 and 1918,
but in that growth certain changes in methods of construction, in the provision
of safety appliances, and in the form of rolling stock have naturally been
necessary to meet the business requirements of the people of the State to ensure
their safety and their reasonable convenience and comfort.
Taking first the actual growth of the system, it may be of interest to
record that while the increase in mileage has been progressive from year to year
with few periods of cessation of construction, the greatest growth relatively was
in the period from 1879 to 1884, when the route mileage increased from 734 to
1,618 miles, an increase of 884, or 120.4 per cent, in 5 years, and curiously
enough the next period of marked growth was during the four war years, when
the route mileage was increased from to an increase of
or 18 per cent. The actual track miles were increased in the last-named period


by 1,137 miles, making the total mileage in operation at 30th June, 1918,
6,286 miles, 68 chains, which was further increased during the year 1018-19 to
6,464 miles, 29 chains.
It may be stated to the credit of those engineers associated with the
creation of the Railway System (and of these Mr. John Whitton’s work will be
long remembered) that no marked change was made until recently in the
general design of the earthworks forming the road bed, nor in the structures
associated with the track, much of the earlier construction having been of a
very fine and permanent character. The formation width of cuttings and
embankments was in the earliest lines as liberal as to-day, and culverts, bridges,
etc., both over and under, were constructed in a permanent manner in brick, or
iron and masonry in combination ; the earlier tunnels were also well lined with
masonry. Some fine examples of old work still exist in the bridges over the
Nepean at Menangle and Penrith, and over the Hunter River at Singleton.
The bridge at Menangle (iron-box girders on masonry piers) is still carrying
the whole rail traffic of the Southern System, though in view of the great
increase in loading per foot run imposed by modern locomotives, the spans
originally 200 feet were halved by the erection of intermediate piers in 1907,
and the floor system partially reconstructed. The bridge at Penrith was
abandoned in 1908 for rail purposes, but will carry road traffic for many years ;
similarly the laminated timber arch bridge of five 80-foot spans over the Hunter
River at Singleton is still in heavy use for road traffic, though it has had a life
of over 50 years. Another fine example of masonry work still be Seen in
the Knapsack Gully Viaduct near Emu Plains. This structure consists of five
spans (semi arches) of 50 ft. 0 in. each, and two 20 ft. 0 in., the height from the
natural formation to rail level being 120 feet.
In the track itself Barlow rails were first used, but these gave place at an
early date to double-headed iron rails, 7.5 lbs.per lin. yard, 18 and 21 feet long being
laid in cast-iron chairs on 9 ft. sleepers spaced 3 ft. centres. Generally the
earlier laid track was ballasted with broken sandstone. This type of track was
laid on the main lines south to Goulburn, west to Bathurst, and north from
Newcastle to Murrurundi. Beyond these points the lines constructed up to the
year 1878 were laid with T rails 70 lb. per lin. yard, 18 and 21 feet lengths on
8 feet sleepers still spaced about 3 feet centres. For the next decade, that is to
1888, the standard rail was of steel of similar section to the 70 lb. iron rail, but
weighing lbs. per lin. yard. These were still used in short lengths
21 feet and 24 feet, but the sleeper spacing was reduced to about 2 ft. 6 in.
centres, ballasting being broken stone of the best quality locally procurable or
suitable gravel laid to a depth of 6 inches below the sleepers. Much of the track
described, except that constructed after 1878, had a poor life, and showed serious
deterioration when in 1888 the control of the railways came under a Board of
Commissioners, and to Mr. Eddy must be given the credit for the first move
towards a better, safer and more economical permanent way. He first adopted
as standard the 80 lb. bull-headed rail, then greatly in use on British railways,
but later gave adherence to the T rail as most snitable for local conditions,
and the 80 lb. T rail first in 30 ft. and later in 40 ft. lengths remained the
standard for main lines until 1907-08, when T rails 100 lb. per yard were


adopted for the heavy traffic of Suburban system, and 90 lb. T rails for the main
lines outside Metropolitan areas. These rails are now laid on 8 ft. sleepers
spaced about 2 ft. 5 in. centres, and the sleepers are bedded on 8 to 10 inches of
basalt ballast, or other hardstone broken to 2 in gauge.
It should be stated here that a very drastic departure from previous
practice in railway construction was originated in the year 1892. Construction
practical!}-ceased during the three years between 1888-9 and 1891-2, the increase
in open mileage during that period having been 14 miles only. Demands for
new lines were numerous, and at the suggestion of the Railway Administration
of the day a more economical construction from the first cost point of
view was adopted. Careful surveys were made to ensure the lightest
earthworks possible with the best practicable ruling grade against the heavier
loading. Light rails, 6(1 lb. per lin. yard, were adopted on 8 feet sleepers
about 2 ft. 10 in. centres laid, in the case of the first few of such lines
constructed on 4 in. of ballast. The axle load of rolling stock being limited by
the weight of the permanent way, bridges and other under-line structures were
also constructed. A further modification to ensure still lower cost of
construction was made a little later about 1893, when for practical!}’ all new
lines what has been termed the Pioneer System was adopted. The lightest
possible earthworks were constructed, the lines in many cases being laid almost
upon the natural formation, waterways restricted to a minimum, passenger
platforms were eliminated, station yard accommodation cut down to the lowest
possible minimum, and the light 601 b. track already described (except that the
sleepers were placed 2 ft. 4 in. centres) laid upon and packed with earth ballast.
It was expected that with such lines all the traffic offering for possibly many
years could be carried at a maximum speed of 15 miles per hour. The types of
permanent way originally provided have been described somewhat lengthily,
but advisedly so, as the safety of all traffic and the comfort and convenience of
passengers depend more upon the character and maintenance of the permanent
way than on almost any other railway detail. A description, therefore, of the
additions to and improvements of what may be broadly termed the permanent
way must include a more than passing reference to the type of track which has
gradually taken the place of that already described. The main developments
or improvements have been :
(1) The addition of 500 sleepers per mile on 2,531 miles of track, or an
addition to the number of sleepers in the road of 1,315,500, and by
this operation giving the road greater power of resistance to
either vertical or Internal displacement.
(2) The relaying of all iron road with steel rails of not less than 80 lbs.
per lin. yard, and (except for a small tonnage) of 40 ft. lengths,
all rail joints being supported by long-angle fishplates. Smoother
motion was given to vehicles by the reduced number of joints—
joints less liable to deflection, and by the generally improved
stability of the track.
(3) Re-ballasting the main tracks throughout or adding to the depth of
the ballast where the latter was already of good quality has
entailed the use of 3,731,979 cubic yards of additional ballast.


Those are the chief track improvements on the old lines of the heavier
types, but attention of a special character has also been necessary in connection
with the more modern lines constructed since 1895. These light or pioneer
lines, as already mentioned, were originally intended to carry traffic at a speed
of about 15 miles per hour, but it was soon obvious that the users could not be
content with such speeds, especially after an already long journey on a Main
Line. Practically the whole of these lines have, by lifting, partial re-laying,
re-sleepering, and re-ballasting, been made fit for speeds from 25 to 30 miles per
hour, and in some cases have been so strengthened as to carry the heaviest
types of goods engines.
It might be mentioned as a matter of interest that the heaviest axle load
usually adopted in Australia for bO lb. rails is 12 tons, but engines having
16 ton axle loads have been running on several of these light lines in this State
for over 20 years without producing rail failures or track deformation.
The second substantial development or improvement in the permanent
way has been in the reconstruction of old and weak bridges and their renewal
either in brick, concrete, or steel. The first considerable work of this character
was the renewal of what was known as the Wagga Viaduct, a timber structure
having an over-all length of 9,233 lineal feet, divided into 313 spans of 29 ft.
6 in. each. The original cost of the timber strncture was while the
new structure, built on the same alignment and without interference with traffic,
was completed at a cost of 000. This seemed to establish the wisdom of
the policy since pursued, viz., to renew in permanent form old structures
annually becoming defective rather than again use timber for the purpose, and
the policy has seemed especially sound during late years in view of the
constantly increasing cost of timber. During the past 20 years, the policy of
renewal has provided no less than 33,138 lineal feet, or 6 miles, 22 chains in
length, of permanent steel or brick and steel structures, and has added a value
of not less than to the railway system considered as a property, the
debits for such renewals being, whether for permanent way or structural
improvements, almost wholly against the annual departmental working
expenses.
It seems appropriate to mention here that a very considerable number of
new works carried out annuall} 7 are debited to working expenses, and the
property as a whole has been improved by these and other charges mentioned
above to the extent of 17,329 since 1895.
It is, perhaps, a little out of order to refer to rolling stock while dealing
specifically with permanent way, but as the subject of improvement in value of
the property development in various directions is being noted, it seems quite
appropriate to include here the additions to the estate as a whole b} - recon-
struction and renewal of rolling stock in more valuable form at the cost of
working expenditure. During the period of 20 3 7 ears in which the main
development has occurred, locomotive, carriage, and wagon rebuilds have
increased the original values b\ T and this sum, taken together with
the value of permanent way improvements and other matters mentioned above,
has increased the actual value of the railwaj' asset bj 7 a total of no less than
/2,354,778.


Equivalent Single Line.
1909.
1919.
Increase.
Miles.
Chains.
Miles.
Chains.
Miles.
Chains.
Route Mileage
3,623
30
4,824
53>
1,201
23-
Second Track
221
101
oWi
56|
315
464
Third Track
N
L
14
71
14
71.
Fourth Track
26
103
7
76
774
Fifth Track
N
L
4
37
4
37
Sidings
530 |
!
62
980
44J
449
624
Totals
4,401
31}
6,464
to
SC
■Hm
2,062
78
Track increase for decade
—2.062 miles 78 chains.
Development of business and the need for the greatest economy in
working have created the need for
(«) More track.
(fj) Improved gradients.
In making provision for these additions to traffic facilities, great works
have been involved, and these mark really the greatest development of the
railwaj- system since its creation.
The provision of “More track” has involved not only a substantial
increase in main line duplication, but the provision of quite a large additional
siding mileage at existing stations, and the provision of new crossing stations
to relieve congestion on single lines, and in this connection it may be mentioned
that the increase in secondary track sidings, etc., during the past decade
(1909-1010) has been no less than 861 miles, while route mileage expanded to
the extent of 1,201 b) miles, the figures being
That part of the above mileage added by the construction of new branch
lines needs no special mention, as this construction was of ordinary character,
but the work involved in duplication and deviation work to secure both more
track and improved gradients warrants more than passing notice. The policy
of reconstruction of old lines to secure better gradients is not new, as such
work was initiated by the first railway administration and pursued by subsequent
administrations, but this work reached its greatest proportion and importance
between the year 1908 and the present date, the first great work of this kind
undertaken being the elimination of the great Zig Zag, on the Main Western
Line. The original line, constructed in zig zag form from motives of economy,
had stood as a monument to the engineering skill of the late Mr. Whitton for
over 40 years, but its severe gradients (1 in 40) and the delays incidental to zig
zag working, constituted such obstructions that the growing traffic of the West
became so congested that a new line had to be found. This new line, which gave
a direct route, started at a point 85m. 46chs. from Sydney, and, falling on a


1 in 90 gradient, joined the old line just beyond the bottom points of the old
Zig Zag. Very heavy earthworks were involved, and a series of tunnels through
spurs from the parent range on which the old line was carried. The material
excavated from cuttings in a total length of 5 miles 63 chains of double track
totalled 637.095 cubic yards, and from tunnels 192,692 cubic yards, while the
lining of the latter entailed the use of 23,047 cubic yards of brickwork and
14,055 cubic yards of concrete. It may be mentioned that the tunnel work, all
performed by departmental day labour, was carried out much more cheaply than
any similar work previously carried out in the State, excavation having cost per
cubic yard T2/ld, brickwork and concrete 31/1 Od per cubic The
county through which the line was run, being of an exceptionally rugged
character, there was room for ingenuity in the method of conveying materials to
the points required, and one device was of special value in this connection. At
one point, where the new line passed under the old, a gully gave opportunity
for the construction of a funicular railway. This had a length of 650 lin. ft.
on a grade of 1 in 1.8. Materials required were unloaded from trucks in a
siding on the old line direct into those used on the funicular railway, and as the
latter was laid with double track the loaded trucks falling drew empties back ;
no power was required in operation, the 011I3' attendant needed being a brakes-
man at the head pulley over which passed the wire rope by which trucks were
lowered and lifted. On this work, too, moveable centres for the lining of
tunnels were first used in this State, and were active agents in producing the
low costs mentioned for these specific works.
Heavy blasting was possible in connection with open earth works, and
masses of rock with cubical contents of from 20,000 to 30,000 cubic yards were
blown practically into embankment position required with one heavy shot.
The next work of great magnitude was also on the Main Western Line
—between Emu Plains and Blaxland. A new line had been made here in 1892
to eliminate a zig zag carrying the Main Line up the first sharp rise of the
Blue Mountains. This new line, however, possessed weak features. It was a
single line on a 1 —33 gradient, with a rather sharply curved tunnel on that
gradient. A double line was essential, and inspection demonstrated this could
be constructed on a ruling gradient of 1 in 60 through Glenbrook Creek gcrge
No heavy tunnelling was involved in this case as the line clung to the face of a
cliff rising from the creek just named, passed by a short tunnel through a spur
from the main range, and into country presenting no special engineering
difficulties, other than the excavation of some rather heav}- cuttings, in the
excavation of which steam shovels were used for the first time in N.S.W.
That part of the line through the gorge is of an interesting character. The
road bed here lies about 400 feet from the summit, and for a length of half a
mile the whole of the cliff was blasted off to give width for a double track.
This new line has a length over-all of 7 miles, 56 chains, and the rock excavated
totalled 1 ,443,534 cubic }'ards. The viaduct over Knapsack Gully has been
mentioned as an example of good work done by the engineers who carried out
the original line, and the same gull}' was crossed by the new line just referred
to, and by viaduct. This new structure has an over-all length of 450 feet in 8
semi arches, 50 feet centres. The whole of the work was carried out in
brickwork laid, as is usual, with cement mortar. At the same time that the


Glenbrook Deviation was in hand, the reconstruction was undertaken of that
part of the Illawarra Line between Waterfall (24 miles from Sydney) and
Otford (30 miles distant). Here the old line was single, and its heavy gradients
through tunnels and with sharp curvature presented serious obstruction to the
transport of a considerable tonnage of coal, etc., mined on the South Coast. A
new route permitting a ruling gradient of 1 in 80, against the old 1 in 40, was
adopted, and entailed the construction of 8 miles 55 chains of new double line.
As the country traversed is very broken, heavy earthworks were involved, and
some titnnelling was unavoidale. From the latter the excavation totalled
71,550 cubic yards, and from cuttings 1,120,000, an average of 200,320 cubic
yards per mile. Instead of the small electrical-driven compressors used on
the Western deviation, larger installations of steam-driven compressors were
adopted on this work. From these mains were laid to a total length of
42,372 1 in. ft. to convejr compressed air to the various rock drills, jack hammers,
etc., used. A small electric plant for the generation of power for lighting the
tunnel work was provided.
Reconstruction of old lines still continues as the traffic developes to a
sufficient extent to permit a new line constructed on better gradients, earning
by decreased working costs per ton hauled sufficient to pay a handsome
percentage on the outlay, and such work is still in hand, and works of great
magnitude are now being brought near to completion. These include the
reconstruction of the Main Southern Line "between Picton (53 miles from
Sydney) and Mittagong (82 miles from Sydney). The existing line was single,
had gradients of 1 in 30 to 1 in 40, and though its traffic capacity had been
brought to a maximum by the provision of crossing loops giving the maximum
number of train movements which can be achieved on a single line so equipped,
the section did actually not carry the traffic tributay to the line as a whole,
and much of that developing south of Harden had to be diverted by a cross-
county line to the Main Western Line. The new line opened on the 13th
July is, over-all, 27m. 51c. in length, and double throughout. It is a work that
may be properly termed a great work, for though no special engineering
difficulties have been encountered the work has involved the driving of 1,804
lineal yards of tunnel, the excavation of 1,740,038 cubic yards of material to
form the road bed, and the erection of a number of bridges and waterways, chief
amongst which is the crossing of the Bargo River. On this, as on all modern
reconstruction work, structures of all kinds have been erected in a permanent
manner and with a view to economy in maintenance. Such a policy can be
supported as wise, in view of the fact that structures in brick and steel cost
little more than in perishable timber, and in the case of those built wholly of
brick need no maintenance, an important factor in these days when labor costs
are high. The Bargo Bridge has five spans (50 feet semi-arches) which, with
the piers and abutments, are all built in brick. The transport of materials by
motor vehicles has in this case been a simple matter owing to the.proximiy of
the Main Southern Road to the new line throughout its length. Another work
of great importance now in hand is the provision of a new double line between
Otford and Coal Cliff, on the Illawarra Line. On the existing line is a mile-
long single-line tunnel on the ruling grade of 1 in 40, and the atmospheric
conditions in this tunnel, during periods of southerly winds, are so


unsatisfactory that drivers attempting to haul a full engine load over the grade
have at times almost suffered suffocation. Ventilation on the Saccardo System
was installed in 1908, but, though double engine loads may now be battled
while conditions are favourable, the single line cannot carry the traffic offering,
and a new double line is being constructed. This, though the ruling grade will
be practically 1 in 80 as against 1 in 40 at present, will be the same length as
the existing line and will have no long tunnel, the greatest length of any one
tunnel being 19 chains. The work involves the driving of a total length of 842
lineal yards of tunnel, the excavation of 661,000 cubic yards of earthwork to
form the road bed, but no bridge work other than the construction of a fine
brick viaduct over the Stanwell Park gorge. For this work the semi-brick arch
of SO feet span (now growing familiar to you) has been adopted, for though the
piers are high (the height from creek bed to rail level being 135 feet) the
foundations are good solid rock, and as the viaduct is on a curve of 12 chains
radius, this span offered advantage over one of greater length. This may well
close the detailed description of works of reconstruction, for, though many
others have been carried out and the future holds more work in view, no other
works have been so considerable or of such importance in their effect upon
traffic movements.
Development in other directions has been by way of additions to structures
or track, and these will be described, or briefly referred to. If taken in proper
chronological order, reference should first be made to the duplication and
quadruplication work carried out by Mr. Eddy, shortly after his appointment in
1888. The duplication of short sections of the Main Line near Sydney was
carried out between 1889 and 1892, and the quadruplication of the Main
Suburban Line between and Homebush was put in hand at the same
time. The latter work was attended with many difficulties, as existing tracks
were re-aligned, new stations provided throughout, subways and overbridges
constructed, while traffic had to be satisfactorily carried on both by rail and on
adjacent streets and roadways affected by this construction. Careful design
and careful work eliminated risk, and the work was carried through in good
time and in substantial manner. No further material additions to the running
line were made until the duplication of the Western Line between Glenbrook
and Katoomba was carried out in the year 1902, when there was again a
cessation of important additional construction until the year 1903-4, when the
old terminal station at Sydney, having proved inadeqate for the business, a new
and larger passenger station was commenced. This was designed, qua-bnildings,
etc., and carried out by Mr. Henry Deane, then Chief Engineer for Railway
Construction, the yard alterations being designed and carried out by officers of
the Railway Commissioners. The platform and track accommodation was
substantially in excess of that at the old station abandoned in 1906, but so rapid
has been the growth of the passenger business that four new platforms had to
be provided in 1914, in association with the provision of an additional double
track constructed to Sydenham for the Illawarra and Bankstown Traffic, and
now the accommodation is again found to be insufficient. It may be mentioned
here as a matter of interest that in London and New York, and other great
cities of the world, in spite of millions sterling spent and being spent, facilities
for the transport of the population to and from the city cannot be kept up to


requirements, and cessation of expenditure here in this connection during the
past four or five years is now affecting seriousl} 7 the convenience of those whose
business entails daity travel to and from the city.
The works so far mentioned have had a beneficial effect upon the working
of both goods and passenger traffic, but one work, designed wholly in the
interests of the former (and usually regarded as the more important section),
may perhaps be described as the most important work carried out in this
State —that is, the new goods railways between Rookwood and Darling Harbour.
Congestion of passenger traffic on the main lines near the city has been so great
for years past that goods traffic could be brought over these lines only? at
intervals when passenger traffic was slack, entailing serious inconvenience to a
great goods business. In 1906 a new railway was suggested by' the writer, who
was authorised later by the Government to carry out the work, which is
illustrated by diagram hereunder. It will be seen that the line takes off from
the Main Suburban Line near Rookwood, swings away to the north and,
curving, passes under the existing passenger line west of Flemington, and is
carried southerly towards the Bankstown branch ; meeting this, it follows the
same route as the latter towards Sydney to a point near Wardell Road, where it
again swings northerly? and again passes under the Main Suburban Line at the
Lewisham viaduct, thence over the Parramatta Road and Marion Street to the
shore of Long Cove Creek, then through Leichhardt and to Rozelle, where a
reception yard has been constructed capable of accommodating at one time
3.000 goods wagons. From this yard will run lines to the present city goods
station at Darling Harbour and Darling Island, these lines being carried under
Glebe Point, round the head of Blackwattle Bay, through Pyrmont, and thus
directly into Darling Harbour Yard. Other lines run from Rozelle to the new
shipping centre being established at Glebe Island, where the bulk of the grain
grown in New South Wales will ultimately be discharged for transport oversea,
and provision is now being made for this traffic to be handled in the most
perfect and the most economical manner possible by the erection by the
Government of elevators and all necessary accessories for the handling of the
harvest of the State in bulk. The terminal elevator at Glebe Island, with its
6.500.000 bushels storage capacity and complete arrangements for the cleaning
and shipping of wheat in association with similar elevators in the grain-
producing centres of the State, will be, on completion, one of the most perfect, if
not the most perfect, of such systems in the world. The yard at Darling
Harbour where ordinary goods business other than wheat or coal will be handled
to and from the county is being entirely remodelled, and as reception sidings
for all classes of traffic have been provided for at Rozelle, the whole area at
Darling Harbour and much of that at Darling Island will be available for goods
sheds and purely loading and unloading tracks. This will increase the capacity?
of the yard by more than 100 per cent, in actual accommodation, and as this
latter will be in much better form the actual increase may be placed at not less
than 150 per cent., whilst a further area of 23 acres is being reclaimed from the
head of Darling Harbour by spoil excavated for the City Railway. One of the
first additions to the accommodation in this yard —a fine goods shed having two
floors on each of which 100 trucks can bel loaded at one time —is now nearing
completion, and other sheds of a similar type will be added later,


The location of this new goods railway is exceptionally good, as traffic
from every directian can be broxrght into it without contact with dense passenger
traffic. A connection is made with the Illawarra Tine at Tempe by a new line
which passes under the Bankstown Line near Marrickville, joins up with the
proposed new line to Botany, and is carried then parallel to the Bankstown Line
to the point previously mentioned near Wardell Road. Illawarra Line traffic
may, therefore, be carried either direct via this route to Rozelle and Darling
Harbour, or may be taken to a great marshalling yard provided at Enfield,
between Liverpool and Punchbowl Roads, on the goods line between Flemington
and Bankstown. This marshalling yard is laid out so that all reconstruction of
trains may be carried out by gravitation ; it contains suitable reception roads
for trains arriving either from the country or terminal depots, breaking up
grids, and other reception sidings for made-up trains. The total mileage of
sidings in the present yard is 37 miles 2% chains, and these will accomodate at
one time 4,838 goods wagons. A sufficient area of land has been purchased and
enclosed to more than double the existing accommodation. The yard as a whole
has been laid out in accordance with the most modern American practice for the
economical handling of traffic, and there are few yards in existence in the world
where either the extent of the accommodation afforded or the convenience for
working are equal to those which will shortly be put into service at Enfield.
Apart from the sidings provided for goods traffic, provision has been
made for sheds for the stabling, coaling, cleaning, watering, and minor repairs,
of 100 goods locomotives. The running sheds are circular, enabling any engine
required being taken out without interference with or movement of any other,
this system having been found much more convenient and economical than
rectangular sheds stabling a number of engines on the one line. The coaling of
engines is arranged from very large elevated bins, into which coal is automatic-
ally discharged from hopper wagons, and from which coal required for engines
can be put upon tenders by suitable shoots ; coal for Loco, use is thus put on
tenders at a cost of less than 2d. per ton. The erection of similar bins at a
number of the more importont Loco, depots has had the effect of reducing the
average cost of handling Loco, coal for the State as a whole from Is. sd. to Bd.,
a saving of 9d. per ton, or about per annum.
The track, with its development and its improvement, having been
described, it becomes necessary to refer to the Signalling and Interlocking
devices which have been introduced or devised for the purpose of providing
maximum safety for all traffic.
PROGRESS OF SIGNALLING ON THE N.S.W. RAILWAYS
The New South Wales Railways have always made a special feature of
equipment designed to increase the safety of the traffic, and, as a result of this
policy pursued through a number of years, there has both been considerable
immunity from mishap, and the signalling and safe working appliances now in
use are of the most up-to-date character, having kept pace from the beginning
with the progress of invention of the necessary apparatus.
For many years all new lines have been full}' interlocked before opening
to traffic, and a definite sum annually is allocated for expenditure on interlocking


the older portions of the system not yet dealt with. At the present time,
87 per cent, of the total points and crossings connected with passenger lines are
interlocked, and only a comparative!}' short time will be necessary to complete
the whole. With traffic densities varying from one train movement per day on
some country lines to twenty train movements per track per hour on the
suburban system, it has been possible to grade the system for signalling and
interlocking purposes into zones, the type of installation depending on the
traffic density.
In this connection, on remote country lines unattended crossing loops
have been provided, which allow the train crews to pass their trains through the
loop with minimum loss of time, whilst retaining entirely safe conditions.
As previously shown, the bulk of the route mileage of the State is single
track, hence the greater portion of the signalling equipment is for single track
operation.
In the earliest days the “ crossing order ” system, still popular in
America, was in use, but following a serious accident at Emu Plains in 1877,
this system was gradually abolished, and, to-day, the whole of the system is
controlled by the Staff and Ticket System, the Electric Tablet, or the Electric
Staff. The use of the first is confined to about 2,144 miles of the less busy
country lines, the whole of the balance being controlled by Electric Tablet or
Elecric Staff.
The multiple track mileage, originally a small proportion of the system,
has always been operated by a block system. To meet the stringent traffic
requirements of the Suburban Line, Sykes’ Lock and Block Instruments were
successfully experimented with between 1900 and 1915, but subsequently
discarded in favour of automatic signals.
Following the policy of duplicating main lines, the need was felt for an
efficient manual block instrument, and joint efforts on the part of Mr. O. W.
Brain, Chief Electrical Engineer, and Mr. C. A. Hodgson, Chief Traffic
Manager, resulted in a successful solution, and the production of an instrument
now adopted as standard for New South Wales.
The automatic signalling system on the suburban lines provides for the
entire automatic action of all signals except those under the control of signal
boxes, necessitated by junctions or crossovers. With the exception of one
small portion the following sections are operated by automatic signals :
Main Line Sydney to Clyde.
Illawarra Line Sydney to Tempe.
Bankstown Line and Glebe Island Line Sydney, Belmore and Enfield.
Automatic signals are also installed on certain country sections where
the traffic density renders the station spacing too long for suitable block lengths.
These sections include :
Moss Vale to Exeter,
Breadalbane to Fish River,
Galong to Cunningar,
Wallendbeen to Cootamundra,
Picton to Mittagong,
And certain smaller sections on the double track portions of
the Northern and Western Main Lines.


Where suitable power is available the manual interlocking installations
are being replaced b\ r power. The first power installation was introduced in
1910, four jmars after the opening of the new Central Station and new
Yard. The system was electric-pneumatic, electricity' being used to control
compressed air supplying the power for the movement and locking of signals
and points. This system was later extended, the Illawarra Junction box, a fine
example of a “straddle” signal box, being completed in 1916. On the Glebe
Island Line at Syffienham a group of three junctions, and at Flemington a group
of seven junctions, “all electric” power interlocking is provided. In these
cases both the control and power for movement and locking of signals and
points are electrical.
In addition to the above, there are many signal boxes where the signals
are worked and the points manually. The combination is particu-
larly efficient when the direct train movements, hence signal movements, are
frequent and the point movements few.
A trial set of locomotive cab signalling apparatus of a type similar to
that used by the Great Western Railway, England, has been in operation on
the Richmond Branch since March, 1917. By' it, a driver fs warned in the cab
by a whistle sounding on passing a distant signal at danger, or by a bell ringing
if the signal indicates “ all clear.” In either case, the driver must acknowledge
the signal, which will otherwise continue to sound. In the case of the danger
signal, a decrease in train pipe pressure is also caused, thus further warning the
driver that he must have his train under control prepared to stop at the next
signal. The apparatus has operated quite successfully, and is now being
installed on the whole of the Junee -Albury' section.
In common with other branches of the service, as much as possible of the
equipment is manufactured by the Department. One important portion of the
manufacturing plant under the control of the Signal Engineer is the production
of ferro-concrete fittings and units for use in construction. On account of the
non-durability of timber, ferro concrete fittings are being largely used in
connection with the signalling equipment, and the plant is kept busy in
addition on the manufacture of suitable unit slabs for structures such as the
relay box previously shown for the construction of bins and fences, and even for
station buildings, as shown by the photo of Macksville Station, the walls of
which are entirely of unit ferro-concrete construction.
In the signalling system as evolved in New South Wales, much of the
best practice of American railways has been adopted, without in any way
relaxing the strict standards of safety maintained on British railways, as the
result of the practice set up by the Board of Trade. This combination of the
two ideals has had satisfactory results in producing a system which lends itself
in an eminent degree to the special conditions found on the railways of this
State.
A summary of the signalling apparatus in use on the New South Wales
Railways is as follows :


Block System.
Miles.
No. of Sections
(Double Track).
Prtwoe’s Two-position Block
7~>
32
Tyer’s Three-wire
16
16
Tyer’s One-wire
.. 234
126
Bock and Block
..
—
M.S.W. Standard without Signal Control ....
1
4
1
N.S.W. Standard with Signal Control
,. 160
47
Track Block and Suburban Automatic
50
119
Country Automatic
.. 107
40
Single Line Working.
Train Staff and Ticket
2,145
103
Electric Tablet
52
Electric Train Staff—Ordinary
1,346
124
Electric Train Staff—Miniature
405
36
Loco. Cab Signalling.
Number of Signal Boxes equipped
14
—
Number of Eamps
26
—
Number of Locomotives equipped
14
_
SUMMARY OF APPARATUS IN USE.
Interlocking. Levers.
Manual Interlocking 12,360
Electro-Pneumatic Power Interlocking 147
All-Electric Pu ver Interlocking 1 lo
(Note : —lncluding Pioton to Mittagong, *e4w
brought into use in June, 1919).
This represents the Richmond Branch trial installation and the work on the
Junee—Albnry section now under construction.
ROLLING STOCK.
Locomotives. —The development of the rolling stock of all classes in
this State is reasonably in harmony • with that which has taken place in the
greater countries of the world, for though we have not kept pace with the
U.S.A. in respect of the size or hauling capacity of locomotives, New South
Wales progress compares favorably with that of Great Britain or Europe, even
though our business is only fractional of that handled even by the former.
The first passenger locomotive used in this State has a drawbar pull
equal to 8,192 lb., whilst the latest type (NN Glass) passenger engine of to-day
has drawbar pull of 27,480 lb., or 3.55 times the capacity of the first engine
used. All the engines of this class have been entirely constructed at the
Eveleigh workshops, and some idea of the advance made in the workshop
equipment may be formed by comparing this locomotive with the first engine
constructed by the Ralway Department, No. 10 in 1870.


The intermediate types up to 1888 shewed no very marked increase in
hauling power, as the Passenger and Express Engines used in that year- —the
C and D types —had a tractive pull of 13,100 lb., and goods locomotives had
developed on similar lines. In the year 1-888, the most powerful goods engines
lifted a load between Harden and Goulburn (still one of the hardest sections in
the State) of 126 tons gross, while the average gross load to-day is 640 tons, and
behind the most powerful engine of to-day the load over the same section is
580 tons.
It has jlist been mentioned that progress equal to that in the U.S.A. has
not been achieved here, and that fact is not so much due to lack of desire to
introduce engines of very great hauling capacity as to the vety heavy expenditure
which must be incurred to permit the use. of such engines. The U.S.A. started
Railway Construction wisely with a liberal load guage, here British practice was
introduced and maintained tip to a comparative!}' recent period.
By load guage is meant the maximum cross section of vehicle (or load)
that may be safety moved along the track by reason of the limitations imposed
by the distance between tracks, the height and width of tunnels, or the vertical
and horizontal distances from the track centre to any other fixed structure.
The matter is made clear by the diagram which shows the load guage at
present in use in N.S.W. ; the English load guage ; the guage which will be
adopted in New South Wales in the near future ; and the American load guage.
In U.S.A., the track centres being 13 ft. 0 in. with a liberal clearance)
they are able to run engines of very large over-all dimensions. The engine of
the Virginia Railway, which is shown in this diagram, is capable of exerting a
drawbar effort equal to 166,300 lb., or 6.05 times greater than that of our
heaviest passenger engine.
Powerful engines must be of large dimensions, and their introduction
can only be effected subsequent to a complete reconstruction of many bridges
and other fixed structures throughout the State. Progress in this direction
has been made during several years past as funds for the work have been
available; all new lines since 1912 have been constructed to allow of the greater
clearances previous!}' shown, and the time for using engines of types
approaching the monster hauling power of those recently constructed in America
is so near that designs for such engines are now in hand.
A cross section of one of these heavy engines of the Mikado type is
illustrated.
One of the immense advantages of this wider gauge is that, in suburban
cars for instance, retaining the same gangway, it would be possible to seat three
passengers on one side and two on the other, or five passengers where four
now sit.
It might be useful at this stage to indicate the progress in locomotive
power in tabulated form :


Class.
Tvtb.
Tea k.
Tractive
Power. ,
Maximum
Axle Load
Passenger Engines—Country Trains.
LBS.
T.
c.
LBS.
1
Single Driver
1855
8,192
2
C
4 Coupled or 4-4-0
1870
18,100
i:i
14
0
0
:i
H
4 Coupled or 4-4-0
1887
14,190
18
5
1
0 .
4
n
4 Coupled or 4-4-0
1888
12,830
18
18
0
0
5
p
5 Coupled or 4-6-0
1890
24,450
14
15
0
0
r.
o
6 Coupled or 4-6-0
1891
22,210
15
6
0
0
7
N
6 Coupled or 4-6-0
1908
25,082
16
18
0
0
8
NN
6 Coupled or 4-6-0
1915
27,480
20
4
0
0
Suburban Passeng’er Engines.
1
Tank Engine 0-6-0
1855
8,675
18
0
0
(1
2
F
,, ,. 2-4-0
1885
0,826
15
17
0
0
4
M
4-4-2
1891
15,770 j
14
8
0
0
4
s
4-6-4
1908
19,120 |
15
H
0
0
Goods Engines.
I
A
0-6-0
1877
I 19,450 j
13
12
0
0
2
J/131
2-8-0
1879
20,870 i
12
6
0
0
5
B
2-6-0
1882
19,450
18
16
0
0
4
L
2-6-0
1885
15.600
12
0
0
0
5
J/488
2-8-0
1891
27,640
15
9
0
0
6
T
2-8-0
1890
81,580
15
10
0
0
7
u
2-6-0
1912
20,740
12
15
0
0
8
TP
2-8-0
1912
29,610
17
7
0
u
9
K
2.8-0
1918
29,610 ;
17
1
0
0
Tank Goods Engines.
I
E
2-6-4
1891
19,450
18
4
1)
(1
2
I
2-6-2
1892
20,840
18
15
2
f)
In main features there has been no very marked departure in locomotive
building from earty standards ; boilers have grown in size, tubes increased in
number ; the number of coupled wheels have been increased. Cylinders have
increased in diameter and length ; the materials used have remained practically
the same ; but in what are sometimes regarded as minor details marked
improvements have been effected in the last decade. Compounding has been
tested and almost everywhere abandoned, but other aids to a reduced
coal and water consumption have been adopted with success. Chief among
these is the superheater, which was introduced in -America and Europe about
1905 by a German firm, though the superheater was actually invented b}-
Archibald Sturrock in the middle of the last century, he being the chief
mechanical engineer of one of the leading British railroads. He was not able to
make a success of it because high flash point cylinder oil was not then known.
Further study has so perfected the system that the hauling power of locomotives
of a given weight has been increased b} r 10 per cent., whila coal consumption
hauling that increased lood has been decreased at least 20 per cent. The
first t}rpe of superheater tested in this State was the “Schmidt,” a which,
including as it did the best principles of several European and American
designs, was, just before the war, very widely used throughout the world. It


had, however, some serious weaknesses, and daring the war period the writer
considered it practicable to design a better type and one all parts of which could
be manufactured locally, instead of importing as was the case previously. The
result was the production of the “Lucy” superheater, designed by the Chief
Mechanical Engineer of the State, and now adopted as standard. The first
superheaters of this were used in service for a period of l x /± years without
requiring any attention or repair, while no others, with one exception, had given
more than two months service without attention.
A corollary of superheating has been the general use of piston valves in
place of the old side valves, in themselves a much cheaper device.
Another important alteration in the direction of economy has been the
introduction of the exhaust injector, which returns to the boiler heat in the feed
water that former!}- was blown into the atmosphere and lost.
Valve, gears on the New South Wales Railways are of many types, chief
among them being the Stephenson radial link motion, the Allan straight link
motion, the Joy’s valve gear, the Walschaert motion, and lastly the “Southern.”
An experimental set of the “Southern” gear has been fitted to J 486
engine, which has performed so far 64,000 miles without costing one penny for
repairs.
A phase of locomotive design to which no very great attention has been
given anywhere until recently is the fire-box, grate and ash-pan, and it may be
claimed that New South Wales has now designed these details in perhaps more
perfect form than is exhibited in any locomotive design elsewhere.
The new “K” class engine, No. 1353, is fitted with cylinders 22 in.
diameter x 26 in. stroke, piston valves actuated by the most up-to-date valve
gear —the “ Southern ” Valve Gear —which has all modern advantages of
simplicity and accessibility, every part being get-at-able without needing access
to a pit. This engine has also the improved “ Lucy ” Superheater and steam
circulatory system for the preservation of superheating elements. The firebox
has a grate area of 28.75 square feet, and the total heating surface of boiler is
2201.7 square feet. The exhaust injector is fitted, also top feed for water from
injectors into boiler, a system which separates automatically many deleterious
elements, these being converted into gas and steam, and therefore discharged
through the steam pipe and cylinders into the atmosphere before having an
opportunity to do mischief to the inside of the boiler. It is possible for the
enginemen to rock the firebars of this locomotive, and thereby riddle out the
ashes and clinkers while coasting down inclines, such ashes and clinkers being
received into the hoppers underneath the ashpan, where they are quenched by
water injected through a special apparatus from the tender tank. The intro-
duction of steam to a suitable cylinder then opens the slides at the bottom of
these ash hoppers, and the ashes wetted, quenched, and harmless, then
automatically drop out on the track or into a pit, as the case may be.
The engine is also fitted with a blow-off-cock that can be operated by the
driver when running, and so get rid of undesirable qualities of water, scale, mud,
etc., from the boiler, which would otherwise cause delay to the engine by reason
of priming.


The ashes from the smokebox can be ejected at any desired spot by the
use of a steam ejector and suitable collecting hoppers situated under the
smokebox.
The effect of these developments in locomotive design may best be shown
by comparison with the work done in an earlier year :
In 1897 the coal used totalled ... ... ... 290,199 tons.
In 1918 do. do. 823,678 ~
In 1897 the water used totalled ... ... ... 4,200,302,016 gallons.
In 1918 do. do. ... ... ...12,177,181,632 ~
In 1918, the goods ton mileage and passengers carried were each more
than four times as great as in 1897, while the coal and water used in 1918 were
less than three times the quantities used in the earlier year, showing a saving
in relation to the business done of over 33 per cent.
In April, 1919, the highest record of efficiency yet achieved in the
consumption of coal per 1,000 ton miles was established, the figures being 5,872
ton miles per ton of coal used over the Railways as a whole, compared with an
average of 5,697 for the year 1918.
CARRIAGES. -The carriages used for passenger travel in the early days
of railway service bore little resemblance to those of to-day. Many people not
yet old would remember the four-wheeled stock of early days, particularly if
they happened to have travelled in second-class carriages. The first-class stock
had padded seats and was full} 7 closed, but second-class had in many cases
almost open sides with plain wooden seats, unrelieved even by a little padding
as support to the back. No lavatory accommodation was provided in any
carriage, or indeed on any train, for a period of about 30 years from the initiation
of railway services. Lavatory carriages were first provided for main line services
during Mr. Eddy’s administration, but the old type four-wheeler without such
accommodation remained in use for most branch line services up to a few years
ago.
The present standard stock for express and mail services is regarded by
the traveller who has had experience in railways in other parts of the world as
at least equal to any stock used elsewhere.
The cross-seated first-class sleeping car (TAM), which provides sleeping
accommodation for 20 passengers, is 72 ft. 6 in. long over the body, and 74 ft. 4 in.
over buffer faces x 9 ft. in. wide, 13 ft. 6 in. high from rail to top of roof, and
and 8 ft. 10 in. from floor to inside of roof.
These carriages are provided with cross-corridor in the centre 5 ft. 6 in.
wide, the two corridors branching from it being 2 ft. 1) 8 in. wide, five cabins on
one side and five on the other to ensure perfect balance of the car in running.
The cabins are each 5 ft. 6 in. wide x 6 ft. 3% in. long, thus providing
plenty of bed room for even the tallest passengers.
Each cabin is provided with wash basins of the tip-np type, and water
laid on ; hot water is provided for passengers’ use from the gas urn in the
attendant’s cabin.
Electric light is installed in each cabin, both from the ceiling and also
from small lamps in each berth which can be turned on independently by the


passenger when in bed, such light causing no inconvenience to the other
passengers in the same cabin.
The cars weigh 43 tons empt}’; each car is provided with an independent
lavatory at each end. All the interior decoration timbers, and nearß all the
construction timbers, are produced in New South Wales and Queensland.
• Wagons. —On all railway systems of the world the type of wagon used
for the transport of the products of the is properly regarded as a matter
of vital importance, the transport of goods business of anv countrv in the most
economical manner being a matter of the greatest moment, as the income of the
people as a whole depends upon what they produce, and their income is governed
largely the cost of transit.
Professor Emory R. Johnson states, in this connection, “ The social
welfare is more dependent upon cheap and unfettered transportation of com-
modities than upon inexpensive and speedy means of travel,” and as freight
rates depend considerably upon the carrying capacit}’ of goods wagons in relation
to their dead weight, the importance of sound design cannot be too greatlv
stressed.
The earlier goods wagons, with a earning capacity of four to six tons
and a dead weight almost equal to earning capacit}-, could not be regarded as
in any sense economical; but these have been gradualW replaced by others
with capacities of 16 to 40 tons, and a tare of two-fifths of the paying load.
“D ” Wagon No. 1, which commenced to run in 1861, had a tare of
4 tons, 3 cwt., and its carndng capacity was 6 tons. What this means in money
is simply stated. The in this State carried in 1919 roughly 6,000,000
tons of traffic (excluding coal), and that tonnage was hauled an average
distance o?*128 miles. Had the older t} r pe of wagon remained in service, the
additional and unnecessary dead weight hauled would have been not less than
8,000,000 tons, or roundly 1,000,000,000 waste ton miles. As each ton mile
costs one-third of a penny, the waste haulage would have cost about 400,000,
and that sum represents the annual saving to producers in this State by the use
of wagons of a good type.
In connection with the bulk wheat carrying policy of this State, 50 box
wagons are on the road, and a further 500 will shortly be completed of
an improved t} r pe. These will each have an hopper for the discharge of the
wheat underneath the body of the car ; the floor of the car, lifted up in section,
will form the grain door, or side bulkhead, during the use of such wagon as a
bulk grain carrier. The load of grain being discharged, it is merely necessary
to lower the door down to the horizontal position to convert this special wagon
into an ordinal box wagon for general goods traffic.
Heavy rail and timber traffic is catered for by the 40-ton steel bogie “E”
wagon. Some of these wagons, fitted to carry water tanks holding 7,000 gallons
of water each, have been of great service in the distribution of water during the
recent severe drought conditions.
For the carriage of specially heavy and large pieces of machinery and
other articles of great size for the development of the country, well


wagons have been provided, specially low designed, to ensure the load carried
clearing tunnel, bridges, etc.
Bogie and four-wheel refrigerator cars, with insulated sides, ends, i'oof
and floor, cooled with ice carried in chambers at the end of each van, are
provided for carrying perishable goods such as meat, rabbits, etc., and a new
type of van was designed for carrying meat from the Government
abattoirs (which were removed from their original position in the city to the
suburbs). They are semi-insulated, and earn" about eight tons of carcases.
All rolling stock needs frequent attention and repair owing to the severe
nature of the service performed, and suitable workshops have been provided for
this purpose, and gradually added to and more satisfactorily equipped with
modern machine tools as offered. To compare workshop practice
of to-day with that of 50 years ago would not be practicable in such a paper as
this. The boiler plate, flanged by the boilermaker’s hammer after
days of labor, is now shaped in a few minutes in the hydraulic forging press.
Plates are curved to perfect form for boiler barrels in electrically? operated rolls ;
powerful electric cranes lift engines and move them swiftly? to and from repair
pits ; great steam hammers do in minutes what men did in day?s with heavy
hammers, hand wielded; and in the machine shop high-speed steel, and
machines suitable for such steel, have produced the same advance as made in
the smith’s and boiler shops by the powerful machines used there.
The greatest advance in the production of labor-saving machinery has
been since 1905. A single forging machine does the work of 40 men. A rivet
or spike-making machine throws out 100 rivets per minute. Automatic and
semi-automatic machines need only setting and feeding with material to turn
out great varieties of highly-finished articles needed for all classes of rolling
stock, and the great heat producable by the oxy-acetylene torch and electric arc
now permit of welding of steel in such a manner as to produce great saving of
material both for new and repair work. Copper tube-plates cracked in work,
formerly? irreparable, are now renewed by a process initiated by? the writer, and
the cost of new plates saved, and expensive drilling and riveting of many plates
is being gradually eliminated by seam and spot welding by the oxy?-acety?lene
and electric arc processes.
In the foundry, in addition to the complete equipment for the production
of iron casting and non-ferrous alloys, a stock steel converter is used for making
steel for wheel centres and general steel castings.
In respect of the use of the whole of these modern appliances, the New
South Wales shops will compare favourably with similar shops elsewhere.
TRAFFIC.
The development of the industries in any state dependent wholly? upon
railways as a means of transport must be greatly affected by the facilities given
for the transport of primary products or manufactured goods, and the rates
levied for such transport. Before discussing in detail the progress of railway
traffic in this State, it may be of interest to show the actual development for
each decade since the opening of the first line: —


1855
1865
1875
1885
1895
1905
1915
1919
Mileage of Line Route miles..,
14
148
437'
1,732
2,531i
3,2803
4,134i
4,824$
Population per Mile of Line..
19,261,
2,861
1,3581
548
498
445
452
403
No. of Passengers earned ...
98,846
751,587
1,288,225
13,506,346
19,725,418
35,158,150
88,774,451
98,568,768
No. of Passengers carried per
7,06' ■
5,256
2,948j
7,790
7,793
10,716
21,500
20,430
Passenger Journeys per Unit
47.4>
.8
1.8
2.06
14.4
16
23.4
50.7
140
416,707!
1.190,032
3,273,004
4,075,093
6,724,215
11,920,881
12,714,012
Freight carried per Mile of
Line
10
2,914
2.680:
1,890
1,609
2,050
2,883
2,635
Freight Tons per Unit of
;
Population
.0005
1.01
1 97
3.44
3.22
4.57
6.37
6.54
Revenue from Passenger
t I.02J.9OI
Traffic
£9,093
£92.984
£168,917:
£1,469,018
£3,401,944
Jffls-. -88s,
Revenue per Passenger
1.8s.
2.5s.
3.2s.
1.2s.
1,03s,
,83s.
.77s.
Revenue per Passenger Mile...
—
—
1.37d.
l.OOd.
*
,57d.
,62d.
£156
22.3s.
£72,048
3.5
c.in« 7rrr!
ci am
£2 214 998
£4 214 567
£5,683,082 5tot 684-
Freight Revenue per ton
7s. ! 8s. 9s.
6.6s.
' 7s.
8.78o. 8-81s.
Freight Revenue per ton mile
—
—
2.44(1,
1.81 d.
1.58cl,
1,04d.
,95d.
,95d.
Average Wage per Employee
1
* !
1
£129
£127
£125
£154
£174
* Not available.
This table shows that, though the mileage of line has been increased
rapidly in proportion to the population of the State, the people have responded
to the facilities afforded by greater travel per unit and by increased production
per unit. Progress in both directions has been consistent, except during the
decade between 1885 and 1895, and from 1914 to 1919, when neither in
passenger travel nor in production was there any marked movement, the
periods of exceptional development having been 1875 to 1885, and 1905 to 1914.
It may be interesting at this point to compare the production (rail borne) per
unit of population in this State with that of the U.S.A., generally regarded as
that country in which the resources are most fulty exploited and the greatest
in economical production has been reached. Rail-borne traffic in those
States totalled no less than 1,210,345,000 tons in 1917, or 1 1.5 tons per unit of
population. Incorporated in this total is the huge tonnage of 700,000,000 tons
of coal and other minerals, or nearly seven tons per head of population, while in
1919 our own rail-borne production of these commodities amounted to three
tons per unit.
Passenger travel has developed in this State in quite an extraordinary
degree, especially during the two periods of great progress already referred to
in connection with the goods business, and has reached a stage, particularly in
connection with the city and suburban traffic, that warrants this being classed
as a separate traffic problem and one demanding a very early solution. The
solution is, in one respect —that is, from the engineer’s point of view—not
difficult, as it merely means the construction of some miles of electrically-
operated city and suburban railways, the alteration and partial reconstruction
of some existing lines, and the provision of a sufficient quantity of suitable
rolling stock. Designs for this very important work have been prepared,
detailed drawings are nearing completion, and all that is at present needed to
put in motion the most important and interesting engineering work yet
attempted in Australasia is money. That, no doubt, will shortly be found, in


I860
1875
1885
1895
1905
1915
1919
Wool-Bales
#
*
290,526
747,480
560,426
844,935
811,293
Livestock—Tons
*
*
*
153,082
174,424
849,604
645,858
Grain—Bags
*
*
*
2,175,021
3,558,029
3,626,116
19,139,787
Coal—Tons
*
1,825,000
2,628,898
4,136,537
6,632,164
5,984,635
Other Minerals
#
#
233,172
732,176
790,721
view of the fact that the traffic problem in this city is becoming daily more
acute and there is now so little time left in which to act before transit conditions
shall have become deplorable.
’ Production of those commodities which this State possesses in natural
form —which can be raised from the soil, and which may be manufactured from
our own raw materials —must be increased very greatl}- before we can make
favorable comparison on a population basis with other progressive nations, but
progress is being made.
The bulk of our wealth is derived from the pastoral, agricultural, and
mining industries of the State, and these have produced, directly, traffic upon
the railways as under :
* Figures not available.
Production in the pastoral and agricultural industries, being dependent
upon seasons, has not shown that steady increase which is possible
and is shown in the mining industry, and this latter has been seriousl}' affected
during the war period by elimination of oversea trade, thus reducing production
to the requirements of Australian markets. Our production of minerals cannot,
unfortunately, be regarded as considerable, either in proportion to population or
per unit emplo}fed in that industry. It was stated recently in the press that in
the U.S.A., in the coal mining industry, upwards of 700 tons (probabH American
tons) were produced annually per individual employed, and in Great Britain a
little over 200 tons. Here, in the year 1918, the production was approximately
495 tons per employee, which, though greatly above that of Great Britain, is
well below the results achieved in the U.S.A., though the comparison would be
on a more favorable basis is respect of this commodit}? if the tonnage production
were reduced to a common basis —that is, 700 tons (American) would equal
625 tons British. In respect to other rail-borne production, the output or use
per unit of population would appear to be also below that of the U.S.A. If their
total of 11.5 tons be reduced b} r 7 tons, coal and other minerals, there is a
balance of 4.5 tons for all other freight, as compared with 3.54 tons in this State
in 1919. Conditions are, however, totalty dissimilar, for while the war had the
effect of stimulating all production in the U.S.A., and freight increased greath T
during the war period, we not only made no progress but produced in the
aggregate a less tonnage than in 1913-14. In that year the total tonnage
handled by the railways was 13,235,842 tons, being about 50 per cent, more than
that handled five years previously and approximately double the business dealt
with a decade earlier. If similar progress had been made during the past five
years, our production figure to-day would compare reasonably with American,
and in spite of the heavy and constant increase in working expenditure, due to
increments in wages and ever upward trend in the value of materials, it is quite


1
N.S.W.
U.S. A.
U.K.
Germany .
France
Austria
approx.
approx.
approx.
Passenger Bates per mile
,62d.
1.5d.
*
.908
.745
.97
112.
f Goods Freight per ton mile
.89
.504.
-M3
.66
.81
,97
+ Tou Miles per mile of line
292,663
1,363,473
*
1,119,983
671,517
747,060
safe to say that increases in rates would have been neglible, though even present
rates compare favorably with those of earlier years, more than favorably with
those of foreign railways other than American, and in respect of some items
favorably even with these, in spite of the advantages accruing to the latter by
their huge volume of business per mile of line operated. The table submitted
at the opening of this chapter shows the revenue received per passenger carried
has constantly decreased from 1875 to this date, and the charge per passenger
mile has also fallen in a very marked degree. Similarly, the average freight
charge per ton mile has been gradually reduced, being 30 per cent, lower to-day
than in 1895, although in the interval wages per have been increased
by upwards of 40 per cent, and the prices of various materials used have
increased by more than 100 per cent.
That the railways of this State have done their share in assisting in the
development of the primary industries is sureh T borne out by these figures,
especially as the charges for products of the land are not high, even in com-
parison with American :
Grain is carried in N.S.W. at a charge of ... ,44d. per ton per mile.
~ ~ ~ U.S.A. ~ ~ ... .48d ',,
Hav „ ~ N.S.W. ~ ~ ... .43d.
~ „ ~ U.S.A. „ ~ ... .78d. ~
livestock ~ N.S.W. ~ „ ... 1.39 d. ~ ~ ~
~ , ~ U.S.A. ~ ~ ... .98d.
and the following comparison of the average rates charged in this State with
those ruling in other parts of the world for all goods and passenger traffic
carried one mile are more than favorable to this State, especially as the volume
of traffic per mile of track is so low here in relation to that operated on other
systems ;
* Not available. t Based co Zooo lb Ton.
11l concluding this paper, it would seem that the conclusions to be drawn
from the figures given are that maximum facilities for development of the
industries of this State can only be given by the Railways by further consider-
able capital expenditure to permit:
(a) Of the use of rolling stock of the most economical character.
(, h ) Of the extension of the use of appliances tending to reduce the
consumption of coal and other materials.
(a) Of additions to labor-saving plant and appliances.
(d) Of the use of electrical energy' (developed on sound business lines)
as a motive power, and
(e) By a co-ordination of effort by the people of the State as a whole to
increase production to a ratio per unit of population comparable
with the best effort elsewhere.
