

SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
A PRODUCT Of ST. STEPHEN'S.
Young as he was when his Sydney life Dr, Gilchrist has been resident in New
began, he soon got into work by which he South Wales since he was ten years of age.
was able to maintain himself. His schooling His parents and family belonged to the Free
was thus interrupted for a few years. When Church in Macquarie Street (afterwards St.
he was about fourteen he became a pupil in Stephen's), where young Gilchrist became a
a school kept by Mr. John Miles and after sabbath school teacher and communicant
for a short time in St. Andrew's presbyterian under my ministry in 1863. ... Dr. Gilchrist
school under Mr. James Thomson. Then is an able preacher and speaks with power
succeeded a period of work, first in Sydney on the platform. He has also lectured with
and afterwards for a few months in Araluen. great success. He has rendered good service
Returning to Sydney, a long spell of enforced to the university extension system by lec-
idleness supervened and was spent in private turing, on the appointment of the Senate, on
study of English grammar and composition historical subjects during several years of
and elementary Greek and Latin. Impressed late. He has also written for the press, and
by his studious habits, and though means were for a time edited a protcstant paper in Vic-
very limited, his father sent him to the Sydney toria. Dr. Gilchrist has taken a warm and
Grammar School, where the lad was received active interest in the business of the Church.
by Mr. W. J. Stephens, afterwards professor After twenty years' work in the ministry, he
at the Sydney university. Young Gilchrist, has been elected to the chair of the General
though over seventeen years of age, was Assembly. He has seen all the changes and
placed in the lowest or first form of the shared in the progress of the church since
school. In six months he had passed through it was united, and it is becoming that the
the first and second and entered the third ' native ministry should now have its foremost
form. At the end of the year he passed into representative in the office of Moderator,
the fourth form and soon placed himself at —Robert Steel, March, 1889.
its head. He carried off many prizes, but
was not permitted to compete for scholar- | n the church courts, his clearsightedness,
ships owing to his age. . . . While still sagacity, firm grasp of constitutional prin-
eighteen, he started his own school in ciples and accurate knowledge of the details
Crown-street, but next year was preaching 0 f ecclesiastical law and usage render his
as presbyterian catechist in Penrith and St. counsels of great value, in debate, he is
Marys. He matriculated at the age of twenty ready, acute, powerful and trenchant, and
and attended the lectures of Professors he never knows when he is beaten. By com-
Woolley, Pell and Smith. During his course mon consent, he is the foremost debater in
he gained prizes in classics and physics. the church.
Professor Smith's special prize for proficiency —"Presbyterian," July, 1893.
in chemistry and physics was won by him two
years in succession and the Deas-Thomson H is last public appearance was at the
scholarship for physical science in his third unveiling of the mural tablet erected to
year. He graduated B.A. at the age of honour the memory of the gifted and vener-
twenty-three. In 1868 he was ordained. ab | e pastor of this church—the late Rev. Dr.
While at Newtown he gamed the degrees of Robert Steel. It was extremely fitting that
LL.B., M.A., and LL.D. the last when thirty Dr. Gilchrist, who had sprung from a St.
years old. , Stephen's family, himself in due time a com-
Presbyterian, July, 1893. municant, who had spent his boyhood and
On the sabbath following the official open- youth under the pastoral care of one who
ing of the Sydney town hall in 1889, a great proved 50 fa,tbful a m "V ster ' 50 true 3 fr,end '
religious ceremony was held. Dr. Gilchrist S ? warm an adm, [ e : and s ° constant a P^ron,
was the chief speaker and his address made a sb ° uld pe " th ! lates [. tr,bute L to tha » be"e-
wonderful impression. It was an anthem in fact ? r . Tbe is the work of a
praise of a Christian commonwealth. The master hand, and the speech at the ded.ca-
sublimity of the idea, the grace and force tlon ' * h ‘ cb 1 heard ; ,eft n ° thl "9 to be desired,
of the language, defy the pen to improve so save tba . t . the s P® ak er might be spared to use
finished a performance. 50 stable a talent for many years in the
service of God.
—Rev. John Ferguson. _j obn Ferguson, December, 1896.
h *
CQ
-P
S 3
I
•H
i —i
Ph
g
o
o
CQ
HP
03
•H
S 3
A 3
o
•H
Cts
Q Cl,
*
cq S
*5 **
*
ARCHIBALD GILCHRIST,
M.A., LL.D. (Sydney).
Born at Rutherglen, Scotland, 22nd May, 1843.
Arrived in New South Wales, 1853.
Licensed by the Presbytery of Sydney, 1867.
Minister successively of St. Enoch's, Newtown;
Scots Church, Sydney;
Union Memorial Church, North Melbourne,
and St. John's, Paddington.
Moderator of New South Wales Assembly, 1889.
Died at Willoughby, 14th December, 1896.
A faithful preacher, a profound scholar,
an able debater and a leader in the councils
of the Church.
"He, being dead, yet speaketh."
<
A 3
■P
•H
£
CM
LTN
C\
i —l
03
®
f —<
r^H
03
•H
Ti
o
o
bO
•xl
S 3
cd
e-5
SCOTS COLLEGE, SYDNEY.
Last year Dr. Gilchrist was invited by the
council of the Scots College to take the first
principalship of that institution, an invitation
which the state of his health led him to
decline.
—"Presbyterian," July, 1893.
He was most persevering in his nature.
Once he put his hand to the plough, there
was no turning back. No difficulties with
him were too great to overcome, no obstacles
too insuperable to be surmounted. The
establishment of Scots College—the last great
work he accomplished for the church he loved
so well—is a striking testimony of the inde-
fatigable zeal with which he carried out any
work with which he was entrusted. Such was
Dr. Gilchrist in his life and character as I
knew him, and I knew him intimately.
—W. M. Dill Macky, December 16, 1896.
Only yesterday we laid in the grave the
body of the man to whom, more than to any
other, this college owes its existence. I refer
to the late Reverend Archibald Gilchrist,
LL.D. All praise, all honour be given to our
worthy Principal for the time, talent, zeal,
energy and outlay which he has expended
upon it; but still, I repeat, had it not been
for Dr. Gilchrist's dogged perseverance and
unquenchable zeal and energy, this insti-
tution would still have been "non est." Brave
soul, he struggled on when almost every
member of committee appointed with him by
the General Assembly to establish a boys'
college had given up in despair; and he lived
to see, with the aid of the Principal, his
effort crowned with success. I think it only
just, on this the first Speech Day after his
death, to lay this tribute alongside the
wreaths that are still fresh on his grave.
Boys of the Scots College, remember that
even the motto of your institution —"Utinam
patribus nostris digni simus"—is the creation
of the busy brain that has ceased to plan
for your welfare. Live it out in your lives!
So will you honour him who wrought to the
utmost of his ability for your advantage, and
so will you prove yourselves worthy scions
of the race from whom you have sprung.
—Dr. Dill Macky at the College Speech Day.


