

Antral orfcer♦
No. 306. Head Quarters,
Melbourne, 2nd January, 1856.
The Funeral of the late lamented Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, K.C.8., will take place
on Friday afternoon next, the 4th January, 1856, at Four o’clock precisely.
The whole of the Troops in garrison, under the command of Major Neill, 40th Regiment,
will attend the ceremony, and be formed in front of St. James’s Cathedral at half-past
Three o’clock.
The Funeral Procession will be formed in the following order: —
Major of Brigade (mounted).
Detachment of Military Mounted Force.
Mounted Troop of the Victoria Volunteer Artillery Regiment.
Squadron of Yeomanry Cavalry.
Firing Party :
Fortieth Regiment.
Victoria Volunteer Artillery Regiment.
Band—4oth Regiment.
Undertaker.
THE CLERGY.
The Medical Attendants.
The Very Reverend the Dean of Melbourne.
The Officiating Minister.
Pallßearers; Pallßearers
Dr. McCrea.
Mr. McArthur.
Capt. Gennys, R.N.
Col. Valiant, 40th Regt.
Col. Anderson, C.B.
The Hon. the Treasurer.
The Hon. the Attorney-General.
The Hon. the Chief Secretary.
[The Coffin being placed on a Gun Carriage, covered with the Union Jack, bearing Orders, Sword, Hat, and
Gloves. The Corpse will be borne to and from the Gun Carriage by the Seamen of the Koval .Navy.]
(ilijßf jfflounurs:
The Private Secretary.
The Aide-de-Camp,
Twisden Hodges, Esquire.
His Excellency Major-General Macarthur.
His late Excellency’s Valet. His late Excellency’s Orderly-Sergeant. Sergeant Cleary, the
Keeper of the Government Offices.
Sailors and Royal Marines of Her Majesty’s Ship Fantome.
(Four Deep.)
Victoria Volunteer Artillery Regiment.
(Four Deep.)
Officers, Naval and Military.
(Four Deep. According to Rank; the Juniors first.)
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
Their Honors The Judges.
The Foreign Consuls.
The Right Honorable the Speaker and Members of the Legislative Council
° The Clerks of the Executive and Legislative Councils.
The Right Worshipful the Mayor and Council of the City of Melbourne.
The Worshipful the Mayor and Council of Geelong.
The Chairmen and Members of the Municipal Bodies.
Magistrates.
Civilians, Members of Government.
(Eight Deep.)
The Chairman and Members of the Chamber of Commerce.
Civilians, not Members of Government.
(Eight Deep.)
Carriage of His Late Excellency the Governor.
Squadron of Yeomanry Cavalry.
Fire Brigades.
Carriages.
On the Procession moving off, seventeen Minute Guns will be fired from the Flag Staff
Battery, and a similar number over the Grave.
The Guns to be manned by a Party of the 40th Regiment, and Victoria Volunteer
Regiment of Artillery.
The further necessary Military Detail will be issued from the Brigade Office.
It is particularly requested, that all carriages and horsemen follow in rear of the
Procession, and to prevent accidents, instructions will be issued for the strict observance of this
rule.
With the concurrence of the Right Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne, that portion of
William-street, from the top of Collins-street to that of Lonsdale-street, will be kept clear from
all carriages and persons passing, not classed in the Procession.
The formation of the Troops, as well as the whole of the Procession, will be under the
direction of the Major of Brigade; but Mr. Inspector Bookey will be instructed to afford
assistance and superintend the formation of the Civil Branch.
Gentlemen are requested to assemble on the open space in front of the Government
Offices at half-past Three o’clock precisely.
Carriages to be in Lonsdale-street, with the horses’ heads to the west, not extending
beyond the junction of William-street.
On arrival at the Cemetery, the Funeral Party will form North and South of the Grave,
facing inwards, the Guns pointing to the East. Between the Firing Party, no one, except the
Clergy, Chief Mourners, and Pall Bearers, will be admitted. The remainder of the Procession is
requested to station themselves between the Troops and the portion of the Cemetery enclosed for
the occasion.
By Command,
THOMAS NELSON,
Major of Brigade, Victoria,
Acting Deputy Adjutant-General.
Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.
VfONAI, LIBRARY
<fF AUSTRALIA
