

PeTM PP!w,
Kcuaious Pams
BOV I Q
CRITICAL METHOD
Cl]c fistorn of Ccstimang,
As Discoursed of
“Robert Elsmere,”
W. STACEY CHAPMAN, M.A.,
New College, Oxford; Coadjutor at St. Paul's, Melbourne;
Special Preacher at Holy Trinity, Balaclava.
Ptlboonu:
SAMUEL MULLEN, COLLINS STREET EAST.


HAASE AND STEVENSON,
PRINTERS,
14 FLINDERS LANE WEST,
MELBOURNE.


To My Reverend Brethren,
“tTbe jfrienbs in Council,”
I have the Honour and Pleasure of
Dedicating tbts paper,
Read at their Meeting, on November 13TH, 1888,
and now
published at tbeir IRequest.




THE CRITICAL METHOD
(Tbf instovn of (Ttstimonn
AS DISCOURSED OF IN
“ROBERT ELSM ERE.”
There can be no question that “Robert Elsmere" is a very
remarkable book. Almost destitute of plot it is nevertheless
of sustained and absorbing interest. It is bright with
epigram, finished in style, replete with observation, and
presents a few fully and carefully drawn characters of much
distinctness and force. To all these features of charm it
adds a thorough and courageous, and obviously sincere
attack upon the Christian faith. It is upon only one part of
that attack I have been commissioned by “ The Friends in
Council ” to make some observations, but if I find it im-
possible to limit myself with uniform exactness to that part
alone—the history of testimony, namely—l shall hope to find
indulgence in the Friends’ recognition of the necessary
relations of the part to the whole.
Notwithstanding that everybody has read the book, it may
be well to remind ourselves that Robert Elsmere, a young
Oxford Fellow, being Rector of Murewell, had for his Squire
a gentleman of ancient family and arrogant manners, of
extraordinary abilities, and of most pronounced and aggres-
sive unbelief. It is a consolation to think that a personage
in some respects so heartless and ogre-like, yet so learned
and eloquent withal, exists perhaps nowhere but in the
brilliant pages of Mrs. Humphry Ward. What the country


clergy at home would do with them—and still more what
they would do with the country clergy—if they existed with
any frequency in the flesh and in the parish, is too painful to
be considered.
While an undergraduate at Oxford the squire had been
caught in the stream of ultra-churchmanship. He seems to
have had literally no excuse or reason for it—certainly had
not so much as even the semblance of religious conviction
about it, —and when Mr. John Henry Newman, now most
illustrious of cardinals, was driven, or supposed himself to be
driven, into renunciation of everything Anglican, the young
squire took revenge upon himself for previous inconsistency
by going off at a tangent into rationalism and revolt. He
hastened to Berlin, plunged into student-life with more
enthusiasm than ever, and after a time began to meditate a
veritable magnum opus on the subject of “ Testimony.” He
pursued his studies, it is clear, always with the unacknow-
ledged intention of shewing the utter unsatisfactoriness of
whatever has been received as evidence for the facts which
underlie all doctrine respecting the life, the person, the
nature, the claims of Him whom we here believe and wor-
ship as our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
There is a certain amount of subtlety in the squire’s idea—
a subtlety that is, I think, the veil for no small amount of
sophistry. Thus: We are perfectly assured that the evi-
dence for the chief facts of the Christian faith—the birth of
Jesus and the time of it, His teaching, His character, His
death under-a certain procurator in the time of a certain
emperor ; His resurrection from the dead ; the devotion of
certain followers He had secured ; the desperate character
of the enterprise to which He committed them, and, on any
merely worldly hypothesis, the inexplicable and even absurd
success which attended the efforts of these followers; all
these things we know are better and more fully and more
variously attested than any other group of facts in ancient
history. There are sundry details of the Christian history


which are not so. That is to say, the evidence for the details
—for this or that parable, for this particular miracle, for
minor incidents of persons, places, surroundings—the evi-
dence for these is less voluminous, less direct, contains more
that is of the nature of inference. It is obvious, however,
not only that the details must be discounted, but that the
fairly overwhelming evidence for the main facts of the
Christain faith as a whole, must in some way be weakened
if Elsmere’s designed renunciation of faith and position are
to be in any way justified. How shall the justification be
effected ? Quite simply and cleverly by the device, as subtle
as it is fallacious, of not treating the Christian evidences
strictly on their own merits, as they claim to be treated,
but putting them in undistinguished confusion on precisely
the same level as any or all other ancient testimony soever.
We see, for example, how scanty, and sometimes how
doubtful, is the evidence for this and the other reported
event or circumstance of ancient times—the birth, say, of
Romulus, the story of Tullus Hostilius, the legislation of
Solon, the death of Themistocles, and a thousand things
besides. Most of these accounts have a foundation, but how
much has been added ! The fact is, that what we receive
on the authority of Testimony while Testimony was still in
its “ pre-scientific stages,” should be held with a very loose
hand. We are to say to ourselves, that all old histories are
full of inaccuracies, and most of them full of wonders. In
some of them, we are given to understand, we can almost
see the miracle in process of development and production.
When we have read or thought about one hundredth part as
much as Robert Elsmere’s squire, we shall recognise in
miracles not frauds or dishonesties, or simple lies, but
“ merely a natural, inevitable outgrowth of human testimony
in its pre-scientific stages.” (P. 353, one vol. edn.) Ex mo
discs omnes , or rather, Ex universo disce singula .*
♦ 1 From the undistinguished mass determine the separate values of the
parts of which it is composed.’


Now let all that kind of thing come on its theoretical side
from the best beloved of college tutors, Mr. Grey, and on its
historical side from that colossus of learning and dogmatism,
the Squire of Murewell, and we no longer wonder it had a
very damaging effect on the Rev. Robert Elsmere, as it has
had indeed on many others. Mr. Grey, the college tutor,
knew Hegel and the Hegelian philosophy better than any
other human being; better, as it was once naughtily said,
than that philosophy was known to Hegel himself. But this
at least should be remembered, that Hegel lived and died in
the communion of the Lutheran Church, and professed
sincere,belief in the Christian religion.
Of the Squire we are informed that he had arrived at his
results only after completing the Herculean task of wading
through all the literature of Greece and Rome, through all
Oriental literature (Sanskrit itself alone being enough for
most men’s lives), and, in fact, “ through the whole mass of
existing records.” (!) Fifteen years (not a day too long) had
been devoted to these studies, that is, to “ classical antiquity
—with India, Persia, Egypt and Judea” (p. 315); and at
the end of another fifteen years he has “ put the last strokes
to a History of Testimony from the Christian era down to
the sixth century—from Livy to Gregory of Tours; from
Augustine to Justinian ” (ib.).
As the Squire affects so portentous an accuracy both as to
facts and ideas, it may be noted as we pass how much more
pomp than meaning there appears in this parade of names.
The first pair of names covers not only the entire period
covered by the second pair, but (making the mention of
Augustine and Justinian superfluous), covers above four
centuries besides. For Livy was born 413 years before
Augustine, while Gregory of Tours was only on the threshold
of manhood when Justinian lay dead.*
* The exact dates are as follows : Livy b. 59, b.c,, d. 17, a.d. ; Augustine
b. a.d. 354, d. 480; Justinian b. a.d. 483, d. 565 ; Gregory of Tours b. a.d.
544, d. Nov. 17th, 595.


Leaving this, however, we learn that the Squire has
evolved from his thirty years’ study of these so-called records,
a huge and all-embracing major premise. Our author of
course takes care not to exhibit it with the conspicuousness
which its importance demands, but, together with its minor
premise and conclusion, it may be thus presented;
Major : Ancient history —history resting on testimony in
its “ pre-scientific ” stages —is frequently untrustworthy, is
largely composed of legend, is always liable to revision, so
cannot claim to be authoritative, binds no one seriously to
believe it.
Minor : The Christian history rests on testimony in irs
“ pre-scientific stages.”
Conclusion ; Then the Christian history may be taken as
frequently untrustworthy, as largely composed of legend, as
always liable to revision, so cannot claim to be authoritative,
binds no one seriously to believe it.
There is an old maxim of the logicians, Dolus Met in
generalihus. I may translate it not unfairly, “In sweeping
propositions sophistry and fallacy find good cover. More
especially is this the case when the arguing of them is
entangled in eloquent and multifarious discourse.
But let the Squire speak for himself. In a subsequent
part of the conversation from which I have quoted, he says :
« Testimony, like every other human product, has developed .
Man’s power of apprehending and recording what he sees
and hears has grown from less to more, from weaker to
stronger, like every other of his faculties, just as the
reasoning powers of 'the cave-dweller have developed into
the reasoning powers of a Kant.” (p. 317.)
The statement is plausible enough, and in some respects is
true enough ; but it is not nearly so extensively true as we
are intended to suppose. Undoubtedly there is an
immensely greater number of observers and narrators now
than in the days, say, of Herodotus. Undoubtedly also, the
observers and narrators have discovered many fresh fields


and departments in which to exercise their powers. But
this is not so much because man’s original powers for
observation have developed, at least within the limits of
historical time, as because it has been found how very much
more there is that is worth observing ; nay, that must be
most exactly and most completely observed, and apprehended
and recorded as well, that we may arrive at the sublime
generalisations in which science reveals God working by
laws. The powers themselves were there ages before science
had become conscious of itself, and not only were there but
were most vigorously and successfully exercised on all such
facts and events as called them into use. Let Homer and
Aristotle and Thucydides, let Caesar’s Gallic War and
Virgil’s Fourth Eclogue and Pliny’s Natural History suffice
for “ testimony.”
With this necessary qualification it may be granted that
“ man’s power of apprehending and recording what he sees
and hears has grown from less to more, from weaker to
stronger.” But to have any hostile bearing (as it is meant to
have) upon the diplomatic evidence for the Christian Faith,
that statement should imply not only that Christian evidences
were earlier than the age of criticism, but that they belong
to a time when man either had not yet attained the power of
apprehending what he heard or saw, or was not able to
record it truthfully—a proposition so untenable as to be
absurd.
The Squire next lays down the indispensableness of
being furnished with the “critical method” if we would
study the first Christian century with intelligence, and
explains that, in history, “ the critical method ” means “ the
science of what is credible,” while in literature it means
“ the science of what is rational.” He then proceeds as
follows :
“ The theologian in such a state [ i.e. whose mind is
destitute of ‘the critical method’] sees no obstacle to accept-
ing an arbitrary list of documents with all the strange stuff


they may contain, and declaring them to be sound historical
material, while he applies to all the strange stuff of a similar
kind surrounding them the most rigorous principles of
modern science. Or he has to make believe that the
reasoning processes exhibited in the speeches of the Acts,
in certain passages of St. Paul’s Epistles, or in the Old
Testament quotations in the Gospels, have a validity for the
mind of the nineteenth century, when in truth they are the
imperfect, half-childish products of the mind of the first
century, of quite insignificant or indirect value to the
historian of fact, of enormous value to the historian of
testimony and its varieties.” (p. 317). On this very important
passage I have to remark at some length.
The theologian must be acquainted with “ the critical
method ” ; and the critical method resolves itself into “ the
science of what is credible ” in respect of history, and “ the
science of what is rational ”in respect of literature. But is
there any such thing in the whole universe as a “ science of
the credible ?” Who would dream, for example, with only a
few chapters from the history of discovery and invention and
achievement in the reign of Victoria alone, of laying down
the limits of the possible. But the possible is, under certain
•conditions, constantly becoming the credible. When the
possible has been made actual, it is not only credible but
credited, as soon as we are in possession of sufficient
<< testimony ”to make it so. Then if there can be a science
of the credible there can also be a science of the possible—
the possible being under certain conditions both the origin
of the credible and the measure of it. And as it would be
not only presumptuous but ridiculous for finite man to
predicate a science of the possible, so is it ridiculous to
pretend a science of the credible. Credibility has, and can
have, no limits narrower than the limits of possibility. And
if miracles are not a priori impossible (which is what the
Squire really aims at), then it is not impossible for there to
be evidence sufficient in nature and extent and variety to


make those miracles credible. While, if miracles are not
possible, then it is not a supposed “ science of the credible ”
which leads to their rejection, but the nature of the case in itself.
The theologian needs also to be furnished with the
science of the rational.” What is meant by the science of
the rational is nowhere explained. It refers to “ literature” ;
but it cannot mean any imaginable criteria of the sublime
and beautiful, of good taste, or of good style. Then does it
refer to sound reasoning ? And if so, in what way are we
advanced beyond what was both taught in theory and
exemplified in practice whole centuries before a line of the
New Testament was written ?
I now come to a sentence already quoted but which I am
obliged to repeat. “ The theologian in such a state
[ignorant, that is, of the sciences of the credible and the
rational] sees no obstacle to accepting an arbitrary list of
documents, with all the strange stuff they may contain, and
declaring them to be sound historical material, while he
applies to all the strange stuff of a similar kind surrounding
them the most rigorous principles of modern science.”
This theologian is certainly a very uncandid and incon-
sistent person. Indeed he will not escape still sharper
reprobation unless we are to regard him as the subject of
that most curious and rare disease, “ mental dualism.” For,
at the beginning of the sentence he is so completely ignorant
of “the principles of modern science” as to “ invite fiasco,"
while at the end of it he is found vigorously applying the
said principles.
Passing this, can anything be more unjust, more
demonstrably untrue, than the suggestion that our Scrip-
tures more especially our New Testament Scriptures—
consist of an “ arbitrary list of documents ?” For my own
part I know of nothing which was farther removed from
arbitrariness than the determination of the Canon of the
New Testament.
Apart from the clear and assured criteria by which some


documents were refused admission into the Canon and others
were accepted, I would submit not only that our omniscient
squire could never have studied the history of the Canon,
but that, leaving the Canon untouched, if he had done no
more than read the documents to which the criteria ot
canonicity were applied, he could never, unless in mere
petulance and bad temper, have spoken of the documents
in question as he spoke to Robert Elsmere. As the passage
stands, the documents accepted and the documents rejected
are pretended to be alike filled with “ strange stuff, and to
be equally valueless. I venture to say there is not a
passably intelligent person in the world who could read
those two sets of documents, and then put them into the
same category. There is as great and as palpable a
difference between the documents rejected and the docu-
ments received, as there is between tinkling brass and solid
gold, between a mud hut and a marble palace, between
puerilities and inane bathos on the one hand, and on the
other simplicity and strength, truth and conviction. What-
ever be the case with the squire’s imagined theologian, it is
here not the theologian but the squire who, by a discreditable
inability to distinguish, has both fiasco and secured it.
With regard to our supposed theologian s “ make-believe
in respect of certain passages in the Acts of the Apostles and
the letters of St. Paul, it is fairly open to say that many
besides professed theologians have found in them a very
valid message indeed, and have shared the mind of the igth
century as well. It would have been only candid in our
squire to remember that the reasons for brevity and condens-
ation in writing our Scriptures were of the most urgent
character, and that in almost all cases, if not in quite all, the
omissions in St. Paul’s arguments can be easily supplied.
We all of us make the statements of our views and reasoning
shorter when we are discoursing with those to whom their
chief outlines are familiar. So did St. Paul. And even that
supposed very difficult example of it, the Epistle to the


Galatians, needs nothing beyond patient and competent study
to be shown as replete with logical sequence as with sound
sense and Christian love.
I have now to revert to the squire’s supposed very
formidable position respecting the History of Testimony and
its bearing on the faCts on which Christian dogma declares
itself based. It is of the first importance to clearly ascertain
what is meant by the History of Testimony and what is the
value of the position. After the most careful consideration,
and after repeated endeavours to find myself mistaken, I find
that what is intended is no less than this, that for every
important statement respecting the past, we must insist on
being furnished with the evidence for it right down from the time
when the fact about which the assertion is made was still within the
immediate knowledge of those making the assertion. If that condition
be not complied with, the chain of evidence is historically
incomplete; and, by implication, such evidence is to be
regarded with suspicion, or, more justly, to be rejected
altogether. If this new critical and historical canon is a true
one, it will of course be quite as true for matters outside the
pages of the evangelists as for matters within them. Let us
try it on an example from the history of Rome.
It is confidently and generally believed that on a certain
day, at a certain hour, with certain weapons, in a certain
place, by certain persons, Julius Caesar was murdered. The
day was the Ides of March, the hour was between eleven
o clock and noon, the weapons were daggers, the place was
the Senate Hpuse, by the statue of Pompey, the persons were
Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Cimber, Trebonius, and others.
Cimber gave the signal by rudely grasping the dictator’s
cloak. Casca struck the first blow rather low down in
Caesar’s neck —faullum infra jugulum. The assassins were
excited, and aimed at face, eyes, everything, inflicting several
wounds upon each other, till Brutus brought the end by a
stab in the groin. The wounds were twenty-three in all, and
then “ the foremost man of all this world ” lay butchered.


Our chief authorities for these particulars about Caesar’s
death are practically our only authorities, and they are
Plutarch, Tacitus, Suetonius, Dio Cassius. Not one of them
gives every one of the particulars I have mentioned, yet their
testimony about them is unanimously regarded as sufficient,
and has always been so regarded. But we have no history of
that testimony. What did Plutarch rely on ? What were
the authorities of Dio Cassius and Suetonius ? Even Tacitus
is without a single reference for what he narrates as facts.
Not one of these authors, moreover, was an eye-witness of the
murder. Not one of them ever spoke to one of the murderers.
Not one of them wrote within a century of the commission of
the murder. Not one of them but wrote his account on the
authority of u human testimony in its pre-scientific stages.
Then, because we have only their testimony, and not the
history of their testimony, shall we forthwith discredit it ?
But that is what we ought to do, if all this talk about the
history of testimony has any meaning.
Besides, the story is marked by a discrepancy. All the
world is aware that on seeing Brutus approach him to give
the final blow, Caesar exclaimed, “Et tu, Brute!” But
Plutarch says something very different. He knows nothing
of “Et tu, Brute /” He says, moreover, that it was at the first
stroke, not the last, and not to Brutus, but to Casca, that
Caesar spoke; that he spoke in Latin; and that what he said
was, “ You villain, Casca, what are you doing ?” Suetonius,
who wrote some thirty years later than Plutarch gives a quite
different account. He tells us that Caesar’s only utterance
was an inarticulate groan, though he acknowledges that others,
whose very names are now unknown, had recorded how Caesar,
on seeing Brutus among his assailants, had cried out, in the
Greek, so familiar to them both, “ Kai su ekeinon, kaisu teknon:”
“ And art thou among them, even thou , son ?” So there is a
somewhat marked discrepancy.
But besides containing this discrepancy, how is the story
marked by antecedent improbabilities! The more highly


educated Romans were largely imbued with ideas of states-
manship, and understood the importance of strong govern-
ment. Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Xrebonius, and the others
were among the better educated Romans ; were gentlemen,
soldiers, scholars, practical statesmen, all of them. They
had been treated by Caesar with unexampled magnanimity,
and, some of them, with the most splendid and recent
generosity. Brutus was the nephew of Cato. Caesar had
not only pardoned him for having been a chief ally of Pompey
in the recent civil war, but had received him to close friend-
ship, made him Governor of Cisalpine Gaul, and, not content
with that, had exalted him to the City Prsetorship. Casca
held the extremely important rank and power of Tribune of
the Plebs. Cassius had been quaestor under Crassus, and
was a great general. Trebonius had only just laid down a
consulship to go as Governor of Asia. Cimber was on his
way to the lucrative governorship of Bithynia at the very
time of the assassination. Then are we to believe that
educated gentlemen, soldiers, statesmen, men of rank and
experience such as these, would join in a conspiracy even more
stupid* than it was wicked, and one so certain to be Injurious,
if not fatal, to the best interests both of themselves and of Rome?
Is it not inherently incredible that men like these who have
been mentioned, men confessedly holding first positions in the
first empire in the world, should have imbrued their hands in
the blood of so illustrious a friend, and blasted their honor and
their souls at once, by the basest and most ungrateful and
most blundering treachery the world has ever seen ? And if
any one believes it, on what ground does he believe it ?
Evangelists were contemporary with the crime they say
was committed at Jerusalem. They were themselves eye-
witnesses of what they tell us was done by Jesus of Nazareth.
* “ Goethe says somewhere that the murder of Cassar was the most sense-
less act that the Homans ever committed) and a truer word was never
spoken.”— Niebuhr .


And they shed their blood in attestation of their own devotion
to, and their own statements about a Master who was held in
general detestation while He lived, and whom His haters
contrary to all but universal rule—were unable to forgive
even after He was dead. With their own eyes they had
beheld him as He lay pale and marred, blood-stained, yet
beautiful, ere He was laid in Joseph’s tomb. With their own
reverent hands they had touched Him after He had risen from
the dead. Both of their testimony and of the history of their
testimony we possess more than is possessed about any other
series of events the world receives. So these men we may
perhaps believe; but of testimony for the murder of “ Im-
perial Caesar ” we have not even a line that satisfies these pre-
tended scientific conditions of credibility. Of a certain sort
of testimony for it, we have plenty. But it belongs, without
exception, to “ the pre-scientific stages.” We have nothing
that even approaches to a history of that testimony ; so,
according to the doctrine laid down in “ Robert Elsmere ,”
the narrative of Plutarch and Tacitus, of Suetonius and Dio
Cassius should be at once discredited and dismissed. Thus
will the annals of human guilt be cleared of one of the foulest
of the charges of which they are made up.
But what of the people who in every age have been
repeating that charge ? Not a poet of any language, not a
historian of any people—least of all his own people—who has
not dwelt on and shuddered at the murder of great Caesar and
made his readers do the like. Henceforth they will know
better. The “ History of Testimony ” will in this particular
insure immunity from future fault.
I have taken theinstanceof Caesar’s assassination,however,
not with a view to “ turn the tables ”, but as a crucial, and it
might perhaps be a final, example of the non-existence of the
materials for such a history as the Squire of Mureweil is said
to have spent thirty years in compiling. We have testimony
in abundance for the histories of Greece and Rome and Syria
and other countries. But we have no history of such


testimony, and we have no materials out of which that history,
except m disconnected fragments, could by any possibility
be compiled.
In what way however, is this impossible History of
Testimony to be utilised against the trustworthiness of the
writings of the New Testament ? I confess I have hardly
patience to treat this part of Squire Wendover’s discourse
with the seriousness it appears to demand. For what is the
grand result at which he has arrived ? It is this : that given
the dominant ideas, the intellectual conditions of a time, and
you may both predict the beliefs and opinions of that time
and their evolutions into fresh forms. Let our instructor
speak for himself. “ Suppose for instance ” says the Squire,
“ before I begin to deal with the Christian story and the
earliest Christian development, I try to make out the
moulds, the channels, into which the testimony of the time
must run [observe the “ must”]. I look for these moulds, of
course, in the dominant ideas, the intelleClual preconceptions
and pre-occupations existing when the period begins.”
Well, I submit that that important-looking paragraph is
simply a piece of injurious and unpardonable nonsense, and I
take leave to affirm as against it, that neither the exactness of
science, nor the conclusions of learning, nor the insight
of genius have any of them prevailed anywhere, on any
subject, or at any period of history, to tell in what moulds or
channels the testimony of a time must run.
Men whose eyes are open have a larger and more accurate
knowledge of their own times than of any others. But who
would presume to say he could point out the channel or
mould into which the testimony of our own time will run ?
If he is an honest man his own share of the testimony will
be determined not by theories of what “must” be, or
inferences as to what will probably be, but by knowledge of
what is or was. The testimony of his fellows will resemble
his own. The testimony of all of them put together will be
the testimony of their time. An individual here or there will


be dishonest or prejudiced and tell what is untrue. An
individual here or there will be weak-witted and mistake
hallucination for fadt. But neither the one nor the other of
them will persuade the men of his time, or even a very small
number of the men of his time, to conspire with his
misstatements. As far as the testimony of the immense
majority of the time survives, the probabilities will be over-
whelmingly in favour of occasional inaccuracy in details but
of historical veracity as a whole.
There was one specially dominant idea, one strong
intellectual preconception, at the time at which the Christian
story opens. I refer to the idea of the Jewish people attaining
military and political supremacy under the leadership of one
they spoke of as Messiah. Then if this pretentious hypothesis
in “Robert Elsmere ” has any foundation, the testimony of
that time, and more especially the Jewish testimony of that
time, will be that about that time the East changed places
with the West in respedt of power, and that the Jews became
masters of the world, or, as in Tacitus, describing the
dominant idea, that valesceret Oriens profectique Judea rerum
potireutur. (Hist. V I3J.
But is the testimony of that time to that effedl ? or is it
rather found to have been supremely ignorant of all such
supposed controlling forces respecting the “ moulds and
channels in which testimony' must run,” and to have been
stupidly but veraciously content to record that no change
took place in the relative positions of East and West, while
the nationality and political status of the Jews were destroyed
altogether.
Lastly, the value of human testimony depends not on the
age in which it is given, whether scientific or pre-scientific,
but on the competence and truthfulness of those who give it
and those who transmit it. In these respedts the Christian
apologist may most legitimately and confidently contend that
the testimony of the evangelists and apostles surpasses all
other testimony soever; that if anything soever that is narrated


about the past is to be deemed credible by the present
credible by those who did not see it with their own eyes or
hear it with their own ears, then the narrative of the
evangelists and apostles is to be deemed credible. For
their testimony was maintained with consistency under every
inducement to prevaricate and deny. It was maintained
in the face of the utmost personal violence offered first to
themselves, and offered next (and again and again through
three centuries) to those who believed them, and who suc-
ceeded to their ministry of witnessing for the fadts and
dodtrines about Jesus the Christ. As far as anything what-
ever oan be found out, it was maintained by its authors just
as consistently when they were remotely separated from
each other as when they were assembled together with
one accord in one place. That testimony is as sublime
and glorious in the contents of it as it is profound and
perfedt in its adaption to the deepest needs of the humanity
to which it is addressed. Notwithstanding all gainsaying
and the perpetually changing methods of attack upon it,
the faith thus witnessed-to is perpetually extending the
area of its influence and the number of its adherents, and
is at this moment the mightiest force the world has in it.
For the present however, the impossible history of its
testimony, as required in “ Robert Elsmere ,” may be dis-
missed. One day we trust to come upon the materials for it.
We shall find them perfedt and complete with the martyrs,
doctors and confessors who have gone to their reward.
Haase <6 Stevenson, Printers, U Flinders Lane West, Melbourne
