

UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES
No. 4.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
AND
INTERNATIONAL LAW
PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE.
SOCIALISM AND THE WAR
MAURICE BLACKBURN, M.A.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Propy Ltd,,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE,


UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES.
ARRANGEMENTS have been made with the University Authorities,
and with the Lecturers, to publish the complete text of each night's
Lectures in booklet form.
There are many thousands who would like to hear the lectures
but are debarred by circumstances from that privilege, and it is for them
mainly that the lectures will be published. But those who have heard
them will also like to have the lectures in print for reference, and for
passing on to their friends.
The complete course, with dates of delivery, is as follows. The
list is subject to possible variation, of which due notice will be given in
the papers.
Tuesday, June 15— PROFESSOR TUCKER—“British and German Ideals.”
PROFESSOR SCOTT-“The Nature of the Issue.”
Tuesday, June 29.—PROFESSOR WALLACE—“ Recent Impressions of
Britain in War Time.” F. W. EGGLESTON—“ The Significance of
the Empire.” ARCHIBALD T. STRONG, M.A.—“ Australia and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 14.—PROFESSOR OSBORNE—“ Germany’s Intellectual
Strength and Weakness.” R. R. GARRAN, C.M.G.—“Trade and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 28.—PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE—“lnternational
Relations and International Law.” MAURICE BLACKBURN,
M.A.—“Socialism and the War.”
Tuesday, August 10.—SIR WILLIAM IRVINE—“The Duties of a Non-
Combatant.” DR. McKELLAR STEWART—“Nietzsche and the
Modem German Spirit.”
Tuesday, August 24.—COLONEL HUBERT FOSTER, R.E., Director of
Military Science in the University of Sydney—“ Strategy on the
Western Front.”
Wednesday, September B.—PROFESSOR MASSON—“Chemistry and the
War.” PROFESSOR BERRY—“Remoter Aspects of the War.”
PROFESSOR LABY—“ The Dominions and the War.”
EACH NIGHTS LECTURES IN ONE PAMPHLET


INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
and INTERNATIONAL LAW.
Lecture delivered in the 'JXCasonic Hall, vMlelbourne,
on July 28th, 1915, by
PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE.
SPEAKING on September 19th of last year, Mr. Asquith
defined the aims of British statesmanship in the
present war as follows:
“ (1) To vindicate the sanctity of treaty obligatioris and
what is properly called the public law of Europe;
“ (2) to assert and enforce the independence of the
relatively small and weak against the encroachments and
the violence of the strong, and
“(3) to withstand, as we believe in the best interests
not only of our own Empire but of civilisation at large, the
arrogant claim of a single Power to dominate the develop-
ment of the destinies of Europe.”
Speaking six months later—in March —of the conditions
necessary for an enduring peace, without which our sacri-
fices would have been in vain, he laid down the following
principles:—
“(1) The clearing of the ground by the definite repu-
diation of militarism as the governing factor in the rela-
tions of States and of the future moulding of the European
world.
“(2) Room must be found and kept for the independent
existence and the free development of smaller nationali-
ties, each with a corporate consciousness of its own.


“(3) By a slow and gradual process the substitution for
force, the clash of competing ambitions, for groupings and
alliances, and a precarious equipoise, of a real European
partnership, based on the recognition of equal right and
established and enforced by a common will.”
The last, it will be observed, stands for an ideal of
ultimate attainment rather than an object to be immediately
accomplished.
The purpose of this address is, if possible, to make a
little more definite what is involved in these declarations of
principle, as well as to indicate some of the difficulties they
encounter. The discussion cannot be very exciting, but
the matters concern us deeply, and we shall have to find
a place for them in our political thinking in the future, if
we are not going to abandon our ideals of self-government
in what are the first and last things of political existence.
Foreign relations and diplomacy are apt to be regarded
as the gold lace of court dress, the peculiar treasure
of kingly and aristocratic governments, with which, if it be
true to its nature, a democracy, anxiously devoting itself to
the development of its resources and the welfare of its
citizens, has little or nothing to do.
Let us examine that notion from the experience of
Australia.
Some 60 years ago, we entered upon self-government
which, as then conceived, meant the management of our
local and internal affairs—police, justice, the control and
development of the resources of our country and our people.
Gradually we formed the opinion that our interests de-
manded the imposition of protective tariffs, the exclusion
of coloured races, the regulation of immigration, the enact-
ment of exceptional shipping laws; and that the mainten-
ance of our social standards, our racial purity and our
political system required the assertion of our policy over a
vast Continent, over the whole of which we exercise political
control, but of which as yet we use a relatively small area.
In giving effect to this opinion by our acts, we have
established points of contact with other nations, and em-
barked on a policy which, as conflicting with their in-
terests and aspirations, invites their attention, calls forth
representations, and might eventually be challenged. We


began with self-government in our internal affairs; to-day
we maintain departments of external affairs and defence.
We see, then, how naturally foreign relations develop
out of internal conditions and policy, and this becomes the
more marked in proportion as the activities of a nation
are absorbed in and dominated by the State and the Govern-
ment of that nation. The paternal State of the 20th cen-
tury does not escape the international complications of the
patrimonial State of the 17th and 18th centuries. Where
the government aims at little more than keeping a ring
for individual activities to play their part together, in co-
operation or in conflict, the points of contact with foreign
nations may not be less, but they will not be so easily
dominated by the political aspect of things, and the points of
contact and therefore of conflict between the governments
will be fewer, a fact which accounts for a good deal that
has been characteristic of the international position of the
United States. But it is impossible for any nation —least
of all a progressive nation—to be a hermit State.
These international relations are controlled in part by
the existence of certain principles and rules generally
accepted by civilised States as the basis of their existence
and of their intercourse. These rules have been elaborated in
treatises innumerable from the 17th century onwards, and
the nature of the obligation imputed to them may be in-
ferred from the fact that in the main the writers of these
treatises have been lawyers, and the subject itself has be-
come definitely associated with the study and methods of
law.
For the rest, the adjustment of the relations of States
is the business of diplomacy, and from early in the 17th
century it has been customary for Governments to maintain
continuously a representative at every foreign court. This
diplomacy is related to international law in part by the
formulation in legal terms of the privileges and immunities
of the ambassador and his suite, in part by a body of dip-
lomatic usages and practices, including a technical ter-
minology and a professional etiquette, which are sometimes
treated as a part of international law itself.
We must distinguish the part of diplomacy from the
part played by law, for international relations are no more


limited by the assertion and vindication of rights than is
our social life. There are many friendly offices which may
be asked but not demanded, many acts which are ungracious
and unfriendly without being the infringement of any right.
A State which persistently refused to make treaties for
the extradition of criminals or for the several purposes
provided for in treaties of commerce, which closed her
ports and rivers to foreign shipping, and refused to recog-
nize the functions of foreign consuls might not infringe
any legal right of other States, but would find itself before
long in a serious situation.
Moreover, the importance of diplomacy over against
law increases from these further facts —that international
law is very incomplete, so that many matters must be ad-
justed by agreement and without any rule at all; that it is
often uncertain, and an uncertain rule is no rule; and that
the law makes no adequate provision for those changes
from which the international life is no more exempt than
is the national.
In international as in other relations, facts may out-
strip and challenge existing rules, and rules may cease to
correspond with facts, opinions, and sentiments either in
general or in a particular instance.
To take a few instances disclosed or suggested by -the
present war. The rapidity of modern land-transit through
the introduction of the railway and the motor has made
largely ineffective some of the old rules on contraband of
war. The introduction of the submarine and the mine
has made blockades impossible if the rules laid down for
them as late as 1856 are to be regarded as binding. The
universality of military service and the complete re-organ-
ization of the community on a war footing, the proved
utility as warlike resources of all manner of hitherto un-
suspected things from gramophone factories upwards,
reveal great difficulties in the application of rules which
grew out of the existence of professional armies and aim
at sharp distinctions between military operations and the
peaceful order of civil life.
New means of offence become known, but they are either
not available or their use is restricted if old rules are to be
treated as applicable to them. In such a case, is the rule


to remain, or is it to give way, so as to permit the use of the
new force ? The aircraft and the submarine give rise
to many such questions.
Or, again, the application of a rule may be deemed to
work hardship or be intolerable in a particular instance.
The obligation of a treaty may have imposed on an unsuc-
cessful belligerent a burden accepted only under dire neces-
sity : a political situation develops which enables the State
to throw off the burden, as when in 1870 Russia declared
her intention of no longer observing the Black Sea restric-
tions imposed on her in 1856.
Or once again—and perhaps most important of all—
there are changes in the society of States as in the society
comprised within a single State: changes in material con-
ditions and needs, changes in thought and feeling. Of the
former, we may suppose two contiguous States, the one
with a small territory and a large and increasing popu-
lation, active and progressive; the other with a large
territory, a population small and increasing slowly, and
with natural advantages of which her neighbour stands
greatly in need. The first State has “aspirations”: it may
aim at “peaceful penetration,” or economic or political
domination of the second.
Of changes in thought and feeling, we have only to con-
sider the part which religion, liberty, legitimism and
nationality have successively played in international rela-
tions, and which community or diversity of economic and
social ideals may play in the future. Let me add that the
unsettling of the foundations, the indisposition to be satis-
fied with old formulas of right, the impatience of old stan-
dards, finds expression in the relations of States as well as
in domestic politics.
In analogous cases arising within a State the constitu-
tion of the State provides machinery for making the neces-
sary adjustments—if they are necessary* The legislature
can repeal or alter-the obsolete rule; if it does not, the judi-
cature will enforce it against the unwilling or dissatisfied
subject, and the executive will coerce him into submission.
If there is hardship in the general rule as applied to the
particular instance, every system of law has devised some
means, adequate or inadequate, through the executive or


the judiciary, of satisfying the justice of the particular ease
against the rigour of the law.
International law is without legislature, executive, or
judiciary; without, therefore, precisely that organization
the application of which to rules is in the internal arrange-
ments of a State the most obvious test whether any rules
are really laws at all. In default of authority, the neces-
sary adjustments and settlements must be made as occasion
arises, if possible by agreement. Here, of course, the great
impediment is the divergent interests of the States. In
default of agreement, the States concerned must determine
for themselves whether they will “take the law into their own
hands” and play the part of legislator, judge and policeman
in their own cause. Behind law and diplomacy lies the
employment of the force of the State.
This ultimate resource of States early led to the re-
cognition that some one State might develop its power to
such a degree that its will might dominate the international
situation. This has, in fact, been threatened time and
again, and it was met by a system known as the Balance
of Power, the acceptance by all States of the principle that
no single State or group of States should be allowed to
attain such a position of strength as would enable it, to
control the rest. So many of the worst things in European
history have been done in its name that with many it has a
very sinister meaning, and is deemed to be the root of all
international evil. But every principle may be perverted;
and many a crime has been committed in the name of
Christianity and Liberty. The Balance of Power has
been the principle accepted by the States of Europe at once
as a matter of self-defence, and as a self-denying ordin-
ance—a defence against the Imperial supremacy of a single
State or system, a renunciation of any claim to establish
such a system. It has been the underlying principle of the
Public Law of Europe as that of a society of independent,
equal, self-governing States. Its alternative—the Imperial
supremacy of some dominant State—might give peace and
might give law : the pax Romana has entered into many a
political dream and stimulated many a dangerous ambition :
perhaps it has never failed to touch the imagination of the
lord of many legions. But, as it involves the subordin-


ation of other States, it would not be International Law, and
a Balance of Power has rightly been regarded an essential
to International Law. As no alteration of the status quo
can take place, no community lose its independence by
merger in another or subordination to another, or lose terri-
tory to another, without some possible disturbance of the
balance, all such movements become the concern of all, and
from 1648 onwards there has been a series of great Euro-
pean congresses—Westphalia, Utrecht, Vienna, Paris, and
Berlin—supplemented by many subsidiary agreements, for
making such territorial arrangements as seemed necessary
to restore or preserve the European equilibrium.
The system has obvious imperfections and dangers. The
delicate equipoise in an uneasy world is constantly being
disturbed, and then the whole system totters: every local
disturbance may upset all Europe. Moreover, it em-
phasises the rivalries and the opposing interests of the
nations rather than their common interests, and tends to
make diplomacy a ceaseless manoeuvring for positions by
grouping and by alliances. It is not surprising that it has
stirred men to consider whether there is not a more excellent
way.
After the Napoleonic wars, there was a very definite
attempt made to give Europe a new and permanent system
based on the brotherhood of nations, their common Christ-
ianity, and their community of interests. The attempt,
honorably associated with the Czar Alexander I. of Russia,
has left a name in the Holy Alliance more sinister than
the Balance of Power itself. But it did for a time exhibit
a Europe linked in co-operative efforts for peace, and came
nearer than anything we have known to a Confederation of
Europe. It died through what we regarded as a perver-
sion of aims: the purpose of basing the society of European
States upon a particular form of government, the mainten-
ance of existing “legitimate” governments. But even its
pale ghost, the Concert of Europe, has sometimes provided
Europe with the semblance of a legislature (as when it laid
down the conditions of maritime warfare in 1856) of an
executive (as in the coercion of a recalcitrant State by
pacific blockade)' and a judicature. For years, and even
as late as the Balkan war of 1918, it did service in local-


izing disputes that, extending, would have precipitated a
contest similar to the present. Its gradual overshadowing
by the formation of groups and alliances within it was a
disaster of the first magnitude.
In the absence of any permanent organization of States,
the sole guarantee for law lies in the recognition and real
acceptance of the principle of mutual obligation by all the
members of the society of States; the only hope of a new
order, substituting co-operation for antagonism, lies in the
observance of a certain compatibility of aim and purpose
among States, and a recognition of the preponderance of
interests which States have in common over interests which
conflict. The standpoint of any great State is therefore a
matter of supreme importance, and I propose to consider
shortly some features of modem German political thought
and action in the light of the matters we have been dealing
with.
I may assume that the literary efforts of the last twelve
months have left you not unacquainted with the most
characteristic doctrines of German nationalism which cul-
minate in the works of Treitschke and of Bernhardi
—that the end of the State is power, “power both
at home and abroad,” its highest duty to pre-
serve this power; to pursue its own interest under
the guiding rule that any voluntary concession to the
interest of another State is immoral; to let no occasion slip
to assert itself. How exactly these views are represented
in the minds of German statesmen the expressions of two
Chancellors bear witness. Of the “shining armour” in-
cident of 1909, when Austria tore up a chapter of the Treaty
of Berlin, von Billow writes:—
“The German sword had been thrown into the scale of
the European decision directly in support of our Austro-
Hungarian ally, indirectly for the preservation of European
peace, and, above all, for the sake of German credit and
the maintenance of our 'position in Europe.” And when
the next appearance of shining armour fails to dazzle at
Agadir in 1911, von Bethmann-Hollweg’s reflection ia:—
“The dominant chord of the passionate feeling which pre-
vails in wide circles, is the will of Germany to assert her-
self in the world with all her strength and capacity.”


Now, if these are universal principles defining the right
and the aims of every State, it is nothing less than perpet-
ual and universal conflict. Interest will clash with inter-
est, culture will war with culture, and as power is the end,
nothing is counted gain which is not attained at someone
else’s expense. Well would a war against such principles be
described, as it has been described, as a “War against War.”
But it is not intended as a universal principle, the
“State” so described in general terms is in fact Germany—
Germany, reviving the old Imperialism which sees no peace
for the world save under her Imperial law, and grafting
upon it in a more intense form than any other Imperialism,
ancient or modem, her own culture as the only means of
human progress. Listen to the German Emperor:—
“Remember that the German people are the chosen of
God. On me, the German Emperor, the spirit of God has
descended. lam his sword, his weapon, and his vice-
gerent. Woe to the disobedient, and death to cowards and
unbelievers.”
Yes: the sword. With such an outlook, the army must
necessarily hold the first place, and very naturally we find
from Treitschke that “of all political institutions the army
is the only one which brings citizens together as citizens—
it is only in the army that they are conscious of all being
united as sons of the Fatherland,” and any view which
assigned the army a subordinate position in the State, or
regarded it as an instrument of diplomacy, is “old fashioned
political science.” And war itself is glorified as a civil-
ising force.
With that aspect of militarism which concerns the in-
ternal liberties of a State, we are not now immediately
concerned. But in the international sphere think what
this means. As Treitschke very clearly points out, it
does not mean that behind the diplomacy of the State stand
its armed forces: that is a truism which in the present state
of the world is not to be denied. It means that while the
military experts are preparing the armed forces of the
State, the main concern of diplomacy is the preparation of
external conditions which augment its military power, a
return to the worst traditions of 18th century international
morality, with the addition of a code of bad man-


ners all its own. Every settlement of dispute,
every removal of causes of quarrel between other
States becomes a menace. Diplomacy becomes the ser-
vant of military strategy. In place of peaceful nego-
tiation we have the ultimatum, the “rattling of the sword
in the scabbard,” “the mailed fist ” and the “shining
armour,” the menace of which was hidden to the world so
long as it could believe them to be no more than the pic-
turesque imagery of a volatile gentleman, but which we
now understand to be simply a part of the system which
hurled Europe to the brink of war in 1905, in 1909 and in
1911, before it precipitated the catastrophe of July and
August, 1914. Negotiations are not friendly intercourse,
but the parleying of armed forces. When a delicate or
critical situation arises, the trumpets' sound—to adopt
Moitke’s phrase—no longer a “parley” but the “flourish in
answer to a challenge.” “Forty-eight hours” here, “twelve
hours” there—diplomacy is ruthlessly flung aside because
strategy has the first claim on time, and the ticking of the
clock heralds the death of millions.
In its bearing on International Law, we. see the shrinking
of obligation which attends the view of the State as Power.
As States are not equal in power, it is ridiculous (according
to this view) to treat them as equal in right. As a matter
of fact, small States having felt more than others the need
for the protection of law against power and force, the
jurists of first Holland, and then Switzerland and Belgium,
have in a remarkable degree contributed to the literature,
and therefore the development of International Law. To
Treitschke there is something unnatural, even revolting,
in the influence of emasculated, neutralised States. y They
can produce no healthy international law. “It is very
unfortunate for the science of International Law that coun-
tries like Belgium and Holland should so long have been
its home. These countries, because they are in constant
fear of being attacked, take a sentimental view of the sub-
ject, and tend to make claims on the victor in the name of
humanity, claims which are unnatural and unreasonable
and contrary to the power of the State/’ (Treitschke, Die
Politik.) Such a view helps us to understand how
the independence of a small State like Servia vanishes


before the necessity for maintaining the prestige of Austria-
Hungary, and the territorial integrity of Belgium is a myth
before the solid fact of the strategy of a great Power. All
the plans of the German General Staff were framed on the
supposition that Belgium would be treated as part of the
German Empire in the event of war.
Another conclusion of the absolutist doctrine is that
international law is no more than a voluntary self-limi-
tation, not importing any obligation to or right in others.
This is enunciated by Treitschke in the particular case of
treaties—“one State cannot hamper the exercise of its own
free will in the future by an obligation to another State,”
because war cancels treaties, and every State has the un-
questionable right to declare war when it likes !
In regard to the “laws of war,” the same principle is
expressed by Clausewitz, “Laws of war are self-
imposed restrictions . . . termed usages of war.”
The German War Book speaks of the attempts which
have been made to elevate these usages of war “to the level
of laws binding nations and armies, in other words, to
create a codex belli, a law of war.” It adds: “All these
attempts have hitherto, with some exceptions to be men-
tioned later, completely failed. If, therefore, in the fol-
lowing work the expression Taw of war’ is used, it must
be understood that by it is meant not a lex scripta intro-
duced by international agreements, but only a reciprocity of
mutual agreement; a limitation of arbitrary behaviour,
which custom and conventionality, human friendliness and
a calculating egotism have erected, but for the observance
of which there exists no express sanction, but only the fear
of reprisals decides.”
If the absolutist theory of the State nullifies the obliga-
tion of international law, the devouring and egoistic
nationalism of Germany threatens the spring from which
flows the impulse towards law. The spiritual pride of the
culture-product leads straight to a contempt for humanity
as such, the mere raw material of culture. Bemhardi
and Treitschke abound in it, but the German War Book is
simply amazing. Following the example of the Govern-
ment of the United States in 1863, it has become the custom
for Governments to issue manuals for the instruction of


their officers, the general purpose of which is to set forth
the limitations imposed on the use of belligerent force, and
to emphasise their obligation upon combatants who other-
wise might remember only “inter arma silent leges.” Yet
the introduction to the German War Book is more than
anything else a protest against the dangers of the modern
tendency of humanitarian considerations to degenerate into
“sentimentality and flabby emotion.” The officer is warned
that he is the child of his time and subject to its intel-
lectual influence; he must test the usages of war by steep-
ing himself in military history—thus will he guard himself
against excessive humanitarian notions. But if after all
—say, after a study of the Thirty Years War, and the cam-
paigns of Frederick the Great—-the fellow is so incorrigible
that he will be humane, then he must be caught by the
truth that the only true humanity very often lies in a ruth-
less application of the severities of war. In the opinion
of the authors, the Geneva Convention and the Hague Con-
ventions have caught the sentimental disease. One is not
surprised; for the Hague Convention dealing with the laws
of war, leaves what is not reduced to rule, “to the principles
of the law of nations as they result from the usages estab-
lished between civilised nations, from the laws of humanity,
and the requirements of the public conscience.”
How well the German army has learnt its lesson is
shown by the fate of Belgium and northern France. We
realize the meaning of the theory that laws and treaties
are mere self-limitations dictated in the main by an en-
lightened self-interest, discretionary and not obligatory in
their application and governed by an appeal to the “rule of
necessity” and to the circumstances of the case.
I think we are now in a position to understand some-
thing of what Mr. Asquith means when he appeals to the
public law of Europe. It involves the recognition of the
equality of States in those rights which three centuries of
history have attributed to the State as such—their indepen-
dence, their right to decide for themselves the issue of peace
and war, their territorial integrity. It meets the claims
of a super-nation to impose its superior culture by force
if need be, with the claim of peoples to work out their own
destiny with as much freedom as is possible in a world


where intercourse is ever growing more intimate; and it
believes that the society of States is enriched by a diversity
of national life. It aims at freeing diplomacy from the
shackles of military strategy, so that it may fulfil its proper
function of removing stumbling’ blocks in the way of peace
and of facilitating the friendly intercourse of peoples; and
so that when delicate situations do arise, the armed forces
of the nations shall be the servants of their diplomacy and
not its masters, and that the time which is necessary for
negotiation shall not be denied by the exigency of military
demands. It involves the recognition of the sanctity of
treaties. It asserts that in peace and in war the practice
of civilized nations and the moral conscience of mankind
have established. rules of conduct as between States that
are binding as mutual obligations, and are not mere self-
limitations resting on , and therefore subordinate to self-
interest.
If it be said that in all this there is no law because the
nature of the State is inconsistent with the idea of its sub-
jection to law, we may well answer—as it has been answered
in the past with more force in Germany than elsewhere—
that law lies mainly in a conviction of the existence of obli-
gation as binding oneself and a belief that that obligation is
recognised by other members of society as incumbent upon
themselves, that without such a foundation no Power,
no Will, no State organization could give more than an un-
certain and capricious application to its commands.
In this view, two things stand out as important. The
first is, that International Law exists just so far as there is a
deep-seated conviction of its existence amongst the peoples.
I am not here to assert that British diplomacy has at
all times been without reproach, or that our own concep-
tions of International Law and its obligation have always
been of the highest. But our constitutional and political
history has made us more familiar than most other countries
with the restraint of governmental power by law. With
some truth it may be said that we have been without any
theory of “the State.” Instead of the State, we have
known the King or the Crown, and a great part of our his-
tory consists in illustrating the fundamental maxim that the
government is not above but subject to the law—that “rule


of law,” which is older and nearer to our heart than the
sovereignty of Parliament. Power has been oppressed by
Right, and again and again routed by it. I believe
that a country where rulers and people hold fast to govern-
ment according to law, has a tradition which is not likely
to desert her for any long time in her relations with other
countries. If, on the other hand, our practice should come
to identify law with mere power and will—well, I cannot
think that in matters of government you can have one theory
and practice for domestic consumption and another for use
abroad.
The second thing which stands out is that this conviction
of obligation must be articulate in the presence of flagrant
wrong.
When Solon was asked how men might most effectually
be restrained from committing injustice, he answered: “If
those who are not injured feel as much indignation as those
who are.”
In our private affairs, where the reign of law is suffi-
ciently supported by the action of the State, the individual
may usually assert his right or not as he pleases, without
involving any serious public interest, though to this there
are obvious limits, and our history would have been very
different if there had not been Hampdens in every century
who saw in their private right a public duty. But, in inter-
national relations, to acquiesce in wrong is to sanction the
wrong; to transform the wrong into right, and ultimately to
destroy the conviction of obligation upon which the law
itself depends. Therefore, no nation can afford to be “too
proud to fight.”


SOCIALISM AND THE WAR.
Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall, Melbourne,
on July 28th, 1915, by
MAURICE BLACKBURN, M.A.
AT the request of a correspondent who is, I believe, pre-
sent to-night, I begin with a definition of Socialism.
Socialism means the collective ownership and demo-
cratic management of those means of production which
are collectively used. It is distinguished from Collectivism
or State Socialism by its insistence upon the administra-
tion of the socialised industry being, so far as is consistent
with the common welfare, the charge of those engaged in
the industry. It is distinguished from Syndicalism by its
refusal to acquiesce in group ownership—its refusal to give
the control of the mines to the miners only, of the railways
to the railwaymen only. It is distinguished from Com-
munism by its defence of private property in the product
of labour. It is distinguished from Anarchism by its
acceptance of political action. It is distinguished from the
common notion of Socialism by the fact that it is the enemy
not of Property or of Individualism but of Capitalism.
Private property in the product of labour it defends against
the Communist. Private property, even in the means of
production, it leaves untouched, unless those means of pro-
duction are entirely outside the possession or control of
their users—the working class. Its “distinguishing fea-
ture,” wrote Marx, “is not the abolition of property gener-
ally, but the abolition of capitalist property.”


Such is the Socialism of the International Movement,
inspired by Karl Marx and, in the main, still guided by his
theory.
Marxist Socialism was outlined by Marx ancf Engels in
the “Communist Manifesto” published in 1847 and offered
as a programme for the “Young Europe” Movement. The
epithet “Communist” was used because thd authors wished
to disclaim any connection with their contemporary and pre-
decessor reformers, whom they dubbed Utopist Socialists.
The manifesto marks off the Utopist from the Marxist or
“Scientific” Socialist. The Utopist developed an elaborate
and detailed scheme of society, and strove by precept and
example to remould the world nearer to his desire. The
Marxist taught that the present system was destined in the
evolutionary process to destroy itself. It would eliminate
competition. It would concentrate production. It would
reduce to a tiny minority those who were interested in
maintaining Capitalism; and it would create a vast
majority of dispossessed who had a world to win and nothing
to lose but their chains.
The Socialist of the Marxist School has his own explan-
ation of War, Militarism and Imperialism. He has long
been predicting a conflict between England and Germany
as a consequence of Capitalist organisation and the resul-
tant struggles of the capitalist classes of the European
nations. He is not concerned with the immediate causes
of this war. This or some other war he regards as the
necessary result of Capitalism. He believes that as the
century proceeds the causes of war will operate more and
more strongly. Victor Hugo foretold that the twentieth
century would be the Century of Peace; but the Socialist
sees no reason why it should not be a century of great wars.
Capitalist production may be called Machine Production.
The simpler cheaper tools have disappeared. Complicated
and costly machines have taken their place. Use and
ownership have been divorced. The tool-less man must
live. To live he must work. To work he must use the
machine. The machine is not his property. He can use
it only on terms prescribed by the machine-owner—the
Capitalist. These terms are that he—the tool-less man—


the Worker —shall work under the control of the Capitalist
and that the product of his labour shall be the property of
the Capitalist. The Capitalist buys his labour power and
in return is willing to give him so much of the product
as will maintain a constant flow of labour power—so much
as will keep the worker alive and permit him to marry and
rear a family of workers. The worker may get more
than this. But his getting more will depend upon there
being accessible land upon which he may go and work for
himself, or it will depend upon the number of his com-
petitors being small in proportion to the demand for labour
power or upon their being so well organized that their
organization by controlling the scale of labour power is
able to exact better terms than if there were no such con-
trol. When the worker has received his portion, there
remains for the Capitalist a Surplus Value. This Surplus
Value remains in every capitalist industry—in every indus-
try in which there is this divorce between use and owner-
ship. The Capitalist class cannot themselves consume
this Surplus Value. Neither can they sell it to the work-
ing class who have already received their share of their
product. The bulk of this Surplus Value must be disposed
of abroad. It must go abroad as goods for sale or as food
and clothing for men who develop new countries by build-
ing factories or railways and other public works. And so
Commerce and International Finance are means of dispos-
ing of the Surplus Value.
One hundred years ago England had emerged from the
Napoleonic wars with her manufacturing system unshat-
tered by invasion. She had thus a clear start of the con-
tinental countries, each of which had been the scene of
battle. She had every country as her market for the
Surplus Values of her capitalist class. She had no
country as her competitor in seeking markets. What use
to her any longer was her protective system ? What
advantage was the control of the commerce of her colonies ?
This was the heyday of British Capitalism. But Eng-
land’s advantage was reduced. France revived her manu-
factures. She aimed at conserving her markets for her-
self. By-and-by she, too, had Surplus Values which her capi-
talist class was feverishly anxious to sell, and sold in com-


petition with England, so with other countries. That ideal
International Division of Labour which would have pro-
longed the life of Capitalism went by the board. The fact
was the Decentralization of Industry—each nation manu-
facturing for itself and by its production of Surplus Value
inevitably driven into the struggle for markets.
In this struggle for markets, Japan was forced to trade
with the foreigner. And the world has seen Japan become
first a market for the manufactures of Europe and America
and now a rival of Europe and America in their competi-
tion for old and for new markets.
The acuteness of the struggle makes nations eager for
Empire. For Empire means fields of investment and
markets which the ruling country preserves for her capi-
talist class. And war is the weapon by which a nation takes
from its neighbours the Empire—the fields of investment
and markets—which it has already won.
Germany came late among the nations. She was com-
pelled either to take the leavings of the elder nations or,
by war, to take from the elder nations their empires, to
win for her own capitalist class the markets, the fields of
investment, which enrich the capitalists of the elder nations.
The fear of being shut out of British Colonies and out of
Britain herself by an Imperial Customs Union increases
the necessity. New markets, new fields of investment—
or bankruptcy for the manufacturer. Not only will the
German capitalist suffer, but the worker in the German
factory will suffer. New and exclusive markets mean for
the German artisan more work, more continuous work,
better paid work. No new markets mean for him less
work, less secure work, and perhaps worse wages.
It is a fact often overlooked that while Capital-
ism exists the Capitalist and his employees have
a common interest in retaining old markets and
acquiring new markets. It is the consciousness
of this' fact that calls the German trade unions—
organizations of skilled workers —to the support of the
German Government in this war. Let me quote from a
summary the view of Wolfgang Heine, a German “War
Socialist”: “That it is a question,” says Heine, “of the
economic existence of Germany in this war cannot be


doubted for a moment. The interest which the German
capitalist has to develop exports as against other nations,
the German working man has to a still greater degree. By
imperialism we must understand ‘all efforts of one state
to extend itself at the cost of another.’ ”
Pacifist Socialists like the British Independent Labour
Party tend to overlook this fact. Walling, a distinguished
American Socialist in his “Progressivism and After,”
writes thus: “When Keir Hardie once went so far as to say
that what is good for Canada is good for India, Arnold
Forster reminded him that the loss of India would mean
. . . . loss of employment to hundreds of thousands of men
and women in Great Britain who produce goods for expor-
tation to India and to tens of thousands who live by mani-
pulating and distributing them.” (Page 282.) Ramsay
Macdonald “overlooks the fact that England is drawing
untold special profits from the results of past conquests.”
(Page 284.)
It is the special mark of Germany that she has a large
and influential class who have as great an interest in war as
the Capitalist class. John Bums said that the British
Army and Navy are outdoor relief for the aristocracy.
Younger sons finds careers in war and in administration of
the British Empire and similarly the younger sons of
the Prussian Junker class have careers and fortunes to win
in war and in the administration of conquered provinces.
This class is more influential and more needy than is its
English counterpart, if in fact an English counterpart
exists. Some Socialists, like Hyndman, at the beginning
of the war, stressed the part which this class has played as
a factor in the war. On the whole English Socialists have
regarded “Prussian Militarism” as a greater factor than is
allowed by the Socialists of other countries.




PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Companion Volume to “Soldier, my Soldier!
THE
CLEAR CALL
DOROTHY FRANCES McCRAE.
i( SOLDIER, MY SOLDIER ! 55 has been one of the most
popular books of verse published in recent years in Australia
and “ THE CLEAR CALL has all the qualities which have
made that book so successful.
With Pictorial Cover designed by Walter Seed.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
PROPY. LTD.,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


How the War Affects Australia.
NOW READY, AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
ARCHIBALD STRONG’S
Articles on the War.
(Reprinted from the Melbourne Herald)
ENTITLED
AUSTRALIA AND THE, WAR
Among the articles in the book are ‘‘ Why Germany Made War,”
‘ 4 World-Power or Downfall ?’’ “ Our Dangers and Duties,” “ The
Worker and Germany, ” “ Our Stake in the War, ” “ Facts to be
Faced,” “ Australia’s Deadly Danger,” “The Agony of Belgium,”
“Self and the State,” “ Women and the War,” “ The Case for
France,” “An American View of Germany,’’ “ The War and
Socialism, ’’ “Ourselves and the Fmpire,” “Naturalisation and
Treason,” “ Australia and Sea Power, ’’ etc., etc.
ORDFR NOW from your Bookseller or from
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.
B. R. Gqwam & Co., Printers, 492 Collins Street, Melbourne.
