

XVll. —Sketch of the Surveying Voyages of his Majesty's Ships
Adventure and Beagle, 1825—1836. Commanded by Cap-
tains P. P. King, P. Stokes, and R. Fitz-Roy, Royal Navy.
Communicated by Sir John Barrow, Bart.
The best charts of the South American coasts, which had been
made by Spain, or by Portugal, were very inadequate to the wants
of a rapidly growing intercourse when France and England under-
took to explore and survey those shores for the benefit of the world.
The French examined the coasts of Brazil; the English those
of Patagonia, Tierra del Fuego, Chile, and Peru. In 1825, two
vessels, the Adventure, 330 tons, and the Beagle, 235 tons, were
ordered to be prepared. Captain Philip P, King was appointed
to the former, and charged with the direction of the expedition.
Captain Pringle Stokes commanded the latter. They sailed from
England in May, 1826.
Part of Eastern Patagonia, the greater portion of the Strait of
Magellan, and a considerable extent of the western shores of Pata-
gonia, had been examined, when the death of Captain Stokes
caused a suspension of operations. Lieutenant Skyring, whose
life has since been sacrificed, was temporarily appointed to the
Beagle by Captain King, but soon afterwards superseded by the
commander-in-chief on the station; who placed the writer of this
sketch in the vacancy. During 1829 and 1830 the two vessels
continued the survey, assisted by a tender, whose commander was
Lieutenant Thomas Graves. In the latter part of 1830 they
returned to England, having added charts of the south-western
cfnd southern shores of Tierra del Fuego, besides those of a mul-
titude of interior sounds and passages, to the acquirements above
mentioned. Information of other kinds, interesting to men of
science, and to most people, was also acquired, and will be made
accessible without more delay than is absolutely necessary. A
paper on this subject, written by Captain King, was read before
the Royal Geographical Society of London, in May, 1831. In
the autumn the Beagle was again prepared for a surveying voyage.
Every care and assistance was given in her equipment. She
wanted nothing that her size would allow to be taken on board.
At the end of that year (1831) she sailed from Plymouth. One
particular object being the measurement of meridian distances,
by a large number of chronometers, the Beagle was ordered to
make her voyages by the shortest steps, touching land frequently,
for the purpose of obtaining observations and ascertaining the rates
of the chronometers. Until the vessel arrived in the River Plata,
her chief occupations were, measuring meridian distances, and
slightly adding to our knowledge of the Abrolhos shoals, on the
coast of Brazil.
VOL. VI. Y


While the officers of the Beagle were employed in their usual
duties afloat, Mr. Charles Darwin, a zealous volunteer, examined
the shores. He will make known the results of his five years’
voluntary seclusion and disinterested exertions in the cause of
science. Geology has been his principal pursuit.
Beginning with the right or southern bank of the wide river
Plata, every mile of the coast thence to Cape Horn was closely
surveyed and laid down on a large scale. Each harbour and
anchorage was planned;—thirty miles of the River Negro, and
tw'O hundred of the Santa Cruz, were examined and laid down,
and a chart w r as made of the Falkland Islands, These earlier pro-
ductions of the Beagle’s voyage are now in the engraver’s hands.
Before going westward of Cape Horn it should be remarked,
that the detailed survey of so much coast in a short time was
accomplished by the constant exertions of Lieutenant John C.
Wickham, Mr. J, L. Stokes, and Mr. A. B. Usborne ; who ran
every risk, and worked by night as well as every day, in two small
decked boats, during the first year, and afterwards in a tender.
The Beagle took portions of coast towards the south, while her
detached party were at work between Port Desire and Blanco
Bay, and afterwards at the Falkland Islands.
Westward of Cape Horn, as far as the parallel of forty-seven
south, little has been added to the results of the Beagle’s first
voyage, because nearly enough was then done for the wants of
vessels employed in, or passing through, those dreary regions ;
and because there were so many other demands upon the sur-
veyors which were of more consequence. Between forty-seven
south latitude and the River Guayaquil, the whole coasts of Chile
and Peru have been surveyed; no port or roadstead has been
omitted.
Of the Chonos Archipelago, no chart existed. Of Chiloe, the
Spanish charts were twenty-five miles in error, in latitude. Of
the other coasts, a mixture of bad and good description alternately
plagued or assisted. Wherever the eyes of Malaspina, Espinosa,
or Bauza, reached, in the expedition of the Atrevida and Descu-
bierta, there the old charts are correct; but the intermediate
details are not to be compared with those resulting from their
labours, nor with those in the vicinity of Lima, executed by the
students at the Nautical School, under the direction of Don
Eduardo Carrasco and his predecessors. Half the coast of Chile
was surveyed in detail, by Lieutenant B. I. Sulivan, in a small
schooner, lent for the purpose by Don Antonio Jose Vascunan,
ol Coquimbo ; and all the coast of Peru was afterwards closely
examined and laid down, by Mr. A. B. Usborne, in the same
vessel, then purchased from her public-spirited owner, and fitted
out by the Beagle. Mr. Usborne’s survey was carried on while


the Beagle was examining the Galapagos* islands, traversing the
Pacific Ocean, and returning to England by the way of the Cape
of Good Hope. r
T. i aced copies of the charts of coasts adjacent to Buenos Ayres,
of the whole coast of Chile, and of the greater part of the shores
of Peru, were given to the respective governments of those coun-
tries before our vessels left their territories, —and long before the
original documents could reach England.
Pour years having elapsed since the Beagle left England, and
having yet three-quarters of the globe to traverse, the little vessel
left South America and hastened to that classical spot, Otaheite.
Hei loute was through the Dangerous Archipelago, in which two,
if not three, new islands were discovered, Krusenstern’s charts
and directions were there the only ones of any use. At Otaheite
(or 1 ahiti), a manuscript chart of that really dangerous labyrinth
and some useful information were obtained from an intelligent
Englishman, who had passed several years in trading with the
natives of those numerous low coral islands.
Meridian distances being now the principal object, all haste
Mas made fiom place to place, and without more delay at any
one spot than Mas absolutely necessary for making observa-
tions. Nearly a week, on an average, was passed at each of the
following places Tahiti, New Zealand (Bay of Islands), Port
Jackson (Sydney), Van Diemen’s Land (Hobart Town), King
George’s Sound, the Keeling Islands, Mauritius, Cape of Good
Hope, St. Helena, Ascension, Bahia (in Brazil), Pernambuco,
Cape Verd Islands, and Azores. At Falmouth the Beagle ar-
rived in the beginning of October; thence she went to Plymouth,
1 ortsmouth, and Greenwich. Directly the rates of her chrono-
meters are ascertained she will go to Woolwich, and there be
paid off.
Mr. Usborne has returned from Peru by the way of Cape Horn.
His little vessel, of only thirty-five tons burthen, Mas sold at Paita,
when done with, for more than her first cost.
Having thus attempted to give a general idea of the means em-
ployed, and course pursued, during these voyages, a few sketches
of those places less known, or more interesting than others, will
be added.
Those almost boundless plains southward and westward of
Buenos Ayres have been too often and too well described to require
another word. As pasture land they are excellent, except in the
summer, when all is parched. I here is a rich tract of country
between Buenos Ayres and Cape Corrientes, where the soil is rich
and water plentiful. In that tract there are ranges of low hills,
running nearly east and west.
* Pronounced Galapagos.
Y 2


From Blanco Bay to the river Negro is a dangerous place.
The land is every where low; there are many and extensive shoals
and strong tides. Yet with a pilot, or correct chart, excellent
harbours may there be reached—in which navies might rest in
safety.
In Blanco Bay (the best of these harbours) there are from
eight to twelve feet rise of tide. If large ships ever frequent that
part of the coast, there must be their asylum. But there are ma-
terial objections to the surrounding country. Water is extremely
scarce; wood is not to be procured, except at a great distance.
Unfortunately the tine river Colorado, which rises near Men-
doza and brings down a great quantity of water throughout the
year, does not run into any of the numerous ports near its open-
ing. A canal might join it to Union Bay, without much difficulty;
but does the river remain in one place many years ? Do not high
tides, floods, and gales of wind alter it annually ?
Low, level land extends southward to the river Negro, and
westward gradually rising towards the Cordillera of the Andes.
Villarino, in his Diary, describes the Negro ;* it cannot be safely
used by vessels drawing more than ten feet water, because there
is a dangerous shifting bar at the entrance. South of this river the
country and coast change their character; ranges of stony hills,
extensive barren plains, and steep cliff's, extend hence to the Strait
of Magellan. Only here and there, close to the little river Chu-
pat, or in an occasional oasis, does a tree or green herbage ap-
pear. Mixtures of brown, yellow, and light red tire the eye.
One naturally asks why Eastern Patagonia should be con-
demned to perpetual sterility—while the western side of the same
country, in the same parallel of latitude, is injured by too much
rain ? The prevailing westerly winds, and the Andes, are the
causes. The winds bring much moisture from the Pacific, but
they leave it all (condensed) on the west side of the mountains.
After passing the Cordillera, those same winds are very dry.
Easterly winds are very rare upon the east coast: they are the
only ones which carry rain to the almost deserts of Patagonia.
Westward of the Andes, an east wind is dry and free from
clouds. All this country is exposed to severe cold in winter, and
to excessive heat in summer ; great and sudden changes of tempe-
rature take place when, after very hot weather, cold winds rush
northwards with the fury of a hurricane. Even the wandering
Indians avoid this region, and only cross it to get salt, or visit
their burying-places.
In a twenty days’ excursion up the river Santa Cruz, we passed
through a similar country, without variety, until extensive beds of
lava were found overlying the whole country. These Mr. Darwin
• Inserted at p, 13G of this volume.


lias already described. We reached nearly to the eastern flank of
the Andes, but for want of provisions could go no farther. The
river was then, at 200 miles from its mouth, almost as large and
quite as rapid as at twenty miles from the sea. Perhaps it runs, for
a great distance, along the base of the Andes, and so collects a great
body of water; or it may run from a lake into which streams pour.
Its water is not muddy. The current runs six' knots ; none of our
boats could pull against it anywhere. We tracked them (pulled
them along by a rope). Its average width is 200 yards, and mean
depth ten feet; perhaps more.
The Gallegos is another rapid torrent; but its size and length
do not nearly equal those of the Santa Cruz.
On the coasts adjacent to these rivers the tide rises very much,
not less than forty feet at spring tides.
The aboriginal natives of Patagonia are a tall and extremely
stout race of men. Their bodies are bulky; their heads and fea-
tures large; but their hands and feet are small. Their limbs are
neither so muscular nor so large-boned as their height and apparent
bulk would induce one to suppose : they are rounder and smoother
than those of white men. Their colour is a rich reddish brown,
rather darker than that of copper, yet not so dark as good ma-
hogany.
Nothing is worn upon the head except their rough, lank, and
coarse black hair, which is tied above the temples by a fillet of
plaited or twisted sinews. A large mantle, made of skins sewed
together, loosely gathered about them, hanging from the shoulders
to their ankles, adds so much to the bulkiness of their appearance,
that one ought not to wonder at their having been called gigantic.
I am not aware that any Patagonian has appeared during late
years whose height exceeded six feet and some inches; but I see
no reason to disbelieve the Jesuit Falkner’s account of the Ca-
cique Cangapol, whose height, he says, w T as seven feet and some
inches. When Falkner stood on tiptoe Jie could not reach the top
of Cangapol’s head. It is rather curious that Byron could only
just touch the top of the'Hallest man’s head whom he saw. Ever
restless and wandering as were the Tehuel-het, of which tribe he
was cacique, might not Byron have measured Cangapol ?* Who
disbelieves that the Roman Emperor Maximinus, by birth a Thra-
cian, w T as more than eight feet high ?—yet w'ho, in consequence,
expects all Thracians to be giants 'i
Among 200 or 300 natives of Patagonia, scarcely half-a-dozen
men are seen whose height is under five feet nine or ten inches :
the women are proportionably tall,
I have nowhere seen an assemblage of men and women whose
average height and apparent bulk equalled that of the Patago-
* Dates agree sufficiently.


nians. Tall and athletic as are many of the South Sea islanders,
there are also many among their number who are slight, and of
lower stature.
The Patagonians seem to be high-shouldered, owing, perhaps,
to their habit of folding their arms (across the chest) in their
mantles, and thus increasing their apparent height and bulk, be-
cause the mantles hang loosely, and almost touch the ground.
Until actually measured, it is difficult to believe that they are not
much taller than is the case.
But little hair grows on their faces or bodies : from the former
it is studiously removed by two shells, or some kind of pincers.
Although they do not try to improve their coarse features by
piercing either nose or lips, they disfigure themselves not a little
by red, black, or white paint, with which they make grotesque
ornaments ; such as circles around their eyes, or great marks across
their faces. Upon particular occasions all the upper part of their
body is queerly decorated by daubs of paint.
On their feet and legs are boots made out of the skins of horses’
hind-legs. Wooden (if they cannot get iron) spurs, sets of balls,*
a long, tapering lance, and a knife (if one can be procured), com-
plete their equipment.
The women are dressed and booted like the men, with the ad-
dition of a half-petticoat. They clean their hair, and plait it into
two tails. Ornaments of brass, beads, bits of coloured glass, or
such trifles, are prized by them.
Mounted upon horses of a middle size, under fifteen hands
high, and rather well bred, the Patagonians seem to be carried no
better than dragoons who ride eighteen stone upon horses able to
carry ten ; yet they go at full speed in chase of ostriches or gua-
nacoes. When hunting, or making long journeys, they often
change horses.
The huts of these wanderers are somewhat like gipsy tents.
Poles are stuck in the ground, to which others are fixed. Over
them are thrown the skins of animals. An irregular, tilt-like hut
is thus formed.
The north-eastern part of Tierra del Fuego is like Patagonia.
The natives, also, are like those above mentioned, but they have
no horses. Balls, bows and arrows, and clubs are their arms and
hunting weapons. Seal, guanacoes, and birds are their principal
subsistence.
The eastern portion of Tierra del Fuego is a better country than
any south of forty-five. The wooded mountains of the west there
sink into hills, and those again into level land, partially wooded.
The climate is a mean between that of Eastern Patagonia and
Western Tierra del Fuego.
* Bolas, Spanish. Two or three balls connected by a thong of hide, which they
throw at animals or men, to entangle and disable them.


Whenever a settlement is made in those regions, St. Sebastian
Bay will be found to possess several advantages.
The southern and western part of Tierra del Fuego may be
briefly described by saying that deep but narrow arms of the sea
intersect high, mountainous islands, whose summits are covered
with snow; while their steep and rocky shores are more than par-
tially covered with evergreen woods.
Throughout the year, cloudy weather, rain, and much wind
prevail. Fine days are rare. Frost and snow are constant on the
mountains; but near the level of that great climate agent, the
ocean, whose temperature is there never below forty-live degrees
of Fahrenheit, neither one nor the other are nearly so trouble-
some as one might expect in so high a southern latitude, among
snow-covered mountains, whose sight is enough to make one shiver.
The wretched natives of Southern and Western Tierra del
Fuego are low in stature, ill-looking, and ill-proportioned. (I speak
of them generally in their savage state.)
Their colour is darker than that of copper ; it is like old ma-
hogany, or rusty iron. The trunk of their body is large in pro-
portion to their cramped and rather crooked limbs. Rough, coarse,
and extremely dirty black hair, half hides, yet heightens, a villain-
ous expression of ugly features.
Sometimes these outcasts wear a piece of seal, otter, or guanaco
skin upon their backs ; and perhaps the skin of a penguin, or
some such covering, is used in front; but often nothing is worn
except a scrap of hide, which is tied to their waist. Even this is
only for a pocket in which they may carry pebbles for their slings.
Passing so much time in low wigwams, or cramped in small
canoes, injures their limbs and movements. In height they vary
from four feet ten to five feet six inches ; yet the size of their
bodies equals that of our largest men. Of course they look
clumsy and ill-proportioned. Women usually wear more covering,
perhaps a whole skin of a seal. The women comb their hair with
the jaw of a porpoise. Both sexes oil themselves, or rub their
bodies with grease. They paint, or rather daub their faces and
bodies with red, white, or black.
Perhaps Freycinet, and those with him, saw some of these people
painted black, as Bory St. Vincent quotes their authority for the
natives of Tierra del Fuego being black, like the natives of Van
Diemen’s Land.—See article “ Homme ” in the Dictionnaire
Classique.
As a Fuegian is seldom out of sight of his canoe, or a wigwam,
a slight idea of those, his only constructions, should be given.
The canoe is made of several large pieces of bark sewed together.
Its shape is nearly that which would be taken by the strong bark
of a tree (twelve to twenty feet in length, and eighteen inches, or


two feet in diameter), separated from the solid wood in one piece,
joined at the ends, but kept open by sticks in the middle. It is
ballasted by clay, and always carries a small fire.
There are two kinds of wigwams: one is made with a number
of small straight trees, whose upper ends are united, while the lower
form a circle; and another which is formed by branches stuck in
the ground, bent together at the top, and slightly covered by skins,
bark, grass, or leafy twigs. A small entrance is left open: smoke
goes out as easily as rain enters.
Western Patagonia is like the worst part of Tierra del Fuego.
It is the upper part of a great range of mountains, whose bases
are immersed in the ocean. The mountain-tops form multitudes
of islands, barren to seaward, but impenetrably wooded towards
the main-land ; and always drenched with the waters of incessant
rain, never dried up by evaporation. Every foot of earth, every
tree, and shrub, on those islands, is always thoroughly wet. Of
course the country is uninhabitable, except by savages. Clouds,
wind, and rain only cease their annoyance during the very few days
on which the wind is easterly, or perhaps southerly. Probably
there are not ten days in twelve months, on which rain (or snow)
does not fall ; and not thirty on which it does not blow strongly.
But it is mild, and the temperature is surprisingly uniform through-
out the year.
The Chonos Archipelago is very little better than the country
just mentioned. It is almost uninhabitable. Indeed, on the west
coast of South America, southward of Chiloe, there are very few
acres of land capable of cultivation, and no place which is fit for
the permanent abode of civilized man. That inhospitable region
should be avoided by ships ; though really full of harbours, it is so
dangerous to run to leeward, and so difficult to make out the land,
obscured as it is generally by rain or clouds, that most of them
must ever be nearly useless. A heavy swell always sets towards
the shore ; and, although there are no sand-banks, there are num-
bers of outlying, dangerous rocks.
Steam navigation may render the numerous interior passages
useful. From the north end of Chiloe to the eastern entrance of
Magellan’s Strait a steamer may go without being exposed to the
swell of the Pacific, except at one place, Cape Tres Montes. In
that interval she may get fuel (wood) on either hand, wherever she
chooses. On the main-land, opposite to Chiloe, are the southern-
most volcanoes of whose modern activity we have any certain ac-
count. There are four in sight of the inhabitants of Chiloe.
- Each one, even when tranquil, is a magnificent object.
None of the mountains in this part of the Andes, or to the
southward, which have been measured, exceed 9000 feet in height.


Chiloe, though a fertile island, is exposed to an excessive amount
of wind and rain. It is the southernmost inhabited part of the
west coast.
About Valdivia the climate is similar, and must always be an
obstacle to cultivation. Northward of Valdivia, towards Concep-
cion, is one of the iinest countries in the world, in a very healthy
climate. There the Araucanians are still unconquered owners ot
their native land. All the efforts of the Spaniards, all exertions
of their descendants in Chile, have tailed in expelling that heroic
race from the birthplace of their ancestors.
That they should now make head against the Chilenos, is not
surprising; but that they should formerly have withstood the
power of Spain, and the enthusiasm of their invaders, excites as-
tonishment.
Gold is often supposed to have been the principal temptation
of the early conquerors of the New World : but there was another
motive for energetic exertion, one which affected many minds far
more than the desire of wealth. An enthusiastically religious
feeling urged them to persevere under every trial and disappoint-
ment. 0 It helps much in accounting for the wonderful hardi-
ness and constancy shown in discovering, exploring, and conquer-
ing all but Araucania.
A high sentiment of religion, urging them to conquer, in order
to convert to Christianity, and to honour God, by honouring their
king, was a powerfully impelling motive in the minds of those
leaders who first opened the roads which crowds of inferior men
afterwards followed.
While the Beagle was at Valdivia, the great earthquake of the
20th of February, 1835, took place.
Concepcion, February QOth.—At ten iu the morning very large
flights of sea-fowl were noticed passing over the city of Concep-
cion, from the sea-coast tow r ards the interior. In the minds of old
inhabitants, well acquainted with the climate of Concepcion, some
surprise was excited by so unusual and so simultaneous a change
in the habits of those birds,* no signs of an approaching storm
being visible, nor any expected at that season. About eleven the
southerly breeze I" freshened up as usual; the sky was deal, and
almost cloudless. At forty minutes after eleven J a shock of an
earthquake was felt, slightly at first, but increasing rapidly.§
During the first half minute many persons remained in their houses;
but then the convulsive movements became so strong, that the
alarm was general, and all rushed into the open spaces for safety.
Chiefly gulls. _ t Sea-breeze.
+ Mean time. —Equation* I4 f subtractive from mean time*
§ No noise preceded the great shock.


The horrid motion increased ; people could hardly stand ; build-
ings waved and tottered ; suddenly an awful overpowering shock
caused universal destruction. In less than six seconds the city
was in ruins. The stunning noise of falling houses; the horrible
cracking of the earth, which opened and shut rapidly and repeat-
edly in numerous places;* the desperate, heart-rending outcries of
the people; the sliding heat; the blinding, smothering clouds of
dust; the utter helplessness and confusion, and the extreme horror
and alarm, can neither be described nor fully imagined.
This fatal convulsion took place about a minute and a half, or
two minutes, after the first shock ; and it lasted equally violent
during nearly two minutes. During this time no one could stand
unsupported : people clung to each other, to trees, or to posts.
Some threw themselves on the ground ; but there the motion was
so violent, that they were obliged to stretch out their arms on each
side, to prevent being tossed over and over. Horses, and all ani-
mals, were greatly frightened, standing with their legs spread out,
and their heads down, trembling violently. Birds flew about wildly.
After the violent shock had ceased, the clouds of dust, which
had been raised by the falling buildings, began to disperse. People
breathed more freely, and began to look around them. Ghastly
and sepulchral was their appearance : had the graves opened and
given up their dead, the sight would have been scarcely less shock-
ing. Pale and trembling, covered with dust and perspiration, they
ran from place to place, calling for their relations and friends.
Many seemed to be quite bereft of reason.
Considerable shocks continued at short intervals, harassing and
alarming. The earth was never long quiet during that or the next
day; nor, indeed, during the three days following the great shock.
Tor many hours after the ruin the earth was tremulous, and the
shocks were very frequent, though not severe. Many shocks, but
not all, were preceded by a rumbling, subterranean noise, like
distant thunder: some compared the sound to the distant discharge
of many pieces of artillery. These sounds came from the south-
west quarter, and preceded the shock by one or two seconds.
Sometimes, but not often, the sound was heard unaccompanied by
any shock.
It was the general opinion that the motion was from south-west
to north-east. Some whole walls, whose direction was south-east
and north-west, were laid flat; the bricks still maintaining their
relative position, though endwise, without being scattered upon the
ground. These walls fell, without exception, to the north-east.f
* The direction of these cracks was not uniform, though generally south-east and
north-west.
f The streets of Concepcion lie north-east and south-west, —north-west and
south-east.


Other walls were scattered as they fell; but the greatest masses of
brick-work were thrown towards the north-east. Walls standing
in the opposite direction, north-east and south-west, suffered far
less. Fragments were shaken, or torn off; and some of the walls
very much cracked ;* but others had suffered little.
Roofs fell in everywhere: houses built of adobes\ fell into a
confused heap. The cathedral, whose walls are four feet in thick-
ness, supported by great buttresses, and built of good brick and
mortar,j suffered more than other buildings. Adhering to the
remains of the walls were left the lower parts of some buttresses,
theupper parts of others; w'hile in one place a buttress stood on
its own foundation, separated entirely from the wall.
The city of Concepcion stands upon a plain very little higher
than the level of the river Bio-Bio : the soil is loose and alluvial.
To the eastward and northward are rocky, irregular hills, of ter-
tiary § formation. From the foot of these hills the loose earth was
everywhere parted by the great convulsion, great cracks being left
from an inch to a foot in width. It seemed as if the low land had
been separated from the hills, having been more disturbed by the
shock.
Women washing in the river near Concepcion wer.e startled by
the sudden rise of the water from their ankles to their knees, and at
the same moment felt the beginning of the convulsion. It was said
that the dogs avoided the ruin by running out of the way before
the shock. This, though certainly known to have been the case
at Talcahuano, wants confirmation with respect to Concepcion.
Of nine men who w'ere repairing the inside of a church, seven
were killed, and two severely hurt. One of these poor fellows
lay half buried in the ruins during five days, with a dead body
lying across him, through which it w'as necessary to cut for his
release. A mother escaping with her children saw one fall into a
hole : a w r all close to her was tottering; she pushed a piece of
w'ood across the hole, and ran. The w'all fell, and covered the hole
with masses of brick-w'ork. Next day the child was taken out
unhurt. Another woman missed a child ; saw that a high wall
was tottering, but ran for her son, and brought him out. As she
crossed the street the w'all fell ,* but they were safe. When the tre-
mendous crash came, the whole street, which she had just crossed,
was filled up with part of the ruins of the cathedral. Besides a
waving or undulatory movement, vertical, horizontal, and circular
or twisting motions were felt. An angular stone pinnacle was
particularly noticed, which had been turned half round without
being thrown down, or leaving its base.
* Vertically,—as if by the undulatory movement of the earth’s surface, —in the
direction of their length.
f Large unbaked bricks, J Both bricks and mortar were excellent.
§ Not quite certain.


Persons riding at the time of the great shock were stopped
short, —some, with their horses, were thrown to the ground, others
dismounted, but could not stand. So little was the ground at rest
after the great ruin, that between the 20th of February and the 4th
of March more than 300 shocks were counted. Much misery
was alleviated by the good conduct and extreme hospitality of the
inhabitants of Concepcion. Mutual assistance was everywhere
rendered, and theft was almost unknown. The higher classes
immediately set people to work to build straw-covered huts, and
temporary houses of boards, living meanwhile in the open air
under trees. Those who soonest obtained or contrived shelter
collected all about them whom they could assist, and in a few
days had a temporary shelter, under which they tried to laugh
at their misfortunes, and the shifts to which they were reduced.
Talcahuano, Feb. 20 th, 183 5. —At Talcahuano the great earth-
quake was felt as severely as in the city. It took place at the
same time and in a precisely similar manner. Three houses only,
upon a rocky foundation, escaped the fate of all those standing
upon the loose sandy soil which lies between the sea-beach and
the hills. Nearly all the inhabitants escaped uninjured, but they
had scarcely recovered from the sensations of the ruinous shocks,
when alarm was given that the sea w'as retiring ! Penco* was not
forgotten : apprehensive of an overwhelming wave, all hurried to
the hills as fast as possible.
About half an hour after the shock, when the greater part of the
population had reached the heights, and the sea had retired so
much that all the vessels at anchor, even those which had been
lying in seven fathoms w'ater, were aground 5 and all the rocks and
shoals in the bay were visible ; —an enormous wave was seen forcing
its way through the western passage which separates Quinquina
Island from the main land. This immense wave passed rapidly
along the western side of the bay of Concepcion, sweeping the
steep shores of every thing movable within thirty feet (vertically)
from high-water mark. It broke over, dashed along, and whirled
about the shipping as if they had been light boats, overflowed the
greater part of the town, and then rushed back with such a tor-
rent, that almost every movable, which the earthquake had not
buried under heaps of ruins, W'as carried out to sea. In a few
minutes the vessels were again aground, and a second great W'ave
was seen approaching, with more noise and impetuosity than the
first. Though this wave w'as more powerful, its effects were not
so considerable, simply because there was less to destroy. Again
the sea fell, dragging away quantities of wood-work, and the
lighter materials of houses, and leaving the shipping aground.
After some minutes of awful suspense, a third enormous swell
* Penco, the former capital of the province of Concepcion, was overwhelmed by
the sea.


was seen, between Quinquina and the main land, apparently
larger than either of the former waves. Roaring, as it dashed against
every obstacle, with irresistible force it rushed along the shore,
destroying and overwhelming. Quickly retiring, as it spurned by
the foot of the hills, the retreating wave dragged away such quan-
tities of household effects, fences, furniture and other movables,
that, after the tumultuous rush was over, the sea appeared co-
vered with wreck. Exhaustion /appeared to follow these efforts.
Earth and water trembled. Numbers of the inhabitants now
hastened to the ruins, anxious to ascertain the extent of their
losses, and to save some money, or a few valuable articles, which,
having escaped the sweep of the sea, were exposed to depre-
dators.*
During the remainder of the day and the following night, the
earth was not quiet many minutes at a time. Frequent, almost
incessant tremors, occasional shocks, more or less severe, and
distant subterranean noises, kept every one in anxious suspense.
Some thought the crisis had not arrived, and would not descend
from the hills into the ruined town. Others, searching among
the ruins, started at every shock, however slight, and almost
doubted that the sea was not actually rushing in again to over-
whelm them. Nearly all the inhabitants, excepting a few who
went on board vessels in the harbour, passed the night upon the
hills without shelter.
Next day they began to raise sheds and huts upon the high
grounds, still dreading the sea. Without explanation, it appears
astonishing how the shipping escaped destruction. Three
large whale ships, a bark, two brigs, and a schooner, were
lying very near the town in from four to seven fathoms water.*
They were lying at single anchor,f with a good scope of cable.J
With the southerly breeze, which was rather fresh at the time of
the earthquake, the vessels were lying to seaward§ of their anchors,
with their sterns towards the sea. They were left aground in this
position. The captain of the port, Captain Delano, was on
board one of the whale ships at the time; whose hatches were bat-
tened down and dead-lights shipped. All hands took to the rig-
ging for safety. The first great wave came in an unbroken swell
to the stern of the vessel, broke over and lifted her along without
doing any material harm more than sweeping her decks. Drag-
ging the slack chain over the mud checked her gradually, as the
first impetus of the wave diminished. Whirling her round, the
* Thieves were numerous in Talcahuano. Directly after the ruin these scoun-
drels set to work, —crying ‘ Misericordia!’ and with one hand beating their breasts,
with the other they stole most industriously.
f Or steadied by a light anchor and hawser, which would bear no strain.
J Chain. The holding ground is excellent; a soft tenacious mud.
§ About half a cable’s length, or from sixty to one hundred yards.


water rushed out to seaw'ard again, leaving the vessel aground
nearly in her former position. From two fathoms, when aground,
the depth alongside increased to ten when the water rose highest,
during the last wave. The two latter waves approached, and af-
fected the shipping similarly to the former. All held on ; though
some of the anchors started a few fathoms. Some of the vessels
were thrown violently against others; and whirled around as if
they had been in the vortex of a whirlpool. Previous to the rush
of waters, the Paulina and Orion, two merchantmen, were lying a
full cable’s length apart. Afterwards they were lying side by side,
with three round turns in their cables. Each vessel had therefore
gone round the other with each wave. The bow of one was stove
in. To the other little damage was done. A small vessel* was
on the stocks, almost ready for launching; she was carried by the
sea two hundred yards in shore, and left there unhurt. A small
schooner, at anchor before the town, slipped her cable, and ran
out in the offing as the w'ater fell. She met the wave unbroken,
and rose over it as an ordinary swell. The Colocolof was under
sail near the eastern entrance of the bay. She likewise met the
wave as a large swell, without inconvenience.
Many put off from the shore before the sea retired.
Some met the advancing waves before they broke, and rose safely
oyer them ; others, half swamped, struggled through the breakers.
The tate of one little boy was extraordinary. A servant woman
had taken reluge with him in a boat: the boat was dashed against
an anchor lying on the shore, and divided. The woman w'as
drowned, but the half of the boat containing the child § was car-
ried out into the bay. It floated, and the child held firmly. He
was picked up afterwards, sitting upright, holding steadily with
both hands ; wet and cold, but unhurt. The boy’s name is Hodges.
His father is an Englishman, well known at Talcahuano ; he was
an officer in the British navy.
Four days afterwards the sea was strewed wdth wreck, not only
in the bay of Concepcion, but outside in the offing. The shores
of Quinquina island were covered with broken furniture and wood-
work of all kinds; so much so, that for weeks afterwards parties
weie constantly at woik collecting and bringing back property
During three days succeeding the day of the ruin the sea ebbed
and flow'ed irregularly, and very frequently. For some hours after
the shock it rose and fell two or three times in an hour.
Eastward of the island of Quinquina, the swell was neither so
large nor so powerful as that which swept over Talcahuano. Hav-
ing more room to expend its strength in the wider and deeper part
of the bay, may perhaps have been the reason why the sea swelled
* About thirty tons, f Chilian schooner-of-war,
t Chiefly, if not all, whale boats. § Only four years old.


rapidly, without breaking, near Lirquen, in the south-east part of
the bay, and why it broke over Toin£* with violence, though not
so furiously as over Talcahuano. The great waves corning from
the sea appear to have been divided, at the entrance of Concepcion
Bay, by the island of Quinquina, and turned aside both ways ; one
part taking its course along the Tumbez or western shore, towards
Talcahuano, the other across the eastern opening, towards Tome.
While the bay of Concepcion was agitated by the great waves,
it was noticed by Captain Walford (from his house at Lirquen)
that the Colocolo was swept to and fro remarkably. She was under
sail near the eastern entrance of the bay. Two explosions, or
eruptions, were seen while the w r aves were coming in: one beyond
the island of Quinquina, in the offing, was seen by Mr. Henry
Burdon and his family, who were then embarked in a large boat
near Tome; it appeared to be a dark column of smoke, in shape
like a tower. Another rose in the middle of the bay of San Vicente,
like the blowing of an immense imaginary w'hale. Its disappear-
ance was followed by a whirlpool, which lasted some minutes. It
was hollow, and tended to a point in the middle, as if the sea was
pouring into a cavity of the earth. At the time of the ruin, and
until after the great waves, the water in the bay appeared to be
every where boiling ; bubbles of air, or gas, were rapidly escaping.
The w'ater also became black, and exhaled a most disagreeable
sulphureous smell. Dead fish were also thrown ashore in quan-
tities ; they seemed to have been poisoned, or suffocated. For
several days afterwards the shores of the bay were covered with
fine corvinos, and numerous small fish. Black stinking w’ater
burst up from the ground in several places. In Mr. Evans’s yard
at Talcahuano the ground swelled like a large bubble, and then
bursting poured forth black fetid sulphureous water. Near
Concepcion similar outbursts of water were seen and similarly
described.
It was said, and generally considered certain, that every dog
had left the town before the shock which ruined the buildings was
felt. By a marked part of the w'all of Captain Delano’s house, it
was ascertained that the body of water reached twenty-five feet
above the usual level of high water. It penetrated into the Altos,F
and left sea-weed hanging to the remains of roofs, or to the tops
of broken walls. But this must not be taken as the general height
of the wave. A body of water, rushing upon a sloping beach
with such force, would naturally preserve its impetus for some
time, and run up an inclined plane to a great height. Those who
* Tome is near the eastern entrance of the bay, where the wave would meet with
more interruption than near Lirquen, though considerably less than in the western
passage.
f First-floor rooms.


watched the waves coming in considered them, while beyond the
shipping, about as high as the upper part of the hull of a frigate,
or from sixteen to twenty feet above the level of the rest of the
water in the bay. Only those parts of the wave broke which en-
countered opposition, until within half a mile of the beach, when
the roar became appalling.
Persons, who were standing on the heights overlooking both
bays, saw the sea come swelling into San Vicente, at the same
time that it advanced upon Talcahuano. The explosion in San
Vicente, and the sea advancing from both sides, made them think
that the peninsula ofTumbez was about to be separated from the
main land, and many ran higher up the hills until they had reached
the very highest point.
Strange extremes of injury and harmlessness were among the
effects of these overwhelming waves. Buildings were levelled,
heavy twenty-four pound guns were moved some yards and upset;
yet a child was carried to sea uninjured, and window-frames with
the glass in them were thrown ashore upon the island of Quinquina
without a pane being broken!
According to a register kept by Captain Delano, it appeared
that his barometer fell four or five tenths of an inch between the
17th and 18th of February, and was still falling on the morning of
the 18th, after which it rose again.* So great and sudden a fall,
not followed by bad weather, may have been connected with the
cause of the earthquake ; but some doubt hangs over these obser-
vations. The barometers on board the Beagle, at that time in
Valdivia, did not indicate any change. Still, at so great a dis-
tance, it does not follow that the mercury should move similarly.
In a river near Lirquen, a woman was washing clothes at the
time of the great shock. The water rose instantaneously from her
feet half way up her legs, and then subsided gradually to its usual
level. It became very muddy at the same time.
On the sea beach the water swelled up to high-water mark at
the time of the shock, without having previously retired. It then
began to retire, and continued falling about half an hour, when
the great wave was seen approaching.
For some days after the ruin the sea did not rise to the usual
marks, by four or five feet vertically. Some thought the land had
been elevated, but the common and prevailing idea was, that the
sea had retired. This difference gradually diminished, till, in the
middle of April, there was a difference of only two feet between
the existing and former high-water marks.
The proof that the land had been raised exists in the fact, tha
* In Concepcion a fall of two or three tenths indicates bad weather; four or fiv
tenths, a gale of wind with much rain.


the island of Santa Maria was upheaved nine feet; but of this
presently.
In passing through the narrow passage which separates Quin-
quina from Tumbez, the great waves had swept the steep shores to
a height of thirty feet (vertically) above high-water mark ; but
this elevation was attained, in all probability, only at the sides of
the passage, where the water met with more obstruction, and there-
fore washed up higher. The passage appears to be nearly one
mile in width, and has ten fathoms water in the middle, but the
rocks on the western side diminish its navigable width to half
a mile.
Wherever the invading waves found low land the destruction
was great, those low lands being in general well cultivated, and
the site of many houses. The low grounds lying at the bottom of
Concepcion bay, particularly those of the island De los Reyes,
were overflowed and injured irreparably. Quantities of cattle,
horses, and sheep were lost. Similar effects, in an equal or less
degree, were felt on the coasts between the river Itala and Cape
Rumena. Large masses of earth and stone, many thousand tons
in weight, were detached from the cliff’s and precipitous sides of
the hills. It \vas dangerous to go near the edge of a cliff, for
numerous chasms and cracks in every direction showed how doubt-
ful was the support. When walking on the shore, even at high
water, beds of dead mussels, numerous chitons and limpets, with-
ered seaweed still adhering, though lifeless, to the rocks where
they had lived, every where met the eye ; the effects of the upheaval
of the land.
I. Santa Maria. —Resides suffering from the effects of the
earthquake, and three invading waves which, coming from the w'est
round both points of the island, united to overflow the low ground
near the village, Santa Maria was upheaved nine feet. It ap-
peared that the southern extreme of the island had been raised
eight feet, the middle nine, and the northern end upwards of
ten feet.
The Reagle visited this island twice, at the end of March, and
in the beginning of April. At her first visit it was concluded,
from the visible evidence of dead shell-fish, water-marks, and
soundings, and from the verbal testimony ot the inhabitants, that
the land had been raised about eight feet. However, on returning
to Concepcion, doubts were raised; and to settle the matter
beyond dispute, or the possibility of mistake, the owner of the
island, M. Salvador Palma, accompanied us. An intelligent
Hanoverian, whose occupation upon the island was sealing, and
who had lived two years there, and knew its shores thoroughly,
was also a passenger in the Beagle.
When w'e landed, the Hanoverian, whose name was Antonio
VOL. vi. z


Vogelberg, showed me a spot from which he used formerly to
gather chores* by diving for them at low' water.
At dead low water, standing upon that bed of chores, and
holding his hands up above his head, he could not reach the surface
of the water. His height is six feet; on that spot, when I was
there, the chores were barely covered at high spring tide.
Riding round the island afterwards, with Mr. Palma and Vogel-
borg, many measures were taken in places, where no mistake could
be made.
Ou large steep-sided rocks, where vertical measures could be
correctly taken, beds of dead mussels were found ten feet above
the present high-water mark.
A few inches only above what w'as taken as spring tide, high-
water mark, were putrid shell-fish and seaweed, which evidently
had not been wetted since the upheaval of the land.
One foot lower than the highest bed of mussels, a few limpets
and chitons were adhering to the rock, where they had grown.
Two feet low er than the same mussels, chitons and limpets were
abundant.
An extensive rocky fiat lies around the northern parts of Santa
Maria. Before the earthquake, this flat w'as covered by the sea,
some projecting rocks only showing themselves. Now, the whole
flat is exposed. Square acres for many quadras) of this rocky
flat were covered with dead shell-fish, and the stench arising from
them was abominable.
By this elevation of the land, the southern port of Santa Maria
has been almost destroyed. There remains but little shelter : and
very bad landing. The soundings have diminished a fathom and a
half every where around the island.
Tuhul. —At Tubul, to the south-east of Santa Maria, the land
has been raised six feet.
The waves did not enter that river’s mouth until about one
o’clock; and then in greater number, but with less force. Six or
seven waves were counted. Might not this be owing to the
meeting of the divisions of that great wave which passed around
the island of Santa Maria ?
I. Mocha. —At the island of Mocha the shock of the earthquake
was so strong that people could not stand. The sea washed over
the rocks at the end of the island, higher than it had ever reached
in a heavy gale of wind.
Antonio Vogelborg w'as on one of those rocks, or rather on an
islet at the south end of Mocha, at the time. A party were with
him, sealing. Their boat was hauled up upon the top of the
rocky islet. They expected to be washed off, and held by the
boat, in readiness. The boat w'as lying nearly east and west.
* A large kind of mussel.


During the earthquake, some water in her bottom ran quickly
from one end of the boat to the other, as if some one were quickly
lifting one end oft’ the ground, and letting it down again. It did
not wash from side to side at any time. Two forked sticks were
stuck in the ground, about three yards apart, another lay across
them for hanging things to dry : these sticks also were nearly east
and west of one another. During the shock they w’aved to and
fro till the forks touched, and the cross stick fell. Strong shocks
were felt by vessels under sail near Mocha. Between Mocha and
Concepcion shocks were felt by several vessels, not only on the
20th, but during the following days.
At anchor oft' Mocha, on the 24th, a slight shock was felt
which resembled the sudden dragging of the anchor over rocks.
Under way on the 2d of March, it was thought that the chain
cable was running out at the hawse.
In one vessel, they thought she had run ashore; on board of
another, that the ship had passed over a whale. Vogelborg thinks
the land has been upheaved about two feet. From his accuracy
in other matters, I am inclined to trust to his opinion.
Valdivia. —At Valdivia, the shock began gently, increased
gradually during two minutes, was at its strongest about one mi-
nute, and then diminished.
The motion was undulating and regular, like waves rolling from
west to east, but strong ; it lasted nearly ten minutes. There was
no difficulty in standing or walking, but the houses waved and
cracked.
The stone church tottered, but was not injured ; its roof is very
light. All the dwelling-houses, being strongly built of wood,
withstood the shock.
Some thought the motion was from south-west to north-east,
but Mr. Darwin, and a person with him at the time, thought the
reverse. The river swelled, or rose, at the same time, and quickly
fell again to its former height. In the port the sea swelled sud-
denly upon the shore, to high-water mark, though it was then
nearly the time of low-water, and quickly fell again. Both sea
and river rose and fell frequently, during the remainder of the day.
The river never fell below its usual height, neither did the sea
retire beyond its proper place, at that time of tide ; but each
swelled from time to time, and again sunk down. This happened
once or twice in an hour. After the great convulsion, other
slighter shocks were felt, at intervals of a few minutes, during an
hour.
In the afternoon, at about five, a smart shock was felt, which
made the people run out of their houses.* One man and one
* Although built of wood.


woman were drowned by the sudden rise of the sea, near Fort
Niebla ; it was supposed that they were upon the rocks, gathering
shell-fish. Excepting in this instance, no injury was done at
Valdivia.
No noise preceded or accompanied any of the shocks at Val-
divia.
I. Chiloe. —This great earthquake extended to the island of
Chiloe, and probably still farther to the southward. The shock
was there slight, but lasted during six or eight minutes ; it was
neither preceded nor followed by any subterranean noise. About
thirty-four minutes after eleven,* the beginning of the shock was
felt: the motion was undulating, and not strong. The swell of
the sea was felt there, but 1 know not at what time. A man was
going to leave the shore | in bis boat; he went a short distance
to fetch something, and returning found the boat aground and
immoveable. Puzzled and vexed, he went away ; but had not
gone many yards before his son called to him that the boat was
afloat.
Northward of Concepcion , Culiumo. —ln the little port of
Coliumo, close to the northward of Concepcion Bay, the waves
rose about as high as at Tome, nearly fourteen feet, before they
reached the shore. The little village of Dichato shared the gene-
ral calamity; but standing rather higher, and more distant from
the sea than Talcahuano, it escaped the ravages of the sea.
Maule. —The force and height of the waves must have been
considerably diminished at the mouth of the Maule. No particular
effect had been noticed at the time, nor were there any marks upon
the shore by which the height of the wave could be afterwards
ascertained.
That the sea should not there have occupied attention is not
surprising, when one considers the locality of “ La Constitucion,”
as the town and port are called. On level low land, at the south
side of the river, is the town. Between the town and the sea is
high land, and a distance of about a mile. The river winds round
the northern promontory of the high land, and then fights its way
to sea over a bar on which there are always breakers.
Without going half a mile, and up the hill, the sea cannot be
seen. There are no houses on the sea-shore. Naturally, then,
for some time after the town was ruined by the earthquake, the
inhabitants would be engaged in saving and sheltering their pro-
perty, rather than looking at the sea, 1 could not ascertain whether
the river had risen or not. A vessel lying close under the pro-
montory mentioned above, was obliged to move as quickly as
possible when the shocks began, so serious was the shower of
* Mean time.
f Sandy Point, San Carlos.


stones which rattled down the hill, and fell about and on board of
her. I was assured by the governor, by the chief pilot, and by
other residents, that instead of the land having been elevated at all,
they considered that it had sunk about two feet. The pilot said
that he had found two feet more water on the.bar, since the great
shock; and that he was certain the banks of the river were lower,
though he could not say exactly how much. A rush of water
might have shifted the loose sands of the bar. Whether the land
had sunk, seemed to me very doubtful. Certainly, however, it
had not risen.
Having previously heard that the waves had been very powerful
at the mouth of the Maule, I was a good deal surprised to find
they had been almost unnoticed. All attention had been engrossed
with the earthquake.
Juan Fernandez. —The island of Juan Fernandez was affected
very much. Near Bacalao Head, an eruption burst through the
sea in a place about a mile from the land, where the depth is from
fifty to eighty fathoms. Smoke and water were thrown out during
the greater part of the day : flames were seen at night. Great
waves swept the shores of the island, after the sea had retired so
much that old anchors were seen at the bottom of the anchorage.
This earthquake was felt at all places between Chiloe and
Copiapo ; between J nan Fernandez and Mendoza. On the sea-
coast within those limits, the retiring and swelling of the ocean
was everywhere felt. At Mendoza, the motion was evenly gentle.
Copiapo, Huasco, and Coquimbo felt similar, although rather
more forcible, undulations. On the continent, towns and houses
which lay between the parallels of thirty-five and thirty-eight, suf-
fered extremely; nearly all were ruined. Northward and south-
ward of those parallels, slight injury was done to any building.
In the parallel of thirty-three and a half, Juan Fernandez
suffered ; yet Valparaiso, opposite, escaped uninjured.
As to the state of neighbouring volcanoes, so various and in-
distinct were the accounts of their action, after and before the
earthquake, that as yet I have had no means of ascertaining the
truth.
On Mocha island, formerly well peopled by Indians, there are
now no aboriginal inhabitants. A few natives of Concepcion, or
Valdivia, live there, for the sake of sealing on the rocks. Mocha
is high, with deep water around it; but straggling, dangerous
rocks lie near, towards the south-west.
All the west coast of South America, with but few exceptions,
is similar in character. High, steep, rocky shores, with deep
water near them, are almost everywhere found.


Northern Chile and Peru are well known, but I have not met
with an explanation of the fact, that no rain falls in Lower Peru.
Is not the south-east trade-wind deprived of its moisture, and
partly checked, by the Andes, before it reaches the low regions
at their western base ? That wind is perennial.
The Galapagos Islands are all volcanic, of comparatively recent
formation. Their lavas seem to be very durable. Vegetation
makes small progress. On live islands there are fertile spots ; at
one of which, Charles Island, a small colony has lately been es-
tablished by the government of Guayaquil.
There are six principal and seven small islands. The largest
is sixty miles in length, and about hfteen broad. The highest part
is 4000 feet above the sea. At tirst landing upon their shores,
black, dismal-looking heaps of broken lava everywhere meet the
eye. Innumerable crabs, hideous iguanas (or rather large lizards),
and great elephant tortoises startle and surprise. These two
latter reptiles are peculiar to the Galapagos. The name itself is
Spanish for land tortoises. These animals grow to a great size,
—to several hundred pounds in weight. Their feet are then like
those of a small elephant. Few reptiles are uglier than those
black lizards. They are about three feet in length. Their great
mouth has a pouch hanging under it. A spiny sort of mane is
on the neck and back. They have long claws and tail, and are of
a dirty black colour. They swim with ease and swdftness, using
their tails only.
A little way inland, on the windw'ard side of the island, there is
much underwood and some crooked trees nearly two feet in
diameter. How they are able to penetrate, or derive nourishment
from, the hard lava, is perplexing.
A shell is common on these shores, which reminds one of the
purple murex. The fish emits a strong dyeing liquid of a similar
colour.
The little colony is established on Charles Island, in a plain
about 1000 feet above the sea. To go there, we ascended
gradually from the shore till we reached the edge of the rocky
height which limited our view. Surprisingly sudden was then the
change. Heated and tired by a dusty up-hill w'alk, through sun-
dried trees and over rugged lava, our bodies were at once re-
freshed by a cool breeze, while our eyes enjoyed an unexpected
view of a fertile and cultivated plain. Surrounded by tropical ve-
getation, by bananas, sugar-canes, sw'eet potatoes, and Indian
corn, all luxuriantly flourishing, it was hard to believe that land so
sterile, and apparently so useless as that we had just passed,
could be so close to such rich fertility.
In a small cave near the top of this island an old sailor lived
many years. He had been unfortunate, and was tired of the


world. Terrapin (or land-tortoises) and sweet potatoes were his
food. An old friend, the master of a whaler, recognized him, and
carried him away by force, for so strongly was the old man attached
to his cave, that no motive was sufficient inducement lor a willing
departure.
Besides affording a wholesome and palatable food, the terrapin
yield an excellent oil. But it is a pity to kill them for this pur-
pose ; they are so useful to the crews ol whale ships.
The little colony can now supply shipping with vegetables,
fowls, and pigs. Very soon they will have cattle, sheep, and
goats. Water for shipping can only be procured at the south side
of Chatham Island.
The particular names of these islands were given by the old
Buccaneers, and by Colnett.
More instances of the manner in which high land deprives wind
of its moisture may be seen at each ot the Galapagos. Situated
in a perennial wind,‘only those sides which are exposed to it are
covered with verdure and have water. All else is dry and barren.
Passing a projecting headland, we were all struck by the wild-
ness and grandeur of the scene which opened to ns, as the ship
sailed round. Immense craters, suddenly rising trom the sea—
enormous masses ot black lava—and a multitude of fumeroles,
scattered in every direction —gave one the idea of an immense
Cyclopian iron foundry. In many places the lava clitis are very
high, while close to them the water is so deep that a ship cannot
anchor, even in a calm. From this situation dismal indeed was
the view, yet interesting. To see such an extent ot country over-
whelmed by lava, and to think of the possible effects ot seven
dormant volcanoes then in sight, was impressive.
Remarkable currents are found about the Galapagos. In some
places they run three, four, or even five miles an hour, generally,
but not always, to the north-west. On one side ot an island the tem-
perature of the sea is sometimes found to be near eighty, while on the
other the water is at less than sixty degrees (Fahrenheit). 1 hese
striking differences may be owing to the cool current, which comes
from the southward along the coast of Chile and Peru, meeting a
far warmer stream from the neighbourhood of the bay of Panama.
The manner in which these great ocean streams preserve their tem-
perature has been remarked : they must have much effect upon the
climates of those countries near the sea along whose shores they
The Dangerous Archipelago is deserving of such a name. Nu-
merous coral islets, only a few feet above water, obstruct naviga-
tion ; while currents and strong squalls add to the risk. Singular
interruptions to the trade-wind are caused by these low lagoon
islands; not only does the trade often tail among them, but heavy


squalls come from the opposite direction, and more frequently by
night than by day. Clouds are said to be attracted, if not partly
caused, by land or by trees. As the low islands of this archipelago
have no hill or height of any kind about which the clouds attracted
by them can gather and discharge their contents, whether electrical
or fluid, perhaps those clouds wanting a conductor discharge them-
selves irregularly and in squalls. Where high land acts as a con-
ductor between the upper regions of the air and the earth, there
may be a continual though unperceived electrical action.
Otaheite, or Tahiti, as it is more correctly called, is indeed
beautiful. We saw it early in the morning, and were at first dis-
appointed. Clouds hung over the land ; but as the sun rose higher
the clouds shrunk away, vanishing as they rolled oft’ the grandly
formed mountains. High, sharp, irregular peaks, and huge masses
of rock appeared between the clouds, and again were hidden.
Deep valleys, or glens, showed darkly ; and as the shadows passed,
seemed to be denied the light of day. Strikingly different in ap-
pearance were the lower hills, and the richly wooded land at the
sea-side. There the bright sunshine heightened the vivid and ever-
varying tints of a rich verdure. Every kind of green, a beautiful
alternation of light and shade, each moment changing as the light
clouds passed ; the groves of graceful palm trees, and the dazzling
white foam of the breakers on the coral reefs, contrasted by the
deep blue of the sea, combined to form a most enchanting view.
But few days were passed at this delightful island. What little
we saw of the missionaries, and what we heard of their labour, and
its effects, highly gratified us. But we were yet more gratified by
hearing of the number of native missionaries who had gone into
other distant islands (having been educated at Tahiti), and of the
beneficial effects produced by them. Wherever the missionary
succeeds in obtaining even a slight influence, there the seaman may
go in safety. He should not be ungrateful. He should not be
among the first to seek for faults. What man, what human in-
stitution is blameless?
In the Gambier Islands there is now a Roman Catholic mission.
It is said to be well supported.
What a fine fertile country is the northern island of New Zea-
land ; and how fast the character of that land and its inhabitants
is changing ! An Englishman may now walk alone, and unmolested
about any part of the northern island, where, ten years ago, such
an attempt would have been a rash braving of the club and the
oven.
English and American houses are scattered near the Bay of
Islands; and settlers are rapidly increasing. All this is chiefly
due to the Church Missionary Society.
Nothing could be more gratifying than the view of a flourishing


agricultural settlement, with good farm-houses, barns, water-mill,
mechanics’ shops, and large gardens, in the interior of the northern
island. I was astonished at what I saw; and when a New Zea-
lander came out of the mill, powdered with flour, and carrying
a sack of corn upon his back, I could hardly believe my own eyes.
This effect has been caused by the missionaries. But I must
hasten to a conclusion.
Sydney and Hobart Town are known well ; yet I do not think
every one is aware of the. great difficulty of bringing up a family
well in those countries, owing to the demoralizing influence of
convict servants, to which children must more or less be exposed.
Nor is every one aware of the extent of that rancorous feeling
which is caused by the total separation of the descendants of
convicts, as well as the emancipists, from free settlers and their
families, as w'ell as from all who are officially employed.
At King George’s Sound they are not doing much, but are very
sanguine.
Swan River, notwithstanding its untoward exposure to the most
frequent winds, is flourishing.
An English family has settled upon the Keeling Islands, where
they make cocoa-nut oil, and catch abundance of turtle. Every
creature upon those islands seemed to live principally upon cocoa-
nuts. Pigs, ducks, fowls, and even large crabs are dependent
upon them.
The Keelings, or Cocos, are a cluster of low coral islands, almost
surrounding a lagoon. Within half a mile of them I found no
bottom with more than 1000 fathoms of line, (1600 were out.) We
were surprised to see that some of the fish lived upon coral
branches, for which kind of grazing they are furnished with strong
front teeth.
Before a hurricane at the Mauritius, the water rises considerably,
and is agitated. In other parts of the world the sea rises before a
storm some feet above its usual level. At the same time mercury
in a barometer falls. Is not this rising of the waters caused by
diminished pressure of the atmosphere at those places, while at
other more distant parts there is an increased pressure ?
Returning homeward by St. Helena, Ascension, and the Cape
de Verd Islands, I had opportunities of proving that the rollers,
which sometimes set heavily upon their shores, are caused by
distant gales of wind. Those at Ascension and St. Helena, for
instance, by Pamperos, and those at the Cape de Verds, by the
severe, though generally short gales met with between the Tropics
in the time of the line westerly Monsoon. These latter gales may
also send rollers towards the north-west side of Ascension.
The heavy rollers which sometimes set in upon the coasts of


Chile and Peru led me to seek for proofs of the causes being such
as I then suspected. But there is at limes another kind of “rollers,”
which are perhaps caused by an earthquake.
Tides, dip, intensity and variation, temperature of air and water,
pressure of the atmosphere, and some other matters, have been
regularly observed ; but time will not allow of my now making
an abstract of the results.
It may appear presumption in a plain sailor attempting to offer
an idea or two on the difficult subject of “ Tides j” yet, with the
utmost deference to those who are competent to reason upon the
subject, I will venture to ask w-hether the supposition of Atlantic
tides being principally caused by a great tide-wave coming from
the Southern Ocean, is not a little difficult to reconcile with the
facts that there is very little tide upon the coasts of Brazil, Ascen-
sion, and Guinea, and that, in the mouth of the great river Plata,
there is little or no tide ?
Can each ocean have its own tides, though affecting, and being
affected by, the neighbouring waters ?
Can the mass of an ocean have a tendency to move westward as
well as upward, after and towards the moon as she passes? If so,
after the moon has passed, will not the mass of that ocean have an
easterly inclination, to regain that equilibrium (with respect to the
earth alone) from which the moon disturbed it ? (Sun’s action
not here considered.)
In regaining its equilibrium, would not its own momentum carry
it too far eastward ? and would not the moon’s action be again
approaching ?
Can one part of an ocean have a westward tendency, while an-
other part, which is wider or narrower from east to west, has an
eastward libration ? If so, many difficulties would vanish : among
them, those which were first mentioned, and those perplexing ano-
malies on the south coast of New Holland.
This sketch has been very hastily written, since the Beagle’s
arrival in England, and is therefore far inferior to the writer’s
wishes.
Annexed, are a few positions, of which the longitudes are sup-
posed to be relatively right, and some notes, showing upon what the
chronometric measurements depend.


Surveying Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle.
337
Coast.
Name of Place.
Name of Particular Spot.
Latitude.
Longitude
in Time.
Variation.
North.
West,
h. ra. s.
0 16 40
0 20 11
England |
Devonport .
F almouth
Baths
Pendennis Castle
5(T 22 OO'
50 08 "33
25° 18* W.
Western 1
Terceira .
Mount Brazil . .
38 38 35
1 48 52
24 18
Islands. j
St. Michael’s
St. Braz Castle .
37 43 58
1 42 41
C. Verd Isl
Quail Island
Gun Point . ,
14 54 02
1 34 00
16 30
South.
Brazil.
Pernambuco
Fort Picao
8 03 35
2 19 26
5 54
Bahia
Fort San Pedro . .
12 50 20
2 34 03
4 18
Abrolhos.
St. Barbara Island
East Summit .
17 57 42
2 34 46
2 00 W.
Brazil.
Rio Janeiro .
Villegagnon Island .
22 54 50
2 52 35
2 00 E.
Riv. Plate.
Monte Video .
Rat island . . .
34 53 20
3 44 53
12 00
Blanco Bay . ,
Wells
38 57 00
4 07 54
15 00
River Negro
f Pilot’s House at the)
I entrance . . .1
41 00 42
4 11 05
17 42
i o
• •
Town
40 48 18
4 11 52
6 SF 'I
River Chupat .
South-entrance Point.
43 20 25
4 19 34
18 06
Port Desire .
Ruins
47 44 56
4 23 40
20 12
a X
W
Port St. Julian .
(Lieut. Shell’s Monu-1
I merit . . . . J
49 15 20
4 30 48
21 00
/
River Santa Cruz
Keel Point . .
50 06 45
4 33 34
20 54
O 1
Good Success Bay
Watering Place . .
54 48 00
4 16 56
22 54
aj hD j
Cape Horn .
South Summit
55 58 41
4 29 04
24 00
•2b«
H 1
Port Famine
(Observatory on Westl
1 Side . . . .J
53 38 15
4 43 51
23 00
Falk. Isl.
Berkeley Sound .
Port Louis Settlement
51 32 15
3 52 29
19 00
/
Midship Bay
(East Side of Centre)
\ Island . . . .)
45 18 30
4 58 25
20 48
Port Lowe . .
Observation Inlet
43 48 30
4 56 09
19 48
Huafo Island
Peak on N.W. end
43 35 30
4 59 10
S. E. extreme oi l
Chiloe . . J
Port San Pedro , .
43 19 30
4 54 59
3 <
Port San Carlos,
Sandy Point .
41 51 20
4 55 44
18 0
o
Valdivia .
(Observation Spot near)
(. Fort Corral . . J
Town
39 52 53
39 49 20
4 53 56
4 53 15
Mocha Island
E. Side near N. Point
38 19 35
4 55 59
v
St. Mary’s Island
f Observation Spot near 1
\ rivulet . . . . /
37 02 48
4 54 12
Concepcion
Talcahuano .
Fort Galvez .
36 42 00
4 52 40
16 48
/
River Maule
Church Rock .
35 19 40
4 49 55
16 24
Valparaiso .
Fort San Antonio
33 01 53
4 46 45
15 18
Papudo . . .
Landing Place . .
32 30 09
4 46 03
15 12
Pichidanque
S E. Point of Island .
32 07 55
4 46 20
15 24
Coquimbo
I S.W. Corner of Her-)
1 radura Bay . .)
29 58 41
4 45 43
14 24
,, Town .
Mr. Edward’s House
29 54 10
4 45 15
Tortoralillo .
South-entrance Point
29 29 15
4 45 35
I <
Huasco .
Capt. of Port’s House
28 27 15
4 45 16
13 37
3
Herradura de 1
Carrisal . j
Landing Place . .
28 05 45
4 45 03
13 23
Pajonal .
S.E. Corner .
27 43 30
4 44 28
13 28
Copiapo .
Landing Place
27 20 00
4 44 08
13 32
English Harbour
( Sandy beach in S.W.l
1 Corner . . . J
27 05 20
4 43 44
13 30
Flamenco
S.E. Corner of Bay .
26 34 30
4 43 10
13 46
V
Lavata , .
Cove near S.W. Point
25 39 30
4 43 09


Longitude
in Time.
Name of Place.
Name of Particular Spot.
Latitude.
Coast.
Copiapo
Iquique
Callao
iding Place
itre of Island
50 s
c
r2
h-< •
fcr *
o.
Staff in
. Point
Chatham
.’s Bay
Charles’s
Albemarl
near
Alben
Otahe
Carrying the Chronometrie Chain one Place farther Westward, gives for the
position of (
New | Bay of Islands . 1 Paihia Islet . . .13516301 11 37 12
Zealand. } 11
Measuring Eastward from Bahia gives the following results
South. West.
Bahia . . . Fort San Pedro . 12 59 20 234 03
K
03
E
PQ
Ascension . , Barrack Square . . 755 33 057 37
{Close to high-water I
mark in the merid. > 15 55 15 0 22 51
of the Observatory J
East.
Simon’s Bay . East end of Dock Yard 34 11 24 113 43
Cape |
Mauritius
Keeling Is.
Cape Town . . Observatory ... 1 13 54
Port Louis . . Observatory . . . 20 09 25 350 06
Direction Island South Point . . . 12 05 22 62? 39
I Princess Royal Har-j
King George’s Sd. i hour, Government !, 35 02 11 751 46
( new buildings . j
Hobart Town . Fort Mulgrave . . 42 53 30 949 37
Sydney . . . Fort Macquarie . . 33 51 30 10 05 08
Paramatta . . Observatory ... 10 04 16
Bay of Islands . Paihia Islet . . . 35 16 30 11 36 39
Otaheite . . . Point Venus ... 17 29 15 957 45
N. Zeald.
Pacific.
By the Beagle’s chronometers the meridian distances between Falmouth and Greenwich
are nearly as follows:
Portsmouth Observatory, from Greenwich . . , , , . 004 24 5
Devonport (Government House) from Portsmouth . . . . . 0 12 15 3
Pendennis Castle, Falmouth, from Devonport . . . . . . 003 31,1
Falmouth, west of Greenwich . . , . . . . . 020 10,9


1834. Name of Place. Name of particular Spot. Latitude. of Green' Variation.
Coast. South. East.
o i a h. m. s. o i
I Ship Harbour . S.W. end of Ship Isl. 51 43 10 4 05 09 20 3
Port Louis . . Settlement Creek . 51 32 15 3 52 29 19 0
Choiseul Bay . S-side of Mare Harb. 51 54 15 3 54 01 19 2
Long Isl. Sound W. part of Long Isl. 52 12 15 3 56 19
Port Porpoise . Head of Creek . . 52 20 45 3 57 23 19 7
Speedwell Island Harbour on E. side . 52 13 00 3 53 46
Port Edgar . . W. arm on N. side , 52 03 15 4 01 06 20 0
Port Stephens . E. end of harbour . 52 11 35 4 02 44 20 4
Ship Harbour . S.W. end of Ship Isl. 51 43 10 4 05 09 20 3
Hope Harbour . Fish cove . . . . 51 20 45 4 02 42
Port Egmont . Ruins of Settlement 5121 30 4 00 17 19 5
White Rock Harb. W. extreme of cliff . 51 26 00 3 67 08
Port St. Salvador j First inlet on W. side 51 27 00 3 53 21
, aor Longitude
loot). Name of Place. Name of particular Spot. Latitude. E.orW.of Variation.
Valparaiso.
Coast. _ South. East. East.
/ Paposa . . Whitehead 0 i „ b. m. s. 0 ,
Constitucion Hbr. Shingle Pt. on Island 23 29 10 0 04 04 12 8
Cobija . . . Flagstaff . . . . 22 34 00
Iquique . . . Centre of Island . . 20 12 30 0 05 49 12 0
Arica . . . Mole 18 28 05 0 05 11 11 0
✓ West.
Islay .... Custom-house . . 17 00 00 0 01 55 11 0
Atico . . . . East Cove . . . 16 13 30 0 08 15 11 2
Lomas . . . Flagstaff on Pt. . . 15 33 15 0 12 53 10 3
San Juan . , Needle Hummock . 15 21 00 0 14 07 10 3
. Bay of Yndepen- S. Pt. of Santa Rosal 14 ig 15 0 18 08
g dencia . . . Island . . , J
( Pisco .... W. Pt. of Paracas bay 13 48 00 0 18 43 10 0
Callao . . . Arsenal Flagstaff . 12 04 00 0 22 08 10 0
Sup6 .... W. end of village . 10 49 15 0 24 22 9 8
Guarmey . . W. end of sandy beach 10 06 15 0 26 06 9 5
Saraanco . . . Cross Point . . . 9 15 30 0 27 25 9 5
Malabrigo . . Bay rocks . . . 7 42 40 0 31 97
Lobos de Afuera (Fisherman’s cove onl 6 56 45 0 36 10 9 5
Island . , . i the east side . J
Payta . , . New end of town . . 5 05 30 0 37 47 9 0
t Island of Puna . { C °Espafi 0 Pt ’} 247 30 0 33 05
j J Guayaquil . . South end of city . 2 13 00 0 32 48
Results of a few of the Observations made by the
Beagle's Tender , 1834 and 1836.
Officers of the


Remarks on the Beagle’s Chronometric Measurements.
Before attaching any value to the results shown in the accom-
panying paper, many questions will probably be asked. Some
of those questions 1 will endeavour to anticipate by the following
short detail.
The chronometers, twenty-two in number,* were taken on
board a month before the Beagle finally sailed from Plymouth.
Their boxes were placed in sawdust, divided and retained by par-
titions secured upon two wide shelves. All were in one small
cabin, into which no person could enter, except to compare or
wind the watches, and in which nothing else was kept. The
greater number have never been moved from their places since
they were first put into them.
The chronometers have been wound daily at nine, and compared
at noon. Both comparing and winding have been performed
most accurately and regularly by one person only, Mr. G. J.
Stebbing, of Portsmouth.
Time has invariably been obtained by series of equal or cor-
responding altitudes of the sun ; observed by one person, with
the same sextant; and the same artificial horizon, with its roof
placed in the same manner, both before and after noon.
A very good pocket chronometer, carried by hand in a small
box, has been always used for taking time. In every instance it
has been compared with the standards immediately before the ob-
servations, and immediately afterwards. This watch (Parkinson
and Frodsham, No. 1041) was so well constructed, that the inter-
vals shown by it between morning and afternoon observations
always agreed with those shown by the standard chronometers
(allowing for the respective rates).
Generally speaking, seven altitudes of one limb have been
taken, and then the same seven altitudes of the other limb, for one
set. Three sets have been usually taken at short intervals, and the
mean result used, unless a marked difference occurred, in which
case the result of each pair of sights was computed, and the
erroneous ones rejected. Those few were considered wrong which
differed from the majority. Generally, however, there has been a
close agreement between the results of single pairs of sights, as
well as of entire sets.
When clouds intervened, the series was unavoidably irregular;
but the pairs of equal altitudes were always numerous.
In a very few instances the chronometers have been rated by the
* Twenty-two chronometers were embarked on board the Beagle when she sailed
from England. Some failed during the voyage; but none of the measurements
depend upon the results of fewer than twelve.


results of absolute or independent altitudes, taken with every pre-
caution at similar times of day. Those rates were obtained by
comparing together the times obtained by morning observations,
or those deduced from afternoon sights ; not by morning and
afternoon, or afternoon and morning observations, on different
days. But the time, considered correct , has invariably been de-
duced from equal altitudes. At Paramatta and at the Cape of
Good Hope, it was ascertained that our time, thus obtained, did
not differ from that of the astronomer.
The sextant, used for obtaining time, is a particularly good
instrument, made by Worthington and Allan. Its index error has
never varied, nor has it ever been out of adjustment. It has been
used almost solely for this purpose. Between corresponding
altitudes it was more than usually guarded, and on no account
handled, or exposed to an unusual change of temperature.
During the first three years of the voyage all observations for
time were made by me. During the last two years Mr. J. L.
Stokes, assistant surveyor, has made nearly the whole. Latterly
my own have been only a few for the sake of comparison. I
found that Mr. Stokes was a better, and more attentive observer
than myself, and willingly gave way to him, especially as the first
and last days at a place,—when good series of observations were
so desirable, —have been usually those on which my mind was the
most occupied with a variety of details, insignificant perhaps, except
in their consequence, and in their being inevitable. Here let me
quietly protest against the attempted union of petty astronomer,
experiment maker, and captain of a man-of-war in one individual.
Latitudes have been obtained by a variety of methods, and by
several officers. The near agreement of their results, when many
observations have been made in the same place, induces me to
place confidence in those made only by the two best of various
instruments.
The computations were made by me, and by some one or two
of the officers (for the sake of comparison and proof) during the
first three years : since then they have been made by Mr, Stokes
and Lieut. B. Sulivan,but inspected, compared, and often proved
by myself. Each of those officers is a better computer than I am.
In the list of resulting meridian distances, 1 have noticed a
few remarkable agreements with the determinations of other
persons. The accordance of different measurements made by
the Beagle, between any two places, is very satisfactory. Yet
there hangs a cloud over the synoptic view wdiich I am as yet un-
able to dissipate, and for which I cannot account in any satisfac-
tory manner. Instead of the length of the w hole chain of distances
equalling twenty-four hours exactly, it is equal to twenty-four hours
and thirty-three seconds. The positions of the Cape of Good


Hope and Cape Horn appear to be ascertained to less than three
seconds of time. Those of Valparaiso and Callao agree with the
results of the best observations, calculated by Professor Oltmanns.
That of Otaheite (or Tahiti) accords with the position assigned by
Captain Cook and Mr. Wales. Our longitude of New Zealand
agrees exactly with that of M. Duperrey, of the Coquille.
" From Sydney to King George's Sound the Beagle corroborates
the determination of Flinders; and from the Mauritius to the
Cape of Good Hope, the astronomical difference of longitude, and
Captain Owen’s meridian distance, are in exact accordance with
our measurements. How, and where, has an error of thirty-three
seconds been caused? r l he computations have all been examined
and verified, again and again. Ihe usual rates of the chrono-
meters, and their daily comparisons, would detect any sudden
error or change.
Remarks on Chronometers.
During eight years’ observation of the movements of a large
number of chronometers, I have become gradually convinced that
the ordinary motions of a ship, such as pitching and rolling mo-
derately, do not affect tolerably good chronometers which are
fixed in one place, and are defended from vibration and concussion.
Frequently employing chronometers in boats and in very small
vessels has strengthened my conviction that temperatuie is the
chief, if not the only, cause (generally speaking) of marked
changes of rate.
The balances of but few watches are so well compensated as to
be proof against a long continuance of higher or lower temperatuie.
It often happens that the air in port, or near the land, is at a
temperature very different from that over the open sea in the vici-
nity. Hence the difference sometimes found between harbour and
sea rates.
ota laico* . ~
The change so frequently noticed to take place in the rates of
chronometers moved from the shore to the ship, and the leveise,
are well known to be partly caused by change of temperature and
partly by change of situation.
I have never found chronometers go better than when the boxes
were bedded in sawdust, and the watches moving freely in well-
oiled jimbals.
Suspending them in cots not only alters their rate, but makes
them go less regularly.
When fixed to a solid substance, they feel the vibrations caused
by people running on the decks, by shocks, or by chain-cables
running out.


A cushion, wool, hair, or any such substance, is preferable to a
solid bed ; but I can think of nothing better than plain dry saw-
dust.
Many chronometric measurements have caused errors, and great
consequent perplexity, in the following manner :
The chronometers were rated in air whose average temperature
was (let us suppose) 70°.
They were then carried through air either considerably hotter or
considerably colder, and again rated in a temperature nearly equal
to that specified.
The rates did not differ much, and it was supposed that the
chronometers had been going extremely well : in truth, the rates
of most of the watches had differed extremely from those found
in port during the voyage; but they had returned nearly to the old
rates upon reaching nearly equal temperature.
This has happened more or less to every ship carrying chrono-
meters across the equator, especially when going to Rio de Janeiro
with the sun to the northward of the line.
Magnetism is supposed by some persons to affect the rates of
chronometers. It is difficult to detect.
XVlll.— Notice of a Visit to the Himmdleh Mountains and
the Valley of Kashmir, in 1835. Communicated by Baron
Charles Hiigel.
[Baron Hiigel, of Vienna, well known as an eminent naturalist,
having just returned to this country, after an absence from Europe
of six years, chiefly spent in India, has communicated the follow-
ing account of a journey from the river Sutlej at Belaspfir, through
the lower range of the Himmaleh to Kashmir, from thence to the
highest part of the Tibet Panjdhl, then to the Attock and back
through the Panjdb to Lud’yana, recrossing the Sutlej ; accompa-
nied by a letter, tracing his route during his five years’ travels, from
which a slight extract is subjoined.]
“ I left Toulon in May, 1831, visited parts of Greece, Cyprus, La-
takia, Syria, and Baalbek ; Alexandria, Cairo, and Egpyt, to the con-
fines of Nubia; descended the Nile to Ghineh’; crossed to Cosseir,
and embarked in the steamer for Bombay, where I arrived in the
spring of 1832. In India I visited Puna, Aurungabad, Ellora, Sat-
tara, Bijapur, Belgdm, Goa, Darwar, Bellari, Bangalore, Seringapa-
tam, the Nilgheries, Kochin, Cape Komorin, Palamcotta, and by RaS
miseram to Mandr in Ceylon. In this Island I visited both the east
and west coasts ; the highest point Pedradallegalla, near Nur Elba, and
VOL. VI. 2 A
