

OS sISSpSHe SI
►
► |s^o_
► iv'H®-
► S^ol
► p
;|2r
►fct
► !»»-*»-
;Ikh~
I Step J r .
:i<^_
1^"
‘S;||
:fc~
:psr
* BcHk*
:fet
: fe^
g
lf<H~




Attention, Unions!!
■O bring the plans of work of the W.C.T.U. before the
lfS^ss Unions in a plain and simple way that each Union
may “ lengthen its cords and strengthen its stakes,” this
manual is sent out, and is intended for the general officers
and the superintendents of departments. The book is sent
out free, but as the funds are very low and our printing
expenses heavy, we are asking each Union to send by
return post two or three shillings towards printing. Please
give this your attention at once, and send to the Treasurer,
Mrs. Webb, “ Heathrop,” Bathurst, K.S.W., who is
Treasurer for Australasia,
Hoping the many useful helps and suggestions will be
carried out by the Unions,
Yours in the cause.
M. E. KIRK, Aus. Sec.,
28 Russell Street, Melbourne.




EDUCATE! A&ITATE! LEGISLATE!
EVANGELISTIC WORK.
‘ For other foundation can ne man lay than that is laid which is Jesus Christ.”
Appoint a superintendent of this department in your Union. Let
her select two assistants that the work of arranging public meetings
may be divided, one secure hall, another get speakers, and one
arrange programme, and all three work in the meetings to get
pledges and names for membership.
First, select a central place of meeting, church or hall, invite all
churches and temperance bodies to join you, and the ministers and
officials to sit on the platform. The president or vice-president
takes the chair, some minister leads in prayer.
Get two good speakers who will speak briefly, not more than
twenty minutes, have good lively singing, something all can join in,
have plenty of books, keep the singing up while the pledges are
being taken, have the last speaker appeal for pledges, members, and
funds, if needed, appoint two or three ladies to work in the back of
the house, for much can be done by personal invitation to sign or
join.
See that all details are arranged before meeting, have programme
ready, hymns selected, collectors and workers appointed, pens, ink,
pledges and ribbons ready, and let everything be done “decently
and in order.” These meetings ean be held on a week night; Satur-
day night seems, in many places, to be a good night, and often
attracts young men from the street; they are sometimes held on Sun-
day afternoon, or after the evening service. Some Unions have
held open-air gospel temperance meetings at the close of the
churches. Get two or three speakers and hold forth on some corner
for a half an hour —much good has thus been done.
“ Remember the noontide hour of silent prayer, twelve o’clock.”
In getting up. public meetings the town or city is often divided
into districts, two members taking each district, and doing house to
house visitation. This done a day or two before the meeting will
bring its reward in the form of a crowded meeting. Have your
pledge book with you, in fact, never go out without it. They can
be secured at S. Australia headquarters, of Miss (.George, Franklin-
street, Adelaide, price Is. fid. per dozen. Try to make your annual
meeting a grand success. The president should give a short address,
say fifteen minutes, the secretary read her report, and the treasurer
also. Make it a special time for strengthening your ranks. Always
give out literature at all public meetings.


Wear the badge, a White Ribbon Bow, v/
X TEMPERANCE LITERATURE, /\
“ How shall they believe unless they hear ?”
This is one of the most important departments and should claim
every attention. Scatter the seeds of temperance broadcast through
your literature, appoint a superintendent (always do that), get a
good supply of assorted literature, including leaflets on the medical
aspect of the question and the use of unfermented wine at the Lord’s
table, send the former to the doctors and the others to the ministers ;
they can be sent through the post, not only in your city but all
through the district; apply for space on the railway station to put
up a small tin box, mark it “W.C.T.U.”—Take one, and keep it
filled with literature.
If ships come into your port, ask permission to hang a canvas
bag somewhere on the ship, fill it with gospel and temperance
literature, adding any good reading matter, periodicals, etc. This
will often prove a blessing to the sailors. Send also to hospitals
and gaols; give out to cabmen as you pass the stand. Let no
opportunity be lost in sowing seed that must bring fruit. Get leaflets
on all phases of the subject; send two shillings for sample
literature to
Mr. R. R. Jack, 301 Pitt-street, Sydney.
Mrs. M. E. Kirk, 28 Russell-street, Melbourne.
Miss George, Franklin-street, Adelaide.
Each Union should take a copy of our officical organ The Union
Signal, 6s. a year. ; Temperance Temple, Chicago, 111., U.S.A. ; also
the temperance papers published in this land. Every Union should
take at least one copy of each, paid for from the funds of the Union,
sent to the president, read and passed on.
Many of the women know nothing of the situation in their own
land My sisters, read ! read ! ! read !!! The Union Signal will be
of more than usual interest this year because of the World’s
Convention to be held during the Fair. The colonial papers are :
The Temperance World, 301 Pitt-st., Sydney, 2/6 per year
The White Ribbon Signal, 2 Prancis-st., Sydney, 1/6 ~
The Alliance Record, Gawler Place, Adelaide, 1/6 ~
The Friend, Hobart, Tasmania 1/6 ~
Ihe Alliance Temperance Neivs, Melbourne ... 1/6 ~
The White Ribbon Signal, Melbourne ... 1/6 ~
Let me urge every Union to take these papers. This movement
is the movement of the century, get full of it, full of arguments and
Jaots. Facts tell, and each w oman will become a power.
' Give out literature at mass meetings, in churches, factories and
shops, at county fairs, agricultural shows, horse races, market
places, sale days, soldiers’ encampment, everywhere. Put a copy of
our declaration of principles (send 1/- to Miss George) into every
letter you write. Have the following notice printed in large and
small bills and posters, and put up everywhere and give out at all
gatherings,


Remember the noontide hour of prayer.
IWANTED! WANTED!! WANTED!!^
ten thousand women to join the W.C.T.U. and help in the fight for
“ God and home and humanity.” '
Y.W.C.T. UNIONS.
“ That your daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of
a palace.”
The following suggestions on young woman’s work comes from the
pen of Miss Brentnall, Australasian president of the Y.W.C.T.U.:
“ In almost every town in these colonies can be found enough
girls to form a Young Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, and
also a good Christian woman especially interested in girls in forming
these maidens into an 4 organised protest against the liquor traffic.’
“To form a ‘Y’ Union interest as many girls as possible by
private conversation, then call a public meeting by notices given
out in churches, Sunday schools, and places of business, &c., or a
private meeting can be called by invitation if thought best to have
the girls alone.
“ Try and have a live meeting with short opening exercises. If
possible secure a good speaker who will give a pointed address on
the aims and objects of the Y. W.C.T.U., urging all to give help and
personal influence.
‘ ‘ Let the girls who join elect their general officers, a president
and secretary. Set them to work at once by asking the secretary to
take names, and the treasurer to take the subscriptions. Have a
supply of cards and constitutions for the members, and leaflets for
those ■who wish to think about it. Decide upon the time and place
of the first meeting. Urge each to be present and bring some friend
with her. At the next meeting the constitution must be read and
adopted, and departments of work chosen.
“ The help of the 4 Y ’ Union is most valuable at socials, Christ-
mas treats for poor children, hospital concerts, quarterly socials,
and entertainments of all kinds for charitable objects. The president
should induce the members to take part in the devotional exercises
at the ordinary meetings, sewing can be done for the poor, original
papers read, or even extracts, with a little music between. Secure
any member who may be visiting your city to give an address, brief
and pointed.
44 By thus interesting the girls there will be a general rally around
the highest standard of a true womanhood, and our lives show forth
the beauty of purity and truth and that love which is 4 the greatest
thing in the world.’ ”
7S WOMANHOOD FRANCHISE. X
The following has been taken from the manual of Mrs. Wallace,
Australasian superintendent of that department:
44 That each Union appoint for superintendent of the franchise de-
partment some member who feels and realhes the weight and moment
of the W.C.T.U. work, who shall communicate with the colonial


Always wear the badge.
superintendent and the colonial with the superintendent for Austral-
asia. That each superintendent subscribe for the Alliance Record
(Temperance and General Life Buildings, Swanston-street, Mel-
bourne). At the meetings of the Union have some word to say or passage
to read bearing on the subject; lead the members to ask questions and
enter into free discussion. In addition to leaflets have printed slips,
which give the views of distinguished persons on woman suffrage.
These are conveniently inserted in letters. Secure column or portion
of column in your local paper for suffrage news. Place literature in
club rooms, hotels, Y.M.C.A., and all reading rooms possible.
Solicit clergymen to preach on woman’s condition, past and present.
Endeavour to have the subject discussed in debating societies, and
made the theme of essays and orations in colleges and seminaries.
Memorialise conventions, secular and religious. Secure attention
and consideration of the subject at political meetings. Circulate
the enrolment papers, securing the signatures of all persons over
twenty-one years of age who believe that women should vote on
equal terms with men. Learn what are the electoral privileges of
women and how many avail themselves of these privileges. Know
the laws concerning assessment and registration of voters, the times,
places and conditions therefor, the conduct of municipal affairs.
Study carefully what is the legal status of married women, spinsters
and widows, and what the protection to person and property.
“ To this end form societies for the study of law and politics—
the science of government—as it well behoves those who are under
the law to have a thorough knowledge of its conditions and pro-
visions. The discussion of the following subjects will be interesting
and instructive: Courts, Lawyers, the Beginning of a Lawsuit,
Evidence, Both Sides of the Jury Question, Marriage, Divorce,
Parent and Child, Teacher and Pupil, Employer and Employee,
Public Corporations, Insurance, Land, Wills, Offences against Per-
son and against Property, Rates, Public Institutions, Public Health,
the Liquor Laws, &c. These and kindred subjects are worthy of
study. Awaken interest in all questions of the day, state and local.
Watch parliamentary proceedings, for all legislation bears directly
or indirectly upon each member of the human family, regardless of
sex, and upon every home. It is said that you may judge of any
nation or age by the condition of the women. Frequent mention is
made of woman’s influence in an indirect and often evil way
in important and far-reaching matters, through motives of vanity
and selfishness. A right knowledge coupled with her quick intuitions
would make her a safer exponent of the influence she wields,' and
made equally responsible, her power w r ould prove a safeguard. The
effort of the W.C.T.U. should be to rouse women to the duties and
responsibilities of citizenship.”
PRESS DEPARTMENT.
Ask for a column or half column in your local paper for temper-
ance news, if the paper is a daily one ask for the column once a week,
if you have not a local paper, ask for space in the district paper.


Learn the Crusade Psalm, cxlvii.
head it W.C.T.U column, give the names of your officers and place
and time of your Union meetings. Report your regular meetings-
and keep your work before the public that all may know you are
alive. Call special attention to lines of work taken up and what
has been accomplished. Ask each member of the Union to be on
the lookout for temperance clippings, both about the W.C.T.U. and
on the subject itself, send these to your superintendent so that she
may always have a supply of late news, for when the column is once
given it must be kept filled.
If you have religious or temperance papers in the district or
colony, send articles on different departments of the work, such as
Peace and Arbitration, Heredity, Scientific Temperance Instruction,
Social Purity, Sabbath Observance, and such subjects as will tend
to educate public sentiment. Let every local and colonial superin-
tendent keep her department before the public. “ The agitation of
thought is the beginning of wisdom.” Get facts and figures
concerning the strength of the Union, and keep them before the
public, also facts as to the amount of liquor consumed, its cost, etc.
MOTHERS’ MEETINGS,
“ Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest.
Appoint someone interested in mothers as superintendent, let
her appoint two assistants, select a place of meeting in a locality
where you will be able to reach mothers who do not go to church ;
if there is not a schoolroom convenient, hold them in some cottage,
send special invitations to mothers who will need the influence of
the meetings ; as you go, call and take some mother with you.
The superintendent will lead, or appoint someone to lead in her
place, sing a familiar hymn, if possible have two or three prayers,
then a short scripture lesson, and a brief address on the portion
read, then give a short reading on home influence, the responsibility
of mothers concerning intemperance, the training of children, or some
helpful subject. Many mothers cannot leave their children, invite
them to bring the little ones, also needle work, and make the
meetings as informal as possible, give the mothers a chance to say
something if they desire, invite them to come to some church, and
urge them to send the children to some Sunday school.
Ask the mothers to sign the pledge before leaving. Give out
temperance literature. Get each mother to promise she will read or
send the tract to one or more friends.
The sale of old clothing, donated by friends, at nominal prices,
and the formation of a club, into which the women may pay Is. per
week, receiving it back at the end of six months with 2d. interest on
every shilling added, also a tea once in six months, often helps to
attract mothers to the meeting, and the cost is covered by the sale
of the cast-off clothing, which is generally very readily obtained.
Send to Hannah Whitall Smith, 44 Grosvenor-road, West-
minster, London, S. W., England, for her Bible reading leaflets.


Every member should carry a pledge book.
WORK AMONG YOUNG MEN.
“ And Jesus beholding him, loved him.”
Work among young men includes every means whereby young
men may be reached, sailors, soldiers, miners, lumbermen, and young
men generally. It is useless to say to young men, “ don’t go to the
public houses,” unless we offer something to take the places of these
resorts. Someone has said, “ man is a social animal,” and, of course,
must have companionship, and if this is not provided they will
seek it in the public house. Try and open coffee and reading rooms
where you can hold gospel temperance meetings once or twice a
week. Have pens, ink and paper where they can write their letters,
if so inclined, keep a supply of the latest newspapers—these are
usually donated—have pledges at hand and invite them to sign.
The secret of success in this work is to make young men feel that
you are interested in them.
Much good may be done among sheep shearers by asking
permission to visit the sheds in the evening. Get up a party, take
hymn books and speakers, hold a short meeting with good lively
singing, at the close take pledges, leave pledges at the station for
new men who may come. Send young men text cards at Christmas
with W.O.T.U. marked on them. Send out personal invitations to
young men to attend your public meeting, and bring some friend
with them.
Try and form a young men’s class for Bible study some week
night, and if possible, serve light refreshments. Hold this from
house to house. Try and interest outside ladies in this Bible
reading or Bible study work.
Another way of working among them is to bring them beneath
home influences. In places where there are numbers of young men,
the Union asks ladies outside of workers to throw open their homes
once a week to young men ; that is, say you have fifteen homes
thrown open, that means each lady’s turn comes about once in three
months. These entertainments are called “ Evenings at Home for
the Young Men.” A list of young men living in boarding-houses
and hotels is secured and an invitation sent to each. Different
members of the Union supply light refreshments, one member sends
in a cake, another some sandwiches, etc,, and about half a dozen
young ladies of the Union assist in entertaining ; innocent games
are provided, and a social evening generally, often familiar singing ;
this throws around them an influence that is sure to touch a young
man’s heart.
WORK AMONG OHILDREN.
“ Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart
from it.”
Every union should have its Loyal Temperance Legion or Band
of Hope. How to form one : First, appoint a superintendent of
this department, who will get up a children’s meeting, to be held if
possible in an unsectarian place ; have the meeting announced in


Try and make hon 3 members of your gentlemen friends.
the day school the day before it takes place, that each child may
gain the consent of parents to attend, have it also announced in all
the Sunday-schools the Sunday before the meeting; have the pledge
written in a blank book, explain the nature of it, then invite the
children to enroll their names under the pledge; have a monthly
meeting (if possible, twice a month); have the children learn
temperance pieces to recite ; introduce Julia Coleman’s catechism
on the effects of alcohol (to be obtained 28 Read-st., New York) ;
work up the Demorest medal contest. This will also interest the
adults. Full particulars and medal are sent free by applying to W. J.
Demorest, “ Demorest Magazine,” N. York City.
In most Sunday-schools there is a Temperance Sunday once in
three months. Appoint ladies who will ask permission to visit the
schools on that day and give a brief temperance address, take pledge
cards with you and invite the children to sign at the close of the
school; send to the Temperance Temple, Chicago, and get a number
of back copies of “ The Crusader,” a temperance paper for children,
and give them out on that day. Beautiful pledge cards can be
secured at head-quarters, Adelaide, at Is. 6d. per doz.
In most lands scientific temperance instruction has been intro-
duced into all the day schools, and it remains for our women to see
that it is really taught. In many places this important study is
neglected, and the union should see to it that the instruction is given.
Then let every Union do what it can towards securing the
reading of the Bible in the Public Schools. All this is most impor-
tant work when you remember that “ the child of to-day is the man
of to-morrow,” and the future of the nation depends on the proper
education of the boys and girls of to-day. “As the twig is bent
the tree is inclined,”
WORK AMONG CABMEN AND TRAMMEN.
“ Therefore shall they know in that day that I am He that doth speak. Behold !
I am He.”
This class of men seems very much neglected in our temperance
work. They are so occupied and their hours are so long, it is diffi-
cult to carry out systematic work among them ; but I believe there
are many things we can do to make them feel how deeply interested
we are in their welfare, also in their families.
First try to induce the cabmen at least to give up Sunday work,
on the grounds of the Divine command and also for their own sakes.
They owe it to themselves to have a rest one day in seven, and to
their families to spend one day with them.
Keep on hand a supply of periodicals and good reading matter,
and as you pass the cab-stand give it to them with a word of cheer
and an invitation to some church. The Bathurst Union has done
a grand work in erecting a cabmen’s shelter, and in Adelaide the
superintendent gives regular social gatherings, when the men and
their families are invited. An interesting programme is arranged —
music, recitations, and a short temperance address is given. All are


Have the W.C.T.U. motto printed and put up everywhere.
invited to sign the pledge, often light refreshments are passed
round, usually provided by members of the Union. In all places
where there is scope for the work I would urge that it should be
taken up.
PARLOR AND DRAWING-ROOM MEETINGS.
“ The rich and the poor meet together ; the Lord is the maker of them all.”
A great work has been done by these meetings in bringing our
work before those who have known nothing of it and, of course, had
no interest in it. Appoint your most popular woman as superin-
tendent of this work, let her ask some society woman of influence,
no matter whether she is an abstainer or not, to invite her friends to
hear an address on “ woman’s work.” She, of course, makes out the
list of those to be invited. The meeting is not intended for members
of the Union, only such as shall take part, it is to interest those who
have never given any help to the cause ; invitations are sent out by
the lady at whose house the meeting is held. Sometimes afternoon
tea is served, but this is of no importance.
The address can be given by the superintendent, the president, or
some minister, special attention being given to the part woman is
taking in all the great moral reforms of the day, including the-
temperance work done by woman.
If a minister is to give the address tell him just what phases
of the work or question you would like him to bring before the
women.
Have your pledge book and membership cards with you, give out
suitable literature, Miss Ackerman’s appeal to women might lead
to an “ arrest of thought.” Be sure and have a vote of thanks
passed by your Union and conveyed by the secretary to the lady
who has opened her home, also to the speaker. If these meetings
could be held monthly in large places and quarterly in small ones, I
am sure the aims and objects of our work would become known to
many who have not so much as heard of it.
COFFEE BOOTHS.
“The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish
These supply a long-felt need and often keep men from going to
the public-house by furnishing good wholesome refreshments at
moderate rates.
Get permission to pitch your tent on fair grounds, at agricultural
shows and horse-races, by the wayside on sale and market days, and
wherever you can sell a cup of tea or coffee and keep a man from
the public-house.
Sometimes the tents are large enough to put forms in and hold an
all-day Gospel Temperance Meeting, or just an evening meeting.
Always have literature at the booth. Put up the W. C.T. U. motto,
so that all may see who you are. Have pledges at hand. When any of
these places are not supplied with water —and they very often are


The great effort of this year is to double our membership.
not—have a tank or barrel put upon the ground, and an honorary
member to give it out, otherwise the water may be wasted. Have
the tank marked—“ W.C.T.U.— Water free.”
PRISON WORK.
“I was in prison, and ye came unto Me.”
Let something be done to provide a place for men and womem
who have no home to go to when they are released from prison.
They come out, often feeling they are branded and despised—turned
loose upon the streets to drift into sin and vice. Learn what day
prisoners, especially women, are to be released, and see that they
have some place to go where they will be surrounded by helpful
influences till they can get something to do. It is not enough to
take them texts, tracts, and books while they are there, but help
them when they come out, and make them feel we do not despise
them.
UNFERMENTED WINE.
“ I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the vine until I drink it new in my
Father’s kingdom.”
Two or three ladies of the Union call on all the ministers, and
bring before them the importance of the use of unfeimented wine at
the Lord’s table. Many a weak one has gone back to drunkenness
by having tasted strong drink at the Lord’s table. I met an
ordained minister who years ago had been a drunkard, and he told
me he never dared to go to communion unless he was sure they used
unfermented wine. Said he: “The very smell of it would set me to■
drinking.” It is an awful thing to set a temptation before a weak
one—of all places at the Lord’s table. The following receipt for
unfermented wine has been found most satisfactory. Send a copy
of it to all your ministers :
Unfermented Wine.
Take fresh, sound grapes ; strip them off the stalks, press them,
and boil them in a copper or enamelled pot for twenty minutes;
strain them first through an enamel colander, then through three
flannel bags; fill demijohns with the juice, and boil in a strong pot
until froth rises on the top ; remove froth and seal while boiling; keep
in a cool place for six months. When wanted to bottle, draw off
with a syphon placed within 4in. of the bottom ; fill the bottles,
boil in water for twenty minutes, cork and seal while boiling. All
utensils used must be copper or enamel. If you wish to make a
light tart wine, mix half white and dark wine grapes together.
M. A. L.


Every member to work for the a:old medal.
SABBATH OBSERVANCE.
“Remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy.” What can
your Union do? Agitate through the press; write about the
shameful desecration of the Sabbath day in your temperance column;
scatter literature on the subject; speak about it at your public
meetings; strictly observe the Sabbath yourself, and discourage
tram and railway travel and writing of business letters on Sunday ; do
not patronise those in business who do not observe the Sabbath ;
see that the Sabbath law, such as you have, is enforced ; see that
the public houses are closed on that day ; agitate for better legisla
tion ; keep the subject before the people.
LEGISLATIVE WORK
First of all read the constitution of your country. Ido not often
find a woman who knows anything about the laws of the land.
Every woman should know the laws that regulate the protection of
her home and children. I wonder how many mothers are familiar
with the fact that her girl who cannot legally sell her playthings
till she is twenty-one can legally sell her honor and virtue when she
is twelve or fourteen. They talk about protection in commerce, but
allow, yes, make laws for, free trade in mothers’ daughters. Let
every mother know what the laws are concerning these things.
Keep watch of the papers to see when licenses for new public houses
are applied for ; circulate a petition among all the women of the
town, and have it signed; present it to the licensing bench in the
name of the W.C.T.tJ., and place on record your protest, because of
The present status of woman we are limited to protesting ; but let
that protest ever be heard, and, if defeated once in our efforts, try
again ; it will do much to educate public sentiment and let the
world see that woman is not sleeping concerning these evils. Agitate
for legislation concerning barmaids till you shall have a law making
it illegal to employ a woman in that capacity. There can be nothing
more degrading to womanhood than to be found in the polluting
atmosphere of the bar-room, and. if we really seek to elevate the
standard of womanhood, let us begin here.
FLOWER MISSION.
“ Consider the Lilies.’’
This department is usually carried on by some of the young
women of the Union. Small text cards fastened to bouquets are
taken once or twice a month to the hospitals. There is no time
when it is so easy to reach hearts as when one is ill, especially if
they are away from home and among strangers. The text leads to
an “ arrest of thought,” and the beauty of the flowers appeals to all
That is good in humanity, for as “ sermons may be read in stones,”
so God’s message often comes through the beauty of a flower ; then
if you hear of anyone who is ill in their home, rich or poor, send the
rflowers and text ; it will be a blessing.


Remember the week of self-denial —last week of July.
TEXT CARDS.
Try and put up text cards everywhere, in hospitals, in waiting-
rooms at railway stations, in public reading-rooms, sailors’ rests, and
in all places where permission may be gained. Have our motto
printed on good sized cards and put it up in Sunday schools and
wherever space may be found,
MOTTO or THE W.C.T.U.
FOR GOD AND HOME AND HUMANITY.
PUBLIC HOUSE WORK.
“ Go out into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in.”
Appoint a committee of two or three to visit the public houses on
Saturday night, and invite young men to some service on Sunday,,
give out tracts and try and have a quiet word with each, especially
the women ; many are only w T aiting to be taken by the hand and
have a kind word spoken to them. No one need be afraid to under-
take the work. I have visited these places in many lands, and have
never had anyone object to the singing, praying, or speaking to the
men, and I know of very much good that has been done.
WHAT YOU CAN DO TO HELP.
fa “ She hath done what shecould.” / f
If you live on a station or out of town you can carry a pledge
book and ask your station hands to sign, you can make them feel
your interest in them as opportunity affords, you can read up about
the work and talk about it to your neighbours, you can influence
your own family to become abstainers, you can put a temperance
tract in every letter you write, and make some self-denial to help on
the cause financially, you can talk temperance to your children,
and live it in your life.
WANTED! WANTED!! WANTED!!!
Ten thousand women to join the W.C.T.U., and help in the fight
for “God and Home and Humanity.” Post your town with this
notice ; have it printed on small bills and given out at all gatherings.
GOLD MEDAL.
Miss Ackerman has offered a prize of a gold medal to the mem-
ber of the Union who secures the largest number of active members
(not honorary) during the year, from April Ist, 1893, to the same


Remember the all day of prayer—July 28.
date of next year. The number must be over twenty-five, and this
is open to all but organizers and public workers. Send number of
members (who have paid their half-crown) you have secured, with
your name and address, to M. E. Kirk, 28 Russell-street, Melbourne
TEMPERANCE DOXOLOGY.
Praise God from whom all blessings flow,
Praise Him who heals the drunkards’ woe,
Praise Him who leads the temperance host,
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
“ Expect great things from God, attempt great things for God.


Websdale, Shoosmith and Co.,
Printers,
117 Clarence Street,
Sydney






