

Hr in rfTM
f f
!


4


[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
December 12, 1867.]
On the Australian Genus Climacteris, with a Description
of a New Species. By John Gould, F.R.S. &c.
Few of the genera constituting the avifauna of Australia are more
distinct and remarkable than that named Climacteris, the members
of which, like the Certhia familiaris of our own island, are especially
adapted for creeping over the surfaces of large trees; they are, how-
ever, as structurally distinct from our well-known Creeper as they
are from the Sittce or Nuthatches, of both of which genera no species
has yet been found in Australia. Their food principally consists of
insects, which they procure among the interstices in the bark of the
trees, or on the ground around the base of their boles.
[l]


The species are :
Climacteris scandens.
Generally distributed over the south-eastern portions of Australia.
Climacteris rufa.
Inhabits the neighbourhood of Swan River, Western Australia.
Climacteris erythrops.
The interior of New South Wales.
Climacteris melanota.
The Gulf of Carpentaria.
Climacteris melanura.
The north coast of Australia.
Climacteris leucophjea.
New South Wales. .
Thus every colony of that vast country, with the exception ot las-
mania, is inhabited by a species of this singular form. When I com-
menced the study of the Australian birds, now nearly thirty years ago,
only two species were known, namely C. scandens and C. leucophaa.
In the interval the four others above named have been discovered; and
I now give the description of a fifth, from a skin sent to me two years
since by Mr. E. P. Ramsay of Dobroyde, in New South Wales, and
which I should have characterized earlier, but for an impression that
it was an example of C. leucophcea in an abnormal state of plumage;
I now venture to do so in consequence of a second inquiry from Mr.
Ramsay as to what I have called the red-rumped Climacteris.
The name I propose for it is
Climacteris pyrrhonota.
Crown, forehead, and wings brown, the feathers of the former
edged with a lighter tint of the same colour; some longitudinal tear-
drop-like streaks of buffy white on the scapularies; wings crossed
by a band of light buff; rump and upper tail-coverts rust-red, form-
ing a conspicuous mark ; throat and chest white ; on the hinder part
of the cheeks a patch of rust-red ; centre of the abdomen buffy white;
flanks deep brown, with the centre of each feather greyish white ;
under tail-coverts fawn-white, each feather crossed by two irregular
lines of black; tail grey, the five outer feathers on each side centred
with black and tipped with greyish white.
Total length 5| inches, bill f, wing 3f, tail 2|, tarsi |*
In favour of its being distinct, I may remark, first, that 1 found
the C. leucophcea very common in New South Wales, and killed
many examples of both sexes without finding a trace of red on t eir
rump-feathers ; secondly, that we rarely find rust-red to be the pre-
cursor of the fine blue-grey of a subsequent change; and thirdly,
that rust-red is a prevailing tint in some of the other species of the
genus. It assimilates in size and general appearance (except in t e
[2]


rust-red of the lower part of the back, rump, and upper tail-coverts)
to the female of C. leucophcea , even to the rusty spot on the cheeks.
Mr. Ramsay’s specimen has “Springfield, Jan. I, 1865,” marked
on the label attached to it.
An apparently immature example of this bird is in the collection
at the British Museum.




.


