

LAW IN NATURE,
&c., fccc., &c.
FOUR
PAPERS,
READ BEFORE THE
%W\k |]Mlosojj|ic:il Sockht,
RICHARD DAVIES HANSON, ESQ.,
CHIEF JUSTICE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
PRINTED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY
ADELAIDE :
FEINTED BY W. K. THOMAS, EEGISTER AND OBSERVER OFFICES,




LAW IN NATURE,
&c., &c., &c.
FOUR PAPERS,
READ BEFORE THE
IJfjilosojjljitiil Sacictn,
RICHARD DAVIES HANSON, ESQ.,
CHIEF JUSTICE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
PRINTED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.
ADELAIDE :
FEINTED BY W. K. THOMAS, REGISTER AND OBSERVER OFFICES,
GRENFELL STREET.
1864,


‘
*


3SSS/F
PREFACE.
The following Papers were read before the Adelaide Philosophical
Society, and are printed at their request. In preparing them for
the press I have preserved as much as possible their original form,
because I am desirous that they should appear what they are—
Papers read before a limited audience, members of a Society formed
for the encouragement and prosecution of scientific investigation,
and familiar to some extent with the topics discussed and the prin-
ciples attempted to be established. Kegarded in any other light,
these Papers would scarcely be suited for publication; if for no
other reason, because of their incompleteness. They do not pretend
to exhaust the subjects upon which they treat, even under the
aspects in which they are presented, but only to suggest and de-
velop certain lines of thought, and the conclusions to which these
seem to lead, so far as they appeared to fall within the objects of
the Society.
The second and third Papers, “ Law in Creation” and “ Law in
History,” are printed almost as they were read ; though in the latter
I should have liked to develop more fully the last section—that
which relates to the influence of former civilizations upon modern
thought. I found, however, that this could not be done at all ade-
quately without an amount of additional matter which I did not feel
justified in inserting. I have, therefore, left it in its original state.
In the first Paper I have added one or two paragraphs in order
to elucidate more fully the sense in which the term “law” is used
in scientific discussions, and the ambiguities which ai’ise from
the other senses in which the word is habitually employed. And
in the last Paper I have expanded the earlier portion for the
purpose of exhibiting more completely what appears to me to be


the essential independence of science and theology, as well as the
reasons for considering such a discussion not merely legitimate but
even necessary. The latter part, however, remains almost verbally
as it was originally written.
It may be thought, as was suggested by one of the members of
the Society, that the views I have endeavoured to establish involve
the impossibility of miracles. This, however, appears to me to be
a misconception ; and certainly Ido not hold such an opinion. I
conceive, undoubtedly, that nature does not and cannot witness to
any supernatural interposition ; and further, that the prevalence of
law which we trace wherever our investigations extend furnishes a
strong presumption against the occurrence of any such interposition.
But this, I imagine, would be conceded by the most unhesitating
asserter of miracles. It is indeed the impossibility of accounting
for an occurrence on natural grounds, and its intrinsic improbability
as a fact, which gives to it its evidential character and value as a
miracle. If we could in any manner explain it, or show that its occur-
rence was naturally to be looked for, it would to that extent become
worthless as a symbol of divinity or an attestation of doctrine. But
I do not, therefore, conclude that miracles cannot have occurred,
or even that there may not be considerations resting upon other
than natural grounds which may diminish the intrinsic improbability
of their occurrence. Ido not doubt the power of God to work
miracles, and certainly I do not assume that I am able to decide
whether he will or will not exercise that power. It seems, however,
to me, that in any enquiries upon the subject the question whether
or not the alleged phenomena were manifested is a question of evi-
dence —whether or not they were miraculous is a question of faith;
and therefore that miracles as such are beyond the scope of science.
I imagined, therefore, that any discussion of the subject would not
fall within the limits of the enquiries in which I was engaged; but
I have thought it right to guard myself from being supposed on that
account to deny the possibility or the actual occurrence of miracles.
These Papers have no pretensions to originality. Although I
should have some difficulty in referring the various arguments and
illustrations to the sources from which they were taken, it is pro-
bable that all have been suggested in the course of reading; and


with regard to the greater portion, they would be found in works
readily accessible to most of my hearers. Still I have not im-
plicitly followed any authority. I have stated my own conclusions
in my own language; but the grounds of my conclusions have not
been the result of original investigation. My object, however, in
these Papers has been not to discover new facts, but to show the
principles which we are to apply in drawing conclusions from facts
already known.
It only remains to add that, as I understand it, the printing of
these Papers by the Adelaide Philosophical Society does not imply
any agreement with the particular views I have pronounced. It
is, I believe, nothing more than an acknowledgment that the im-
portance and interest of the questions discussed, and, to a certain
extent also, the manner in which they have been treated, justify
the Society in securing for the members a more permanent and
available record than would otherwise exist.
Adelaide, June 24, 1864.


ERRATUM.
Page 26, third line from the bottom, between “otherwise” and “is,” insert
“is supernatural.”


THE IDEA OF LAW IN NATURE.
I propose in the course of the present, and of two or three
succeeding papers, to offer a few observations for the purpose of
explaining and illustrating the operation of law in nature, and of
discussing how far it may be traced in what we know or can infer
with regard to the plan of nature and the history of mankind ; as
well as the relation which these subjects, and science in general,
bear to theology. The present paper is chiefly introductory, and
its object is to illustrate what, in default of a more appropriate term,
I have designated “ The Idea of Law in Nature.”
The first impression produced by the aspect of external nature is,
that almost everything is capricious and irregular. With the single
exception of the succession of day and night, and the position and
courses of the heavenly bodies, there is nothing that, to the unin-
structed eye, bears the impress of order or method. The wind
bloweth where it listeth—the clouds arise and the rains descend —
seasons of drought and of flood succeed or alternate with each other
—hurricanes and calms, sunshine and storms, come and go fitfully
and irregularly, according to no assignable or intelligible order.
And these events are not merely irregular, but they seem also to
be isolated. There are between them no signs of mutual inter-
dependence ; and even when experience has shown that there
is practically a connection between two events, this connection is
often, so far as appears, altogether arbitrary ; there may be a connec-
tion in fact, but there is none in reason. And all this is the case


even more emphatically with the phenomena of life and organi-
zation; while these latter have further a mystery of their own.
Generation, nutrition, growth, and decay —birth, life, and death —
are still among the unsolved problems of science; and it is no
marvel, therefore, that they should, to the earliest thinkers, have ap-
peared not only to be beyond their powers of investigation, but to
belong to quite a different order of phenomena from those of inor-
ganic matter. The first rude division of objects, therefore, would
be into those which possessed and those which were destitute of
life : the former being supposed to be endued with an animating
spirit, which would account for all the appearances which they
presented —the latter having no internal power, but their opera-
tions being caused by the active energy of some Divine agency
external to themselves.
It is not necessary now to attempt to trace the steps by which
this primitive conception has been gradually changed into that with
which we are now familiar. It has been argued by Comte, in his
Philosophie Positive , that the human intellect in every science has
passed, or is passing, through three stages, which he designates as
the theological (or supernatural), the metaphysical, and the posi-
tive. “In the first (the supernatural) phase the mind seeks causes ;
it aspires to know the essences of things, and the absolute reason
of their operation. It regards all effects as the production of super-
natural agents. Unusual phenomena are regarded as the signs of
the pleasure or displeasure of some god. In the metaphysical
stage a modification takes place: the supernatural agents are set
aside for abstract forces or entities supposed to inhere in various
substances, and capable of producing the appearances which they
manifest. In the positive phase, the mind, convinced of the futility
of all enquiries into causes and essences, restricts itself to the obser-
vation and classification of phenomena, and to the discovery of the
invariable relations of succession and similitude which things bear
to each other; in a word, to the discovery of the laws of pheno-
mena.’ ’ There can be no doubt, I imagine, that this conception
truly represents one aspect of the progress of the human mind;
and it is not necessary to go to the past for illustration these
different methods of viewing the same actual fact: since not merely
at the present time are there some sciences—sociology for instance —
which are, so far as the great majority of thinkers are concerned,
still in the supernatural stage ; and others, such as biology, in the
metaphysical; but if we extend our survey beyond a comparatively
narrow circle, we shall find that the vast majority of the human race


are still in one or other of the preliminary stages in regard to every
class of phenomena. The idea that pestilence is the result, not of
the neglect of sanitary laws, but of the Divine displeasure, and is
to be averted or removed by propitiatory rites, is as familiar to the
modern as it was to the ancient mind, and to civilized as to un-
civilized communities. In fact, with the greater part of mankind,
every unfamiliar occurrence, especially if its results are widely
injurious, is at once imagined to be supernatural; and as the method
of education in every country is still theological instead of scientific,
it can be no matter of surprise that this should be the case. The
positive conception, so far as it is realized, can only be attained in
after life by the process of discarding the lessons which the mind
has first been taught; and this is beyond the power of the many.
It should, however, be observed that the conception of the positive
philosopher, that is to say, of the enquirer who seeks exclusively
to ascertain the laws which regulate the relations of phenomena,
does not necessarily contradict either the theological or the
metaphysical notion. It does not pretend to investigate the ab-
solute cause of anything ; it confesses that any such enquiry is
beyond its province, and that it has neither methods nor instruments
of investigation applicable to the purpose. All that it can perceive
is certain appearances; all that it can discover is in what relation
of coincidence or succession these appearances stand to each other.
These relations it abstracts and generalizes, and the results are the
laws which it seeks to trace and define. What underlies these
appearances what gives efficiency to these laws—what is the
ultimate principle or the efficient cause of phenomena—as it
cannot discover it is content to be ignorant of; but it asserts that,
whatever this unknown something may be, it always operates in-
variably, the same antecedents producing the same results, and
every change in the antecedent being accompanied by a corres-
ponding change in the result. And in confirmation of this assertion
it appeals to its power, in proportion as these laws are understood,
to predict or to produce results. It assumes, moreover, as a
necessary hypothesis, that all phenomena have analogous relations
which are capable of being ultimately ascertained by the application
of appropriate methods of investigation. This, however, does not
exclude the supernatural conception, excepting upon the hypothesis
that a supernatural cause must necessarily be capricious and irre-
gular a hypothesis for which few would now care to contend.
The idea, then, of Law in Nature implies that certain definite and
constant relations subsist between all classes of phenomena—that


there is nothing isolated and nothing anomalous—that any apparent
irregularities are only seeming, and relative to our ignorance ; and
that, although it may-well happen, either owing to the complexity
of the phenomena, or to their unusual character, that certain
classes of facts may be, for an indefinite period or for ever, beyond
the po ’ er of the scientific method, yet that this would be simply
because of the limitation of our faculties, and not because these
facts are really of a different order.
Whatever may be the truth or error of this idea, there can be no
doubt that it is only in so far as it is capable of realization
that there can be any science. If there be any classes of facts, or
any single facts, which stand isolated and apart from the general
scheme of nature —not being, if I may so express myself, links in
the chain of causation—they are by that very isolation rendered
incapable of being the subjects of scientific investigation. The
essential object of science—that without which it has no meaning
and no value—is to ascertain those very relations of cause and effect
which, by supposition, these facts do not possess. They are pheno-
mena which we may observe and register, and upon which we may
speculate, but we can assign them no place in the order of nature.
Science implies prevision ; its formula is—given certain conditions
and arrangements, and certain results follow as the invariable effect —
but with regard to these assumed facts no prevision is possible.
Take, for instance, as illustration, acts which depend upon human
volition. It is well known that there are two classes of thinkers
upon this subject, the one of which asserts and the other denies the
absolute freedom of the will in man. Into this controversy I have
no intention to enter ; in part it is a mere question of words, there
being no difference of opinion as to the actual phenomena, but only
as to the phrases in which they should be described ; and in part it is
bound up with questions which science, as I understand it, does not
profess to be able to solve. But it is obvious that, on the hypothesis
of the absolute freedom of the will, in the sense for which one
class contends, it is impossible to make the acts which freely result
from the will the subject of calculation. We may guess, but we
cannot with any consistency venture to predict; since although
these acts, when performed, become themselves causes, and in their
operation differ in no wise from similar acts produced by known and
calculable laws, yet the volition of which they are the result, being
self-determined, is therefore beyond law. And under whatever
modifications the idea of the freedom of the will may be entertained,
it must necessarily be the case that, in so far as it is free and self-


determined, its acts are incapable of prediction; and this, not be-
cause of the complexity of the phenomena, or of our ignorance of
some of the conditions of the problem, but because this element of
self-determination is on that very account beyond the reach of the
method of scientific investigation. I have instanced this merely as
an illustration of the necessary limits of science; which can only
be concerned with phenomena which are themselves determined
by their antecedents, and can therefore, to the extent of our know-
ledge and faculty, be predicted. But I may go on to remark that, in
reality, this question of the freedom of the will is one which, in its
scientific aspect at least, is speculative rather than practical. In
our personal and individual experience we always find our know-
ledge of men’s character and circumstances sufficient to enable us
so far to foresee their conduct in the ordinary transactions of
life, as to form a safe guide to ourselves; and in public affairs,
though prediction is more difficult as to the particular direction
which the popular feeling may take, or the extent to which it may
be embodied in action, yet on looking back we are for the most
part able to trace clearly the nature and the mode of operation of
the causes which have led to any great national movement, and thus
to gather rules for future guidance. More than this, it is not pro-
bable we shall ever be able to do, since the most unbending
advocate of the doctrine of necessity can never expect that he will
be able to bring under any mathematical formula all the various
causes which contribute to determine the will of an individual or
the collective will of a people; and less than this no rational observer
of himself and others can be satisfied to claim. And this being
the case, I confess that it appears to me to be altogether imma-
terial, for the purposes of science, whether we employ the wmid
freedom or the word necessity. If the word necessity is used, its
conception must be enlarged so as to admit the well-nigh infinite
variety and play of motive and of feeling which go to make up
the individual man; and if the word freedom be used, it must be
so understood as to allow that, in fact, the acts of all men are
capable of being predicted just in proportion as we understand
their character and the circumstances in which they will be placed.
No doubt it is the case, that when the particular term, freedom or
necessity, is abstracted from the phenomenii which it represents, and
then made the basis of a train of deductive reasoning, founded upon
the meaning of the term, and not upon those phenomena, very
different results will be arrived at, according to which of the two
terms is employed. This, however, is only a particular instance


of a very general source of error—reasoning upon tlie symbol in
forgetfulness of tbe things symbolized—an error which none can
wholly escape in cases where the symbols used have any meaning
of their own, and which is prevalent in proportion to the force and
vitality of the expressions employed. And as we probably never
shall, and certainly need not wish to, come down to abstract signs
—to the a and h and x and yof the algebraist—we must be content
to remain liable to this error, only endeavouring, by a constant
remembrance of the liability, to escape, as far as possible, its
actual commission.
This is perhaps a digression, but it is so nearly connected with
the topic of this paper, and appears to me so to illustrate some of
the aspects of the question, that I trust it may be pardoned.
Now, this being the idea of law in nature as a subject of science,
and this its ideal limitation, the question arises, is there such a
limitation in fact ? Are there any phenomena in nature which are
really without a natural cause ? Before attempting to give any
answer to this question, it is right that I should explain the sense
in which 1 employ the word cause. I have said that with absolute,
or what has been termed efficient causation, science properly so called
has nothing to do ; but we are nevertheless compelled to use a word
which in the general mind connotes these ideas. But I use the word
here to express the sum of the conditions which determine any
particular phenomenon. These conditions may precede or be co-
incident with the phenomenon, or, as is very frequently the case,
they partly precede and partly coincide with its manifestations, so
that the word antecedents is in many cases inapplicable. To state
the question, then, in somewhat different language, but expressing
the same meaning—are there any phenomena in nature which are
not determined by certain known or knowable conditions ?
In the first place it would seem certain that all phenomena,
however exceptional their origin may be supposed to be, do, in
reality, so soon as they are manifested, take their place in nature,
and at once become part of the network of causation. It would
seem, therefore, to be improbable that they did not originate in
accordance with the laws which, when once manifested, they obey
and harmonize with. To take, for instance, the origin of a new
species. However originating, the individuals of which it is com-
posed are, from the very instant of its existence, subject to all the
natural laws, material and vital. They are nourished in the same
manner; their frame is composed of the same constituents; they are
affected by the same influences and in the same degree; they propa-


gate their like, and they die, in precisely the same manner as those
whose origin is confessedly owing to natural laws. If the first in-
dividual or pair of a species differed in any assignable character
from their successors, if they were differently affected by all or by
any natural laws, there would be a ground in reason for assigning to
them a different origin ; but the very idea of a species according to
the definition of those who argue for its supernatural origin excludes
any such difference, since it implies that the parents beget offspring
which in all essentials and in all specific distinctions resemble
themselves. To infer, therefore, a supernatural cause for what,
tried by any test we can appl}*, appear to be natural effects, would
seem in reality to be only a confession of ignorance ; at any rate
there is nothing in the observed phenomena to warrant any such
inference. All that we see, all of which we can find the trace, tells
the same tale. The phenomena of organization and life manifest
themselves in orderly development and succession according to
definite laws, and nothing affords the faintest indication of that
period of disorder and disorganization which some persons, it may
be surmised mpre devout than intelligent, have assumed as the
necessary proof of the existence of the Supreme Being.—And, in the
second place, it is obvious that if there are such, it is to us, not
merely as men of science but as men of action—men whose business
in this world is emphatically to do, whatever other business we may
have—just the same as though there were not. I have said that if
there are such they are beyond the domain of science—they can
neither be foreseen nor accounted for—no precautions on our part
can avoid—no power can produce them. Hence we must leave
them out of consideration. In fact, the dilemma appears to me to
be inevitable : either events occur according to some law, in which
case we may, in proportion to our knowledge and power, so conform
our conduct to the requirements of that law as to enable us to pro-
cure the advantages which it offers' and to escape the evils which it
threatens; or we must leave them out of our consideration altogether,
excepting in so far as it may be within the scope of our ability to
provide against the inconvenience which their occurrence, whenever
it does take place, may occasion. If we cannot tell whether an event
will happen or not, or whether there is any assignable probability
that it will happen; and if its happening or the reverse can neither
be averted or procured by any act of ours, then we may indeed
attempt to provide against any consequences which in the natural
course of things may follow from its happening ; but otherwise we
must arrange our plan of life and form our theories of nature without


reference to it. Our practical position in this respect would be, for
all time, analogous to that of those who, in the existing state
of knowledge, live in the neighbourhood of a volcano. They
may know that at anv moment an eruption may occur which will
destroy all the fruits of their labours and perhaps their lives; but
they cannot prevent it—they cannot tell how soon or how long
deferred its coming may be, or whether, if it does come, they or
others will be the sufferers. Hence they go on sowing and reaping,
planting and pruning, and gathering in the vantage, building houses
and barns, marrying and giving in marriage, just as though no erup-
tions were to be feared. They may take precautions against any of
the preventible evils which may be produced by the eruption, but
otherwise they live and act as those do who are exposed to no such
dangers. Undoubtedly the idea of the imminence of such an event,
or of any event which can neither be foreseen nor averted, would
have an inevitable tendency, in so far as it was realized, to paralyze
effort, and to destroy that feeling of security which is the encourage-
ment of exertion and the best earnest of success. Happily, how-
ever, the classes of phenomena which can now be regarded as thus
anomalous are few, and they are daily being brought nearer even
in common apprehension to the same conception which we apply to
ordinary events.
There is, however, an ambiguity in the employment of the term
law in reference to this subject which it is important always to bear
in mind, and which it will be well to elucidate. The word
law in fact is in itself misleading, since its primary, cr at at any
rate its ordinary use implies something external to the phenomena
which are to be regulated by it. The term law, however, as applied
to designate what are called laws of nature, is only an explicit
statement of the observed uniformity of relations existing among
the phenomena themselves, and resulting, so far as we can observe,
from the very nature of the phenomena. Certain uniformities of
coincidence or succession are observed, which are summed up in one
general expression, and this general expression is termed the law of
the phenomena. Thus, that all unsupported bodies fall to the ground,
is a law ; but it is obvious that this does not imply any force external
to the phenomena, by which this result is caused; it is merely the
statement in one formula of the observed phenomena. So long as it
remains, however, in this first stage, it is a mere empirical law. When,
however, we go a step farther and say that all unsupported bodies fall
to the ground because they are attracted by the earth, and that they
are attracted bv the earth because all bodies attract each other in


proportion to their mass, this first law ceases to be empirical, be-
cause we are able to deduce it from some mere general law ; but
then the latter law, of which the particular law is the consequence,
must, I imagine, be called an empirical law, unless we can show
that it is the consequence of some law yet more general. But how-
ever wide may be our generalization, and however many particular
uniformities may be included in one general expression, still each
particular law, as well as the general law in which they are all
included, is only an expression or formula which describes the
actual observed relation subsisting between the phenomena which
it embraces.
It thence follows that to talk of a violation of a law of nature, or
an exception to it, is something like a contradiction in terms. Since
the law, or what we terra by that name, is nothing more than a
general expression of the observed relation, if anything occurs
which is really an exception to that expression, it only shows that
the expression does not truly represent the actual facts, and requires
to be corrected. Thus, to take an illustration which has been used
by Professor Kingsley—suppose it to be stated as a law that ail
heavy bodies fall to the ground ; but it is found that I or any one
can catch a stone as it falls and prevent it from reaching the ground :
it is clear that this proves, not that a law of nature is violated, but
that we had not accurately expressed the actual relations of the
phenomena, since our formula did not include the cases in which the
tendency to fall to the ground was counteracted. We have only
then to correct our formula by stating it, that all bodies, unless
supported, will fall to the ground, or that all bodies have a tendency
to fall to the ground, and there is no exception.
It is, however, in moral relations that the ambiguity is most
apparent. There are then, in fact, three senses in which the word
is used—the scientific sense, as explained above ; the sense of a law
imposed by some external authority ; and the sense of the rules
which we deduce from the observed uniformities of nature as guides
to our own conduct. And as the same word is used to express all
of these different conceptions, it constantly happens that the con-
clusions which are proper to the one sense are erroneously trans-
ferred to another. Thus, I have seen it argued by an eminent
modern professor, “ As for laws which work of themselves by an
irresistible movement, how can we discover such in a past in which
every law which we know has been outraged again and again ?” In
the first place, it appears to me that the phrase “ laws which work
of themselves,” whether by an irresistible movement or not, does not


express what is contended for by those who seek to discover a law in
events. At any rate, it does not express my conception of the
subject. I see certain forces in inorganic and in organic nature,
and I see that these operate with a certain uniformity which admits
of their modes of operation being combined into general expres-
sions. These general expressions, in accordance with ordinary
usage, I call laws. But I attribute no inherent or intrinsic power,
nor even any independent existence, to these laws. When I say
that the attraction of two bodies to each other is directly as the
mass and inversely as the square of the distance, I express a law of
nature ; but that law is not the impelling or controlling force ; it is
merely an expression of the mode and condition of action of the
force. And the same is the case with regard to moral or mental
laws, though, from the ambiguities of language, it is less clearly
perceived. When I say that interest is one of the motives by
which men are influenced, I state what is assumed to be a law of
nature; but then this law, so far as it is such, is only an expression
of one manner in which the sum of the forces which exist in
and constitute a human being do actually operate. A law, therefore,
in this sense, is not a force ; it is not self-acting, nor does it con-
stitute or confer an impulse ; it is simply the general expression
which describes the manner in which a given force acts.
It is, however, true that a law of nature as generally stated im-
plies the existence of the force, the mode of whose action it defines.
But though it implies the fact that such a force exists, it does not
express anything as to its nature, excepting in so far as that nature
is implied in or may be conjectured from the mode of its operation.
The scientific expression, therefore, would be, not “ laws which
work of themselves,” but that all forces work according to some
ascertainable method, which method we call the law of the force,
and which we include in the term “ laws of nature.” But
again, when it is said “Every lav/ which we know has been
violated over and over again,” it is obvious that the sense in which
the term law had been used in the former part of the sentence is shifted
in the latter, and it is used either in the sense of rules which men
frame for themselves, or of the law which God has revealed.*' Un-
questionably every rule of morality or prudence, whether deduced
by the human reason or taught by divine revelation, has been “out-
raged again and again ;” but the laws of nature, meaning by that
* This will be clear by just supplying the definition in each case. “As for laws”
(uniformities of relation) “which work of themselves by an irresistible movement, how
are we to discover such, in a past in which every law” (rule of action either commanded
by God or deduced by reason) “which wc know has been outraged again and again ?


the actual relation between phenomena; the manner in which the
human will as a determining; force manifests itself in the various
circumstances of country, race, climate, government, religion; and
the relations between the acts which the human will originates, and
their consequences, have never been interrupted : since all these
alleged violations of moral or prudential rules —all from which they
result and all that they produce—are in reality just the very facts
whose relations of sequence or coincidence we have to comprehend
in certain general expressions, which expressions, when accurately
deduced, will be the law. Thus, the kings of Egypt, in employing
the labour of tens of thousands of men for generations in building
the Pyramids—Solomon, in expending a sum slightly exceeding the
national debt of England in erecting and decorating the Temple of
Jerusalem—the kings of Babylon, in depeopling provinces to fill
the new capital which they had built—in a sense violated the laws
of political economy. So, in the same sense, the vast majority of
wars are violations of the laws of justice and humanity, and all vices
violate the laws of morality, and most of them the laws of prudence—
that is to say, they violate the rules of practice which we should
deduce for the guidance of human conduct from our experience of
the result of certain courses of action. And yet in reality none of
these laws are broken; because, being only expressions of the re-
lations of phenomena, they do, so far as they truly express those
relations, manifest themselves as clearly in these alleged violations
as they do when they are most carefully observed. For, in fact, the
law is not that such and such things will or must be done, but that
whatever things may be done such and such results follow from their
doing. And these results inevitably follow, in so far as we have
accurately expressed the law. And beside this every one of these
acts was itself the result of forces acting in a determinate order.
The conduct of the monarch or of the nation, or, perhaps more ac-
curately, the combined action of the two, resulted from individual
character and surrounding circumstances and influences. However
little we may be able to indulge the expectation of determining the
character or the law of these forces, it can hardly be suggested,
since men were the instruments, that there is any other possible
cause than individual character, and the circumstances of whatever
kind external to the individual by which that character is made to
embody itself in action.
It is only necessary to add to this, that every law truly stated
implies only a tendency, which will be effectual if not counteracted,
but which is liable to counteraction by other forces operating in a


different direction. The forms in which the forces of nature mani-
fest themselves are innumerable, though it may,be that the ultimate
force is one; and every form implies a separate mode of action. The
first laws are those which express these modes of action by them-
selves, making abstraction of everything else; but these laws, though
accurate in so far as they express tendencies, are probably never
absolutely realized in practice: since, although the law for every
form of force bolds good for that so long as it operates by itself the
conjoint action of two or more forms of force is the result not of the
law of action of any one, but of the conjoint effect of the laws of
action of all.
It follows from this that the idea of law in nature implies that all
the forces of nature work according to determinate laws—not by
any means that there is symmetry, or what we might conceive of as
order, in the results. A tree may grow irregularly ; different trees
of the same species, planted at the same time, may grew taller or
more spreading, feebly or vigorously, according to the soil, shelter,
aspect, and other conditions of the place in which they were planted.
But the processes of assimilation —the attraction of carbon from
the atmosphere, and the exhalation of oxygen ; the forces of gravi-
tation, of capillary attraction, and the rest; all of these operate ac-
cording to fixed and invariable laws. The effects which the conjoint
operation of these forces may produce will be modified by the
favouring or counteracting influences of other forces to which the
plant is exposed; but all the forces—those which result from, or which
produce organization, as well as those which act externally to the
organization, operate in a definite method, and with unvarying
regularity. Always, for instance, when a piece of carbonate of lime
is exposed to a certain heat in contact with air containing oxygen,
will a portion of the carbon leave the lime to unite with a portion
of the oxygen ; always will the various elementary bodies combine
chemically in certain definite proportions, and in no other ; always
does living organized matter assimilate, either directly or indirectly,
inorganic substances, forming out of them the same ternary or quater-
nary compounds which go to build up the fabric of the plant or
the animal; always, that is, do the forces of nature act in exact
conformity with the law's which the Author of nature has imposed.
It is, in fact, as inconceivable, in the absence of a disturbing cause,
that two bodies oppositely electrified should not attract each other
when brought into the requisite proximity, or that the opposite
poles of a magnet should not attract, and the corresponding poles
repel, each other, as that the three angles of a triangle should be


equal to more or less than two right angles, or that two and two
should not make four. And although some very ingenious gentlemen,
two at the least, have lately been endeavouring to convince the
world that upon a sufficient amount of evidence we might believe
that two and two did make five, and by inference therefore that
we might believe all the other impossibilities which I have in-
stanced ; yet there is, I imagine, no danger of such a speculation
ever taking the form of practice. When it does it will be a for-
tunate day for those who have to pay, and an unlucky one for those
who receive.
If then we are justified in the assumption that the forces of na-
ture —if in truth there is more than one force, of which heat, elec-
tricity, gravitation, and the rest are specific manifestations —work
according to fixed laws, it is a necessary inference from this that
they have so worked in all time. We cannot upon any ground,
scientific or otherwise, assume that there was a time when these
forces did not exist wherever matter or life existed, or that they acted
in any other manner or according to any other laws than those by
which they are now regulated. And so far as an inference of this
kind is susceptible of proof, we have proof of it in the disclosures
of geology. In the records of the rocks we see the same results of
mechanical and chemical laws the same type of organization
showing that the external nature to which that type was adapted
was essentially the same as at present. The structure of the eye,
for instance, shows that the laws of light were similar; and the
vai ious contrivances adapted to fit the animals of the early world
to walk or to swim or to fly, show that there were air and water
and solid earth. And these facts furnish not merely the only proof
that can be given, but a proof which is abundantly satisfactory,
that into whatever remote depths of the past we may be enabled to
gaze, we shall see there the same orderly working of harmoniously
adjusted laws, the same marks of order, regularity, and design.
It is not, of course, intended by this assertion of the uniformity
of the laws by which natural phenomena are regulated to assert any
uniformity in the phenomena themselves. On the contrary, as-
suming, as some have assumed, upon grounds which have com-
manded the assent of probably a majority of geologists, that the
earth was originally a diffused nebulous mass, and was, when first
condensed, fluid with the liberated heat, and that since then it has
gradually cooled down until it has reached a point at which the
heat received from the sun balances, or nearly balances, that which
is lost by radiation—it is obvious that, though the laws according to


which the natural forces operate have remained identical, yet the
amount and direction of the forces themselves must have greatly
changed. Or, to take another hypothesis not so generally prevalent,
that all the carbon in the earth originally existed in the air, from
which it has been absorbed by vegetation, it is obvious that, although
the laws of vegetable and of animal life were the same, the forms in
which they would be embodied must have been very different in order
that they might be adapted to the different circumstances in which
they were placed. In such a case the manifestations of the forces
of nature would, under some aspects, be more and in others probably
less energetic than they are at present; but the forces would be iden-
tical and the laws which regulated them unchanged. It is often as-
sumed that those who assert the same laws have operated through
all time, have therefore asserted or implied that their manifestations
were uniform. On the contrary, the very identity of the law would
necessitate a change in the amount or character of its effects in pro-
portion as the circumstances were changed in which it operated.
Another, but less certain, inference is that these laws operate
likewise in all space. There is undoubtedly proof that two of the
forces operate so widely as to make it a matter of safe inference
that they operate universally —the forces of gravitation and of light
—and this gives scientific grounds for the conclusion that all the
other forces which have been shown to be wholly or partially
convertible "with, or correlated to them, are at least as extensively
diffused. At any rate, if upon our earth the force of gravitation,
as manifested in a falling body, when arrested is converted into
heat; the same amount of force existing under this new form as has
been stopped in the other; if heat is convertible into light, and if
light, electricity, magnetism, chemical attraction, and vital force,
under certain aspects, touch and pass into each other, there is a
fair ground of inference that when one of these forces is found to
exist the others are also present. An able and ingenious attempt
to show that the laws which regulate the forces of nature on our
globe exist not only in all parts of the solar system, but through-
out the whole stellar universe, and that this is true of the
particular laws by which intelligence and the capacity of moral
and spiritual ideas are, or seem to be, connected with a particular
type of physical organization, which is that of the minority of the
human race, is to be found in a work, not bearing the name, but
known to be the production of Professor Whewell, “The Plurality
of Worlds.” And this attempt is the more noticeable considering
the general views of the author and the object with which that


particular work was composed. The argument of that work consists,
so far as relates to this topic, of statements which appear to show
in a very clear and irrefragable manner, that in fact the capacity
of intellectual progress and of adequate moral and spiritual ideas, is
not merely limited to the human species by virtue of its organization,
but even among mankind is limited to particular races and families,
as must be assumed in consequence of their organization, since other-
wise the argument would lose its point. The author then shows that
this organization is essentially related to the constitution of the world,
to its amount and proportion of heat and cold, to the pressure
exerted by gravitation, to its atmosphere, and to its other conditions.
He then proceeds to indicate the essential difference that exists be-
tween these conditions upon the earth, and upon the other planets of
our system, and in the stars; and from this he argues that such organi-
zation as we find essential to the possession of a power to conceive
worthily of God, and to worship him aright; to receive intellectually
and to embody in action the revelation which God has given; could
not exist in these planets or in the stars, and that as a consequence
the capacities which result from this organization would also be
wanting. And from this he deduces, as a conclusion, that the motive
which has been so often assigned why these worlds should be in-
habited, that their inhabitants might know, and love, and worship
God, is devoid of force, because there is every ground in analogy to
conclude they would not possess the requisite faculties to enable
them to do this. Of course it would be out of my province to enter
into any discussion of the validity of this argument as affecting the
conclusions which the essayist has deduced from it. But it is
relevant to my present subject to remark that he appears to have
confounded uniformity of law with identity of result. In our world
we see that organized beings have existed from times inconceivably
remote ; that they have gradually changed from their original
type in the direction of a greater specialization of organ and
function; and that as the highest and probably the latest organiza-
tion man has appeared: as it would now seem in a low type at the
first, but in one which, as it was capable of the improvement it has
received, we may also conceive to be capable of yet further
elevation; and all this in strict relation to the external
influences of every kind to which they have been subject. Now
we may have from this a right to argue that the human organiza-
tion, and even the higher types of that organization, are, under the
circumstances in which living creatures are placed upon this earth,
a necessary condition to the enjoyment of certain capacities and


faculties; but since we have no experience and no analogy which
can guide us upon the subject, one of the terms being wanting, we
have no right to say that these are necessary in worlds differently con-
stituted. The same laws operate there as here, and we may presume
that they work towards similar results ; but we know that they work
under different conditions and possibly upon differently-arranged or
differently-proportioned materials. But are we, therefore, to con-
ceive that they cannot result in the gradual perfecting of organiza-
tion to as high a degree as has been attained in our earth; this per-
fected organization being as harmoniously adjusted to the size,
gravity, temperature, and composition of each particular world as is
man to the world which forms the place of his habitation ? The
ultimate difference in the composition of the brain and nerve tissues,
and of other bodily tissues, is, as I understand, that in the former there
is a certain proportion of phosphorus Avhich is wanting in the latter.
And I am not aware of any ground for supposing that element to be
absent in Jupiter, or, if it were, for supposing that mind cannot
come into relation with the worlds of matter and of spirit, unless
phosphorus be present in the animal tissue. But though in this
respect I think the essayist has carried his inferences beyond their
legitimate scope, I recognize his philosophical view of the univer-
sality of law ; that it pervades all space as well as all time ; and I
have no doubt that when the particular controversy to which this
essay gave birth has died away, the beneficial effect of these
philosophical conceptions will continue to be felt.
I have thus very imperfectly completed the object of this paper.
I had hoped, when I first thought of the subject, to have treated of
the idea of law in nature under other aspects, and to elaborate more
fully those to which I have referred; still I trust that I have at
least said sufficient to show the general bearings of the subject.
The idea of law in nature implies no knowledge of anything but
the relations which exists between phenomena ; but it implies
that these relations are constant; that all changes are the results of
the forces of nature; and that these forces act according to invariable
laws, which are coextensive with nature in time and in space. If
I have leisure I propose, with your permission, to devote one or two
other papers to particular manifestations of these laws, under the
titles of “ Law in Creation” and “ Law in History,” and then I
hope to be able to read one last paper on “ The Relation of Science
and Theology.”


LAW IN CREATION.
In my former Paper I attempted to show that in nature, so far as
our investigations are able to extend, either in time or in space, we
find everywhere phenomena manifested according to certain definite
laws ; and that this, in fact, is our only conception of nature. In
the present Paper I propose to examine what grounds there may be
for supposing that the maintenance of organic life upon the earth,
and its successive manifestations in the various geological formations
in which we are able to trace its appearance, as well as in the almost
infinite variety of living things by which the earth is now peopled,
can be brought under the same conception. It is, however, right
to state that, though, in the title of this Paper, I have used the word
“ creation,” I have not any intention of suggesting any theory with
regard to the origination of matter or of force. The beginning of
things is altogether beyond the domain of science, as I understand
it. My enquiries refer only to the law, if any can be shown to exist,
of the changes in organized beings, which have occurred since their
first appearance on the earth.
In entering upon the discussion of this question, however, we are
met upon the threshold with objections arising out of the theological
views which prevail in reference to the idea of creation, and which,
if we may judge from the temper in which every theory upon the
subject has been attacked, would seem to render its calm and dispas-
sionate investigation almost impossible. It appears to be assumed
that there is something peculiarly mysterious and sacred in the
origination of species—that it stands apart and isolated from all
phenomena—and that, whatever may be the case with other and
meaner matters, for which the laws of nature may be allowed to
offer a sufficient explanation, here at least nature must be considered
to stop, and something superior to nature must be invoked. The
sun may shine and the winds may blow in obedience to law ; the
thunderstorm and the earthquake may be traced to natural pro-


cesses ; mountains may rise and valleys be excavated, tides may ebb
and flow, the mightiest and the most minute inorganic changes, in-
volving as they do the welfare or the destruction of millions of
organized beings, may occur in accordance with and may be the
necessary result of the laws to which nature is subservient. This
the theologian who knows anything of science will admit. But
the minutest organism that peoples the water, or as a well-nigh in-
visible speck is seen upon the weathered face of a rock, or hastening
the decomposition of what was once a living substance, must, he
insists, have required for the origination of the trivial characters by
which it is distinguished from allied species, a direct supernatural
intervention of the Supreme Being. And he who denies or even
doubts this runs no small risk of being denounced as an atheist.
Happily, however, in this room we may pursue our enquiries without
any fear of being subject to such imputations.
The first notion of creation which certainly most, and probably all,
of those who hear me received, was contained in that version of
the fourth commandment which is given in the Book of Exodus—
“ In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
in them is.” This, taken by itself, was complete and satisfactory.
There was no distinction between organized beings and inorganic
matter —all alike owed their being in their present form to the fiat
of the Almighty, at a date not quite six thousand years ago. With
this view the question of development or of creation by law could
have no meaning ; there was, in fact, no place for any such idea.
But though this continues to be taught in schools, and, I suppose,
also in colleges—for error is often thought to be safer than truth—
it is a view which no person acquainted in any degree, however
slight, with the discoveries of geology during the last half century
continues to hold. It is as certain as any conclusion of reason can
be that the world has existed as the habitation of organized beings
for unknown millions of ages, and that the various species of animals
and plants by which it is now peopled are comparatively of very
recent introduction, though the existence of some of them must be
calculated by probably millions of years. I cannot better illustrate
this part of my subject than by a brief quotation from Professor
Owen’s recent work on Palaeontology; and I quote from him in
preference to other authors whose words I might employ because
he has been an opponent of every proposed theory of development.
“ Palaeontology teaches that the globe allotted to man has re-
volved in its orbit through a period of time so vast that the mind in
its endeavour to realize it is strained by an effort like that by which


it strives to conceive of the space dividing the solar system from the
most distant nebulae.
“ Palaeontology has shown that from the inconceivably remote
period of the deposition of the Cambrian Rocks the earth has been
vivified by the sun’s light and heat, has been fertilized by refreshing
showers and washed by tidal waves—that the ocean not only moved
in orderly oscillation, regulated, as now, by sun and moon, but was
rippled and agitated by winds and storms —that the atmosphere,
besides these movements, was healthily influenced by clouds and
vapours rising, condensing, and falling, in ceaseless circulation.
With these conditions of life, palaeontology demonstrates that life
has been enjoyed during the same countless thousands of years, and
that with life, from the beginning, there has been death. The
earliest testimony of the living thing, whether coral, crust, or shell,
in the oldest fossiliferous rock, is at the same time proof that it died.
At no period does it appear that the gift of life has been monopo-
lized by contemporary individuals through a stagnant sameness of
untold time, but it has been handed down from generation to genera-
tion and successively enjoyed by the countless thousands that con-
stitute the species. Palaeontology further teaches us that not only
the individual but the species perishes—that, as death is balanced
by generation, so extinction has been concomitant with the creative
power which has continued to provide a succession of species ; and
furthermore, that as regards the various forms of life which this
planet has supported, there has been an advance and progress in
the main. Thus we learn that the creative force has not deserted
the earth during any of the epochs of geological time that have suc-
ceeded to the first manifestation of such force, and that in respect
to no one class of animals has the operation of creative force been
limited to one geological epoch ; and perhaps the most important
and significant result of palaeontological research has been the
establishment of the axiom of the continuous operation of the or-
dained becoming of living things.”
These being the facts, the view taken of them by those who
insist upon the supernatural origin of species—or what I might
call the theological view—appears to be that, as soon as, by the slow
operation of natural causes, the world had become fitted for the re-
ception of organic life, the lowest forms of vegetables and of animals
were introduced by a direct supernatural creative act of the Deity.
That, being so introduced they increased and multiplied until, by
some catastrophe—whether the result of natural law or of miracu-
lous interposition is left doubtful, though presumably it must


have been the latter—they were all destroyed. That, after this des-
truction, when the forces of nature had recovered their equilibrium,
another set of animals and plants suited to the new conditions of the
earth was again miraculously created. And that, this process has
been repeated -from time to time until the commencement of the
present order of things; since which period there have been successive
miraculous creations of new species of animals and of plants to take
the place of those species which have successively in the slow pro-
gress of time become extinct, the creation of man being the last of
these. This, so far as I can gather, appears to be the view most in
favour, though it is gradually losing its hold of more advanced
thinkers, and it may have been superseded by some newer views
which have not yet reached me. In any modification which it may
receive, however, the essential idea must remain ; and that is, that,
whether by a gradual decay of vital force in the individuals of which
the species is composed, or by a change of the conditions in which
they are placed, either sudden and catastrophic or gradual and
regular, all extinct species have perished without leaving any pos-
terity; and that, the miraculous intervention of the Creator has been
required, by the creation of new species, either to supply the gap thus
occasioned, or to prevent its being filled up by other surviving
species. This view, in its general results, suggests order and regu-
larity as the rule, both in the inorganic and organic world; all things
going on in accordance with natural laws for thousands or for millions
of years; then, suddenly, a breaking up of the whole system, for some
unexplained and inexplicable reason, and in some incomprehensible
mode; then a period, longer or shorter as the fancy of the individual
speculator may determine, of lawlessness and confusion; and then, the
beginning of a new era of order and regularity in a world of changed
conditions and peopled by new inhabitants organically adapted to the
change. I must say it appears to me that to make this conception
complete it requires the old Persian view of two opposite powers—
Ormuzd ruling during the periods of repose and order, and Ahriman
obtaining the mastery in those of confusion and destruction. To
suggest that the Supreme Being becomes dissatisfied with the result
of his labours and so breaks up the system he has established; or to
suppose that the machinery he has set in motion gets out of gear
and knocks itself to pieces, or becomes worn out with age—and
one of these conceptions appears necessarily involved in the hy-
pothesis I have described—does seem to me to introduce low and
unworthy views of his character and works. The whole view, how-
ever, is thoroughly anthropomorphic. It is the conception of an


artificer, hampered by his materials, who has to make essay after
essay until the elements with which he has to deal grow plastic
under his hands, and he can at length mould them into a form which
adequately embodies his conception. This is not the view of God
which either reason or revelation suggests or sanctions; and that
such a view should ever have been adopted, and especially that it
should have been supposed to save the credit of revelation and to
satisfy the requirements of reason, is a marvel to me ; and none the
less so that I once myself held very similar views.
The history of this theory is, in fact, something like that of the
Ptolemaic theory, which, starting from the assumption of the im-
mobility of the earth in the centre of the system, and accounting for
the movements of the sun and the planets by “ cycle on epicycle,
orb on orb,” grew more and more complicated with every improve-
ment in the means of observation, until Alphonso of Portugal could
say, with the avowed or silent assent of all astronomers, that if God
had consulted him in arranging the motions of the heavenly bodies
he could have shown him a much better way. So here, starting from
the assumption that the origin of species is necessarily a phenomenon
altogether beyond any force or law of nature, either known or un-
known, and therefore one that could only have been produced by a
miracle, the result has been that, to explain the succession of species
from the first manifestation of life upon the earth up to the present
moment, theories more and more complex have required to be in-
vented ; until every idea of order and regularity is lost in the profu-
sion of perpetually recurring miracles, and the conception presented
of the Creator is a good deal more like that of a workman putting his
hand to his work, than that of such a Being as revelation discloses
and reason recognizes.
It must, however, at the same time be admitted that most of the
theories which have been put forth on the other side have been, to
use the mildest terra, of a highly speculative and fanciful character.
The theories of LaMarck and DeMaillet were as little accordant with
observed phenomena, and as little capable of proof, as that theory of
immediate creation which they were invented to supersede; and they
were easily capable of being presented in a ludicrous point of view.
The description of them in the lines of Mr. Hosea Biglow when
he says—
“ That the fears of some monkey whose holt chanced to fail
Drawed his vertebrae out to a prehensile tail,”
is scarcely an exaggeration of some of the processes 'which were
supposed to have been operative in order to bring about the observed


modification of organs and habits in allied classes of animals. And
in the recent work in which the theory of development has been
temperately and ably supported, with many modifications drawn from
more extensive observations of facts, “The Vestiges of Creation,”
there appears to me still to be the same weakness. All of these
various theories, although they shadow forth with more or less com-
pleteness what we may conceive might have been, are deficient
under two aspects —they do not rest upon causes which we can ac-
tually see in operation, or can infer certainly from the analogies of na-
ture ; and they leave unexplained certain classes of facts which any
complete theory is bound to account for. With regard to the former
objection, it is net the rule that a change of circumstances or habits
involves a change of organization; and with regard to the latter,
such phenomena as those of the colour of some insects being adapted
to the colour of the leaves or branches where they are usually found —
the colour of the eggs of some birds being similar to that of the
places where they are deposited —the peculiar organization and
habits of neuter insects, and other analogous facts—are left unac-
counted for. But it should in fairness be remembered that these
defects are no more than we must expect to find in the first attempts
to explain phenomena so complicated and so far beyond the limits
of our ordinary experience as those with which this theory professes
to deal; and that it is the necessary, or at any rate the invariable
course of the human intellect, to attain to a complete and satisfactory
theory upon any subject, only after framing and abandoning many
imperfect and erroneous theories. It might almost be said that we
can only reach truth through the gate of error. And these theories
have answered some important purposes. They have brought under
one general view all the phenomena which they profess to explain —
they have shown to a certain extent the relation and interdependence
of these phenomena; and by their very failures they have pointed to
the path in which a true explanation of the facts is most probably
to be found.
In attempting to form any theory upon the subject the first ques-
tion to be determined is, whether in reality there has been any real
development or progress —whether the -plants and animals of the
present time are of higher classes and more perfectly organized than
those of the earliest times ; and if so, whether that elevation of type
and improvement in organization is such as to point to a gradual
progress from the simplest forms, or merely to an improvement by
the simplifying or specialization of more complex organizations.
These are questions which are far from being settled : but upon the


whole it appears to me that the evidence, both negative and posi-
tive, establishes the conclusion that there has been a progress from
lower to higher classes of beings, and from the more simple to the
more highly organized forms; and that although a part of that
progress has consisted in a specialization of organs, yet that this has
on the whole been accompanied by a gradual elevation of the type,
the lowest organisms standing at one end of the scale and man at
the other. This conclusion is asserted or admitted by almost every
geologist, and by none more decidedly than by those who are opposed
to the doctrine of transmutation of species. That, in the order of
creation, the invertebrate preceded the vertebrate type, and that,
among vertebrates, fishes preceded reptiles, and reptiles mammals,
and that, last of all, man appeared, are conclusions to which all the
evidence points, and in which all, or almost all, enquirers agree.
When, however, the question is raised "whether the same evidence
of progress exists among the various species of which these families
are composed, and still more, whether there is any indication of a
passage from one class to another, there is no longer the same
unanimity. And it is undoubtedly the case that the earliest fishes,
reptiles, and birds, of which we have any remains, are not either of
small dimensions or of the lowest organization. With regard to
fishes, Professor Owen,from whom 1 again quote, says, “A retrospect
of the genetic history of fishes imparts an idea rather of mutation
than of development to which the class has been subject in the course
of geological time.” And again, “It (the present period) repre-
sents rather a period of mutation of the piscine character depending
upon the progressive assumption of a more special piscine type, and
progressive departure from a more general vertebrate type.” “ The
comparative anatomist dissecting a shark, a polypterus, or a lepi-
dosteus, would point to the structures of the brain, heart, generative
organs, and, in the last two genera, to the air-bladder, as being of a
higher or more reptilian character than the corresponding parts
would present in most other fishes. But the palaeontologist would
point to the persistent notochord and to the heterocercai tail in
palaeozoic and many mesozoic fishes as evidence of an ‘ arrest of
development’ or of a retention of embryonic characters in these
primeval fishes.” Again, with regard to reptiles, he says, “ A
retrospect of the foregoing outline of the palaeontology of the class
of reptiles shows that, unlike that of fishes, it is now on the wane,
and that the period when reptiles flourished under the greatest di-
versity of forms with the highest grade of structure and of the most
colossal size is the mesozoic. The progress of air-breathing verte-


brates, graduating by close transitional steps from the water-
breathing class, has been checked, as if it had been unequal to the
exigencies and life capacities of the present state of the planet.
Reptiles have been superseded by air-breathers of a higher type
which cannot be directly derived from the class of fishes. A more
generalized vertebrate structure is illustrated in the extinct reptiles
by the affinities to ganoid fishes shown by the ganocephala, laby-
rinthodontia, and icthyopterygia, by the affinities of pterosauria to
birds, and by the approximation of dinosauria to mammals.” With
regard to birds the evidence is so imperfect that scarcely any general
conclusion can be drawn; but the earliest indication of the existence
of this class of vertebrates, the fossil footmarks found in the sand-
stones of Connecticut, show birds of a size apparently surpassing
any at present known to exist. With regard, consequently, to these
three classes of vertebrate animals, there appears to be no evidence
of any links connecting the earlier forms with any lower organiza-
tion, and these earlier forms are themselves highly organized and
many of great size. From their first appearance there are indica-
tions of change of specific character, which in the fishes has resulted
in the general establishment of true fish-like forms without any
of the reptilian characters found in the palaeozoic fishes, and in the
loss of the embryonic characters by which those palaeozoic fishes
also appear to have been distinguished. In the reptiles there has
also been a similar specialization, the existing reptiles having for
the most part lost the fish, bird, and mammal affinities which the
earliest forms displayed. The evidence, then, which we possess, con-
fining ourselves to these two latter classes for the moment, shows a
change in each in a certain direction, which so far would seem to be
favourable to the idea of transmutation of species—at any rate
within these classes themselves, and possibly also of a transmutation
from the class of fishes to that of reptiles ; but it does not afford any
support to the idea of the derivation of the class of fishes from a
lower class. It does not, however, contradict such an idea, unless
upon the supposition that the evidence is complete, and that the
fishes whose remains we have discovered were the earliest fishes
that existed. With regard to mammals the evidence appears to be,
that the earliest known fossils of this class are found in very early
deposits, and are, so far as they can be identified, of the lowest type ;
then that there are enormous periods of time, and deposits rich in
fossils of various classes, but with no mammalian remains, until we
arrive at the tertiary deposits, where fossils of this order abound,
gradually becoming more and more similar to the existing order of


animals. Taken generally, then, it may perhaps be stated that the
result of the palaeontological evidence shows there is in a certain
sense a progress from the earliest times to the present —that in some
cases, more especially in the invertebrate class, and most noticeably
as we approach the existing order of things, where the evidence is
more continuous and perfect, species appear to pass into each other
by almost insensible gradations, but that this seeming continuity is
frequently interrupted, and that there are intervals between the
various classes which contradict the theory of transmutation, if we
can assume that there are no missing links which might, if pre-
served, have filled up the gap.
It is, of course, essential to any theory which can be received as
sufficient that it shall not be contradicted by the evidence. The
evidence may not in the first instance completely establish the
theory—it may not in some cases ever prove sufficient to do so, be-
cause the evidence itself may be hopelessly defective. And there
may even be facts which the theory is inadequate to explain, without
destroying its claim to be received, conditionally, or even absolutely.
As, for instance, the theory of gravitation was insufficient to explain
the perturbations of the planet Uranus until the discovery of the
planet Neptune; and Kepler’s laws to explain the observed differences
in theperiod of the occultation of Jupiter’s satellites, according as they
were nearer or more distant from the earth, until the velocity of light
was admitted and determined. Nevertheless, these theories were
accepted, and astronomers addressed themselves to the work of
discovering the cause of the seeming exceptions. And so, in any
theory that may be framed in order to account for the origin of
species, it is no valid objection to its soundness that there are ap-
parent exceptions and anomalies which it fails to explain, though it
would be a conclusive objection if there were any facts by which it
was directly contradicted. If, for instance, to refer to a work which
is probably well known to all of you, there was proof that the gi-
gantic asterolepis, discovered by the late Hugh Miller in the Caith-
ness Sandstones, and so graphically described by him in his “ Foot-
prints of the Creator,” was the earliest fish that ever existed, as it
is one of the oldest fishes of which any trace has been found; and if
there were no invertebrate animals which approached nearer to it
than those whose remains have been discovered; such a fact would,
as it seems to me, directly contradict and be fatal to any theory of
development or transmutation. But the fact that this organism is
the oldest fossil vertebrate discovered, in our profound ignorance of
the innumerable organisms which peopled the palaeozoic seas prior


to and contemporaneous with the deposit of the old red sandstone,
almost the only trace of which is found in those Caithness Sand-
stones, of itself proves nothing against any theory. It only leaves
the application of the theory imperfect so far as these animals are
concerned, inasmuch as it is impossible to show whether or in what
manner their origination conformed to the theory.
Assuming, then, what no one will now deny, that the materials
of evidence are incomplete; that, whatever theory we may adopt, its
application must inevitably be in a great measure conjectural; the
questions for our decision are, first, what is the apparent bearing of
the evidence so far as we can trace it—and second, is there anything,
in the nature of the case or in the seeming exceptions, which should
prevent us from adopting this apparent conclusion as true ? Before
attempting an answer to these questions there are, however, certain
general considerations which ft is necessary to bear in mind.
In the first place, then, birth and death, extinction and repro-
duction, are correlative, and in the order of nature supplement and
indeed almost imply each other. The causes which produce one set
of phenomena are therefore presumably sufficient to account for the
other. If the death of individuals results from the laws of nature,
so also we may presume will their birth ; if the extinction of species
is due to natural causes, so we may presume is their origination.
Throughout the past the two processes have gone on together, both
with regard to individuals and to species ; and they appear at all
times to have balanced each other, so that on the whole there has
been neither excess nor deficiency. Their conjoint operation has
been, moreover, a necessary condition of the progressive elevation
of the type of organized beings. As, therefore, we know from
our own recent experience that natural causes will produce the ex-
tinction of species, there is a strong antecedent presumption that
natural causes may also produce their origination. In fact, to deny
this is, by an almost necessary implication, to assert that the world
is so arranged as that natural causes produce supernatural conse-
quences. The occasion in nature for the origination of a new
species is that there is a place for it, either by reason of its greater
fitness for its new position, or by reason of the diminution or ex-
tinction of some other species, and this is unquestionably a natural
cause. To assert, then, that the production of a new species, which
is produced because there is this place for it, and would not be pro-
duced, for it could not exist, otherwise, is in effect to attribute
supernatural effects to natural causes.
And, in the second place, the general, if not the universal, rule is


that there is now no origination of the vital force. Excepting with
the most elementary forms, if even they are to be excepted, it ap-
pears now to be established, or at any rate it is the almost universal
opinion of naturalists, that there is no such thing as spontaneous
generation —that the whole organic life of the globe, in all its com-
plexity and profusion, is a continuation of former life without any
interruption or break. Myriads of germs possessing vital force are
never developed—myriads of living beings in every generation die
without reproducing their species; but organic life is always the con-
tinuation of previously-existing life. The life of the offspring is a
prolongation of the life of the parents —the germ developing itself
according to definite laws, so as in its full growth to be specifically
identical with the parent, though individually distinct, and within
certain limits different. Whatever doubts may rest upon other
questions connected with this subject, upon this there is none —that
organic life, in all but the most elementary forms, is but the mani-
festation in new elements of the same life which before existed.
There can be no break in this chain. If a seed die, it rots and
nothing springs from it. *ln order to the growth of the plant it is
essential that the vitality of the germ remain unimpaired; and then,
by some power, which in our ignorance of its nature we call the
vital force, and by some process, which as yet we are unable to ex-
plain, it attracts from the surrounding inorganic elements the mate-
rials for building up a perfect plant. Now this fact, which is most
strongly insisted upon by the opponents of all theories of develop-
ment or transmutation, appears to me at any rate to involve a very
strong argument against their theory of the origination of species
in some unexplained manner, but not in the course of ordinary
generation. For, assuming, as they assert, that all new species are
formed independently; either by infusing life into some newly-formed
germ which shall develop itself into mature and complete being by
assimilating from the surrounding elements the necessary materials;
or else by shaping those elements at once into the perfect form of
the new animal or plant—and it must be presumed that one or the
other of these methods is intended—then spontaneous genera-
tion is just what we should have a right to expect; and in the con-
ditions of the globe, changing as they are in every locality from
year to year, we should always be on the watch to detect these new
manifestations of creative power. From the earliest ages of which
the crust of the earth presents a record, down to the present time,
there has been a change in the two directions of extinction and
renovation—species dying out, and their places being supplied by


new species; and as at the present moment the process of extinction
of species is going on, we have a right to presume that the cor-
responding process of the origination of new species is going on too.
If, therefore, this origination is not in the way of ordinary genera-
tion, to us it must necessarily appear as spontaneous generation.
It would consequently be wise in the opponents of the idea that
species can be originated as a result of the ordinary laws which
regulate the succession of organized beings, to re-examine their ob-
jections to the theory of spontaneous generation, and to consider
whether, by their opposition to that theory, they may not have de-
prived themselves of opportunities of seeing the actual manifestation
of that miraculous creative energy in which they believe.
It may, no doubt, be said that there is yet a third method. The
animal or plant might be created in the theological sense—that is,
formed out of nothing; the very elements of which it is composed
might be called into existence; and the being thus miraculously origi-
nated might be placed upon the earth, perfect in organization, with
matured instincts and powers, supematurally implanted and directed.
And this appears to be the view of the learned author of the Eclipse
of Faith, at least with regard to man. But even in this case, since
it would be necessary, in order that the being thus created should
be nurtured, and live, and propagate its species, that the elements
of which it is composed—the carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
phosphorus, iron, sulphur, and the rest —should be absolutely the
same in their nature and properties with those which already ex-
isted, so that the most minute chemical analysis should fail to detect
the slightest difference, there would be no possibility of verifying
this supposed method of origination, and, to the spectator who wit-
nessed the phenomenon, it would still, if he could believe his eyes,
be no more than an apparent case of spontaneous generation. Whether
it be a germ into which a new principle of vitality is infused, and to
which a new form of development is given ; or whether the inorganic
elements suddenly flash into the organized tissues which constitute
the perfect form; or whether the very substances of which these
organized tissues are formed are contemporaneously called into
existence, to our observation and to our understanding there is and
can be nothing but the appearance of spontaneous generation.
Undoubtedly, however, there are considerations connected with
the idea of spontaneous generation which account for the disfavour
in which it is held by the opponents of the idea of the transmuta-
tion of species. For, inasmuch as this spontaneous generation would
be nothing more than the apparent evolution of the vital force by


the union or combination of certain elementary substances, in no way
to be distinguished from the evolution of the electrical force, or of
chemical forces, from similar unions and combinations ; nothing to
the common apprehension would more tend to connect the idea of
life with the idea of law than such an occurrence. And however
miraculous the occurrence in fact might be, there would be no pos-
sibility of the most eloquent theologian, or the most acute controver-
sialist, proving upon scientific grounds its supernatural character.
We may, however, for the purposes of the present discussion, assume,
as a fact resting upon all the evidence which in the nature of the
case it is possible to bring to bear upon the subject, that at any rate,
excepting in the case of the most simple and elementary organism,
spontaneous generation does not exist. Every living thing has sprung
from a parent by the process of ordinary generation. And, upon the
other hand, it is an admitted fact that generally, if not universally,
species remain constant for many thousands of years ; that no case
of the passage of one species into another has ever been verified ;
and that the divergencies between known species are in very many
instances so great as to negative the idea that they can have passed
one into the other without having also passed through transitional
stages of which no traces can be found. On each side there are
unquestionable and admitted difficulties. The question, then, is
whether it is more probable that, we will say, the first pair of
elephants was produced by ordinary generation from parents dif-
fering slightly from themselves, who had themselves been similarly
produced; or whether they were the outgrowth of germs inde-
pendently originated, and miraculously developed into the form of
an elephant, by a process of assimilation which we not only do not
know but cannot even by any process of imagination represent to
ourselves; or whether the various elements of which their bodies
were composed were suddenly brought together from the surrounding
earth and air and plants and water, and formed into the complete
forms of a male and female elephant, into which forms life was mi-
raculously infused, and which were also at the same time and by the
same miracle endowed with all the instincts necessary for their own
preservation and the propagation of the species. Tried by the test
of reason, and by their conformity to the laws of nature, which are
to us the expression of the Divine plan, there can be no doubt that
the first of these suppositions is the most probable—nay, is the only
one conceivable. There may be difficulties in the way of any theory
that may be framed to account for the precise mode in which the
species of elephants has originated—how the specific differences by


which that species is characterized and defined could have been
produced, and how, being produced, they could have remained so
permanent; but these difficulties, great as they undoubtedly are,
almost disappear by the side of those by which either of the other
theories or any that can be substituted in their place is surrounded.
It may, no doubt, be said that the cases are different—that in the
one case, when we undertake to explain and account for the pheno-
mena, the theories which we frame for this purpose are properly
amenable to reason and must satisfy the conditions of science ; but
that when reason is confessedly abandoned, and science pronounced
incompetent either as a clue or as a test, and when it thus becomes
necessary to invoke the direct supernatural interposition of the
Deity, we have no right to subject the mode of his operation to
criticism upon rational or scientific grounds. Ido not enquire how
far this objection may be well founded in principle, but it is obvious
that it proceeds upon the assumption that the supernatural character
of the phenomenon is demonstrated, at least negatively by the ex-
clusion of every other hypothesis ; while, in fact, that is the very
question at issue. And, until this demonstration is furnished, we of
course are entitled to examine the apparent appropriateness and
adequacy of the processes which it is proposed, or which it is pos-
sible, to substitute for those which we have suggested.
But, to revert for a moment to the case of the elephant, there is a
further difficulty suggested by his peculiar organization. In his
massive foot, enclosed in one continuous integument, and combined
together into a solid mass, there is the same number of separate
bones, occupying the same relative positions, as in the human hand.
How or why this should have occurred on the theory of supernatural
creation, no one has ever suggested, excepting upon the anthropo-
morphic idea that the Creator has, throughout the wdiole animal
kingdom, designedly limited himself to a certain type, and has, if I
may venture to employ the phrase, shown his skill and ingenuity
by the innumerable modifications of that type which adapt it more
or less perfectly to the circumstances of the particular animal: thus
accomplishing indirectly what might otherwise have been accom-
plished directly —imperfectly what might have been accomplished
completely, and even creating useless appendages and rudimentary
structures, such as, for instance, the abortive teeth in the young
whale, for no other purpose than to preserve this unity of type.
That this unity of type does exist is no doubt incontestable, as
well as that it has existed from all time. In the past, as well as in
the present, there is nothing at variance with this plan. Whatever


discoveries may have been made, and however widely the forms dis-
covered may depart from those with which we are familiar, they are
all part of the same system, and take their place in the series—
generally tending to bridge over the intervals which were previously
supposed to exist between known forms. As it has been said, we
never come upon a fossil centaur or a palaeozoic mermaid. Every
new discovery in fact only tends to bring into greater union and
harmony the existing forms, and to demonstrate yet more com-
pletely the unity of plan which pervades all nature. The only
question here is, what inference are we entitled to draw from its
universality and permanence ? It is scarcely necessary to say that
this unity of plan, at any rate, becomes intelligible on the supposition
that all species are connected through the medium of a common an-
cestry, if it does not even furnish a presumption in favour of that
conclusion. It is a fact eminently consistent with such an idea, as
taken by itself it may be supposed to be also consistent with the
opposite idea of direct creation, all forms having their origin in the
same creative mind. But while on a general view this observed
unity is consistent with the latter conception, the manner in which
it is carried out is full of difficulties. When, for instance, the same
bones in the same relative positions are found in the hand of man,
the “ trowel” of a mole, the paddle of a whale, and the hoof of an
elephant—when the same multiplied points of ossification in the skull
of the human foetus which are so useful in parturition are also
found in similar order “ in the skull of the embryo kangaroo which
is born when an inch in length, and in that of the callow bird which
breaks the brittle egg,” these facts, which are significant on the one
supposition are meaningless and unintelligible on the other; and
these, though among the most striking, are only an insignificant
fraction of the vast number of similar instances.
Another fact which points in the same direction is the existence
of what have been termed specific centres of creation. It is well
known that whenever any two tracts of land, whether large or small,
are entirely separated from each other, then whatever may be the
analogy of soil, climate, and natural conditions, there is almost always
an absence of specific identity between the animal and vegetable forms
found in the one and in the other, while at the same time there is
a strong general resemblance between them. Thus, in the temperate
regions of Europe, of Asia, and of North America there is a striking
resemblance in the general aspect of the flora and fauna, while
there are comparatively very few plants or animals specifically
the same. And, in connection with this, there is the additional


circumstance that, in small islands, the plants and animals found
there generally resemble those which are found in the nearest con-
tinent, though they differ specifically. Nor can it now be said, as
once used to be said, that there is such a relation between the or-
ganisms found in any country, and its conditions of soil, climate,
and temperature, as that they are better adapted the one to the
other, than without these specific differences could have been the
case. For it has been found that both plants and animals, when
introduced by the agency of man into a new country, and there left
to themselves, have spread themselves over the face of the land to
the exclusion and consequent destruction of the native races ; thus
proving themselves better adapted to their new home than species
which upon this theory were created specially for it; and even some-
times showing that their new home was better adapted to themselves
than that from which they had been transplanted, and where they
were first found.
There are two other general facts pointing to the same general
conclusion to which I may advert, merely mentioning them. The
one is the existence of apparent imperfections in organizations,
which may be illustrated, to select one instance only, by the circum-
stance that the bee loses its sting and so its life when it uses it;
and the other is the manner in which animals are adapted to habits
of life apparently at variance with their organization, as in the case
of the water ouzel; or in which the purposes of the organization
appear to be missed, as in the case of the musk duck of the Murray,
which, though having wings, is unable to fly, and only uses them
to paddle itself along more quickly. All of these are inexplicable
on the theory of specific acts of creation, but they are capable of
explanation on the hypothesis, which they all in their turn tend to
support, of the transmutation of species.
It may be said in answer to these last suggestions that it is
nothing uncommon in nature to find phenomena for which we are
unable to account, and that imperfection is the universal attribute
of finite beings. I admit this, and I admit also that it would be
an unusual and, so to speak, a suspicious circumstance if anything
were found not having these marks of obscurity and incomplete-
ness. The analogy of nature leads us necessarily to anticipate their
existence ; but, if any opponent of the theory of creation according
to law refers to the analogy of nature and relies upon it, he must be
content to be bound by the witness to which he has appealed. And
that gives no support to his view. On the contrary, we see every-
where in nature general laws operating; working, as we believe, on


the whole, for the general good, but causing in their influence much
individual suffering—everywhere we see evidences of the highest
wisdom as shown in the establishment and maintenance of perma-
nent order and regularity; but we look in vain for any marks of in-
terruption or violation of those laws or of that order. Everywhere
we see natural causes working to the accomplishment of the Divine
purposes; nowhere do we find anything to show us that those
ordained causes are inadequate, or that they require special inter-
positions to prevent their failure. The analogy of nature leads us,
therefore, irresistibly to the conclusion that whatever we see around
us owes its origin to the same laws to which obviously it owes its
preservation ; and there is nothing in nature, whatever there may
be in the regions of speculation or of sentiment, to lead to any other
conclusion.
I had intended to have said something in detail of the theory of
Mr. Darwin, which, though confessedly incomplete, at any rate
offers a solution of the problem of the origin of species strictly in
accordance with what we know from experience, and can infer from
analogy, of the operations of nature : but I find that I have not left
myself space for the purpose. His theory is based upon the ob-
served fact that in all, or almost all, organizations there is a tendency
to slight variation, and that, by taking advantage of this tendency
and selecting for breeding those animals which vary in any par-
ticular direction, we are able to accumulate these variations and to
cause in the course of a comparatively few generations very percep-
tible differences of structure and habit. And from this, taken in
connection with the constant struggle for existence among indi-
viduals of the same and of different species, arising from the cir-
cumstance that in general only a fraction of those who are born can
live and propagate their kind, he argues that in the battle of life
any variation, however slight, which gives any individual an ad-
vantage, will tend to the preservation of that individual, and to his
having offspring, some of whom at least, on the principle of the
hereditary transmission of individual peculiarities, would partake
of the peculiarity of their progenitor, possibly in a greater degree,
and would thus be more likely to survive and to bear offspring re-
sembling themselves in the characters to which their own preser-
vation was owing. And in this manner, time being allowed, he
assumes that any amount of deviation from the original species is
capable of explanation. Stated in this general manner, there is
nothing in the theory which is not within the limits of a sound
analogy ; but whether, when applied to the facts, it will suffice for


their explanation, is an altogether different question, and one upon
which it would be premature to pronounce confidently. But at any
rate it has the merit of proposing a vera causa , something that we
know to exist, and whose operations we are, within certain limits,
able to trace ; and in the sketch of his theory which Mr. Darwin
has published, he has accumulated an immense amount of facts, of
many of which I have already availed myself, which tend to show
that at any rate this principle has the merit of offering a probable so-
lution of the question. And although his theory, from the extent to
which it runs counter to cherished prepossessions, is certain to excite
strenuous opposition, I have no doubt that it will be ultimately
recognized as having commenced a new era ; and that it will be
conceded to Mr. Darwin that if he has not himself effectually solved
the problem, yet that he has opened up the true way to its ultimate
solution.
There is one objection to this theory as developed by Mr. Darwin
proceeding from the pen of Sir John Herschel, to which, however,
I may before concluding briefly advert, because it is a type of much
that has been written against the theory, and of more that has silently
operated to prevent its reception. Sir John says, “we can no more
accept the principle of arbitrary and casual variation and natural
selection as a sufficient account per se of the past and present
organic world, than we can receive the Laputan method of
composing books (pushed a Voutrance ) as a sufficient one of
Shakspeare and the Principia. Equally in either case an intel-
ligence guided by a purpose must be continually in action to
bias the direction of the steps of change—to regulate their
amount—to limit their divergence—and to continue them in a
definite course. We do not believe that Mr. Darwin means to deny
the necessity of such intelligent direction. But it does not, so far
as we can see, enter into the formula of his law, and without it we
are unable to conceive how the law can have led to the results.’ 1
So far Sir John, and there is no doubt that he expresses the senti-
ments of very many persons, though I confess there is scarcely any
person from whom I should not have been less surprised to hear
such sentiments than from him. This objection seems to me to
ignore all that has been accomplished, in no small degree by his own
labours, to show how the laws which the Creator has impressed
upon matter are sufficient of themselves, and enable us to dispense
with the imaginary vortices of Descartes, or the angelic intelligences
of Kepler, that kept the planets spinning on their axis. It leaves
out of consideration what Bishop Butler had said of the superior


evidences of wisdom and power furnished by a law which executes
itself, as contrasted with one which requires the perpetual inter-
vention of the Lawgiver in order that it may be executed. And, in
reference to the special subject, it forgets that, inasmuch as this law
of variation can only work in so far as it tends to give to the indi-
vidual some advantage which otherwise he would not have pos-
sessed, it has within itself the necessary guide and check. The
theory assumes that variations, hurtful as well as beneficial, may
occur, and perhaps with equal frequency ; but that only those which
are advantageous to their possessors have any tendency to per-
petuate themselves ; while those which are injurious have a direct
tendency to prevent their own perpetuation; inasmuch as they place
the individuals in whom they occur at a disadvantage in the struggle
for life, and so on the whole ensure that they shall not survive or
propagate their species. This law, then, if established, does not
require that an intelligence guided by a purpose should be con-
tinually in action to bias the directions of the steps of change, for
the intelligence which has established the law has rendered it self-
executing and self-regulating. And this surely gives us a higher
conception of the Divine wisdom and power than a system which
was so imperfect as to need perpetual interference and adjustment.
Once it was thought that the planetary perturbations were such as
to threaten the system with ruin, unless the Creator should interfere
to restore order; and there were not a few who looked upon this as
one of the proofs of the existence of a Deity. But now that we know
that God has made these worlds fast for ever and ever—that he has
given them a law which cannot be broken—that by this law they
will, so far as our foresight extends, continue harmoniously in their
courses for all time—have we not a higher and a worthier concep-
tion of his wisdom, and even a more convincing proof of his ex-
istence, than could be derived from any fancied imperfection in his
plans, because that imperfection might, to our limited view, appear
to require his personal interposition ? The highest evidence of the
wisdom, and the most adequate, or I would rather say the least in-
adequate, idea of the character of God, appear to me to be derived
from the contemplation of all things, whether inorganic, vital, mental,
or spiritual, working together, obscurely perhaps but unerringly,
towards the accomplishment of results which he has preordained*
in obedience to laws which he has established.


LAW IN HISTORY.
The idea of Law in History implies little more than the application
to communities of the conception involved in the familiar phrases
which we so frequently employ in speaking of individuals—“ one
would not have expected it of him,” and, “ what else could he
expect?” It implies that the conduct of nations, no less than that
of individuals, and just because nations are made up of individuals,
is the result of the character and circumstances of the nation ; and
that its destiny is, to a certain noticeable extent, the result of its
conduct. It however implies, further, that the character and circum-
stances of the nation are themselves the orderly result of something
that has gone before, which has made them what they are ; and
that, whatever may affect its destiny, not as the direct result of its
own character and conduct, must either result from physical causes,
which again result from the operation of physical laws, or from the
contact of other nations, whose conduet towards it is in the same
manner determined by their own circumstances and character. But
in all these respects the idea of natural laws as applied to nations
resembles, in its essential particulars, the conception which we form
with regard to individuals. And it is so much a matter of common
experience that the conduct of any individual is determined, first, by
what he is in himself, and secondly, by the circumstances in which
he is placed and the motives which arise out of those circumstances;
and that, just in proportion as we are acquainted with these, we
should be able to anticipate what he will feel and do in any par-
ticular conjuncture; that few would experience any difficulty in
extending the conclusion which is thus found applicable to indi-
viduals to the case of nations. The object, then, of the present
Paper will be, first, to enquire whether a general survey of the
observed facts of history supports this first impression, and what
are the elements of the law thus deduced.
The first general conclusion, which springs from the most ele-


mentary acquaintance with history, is that, among what we call
civilized nations, there has been, on the whole, a progress in all
subjects —material, mental, and moral; and that this progress has
resulted from the circumstance that, as a rule, each generation has
been enabled to avail itself of the experience of those which have
gone before; and to make the acquisitions and discoveries of its pre-
decessors the starting point for new discoveries and gains. No
doubt there have been numerous and signal exceptions to this.
Wars and despotisms have not only at all times checked progress,
but they have sometimes even thrown nations back to a condition
of barbarism in which they have lost the knowledge which their
ancestors possessed, and have almost forgotten its existence. But
these are the exceptions ; and in spite of these the human race has
continued to advance. This is so obvious that it is unnecessary to
attempt to prove it, and scarcely necessary to give any instance by
way of illustration. A railway train with its engine and carriages,
as compared with the carriages, or rather cars, which are figured
on the monuments of Thebes or Nineveh ; and these latter as con-
trasted with the entirely primitive and, I presume, patriarchal
methods of locomotion employed by the natives of this land ; or the
gas lights which in almost all the large towns of the civilized world
render the streets as passable by night as by day, and the moderator,
argand, paraffin, kerosine, and other lamps for domestic use, as com-
pared with the torches and lamps of Egypt and Assyria, or of Greece
or Rome ; as these latter, with the absence of all means of artificial
illumination among our natives, whom we may perhaps take as types
of the primitive man—not indeed in colour or in organization, but
in knowledge— may be referred to for the purpose of illustrating
the reality and the extent of this progress in the material elements
of civilization. And it is also obvious that, in the very nature of
things, this progress implies that every successive step is contingent
upon those which have preceded it. The knowledge of any given
fact is the necessary condition for the acquisition of the knowledge of
all other facts dependent upon it—the possession of an instrument is
the necessary condition for the execution of all the works which,
without that instrument, could not have been accomplished. Thus,
the knowledge of the properties of fire in smelting metals, and in
reducing them into such a form as that tools could be manufactured
from them, necessarily preceded the formation of those tools ; and
the possession of those metal tools was a pre-requisite to the erection
of temples and palaces, the construction of ships, the making of
armour and weapons, and, in fact, for the accomplishment of all the


■various purposes to which these tools were devoted. Under this
aspect, therefore, the development of humanity must have been, as
it must continue to be, progressive. And it may be added, that the
first steps of that progress must have been almost inconceivably
slow. Let any one compare, for instance, the mode of melting and
forging iron at the present moment in use among the natives of India,
with that which is shown to have been in use in Egypt, certainly
some three thousand years ago, and observe the little improvement
which has been made in that long interval, and he will then be able
to form some estimate of the smallest period necessary in order that
the art of metallurgy should have been raised to that rude stage,
even after the possibility of fusing and employing metals had
been discovered. And, if we may judge by analogy, the period
which must have elapsed before that discovery must have been even
yet more extended; since it would seem inevitable that the first
stages of invention, unguided by theory, and unaided by the imple-
ments which invention itself creates, must have been the slowest
and longest.
With regard to the mental progress of mankind it may be
sufficient to adduce by’ way of illustration the differential calculus
as compared with the arithmetical methods known even to the
most advanced of the Greek mathematicians, and this with the
primitive method of counting by the fingers and toes ; or, better
still, we may refer to the general amount of knowledge, diffused
through the majority of the inhabitants of every civilized country,
as contrasted with the inevitable ignorance of the peoples of an-
tiquity, upon all subjects excepting those of a directly practical
character, and, even upon these, outside of the class which needed to
employ the knowledge in practice. And, with regard to the moral
progress, it is sufficient to refer to the wide difference between such
conceptions of the character of the Supreme Being as are involved
in the phrases “ Jehovah smelled a sweet savour,” “ Jehovah rested
and was refreshed,” “ It repented Jehovah that he had made man,”
and those which are conveyed by the words “ God is a spirit,”
“In him there is no variableness nor the shadow of turning/’
“Jehovah, the maker of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither
is weary;” or, under another aspect, to contrast the idea of the
Divine government involved in the account of the slaughter of all
the first-born of Egypt to punish the obstinacy of their king, the
command to exterminate the people of Canaan, and the sacrifice of
the grand-children of Saul to stay a famine, with those implied in
the phrase “ God willeth not the death of the sinner, but rather


that he should turn from his wickedness and live,” or thi*, “ He bath
showed thee, oh man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require
of thee but to do justice and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God ?” or this, “ Suppose ye that those upon whom the tower
of Siloam fell were guilty above all who dwelt in Jerusalem”—in
order to see how great is the progress under this aspect. And, as
the conceptions which men actually form of the Being whom they
worship, however those conceptions may have originated, or from
whatever source they may have been derived, constitute the ideal
to which they, for the most part, seek, consciously or unconsciously,
to conform their own life, and the test by which character and con-
duct are tried; this progress in the ideas formed of the Divine
character forms a standard by which we may approximately estimate
the moral progress of man. And this is the more noticeable when
we remember by how wide an interval even the earliest of these
conceptions, involving, as they did, the idea of the Unity of God,
and that he is the moral Governor of the world, were separated from
the fetichism and polytheism of the surrounding nations, and from
the degrading idolatry and shameless practices with which this
fetichism and polytheism were associated.
And not merely do we thus find proofs of a progress of our race
under these aspects; and all progress implies causes, and suggests
laws, according to which those causes operate; but we are also able
to trace, to a certain extent, the causes of the growth and decay of
empires and of states, and to see in what manner and by what in-
fluences this general progress has been interrupted, and sometimes
apparently changed into a retrograde movement; often by the very
means employed for the purpose of accelerating or securing its
advance. It is not necessary for the purposes of this Paper, nor
would it indeed be possible within the limits to which I must con-
fine myself, to illustrate this branch of the subject at any length.
It is sufficient to say, wffiat the recollection of all will confirm, that,
in precise proportion as we are acquainted with the details of the
history of any people, we are enabled to trace the various phases of
growth and decay, of prosperity and suffering, to intelligible and
ascertainable causes, and to see how the laws of human nature and
the influence of circumstances have asserted themselves against the
most skilfully-planned attempts or the most elaborate policy. Illus-
trations from ancient history might be found in the early vigour, the
uniformly succeeding corruption, and the rapid fall of the Empires
of the East; in the brilliant but brief career of the Greek Republics ;
and in the slow" grow'th, the long vigorous maturity, the gradual


decay, and the ultimate dissolution of the Roman Empire ; but all of
these would require more detailed explanations than my time will
allow me to afford. I will, therefore, select only one illustration,
which I will take from the Jewish history, and which has appeared
to me to he one of the most striking instances of the influence of
circumstances as prevailing over, at once, the intentions of those who
originated the movement, and the feelings and wishes of those who
were the agents in its accomplishment. I refer to the causes
which led to the establishment of the kingdom of Israel as a separate
kingdom, and the consequences of that separation.
There can, I imagine, be no doubt that Ahijah in anointing
Jeroboam, and in thus preparing the way for the revolt of the
ten tribes against the successor of Solomon, had in view the
establishment of a kingdom, in which the pure worship of Jehovah
should be maintained. The idolatry of Solomon—his introduc-
tion, or public sanction, of the worship of strange gods, had
been the causes why the kingdom that his father had founded,
or rather consolidated, w T as to be broken up ; and it might
naturally be supposed, and was no doubt confidently anticipated,
that, with such an example before him, the man wdio was selected
by the prophet of Jehovah, speaking in his name, to rule over
the separated people, would have established and maintained a
pure worship ; which his successors would have preserved as their
best inheritance and their surest safeguard. We may, moreover,
reasonably presume that Jeroboam himself was known as a sincere
worshipper of Jehovah, and as one who had, privately at least, pro-
tested against the melancholy defection of Solomon from the faith
of his youth and his early manhood. And yet, no sooner was the
revolt successful, no sooner was the separation of the ten tribes
completed and the kingdom of Israel established, than the inevitable
jealousy of the ruler and of his people against the metropolis of the
old kingdom ; the jealousy of the priests of the high places against
the priests of the temple ; and the anticipations of the new king and
of his advisers of the probable consequences of allowing his subjects
to go up year by year to worship in the temple; thus bringing them
under the influence of associations connected with the line of
David and the supremacy of Jerusalem, prevailed over every other
feeling: and Jeroboam set up, with the cordial acquiescence of the
whole separated nation, the golden calves at Bethel and at Dan,
and presented them to his people as representatives of the Elohim
who brought them up from the land of Egypt. Nor was this feeling
confined to him; for when, at a later period, under Ahab, the wor-


ship of the sanguinary and obscene deities of the Phoenicians was
introduced, and the struggle between the servants of Jehovah and
the partizans of the idolatrous worship culminated in the massacre
of the priests of Baal in the deep clefts of the Kishon, and in the
anointing of Jehu to be king of Israel; the latter, although receiving
his commission from a prophet of Jehovah, and although he quenched
the fires of the altars of Baal in the blood of their priests, and des-
troyed or suppressed every manifestation of foreign idolatry, was
impelled by the same motives or coerced by the same influences
that operated upon Jeroboam, to maintain the worship which
Jeroboam had established. And thus the result of a measure which
had for its object to found a kingdom dependent upon Jehovah, and
in which Jehovah should be peculiarly worshipped, led to the almost
entire apostacy of the majority of the Jewish people, and to their
ultimate absorption into the population of the kingdoms into which
they were carried captive. And this happened as the natural result
of the instinct of self-preservation, the feelings of national and
priestly rivalry, and the dictates of policy, necessarily springing out
of the position in which the new kingdom was placed.
It must not, however, be forgotten that other consequences of this
division have been of the highest importance to the history of the
world. It separated the kingdom of Judah from those countries
whose alliance had been most injurious to the religion of the nation—
it rendered impossible those projects of forming a kingdom which
by its intrinsic strength might maintain itself against the monarchies
of Assyria or Egypt, which the successors of David would otherwise
have entertained—it cut off the channels of the commerce which,
under Solomon, was sapping the foundation of the Hebrew nation-
ality—and it therefore cleared the ground for that complete religious
reform or development, under whichever aspect it may be viewed,
which characterized the reigns of Hezekiah and of Josiah; and
which, finding its fullest expression in the writings of the prophets,
enabled a portion of the exiled Jews to maintain their unity and
their faith in the land of their captivity, and through the stormy
times that intervened between the return from exile and the birth
of our Saviour. Had the kingdom which David left been continued,
it can scarcely be doubted, from the conduct of Solomon, and the
subsequent history of the kingdom of Israel, that its great worldly
prosperity and the necessary blending of foreign elements with the
Jewish nationality, would have destroyed the essential peculiarities
of the character and religion of the Jews. And if this had been the
case, they too would have passed away, as so many nations more nu-
merous, powerful, and united than they have done.


In modem history the instances are scarcely less striking. The
decay of Spain, as contrasted with the prosperity of Holland—the
fatal divisions which have hitherto prevented Italy from ranking as
a nation—the loss of the American Colonies by England—the French
Revolution—and last, but not least instructive, the disruption of the
United States of America—all are so many illustrations of the
operation of causes which we can trace in the character, conduct,
and circumstances of each nation. And, in fact, owing to our more
intimate acquaintance with the events of modern history, we are
able to follow that operation into more minute details, and to see
that it applies not only to the broad general facts of history, but
also to the separate incidents of which these general facts are com-
posed.
This is not, of course, suggested as a scientific demonstration of the
fact that all events in history are due to the operation of natural causes
working in a definite direction and producing certain results—nor
even as a complete enumeration of facts from which such an inference
might be deduced. I have rather proceeded upon the assumption
that the conduct, and consequently the fate, of nations is determined
by the character of the individuals of whom it is composed, of course
according to the degree of effective power which they possess ; and
by the circumstances in which they are placed; and I have referred
to these few familiar instances not by way of proof but of illustra-
tion. And I anticipate no dissent from this assumption, whatever
may be the view taken of the actual bearing of any of the examples
to which I have referred. Possibly, in fact, I might have spared all
illustration, and have proceeded upon the supposition not merely
that the general conclusion would be admitted, but that it did not
need any reference to particular instances in which its tendencies
were exemplified. But even if superfluous, I trust that the manner
in which I have attempted to illustrate the subject will not be found
altogether uninteresting.
Proceeding, then, upon the basis of this assumption, we have to
consider whether we can take a further step, and ascertain, in the
first place, what it is that determines the character of a people.
And here we enter upon a question upon which very wide differences
of opinion exist. The question may perhaps be thus stated—ls
human nature, so to speak, a constant quantity; so that if any people,
whatever their organization provided they are men, are placed in given
circumstances of soil, climate, and aspects of nature, we may expect
them to be similarly affected by these, and to develop a corresponding
civilization ; or, do different races so vary as that, if they could be


placed in the same circumstances in all respects, so far as regarded
soil, climate, and aspects of nature, they would nevertheless manifest
a different degree and character of civilization, or might never attain
any civilization whatever ? This question has received various
answers ; and many eminent men—among whom I may mention two
of a past generation, Locke and Turgot, quoted by Mr. Buckle, and
two of the most profound thinkers of the present time, Mr. Buckle
and, if I mistake not, Mr. John Stuart Mill —support the former
view. Nor can it be denied that there are many very powerful
arguments in support of that conclusion. The effect of these ex-
ternal circumstances to which I have referred is unquestionably
immense; and it appears to be established beyond all reasonable
doubt that, if two divisions of the same people could be separated
from each other, and placed, the one, for instance, in such a country
as Greece, and the other in such a country as Bengal, their develop-
ment must take different directions ; and their ultimate character,
when they had grown up into nations, must differ very widely from
each other. In fact, it may almost be considered as proved that
this experiment has been made. The analogies of the Greek and
the Sanskrit languages have led all who have studied the subject to
conclude that the ruling class in Hindostan, and the Greeks, were
two branches of the same family, who were not separated until they
had reached a certain amount of civilization: so that the wide dif-
ferences which existed between the development of the Greeks and
of the Hindoos—between their modes of thought, form of govern-
ment, religious ideas, and philosophical spirit—must be due to the
influence of the circumstances in which they were respectively
placed. And if we were to suppose two colonies of Englishmen,
the one placed in a land like that which we inhabit, where
everything is to be procured as the result of labour, and where
the productive powers of nature are rather deficient than excessive,
and the other placed in the valley of the Amazon, where little labour
is required, and where the powers of nature operate with such in-
tensity as to dwarf by comparison the results of the labour of man ;
and if we further suppose both shut out from communication with
other countries, so that their development should depend entirely
upon themselves and upon the circumstances by which they were
surrounded, we could scarcely doubt that at the end of a few cen-
turies the actual character of the two communities must be widely
different.
And not only is there this ground for assuming that a dif-
ference would be produced between members of the same family


as a result of their being placed in different circumstances, but there
is also the seeming fact, that, when individuals of different families
of the human race are brought under the same influences, their
character is what we might predict from the known operation of
these influences, unmodified by the influence of race. For instance,
few topics have been more insisted upon by modern writers than
the essential difference in organization and character between the
Celtic and the Teutonic races. Innumerable events in history are
referred to this difference as their cause, and the political and social
position of Ireland, and of France—the two great representatives
of Celtic nationality at the present day —has been explained on this
assumption. Now, it is said, not merely that the character of these
nations, and especially of France, has undergone great changes con-
sequent upon changes in their constitution and government, but also
that, if individuals of either nation became citizens of other countries,
under circumstances which expose their children freely to the same
influences which operate upon the other inhabitants of their new
country, there is no perceptible difference in their character. It is
not, of course, denied that if the French, for instance, form a separate
establishment, like that formed by the Huguenot Refugees in Spital-
fields, or the Irish, like those which they have formed in many of
the principal cities of Great Britain and the United States, that
they may for -an indefinite period continue to manifest perceptible
traces of their original character; but it is said this is due to the
effect, not of race, but of education, meaning by this, the sum of all
the external influences which contribute to form the character.
And in support of this view may be instanced the Lefevres, the
Romillys, and many others of Celtic descent both in England and
the United States, who, it is said, are now in all respects as
thoroughly English or American as though they had been Anglo-
Saxon by descent instead of by adoption. Without pretending to
give an opinion upon this branch of the question, so far as the dif-
ference between the Celtic and Teutonic races are concerned, I would
suggest two considerations which appear to me to render these
assumed facts of little value in determining the general enquiry.
In the first place the same reasoning which led to the conclusion
that the Greeks and the Hindoos were branches of the same family
leads also to the conclusion that the Celts are another branch which
separated from the original stock at some earlier epoch : in which
case the difference in character might be attributable to the effect
of the different circumstances in which they have been placed, and,
of course, would be susceptible of obliteration by analogous causes


operating in a reverse order; and, in the second place, it is a
question whether the difference between the character of the English
people, and that of the other branches of the Teutonic family, may
not be in some degree dependent upon the greater infusion of Celtic
blood, and whether the character of the American people may not
even now be in course of alteration from the same cause.
Still, whatever opinions we may adopt with regard to such
original differences of organization, if any, as may prevail between
the different peoples who now inhabit Europe, excepting the
Laplanders and their cognate races, it is very difficult for anyone
who has seen the Australian and Polynesian races, to say nothing
of the North American Indians and the negroes, to adopt the
opinion of Mr. Buckle when he says, “The child born in a
civilized land is not likely, as such, to be superior to one born
among barbarians ; and the difference which ensues between the
acts of the two children will be caused, so far as we know,
solely by the pressure of external circumstances, by which I
mean the surrounding opinions, knowledge, associations —in a
word, the entire mental atmosphere in which the two children
are respectively nurtured.” That a child of European parents born
among the native Australians, and, from the moment of his birth,
separated from its parents, and brought up among those natives ex-
clusively, never seeing any other practices or hearing any other
sentiments than those of the tribe among which he grew up, would
show no marks of superiority either intellectual or moral, is possible;
though it is also possible, and, I am inclined to think, probable, that
he would be their superior in intellect and energy; but that the child
of natives of this country, brought up in England, and never hearing
or learning anything but what English children hear and learn, would
be undistinguishable, mentally and morally, from an Englishman, is
a proposition which I confess I greatly doubt. It is easy to repress
tendencies and to dwarf growth, but not so easy to infuse tendencies
which are not proper to the organization or to increase the growth
beyond certain well-defined limits. It is said that the Chinese have
an art of growing oaks in flower-pots, so that the mature tree should
not be larger than a cabbage; and this, by withholding the appro-
priate nourishment and constantly repressing the growth, is con-
ceivable ; but I never heard of any people persuading a cabbage to
grow to the size of an oak.
And, taking a general survey of history, it appears to me there
are innumerable facts that point to the same conclusion. Thus, in
many countries in the old world, the actually civilized race by which


we find them to have been inhabited within the historical period
was not the earliest possessor of the soil, but dispossessed some
anterior occupants who had never raised themselves above bar-
barism ; and in many of the countries which were once civilized,
and whose soil and climate and aspects of nature remain the
same, the new conquering race, although it had the example of
anterior civilization by which to profit, has not in fact ever raised
itself above its original condition. In the new world, too, it is
true that we find the two comparatively-civilized empires of
Mexico and Peru grown up just where the theory of Mr. Buckle
would require that they should; and yet we see, in the more
temperate parts of North America, the Indian hunting over plains
dotted with mounds marking the sites where once stood large cities,
and where the material elements and incentives to civilization lie as
ready to his hand as they did to those of the extinct population by
whom these mounds were erected, without any attempt to elevate
himself above his existing condition, and without even the curiosity
to enquire how these mounds were formed.
It would seem, too, that the view which regards differences of
race as important elements in the formation of character is war-
ranted by the analogies of nature. Making every allowance for
the power of adaptation among animals, by which they are, to a
certain extent, enabled to accommodate themselves to new con-
ditions of life, it is manifest that their habits and instincts, their
mode of life, their food, and their methods of obtaining it, are
dependent upon or intimately correlated with their organization,
and that, for the most part, any change in the former must be
accompanied by a corresponding change in the latter, if the animal
is to survive. And as man is certainly an animal, though with
faculties, powers, and feelings which no other animal possesses,
there is a strong ground in reason for supposing that those faculties,
powers, and feelings, if not directly dependent upon, yet would be
found to be correlated with his physical organization. And when
we find that, in fact, there are gradations of form and structure in
the races of man, from the Australian negro up to the Caucasian—to
employ a much-abused term —and that, for the most part, if not uni-
versally, these gradations in organization are associated with and
indicate corresponding gradations in actual progress, if not in in-
herent capacity, there seems to be all the proof which the nature
of the case admits, that the two are in some degree associated as
cause and effect; though we may be very far at the present time from
knowing the nature of the connection or the mode of its operation.


And this conclusion appears to me to be strengthened by the
analogous phenomena which we observe with regard to individuals.
There is in them the same variation in organization and the same
difference in mental capacities and in moral character. And there
appear to be the same general grounds for supposing that the one
class of phenomena is dependent upon the other. Upon the whole,
therefore, I have arrived at the conclusion that difference of race is
one of the elements which enter into the formation of the character
of nations, and aid in determining the course of their history.
It must, however, be confessed that this conclusion, if true, leads
us a very little way, for, of all matters, those of which we know least
are perhaps the causes which determine the varieties of organization
of the human family, whether as regards individuals or races. We
must, for the present, accept the existence of these varieties as an
ultimate fact. That such differences do exist is undeniable—that
they are connected with, and are the causes of, mental and moral
differences, I think that I have shown to be probable : but further
than this we are at present unable to penetrate. The only conclu-
sions I can here venture to draw are, that any laws, deduced from
the observed effects of external causes upon the races which have
actually become civilized, are not necessarily nor even probably
applicable to other races; and that it is at the least presumable that
some of the observed differences in different civilizations are due to
difference of race, instead of being due entirely to the operation of
the circumstances in which a nation has been placed. In analyzing,
then, and defining the physical and mental laws which favour the
growth of civilization and determine its character, we have to bear
in mind that their result is not an absolute quantity, but one which
varies in some unknown degree with the organization of the people
upon whom they operate.
Subject to this exception, however, it seems to me that the view
given by Mr. Buckle in his history of civilization in England of the
circumstances which render civilization possible, and which deter-
mine its course, is mainly correct. He conceives the first requisite
to have been a soil and climate which enabled the unskilled labour of
primitive man to raise a larger portion of food than was required for
the subsistence of the labourer, in order that the surplus produce
might be available for the support of an unemployed class. Until this
was the case, no organization beyond the rude organization of the
family and the tribe, no division of employment, and no combination
of labour could exist; and, as a consequence, there could be no cre-
ation of capital and none of the works which can be produced by the


power which capital furnishes of commanding combined labour. He
then shows how the character of the food which is the staple pro-
duct of the various countries in which the principal civilizations
of the East and of America have originated—by its cheapness and
abundance, has encouraged a dense population, which has therefore
been poor, and the labour of which has been at the command of the
ruling class upon easy terms. And he has shown how, by the side
of these, other civilizations have arisen, later in their development,
because less aided by the powers of nature, where food was neither so
cheap nor so plentiful, requiring more labour for a scantier return,
but in which a freer scope was given for the play of the human facul-
ties, and in which there were no such wide differences between the
conditions of the various classes of free men as those which gave
their character to the older civilizations. He shows also in what
manner those other influences, which he calls the aspects of nature,
operate; how, when men feel themselves powerless beside the results
of natural forces, the hurricane, the earthquake, or the volcano;
or when the fertility of nature is so exuberant, as that the results
of what man does are insignificant in comparison with what nature
does for him ; or when the climate is pestilential; certain concep-
tions with regard to the objects ©f worship naturally arise, essentially
distinguished from those which spring up in other countries, where
these natural conditions are reversed. It is not, however, my
purpose to pursue these investigations. It is sufficient to say that
under these combined influences of external circumstances and of
national character thus originated or modified, Mr. Buckle considers
that the various early civilizations of Egypt and the East, and the
later of Judea, Greece, and Rome, sprung up and obtained their
separate development: and, as the result of these different influences,
he shows that while the one kind of civilization chiefly depends
upon and is to be explained by physical laws, the other, including
that of modern Europe, chiefly depends upon and is to be explained
by mental laws.
The question then arises—What are the mental laws that regulate
the progress of European civilization ? Is the guiding power the
perception of moral or of intellectual truth ? One or the other of
these it must be, since all mental laws may be classed under one of
the two heads of moral or intellectual—the one relating to our duties,
the other to our knowledge. To this Mr. Buckle has answered —
Intellectual truth; and the argument by which he supports this
conclusion may be very briefly stated. He observes that the
standard of conduct in nations is perpetually varying, and on the


whole progressive, and he thence infers that, whatever it may be
that determines conduct, must itself be variable and progressive.
He then shows that the truths which are recognized as the ultimate
rules in morals have been long known, and have for many centuries
received no addition, and that hence it cannot be these which furnish
the varying rule necessary for the purpose of the enquiry. On the
contrary, intellectual truths, or what are apprehended as such, are
constantly varying and constantly progressive, and hence supply
such a standard as is required. He therefore concludes that the
latter are proved to be the cause and measure of change and of pro-
gress. In this conclusion lam disposed on the whole to concur,
at any rate so far as nations are concerned. Allowing for occasions
such as that of the French Revolution, and that of the war now
raging in America, where the passions become so excited as to
silence for the time all considerations of expediency, there can be no
doubt that national action is, in the great majority of cases, if not
in all, determined by a consideration of what is conceived to conduce
to the national interest. And under this view it may be doubted
whether even the instances to which I have just referred are excep-
tions, since both of the movements originated in an instinctive
feeling that the deepest national interests were involved ; and it is
the nature of all powerful impulses to action to carry the agent far
beyond what would be the limit fixed by a mere consideration of
the object sought to be obtained. But if this is the case, then
whatever tends to enlighten mankind as to their true interests—to
make them feel that religious persecution, war, slavery, oppression,
injustice, never in the long run accomplish even the objects for which
they are undertaken or sanctioned, and that they are as injurious to
the progress of a nation as they are to the happiness of individuals—
must tend to render the occurrence of these scourges of the human
race less frequent, and so far to improve the conduct and the circum-
stances of nations. At the same time, I conceive that this conclusion
is stated too absolutely. I doubt if sufficient allowance is made for
the different degree of force with which the same truth is appre-
ciated, according to the time and circumstances in which it is pre-
sented to the individual; or for the effect of example in stimulating
to virtuous conduct; or even for the probability that these intel-
lectual truths, which are supposed to be the sole guide, owe no small
degree of then’ operative force to the perception that their dictates
practically coincide with the old moral truths. No doubt, how-
ever, Mr. Buckle would have been quite ready to admit all these
considerations. But in a work which was intended to lay the


foundation of a science of history, he pursued the scientific method
of making abstraction of all but one chief element, in order that its
distinct and separate effects might be traced and decided, leaving
the other subsidiary elements to be afterwards estimated and
allowed for.
There is one corollary from this view of the determining cause of
human progress to which it may be useful to advert. Intellectual
progress, and moral progress, too, so far as it depends upon the
conclusions of the intellect, imply the substitution of true views
for erroneous, or the elimination from partial truths of the errors
which they contain. Now, it is obvious that this is impossible to
anyone w T ho is impressed with the conviction that what is received
as truth is not to be questioned. To substitute a new view for an
old one it is necessary that the old vie w should be found to be no
longer tenable ; and this demands, as its previous condition, enquiry
and investigation ; which again will not be undertaken excepting as
the result of doubt. It is true that the actual course of the discovery
of new truths does not always appear to take this form. They often
seem to flash upon the mind as intuitions coming we know not how
or whence; but these intuitions of new truths never come excepting
to those who, consciously or unconsciously, have felt the barrenness
and insufficiency of the received belief. Hence this conclusion
follows—that doubt is the great instrument of progress, and that
sceptics are among the great benefactors of the world.
It ought not to be necessary to show the limitations of this state-
ment, but to prevent misconception I will do so. In the first place,
then, I do not regard doubt as either the necessary or the appropriate
condition of the great majority of mankind. Action is the essential
function of humanity, and doubt always tends to impede action.
And there are few, comparatively, who have either the leisure for ori-
ginal investigation or the faculties which its successful pursuit de-
mands. Not many of our race have the intuitions which enable them
to discover new truths, or the logical training which fits them to
judge of the sufficiency or completeness of the proof which is offered
in support of the old. All of us upon some topics, and most of us
upon all, must take our opinions upon authority, accepting as suffi-
cient proof of their correctness the general agreement among those
who have investigated the subject. And, with regard to those
questions in respect of which no such agreement exists, though
opinions are and must be adopted by the many without enquiry, yet
in these cases they, for the most part, practically adopt only such
part as they feel to be suitable to their condition and wants, and more


or less consciously reject or modify the rest. They are benefited,
consequently, by doubt and enquiry, only at second hand, when
results are obtained which can be embodied in popular teaching :
but they are thus benefited. And, in the second place, mere doubt,
excepting for its indirect effect of making us tolerant both of the
doubts and the convictions of others, is useless. It is useful only
when it has led to an enquiry which has either established some old
opinion on a firmer basis, or has unseated it and substituted some-
thing better in its place. But the essential condition of progress,
and the proper attitude of every reasonable being, is that the intellect
should be kept open to new truths or new views of truth, from what-
ever quarter; and that no enquiry should be rejected or forbidden
upon the ground that the subject to which it relates is established
beyond the possibility of question.
In order to complete the view T which I propose to take of this
subject, there are still two topics to which I wish to advert, and
which I shall briefly illustrate. The first is, the influence exerted
upon the course of history by individual character and action i
and the second, the manner in which the actual condition of the
civilized world is dependent upon and moulded by all preceding
civilizations.
It is a complaint of the poet that “ the indiA’idual lessens and the
mass grows more and more,” and there is undoubtedly some truth
in this ; though there probably was never a time in which the mass
was not liable to be swayed by common motives and to obey a
common impulse ; and, even now, the influence of individual genius
and energy is a perceptible power in the progress of human know-
ledge and conduct. And no theory of history can be complete
which does not include this influence of individuals as w T ell as the
more general causes which operate upon a people as a whole.
Take a not very great number of men out of modern history, and
how different would have been the intellectual condition of the
nations of Europe. One may enumerate less than a dozen—
Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Bacon, Descartes, Newton, Leibnitz,
Flamsteed, Lagrange, Laplace. Where, without these, would the
science of astronomy have been ? Without Cromwell, how different
would have been the history of England ; without Napoleon, how
different that of France. It is no doubt true that all of these
were, in a certain sense, the product of the age —they could not have
been what they were, nor have accomplished what they did, had it
not been for the actual condition of the circumstances in which they
were placed ; but the subsequent course of science and of history


would have been different had they not lived. I will select two
illustrations of this effect—one from ancient and one from modern
history —the one connected with the history of the Jews, and the
other with that of the Roman Church.
One of the most perilous times for Jewish nationality was the
reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. An able, energetic, and liberal ruler,
he entertained the project of establishing a united monarchy upon
the principle which he had seen practised with so much success at
Rome, where he had long been a hostage, of absorbing all nation-
alities in a common organization. In this projected kingdom he
proposed to establish the policy of Rome and the arts and philosophy
of Greece. To the accomplishment of this design there was one
obstacle —that of Judma; and to overcome that obstacle he put in
motion the various means which were familiar with the rulers of
that day, and which have not yet become entirely obsolete. He
tempted the pliant by the offer of place and power; he awed the
indifferent by the display of force; and to the malcontent he gave
the alternative of submission or death. At first he was suc-
cessful. The high priest was won over to the side of the monarch,
and signalized his adhesion by adopting the name of Jason in place
of that of Joshua; and the majority of the priests and of the people
of Jerusalem followed his example. The Temple was polluted: for
a moment the statue of Olympic Jupiter was erected within its walls ;
and though this provoked tumults, they were put down by the
troops of Antiochus. And it almost seemed at one time that
the attempt would be crowned with ultimate success. In this ex-
tremity, however, the members of one heroic family—the Mac-
cabees —offered themselves as leaders for the adherents of the ancient
faith, rallied round them the patriotism of the nation, and organized
and maintained a resistance which all the power and policy of
Antiochus were unable to overcome. It is not easy to over-estimate
the consequence to the civilized world of these events. Had
Antiochus succeeded, the material prosperity of Judaea might have
been much greater, but it could not have been the birthplace of
Christianity: and yet but for this one family his success was all but
assured. Never, perhaps, has any conflict been fraught with more
momentous results. Great as were the interests involved in the battle
of Marathon, where, as has been forcibly stated, the contest was
whether Europe should be civilized or barbarous, they appear to me
to become well nigh insignificant in comparison with that which
was at stake in the almost nameless battles of the Maccabees; for
there the question was, whether the long progress of those religious


ideas which formed the inheritance of the Jewish nation, and which
found their completion and fulfilment in the work of Christ and the
preaching of St. Paul, should run their course, or should be checked,
and be absorbed in the civilization and philosophy of Greece. And
beside the intrinsic importance of the events, I have been induced
to select them because, owing to the break in Jewish history which
is occasioned by our habitually passing over the period which
elapsed between Malachi and John the Baptist, this is a period
which seems to me scarcely to have received the attention to which
it is entitled.
I select now, as another illustration, the founder of the Society of
Jesus—lgnatius Loyola. For though, possibly, the personal in-
fluence of Luther was as great or greater, that influence displayed
itself more in accordance with the obvious tendencies of the age.
And though the Reformation either would not have occurred when
it did, or would have run a different course had Luther never lived,
yet he did not set so unmistakeable an impression of his own indi-
viduality upon the movement which he originated, as did Loyola.
The Society of Jesus has been, almost ever since its foundation, a
power in the world ; and it has been so by maintaining the organi-
zation and observing the rules prescribed in the first instance by its
founder. The celebrated reply of one of its generals, when urged
to make some concessions for the purpose of neutralizing the hos-
tility which the Society had provoked, “ Sint ut sunt aut non
sint,” has always been the governing principle of the body ; and it
shows the profound knowledge of human nature, sagacity, and de-
termination of its founder, that he should have thus framed a system
which contained these elements of perpetuity and strength, and should
have succeeded in procuring its adoption. The first results of the
operations of the Society are soon told. When the Jesuits entered the
field, Protestantism was everywhere in the ascendant. It had pene-
trated into every country in Europe, and though opposed and pro-
scribed in some, was still gradually working its way even in Italy and
Spain, while in France it was supposed to number one third of the
population. Within little more than half a century it was extin-
guished in Spain and in Italy, was checked in France, and was only
saved from annihilation in Germany by the intervention of Gustavus
Adolphus, and at the price of the thirty years’ war which reduced
to a desert the most flourishing portions of the empire. And of this
reaction the Jesuits were the authors and the agents. If the Refor-
mation in its actual form and results was due to Luther, still more was
the reaction in its actual form and results due to Loyola.


Of course I do not suppose that in either of these instances the
individuals whom I have thus selected for the purpose of illustration
could have effected what they did if they had not represented and
embodied an actual existing feeling and tendency. Had not the
feelings of nationality and patriotism, of love for the national religion
and faith in the national God, existed in the minds of the bulk of the
Jewish people at the time of the Maccabees, their zeal and courage
and energy would have been fruitless. But, by means of that
family, these feelings were stimulated and developed ; the weak
were roused, the wavering fixed, the timid encouraged, and, what was
above all essential, leaders were provided equal to the occasion,
around whom all might rally, and who were able to unite the scat-
tered elements of resistance into combined and mutually supporting
action. And without such leaders the feelings which prompted the
resistance would have evaporated in fruitless repinings, or would
have wasted their strength in isolated tumults that would have
been easily suppressed. And so, in the case of Loyola, the elements
of the reaction were already there. The Reformation had from the
first aroused the hostility of all who were interested in the ancient
abuses, or were sincerely attached to the ancient faith ; and in its
progress it provoked a wider opposition. It is a necessary, or at all
events an universal, tendency of human nature, that no principle,
however pure in its character, can maintain its purity when at-
tempted to be realized in practice through human instrumentality.
The early history of Christianity—l might say its entire history—
is a striking exemplification of this ; and assuredly the history of the
Reformation formed no exception. The wildest excesses in doctrine
and practice, of which the proceedings of the Anabaptists at Munster
are examples, too often disfigured the movement. Many, taking
literally the precept, “ The truth shall make you free,” imagined
themselves freed from the restraints of law and custom, as well as
from the errors of doctrine and practice against which the Refor-
mation was directed. The negative character of much of the
teaching of the reformers, and the logical aspect of their doctrines,
were felt as unsatisfying and repugnant by the sincerely devout.
And all who considered it meritorious to surrender their reason to
faith, and who deemed it impious to subject the claims of the Church
which they had so long been taught to regard as infallible, to the
same investigation which they would have allowed in the case of
mere human institutions, regarded the free spirit which the Refor-
mation encouraged as a mark of infidelity, or rather of atheism.
But an organization was wanted to combine all these scattered


elements —something roue cl which, so to speak, they might crys-
tallize, and this was given by the Society of Jesus. That there would
have been a reaction —that the progress of Protestantism must have
been checked —is an inference that no one probably can fail to draw
from the feelings which the Reformation had provoked ; but that
reaction would have been very different in its character, and far less
complete and durable in its results, if Loyola had not lived.
I need hardly say that I do not consider this influence of the
great men of every age upon their contemporaries, and the character
which they thus impart to the history of their time and of future
times, as an exception to the order of nature. It is a part of that
order. But I deem it not unnecessary to call attention to the fact
of this influence because, in referring to general laws, there is a
tendency to ignore the freedom of human action and the infinite
variety of human character, and to argue as though the laws which,
in the long run and in the mass, are seen to regulate human affairs
and determine the course of events were inconsistent with, instead
of being the exponents of, the free choice and self-determined action
of individuals.
The present condition of mankind is the result of its past history.
There is scarcely any people that has lived that has not contributed
something to the formation of the character of the existing genera-
tion. We ourselves have received our religion primarily from the
Jews, our laws and institutions partly from our Saxon ancestors and
partly from Rome, our logic and mathematics and philosophy from
Greece. And each of these nations, in that which it has thus
transmitted to modern times, has been indebted in part to influences
derived from the nations who preceded or were contemporary with
its history. Nor can anyone say that one of these gifts to modem
society is less important or less influential than another, so far as its
progress is concerned. If there are those who would depreciate the
secular elements of our civilization as contrasted with the religious,
I would request them, before they definitively pronounce their
opinion, to trace out the result of all the attempts which have been
made to establish a state upon a theological basis ; and, either to
deduce the laws of government and the maxims of society, not from
the laws of God as taught by experience, or from the example of
those who had made the science of government their study, but from
the Bible ; or to exclude all science as profane, and all free enquiry
as treason against God and an affront to the infallible rule which he
has afforded, whether in the Church or in the Scriptures. They
may take New England, or one party in England itself, in the time of


the Commonwealth, or Geneva in the time of Calvin, as illus-
trations of the one, and Paraguay or Spain as examples of the
other. And, having done this, they may say whether even re-
ligion itself does not gain by the admixture of those secular
elements which modern Christian society has derived from Pagan
sources, and from that spirit of free enquiry into the origin and
grounds of all belief of which Socrates may be taken as the most
signal, though very far from the only, example and teacher. For,
under another form, and with a different method, which prevent
its being generally recognized, the same spirit was as fully ex-
emplified in Isaiah and St. Paul; to take them as types of Hebrew
and Christian teachers. In truth, both Hebrew prophecy and
Christian teaching were founded upon the inalienable right of man
to reject or to modify any views of truth, however sanctioned, which
were found inconsistent with improved knowledge or inapplicable
to existing circumstances. And whether they, to whom I am ap-
pealing, admit this or not; since they cannot be blind to the fact
that these secular influences exist, and that they have modified and
are even now modifying religious opinion; they cannot but see that
there are natural causes operating by their own intrinsic force in
accordance with the laws of human nature which affect the faith
and feeling and character of men—even of religious men. If
acquainted, even in a small degree, with the history of controversy
they will know how much of what is now received as Christian doc-
trine is in reality the result of the application to the language of the
New Testament, of the ideas of Plato, or the mystical conceptions
of the schools of Alexandria, or the juridical maxims of Home; if
altogether unlearned in this history, they may at least, if they watch
the current literature of the day, see how, under the influence of
secular ideas, the views even of systematic theologians have changed
from those which were current only half a century ago, and are still
in process of change. And, seeing all this, I ask them, will they
retain the current view which supposes that, of many causes thus
operating to produce a common effect, the one is the result of the
watchful and overruling providence of God, and all the rest the result
of what, under this aspect, is equivalent to chance ? Will they
believe, in opposition to St. Paul, what the current theology implies,
that God was the God of the Jews only and not of the Gentiles ;or
will they not rather see a proof in all this, that the laws which God
has ordained; which rule the conduct of men no less than the forces of
nature ; which, being framed by infinite wisdom, can find no emer-
gency unprovided for, no contingency overlooked; which, being


the representative to us of a Being in whom is no variableness,
cannot admit of change ; of a Being almighty, cannot allow of
violation; have been operative in all times of history and in all
countries which have been peopled by man ? Law, under this
aspect, is not the antithesis but the manifestation of will, and since
that will is the will of a Being perfect in wisdom, knowledge, power,
and goodness—the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever —all its
operations, rightly interpreted, will manifest these attributes of its
author.


SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY
I proceed on the present occasion to attempt to redeem my promise
to read a Paper on the relations between Science and Theology;
but I confess that I have entered upon the task with much reluc-
tance. The subject is one of great intrinsic difficulty, and it is not
easy so to speak as to avoid misconstruction; nor do I feel that I
am competent adequately to deal with it. Still, the topic is not
merely interesting, especially at the present moment, but it possesses
a close practical relation to the great majority of the subjects which
from time to time occupy our attention as members of this Society.
Every scientific investigation, whether physical, physiological, or
historical, runs up into regions which have been at one time or
another monopolized by theology; and it is consequently almost
a matter of necessity that the respective claims of the two should
be adjusted. Whether this can be satisfactorily accomplished may
be doubted ; or rather, it is quite certain that no present adjust-
ment is practicable, which shall secure freedom to the enquiries
of science and at the same time preserve the peace of the theo-
logian. It may be permitted, however, to investigate the nature
of their relations, and the points in which they apparently conflict,
in the hope that something towards the solution of the question
may be accomplished in this case as in so many others, by an
attempt to exhibit in calm and unexaggerated language what the
question really is.
It can, I imagine, scarcely be doubted at the present time, that
in many particulars the conclusions of modern science conflict with
the dogmas of theology; and even if it were possible to dissemble
the fact of this contradiction, either by denying the conclusions of
science, or by modifying the theological dogma so as to bring the
two into apparent juxtaposition, yet there would still remain an ab-
solute difference between the theological and the scientific basis and
method as they are at present understood. Theology rests upon


authority : science upon investigation. Theology is always based
upon a revelation either universal or special; science upon reason.
Theology presupposes the absolute insufficiency of the human facul-
ties : science their relative sufficiency. Theology proceeds from
certain facts or principles which are held to be above all need of
proof, and to be exempt from investigation : while science assumes
nothing excepting by way of hypothesis and conditionally, accepts
nothing as true excepting upon the appropriate evidence, and re-
gards no assertion as raised above investigation. Even, therefore,
when the conclusions of the theologian and of the philosopher
coincide, they rest upon different foundations and have been attained
by a different process.
And yet it would appear, a priori , that there need not be any
such conflict: for the appropriate domain of theology lies altogether
beyond or at any rate apart from that of science, and those ultimate
truths upon which theology pronounces so absolutely are truths
which science confesses itself without instruments either to prove
or to confute. What is the origin, and what the essence of mind
or of matter—what the cause and principle of the forces which per-
vade nature —what the essential being and attributes of God—what
the ulterior destiny of man —these are questions which science,
properly understood, can scarcely propound to itself, and which,
when proposed, are by their terms beyond the reach of a scientific
solution. Some of them, no doubt, are not beyond the reach of
analogical conjecture; but, as these conjectures have no basis of
certainty, and are beyond the possibility of verification, they cannot
pass into the domain of science. They may raise a faint presumption
in favour of one set of views or against another, but that is all.
And thus there cannot be properly, and there is not, I imagine, in
fact, any opposition between science and theology upon these essen-
tially theological subjects.
It may even be said that science, by the very limitations which
it confesses, and the contradictions in which it is involved when it
attempts to pass these limits and to speculate upon subjects which
transcend its sphere, bears unconscious testimony to the central
truths of theology; that there exists a great first cause from which
proceed every thing that we see and all that we are, and that this
cause is unsearchable and past finding out. No doubt this tes-
timony is, under most of its aspects, rather negative than positive,
and under every aspect imperfect. But it is not therefore the less
valid, so far as it extends. In every direction in which our en-
quiries are prosecuted, we find ourselves encountered by insoluble


mysteries. We are absolutely unable to conceive the possibility
either of the origination of matter or of its eternal existence, and
yet are of necessity compelled to conclude that one or the other of
these must have been the case; and similar difficulties surround the
question of the cause and origin of spirit. We cannot conceive of
force as an essential attribute of matter, and yet cannot conceive of
matter otherwise than as possessing force, for matter is incon-
ceivable without resistance, and resistance is a manifestation of
force. And these are only samples of the contradictions in which
we are involved when we attempt to form any conception of “things
in themselves.” But, then, the very impossibility of any solution
derived from our own faculties appears to involve the idea of some-
thing, or rather of some being, the cause and the reason of all
existence, in whom all these seeming contradictions are harmonized,
but whose nature and essence are on that very account inscrutable
to our imperfect conceptions. And when we see how a few
elementary substances, manifesting or acted upon by various
forms of force, result in all the variety and order and beauty of
organic and inorganic nature —how every part is dependent upon
and adjusted to the whole, as the whole is adjusted to the various
parts —how all creatures, from the lowest to the highest, are adapted
to their circumstances, and all apparently exhibit a marked pre-
ponderance of enjoyment —we cannot, as it appears to me, do other-
wise than regard all these phenomena as so many manifestations,
relative to our faculties, of the wisdom and goodness of the Being
to whom they are owing ; though we still confess our inability to
conceive of Him as he is.
And further, although, as I have attempted to show in my pre-
vious Papers, everything around us, everything that science dis-
closes of the past or can conjecture of the future, displays the same
obedience to law —although nothing in nature warrants the as-
sumption that there have been emergencies which infinite wisdom
had failed to foresee in the adjustment of these laws, or against
which infinite power had been unable to provide, and in which,
therefore, some suspension or violation of law was needed in order
to prevent or to remedy disorder —yet there is nothing in this con-
ception which contradicts the theological idea of a personal God,
or excludes the notion that he works in all things according to his
will. Impossible as it is for us to think of absolute being as per-
sonal, or to predicate of it such an attribute as that of will, yet
these difficulties are metaphysical, not scientific. So far as science
is concerned, there is nothing in the conception of causation that


necessarily contradicts personality—nothing in the universality of
law which excludes will. On the contrary, knowing that with men,
the higher their moral and intellectual faculties the more nearly do
they approach to consistency, and the more rarely do they manifest
anomalies and imperfections, we are naturally, if not necessarily, led
to regard this connection as essential, and to suppose that in propor-
tion to the wisdom, goodness, and power which any being possesses
will be the uniformity of the procedure in which his will is manifested.
And hence, assuming the absolute wisdom, power, and goodness of
God, we should deduce from that assumption an absolute uniformity
in the processes of nature and the dealings of providence, supposing
that these are the results of his will. No doubt, to those who place
God outside of nature, and conceive of him as in some respect an-
tagonistic to it, this view of the universality of law is repugnant,
because it appears to exclude God from the universe. So far from
this being the case, however, it negatives the idea of the occasional
intervention of the Deity only because it regards him as always and
everywhere present and active.
It is not, therefore, upon any of these great truths which underlie
all theology, that the oppositions to which I have referred arise.
The questions which are now at issue between men of science and
theologians stand upon another and a lower ground. They are, for
the most part, reducible to one, or, rather, they are different aspects
of the same fundamental question:—what, in matters of science,
meaning by this everything which the human intellect is competent
to investigate, is the authority of the Hebrew and Christian Scrip-
tures ? Either directly or incidentally these writings contain no-
tices, or descriptions, or narratives, which refer to matters susceptible
of investigation, and which are more or less at variance with the
results of scientific enquiry. And, as the first consequence of the
perception of these variances was the denial of the conclusions at
which men of science had arrived and a condemnation of the method
of enquiry which had led to these obnoxious conclusions, it followed
necessarily that those who had proved the soundness of their method
of investigation in a hundred fields of research, and who could not,
without renouncing the exercise of their reason, doubt the truth of
the conclusions at which they had arrived, were drawn to examine
their position in reference to the Bible. This examination took at
first the form—ls the teaching of science in these matters, especially
in geology, at variance with the teaching of the Bible ? In this
enquiry many persons, among whom I may name Granville Penn,
Chalmers, Buckland, Pye Smith, Hugh Miller, proposed various


methods of reconciling the apparent discrepancy—some by moulding
the facts of science so as to make them harmonize with the lansruao-e
O o
of the Bible, and some by moulding the language of the Bible so as
to make it harmonize with the facts of science. But as all of these,
however decided and however sincere their professions of belief in
the inspiration and infallibility of the Bible, virtually conceded by
the very attempt at reconciliation that, in matters of science, science
was the ultimate authority, a further question necessarily was raised :
Is the Bible to be regarded as infallible in matters of science ? And
this latter question became connected with others which resulted
from contemporaneous investigations into the origin of the Bible
itself, and which concerned the date, authorship, authenticity, and
genuineness of the various books of which it is composed. And
all these questions have gradually been investigated with more
boldness and earnestness as their importance to the interests both
of science and of religion has been more appreciated, and as the
materials for forming a conclusion have become more abundant and
accessible.
The question, therefore, between science and theology has a two-
fold aspect. It regards, on the one hand, the facts narrated in the
Bible—its cosmogony, chronology, ethnology, and history, and
examines into their accordance with the laws of nature, and with
the inferences derived from a complete induction of known facts.
And, on the other hand, it regards the origin of the Bible itself—
at what time, by what authors, under what circumstances, were its
various books written. And under each of these aspects science comes
into collision with theology. Theologians assume that these books
are the direct utterance of the Supreme Being, and that whatever is
therein narrated must not only be received as literally true, but
must, if needs be in order to its reception, be considered as with-
drawn from the operation of the ordinary laws of nature, and as
being in the strictest sense miraculous; and this, if admitted, would
be fatal to the pretensions of science. It is true that, in deference
to the opinions of the day, from the influence of which no man can
wholly escape, there has been on the part of many theologians a
recession from these extreme pretensions; but this is at variance
with the theological spirit, and those who have made such conces-
sions are often regarded as only a shade less dangerous than those
who frankly adopt the scientific method throughout. This, then, is
the theatre of conflict, and the question is whether science in its
enquiries upon these subjects has invaded the domain of theology,
or theology, in attempting to exclude them from investigation, has
intruded into that of science.


It cannot, of course, be pretended that the great majority of these
subjects, relating, as they do, to results of physicial agencies, and
to human conduct, are not in themselves properly the subject of
scientific investigation. Whether, for instance, at any time within
the last 4,000 or 5,000 years the whole of the earth has been covered
with water to the depth of some miles, and for a period of many
months, is a question of the effect of physical agents, and properly
to be investigated by the methods of physical enquiry. Whether
a book, such, for instance, as Genesis, appears to be the production
of one individual, or of more than one—whether it exhibits a unity
of conception and of execution—whether the language is all of one
age or in parts of different ages, and to what age the language is to
be referred —and whether the date of the composition, in whole or
in part, can be approximately fixed by a consideration of the pecu-
liarities of the language, or of other internal evidence —are questions
of crititism, and are prima facie to be decided by the same canons
as are applicable to other ancient writings. Whether a particular
people belonged to one branch of the human family or to another
is a question of ethnology, and to be decided by considerations of
their language, institutions, and history. Whether events are
probable or the reverse, and whether the evidence of their having
actually occurred is of such a nature as to overbear any antecedent
presumption against them on the ground of their improbability, is
a question of evidence, and to be decided by the same principles as
would guide us in investigating any contemporary narrative. At
least, this must be the case, unless some reason can be shown for
applying different methods and tests to the investigation of the
books of the Bible and the events therein narrated from those which
would be applied to other books and events.
There is, however, a widely-spread feeling that the Bible and
everything that it contains ought to be exempted from enquiry.
Apart from those, and they are many, who think that the teachings
of the Bible are to be taken as conclusive upon all subjects, and that
it is impious to enquire, when, as they conceive, God has spoken,
because enquiry implies a doubt either of his knowledge or of his
truth, there are many who would willingly ignore all these topics.
They admit the right and the competence of the human intellect to
prosecute such enquiries, but they fear, possibly, that the results
may tend to weaken their own faith, or, at any rate, to weaken
the faith of the multitude. Both of these classes are entitled to
much consideration, but neither of them has a place within the walls
of this room. The very object of this Society is to investigate the


laws of nature, in their practical and in their speculative aspects,
and this implies, necessarily, the absence of all bias and of all limit.
In other societies, philosophical or scientific investigations may be
followed only to a certain distance, and always with a tacit regard
to consequences. Here we have no object but truth, and no limit
but that which results from the necessarily progressive character
of all knowledge. In fact, it is obvious that any such limits as
theology would impose are inconsistent with all enquiry. In geo-
logy we should have to stop with the last division of the recent
period, because that may possibly, with a little management, be
brought within, or nearly within, the received chronology, and must
exclude from our investigations everything beyond. In ethnology,
we should have to limit our enquiries to the mere classification of
the existing varieties of the human family, without venturing to
speculate upon their origin and affinities, because these speculations
must, or, at any rate, may result either in attributing an antiquity
to the human race far beyond that warranted by Genesis, or in as-
suming an original diversity of races. In the science of language
we should have to shut our eyes to the evidences lying before us of
the existence, so to speak, of one stratum of language underlying
another, because, tracing these downwards, we may, in the dim dis-
tance of an unknown antiquity, far beyond the records of history or
the dawn of tradition, faintly surmise some original language spoken
by our primeval fathers, from which all existing languages have been
derived by natural processes. In history, we should have to leave
out of our investigations the origin, course, and results of the two most
pregnant facts in the development of our race —the Jewish and
Christian religions. I might extend the list of these limitations
indefinitely, but these are enough to show how narrow would be the
range, or, rather, how impossible would be the prosecution, of philo-
sophical investigation if we should really determine to avoid all those
points in which the Bible and science may come into collision.
It may however be said, granting all this, the investigations of
■science should be conducted apart. Philosophers may pursue their
speculations and form their conclusions, but they have no right to
bring these conclusions into comparison with the dogmas of theo-
logy. This is the task and the function of theologians only, and
therefore all such enquiries as the present are beyond the legitimate
■objects of a philosophical society. There might be some fairness
in such a suggestion if men of science were left to pursue their en-
quiries without encountering opposition or obloquy from the men
of theology, but even then it would be alike unwise and impracti-


cable. For, in the first place, why should science be condemned to
he irreligious ? There can surely be no reason why the man who
before all others is familiar with proofs of the marvellous adaptations
of nature —who sees above, around, and within him evidences of
wisdom and benevolence which increase with every increase of his
knowledge, should be compelled to exclude from his consideration
all the lessons which he may thence derive. It has been too often,
though unjustly, the complaint against science that it is irreligious;
but this would be to compel it to remain so in the supposed in-
terests of religion itself. And, in the second place, it must be
remembered that after all members of philosophical societies are
men, and as such are as much interested in theology as anyone
can be. It is for us individually as important to know whether
there is or is not any conflict between science and theology as it
is for the man who repudiates all science as profane. We do not
drop our personality when we enter this room, nor are we able
to draw a sharp line of demarcation between our scientific and theo-
logical belief, much less to assume the same thing to be a theological
truth and a scientific error. Whatever may be our creed, it is the
same person who believes and who investigates ; and it is therefore
our right as enquirers, if it is not also our duty, to attempt to ascer-
tain the relations between our faith and our science.
That there is such a duty, whether it devolves upon us or not,
must be taken to be admitted, for otherwise it would be impossible
to account for the large and increasing number of works professedly
devoted to this subject. It must, however, be confessed that there
appears something of inconsistency in the manner in which these
questions are treated by different persons who have discussed them
from the theological point of view, and even by the same person at
different times. Sometimes what, for the sake of distinctness, I
may call the orthodox view, is supported by arguments appropriate
to the subjects of enquiry, regarded under their scientific aspect,
while sometimes the application of similar arguments to the deter-
mination of the same questions, is denounced as irreverent, if not
impious. It would really seem that the true solution of these ap-
parent inconsistencies is to be found in the assumption, that the
scientific method is permissible in reference to questions of theology
only when it is employed to establish the truth of the received
opinions, and in no wise when it is employed simply to investigate
whether they are true or not. I do not suppose that in fact the
majority of orthodox writers have consciously represented their own
principles to themselves under this definite formula, but it is difficult


not to imagine that some such feeling is more or less unconsciously
underlying all their conceptions on the subject; and there are some
who undisguisedly avow their adhesion to this rule.
It is, however, obvious that all arguments addressed to the reason
presuppose that reason is the ultimate judge of the truth of the con-
clusions to which these arguments are designed to lead, and it would
seem equally obvious that any claim to authority which shall exclude
the employment of the reason in reference to any particular subject
must, in the first instance, vindicate itself by arguments addressed
to the reason. However much we may be disposed to concede to
authority when its claims are established, it would seem to be un-
questionable that the establishment of these claims is a necessary
preliminary to our submission, and that this must, or rather should
be (for often it is not) the result of arguments addressed to the
reason. Whatever form, therefore, the argument may assume,
whether the truth and divine authorship of the Bible are attempted
to be proved inductively from an examination of its contents, and
from the characters of the persons by whom it was written and the
miracles by which it is alleged to have been authenticated, or whether
the truth of everything it contains is established deductively upon the
basis of its divine authorship, the appeal is ultimately made to the
human reason ; in the one case as to the validity of the induction,
and in the other as to the truth of the assumed basis. And if the
reason of each man is to be for himself the ultimate judge of the
conclusions he shall adopt, then those conclusions must be tested by
the same methods, and the evidence adduced in their support must
be subjected to the same processes of examination as are applicable
to all other questions.
There is probably nothing in this which would not receive the
formal assent of all Protestant theologians, since the very right to
protest against the doctrines and the practices of the older Church
must be founded upon, or, at any rate, can only be justified by, the
right of private judgment —that is, the ultimate supremacy of the
human reason—with regard both to the grounds and the objects of
belief. It too often happens, however, that the supremacy thus
conceded in theory is denied in practice, and men are permitted to
enquire and examine only upon the tacit condition that they shall
arrive at certain predetermined results. But this is an inconsis-
tency which by no means derogates from the soundness or value of
the admitted principle.
Taking it, then, to be admitted, at least in this room, that there is a
right of enquiry into the grounds of theological belief, both as re-


gards the authority of the Bible and the conclusions to be drawn
from its teaching, and knowing that there are many persons who
have, as the result of such enquiry, arrived at the conclusion that the
Bible is not only inspired but also absolutely authoritative upon all
subjects, it is not, perhaps, irrelevant to remark that any inferences
to be deduced from this conclusion must partake of the uncertainty
of the conclusion itself, as well as of the added uncertainty of the
reasoning by which the inference is reached. It would often appear
as if, by a natural confusion of ideas, men upon this subject transfer
the attribute of infallibility which, as the result of their investiga-
tion, or sometimes prior to all investigation, they attribute to the
Bible, to the process or act by which the conclusion has been reached,
and thus not merely conclude that the Bible is infallible but that
they are infallible in making that conclusion. In fact, however, it
is only necessary to state the proposition in order to secure its re-
ception, viz., that whether, in point of fact, the Bible be or be not
infallible, our conclusion that it is so, being simply the result of our
own mental processes, has no greater certainty than belongs to other
conclusions arrived at by similar processes. The stream cannot rise
above its fount. There can be no infallible conclusions of fallible
reason, and therefore the assertion of the infallibility of the Bible
being only a deduction of reason, cannot logically be used to bar
any course of enquiry or to prove, a priori , the unsoundness of any
conclusions to which that enquiry may lead.
And, as has been well shown by Archbishop Whately, in reference
to another subject, it is impossible to escape this dilemma. Whether
a man surrenders his reason to the Bible, or to the Church, or to a
priest, or to the witness of the spirit within, and however complete
the surrender or abnegation of reason may be, there is one exercise
of reason which he cannot escape—he must decide what shall be
the authority to which his reason shall be subservient, and that
choice must be determined explicitly or implicitly by his reason.
As a late writer has said, to attempt to avoid being ultimately de-
cided by reason in choosing a faith is like a man attempting to jump
off his own shadow ; and thus the uncertainty which attaches to all
processes of argument necessarily attaches to the decision in favour
of this or that authority. Any conclusion, consequently, formed
upon the basis of any authority has necessarily no greater validity
than the act of reason by which that authority was recognized.
I have said this because it appears tp me that many persons con-
ceive, either that there is something in the fact that theology has
claimed any subjects as being within its domain, which renders the


human reason incapable of forming a judgment upon them; or that
there is a peculiar certainty in the conclusions which may be formed
or accepted by the human reason in relation to them. And, sin-
gular as it may appear, it often happens that these two somewhat
contradictory conceptions are held by the same person, who thus
both denies the competency of his reason to form an opinion, and
asserts the absolute truth of the opinions which, as he alleges in the
absence of his reason, he has adopted. And I have therefore
attempted to show that, on the contrary, the points upon which
scientific investigation is now exercised are matters especially within
the domain of science ; and that every opinion which may be formed
on the subject is an opinion which, in the nature of things, must
rest upon individual reason, and consequently can at any rate have
no greater certainty than belongs to conclusions of reason in general.
I might, if it were necessary, go even further and say that, from
the nature of the subject, there is necessarily a smaller amount of
certainty attaching to theological conclusions than to conclusions
upon any other subject, because, in addition to the difficulties which
are common to those subjects and to theology, there are added diffi-
culties arising from the very nature of the objects of theological in-
vestigation. And, in support of this view, I might quote largely
from Mr. Mansel, whose new defence of the faith excited so much
attention a short time since, and having answered its end of puzzling
some and amusing others, is gradually sinking out of notice. But
I refrain from dwelling upon this view of the subject, which is be-
sides immaterial under that aspect of the question which I am con-
sidering, and content myself with remarking that these admitted
difficulties may at least serve to inspire theologians with reserve and
diffidence in stating their conclusions, and with some consideration
for those who, upon matters so important and so difficult, may have
arrived at views different from their own ; even though this should
appear to admit the possibility that their own views were not abso-
lutely complete and accurate.
But if, in fact, it is competent to anyone to investigate the age,
authorship, and authenticity of the various books of which the Bible
is composed, to examine upon independent grounds the historical
truth of the narratives which it contains, and to pursue the study
of sciences, though their conclusions may conflict with the plain
language of the Bible —then it would seem that no theological con-
siderations ought to be allowed to influence the course of enquiry
or to affect its result. A scientific investigation is utterly worthless
unless it is absolutely unbiassed. And, if so, it would appear further


that no real theological principle can be involved in the enquiry.
For instance, the uniform course of opinion during the last half
century among all competent enquirers has been in a direction ad-
verse to the historical character, at least of the early part, of the
Book of Genesis. Geology has, I believe I may say, utterly exploded
the notion of creation in six days as given in the first chapter, as
well as the idea of a universal deluge, and it is gradually throwing
back the date of the first appearance of man upon the globe to an
antiquity which, according to present appearances, will ultimately
be measured by hundreds of thousands of years. The science of
language and ethnology both tend to show that the separation of
the human family, if, as is probable, it was one family originally,
must be thrown back for tens of thousands of years ; and that the
people of Canaan, whom the Israelites drove out, belonged, no less
than the Israelites themselves, to the Semitic race instead of being
Hamites, while the Persians belonged to the Indo-European family
instead of being, as the author of the tenth chapter of Genesis makes
them, Semitic. And, at the same time, critical investigations as
to the age and authorship of the book are leading unmistakeably to
the belief that, whoever its compiler might be, and whatever ancient
documents might be embodied in it, there were, at any rate, more
than two persons concerned in its authorship, the earliest of whom
could not have lived much before and probably did not live after
the time of David. Ido not now put forward these conclusions as
true, though personally I consider the evidence such as to warrant
our belief of their truth, but I mention them as those conclusions
to which the current of opinion is now leading, and which the ma-
jority of independent thinkers who devote themselves to these
enquiries will be likely to adopt. In fact, but for the theological
interests supposed to be at stake and the theological passions there-
fore aroused, I believe that there would at this time be no more
doubt as to the general truth of the conclusions which Bishop
Colenso is enouncing with regard to the uncertainty of the early
history of the world and of the Jews than there is with regard
to those put forth by Niebuhr as to the uncertainty of the early his-
tory of the Romans. But however this may be, it cannot be denied
that among independent thinkers who have directed their enquiries
to this subject the tendency is towards the conclusions which I have
indicated, in spite of strong early prepossessions, and of no slight
present inducements to maintain the contrary views. Now, is it to
be supposed—will anyone venture to assert —that these views, if
adopted, can affect the relation of man to God, or the purposes of


God to man; that the inducements to virtue or piety will be
diminished, or that virtue and piety will be less acceptable to God;
or even that these opinions, if honestly formed ard manfully pro-
claimed, will be less pleasing in the eyes of the God of truth than
the contrary opinions taken at second hand without enquiry, or ob-
tained as the result of an enquiry whose conclusion was Predeter-
mined. No doubt it is true that many opinions which we have been
accustomed to hold, rather, though, upon the authority of the school-
men and of Milton than of the Bible, will fall if these views ulti-
mately prevail; and those who insist upon having their theology in
a systematic form may have to remodel their systems : but these are
the necessary consequences, in every branch of enquiry, of the dis-
covery of new truths, whenever systems have been prematurely
formed. But whatever may be their results, unless w*e are prepared
to prohibit all scientific investigation; and though outside these
walls there may be many who would do so, yet the very character
of this Society is a proof that all here would repudiate such a pro-
posal ; these enquiries are demanded by the very importance and
sacredness of the subject; and, if instituted, they must be carried
on with no other purpose than that of following truth whithersoever
it may lead us.
But there is another aspect of science, of which the previous
Papers that I have read have been partial illustrations, and that
is, that all things are conducted according to invariable rules, and,
to use the common phraseology, through the instrumentality of
second causes, which even more conflicts with the theological spirit.
But apart from the question of miracles, with which I do not here
intermeddle, only remarking that the evidence to prove a miracle
must be strong in proportion to the exceptional character of the
fact to be proved, 1 imagine there is no well-informed person (I beg
pardon, I must except modern spiritualists, but excepting them)
who does not admit that the course of nature is now uninterrupted,
and that all results are brought about by the silent operation of
natural forces working in definite and prearranged directions, and
producing, no doubt, their appointed results. The Hebrew poets
regarded thunder as the voice of Jehovah, and lightning as the
breath of his nostrils ; hail and snow were laid up in his storehouses
to be poured forth at his will; and, in fact, every occurrence, whether
helpful or hurtful, was referred to his direct agency. We, however,
see in thunder and lightning and hail the effect of electrical agencies.
Even the courses of the winds and the fall of rain are found to be
regulated by laws as definite as those which cause the succession


of day and night; and in all surrounding circumstances we are able,
altogether or proximately, to refer them to their causes and to show
the manner in which those causes operate. But we do not, on that
account, deny the being of God, or conceive of nature as existing
independently of him. We are unable, doubtless, to represent to
ourselves the mode of his existence, or the character of his relation
to the phenomena by which we are surrounded and the sum of which
we call nature, but we look upon all manifestations of power or
beauty as tokens of his presence, and we regard the laws which we
are able to trace, not as hiding him from us but, as revelations of his
method of government, and as enabling us, however imperfectly, to
conceive of some of his attributes. And if we are to believe what
reason, no less than revelation, would seem to teach, that he is the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, then this may be presumed to
have been the method of his government from the beginning. And
yet whenever attempts are made to suggest the manner in which
the existing order of things may have been developed by the opera-
tion of laws which still subsist, there is always more or less of sus-
picion attaching to the attempt, as if it were derogatory to God to
show that he was not like man, and that his operations have none
of those marks of weakness and imperfection which characterize our
own.
It is probable, however, that one great source of the objection
felt to these views is the fact that they conflict more emphatically
than even the views as to the antiquity of the human race, or as to
the non-occurrence of the flood, with the Book of Genesis, and with
theological deductions from it, especially as to the fall. For, if the
world has existed under the same laws from the first moment of its
formation; if all things have been slowly shaping themselves
into fitness for the existence of higher and higher classes of being,
organic and inorganic nature gradually assuming improved forms ;
and if, as the culmination of the long progress, Man appeared, at
first in a low animal form, but gradually elevated to higher and
higher types—then the whole doctrine of the fall, as represented in
eur systems of theology, and of the present degradation of our race
as compared with its early elevation, and of the deterioration of ex-
ternal nature as a consequence, is obviously erroneous.
I may, however, venture to observe upon this point that, although
this view is inconsistent with the historical truth of the narrative in
Genesis, yet the idea of the fall answers to facts lying deep in the
human consciousness, and to which the experience of every man
will testify. The contrast between faith and practice—between


resolve and performance—between tbe excellence which we are
able to conceive and that which we can embody in action—is a real
and permanent fact in the nature of man, whatever be the language
in which it is expressed or the cause to which it is to be referred.
Whether we say, with St. Paul, “ To will is present with me, but
how to perform that which is good I know not,” or with the heathen
poet, “ I see, and I approve the things which are better : I follow
the things which are worse”—whether, with Augustine and his
modern followers, we regard it as a predestined result of the sin of
Adam, which was itself predestined, or, with some recent thinkers,
as a proof of the growing supremacy of the human reason and con-
science, an increasing knowledge of good and evil which brings with
it an admiration of the former, accompanied by a consciousness of
subjection to the latter, or in whatever other forms it may be repre-
sented or embodied—it remains as a fact. And, consequently, no
theological doctrines which are based upon its existence would seem
to be affected by the result of any scientific investigation, though
dogmas which rest entirely upon the form of the narrative must fall
if the narrative itself is shown to be at variance with fact.
There is, then, even at the present time, an opposition upon these
various grounds between science and theology. And, while theology
has been stationary, at any rate since the .Reformation, for the
same questions are agitating theologians now as were then raised,
and are apparently as far from settlement as ever, science has con-
tinued to advance; and, regarding the signs of the times, it would
seem destined to continue its progress, unless stopped by some
catastrophe such as that which overwhelmed the civilizations of
Greece and Rome. For, however much it maybe distrusted or de-
nounced, the obvious practical benefits which it confers upon society,
and the political, intellectual, and material superiority of those
countries in which its unfettered cultivation is permitted, as com-
pared with those where the theological spirit is in the ascendant,
are too plain and palpable to allow any doubt of its utility and value.
The nations for whom science has done and is doing so much
will never willingly consent to dry up the sources of their progress
by throwing impediments in the way of its further development.
Whatever, consequently, may be its effects, they are inevitable, and
must be accepted as necessary elements in any scheme for the future.
If science stood in need of State patronage or of artificial fostering
of any kind, there might be some uncertainty as to its permanence
and progress. It needs, however, no other encouragement than to
be let alone, and then its inherent attractions will secure for it a


crowd of willing votaries by whose efforts it is advanced in every
direction. And whenever any obj ect requires for its accomplish-
ment more than isolated individuals can perform, the results to be
attained are such as to ensure the ready union of private persons
or to command the support of the public. And as a result of this
progress, we may expect to see every occurrence in nature and every
historical record explained and accounted for by being referred
either certainly or probably to natural circumstances acting in obe-
dience with or in analogy to known laws. No doubt the time of
the complete fulfilment of this anticipation is far distant, but every
year will see some progress made towards it, and every step in the
progress is an earnest and a prophecy of its ultimate realization.
But, in this case, what is to be the attitude and what the function
of theology? For the last four centuries theologians have been
fighting a losing battle in every country in which free thought has
been permitted. They have been compelled to concede one point
after another, always after having continued the defence when im-
partial bye-standers could clearly discern that the point was already
lost. And they have at last retired unwillingly and under protest,
not seldom anathematizing those by whose labours they have been
compelled to recede. And in countries in which thought has been
fettered and enquiry forbidden or its results stifled, theology has
been able to hold its ground only on the condition of arresting the
mental progress of the nation. So that a very few years since (as
late as 1857) a Spanish archbishop could denounce the whole circle
of modern science, including the discoveries which have immor-
talized the names of Newton, Laplace, and others as only a renewal
and reproduction of errors which had been a thousand times refuted
and denounced by the Church !* Might we not fancy this to be an
echo of recent orthodox denunciations in England ? Are theo-
logians prepared to continue a conflict in which defeat is assured if
the terms of the combat are equal, or in which victory, or rather
escape, is only possible on the terms of prohibiting all enquiry into
the subject ? Or will they not rather recognise the fact that nature
* I subjoin a translation of the passage so far as material. It occurs in a note in
’‘Buckle’s History of Civilization in England,” vol. ii., p. 147. ‘‘Firstly, that the schools
of Holland, Germany, England, and France, hostile to Catholicism, have commenced
and prosecuted with the utmost zeal certain philosophical discussions, presenting them
as a triumph of reason over religion, of philosophy over theology, and of materialism
over spiritualism. Secondly, that these maxims are, for the most part, nothing more
than the reproduction or further development of errors a thousand times refuted and
condemned by a holy philosophy and by the Church, so that instead of having to con-
gratulate themselves upon their progress, they should far rather blush for their retro-
gression.”


is as truly a revelation of God as any book can be; that the reason
of man is a God-implanted faculty and its free exercise a sacred duty,
and that, in the exercise of his reason for the purpose of discovering
the laws or elucidating the phenomena of nature, man is only bringing
into broader light the proofs of the wisdom and goodness of God ?
This alternative is open to them, and in spite of the clamour which
a few have raised, and which the many have echoed, I think there
are some symptoms that no inconsiderable portion of the theologians
of the present day will adopt the latter course.
In this case the task of the theologian is marked out before him.
He has two objects to keep in view. The first is to show that the
essential doctrines of theology are and will remain unaffected by
any scientific conclusions, to separate them from all extraneous or
adventitious elements with which they may have become mingled,
and to present them in their purity and simplicity; and the second
is to consecrate, so to speak, the conclusions of science by showing
their harmony with these essential truths and by bringing out their
religious significance. The attitude which theology in Protestant
countries has long since assumed with regard to astronomy may be
taken as an illustration of the spirit in which this twofold task
should be performed. There can be no doubt that in the first in-
stance the system of Copernicus was regarded as eminently anti-
theological and atheistical. It was at variance with the letter of
the Bible, with the teaching of the Church, and with the doctrines
of the Fathers, and, by destroying the localities in which mediaeval
theology had placed its heaven and its hell, it seemed to annihilate
the belief in those future rewards and punishments of which they
were to be the theatre. But now-a-days no one, in England at least,
even dreams of there being any such contradiction, and the dis-
coveries of astronomy are referred to as a sort of common place for
illustrations of the infinity, power, wisdom, and goodness of the
Creator. It is true that more is involved, or rather, perhaps, more
seems to us to be involved, in admitting the antiquity of man —the
origin of all species, including man, by development out of lower
organisms—the late date and uncertain authorship of the Penta-
teuch—to take only a few of the matters which are still the battle-
field of science and theology. Nor do I assert or assume that these
are now proved, or that ever they will be proved, at any rate, with
the same absoluteness of demonstration as belongs to the dis-
coveries of astronomy. But, if not proved, these opinions are held
by men eminent for ability, learning, patient investigation, and a
reverent spirit, and they are winning their way into an ever widening


circle of disciples. They demand recognition, then, as plausible,
and even as probable hypotheses ; not proved, but coming year by
year nearer to proof; and as such a theologian might deal with
them. And surely there are aspects under which all of these might
be made to subserve the purposes of theology. lam no professional
theologian, but I might, perhaps, suggest as appropriate and as
sanctioned by precedent such as these. The enlarged view which
they present of the period during which the divine energy and
superintendence has been manifested on our globe—the confirmation
which they give to the Divine wisdom and immutability in showing
that one system of laws has prevailed from the very commencement
of organization, and that system so arranged as gradually to evolve
all that we now see—the manner in which instrumentalities of the
most varied and seemingly unlikely kind have been employed for the
education of the world and in preparing it for higher and purer
teaching—these are some of the lessons which might be deduced,
and which, whether or not the most appropriate or edifyingthat might
be drawn, may at least suffice to show that theology need not lose
anything essential, or any instrument for elevating or purifying the
intellect or the character, even were these conclusions adopted.
To me the opposition between science and theology has always
appeared most unfortunate. The implied stigma cast upon science,
by denouncing its enquiries as presumptuous and unwarranted and
its conclusions as irreligious and atheistical, is injurious to the mental
tone of those to whom it is addressed, and the consequent injury to
theology when it is perceived, as in many cases it is, that what has
been so denounced is nevertheless demonstrably true has been at
least equal. If I could believe that the opposition was necessarily
inherent in the nature of the two conceptions, I should have no
prospect before me but on the one hand the destruction of theology
or on the other the enslavement of the human intellect, either of
which I should regard as a misfortune of almost equal magnitude;
though undoubtedly the former would be the more tolerable and
the more hopeful condition : for man, by his very constitution, if left
free, would frame a theology for himself, not, we may believe,
without the guiding spirit of God, while the enslaved intellect might
struggle for ages without ever raising itself to a worthy conception
of its author, its nature, or its destinies. But I do not think that
there is any such essential incompatibility between the two, and it
appears to me, therefore, that their present conflict arises from mis-
taken views on one side or the other, which a calm and dispassionate
investigation may help to remove.


~TAf f
BfBUO
Ftozt?
// c€f‘- {
W. K. THOMAS, PEINTEE, EEGISTEK OFFICE, ADELAIDE,




*• ■■■ « 4 •
-
.
. * 4 *•'"■■■
* , . V-' ■ ■ ■ > ■ •-*
, ir
