





A HISTORICAL INQUIRY
INTO THE EFFICACY OF
LIME = JUICE FOR THE
PREVENTION AND CURE
OF SCURVY...
By Alice Henderson Smith.
Reprinted from the Journal of the Royal Army Medical Corps.
February and March, 1919
LONDON: JOHN BALE,
SONS & DANIELSSON,
Ltd., OXFORD HOUSE,
83-91, GT. TITCHFIBLD
STREET. W. 1....


A HISTORICAL INQUIRY INTO THE EFFICACY OF LIME-
JUICE FOR THE PREVENTION AND CURE OF SCURVY. 1
By ALICE HENDERSON SMITH.
{From the Lister Institute.)
TABLE OP CONTENTS.'
I. —lntroduction.
ll. —What Lime Juice Was and Is.
111. —lndications that Lemon Juice (“ Lime Juice”) was responsible for the Dis-
appearance op Scurvy from the Navy at the Beginning of the Nine-
teenth Century.
Measures taken to secure a Pure and Unadulterated Supply op Lemon
Juice-. -
IV. —lntroduction op Lime Juice prepared from the West Indian Sour Limes.
V. — (i) Experience from Two Arctic Expeditions—McClure’s (1850) and Narks’
(1875) —PROVIDED WITH LEMON JUICE AND LIME JUICE RESPECTIVELY.
(ii) Official Inquiry into the Causes op the Outbreak op Scurvy in Nares’
Expedition, 1876.
(iii) Detailed Comparison op the Diet op the Two Expeditions ; the Value
op Fresh Meat ; Herbs and Vegetables available ; Beer supplied.
(iv) Quantity and Nature of the Lime Juice Ration; Methods op Prepara-
tion and Issue.
(v) Value op Lime Juice in the Treatment op Scurvy.
VI. —Experience on other Ships of the Search for Franklin, 1847-59.
' Vll.— Evidence of the Antiscorbutic Value op Lime Juice afforded by the
Experience op Recent Arctic Expeditions ; Influence of Improved and
Ampler Diet.
VIII.— Summary.'
I.—INTRODUCTION.
The antiscorbutic value of fruit juices was recognized three hundred
and more years ago, and the traditional faith in lime juice as a specific
remedy and preventive for scurvy is of very old standing. During the wars
of the second half of the eighteenth century, this belief was so constantly
and so powerfully confirmed that in spite of the great expense and diffi-
culties entailed, a regular supply was eventually adopted by the British
Admiralty; and early in the nineteenth century the disease, hitherto a
most serious menace to the efficiency of the Navy, was practically
eliminated by the introduction of a general issue of so-called “ lime juice.”
The firm belief in lime juice is not, however, shared by those who in
recent years have had occasion to put its value to a practical test. Dis-
1 A short abstract of the results contained in this paper was published in the Lancet,
November 30, 1913.


appointment in its antiscorbutic powers may be traced in the reports of
Arctic explorers towards the end of the nineteenth century. During the
present war, lime juice prepared from the West Indian sour lime has been
issued to troops when the military circumstances rendered an adequate
supply of fresh meat and vegetables impossible, and the opinion formed of
it by medical officers who have been confronted with outbreaks of scurvy
among the troops appears to be equally unfavourable.
An experimental study of scurvy has recently been carried out by a
group of workers at the Lister Institute. 1 These researches have largely
been devoted to an experimental determination of the relative antiscorbutic
value of different foodstuffs, and among these considerable attention has
been paid to *fresh and preserved fruit juices. The fresh juices of oranges
and lemons were found to be among the most potently antiscorbutic of the
materials examined ; that of the fresh, ripe lime was discovered to be
markedly inferior to that of the lemon, and preserved lime juice, as issued
to the Services, was found to be useless for the prevention of scurvy by
the method employed. 2
The following historical investigation was undertaken in the hope that
light might be thrown upon the divergence between the Naval experience
of a century ago on the one hand, and the recent experience with outbreaks
of scurvy in man and experiments upon animals on the other. The
explanation that has emerged is both satisfactory and simple. It has
appeared that the introduction of the juice of the West Indian lime as the
lime juice ration in the Navy and Mercantile Marine dates only from the
latter half of the nineteenth century, when the faster rate of travel, among
other changes, caused a great improvement in the dietary on board ship,
and any serious reliance upon the antiscorbutic value of the lime juice
carried would be an extremely rare occurrence. In the early part of the
nineteenth century, when the lime juice ration often provided the only
antiscorbutic food in the sailors’ dietary, it was the juice of lemons from
the Mediterranean that was employed.
The contrast in the value of these two products is dramatically shown
in the experience of two Arctic expeditions, provided respectively with the
juice of lemons and of limes, of which a full description is given in the
following pages. In other respects the circumstances seem to have been
comparable. The “Investigator,” commanded by McClure, which went in
search of Sir John Franklin, 1850 to 1854, was supplied with lemon juice
and enjoyed immunity from scurvy for over two years, notwithstanding
great privations. The “ Alert ” and “ Discovery,” in 1875, were the first
ships on Arctic service to which the preserved juice of West Indian limes
was issued. To the dismay of all concerned, severe scurvy broke out after
1 Chick and Hume. 1917. Trans. Soc. of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene , vol. x,
p. 141.
' Chick, Hume and Skelton. 1918. Lancet, November 30, 1918.


the first winter spent in the Arctic circle. The Admiralty Committee
appointed in 1876 to inquire into the cause of this outbreak found no
satisfactory explanation. It took no cognizance of the ,change in the
nature of the lime juice provided. In the light of the experimental
researches mentioned above, this substitution of limes for lemons in the
preparation of lime juice appears to have been the cause of the disaster. .
II.—WHAT LIME JUICE WTAS AND IS.
“ . . . The jnyce of Lemmons is a precious medicine and well tried,
being sound and good, let it have the chiefe place, for it will deserve it,
the use whereof is : It is to be taken each morning two or three spoon-
fulls, and fast after it two houres, and if you add one spoonfull of Aquavitae
thereto to a cold stomack, it is the better. Also if you take a little thereof
at night it is good to mix therewith some sugar, or to take the syrup
thereof is not amisse. . . . In want whereof, use the juyce of Limes,
Oranges or Citrons, or the pulpe of Tamarinds.’' So, in his chapter on
scurvy, Dr. John Woodall, a surgeon of the East India Company, in “The
Surgeon’s Mate,” which was published in 1617. The knowledge of this
precious medicine was not new in his day, and he knew almost as much
of the use of it as we do to-day. And in his day there was “a good
quantitie of the juyce of Lemmons sent in each ship out of England by
the great care of the Marchants, and intended onely for the relief of
every poore man in his neede, which is an admirable comfort to poore
men in that disease.” But the knowledge of it did not grow as the need
for it grew and multiplied ; and the merchants, with the growth and
complication of their affairs and the continual increase of shipping, failed
in this personal great care of the seamen carrying their merchandise ; and
invention failed to meet the problem of the preserving of a fresh fruit on
long voyages. A century and a half later, Dr, Lind became the authority
of his day on scurvy, and made a great step forward by his attempt to
solve that problem. But when in the second half of the eighteenth
century England was involved in war after war, scurvy was still
unconquered and its ravages were such as seriously to menace the efficiency
of the Navy and thus the safety of the country. Many remedies were
tried, more or less ineffective, before the juice of lemons, limes and
oranges, proved to be useful by generations of merchant sailors, was
adopted and its preparation and issue begun on a large scale.
Recent investigation 1 having thrown doubt on the efficacy as an anti-
scorbutic of the lime juice now issued to the Services, it has become desir-
able to seek in history for any information as to the qualities, the source
and preparation of the “lime juice” that was used when its reputation
was made in the Navy. The examination of the Admiralty records with
1 Chick and Hume, 1917. Trans. Soc. Tropical Medicine and Hygiene , x, 141.


this object has been disappointing, large series of records having been
destroyed, including the medical records; and of those that remain many
are chaotic masses, unordered, unindexed, undigested, so that a search for
details so remote is laborious and its harvest small. Exact information is
the more difficult to obtain because in the early days of the use in the
Navy of the citronaceous fruits, there was practically no discrimination
between limes and lemons. Again and again the terms “ lemon juice ” and
“ lime juice ” are used indifferently in the same letter, of the same consign-
ment; either term was .applied indiscriminately to the juice of limes and
lemons, and the confusion remains to-day. Limes and lemons were taken
to be to all intents and purposes the same thing, and the only occasion on
which I have found them definitely differentiated in the correspondence of
the Sick and Wounded Board, during the time when scurvy was a pressing
problem, is in a question of the number of fruits required in the treatment
of cases, and so is a reference only to the difference of size between the
two fruits.
The two words both derive from a word that takes different forms in
different parts of the far East, lemon, lim.oo, lemo, etc., but stands for the
whole genus Citrus. 1 The two fruits were differently named in England
early, but before the lime was familiar the lemon was called lymon, and
later limon and limmon. From the same origin the French derive limon
and limonier (Citrus limonum, Risso ; our lemon and lemon-tree), but except
in the south they use citron for the lemon (an irregularity deprecated by Risso
who refuses to conform with it), and limonade and jus de citron represent
equally and interchangeably our lime juice and lemon juice, which does
not tend to relieve the confusion. Thus in the records —
“ The Lemon and the piercing Lime
Their lighter glories blend,
making it a matter of difficulty to divide and consider their relative virtues
or to recognize what fruit exactly was used for the health of the Navy,
until one turns to the source of supplies. There at least, in correspondence
in connexion with the actual purchase of the fruit, one may expect to find
more exact terminology, and from its source to learn what the fruit was.
According to the authorities, Linnaeus, Risso, 2 &c., Citrus medica, includes all
citrons, lemons and limes. Risso, in his exhaustive catalogue of the oranges of
Europe, calls the lemon C. limonum, and gives the varieties G. limonum vulgaris and
G. limonum bignetta as the two most cultivated on the shores of the Mediterranean.
They are the lemons of our daily use. It is the G. limonum that is grown
exclusively for commercial purposes in the south of Italy. G. limetta is the
lime of the south of Europe and was cultivated some centuries ago in the south of
France much more than in Risso’s time or since. G. limetta hispanica is a variety
1 “Cultivated Oranges and Lemons of India.” E. Bonavia, M.D., 1888.
2 “ L’histoire Naturelle. des Grangers de I’Europe,” Risso et Poiteau. 1818, Second
Edition, 1873.


grown in Spain from remote times, but the lemon is the more important product
there too. In his “ Reflections on the Commerce of the Mediterranean,” 1 1804,
a book that gained the attention and respect of the Admiralty, Jackson does not
mention the lime at all, among the exports, but he gives lemons, oranges, lemon
juice and the essences of lemon and bergamot in his list of Sicily’s important pro-
ducts. The G. limetta is a sweet lime, its juice being but slightly acid ; it is hardly
distinguishable from C. lumia which is also called sweet lime or sweet lemon, and
it is akin to the sweet limes of India.
The sour lime is quite another variety. 2 It is the C. medico, , var. acida, and does
not occur in Eisso’s list of the European varieties. Like all the genus Citrus it
came from the East Indies, but it was very long ago taken by European colonists to
the West Indies, and since the middle of the last century its cultivation there has
become a very large industry. It is C. medico acida from which our modern lime
juice is procured.
We know, then, that limes from the Mediterranean were sweet limes
only and we know that the Italian fruit was lemons only. The West Indian
lime is the sour lime, which demands different conditions of climate for its
growth.
It is not by any means easy to find the source of the fruit at first used
by the Admiralty, as all the contracts of the Sick and Wounded Board
have been destroyed, and at first it was the Sick and Wounded Board that
bought and issued the juice. From information available in scraps in
departmental correspondence, however, it appears that the juice that was
used did come from the Mediterranean. For years there was great
difficulty in getting enough. The Sick and Wounded Board periodically
recommended the extension of its use, to which the Lords Commissioners
replied that such was their intention, that they were only waiting for the
Sick and Wounded Board whose business it was to find the supply. In
1796 Spain changed over to the French side in the war, thereby reducing
the available sources of the fruit and so raising the price. Deficiencies
were made up to a certain extent with lemons from Lisbon, but it was
then hoped to get lime juice cheap from the West Indies and inquiries
were sent to the victualling agent and to the Commander-in-Chief on the
Jamaica station. Keports were received but have not been preserved, and
presumably they must have been unfavourable as there is no reference to
any supplies coming thence. When, after the Battle of the Nile in 1798,
Nelson took possession of Malta, we had in our own control an ample
source of supplies of lemon juice, but it is not until September, 1803, that
we find the first attempt to get a supply from Malta. The Commander-in-
Chief on the Mediterranean, Lord Nelson, was asked to inquire into the
possibility of doing so, and the resulting report was so favourable that
contracts were immediately formed. (The price quoted for the fruit juice
1 “Reflections on the Commerce of the Mediterranean.” John Jackson, F.S.A. 1804.
2 “ The Sour Lime,’’ Botanical Magazine , tab. 6745. Sir J. D. Hooker.


was Is. per gallon, while the London contractors who had supplied the
Admiralty from 1794, tendered at the same time a quantity at “Bs. per
gallon, or, in the event of war with Spain, 9s. per gallon.” Presumably
freight was very high then, owing to war risks, as it is now.)
It is possible, then, that the “ lime juice ” issued before 1804 had in it
at least a proportion of the juice of sweet limes as well as of lemons. After
that the whole supply until 1860 at least (with the exception of that for
the West India squadron from 1846, to which reference is made later) was
contracted for at Malta and consisted of the juice of lemons grown in
Malta and Sicily. This Malta lemon juice was used for all our ships, and
sent not only to Halifax and the Baltic, but to the Cape of Good Hope and
to the West Indies, and even the Gibraltar station was supplied from
Malta.
III.—INDICATIONS THAT LEMON JUICE- (“ LIME JUICE ”) WAS RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE DISAPPEARANCE OF SCURVY FROM THE NAVY AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
One fact that emerges clear from the Admiralty correspondence is that
the regular issue of lemon juice was achieved not all at once, but only
gradually over a number of years. In his much-quoted statement, made in
the year 1830, that the use of lemon juice in the Navy was begun in 1795,
and scurvy “ totally rooted out” within two years, Sir Gilbert Blane 1 was
swayed by an optimistic enthusiasm, after the work had been accomplished
and found to be good.
There was no regular and general issue of lemon juice in the Navy in 1795.
Indeed lemon juice was practically one of the things for which the sailors mutinied
in 1797. Among the very modest demands drawn up by the companies of fifteen
ships in mutiny in April of that year, one was : “ That your Lordships will be
pleased to look into the state of the sick. . . . that their necessaries be not
on any account embezzled.” Another, “ That there may be granted a sufficient
quantity of vegetables of such kinds as may be most plentiful in the ports to
which we go; which we grievously complain and lay under want of.” And an
interesting letter 2 of Admiral Waldegrave shows that the seamen knew the
value of lemon juice and resented its not being supplied to them. In November,
1897, the Admiral had requested that he might have expenses allowed from last
May, for vegetables and lemon juice he had bought, which their Lordships
refused, and he appealed again:—
“ London, December 2, 1797.
“Evan Nepean, Esq.,
“ Sin, —In answer to your letter of 24th ultimo, stating that the Lords -Com-
missioners of the Admiralty conceive it might have been proper for me to have
' “A Brief Statement of the Progressive Improvement in the Health of the Royal
Navy,” Sir Gilbert Blane, 1830, p. 13.
2 Pub. Rec. Off., Adm. Sec.’s In-letters.


ordered a supply of lemon juice to H.M.S. ‘Pluto ’ from the time of my receiving
the application to that effect, but that they cannot allow of its bearing a retrospect,
and will not admit of any charge of that description being brought against the
Public, I have to request that their Lordships will be pleased to take into con-
sideration the temper of the times and my own peculiar delicate situation, which
not only required of me the nicest judgment to preserve my squadron from
breaking out into a determined open mutiny, but also demanded no less manage-
ment and circumspection to prevent the mutineers from increasing the apparent
discontent of the troops and forming a junction with them.
“In this critical situation the ‘ Pluto’s ’ ship’s company applied to me for
lemon juice and sugar, the same as had been issued to the ‘ Latona ’ and
‘ Romney,’ demanding that the allowance might take place from the time it had
been first issued to the latter ship. In this dilemma, being but too sensible how
little command I had over the seamen of the squadron, and being apprehensive
that I should receive no real support from the troops, I determined to make a
virtue of necessity and comply with their request. Were it necessary to call
witnesses on the occasion, I could prove that this very measure kept the crew of
the ‘ Pluto ’ from joining in the mutinous proceedings of the ‘ Latona,’ which
had it once taken place, I am certain the troops would have joined in the league,
the ‘ Pluto’s ’ people from their long residence in this country being closely
connected with the whole of them.
“ (signed) William Waldbgravb,”
There is a marginal note on this letter, which may be in Sir Gilbert Blane’s
own handwriting as he was then one of the Commissioners of the Sick and
Wounded Board. “December 4; Let me see whether he received the second
order about confining the use of lemon juice and sugar to those only on the surgeon's
list.”
Even in 1801, it was only after some correspondence with the Sick and
Wounded Board, of which Sir Gilbert Blane was still a member, and after over-
coming obstruction, that Dr. Baird, surgeon on board Lord St. Vincent’s flagship,
got that full issue of lemon juice to the Fleet during the siege of Brest that secured
for it the exceptional record of health triumphantly cited by Sir Gilbert Blane.
It was only in August, 1804, that the representations of Dr. Baird to the Lords
Commissioners achieved the order that lemon juice and sugar should be issued
regularly to the Channel Fleet. Before that it was given only to ships going on
foreign service and for the use of the sick.
*
And so far from scurvy having been stamped out within two years of
1795, thousands of cases continued to occur well into the next century.
That they ceased to occur in large numbers in the records of the naval
hospitals was due to the fact that in the new sick bay and with the
improved knowledge and more uniform treatment of the disease, it was
found to be as easily curable on boardship as on shore. Indeed, the swing
of that pendulum is shown by the statement of Dr. William Turnbull, 1
in 1806, that it could not be so well cured on land as at sea.
1 “ The Naval Surgeon, Comprising the entire duties of Professional men at Sea.”
William Turnbull, A.M., 1806.


There is no question, however, of the very great value of lemon juice,
as demonstrated by the history of individual ships in this period. Where
no lemon juice was issued scurvy raged, and when lemon juice or lemons
and oranges were supplied, the scurvy was immediately abated or cured.
That is a commonplace. But the question of the exact share taken by this
important issue in the general very gradual improvement in the conditions
of the seamen is complicated by its introduction coinciding with many
other changes of enormous importance to the health of the Navy. Apart
from the fact that before 1797, owing to the dishonesty of pursers and
surgeons, medicines and comforts very often failed to reach the sick men
for whom they were . issued, the adoption of the issue of lemon juice
concurred with the introduction and increasing use of vegetables in the
seamen’s diet, due to the efforts of Dr. Trotter; with very much improved
issues of fresh meat; with more uniform and more considerate treatment
of the sick and ailing ; with great improvements in the men’s quarters ; and
with the copperplating of ships, making them cleaner and therefore faster,
as well as drier. The study of these changes is full of interest, but for the
immediate purpose of comparing lemon juice and lime juice it is more
useful to go forward to the middle of the nineteenth century and look for
any information that maybe gleaned round about the time when the change
was made by the Admiralty from the one fruit to the other.
During the first half of the century evidence continued to accumulate
in favour of “lime juice”—that is, the juice from the Mediterranean.
When practically extinct in the Navy, scurvy flourished in the Mercantile
Marine, especially in ships sailing to and from the east, and was reduced
when the use of “lime or lemon juice” was made compulsory by the
Act of 1844 ; l and, again, when the Act of 1867 2 doubled the compulsory
issue (jounce increased to one ounce daily), and secured that the juice
supplied should reach a certain standard of quality, there was a significant
drop in the number of cases received into the Seamen's Hospital. 3
Measures taken to ensure a Pure and Unadulterated
Supply of Lemon Juice.
The purity of the supply for* the Navy was always a matter of much
care and concern, and there was difficulty, and sometimes failure, in
securing it from adulteration. As was natural, injured or decayed fruit
that was not fit to be shipped was made into “ lime juice,” 1 and in 1853 we
1 7 and 8 Viet. Cap. 112, S. 18, by which the master of every ship must supply lime or
lemon juice or other such articles as the Board of Trade may sanction as substitutes, and
sugar and vinegar, whenever the crew have consumed salt provisions for ten days; | ounce
each daily of juice and sugar, and one pint of vinegar weekly.
2 Merchant Shipping Amendment Act, 1867.
3 Win. Johnson Smith, F.E.C.S., Seamen’s Hospital, Greenwich r in Practitioner, 1896,
vol. Ivi, p. 579, and Lancet, August 15, 1891. 1
* Jackson, “Commerce of the Mediterranean,” 1804.


find the statement without comment in a medical work, 1 “Lemon juice
has long been regarded as an invaluable antiscorbutic ; but, on account of
the difficulty of preserving it, crystallized citric acid is usually substituted.
From about 1838 complaints were made repeatedly about the quality of
the lemon juice being supplied from Malta, but severe therapeutic tests
were not then occurring in the ordinary service of the Navy, as the sbips
were seldom exposed to scurvy conditions. Polar exploration, however,
offered opportunities for testing it, and Sir James Boss’s expedition of
1848 returned in 1849 with a report of a serious outbreak. The lemon
juice supplied to his ships was examined and was found to lack nine parts
in ten of the proper acid content. The grave importance of the matter
was at once apparent, and Sir William Burnett, Medical Director General,
began an exhaustive inquiry. All lemon juice in the victualling stores was
analysed, with results showing that all was below the proper standard of
acidity, although none of the reports showed so large a deficit as that of
the juice brought home by the expedition. The method of preparation
was reported on in great detail, and opinions obtained from several
chemists as to the point at which it had failed. It appears from these
reports that nothing was lacking of care and precision from the moment
at which it was delivered to the_ Naval representatives by the contractors.
But the fruit was being gathered in summer, instead of in the first months
of the year, when its acid content is greatest, and there was no guarantee
that the fruit used was sound. Moreover, the juice was allowed to settle
for a month, to clear it, before it was tested for acidity, after which the
preservative agent was added, so that, the chemists said, fermentation had
probably often begun before the addition of the spirit. And we know now
that in that time it had lost considerable antiscorbutic potency. It has to
be remembered that lemon juice was a bye-product for the contractors,
their principal business being concerned with the rind of the fruit in the
preparation of essential oils and crystallized peel. The unsatisfactory
standard, or want of standard, of cleanliness, too, of the native workers
demanded new clauses and safeguards in later contracts. From that time
an officer was sent from Malta to Messina, or wherever juice was bought,
to superintend its production in the interests of the Service. To be
perfectly sure in the meantime that the other Arctic explorers who were
about to leave England should have the best possible, the Medical Director
General caused fresh lemons to be bought, and juice to be prepared specially
for them at Deptford. He thus secured for them a supply much better than
any that was then to be bought in the open market, and the ships furnished
with it enjoyed a remarkable immunity from scurvy.
1 Pereira, Materia Medica, Third Edition, 1853, p. 1999.


IV.—INTRODUCTION OF LIME JUICE PREPARED FROM THE
WEST INDIAN SOUR LIMB.
The supply of reliable “lime juice” was still not equal to the need
when the industry of its production was started in the West Indies by
Messrs. Edmund Sturge, citric acid manufacturers of Birmingham, who
undertook it, at first on a small scale, when they bought land for the
purpose in Montserrat in the early fifties. Lime juice from the West
Indies had been tried with a view to its use in the Navy, ou the suggestion
of the Governor of Bermuda, in 1845. Sir William Burnett, taking up
any idea that might lead to the improvement of supplies, caused samples
from Bermuda to be tested and compared with Malta samples. The report
of the Bermuda juice was so favourable that although its cost was rather
more, an order was given in 1846 that H.M. ships stationed there should
be supplied with this, the produce of the colony. Eventually, in the sixties,
the Admiralty arranged contracts for the whole of its supply of lime juice
from the West Indies. This it was enabled to do by the development of
the cultivation of the lime in Montserrat, where the production was
managed in such a way as to secure the fruit being collected uniformly at
the stage of its growth when it is of most value, and to secure also the
utmost possible purity of the juice as prepared for use. It was considered
very superior to the old supply, was probably much cleaner and stronger in
acid, and the Merchant Service adopted it, too, as far as it was available.
The tests of quality were always chemical of course, not therapeutic,
and consisted principally in ascertaining the amount of alkali that was
neutralized by a given amount of juice. As a matter of fact, it was a
mistake to suppose that acidity was necessarily the important element.
Pure citric acid was known a hundred years ago to compare unfavourably
with the fruit juice in the treatment of scurvy, and yet, by another
confusing eccentricity, the surgeons then often spoke of their fresh lemon
juice as “citric acid”; it was still supposed that it was the combination
of the acids in it that was important. Recently the protective value of
lemon juice from which all the citric acid has been extracted, has been
tested experimentally, and it has been found to be unimpaired ; l so that
mere alkali tests, although useful as a check on the purity of supplies, were
really no just measure of the antiscorbutic potency.
In the meantime a new and momentous change of conditions comes in
with the beginning and development of steam navigation. With steam
power, voyages were so shortened that ships' companies were never for
many weeks cut off from fresh supplies, so at a stride lime juice was
enormously relieved of its responsibility, and tests of its merit thus
became fewer. Still, however, the history of Polar exploration gives an
opportunity for studying the incidence of disease in definite relation to the
1 Harden and Zilva, 1918. Biochemical Journal, vol. xii, pp. 259.


various prophylactics. There we get exact statements of the amounts and
kinds of food used, and should be able to make some estimate of the value
of different rations. Before 1860 all the juice issued by the Admiralty was
■the juice of lemons from Malta, and it is interesting to compare the
experience of Arctic explorers immediately before that date with that of
the expedition of 1875, the first that was supplied with the juice of limes
from Montserrat. In other essentials their conditions were very similar.
In that point they differed. Does that difference possibly supply a key to
a question hitherto unanswered, the cause of the great contrast in their
experiences of scurvy?
V.—(i) EXPERIENCE FROM TWO ARCTIC EXPEDITIONS PROVIDED WITH
LEMON JUICE AND LIME JUICE RESPECTIVELY.
When Sir John Franklin sailed with the “Erebus ” and the “ Terror ”
in 1845 the problem of a North-West passage to the Indies and Cathay to
which so much energy and attention had been devoted by generations of
merchants, geographers and sailors, seemed to be very near a solution, but
gave precedence, on his failure to return in 1847, to the urgent question of
his safety. Then began a series of search expeditions following one
another closely, until Franklin’s fate was finally ascertained beyond doubt
by Sir L. McClintock in 1859. Of the many vessels that took part in the
search, a number left England in 1850, and I propose to compare the
voyage of one of these in particular, the “ Investigator,” with the 1875
expedition of Nares on the “Alert” and the “Discovery,” because we
know that the fruit juice was used in precisely the same manner, with the
game safeguards against any variation in the consumption of it, in the
two cases.
In 1850, the “ Enterprize,” Captain Collinson, and the “ Investigator,”
Captain McClure, went round by way of Behring Strait, while Captain
Austin’s four ships, “ Assistance,” “Resolute,” “Pioneer” and “Intrepid,”
followed Franklin’s route by Barrow Sound. Of the eastern ships,
Collinson’s, having searched a great part of the coast of America, got
home in 1854, and McClure and his companions in the “ Investigator ”
were the first men who actually traversed the North West passage,
although the second part of their journey in 1854 was made in a relief
ship, the “Investigator” having had to be abandoned, icebound, in 1853.
All these ships, although equipped with the utmost care and given all that
science or experience demanded as desirable and practicable for the
preservation of health, lived necessarily very near the scurvy line, and
most of them had more or less experience of scurvy. But in no case did
it threaten the efficiency of the ship’s crew even after a second winter
in the ice, and cases did not often occur before the second winter.
The “ Investigator’s ” crew had the longest term of all in polar seas.
Of their experience there is a closely detailed account published in 1858,


by the Medical Officer, Dr. Armstrong, 1 from the point of view of scurvy
solely. His ship’s company had a longer period of immunity from scurvy
than any previous party engaged on polar exploration, and this immunity
Dr. Armstrong attributes solely to the rigid regularity of the issue of good
lemon juice. The ship left England in January, 1850, and the first- case
of scurvy did not develop until the spring of 1852, twenty-seven months
after leaving home, and seven months after the principal rations had had to
be reduced to two-thirds of the quantities originally thought requisite.
The voyage out, which occupied six months, took the ship twice through
the tropics and round Cape Horn. During these six months they had
only, of fresh provisions, in the Strait of Magellan, two small bullocks
giving a few day’s fresh meat, and no vegetables; at the Sandwich Islands,
fresh meat for fourteen days and a quantity of vegetables of which the
different accounts ’vary from the “less than fourteen days’ supply’’ of
Dr. Armstrong’s 1 account to “ forty days’ supply ” of Captain Sherard
Osborn’s. 2 That it was enough to be of definite value is shown by Captain
McClure's letter to the Admiralty written immediately afterwards. “It gives
me great pleasure to say that the good effects of the fruit and vegetables
<a large quantity of which we took on board at Oahu) are very perceptible
in the increased vigour of the men, who at this moment are in as excellent
condition as it is possible to desire, and evince a spirit of confidence and
a cheerfulness of disposition which are beyond all appreciation.” But it
was certainly less than they hoped for, for the visit of the “ Enterprize ”
to the port, just before them, and the annual visit of the American whaling
fleet on their way north, had much reduced the resources immediately
available.
The ship met with bad weather, being twice dismasted by the violence
of the gales, and the conditions for the crew were very arduous ; she
became leaky and the lower deck was damp and ill-ventilated from the
frequent necessity of battening down the hatches. And the air on board
continued to be so damp and so impure from there being insufficient fuel
to dry and warm it, that cases of ague occurred each winter. Thus the
crew did not have a specially favourable preparation for their first winter
in the ice, nor did they have specially favourable conditions during their
long imprisonment, which lasted for three and a half years before they left
their ship. In that whole time there were three deaths from scurvy out
of a ship's complement of sixty-five.
As, in 1820, Parry had sighted Banks Land from Melville Island, but
had been unable to reach it because of the miles of impenetrable ice
of Melville Sound intervening, so in his first autumn McClure sighted
Parry’s farthest on Melville Island and knew that only those seventy
miles of ice lay between him and the making of a North-West passage.
1 “ Naval Hygiene and Scurvy.” Alex. Armstrong, M.D., R.N. 1858.
2 “ McClure’s Discovery of a North-West Passage.” Sherard Osborn.


He was then drifting fixed in the ice at the north end of Prince of Wales
Strait. The current carried him south and he wintered in the Strait,
1850-51. He tried again the next year but found it impossible to get his
ship through the ice and so took her south to make another attempt from
the western side of Banks Land. He was beset in the ice and had to
spend a second winter, 1851-52, in a bay on the north of the island, which
he called the Bay of Mercy. He never got his ship out again. He crossed
Melville Sound with sledges, expecting to find one of Austin’s ships, but
all he found was the record of their visit a year before. He left a record
on the same stone as Parry’s, and returned to spend a third winter,
1852-53, in surely as, hopeless a position as ship’s company ever waited
in. But that ship’s company never wavered in courage.
Their rations had had to be reduced in October, 1851, the beginning of
their second winter, because of the loss earlier of a boat’s load of salt
meat, and then the loss of 500 pounds of preserved meat, found to have
gone bad owing to fractures made in the tins in packing them in
England. In October, 1852, the rations were further reduced and the lemon
juice -ration was halved 1 so that they were on starvation allowance
through the third winter. In May, 1852, scurvy had begun, and now,
of course, made rapid strides and the men were mostly too weak and
disheartened even to hunt for game. Deer were plentiful however, and
they continued to get some. Happily their record was found by one of the
“ Resolute ” sledging parties and Lieutenant Pym arrived just a few days
before the date on which it had been arranged that a party should set out to
try to reach the coast of North America on foot. One can hardly doubt that
their fate would in all probability have been that of Franklin’s men who
made the same attempt, with much less distance to cover. Eventually,
after three and a half years of hardship and much suffering they crossed
Melville Sound and were taken on board the “ Resolute.” They are
described by an officer of this ship as looking, on their arrival, like men
who were out of their minds. On board the “ Resolute,” one “ Investigator ”
officer died of consumption, and later, on the “ North Star,” one man died
from the effects of .scurvy. All the others recovered. After another winter
the “ Resolute,” alqng with the others of Belcher’s ships, was in her turn
abandoned and the “Investigator” veterans completed their North-West
passage in the “ Nprth Star,” “Phoenix,” and “Talbot,” relief ships.
The immunityfrom scurvy in the first two years of the “Investigator’s”
voyage, while exceptionally complete, was not greatly different from that
recorded by other British ships of her own time. But the history is
far other of that expedition that left England in May, 1875, on board
the “Alert” and “Discovery” under Captain George Nares, to try to
1 By an oversight, it was erroneously stated in the La ncet , November 30, 1918, that the
lemon juice ratibn ivas reduced in October, 1851, instead of October, 1852.


reach the North Pole. 2 They wintered, the “Discovery” in a bay in
Eobeson Sound, and the “Alert” on the north-east coast of Grantland,
latitude 82° north. After preparatory sledging expeditions in the autumn,
the principal sledging parties went out early in April, 1876, Commander
Markham going due north and reaching the latitude of 83° 20' 27" N.
Lieutenant Aldrich west along the north coast of Grantland, and
Lieutenant Beaumont east along the Greenland coast. All three parties
were severely attacked by scurvy soon after leaving their ships, the first case
occurring within a fortnight in each crew, notwithstanding the fact that
the “ Alert’s ” men, that is, Markham’s and Aldrich’s sledge-crews, had had
a double issue of lime juice daily for a month before they started.
The recommendations issued in 1875 to the ships’ commanders by the
then Medical Director General, Sir Alexander Armstrong, who had been
Medical Officer on the “Investigator,” conclude with the words: “Looking to
the fact that this expedition will be one purely of exploration and discovery,
and, unlike former ones, will be emancipated from the more trying duties of
search, and with a greatly improved dietary and supplied with all modem
improvements suitable to the Service, I am of opinion that, if the crews be
carefully selected and the sanitary rules strictly enforced, the ships’
companies should enjoy an immunity from scurvy, and a freedom from
disease hitherto unknown in Arctic expeditions.” That expectation was
shared by all the officers. So well equipped were they that none of
theili anticipated scurvy; they did not think it a possible danger until at
least the second winter, and the medical officers did not even think it
necessary to give instructions to the sledging parties for its treatment
should it appear.
The first case of scurvy was in January (1876), the patient being a man
who had had access to the spirits and was believed to have drunk more than
his ration. The case was therefore considered exceptional. No other case
occurred until April when the sledges started, but then, with the sudden
access of very hard work, scurvy at once developed, not in one or two, but
in nearly all the members of the sledging parties. Of Commander Markham’s
party of seventeen every man and officer was stricken, and they w T ere
unable to complete their journey back to the ship until after a relief party had
reached them. News of their plight was brought back by Lieutenant Parr
who although suffering himself was still able to walk and did a fine forced
march to the ship for help. In the meantime one man had died. Of the
western party of eight, Lieutenant Aldrich and one man alone were able to
drag the sledge and they Were at the end of their strength when a relief
party met them. Lieutenant Beaumont, whose party was twenty-four in all,
got back near to Polaris Bay, on the other sideof the strait from “Discovery’s”
2 “A Voyage to the Polar Seas.” Sir George Nares, 1877. Parliamentary Papers,
“ Journals and Proceedings of Expedition of 1875,” —1877, LVI. “ Report of the Committee
on Scurvy,” 1877, etc.


quarters, when help reached them, and they had to remain there for some
weeks under medical care before they were able to get back to the ship.
They lost two of their number.
The men on the sledging journeys were, of course, exposed to severe
physical strain, and Sir Alexander Armstrong says he always found that
exceptionally hard work “ favoured the development of scorbutic symptoms.
Indeed, it was not an uncommon circumstance to find that men who were
previously more or less debilitated, presented themselves after one day’s
very laborious exertion, with symptoms of scurvy well and fully developed.”
His view that incipient scurvy is quickly developed by over-fatigue is largely
supported by other Arctic officers, and confirmed through history. But in
the case of these ships, scurvy was not confined to the men with the
sledges. The men who remained on the ships, who were not subjected to
fatigue at all and who continued to drink their lime juice ration, the “ idlers ”
as they were called, whose duties were on board ship, also developed scurvy.
By 18th May, “ Alert ” had a sick list of seventeen, the whole of those left on
board with very few exceptions. 1 The total number of cases in the
expedition was sixty in the first year out, with three deaths, out of 122 men.
This makes a very startling contrast with the previous history. The
“Investigator” in her three-and a-half terrible years had not more deaths from
scurvy. The “Alert” was home in England within seventeen months
of her departure. The “Investigator” was out for twenty-seven months,
seven months of that time on reduced rations before her first case
developed.
(ii) OFFICIAL INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES OF THE OUTBREAK OF SCURVY
IN NARES’ EXPEDITION, 1876.
On the return of “ Alert ” »nd “ Discovery ” to England in October, 187(3,
a Committee was appointed to inquire into the reason of the outbreak.
The equipment of the ships had been excellent and the officers had
practically no improvements to suggest. The food supplies had been
on lines that had been tested and proved by other, more fortunate,
expeditions. Lime juice had been issued in accordance with the instruc-
tions of the Medical Director General, in the same way that he had found so
efficacious on “ Investigator,” namely, one ounce of lime juice with one
ounce of sugar was consumed each day by each man, in the presence of an
officer. For fully a month before the sledging parties went but a double ration
had been consumed daily on board the “Alert.” No lime juice was taken
out, however, by the early sledging parties. It had not been taken out by
sledging parties on other expeditions, as it was frozen hard in the bottles at
that time of the year and could not have been carried liquid until well on in
May. It would therefore have required that extra fuel should be carried on
the sledges to melt it, and it was not considered necessary.
' Sir George Nares in “ Journals and Proceedings.”


The Committee reported that the early outbreak of scurvy was due to
the omission of lime juice from the sledge dietary, and that therefore the
orders given by the Commander of the expedition were not proper.
Sir Clements Markham, then Secretary of the Royal Geographical
Society, immediately published “ A Refutation of the Report of the Scurvy
Committee,” 1877, in defence of Sir George Nares, in which he examined
the evidence exhaustively. He shows that the conclusion does not agree
with the bulk of the evidence, that it is in direct opposition to the opinions
expressed by a large majority of the old Arctic officers who gave evidence,
and of the medical officers of the expedition in question, and that it is only
partially supported by the evidence of the other medical witnesses who had
not Arctic experience. Nor does it take into account the facts that the first
case of scurvy developed long before the sledge journeys started, that other
cases occurred among men who never left their ships, and that cases
occurred later on sledges that did take Ijme juice. Throughout the
evidence of witnesses there is a reluctance to accept as the cause ©f
the outbreak the stoppage for so short a time of the lime juice issue,
but there is no other apparent cause of it. It continues to seem inexplic-
able, for other expeditions have had the same ration and have had much
less illness, although out far longer than this one. Sir Clements Markham
proceeds to examine the history of previous expeditions and concludes that
“ The rule is that Arctic sledging parties have never taken lime juice
and have never had scurvy, and there are hardly any exceptions to
this rule.”
How utterly misleading to the general public that finding of the Scurvy
Committee was may be seen from this sentence from the Times leader that
appeared on 19th May, 1877 : “ Had it been possible to transport them
instantaneously from England to the point from which their sledge
journeys started, and had they then been sent on those expeditions without
lime juice, they would, according to all existing experience, have fallen
victims to scurvy.” Nothing could be more untrue. All then existing
experience was diametrically opposed to any such conclusion. The Times,
article is a long, ungenerous condemnation of Sir George Nares for having
done exactly what all the great explorers had done before him with impunity.
“The means, in fact, were all at hand,” it says, “ for obviating the disease
which is the great enemy of all such enterprises, but by a lamentable
failure of judgment they were not used.” Admirals Sir George Richards
and Sir Leopold M’Clintock, who had been among the greatest sledge-
travellers of the Search expeditions, both wrote to the press stating that
they had never used lime juice when sledging, and that there was no
experienced Arctic officer living who would not have done precisely what
Sir George Nares had done. The Report of the Committee simply failed
to explain the outbreak of scurvy.


(iii) DETAILED COMPARISON OF THE DIET OF THE TWO EXPEDITIONS.
If, then, it is impossible to accept a theory by which all cases of scurvy
on the “Alert” and “Discovery” sledges were due to the absence of lime
juice from the sledge diet, and all cases on board ship were due to excep-
tional conditions of constitution or habits in the individuals, what theory
does meet the case ? What condition obtained to which all were subject and
in which they differed from the crews of former ships similarly situated ?
Was there any important difference in the diet, through these months on
board ship, which reduced the men to the point at which scurvy was ready
to develop, on the application of sudden strain? In his narrative 1 Sir
George Nares quotes from his journal of 9th February, before any sledging
parties have gone out, before daylight has returned, “Everyone without
exception is complaining of shortness of breath. I certainly do not
remember experiencing the same at Melville Island (he was in ‘Besolute,’
1852-54). In more than one instance severe running has been followed
by blood-spitting in otherwise healthy men.” So there was even then
a distinct abnormality, and in the direction of scurvy, unremarked, be
it noted, by the Scurvy Committee. Does any difference in diet account
for it ?
The general diet scale of “Alert” and “Discovery” was as recom-
mended by the Arctic Committee, made out on the lines of the former
expeditions, with every improvement that experience suggested. Herewith
is a table showing the principal items of diet, compared with those of
“ Investigator’s ” diet, during first, second and third winters. It should be
rioted that “Investigator’s” officers thought her supplies of meat from
the first rather less than ample. Hence an increase in “ Alert’s ” supplies.
The salt beef was the one item in the 1875 food that was not so good as
the earlier supplies, in so far that it was too salt. It was the same kind of
meat that Sir Edward Belcher's ships had, ramps and rounds of the best
quality that could be procured, salted in the ordinary way; but it had
absorbed more salt in the process than usual and was not liked.
The preserved vegetables were more varied, and Bear-Admiral Bichards,
who was in “ Assistance ”in 1852-54, says 2 ; “I think the qualities were in
many cases superior in the late expedition (i.e., the ‘Alert’ and
‘ Discovery’), because all preserved vegetables are now produced in a
higher degree of perfection than they were in our time.” It may be that
greater perfection of preservation implies greater perfection also of the
destruction of vitamines, so that their antiscorbutic value may be still
further diminished. But “ Alert ” and “Discovery ” had double “Investi-
gator’s” ration, as well as an extra supply of “compressed” vegetables, and
double her ration of fruit.
1 “A Voyage to Polar Seas.”
2 Evidence, Scurvy Committee.


“Alert’s” .
“ Investigator’s ”
Winter scale
First winter in ice
1850-51
Second winter in ice
1851-52
Third winter in ice
1852-53
Lime juice and
1 oz. each daily
1 oz. each daily
1 oz. each daily
J oz. daily (lemon)
sugar
(lime)
(lemon)
(lemon)
Flour for bread
3 lb. in four days.
1 lb. daily
| lb. daily
\ lb. daily
9 oz. every 4th day,
extra for puddings
Biscuit
1 lb. 1 day in 4 ..
—
—
Spirits
J gill daily(doubled
1 gill daily
| gill daily
| gill, alternate
for some of the
days
winter months)
Preserved fresh
11b. altera ate days
| lb. alternate days
J lb. alternate days
J lb. alternate days
meat
Salt or corned
1 lb. alternate days
f lb. alternate days
J lb. alternate days
J lb. alternate days
■ meat
and J lb. every
4th day
Soup ..
i lb. every 4th day
f lb. per week ..
None
None
Preserved vege-
| lb. 'daily (Ed-
ward’s potatoes,
Jib. alternate days
(Edward’s pota-
Jib. alternate days
2J oz. alternate
tables
(potatoes, carrots,
days (potatoes,
carrots, onions)
toes and carrots)
barley and rice
carrots,barley and
alternately)
oatmeal alter-
nately)
Compressed
1 oz. every 4th day
None
None
None
vegetable
Fruit ..
4 oz. per week with
extra sugar
2 oz. weekly (cran-
berries)
None
None
Pickles
7 oz. weekly
6 oz. weekly
6 oz. weekly
7 oz.weekly
Peas ..
Less than J lb.
1 lb. weekly
1 lb. weekly
1 lb. weekly
weekly
Tea
J oz. daily
\ oz. daily
J oz. daily
J oz. daily
Chocolate
1 oz. daily
oz. daily
1 oz. daily
f oz. daily
Sugar..
If oz. daily and
l| oz. daily
oz. daily
1J oz. daily
extra with fruit
' ,
Suet issued in lieu of flour, J oz. to 1 oz. flour.
J lb. meat averaged 6 oz. when bone and fat were deducted.
There are two points to be noted here: First, there was a definite
difference in the incidence of scurvy in favour of the officers as compared
with the men. Why ? On the sledge journeys, at first the men had more
of the hauling, the severest physical strain, the officers having to pioneer
and seek out the path; but as one by one the men failed, the officers had a
greater and greater share of the extraordinarily arduous work of digging or
pick-axeing a way through the snow or ice-hummocks and dragging the
sledges over and through them. As the men became more and more
unable even to walk and had to be carried on the sledges, the officers had
very muqh the larger share of the sheer physical work added to their
responsibility and anxiety. So, if over-fatigue is considered, there was
nothing there in their favour. What else? They had the same food as
the men on the sledge-journeys. On board ship, however, through the
winter, their diet had included private supplies of wine (“ sixteen glasses
of wine per week, sherry, port or Madeira, and a bottle of brandy or whisky


every ten days.”) And, beyond the ships’ supplies, “ butter, milk, cheese,
jams, sauces, soups, rice, hams, tongues and a few vegetables.” Here is
a contrast in diet which should count considerably in favour of the officers
and it seems to be the only significant difference.
Then there is a second point. There was a marked difference also in
the incidence of scurvy as between the two ships, in favour of “ Discovery,”
which had twenty cases out of a total complement of sixty, as against
forty of the “ Alert’s ” company of sixty-two ; or, as eight men of the
“ Discovery ” wintered on the “Alert,” it should rather be put that of
fifty-two who spent the winter on the “ Discovery,” fifteen men afterwards
had scurvy, and of seventy who wintered on “ Alert,” forty-five. The
difference in latitude of their winter quarters was only that between 82° 27'
and 81° 42', but the “ Discovery ” lay in a sheltered bay, and on the
land surrounding it there was a certain amount of vegetation, and therefore
she got considerably more game in autumn and had fresh meat for fifty-
three dinners in ten months, while the “Alert” had only fourteen fresh
meals. Here is another contrast then, surely directly referable to the
boardship diet, The officers’ gain of weight during the winter averaged
on the “Alert” 5 pounds 6 ounces, on the “Discovery” 8 pounds 13
ounces; the men’s gain of weight on “ Alert ” 3 pounds 4 ounces, on
“ Discovery ” 7 pounds 9 ounces.
Value of Fresh Meat in the Prevention of Scurvy. —The importance of
fresh meat can hardly be exaggerated. Given enough fresh meat it may
alone form a complete diet. Of course there are cases in history where
scurvy occurs with a mixed diet including generous quantities of fresh meat,
and it is only one example out of scores, that our soldiers in the Kaffir
Campaign of 1846-47 had scurvy while they had “abundance” of fresh
meat and biscuit, with rice for their only “vegetable.” But if biscuit and
rice had been omitted and they had had more fresh meat and only fresh
meat, probably the scurvy would not have appeared. As is the case with
fresh milk, 1 fresh meat is not sufficiently antiscorbutic to balance a diet
of this sort, but where the food consists of nothing but fresh meat, enough
of the antiscorbutic element is present to prevent disease.
The Hudson’s Bay Company’s people lived almost entirely on fresh meat and
fish, without farinaceous foods at ail; with nothing else, indeed, often, all winter.
Dr. Rae, a surgeon of the Company for many years, and an active searcher for
Franklin, said he had never had scurvy cases in the whole of the Mackenzie
River District, and had only heard of it occurring at York Factory, a port on
Hudson’s Bay. He says: 2 “On many parts of the Mackenzie River they cannot
grow any vegetables and I know that none are sent in because they are too heavy
1 FrOlich, 1912, Zeilschrift f. Hygiene, vol. Ixxii. Chick, Hume and Skelton, 1918.
Biochemical Journal, vol. xii, p. 131.
2 In evidence before Scurvy Committee.


to carry. The only thing we could have there would be Edward’s preserved
potato, but it is an immense distance to carry it, and it is never thought of
because they have never had any disease arising from want of vegetables. Of course
they get berries occasionally, but that is not in winter time, and it is usually
only in small quantities.” The Company’s men generally got little or no vege-
table food. At York Factory they kept lime juice because sometimes they had
to live largely on salt meat. When there was not an ample supply of venison,
then only Edward’s desiccated potatoes and cranberries were issued, as it was
found that scurvy might occur without; but when the fresh meat and fish were
ample, the potatoes and cranberries were not given.
The quantities of meat used were large. When Sir John Richardson and
Dr. Eae, with a party of English sailors and sappers, wintered at Fort Confidence
on the Great Bear Lake, 1848-49, there were only twenty-five lbs. of flour or
barley meal served out to each man during 240 days. The daily rations
for all in the Fort were, to quote Dr. Rae’s words 1 again ; “8 lbs. fresh venison
per man, 4 lbs. per woman, 2 lbs. each child ; or 4 lbs. half-dried meat for a man,
2 lbs. for a woman, 1 lb. for a child; or when we had fish, 3 large white fish per
hian, 2 large white fish per woman and 1 per child. The fish ranged, according
to my memory, from 3 to 4 lbs. each weighed, as taken out of the water.”
Lieutenant Pullen, 2 who left the “Plover” in July, 1849, with thirteen men
in two whaleboats, to search for Sir John Franklin east along the coast of North
America, wintered with Dr. Eae on Mackenzie River. They had met with
stormy weather in the boats, gales, mostly northerly, bearing down heavy ice on
them on a lee shore, and they had had to throw overboard most of their
provisions to save their lives. Some of the men wintered on the Great Bear
Lake and lived entirely on fish, principally herrings, which they caught in nets
set under five feet of ice. The others, on Great Slave Lake and at Fort Simpson
lived as the Hudson’s Bay traders lived, on dried or fresh dqer meat and fish,
brought into the stations by the Indian hunters. The allowance of flour for an
officer was one or two bags per annum, and his guest shared with Dr. Eae the
allowance; but the men had none. The rations of meat were as quoted above,
8 lbs. fresh deer or 4 lbs, dried (the dried meat was without bones). The men
had nothing else to eat, except when game was to be had, which gave the
only variety. In that case two wild geese was a man’s daily allowance, or four
ducks. The fish for Fort Simpson was brought from the Great Slave Lake in
August, buried in the snow and dug out as required. 3 One fish day a week was
the rule. In the officers’ mess they sometimes had potatoes, but the men had
none. Spruce tips were not eaten and no beer was brewed, neither spruce-beer
nor any other sort. The only drink was water. Tea was not then issued by the
Company and there was very little sent up even to buy, either of tea or sugar.
No spirits or wine were issued to men or officers and they had none. At the end
1 To Scurvy Committee.
2 Rear-Admiral Pullen’s evidence, Scurvy Committee. Parliamentary Papers, 1852, LI.
It is an interesting comment on the later chronic ptomaine theory that the fish was
often “ rotten ”by the spring, “or what is called short; not offensive so far'as smell went,
still we were obliged to eat them.” See also Dr. Redpath’s statement in Lancet, November
23, 1901, that African natives eat decomposing meat and do not have scurvy.


of this winter of between eight and nine months, from early October to late June,
Lieutenant Pullen’s men were all fit, and eager to get back to the coast and carry
on. They did so, came back again to Fort Simpson for a second winter, and got
home to England in 1851. Lieutenant Pullen himself was the only man who
ailed at all, and he did not have scurvy. And he never saw or heard of scurvy
during his sojourn on Mackenzie River.
Mr. Campbell, 1 who had been chief trader in a branch of the Mackenzie River
for fifteen years, 1837-1852, said he never had vegetables of any kind whatever
and sickness was unknown among his people, “ except sometimes being weak
for want of food.” He never saw a case of scurvy during forty years in Hudson’s
Bay. The Hudson’s Bay pemmican, used by their people when travelling, was
not commonly made with currants and raisins like the American, but plain,
unsweetened. Only when it was wanted specially fine some service-berries
were added.
A striking case of the use of fresh meat in extreme conditions is given by
the second Grinnell Expedition under Dr. Kane, in 1853-55. When conditions
were at their worst, in spring, 1855, and every man was seriously ill with
scurvy, their condition went up and down in exact and immediate relation with
their casual and irregular supplies of fresh meat. Again, during the first winter
when all were affected,-Dr. Kane himself was among the worst cases, but in
the second winter his health was comparatively good, and he attributes this to
his having been the only man on board who would eat the rats with which the
ship was infested. 2
Then there is the interesting case of nineteen people who were cut off from
the American ship “ Polaris ” and lived on the ice-floe for six and a half months,
in 1872-73, having already spent a winter on board ship in lat. 81°. They had
with them some bags of bread, a quantity of pemmican, which would be the
American sort with fruit in it, and a small quantity of chocolate, and they killed
seals which they ate uncooked. 8 The party included two Esquimaux women and
five children. They were picked up in May by a Scots sealer, all well. 4
In his Presidential Address to the Royal Geographical Society in 1862, Sir
Roderick Murchison speaks of Russian sailors on Spitzbergen, who had lived
on game for more than six years, and three out of four were brought home in
perfect health. 5
Later, there is the case of Mr. Leigh-Smith’s men on Franz-Josef Land, who
when their vessel, the “ Eira,” was sunk, lived in health on fresh bear and
walrus meat. Dr. Neale entitles his account of that experience “ How to Avoid
Scurvy in Arctic Regions,” 6 but as he does not tell how to ensure that there
shall be bears and walruses to live on, he makes no new discovery. The regions
1 Scurvy Committee’s Report, Appendix No. 28.
* “ Second Grinnell Expedition,” Dr. E. K. Kane, 1856.
3 Of fresh meat, seal was believed to be more antiscorbutic than deer-meat;
Dr. Kane believed in walrus-meat. McClintock says that white whale was greatly prized
by the Greenlanders, and speaks of the pickled skin of the blacls whale as “ a famous
antiscorbutic.”
4 Report of Polaris Expedition, by Sec., U.S. Navy.
3 j ßoy. Geo. Soc. Proc., 1852.
6 Practitioner, 1896, IvP 585.


of the western Arctic have so much less open water that they have very much
less game in winter than'is met in the eastern Arctic.
Mr. Jackson has a story of six Russian priests who sojourned at Saharova,
in Arctic Russia, a few years before his own visit there in 1893. 1 Their vows
bound them to abstain from eating meat, and by the end of the second winter in
the frozen land all had died of scurvy, while their servant, a young boy who had
lived on reindeer, was in good health. Mr. Jackson himself and his eight
companions of the Jackson-Harmsworth expedition to Franz-Josef Land in 1894,
added fresh bear meat to an otherwise very full and complete provisioning, and
had not a single day’s illness in their three years.
It appears that in such cases as that quoted above, of our soldiers in the
Kaffir campaign, the abundant supply of fresh meat does not give the amount
of protection it should. This is probably due to the unvarying stew of the
British Army. Probably about 100 per cent of the meat meals served in the
Army abroad are cooked for two or three hours, and the meat and the vegetables
cooked with it are thus robbed of one of their most important properties.
The staff of life, th’en, seems to be the one type of food that will not
alone sustain life, and in comparing the history of the 1875 ships with that
of the earlier ones, the occurrence of game is second in importance only to
that of vegetables. But we do not find that the earlier ships had more
fresh meat on the whole than had the “Alert" and “Discovery.”
Dr. Armstrong 2 writes, of “Investigator”; “In the autumn of 1850 we
were fortunate in procuring some musk-oxen, the flesh of which was issued
in lieu of salt beef, at the rate of one pound per man each week, and
occasionally three times a fortnight, for a few months. In the following
summer we were equally fortunate in procuring game, consisting of wild
ducks, geese and ptarmigan, which for about three weeks afforded‘us a
pound of fresh meat weekly. Throughout the winter of 1851-52, owing to
the circumstance of meeting with reindeer, we were enabled to issue a
pound of fresh meat three times a fortnight, the allowance being subject
to occasional interruptions, and birds were procured in the summer as
before. For several months of the third winter we were also enabled to
continue the supply of reindeer, and occasionally the supply was continued
in the spring.” That is, in the first winter, the time comparable with
“Alert” and “Discovery’s" winter, they had one pound of fresh meat a
week, or sometimes three pounds in two weeks. This is more than
“Alert’s” fourteen meals in ten months; but it is much less than
“ Discovery’s ” total 18,000 pounds of game, or 800 pounds of fresh meat
issued per month, i.e., 15 pounds per head per month, a supply equalled by
few previous expeditions.
Herbs and Vegetables available. —On most of the ships attempts were
made to grow mustard and cress, but with very indifferent success. Some
1 “The Great .Frozen Land,” F. G. Jackson, 1895.
2 “Naval Hygiene and Scurvy.”


was grown on board “ Investigator,” but not much. On board “ Alert ”
and “Discovery” there was never enough produced for a general ration,
and only the officers had a little occasionally.
On the “ Investigator,” 1 “In the summer of 1852, for a period of nearly
three weeks, we were able to procure limited supplies of sorrel (Bumex
acetosella ) and scurvy-grass (Cochlearia officinalis), which were daily
issued in variable quantities of a few ounces. This was the only fresh
vegetable food that we ever obtained.” The later expedition also got
sorrel in summer, but by that time of course they already had scurvy
rampant.
. Beer supplied. —There was a small difference in the beer used by the
two expeditions, which, had it been brewed from the air-dried malt of
Captain Cook’s time, might have told in favour of the earlier ship. Both
carried Allsopp’s Burton ale in casks, which lasted perhaps through the
first winter; but in the “Investigator” small beer was also brewed on
board and issued occasionally. Had there been any antiscorbutic value in
either of these beers, the ship that had the fresh brew would presumably
have been at an advantage ; but malt was by that time “ high-dried,” so
there was probably none. 2 The beer consumed on the “ Alert ” was not
more than half-a-pint per head, two or three times a week, and if rather
more was used by the “ Investigator’s ” crew, any gain to the latter would
certainly not balance the disadvantage they were under by their larger
consumption of rum. In any case, the quantities used were so small that
the variation between the two may safely be disregarded.
Questions of conditions on board Nares' ships, work and exercise,
ordinary diet, fresh meat and vegetable supplies, and many others were
considered in great detail by the Scurvy Committee. Several Arctic
leaders concluded that in the absence of any other apparent reason, the
harder work Nares’ sledging parties had had than most, though not all
of their predecessors, must account for their extraordinary misfortune and
Sir George Nares himself was of this belief. 3 Many expressed their
continued opinion that it was unaccountable. The Committee reported
that it was due to the failure of the sledge-parties to take lime juice; but
the impression remained which was afterwards expressed by Admiral
Richards. 4
“ Much stress has naturally been laid on the superior equipment of
this Expedition and on the great advantages it possessed over previous
ones ; but when we come to analyse those advantages they are more
apparent than real. Doubtless no ships could have been more efficiently
1 “Naval Hygiene and Scurvy."
2 Harden and Zilva, Journal of the Institute of Bretving, 1918, vol. xxiv, p. 197.
(a) Henderson Smith, Lancet, 14th_December, 1918.
3 Journals and Proceedings, Parliamentary Reports, 1877, LYI.
4 Introduction to Nares’ “ A Voyage to Polar Seas.”


equipped or better provisioned, yet in this respect there could scarcely
have been any appreciable difference between them and the numerous
expeditions which had been employed previously in the search for Franklin.
In all their arrangements the Government Were actuated by one principle
—efficiency and comfort —regardless of expense. Yet we find the travelling
parties of the present Expedition attacked by malignant scurvy which
almost prostrated them after one winter in the ice, though happily the
mortality exceeded that of no former expedition. If we turn to the
records of the condition of crews of Collinson’s and McClure’s ships after
three and four winters passed in a much lower latitude we find an absence
of any severe case of the same disease, and so in other voyages of shorter
duration. . . , These are significant facts, the causes of which have
hitherto been past man’s finding out.”
The discussion of the Commission might almost be summarized in
words of John Woodall, written in 1617, “Truly, the causes of this
disease are so infinite and unsearchable as they farre pass my capacity
to search them all out. . . . Some charge Bisket as a cause of the
scurvie but lam not of their opinion; some say inordinate watchings are
the cause thereof; some say extreme labour wanting due nourishment;
some also affirme cares and griefe to be some cause thereof; others affirme
the very heat of the aire, resolving the spirits; but what shall I amplifie
further ? for it is also true that they which have all the helps that can
be had for mony, and take as much care as men can devise are even by the
evil disposition of the aire, and the course of nature, strook with a scurvie,
yea and die thereof at sea and land both.”
(iv) QUANTITY AND NATURE OF THE “LIME JUICE” RATION; METHODS
OF PREPARATION AND ISSUE.
There was one point, however, that w T as not considered vitally important
by the Committee. The source of the “lime juice” was different and
may supply a key to the whole problem. Animal experiments have
recently been made with Mediterranean lemons and West Indian limes,
and the results of these have shown that the antiscorbutic value of the
lemon is four times that of the lime. 1 The supreme importance of this
difference in connexion with the use of the fruits in the Services is imme-
diately obvious. The preparation and exhibition of the lemon juice
supplied by the Admiralty to the Search ships of 1850 is described in
detail in “ Naval Hygiene and Scurvy ” as follows :
“ The lemon juice with which we were supplied was of the most
1 Chick and Hume, 1918. From a series of tests, it has appeared that a daily dose of
2'5 centimetres of fresh lemon juice will protect a guinea-pig from scurvy, while it takes
ten centimetres of the fresh juice of limes to afford the same immunity. ( Lancet,
November 30.)


excellent quality, and consisted of two kinds, one of which was prepared
by adding a tenth of brandy; and the other was the acid simply boiled, 1
and contained ,no spirit. The juice was kept in bottles, each containing
sixty-four ounces, with a stratum of olive oil, about half an inch in thick-
ness, on its surface, and the bottles were carefully corked and sealed.
Previous to my departure, I received instructions from the Director-
General of the Navy to adopt whatever means might seem to me most
judicious, whereby I might be able to report on the relative merits of the
two kinds of acids, and their efficacy as antiscorbutic agents. I therefore
recommended the following plan for adoption that I might be enabled
to arrive at results as accurate as it was in my power to obtain, viz., that
each half of the crew should partake of the different kinds of acid.
“ In pursuance of this plan it was mixed in separate tubs, from which
each man daily drank his allowance in presence of an officer. The adop-
tion of this practice was attended with the happiest results. I had thus
the positive evidence afforded me that every man in the ship drank his
allowance (one ounce) daily, and was thus fortified with a regular daily
quantity of a powerful antiscorbutic. To this circumstance, therefore,
I unhesitatingly attribute not only the immunity we enjoyed from scurvy
for a longer time than has ever been known in the Polar Sea, but also our
good fortune in maintaining an unprecedentedly high standard of health
among our crew during the same period.
“ The custom which has been hitherto observed in Polar ships, and
which is still followed in the Navy, is to issue the lemon juice, with the
necessary quantity of sugar, to the different messes into which the ship’s
company may be divided, in quantity proportionate to the number of men
contained in each mess.
“But, although the lemon juice is regularly issued, it does not neces-
sarily follow that it is consumed; and this plan affords no guarantee
whatever that each man drinks his allowance.
“ ... In order that each man should drink his proper allowance,
I proposed for adoption the plan I have already mentioned, which was very
strictly carried out . . . The lemon juice on board the. ‘ Investigator ’
was subject to every possible vicissitude of temperature from the highest
degree of Equatorial heat, to the lowest of Polar cold, being under the
influence of the latter for upwards of three years ; and when I examined it
at the end of this period I found it as good and pure as on the day we left
England, and its power of neutralizing alkalies was not in the slightest
degree impaired ... I have previously mentioned that we were
supplied with two kinds of lemon juice ; one of which was prepared by
adding a tenth part of brandy, the other was simply boiled, without the
addition of any acid. Now, with regard to the relative merits of the juices
thus differently prepared, I could detect no difference in the excellence of
1 This boiling was for less than five minutes.


either from their therapeutical influence over the disease, as both appeared
to me equally efficacious in their action. I remarked, however, that that
which was prepared with spirit remained clear and free from deposit in the
bottle, while that which was simply boiled deposited a portion of its
mucilaginous constituents in the fprm of a heavy, dense, cioudy-looking
mass at the bottom of the bottle, apparently indicating that some change
had taken place, but neither its power of neutralizing alkalies, nor its
therapeutic efficacy was in the least degree affected. But from the fact of
this mucilaginous deposit taking place, I am disposed to give a preference to
the juice which is prepared with spirit, and I consider it the best for use in
Her Majesty’s Navy.
“ The quality of lemon juice which is used in the Mercantile Marine of
this country is very much inferior to that which is in use in the Navy—
which is the best that can be procured.”
The lime juice used on board “Alert” and “Discovery” was given in
the same way with the same precautions that each man should consume
his share. But it was juice of West India limes, not of lemons.
Dr. Colan, Medical Officer of “ Alert,” 1 says: “So far as lam aware, lime
juice is procured from -the lime at Montserrat, in the West Indies, and is
sent home to England in puncheons. The lime juice supplied to “Alert ”
and “ Discovery ” was obtained from Messrs. Evans and Sons of Liverpool,
and was delivered in the Deptford Victualling Yard and examined by a
board of officers there for the Navy in general. It was packed in jars,
wickered to the nozzle, each containing four gallons or 40 lbs., securely
corked, sealed and capsuled. It was fortified when drawn off into the jars,
which was done in April 1875, by ten per cent of the best strong Demerara
rum placed in each jar, the jars then being filled up with lime juice.
The lime juice was supplied to me from the ship’s stores as I required
it ... It was the colour of dark brandy, quite clear.”
So these two supplies of “lime juice,” one of lemons and the other of
limes, were preserved and put up in the same way, and different methods
introduced later of preserving the juice do not come in to complicate the
comparison. They were also used in precisely the same way, and the con-
ditions in which they were used were, I have tried to show, very similar,
with any advantage rather in favour of the later expedition.
(v) VALUE OF LIME JUICE IN TREATMENT OF SCURVY.
Clear evidence as to the value of the lime juice in the treatment of the
cases from the “Alert” and “Discovery” is difficult to get for the same
reason that must always make it so —that the patients were being given
everything available that might relieve them. To quote Sir George
Richards again: 2 “It is, of course, not to be expected that medical men,
1 Scurvy Committee Report.
2 Letter to Times, May 21, 1877.


when called upon to give evidence, will state that they do not believe in
the efficacy of lime juice as an antiscorbutic, because it is a generally
received medical fact ” ; and when asked as to its curative value, Dr. Colan,
Medical Officer of “Alert,” said the men mended under it. Dr. Ninnis, of
“ Discovery,” while subscribing to the established belief that it was the
best substitute for fresh vegetables, pronounced it very much inferior
thereto. Dr. Coppinger, Assistant Medical Officer in “ Discovery,” who
had charge of Beaumont’s party at Polaris Bay, alone commented on
its failure to do what he expected of it. He was asked, “ Have you any
information which you can give the Committee which has not been elicited
by their examination?” and replied, “I noticed certain peculiarities as
to the effects of certain remedial agents. In the case of Chattell, to whom
I gave a large allowance of lime juice from the time that he showed the
first sign of scurvy, no material improvement took place in his condition
until after he came on a diet of fresh seal meat. Again, in the case of
Lieutenant Beaumont’s crew, who suffered from scurvy, I was at first only
able to administer to them lime juice in addition to such portions of the
sledge fare as they could digest, and those men did not materially improve
until after they got an allowance of fresh meat. Again, I might remark
that two of the men of Lieutenant Beaumont’s crew who suffered from
scurvy, exhibited fresh signs of the disease after they had been for five or
six days taking a liberal supply of lime juice. In the case of Jones, the
stoker, a fresh outbreak of petechias appeared on the legs after he had been,
I think, seven days taking a large allowance of lime juice. In Lieutenant
Beaumont’s case, a fresh outbreak of large extravasation patches appeared
on the legs after he had been for several days taking lime juice, and in
Shepherd’s case his progress towards recovery seemed to date from the
time when the weather in the spring became so mild that he was induced
to take open-air exercise. He seemed to get rather worse and worse during
the winter, although he was supplied with a large allowance of good lime
juice, fresh meat and medical comforts of various kinds.”
It would appear, then, that not all of the medical men who treated the
scurvy cases of the “Alert” and “Discovery” were convinced of the
infallible potency of the lime juice which was in their hands, and that in
some cases, at any rate, it was not of itself, even when administered in
considerable doses, sufficient to keep the disease in check. The history of
its use entitled them to expect much clearer results, but previous experience
was derived from the juice of lemons, not of limes.
VI.—EXPERIENCE ON OTHER SHIPS OF THE SEARCH FOR FRANKLIN,
1847-1859. (See infra.) map p.36
It is of interest here to look very briefly at the conditions in some of
the other Arctic ships and their supplies, beginning with the first of the
Search expeditions.


Sir James Boss. 1
One Winter. Bad Lemon Juice. Bad Scurvy.
Sir James Boss, with the “ Enterprize ” and “ Investigator,” wintered
in Leopold harbour, North Somerset, in 1848-49. After preliminary
sledging in April, 1849, the main parties went out on May 15. By that
time of the year lemon juice could be taken on the sledges without its
freezing, and it was taken, but scurvy developed, and on the return journey,
which was begun on June 5, the men were so incapacitated with “ lame-
ness and debility ” 2 that some had to be carried in, while others were only
just able to walk. The ships were unable to get west through the ice in
summer, w T ere caught in the pack, and drifted down the west side of
Baffin’s Bay, and when released came home to England, arriving in
November, 1849. Their lemon juice was examined on their return, and
was found to lack nine parts in ten of the proper acid content. It is not
surprising that, thus deprived of their trusted prophylactic, they succumbed
to scurvy.
This most unfortunate expedition w T as victimized by the hideous
callousness of the contractor who supplied their preserved meat. In
buying the preserved meat which was now taking the place in the Navy
of some of the salt junk, it had been found to be much cheaper to get it in
Eumania where cattle were cheaper, and large contracts were made in
1845 and again in 1850, with a man called Goldner, of Galatz, whose agent
in London was one George Blogg, of Houndsditch. The meat supplied
was satisfactory. But when a Polar expedition was to be catered for,
special purchases were made, in order that supplies of superior quality
should be secured for it. Here was Goldner’s opportunity. Arctic
voyagers were too far off to interfere with his contracts and their return
was uncertain; and the tins for these ships were filled with putrescent
meat and offal. The salt meat these ships had was also bad in quality and
deficient in quantity. Providentially, the expedition got a great number
of sea-birds and eggs in early summer, so their case was not so bad as it
would otherwise have been, but by the time they were nearing England
there were few men in the whole expedition who were not more or less
affected by scurvy.
It is possible, even probable, that Franklin, too, had deficient lemon
juice. We know he had Goldner's meat, and it appears from the cor-
respondence about it in the Eecord Office, that it was delivered late, the
ships actually having to wait for it —a way of securing that there was the
least possible chance of its being examined.
1 References. —“ Parliamentary Papers,” 1850, XXXV ; 1852, XXX, p. 317. Dr.
Robertson’s Report in “Scurvy Committee’s Report,” 1877. Dr. Robertson’s Journal in
Public Record Office, and letters and reports there. “ Victualling in the Royal Navy, Past,
Present and Future,” Inspector-General Alex. Turnbull, M.D., 1903.
2 The dreaded word scurvy was avoided, and men who had been on this voyage
examined by the Scuryy Committee in 1877 said there had been debility but no scurvy.


“Plover,” 1847-1854. 1
Seven Years. Varying Provisions. Varying Health.
Commander T. E. L. Moore sailed in the “Plover” in January 1848,
a few months before Sir James Ross, for Behring Strait, hoping to meet
and support Sir John Franklin’s ships. The “ Plover” was out until 1854
as depot and communicating ship, but she was constant!}' reinforced and
her sick men replaced by others, so that she is not exactly comparable
to the ships that were dependent on their own resources solely. There
are, however, several interesting points in her history.
She got fresh vegetables, brought from the Sandwich Islands each
summer, and in 1851 purchased from a Sydney vessel four months’ supply
of fresh potatoes at one pound per head per day. The idea of freezing
these potatoes to preserve them was at first put aside as it was the common
opinion that potatoes were spoiled by frost, but when the experiment
was made it was found to be perfectly successful. When frozen through
and kept frozen, they remained perfectly good and the crew got a certain
supply of them the following winter. They were issued dail}', half a pound
and one pound on alternate days, and while they lasted there was no scurvy.
(This information does not seem to have been applied in later voyages ;
might it not also be applicable to fresh lemons?)
Another interesting fact is this : Men who were invalided or wished to
leave the Arctic service were replaced in 1850 by men from the “ Herald,”
who had been surveying for four years in the tropics. These men suc-
cumbed to scurvy when the “Plover’s” men were immune. The same
thing occurred in 1851; fourteen scorbutic men from the “ Plover” were
exchanged for fourteen fresh men from the “ Herald,” and it was again the
“Herald’s” men who were afterwards the worst cases of scurvy, the
disease occurring only in a comparatively mild form in the “Plover’s”
men who had been out since the beginning of 1848. By this time the
“Herald” had been five years in the tropics, and her provisions were old
and very bad. Presumably she was revictualled from victualling stations
very remote from home, and in 1850 and 1851 she supplied the “Plover,”
which was also thus heavily handicapped. Fortunately the “Plover” was
never entirely dependent on ship supplies or some of her many scurvy
cases might probably have ended fatally. Her vegetables and frozen
potatoes were of course a source of strength while they lasted, and con-
siderable quantities of berries and wild onions were found near some of
her anchorages.
Of lemon juice only half an ounce per man was issued daily, except in
the treatment of actual cases. Wherever it is spoken of by the surgeon
it is spoken of favourably, but that it was not so good as the 1850 juice is
apparent from the time it took to effect cures, and from the fact that the
surgeon used citric acid (thirty grains, twice or thrice daily) and was satis-
1 Medical Journals, “Plover,” 1847-1854. Public Record Office.


fied that it was equal to the lemon juice. This opinion is at variance with
that repeatedly formed by others, when citric acid was compared with the
1850 lemon-juice.
In 1853 the “Rattlesnake” came out from England bringing stocks
of quite fresh provisions, and between that summer and the following one
when the “ Plover ” left the Arctic zone, no scurvy occurred on board of
her, except in the case of two men after a long journey in the ice. These
fresh provisions probably included the fresh lemon juice. During this
winter, 1853-54, they also had four pounds per head per week of saurkraut
and four ounces of cranberries. The lemon juice ration was half an ounce
throughout.
Collinson, 1850-54. 1
Four Winters, Three in Ice. Good Lemon Juice. Very little Scurvy.
The serious failure in provisioning Sir James Ross’s ships ensured the
utmost possible care being given to the supplies for the next expedition,
and when the same ships “ Enterprize ” and “Investigator” sailed again
in January, 1850, it was under very different conditions. Excellent sup-
plies, uniformly reported on in the most favourable terms when the ships
returned, and the fresh lemon juice, gave them every chance, and although
the conditions of their service were extremely severe, the health record
was exceptionally good.
On getting through Behring Strait, in summer, 1850, Captain Collinson
attempted to get straight north into the Arctic Sea, but was stopped irre-
sistibly by the ice, and by the time he extricated his ship it was too late
to go east that year and he had to get into winter quarters. He went
south and wintered at Hongkong. In spring,- 1851, he went up Prince
of Wales Sound, but found that McClure had been before him ; and again
when he started to go up the west coast of Banks Land he found that
McClure had already searched that part too. He then went east, searching
the coasts of Prince Albert Land, where he wintered in 1852-53, and
Victoria Land, where Cambridge Bay was his next winter quarters. He
contemplated the possibility of trying for a North-West passage by Peel
Sound, but found that by some mistake in the outfitting at home, he was
very short of coal and must of necessity take his ship to some locality
where fuel was to be found. - The winter of 1853-54 was therefore spent
on the Canadian Coast, in longitude 145° W., and he came home in 1854.
Lemon juice was issued on board in the usual way to the messes, not
as in the “ Investigator,” where every man was bound to swallow his own
share. The ration was one ounce daily. Slight, scorbutic symptoms
appeared in the first winter “in the warrant officers and ice-mates,”
but these “ yielded at once to the action of a few doses of lemon juice.”
The total number of cases of scurvy on the sick list was twelve, of whom
1 Froc. Boy. Geog. Soc., 1855. Medical Journals and Letters, Public Record Office.


two died ; in four men on the list for other complaints there was also
scurvy, and five men were slightly affected without having to leave their
duties. This is surely a remarkable immunity for the five years of the
ship’s commission in such conditions. The crew were fortunate in getting
a fair supply of fresh meat at the various anchorages, and at Cambridge
Bay a lot of salmon.
Austen’s Expedition , 1850. 1
One Winter. Good Lemon Juice. No Scurvy.
Captain Austen, in the “ Resolute,” with “ Assistance ” (Captain
Ommaney) and “Pioneer” and “Intrepid” as steam tenders, went out
in early summer, 1850, returning in autumn, 1851. These ships had the
fresh, newly issued lemon juice, squeezed at Deptford, which was issued
to the messes fn the usual way, and one ounce daily. Mr. Bradford,
surgeon of the “Resolute,” recommending an increased allowance for
future ships of preserved potatoes and lemon juice, says he is satisfied that
several of the men of his sledging party in 1851 showed “ some of the
premonitory symptoms ” of scurvy. In his list one entry occurs under
Scorbutus, and is “discharged to duty,” but he does not mention that or
any other case, or refer to scurvy in any way in his journal, so presumably
it was negligible.
The “Assistance” had no scurvy, and the officers say of the whole
expedition that they “ never heard of scurvy ” —“ the idea of scurvy never
entered our heads.” No fresh meat at all was served to the ship’s com-
pany of the “ Assistance ” during the winter, and it was only after the
spring sledging that they got birds and eggs in considerable quantities.
These ships were out as long as the “Alert ” and “ Discovery ” were in
1875-76.
Sir Edioard Belcher, 1852-54. 2
Two Winters. Good Lemon Juice. Little Scurvy.
The same vessels went out again in 1852, under Sir E. Belcher, who
was himself in command of the “Assistance,” with “Pioneer ” (Lieutenant
Osborn), while the “Resolute’s” commander was Captain. Kellett, with
“Intrepid” (Lieutenant McClintock), and the “North Star” (Lieutenant
Pullen), acted as store and communication ship at Beechey Island.
1 References for Austen and Belcher Expeditions. Parliamentary Papers, 1852, L,
1854, XLII. Journal of Medical Officer of “Resolute,” A. R. Bradford, Public Record
Office. Journal of Medical Officer of “ Assistance,” David Lyall, Public Record Office
Report of the Scurvy Committee, 1877.
2 References for Austen and Belcher Expeditions, Parliamentary Papers, 1852, L,
1854, XLII. Journal of Medical Officer of “ Resolute.” A. R. Bradford, Public Record
Office. Journal of Medical Officer of “ Assistance,” David Lyall, Public Record Office,
Report of the Scurvy Conirpittee, 1877,


“Assistance” and Pioneer ” wintered, 1852-53, in Northumberland
Sound, Wellington Channel (76° 52' N., 97° W.). It was a peculiarly
barren spot, the steep limestone hills having no vegetation and therefore
no game, and the crews would not taste the flesh of the few bears they
killed. The following summer (1853) they failed to get the ships south to
Beechey Island, and they wintered, 1853-54, fifty-two miles north of it, on
an exposed shore. They had no fresh meat at all during their two winters,
so that all who were on board these ships remembered particularly that
the “ Phoenix ” (out in the summer under Inglefield) sent them eighty
looms for their second Christmas dinner, not quite one bird for each man.
They had no sorrel or scurvy grass; of mustard and cress they grew
enough to issue it on three occasions each winter, one ounce to each man,
and the sick got a little more. Three of their men showed slight scorbutic
symptoms in the first year and they had several cases in the second winter.
One man died of scurvy on the “ Assistance,” who had been confined below
for a long time with other complaints, and a man died on the “ Pioneer.” l
By the time they joined the “ North Star” in the summer of 1854, many
showed signs of incipient scurvy.
The “Eesolute” and “Intrepid” spent their first winter (1852-53) at
Dealy Island, Melville Island, and their second in Melville Sound, not far
from Cornwallis Land. They seem to have been more fortunate in regard
to game than most ships, their total bag being 28,000 pounds weight. Of
fresh vegetables “ "Resolute ” had very little scurvy-grass or sorrel and no
mustard and cress; “ Intrepid,” a small quantity only of mustard and cress
grown on board, no sorrel or scurvy-grass. These ships had no scurvy.
Agaip the officers say “ scurvy never entered our heads.” Very long
sledging expeditions were carried out without lemon juice and without any
scurvy at all.
The “North Star” had no symptom of scurvy during her two winters
and three summers at Beechey Island. Her crew had no game or very
little, but they seem to have been more successful than some ships in the
growing of mustard and cress, of which they produced enough to issue a
small quantity as often as once a week. The medical officer, Dr.
McCormick, reviewing his whole experience, says: “In three voyages,
one of them of four years duration, to the Antarctic, embracing every
possible transition of climate and exposure, I have never lost a single life
or even had a serious case of sickness or scurvy throughout a Polar service
falling little short of seven years ” ; and Lieutenant Pullen, who com-
manded the “ North Star,” says : “ I do not think I ever in my life met
with scurvy.” It will be remembered that he left the “ Plover ”on his
boat expedition in 1849, before scurvy developed on that ship.
1 This from Medical Journal of Dr. Lyall, of “Assistance,” but Dr, Toms, of “ Pioneer,”
denies in 1877 that scurvy caused this man’s death,


“ Prince Albert ,” 1851-52.'
One Winter. Source of “Lime Juice ” unknown. Bad Scurvy.
Another ship of this period must be recorded because it suffered
severely from scurvy—the “ Prince Albert,” one of Lady Franklin’s own
ships. Lime or lemon juice of some sort the ship must have had, but
what it was, where they got it, and how it was issued, are not recorded.
It was certainly not the Navy lemon juice, for Captaiji Kennedy specially
speaks with gratitude of the Admiralty having supplied him with a ton
and a half of pemmican ; if he had also had his lemon juice from the
Admiralty, he would have mentioned it too. Very impure lemon juice
was then being sold to sea-going ships, and the ration that was legally
compulsory was then only half an ounce.
McClintock, 1857-59. 2
Two Winters. Navy Lemon Juice. Little Scurvy.
The “Fox,” the last of Lady Franklin’s ships, and the ship that finally
established the fate of Franklin and his crew, went out in 1857 under Sir
Leopold McClintock, with Lieutenant Hobson and Captain Allen Young.
She was supplied with lemon juice by the Admiralty. Caught in the ice
in Melville Bay in August, the year being exceptionally unpropitious, she
spent the whole of her first winter in the ice pack drifting down Baffin
Bay towards the Atlantic, and freed herself only in April, 1858. After
a second winter, spent in Bellot Strait, some extremely strenuous sledging
was done.
There were in all five cases of scurvy. One man died who had disliked
potatoes and refused to eat them ; he had also eaten only salt meat, pre-
ferring it to the preserved fresh meat; and he had been in charge of the
stores and had drunk more spirits than his share. Of the others, Lieut-
enant Hobson’s was the only bad case. He had voluntarily foregone his
lemon juice ration for some time on board ship as there was a fear of the
supply running short.
The Grinnell Expeditions . s
(I) Lieutenant de Haven. One Year. Lemon Juice not used.
Bad Scurvy. (II) Dr. E. K. Kane. Two Years. Lemon
Juice not used. Bad Scurvy.
Two American expeditions, equipped by the generosity of Mr. Grinnell
of New York, took part in the search for Franklin; the first in 1850, in
the “Advance” and the “Rescue,” under Lieutenant de Haven, U.S.N.,
with Dr. Kane, U.S.N., as medical officer.
1 11 A Short Narrative of the Second Voyage of the ‘ Prince Albert,’ ” W. Kennedy, 1853,
Proc. Boy. Geog. Soc., vol. XXIII.
2 “ The Fate of Franklin and his Discoveries.” Sir F. L. McClintock, 1859. Report of
the Scurvy Committee, 1877.
3 “U.S. Grinned Expedition in Search of Sir J. Franklin.” Dr. Elias Kent Kane
1852, “ Arctic Exploration; The Second Grinned Expedition,” Dr, E. K. Kane,
1850.


These ships, after meeting in Barrow Sound with eight other vessels
all engaged in the search, went up Wellington Channel, where they were
caught in the floe. In it they were drifted east and south until April when
they were released far down Davis Strait. In spite of scurvy they tried
to get back to Wellington Channel in the summer of 1851, but were
detained by the ice in Melville Bay so long that they had to give up the
attempt and return home.
The American Navy did not use lime juice as a regular ration and these
voyages were not exceptional in this. Dr. Kane did use it in his treatment
of cases of scurvy, but what fruit exactly it was expressed from, whether
lemons or limes, does not appear. It is quite likely to have been limes,
because the sour lime has always been used in the States much more than
in Europe, and is largely preferred to the lemon; and also, at this time
the British medical officers were speaking of their supply as “ lemon juice,”
which it was, while Dr. Kane speaks of his as “ lime juice” and is not less
likely to speak exactly. Whatever it was, he did not value it highly as
fresh fruit juice, and in his treatment “used freely an extemporaneous
citrate prepared from our lime juice.” The American safeguard was raw
potatoes sliced up and mixed with molasses. Molasses was long valued
highly in the British Navy, too, and it was the one of the earlier issues
believed to be antiscorbutic, that was not given up on the introduction
of lemon juice. The amount of sugar issued to the sick a hundred years ago
was amazing; but as one of the first signs of a scorbutic diathesis is loss of
energy, sugar as a quickly assimilable energy food was possibly of use in
increasing resistance to the disease. Unrefined molasses may also have
retained some vegetable properties from the sugar cane. It was used in
many ways in American ships.
De Haven’s ships went out in May; scurvy is first mentioned by
Dr. Kane so soon as the end of September. They had quantities of game
at Beechey Island in August and September, but thereafter it all vanished,
and in the later months seals were eagerly watched for on account of the
sick. By Christmas shortness of breath was general; the appetites of all
had changed, and they developed the same increasing desire for fats noticed
also on the British ships. “Ham-fats, and sauerkraut swimming in olive
oil were favourites.” They had beer brewed on board, and they had also,
as our men had not, sauerkraut and butter. They dreamed of fruit. They
seem to have had as much fruit as our men, or more, but most of it was
evidently dried, which may be more destructive than the process by which
it is preserved in tins. By January the Commander was so ill that he had
to delegate his duties. In February, twelve cases of swollen gums are
recorded, and stiff and painful limbs were general. By the beginning of May
they had finished all their antiscorbutics, but by that time seals and walrus
were again available.
In May, 1853, the “ Advance ” again sailed, with Kane as Commander,
and a total complement of twenty, the object being tq search Smith Sound


for the missing ships. She wintered in a small bay on the Greenland shore
(78° 37' N., 70° 40' W.) By February, 1854, Kane says “ scurvy and general
debility have made me short o’ wind,” and speaks of the “ scurvy spots that
mottled our faces,” showing a pretty advanced stage of the disease, and in
March only two men were exempt. They had had meat in summer but
through the winter were rarely successful in the hunt. All on board fared
alike and he gives the daily menu : “For breakfast, tack (biscuit), pork,
stewed apples frozen like molasses-candy, tea, coffee, with a delicate portion
of raw potato. Dinner, the same as breakfast, but without tea and coffee
and with pickled cabbage and dried peaches. Six o'clock supper, something
like breakfast, something like dinner, only a little more scant.” Their anti-
scorbutic was not effective, in the quantities available, neither was it so
palatable as the British one. “At dinner, as at breakfast, the raw potato
comes in, our hygienic luxury. Like doctor-stuff generally it is not appetiz-
ing as desirable. Grating it down nicely, leaving out the ugly red spots liber-
ally, and adding the utmost oil as a lubricant, it is as much as I can do to
persuade the mess to shut their eyes and bolt it, like Mrs. Squeers’ molasses
at Dotheboys Hall. Two absolutely refuse to taste it. I tell them of the
Silesians using its leaves as spinach, of the whalers in the South Seas
getting drunk on the molasses which had preserved the large potatoes of the
Azores —I point to this gum, so fungoid and angry the day before yesterday,
so flat and amiable to-day—all by a potato poultice; my eloquence is wasted;
they persevere in rejecting the admirable compound.”
In spring, 1854, a preliminary sledging party went out to lay depots, but
broke down badly owing to the severity of the cold. This was followed by
several amputations for frost-bite, and two men died of tetanus thereafter.
The main search parties went out at the end of April, but the scurvy that
had been with them all winter, but had been relieved by fresh meat in spring,
at once broke out again, as well as the obscure tetanoid symptoms that had
also appeared through the winter. Finally, Dr. Kane was carried back to the
brig “ nearly insensible and so swollen with scurvy as to be hardly recognis-
able,” his condition then being regarded as almost hopeless. There
remained only three men able for ordinary duty on the ship. Now,
however, there came abundance of animal life, fresh sorrel was found,
and the conditions on the ship improved rapidly.
The intention was to finish the search of Smith Sound and to go south
when the ice broke up, so no stores were laid in during the time of plenty
for a possible second winter. The ice did not break up. The position of
the ship’s company became very grave, and when the Arctic night settled
down life on board the brig resolved itself into a long daily struggle at close
quarters with disease. The Esquimaux were unable to help, as it was with
them too a year of famine, and their own extremity great. In March, 1855,
only three of the voyagers, including Kane, were able to leave their bunks, and
these three were very ill; and it seemed as if none of them could survive,
when an opportune supply of walrus was secured, and thereafter the




occasional irregular bag of fresh food was only just enough to carry them
through until the return of comparative plenty.
They left the brig in May, with sledges and boats, carrying those who
were still disabled, and after many dangers reached the Danish settlements,
where they were picked up by ships sent out by America to seek them.
A later American 1 expedition went up Smith Sound in 1871, in the
“Polaris” under Captain Hall, and it was from depots left by them
that Lieutenant Beaumont got supplies of lime juice in 1876. The
“ Polaris ” 2 had fresh seal meat all winter in their bay on the Greenland
coast (81°N.) in what must surely have been an exceptional season, so
whatever their use of lime juice may have been, it is not surprising that
scrfrvy is not mentioned in the report of the expedition. It was from this
ship that nineteen people lived on the ice-floe for six months (1872-73)
without illness.
VII.—EVIDENCE OF THE ANTISCORBUTIC VALUE OF LIME JUICE AFFORDED
BY THE EXPERIENCE OF RECENT ARCTIC EXPLORATIONS ; INFLUENCE
OF IMPROVED AND AMPLER DIET.
In recent expeditions the importance of lime juice is much reduced
by the greater variety in the general diet. Merely an ampler and more
varied diet, apart from the greater quantity of directly recognizable anti-
scorbutics it may contain, assists the patient's forces in resisting scurvy.
It is a commonplace of everyday experience that variety makes food more
grateful and more relished and that the interest and appetite decline before
monotony. On those ships, where even the change from night to day
is not, monotony must obtain to a nightmare degree hardly realizable
by those who have not experienced it, and the importance of mere change
of diet is noted again and again by Arctic officers. Also the extra demands
due to Arctic conditions require certain things in greater proportion than
elsewhere. Eor instance, fats seem to have been wanted in all cases and
there is a general agreement among witnesses examined by the Scurvy
Committee that the Addition of butter and preserved milk would be
very great improvement in Arctic diet. 3 Several officers spoke of having
experienced “a sort of craving” for fat as well as for fresh meat, e.g.,
Captain Hobson of the “ Rattlesnake ” and the “ Eox,” and Dr. Toms of the
“ North Star ” and the “ Pioneer.”
1 Report of Secretary of U.S. Navy.
3 Statement of the Esquimaux hunter, who was with Nares, later : “A Voyage to Polar
Seas,’’ p. 304.
3 Chick, Hume and Skelton, found in their work that the addition of milk (heated
to destroy antiscorbutic vitamines) to the “ scurvy” diet of their guinea-pigs improved the
condition of the animals, and maintained their weight, although the onset of scurvy was
not prevented. (Biochemical Journal, 1918, vol. xii, p. 131.


The scurvy patients.in the “ Alert ’.’ and “ Discovery ” were cured, those
who survived, on the ship’s resources and it is to be remarked that they
began to improve on “Alert,” before fresh meat was available for them. 1
They were of course given all that the ships’ stores and medical comforts
could produce to vary and improve their diet. Early in the treatment
fresh meat was added and their improvement was rapid; but besides fresh
meat and fish, and sorrel, and the mustard and cress grown on board,
Dr. Golan’s report says, “ Potatoes were given every day, as also pickles.
Cabbage frequently, and fruits according to circumstances. For breakfast
and tea and sometimes for dinner I drew on the medical comforts for apple
jelly, oysters, milk, boiled fowl, extract of mutton . . . port wine,
sherry, brandy . . . and on the ship’s stores for ale. ... A firkin
of butter was given by the officers to the men which was much appreciated.
Some American hams left by the “ Polaris” were distributed and liked.” 2
The ampler and more varied diet of the officers compared with that of
the men, on “ Alert ” and “ Discovery,” might account for the corresponding
difference in resistance to scurvy. The same contrast was apparent on
board the “ Investigator.” After communication had been established
with the “ Eesolute,” McClure asked for volunteers from his people to
spend another season on his own ship in the ardent hope which all shared,
of eventually bringing her through. All the officers felt fit to do so and
volunteered (except Sainsbury who died soon after), but only four of the men
were able for it. On board the “ Plover,” the gunroom officers were never
touched with scurvy, and it is noteworthy, too, that in the scurvy outbreak
in Hungary in 17‘20, during the war between Austria and Turkey, the officers
were not affected; but with the Grinnell expeditions, where men and
officers shared the same diet, they suffered equally from scurvy. Dr. Kane
mentions in February, 1851, that then only five out of his twenty-four men
had not ulcerated gums and blotched limbs, and of these five four were the
cooks and stewards. And the cooks on board the “ Plover ” were also less
affected than the rest of the crew. Scurvy has in fact been called a disease
of the forecastle since at .least the time of Dr. Lind, who says, 3 “Officers are
seldom or never affected with scurvy; even the subalterns and petty
officers generally keep free from it While it commits great ravages
among the common seamen.”
Since, then, the patients on the “ Alert ” could begin their cure, and
since the officers could be protected, by supplies carried on board the ship,
an improvement of the general diet was indicated for the protection of the
whole crew. So, on lines suggested by the evidence given before the
Scurvy Committee, the victualling of later exploring ships has been
much enlarged. Lime juice had been relied on and had been found
1 Nares. “ A Voyage to Polar Seas,” vol. ii, p. 2,
3 Scurvy Committee’s Report, p. 400.
3 Dr. James Lind, “ Treatise on the Scurvy.’ Third Edition, 1773-


surprisingly wanting ; it was therefore depended upon less, and a fuller
and more varied diet, with a greater proportion of antiscorbutic food, again
took some of the responsibility from it.
But the early ships were very largely dependent for their protection on
their lemon juice, and it was barely protection enough. We have seen
that the Grinnell ships did not use it, and had scurvy badly both times;
that the British ships they were alongside of in 1850 did have lemon juice
and did not have scurvy; that Sir James Boss’s ships in 1848-49 had
deficient lemon juice and did have scurvy; and that an individual officer
suffered directly for the withdrawal of the protection, when Lieutenant
Hobson took the risk upon himself for the general good of the ship’s
company of the “ Fox.” Becent experiments have demonstrated that
the antiscorbutic value of the fresh juice of the lime is one quarter of the
value of the fresh juice of the lemon. 1 By substituting lime for lemon
juice, the protection is reduced by three-fourths, and what before barely
sufficed to ward off disease now fails completely and the men are at its
mercy. Later elaboration of processes of preparation, entailing a long
delay between the plucking of the fruit and the use of its preserved juice,
have reduced still further the efficacy of the lime juice, but it is from the
date of the change from lemons to limes that a change begins in the his-
torical evidence as to its value.
Already on the “ Alert” and the “ Discovery ” the men have lost faith
in it, and Dr. Coppinger is quoted 2 as having said that he depended more
on fresh meat than on lime juice in his treatment. This is a long step
from the belief of twenty years earlier. Bead, beside it, Dr. Armstrong's
letter of October, 1854, to Sir William Burnett: “I had recourse to it
(lemon juice) in all the scorbutic cases with the utmost confidence . . . .
on it I placed the greatest reliance, it was my unfailing hope, and as long
as I could command a liberal supply I was never disappointed in the
anticipated results.” 3 In i 894 the Jackson-Harmsworth expedition 4 offered
another test. Having left the exploring party on Franz-Joseph Land,
the ship “Windward ” was to return home, but was beset in the ice and
her crew had to pass the winter of 1894-95 in Arctic conditions, for which
they were not specially prepared. They refused to eat the bear meat that
kept the land party in good health, and lived on ordinary ship’s stores,
salt and preserved meat, with a daily ration of lime juice; all the crew
developed scurvy and three died of it.
Again, 5 in 1895-96, in the Chitral garrison, every man was affected
with scurvy more or less severely “ in spite of our having a good supply of
1 Chick, Hume and Skelton, Lancet, November 30, 1918.
2 Fleet Surgeon Gilbert Kirker, in discussion, British Medical Association, 1902.
3 Medical Department. In—letters, Public Eecord Office.
4 “ A Thousand Days in the Arctic,” F. G. Jackson, 1899.
5 “ Letter of Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton, 1.M.5., Brit. Med. Journ., October, 1902.


so-called lime juice.” (Herbs were found, however, which stopped the
ravages of the disease.)
Lime juice had thus failed repeatedly, and questions came up again, as
they had done a hundred years before, as to the nature of scurvy and the
cause of it, but with the answer of that day now ruled out. Indeed, the
line was taken that scurvy cannot be caused by the absence of vegetable
food, and was argued thus :
Lime juice is equal to vegetable food ;
But lime juice does not prevent scurvy ;
Therefore vegetable food does not prevent scurvy ;
Therefore its absence cannot be the cause of scurvy.
Q. E. D.
Every kind of theory as to its cause had been put forward at some time
or other—that it was caused by the “ heat of aire,” 1 or by enforced celibacy, 2
or even that citric acid caused it. 3 Now the fresh vegetable theory
seemed to have gone the way of all the others and the real cause was still
to seek. Dr. Turnbull, 4 Dr. Koettlitz, 5 Medical Officer of the “Fram,” the
“Windward” and Scott’s “Discovery,” Mr. Jackson and Dr. Harley, 6
following Professor Torop of Christiania, attempted to demonstrate that
scurvy was a chronic form of ptomaine poisoning. But the contention
produced a new crop of interesting evidence, 7 all on the lines of a hundred
years before, that it was still due to the absence of fresh vegetable foods,
and was immediately curable by their addition to the defective diet.
But in the meantime our National Antarctic Expedition was equipped
and provisioned on the chronic-ptomaine idea, and when scurvy appeared
in September, 1902, fourteen months after the expedition left England,
it was matter for amazed surprise, and the officers were quite unable to
account for it in any way, as their provisions were apparently perfectly
sound. What Captain Scott did, replacing all tinned meat as far as
possible with fresh seal meat, increasing largely the use of bottled fruits,
and growing mustard and cress as much as the conditions permitted, was
in any case the best course he could take. The scurvy was got under,
although Lieutenant Shackleton was in grave danger from it later, while
travelling in December, and so ill that presently he had to come home on
the relief ship. 8 The expedition was fully and generously equipped with
1 Woodall, “ The Surgeon’s Mate,” 1617.
2 Surgeon Gillespie’s Diaries, 1785-1803, Public Record Office.
3 s Stevens, quoted by Pereira, “ Materia Medica.’’
4 “ The Prevention of Scurvy,” Inspector General Alex. Turnbull, M.D. A discussion
in the section of Navy, Army, and Ambulance, British Medical Association, 1902, pub.
Brit. Med. Journ., 1902, vol. ii, p. 1023.
5 Brit. Med. Journ., February 8, 1902.
s Proc. Boy. Soc., April 14, 1900.
7 e.g., Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton, 1.M.5., British Medical Journal, October 25,1902.
8 Voyage of the “ Discovery,” E. F. Scott.


West India lime juice by the gift of Messrs. Evans, Lescher and Webb,
but by this time there was no question of compulsory consumption, 1 as it
was not supposed to have, and had not, any special merit.
In all the recent investigations, the change in the fruit from which the
“ lime juice ” was expressed was not observed or was taken to be immaterial.
Moreover, the methods of preparation have been altered ; and in the over-
preparation, in the mere passage of time after all vital processes have been
stopped and vitamines are no longer being produced, the virtue is destroyed.
And so the juice of limes , prepared by a slow process which further reduces
its already inferior properties, continues to this day to be accepted as the
same as the fresh juice of lemons that protected Lord St. Vincent’s fleet
in 1801. Just such was the history of malt in the Navy. Fresh malt
(that is, germinated barley) air-dried, was used for the prevention of scurvy
at the end of the eighteenth century, in fresh infusions and in small beer,
and it was useful; and a century later we find the tradition then formed
still clinging round the fined ales, made by a slow process from kiln-dried
malt, that were carried instead by the Arctic ships. Spruce-beer, too, in
which fresh leaves were at one time a real antiscorbutic, was made later, in
complete disregard of its origin, without the fresh leaves. Such also was
the. course of history when green vegetables were reputed the sovereign
remedy. Immediately, people produced and offered to the Admiralty
preparations of dried vegetables, soup preparations with herbs, &c., which
were experimented with, and the same sort of thing is being advocated
to-day. Dried potatoes have certainly by many years’ experience proved
their worth in high latitudes, but an attempt to replace in general green
vegetables with the dried forms would eventually lead to the discrediting of
vegetables as a whole, in their turn, and we should be back again at the
beginning. In what we called “ lime juice ”we had at one time a “ precious
medicine.” Not recognizing the arbitrary eccentricities of the genus citrus,
we have altered the source of our “ lime juice ” as well as the manner of its
preparation and preservation, and we have not realized that we were
altering essentials, so long as we still had “ lime juice.” Yet, in the
reign of James I, John Woodall said “ In want of lemons, use limes.”
Scurvy need never occur again in Arctic service. The same care and
precision may be applied to the production of fresh pure lemon juice that is
now devoted to an inferior substitute for it, and our explorers again be
protected as was the Navy in its dire need a century ago. Add to that the
present perfection of food preparation and the full and varied diet devised
for recent travellers. And add the new knowledge that if the dry pulses
they have always carried, in ignorance, alas, of their potential value, are
allowed to germinate before being cooked, they have in them an anti-
1 Medical aspect of “Discovery’s” Voyage. British Medical Journal, 1905, vol. ii,
p. 77. Dr. E. A. Wilson.


scorbutic food of real importance, 1 akin to the fresh malt of Captain Cook’s
voyages. The frosts of five Arctic winters will not kill the germ, 2 so here is
at hand in a very simple form, a considerable additional safeguard. The
“ Investigator’s ” men in their five years must have consumed something
over 16,000 pounds of dried peas —waving acres of vitamines, had they but
known. The “ Alert ” and “ Discovery ” returned into Deptford Stores,
6,000 pounds, enough to have given them constant rations of fresh growing
vegetable food. Scott’s “'Discoverers” might by this means have turned
the balance well in their favour. How much distress might have been
averted all along, had they but known !
Scurvy need never occur again in Arctic service. That was said before
“Alert” and “Discovery” sailed; it was said again when Scott’s
“ Discovery ” sailed. Now we are getting back on only rather more logical
lines to the empirical wisdom of a hundred and twenty years ago. We
have worked round in a circle away from the truth by our confidence in our
knowledge, and back again through hard experience; and it may be that in
a long term of immunity we shall again forget or learn to misapply the
facts so hardly gained. Until our knowledge of scurvy is more exact than
it is to-day, such a thing is still possible. But at least it is with a confident
hope, as well as in profound gratefulness that we may now believe that that
terrible chapter of suffering has been finally closed.
VIII.—SUMMARY.
There is a strong traditional belief in the value of lime juice for the
prevention and cure of scurvy. Eecent investigation has however demon-
strated that the lime juice now issued to the Services is without anti-
scorbutic potency, and it has become important to examine the origin of the
tradition and to find out how it was justified. The discrepancy between the
merit of the former and the failure of the present issues is explained by the
facts recorded in this paper.
On going back to its earliest use in the Navy, we find that “ lime juice ”
was introduced in the last years of the eighteenth century, its use being
extended until 1804, when it became general. Its value then was immense
and indubitable, and it then established firmly the reputation that has
lasted for over a century. But, although often called “ lime juice,” it was
in fact chiefly the juice of lemons, and any limes that may have been used
at first, with the lemons, were the sweet limes of the Mediterranean, and
1 Fiirst, 1912, confirmed by Chick and Hume, 1917. Wiltshire, Lancet , December 14,
1918.
2 The Smithsonian Institute sent out with Captain Hall on “Polaris,” 1871, a quantity
of test samples of grains which were left in depot at Polaris Bay. They were brought home
by Hares in 1876, and some grown at Kew (of which sixty-two per cent germinated);
the rest were returned to the Smithsonian Institute, Washington. “A Voyage to
Polar Seas.” Hares, vol. i., p. 340.


not the sour limes now used for the preparation of the juice. From 1804
until after 1860 all the juice used by. the Navy was the juice of lemons from
Malta and Sicily. With the employment of lemon juice, and the simul-
taneous improvement in the men’s conditions that followed the mutinies of
1797, scurvy gradually disappeared from the Naval surgeons’ lists. So
successful was its use in the Navy, and so much loss was averted by it, that
it was eventually made compulsory in the Merchant Service too, by the Act
of 1844 (confirmed in 1854), which provided that lime or lemon juice should
be given to the crew of every ship after they had been for ten days on salt
provisions. The Merchant Shipping Amendment Act of 1867 doubled the
compulsory ration and history continues to show the value of it.
There was difficulty in securing the purity and soundness of the supplies
of lemon juice for the Navy, but the greatly improved provisioning of the
Service rendered this the less important, because scurvy seldom had an
opportunity of developing. The deficiency of the supply, and the gravity, of
the consequences of that deficiency were demonstrated, however, by the first
of the expeditions in search of Sir John Franklin, in which severe scurvy
developed. The lemon juice supplied was found to be so greatly adulterated
as to lack nine parts in ten of its proper acid content. The utmost care was
therefore taken to provide pure fresh lemon juice for the succeeding expedi-
tions, and these show an almost complete immunity from scurvy. Later,
the development of the cultivation of the lime in the West Indies gave
an opportunity for securing a supply of pure acid juice, produced under the
most favourable conditions, and by 1875 the Admiralty had transferred its
contracts from Malta, and substituted the juice of lime. s for that of lemons
But the sour lime of the West Indies (Citrus medico, acida ) happens
to have only one quarter of the antiscorbutic value of the lemon {Citrus
medica limonum). That fact has been shown by recent experimental work,
but was not then suspected. The West India lime juice answered satisfac-
torily to all chemical tests and was believed to be superior to the old lemon
juice. Practical tests of the value of the issue became more and more rare,
with the introduction and increasing use of steam power, which shortened
voyages generally beyond the possibility of scurvy. But polar exploration
still gave its opportunity, and the first Arctic expedition that went out
furnished with the lime juice was’ that of Sir George Nares on the “ Alert ’>
and the “ Discovery,” 1875-76, which suffered from scurvy in great severity.
On the return of these ships to England a Committee was appointed to
inquire into the cause of this outbreak, and they returned a finding that it
was due to the failure to send lime juice with the sledge travellers. The
publication of this opinion was greeted with protests from the Secretary of
the Royal Geographical Society and from Arctic officers of long experience)
and its untruth was demonstrated. Former Arctic expeditions had not sent
lemon juice with their sledges and had not had scurvy ; men of the “ Alert ’’
and “Discovery” who did not go with the sledges but remained on board ship
and continued to drink lime juice, also developed scurvy; and moreover,


premonitary scorbutic symptoms bad appeared pretty generally before the
sledges went out. The finding of the Committee failed to explain the
outbreak.
The conditions, diet, &c., of these ships are compared above, in detail,
with those of the ships of the Franklin Search, and especially with
those of the “ Investigator,” Sir Eobert McClure’s ship, that had the
longest term in polar seas. The “Investigator” went out in January,
1850, and her first case of scurvy showed in May, 1852, twenty-seven
months after she left England, and seven months after her principal rations
had had to be reduced to two-thirds. The “ Alert ” and “Discovery ” left
England in May, 1875, and the first case of scurvy occurred in January,
1876, the general development of it in April, eleven months after leaving
home, the ships’ companies being all the time on full rations. The lemon
juice and lime juice on the two expeditions were prepared in the saine way
and issued in the same way and in the same quantities, and their diet
shows no important variation, except in favour of the later ships. The one
significant difference is in the source of their antiscorbutic, and the ship
protected by lemon juice has a long immunity, while those protected by
lime juice succumb early to the disease. The examination of the history of
other ships with lemon juice confirms the conclusion suggested by that of the
“Investigator.” And later cases of the use of lime juice are shown to
demonstrate further its limitations.
The general diet of later expeditions has been so enlarged and improved
that they are no longer so dependent on the lime juice, but wherever weight
is leaned upon it, it fails. Incidentally, numerous illustrations are given of
the importance of fresh meat in the prevention and cure of scurvy.
Later methods of preparing and preserving lime juice have taken from
it what value it originally had ; but it is from the change in the fruit used
that the change begins in the history of its merit as an anticorbutic ; and
the discrepancy between the worthlessness of the lime juice of the present
day and the undeniable value of the juice issued at the end of the eighteenth
century, and during the first half of the nineteenth, is due chiefly to the fact
that the modern issue is derived from the West Indian sour lime, while the
earlier was the juice of lemons.
John Bale, Sons & Danielsson, Ltd., Printers, 83-91, Great Titchfield Street, London, W.l.




