

THE SOVIET-YUGOSLAV
DISPUTE
THE FULL TEXTS OF
Letters between the Communist Parties
of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia
20 March to 22 May 1948
Statement of the Communist Party
of Yugoslavia to the Cominform
20 June 1948
The Cominform Communique
28 June 1948
Reply of the Communist Party
of Yugoslavia to the Cominform
29 June 1948
Price Is. net
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS




THE SOVIET-YUGOSLAV DISPUTE


Toronto Bombay
Melbourne Wellington Cape Town
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
THE ROYAL INSTITUTE
OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
London: Chatham House, St James’s Square, S.W.I.
New York : 542 Fifth Avenue, New York 19


THE
SOVIET-YUGOSLAV
DISPUTE
TEXT OF THE PUBLISHED
CORRESPONDENCE
LONDON & NEW YORK
Royal Institute of International
Affairs


The Royal Institute of International Affairs is an unofficial and non-
political body, founded in 1920 to encourage and facilitate the scientific
study of international questions. The Institute, as such, is precluded by
the terms of its Royal Charter from expressing an opinion on any aspect of
international affairs.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE BROADWATER PRESS, WELWYN GARDEN CITY,
HERTFORDSHIRE
First published, November 1948


CONTENTS
Introduction 7
Letters exchanged between Central Committee of Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia (CC of CPY) and Central
Committee of Communist Party of Soviet Union
(CC of CPSU)
CC of CPY to CC of CPSU, 20 March 1948 9
CC of CPSU to CC of CPY, 27 March 1948 12
CC of CPY to CC of CPSU, 13 April 1948 18
CC of CPSU to CC of CPY, 4 May 1948 31
CC of CPY to CC of CPSU, 17 May 1948 53
CC of CPSU to CC of CPY, 22 May 1948 54
Statement of CC of CPY to Cominform, 20 June 1948 58
Cominform Communique, 28 June 1948 61
Reply of CC of CPY to Cominform Communique, 29
June 1948 71


INTRODUCTION
The Communist Information Bureau, subsequently known as
the Cominform or Informbureau, was established in Sep-
tember 1947, and consisted of the Communist Parties of the
following nine countries: The Soviet Union, Poland, Czecho-
slovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, France, and
Italy. Its headquarters were set up in Belgrade, and a fortnightly
paper was issued in a number of languages.
The Cominform communique announcing the expulsion of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia was first made public on 28 June
1948 in Rude Prdvo, organ of the Czechoslovak Communist Party.
At the same time the headquarters of the Cominform were
removed from Belgrade to Bucarest. The text used here is that
published in the English language edition of the Cominform
paper, For a Lasting Peace, for a People's Democracy, of 1 July 1948.
On 29 June the Yugoslav Communist Party issued a statement
on the Cominform communique, and the text of its letter of 20
June to the Bureau, announcing its decision not to attend the
Cominform Conference, which was held in Bucarest in the latter
half of June.
Late in August, a pamphlet in Serbo-Croat, published by
Pravda, organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, was in
circulation in Belgrade, containing three letters addressed by the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to
the Central Committee of the Yugoslav Communist Party on
matters in dispute between them, dated 27 March, 4 May, and
22 May 1948. The letters as given here are translated from that
pamphlet {Pisma Ts.K. SKP{b) Tsentralnom Komitetu Komuni-
stichke Partie Yugoslavie, Izdavachko preduzecdje Pravda, Mos-
cow, 1948).
Shortly afterwards, a second pamphlet in Serbo-Croat appeared
containing, in addition to the three Soviet letters, three letters
from the Central Committee of the Yugoslav Communist Party to
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, dated 20 March, 13 April, and 17 May 1948. It included
also the Cominform communique and the Yugoslav reply, and a
lengthy introduction elaborating the position taken in the Yugo-
slav letters. The Yugoslav letters, and the Yugoslav statement of


29 June as given here, are translated from that pamphlet (Pisma
Ts.K. KPYi Pisma Ts.K. SKP{b), Belgrade, 1948).
The Yugoslav letters of 18 March and 20 May referred to in the
Soviet letters of 27 March and 22 May have not so far been made
public.
In this publication the documents have been arranged chrono-
logically. The footnotes were not in the original texts, but have
been inserted as a help to the reader.
Introduction


CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF YUGOSLAVIA
TO CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION
LETTER FROM J. B. TITO TO V. M. MOLOTOV
20 March 1948
On 18 March General Barskov told us that he had received a
telegram from Marshal Bulganin, Minister of People’s Defence of
the USSR, in which we are informed that the Government of the
USSR has decided to withdraw immediately all military advisers
and instructors because they are ‘surrounded by hostility’, that is,
they are not treated in a friendly fashion in Yugoslavia.
Of course, the Government of the USSR can, when it wishes,
recall its military experts, but we have been dismayed by the
reason which the Government of the USSR advances for its
decision. Investigating, on the basis of this accusation, the relations
of the junior leading people of our country towards the Soviet
military advisers and instructors, we are deeply convinced that
there is no basis for this reason for their withdrawal, that during
their entire stay in Yugoslavia relations with them were not only
good, but actually brotherly and most hospitable, which is the cus-
tom towards all Soviet people in the new Yugoslavia. Therefore,
we are amazed, we cannot understand, and we are deeply hurt by
not being informed of the true reason for this decision by the
Government of the USSR.
Secondly, on 19 March 1948, I was visited by the Charge
d’Affaires Armaninov and informed of the contents of a telegram
in which the Government of the USSR orders the withdrawal of all
civilian experts in Yugoslavia also. We cannot understand the
reason for this decision and it amazes us. It is true that the Assist-
ant of Minister Kidric, 1 Srzentic, stated to your commercial repre-
sentative Lebedev that, according to a decision of the Government
of the FPRY, 2 he has not the right to give important economic
1 Boris Kidric, head of the Yugoslav State Planning Commission.
a Federated People’s Republic of Yugoslavia.


information to any one but that for such information the Soviet
people should go higher, that is, to the CC of the CPY 1 and the
Government. At the same time Srzentic told Lebedev to approach
Minister Kidric for the information which interested him. Your
people were told long ago that the official representatives of the
Soviet Government could obtain all important and necessary
information direct from the leaders of our country.
This decision was issued on our part because all the civil servants
in our Ministries gave information to any one, whether it was
necessary or not. This meant that they gave various people State
economic secrets which could, and in some cases did, fall into the
hands of our common enemies.
We have no special agreement, as mentioned in the telegram,
regarding the fact that our people have the right to give economic
information, without the approval of our Government or Central
Committee, to Soviet workers in economy, except such informa-
tion as is necessary to them in their line of duty. Whenever the
Soviet Ambassador, Comrade Lavrentiev, asked me personally
for necessary information, I gave it to him without any reserva-
tion, and this was also done by our other responsible leaders.
We would be very much surprised if the Soviet Government
were not in agreement with this attitude of ours from a State
standpoint.
At the same time, in regard to this case, we are forced to reject
the reason about some sort of ‘lack of hospitality and lack of con-
fidence’ towards Soviet experts and Soviet representatives in Yugo-
slavia. Until now not one of them has complained to us of any-
thing like this, although they have all had the opportunity to do
so personally with me, because I have never refused to see any of
the Soviet people. This is also valid for all of our responsible
leaders.
From all this it can be seen that the above reasons are not the
cause of the measures taken by the Government of the USSR, and
it is our desire that the USSR openly inform us what the trouble is,
that it point out everything which it feels is inconsistent with good
relations between our two countries. We feel that this course of
events is harmful to both countries and that sooner or later every-
thing that is interfering with friendly relations between our
countries must be eliminated.
1 Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia.
CPY to CPSU, 20 March 1948


Inasmuch as the Government of the USSR is obtaining its
information from various other people, we feel that it should use
it cautiously, because such information is not always objective,
accurate, and given with good intentions.
Once again, accept the expression of my respect.
President of the Ministerial Council,
J. B. TITO
20 March 1948
CPY to CPSU, 20 March 1948


LETTER FROM CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION
TO COMRADE TITO AND OTHER MEMBERS OF
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF COMMUNIST PARTY OF
YUGOSLAVIA
27 March 1948
Your answers of 18 and 20 March have been received.
We regard your answer as incorrect and therefore completely
unsatisfactory.
1. The question of Gagarinov 1 can be considered closed, since
you have withdrawn your accusations against him, although we
still consider that they were slanderous.
The statement attributed to Comrade Krutikov 2 that the Soviet
Government has allegedly refused to enter into trade negotiations
this year, does not, as can be seen, correspond to the facts, as
Krutikov has categorically denied it.
2. In regard to the withdrawal of military advisers, the sources
of our information are the statements of the representatives of the
Ministry of Armed Forces and of the advisers themselves. As is
known, our military advisers were sent to Yugoslavia upon the
repeated request of the Yugoslav Government, and far fewer
advisers were sent than had been requested. It is therefore obvious
that the Soviet Government had no desire to force its advisers on
Yugoslavia.
Later, however, the Yugoslav military leaders, among them
Koca Popovic, thought it possible to announce that it was essential
to reduce the number of advisers by 60 per cent. They gave various
reasons for this; some maintained that the Soviet advisers were too
great an expense for Yugoslavia; others held that the Yugoslav
army was in no need of the experience of the Soviet army; some
said that the rules of the Soviet army were hidebound, stereo-
typed and without value to the Yugoslav army, and that there was
no point in paying the Soviet advisers since there was no benefit
to be derived from them.
In the light of these facts we can understand the well-known and
1 Member of the Soviet Trade Mission in Yugoslavia.
s Aleksei D. Krutikov, Soviet Deputy Minister for Foreign Trade.


insulting statement made by Djilas 1 about the Soviet army, at a
session of the CC of the CPY, namely that the Soviet officers were,
from a moral standpoint, inferior to the officers of the British
army. As is known, this anti-Soviet statement by Djilas met with
no opposition from the other members of the CC of the CPY.
So, instead of seeking a friendly agreement with the Soviet
Government on the question of Soviet military advisers, the
Yugoslav military leaders began to abuse the Soviet military
advisers and to discredit the Soviet army.
It is clear that this situation was bound to create an atmosphere
of hostility around the Soviet military advisers. It would be ridicu-
lous to think that the Soviet Government would consent to leave
its advisers in Yugoslavia under such conditions. Since the Yugo-
slav Government took no measures to counteract these attempts to
discredit the Soviet army, it bears the responsibility for the situa-
tion created.
3. The sources of our information leading to the withdrawal of
Soviet civilian specialists are, for the most part, the statements of
the Soviet Ambassador in Belgrade, Lavrentiev, as also the state-
ments of the specialists themselves. Your statement, that Srzentic
allegedly told the trade representative, Lebedev, that the Soviet
specialists seeking economic information should direct their
requests to higher authorities, namely to the CC of the CPY and
the Yugoslav Government, does not correspond to the truth. Here
is the report made by Lavrentiev on 9 March:
Srzentic, Kidric’s assistant in the Economic Council, informed
Lebedev, the trade representative, of a Government decree forbidding
the state organs to give economic information to any one at all. There-
fore, regardless of earlier promises, he could not give Lebedev the par-
ticulars required. It was one of the duties of the state security organs to
exercise control in this matter. Srzentic also said that Kidric himself
intended to speak about this with Lebedev.
From Lavrentiev’s report it can be seen, firstly, that Srzentic did
not even mention the possibility of obtaining economic informa-
tion from the CC of the CPY or the Yugoslav Government. In any
case, it would be ridiculous to think that it would be necessary to
approach the CC of the CPY for all economic information while
there still existed the appropriate ministries from which Soviet
1 Milovan Djilas, head of the Agitation and Propaganda Department of the
Yugoslav Communist Party.
CPSU to CPY, 2J March 194.8


specialists had previously obtained the necessary economic infor-
mation direct.
Secondly, it is clear from Lavrentiev’s report that the reverse of
what you write is true, namely that the Yugoslav security organs
controlled and supervised the Soviet representatives in Yugoslavia.
One might well mention that we have come across a similar
practice of secret supervision over Soviet representatives in
bourgeois States, although not in all of them. It should also be
emphasized that the Yugoslav Security agents not only follow
representatives of the Soviet Government, but also the representa-
tive of the CPSU 1 in the Cominform, Comrade Yudin. It would
be ridiculous to think that the Soviet Government would agree to
keep its civilian specialists in Yugoslavia in such circumstances. As
can be seen in this case, too, the responsibility for the conditions
created rests with the Yugoslav Government.
4. In your letter you express the desire to be informed of the
other facts which led to Soviet dissatisfaction and to the straining
of relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia. Such facts actually
exist, although they are not connected with the withdrawal of the
civilian and military advisers. We consider it necessary to inform
you of them.
(a) We know that there are anti-Soviet rumours circulating
among the leading comrades in Yugoslavia, for instance that ‘the
CPSU is degenerate’, ‘great-power chauvinism is rampant in
the USSR’, ‘the USSR is trying to dominate Yugoslavia economic-
ally’ and ‘the Cominform is a means of controlling the other
Parties by the CPSU,’ etc. These anti-Soviet allegations are
usually camouflaged by left phrases, such as ‘socialism in the
Soviet Union has ceased to be revolutionary’ and that Yugoslavia
alone is the exponent of ‘revolutionary socialism’. It was naturally
laughable to hear such statements about the CPSU from such
questionable Marxists as Djilas, Vukmanovic, 2 Kidric, Rankovic 8
and others. However, the fact remains that such rumours have
been circulating for a long time among many high-ranking Yugo-
slav officials, that they are still circulating, and that they are natur-
ally creating an anti-Soviet atmosphere which is endangering
relations between the CPSU and the CPY.
1 Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
* General Vukmanovic, formerly Assistant Minister of Defence, appointed
Minister of Mines in August 1948.
3 Col. Gen. Alexander Rankovic, Yugoslav Minister of the Interior; in August
1948 he became Vice-Premier.
CPSU to CPY, zy March 1948


We readily admit that every Communist Party, among them the
Yugoslav, has the right to criticize the CPSU, even as the CPSU
has the right to criticize any other Communist Party. But Marxism
demands that criticism be above-board and not underhand and
slanderous, thus depriving those criticized of the opportunity to
reply to the criticism. However, the criticism by the Yugoslav
officials is neither open nor honest; it is both underhand and dis-
honest and of a hypocritical nature, because, while discrediting the
CPSU behind its back, publicly they pharisaically praise it to
the skies. Thus criticism is transformed into slander, into an
attempt to discredit the CPSU and to blacken the Soviet system.
We do not doubt that the Yugoslav Party masses would disown
this anti-Soviet criticism as alien and hostile if they knew about it.
We think this is the reason why the Yugoslav officials make these
criticisms in secret, behind the backs of the masses.
Again, one might mention that, when he decided to declare war
on the CPSU, Trotsky also started with accusations of the CPSU
as degenerate, as suffering from the limitations inherent in the
narrow nationalism of great powers. Naturally he camouflaged all
this with left slogans about world revolution. However, it is well
known that Trotsky himself became degenerate, and when he was
exposed, crossed over into the camp of the sworn enemies of the
CPSU and the Soviet Union. We think that the political career of
Trotsky is quite instructive.
( b ) We are disturbed by the present condition of the CPY. We
are amazed by the fact that the CPY, which is the leading party, is
still not completely legalized and still has a semi-legal status.
Decisions of the Party organs are never published in the press,
neither are the reports of Party assemblies.
Democracy is not evident within the CPY itself. The Central
Committee, in its majority, was not elected but co-opted. Criti-
cism and self-criticism within the Party does not exist or barely
exists. It is characteristic that the Personnel Secretary of the Party
is also the Minister of State Security. In other words, the Party
cadres are under the supervision of the Minister of State Security.
According to the theory of Marxism, the Party should control all
the State organs in the country, including the Ministry of State
Security, while in Yugoslavia we have just the opposite: the
Ministry of State Security actually controlling the Party. This
probably explains the fact that the initiative of the Party masses in
Yugoslavia is not on the required level.
CPSU to CPY, 27 March 1948


It is understandable that we cannot consider such an organiza-
tion of a Communist Party as Marxist-Leninist, Bolshevik.
The spirit of the policy of class struggle is not felt in the CPY.
The increase in the capitalist elements in the villages and cities is
in full swing, and the leadership of the Party is taking no measures
to check these capitalist elements. The CPY is being hoodwinked
by the degenerate and opportunist theory of the peaceful absorp-
tion of capitalist elements by a socialist system, borrowed from
Bernstein, Vollmar and Bukharin 1 .
According to the theory of Marxism-Leninism the Party is con-
sidered as the leading force in the country, which has its specific
programme and which cannot merge with the non-party masses.
In Yugoslavia, on the contrary, the People’s Front is considered
the chief leading force and there was an attempt to get the Party
submerged within the Front. In his speech at the Second Congress
of the People’s Front, Comrade Tito said: ‘Does the CPY have any
other programme but that of the People’s Front? No, the CPY has
no other programme. The programme of the People’s Front is its
programme.’
It thus appears that in Yugoslavia this amazing theory of Party
organization is considered a new theory. Actually, it is far from
new. In Russia forty years ago a part of the Mensheviks proposed
that the Marxist Party be dissolved into a non-party workers’ mass
organization and that the second should supplant the first; the
other part of the Mensheviks proposed that the Marxist Party be
dissolved into a non-party mass organization of workers and
peasants, with the latter again supplanting the former. As is known,
Lenin described these Mensheviks as malicious opportunists and
liquidators of the Party.
(c) We cannot understand why the English spy, Velebit, 2 still
remains in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia as the
first Assistant Minister. The Yugoslav comrades know that
Velebit is an English spy. They also know that the representatives
of the Soviet Government consider Velebit a spy. Nevertheless,
Velebit remains in the position of first Assistant Foreign Minister
of Yugoslavia. It is possible that the Yugoslav Government in-
1 Eduard Bernstein and Georg Vollmar were leaders of the German Social-
Democratic Party; Nikolai Bukharin was a prominent Bolshevik, executed in
1936.
2 Vladimir Velebit was reported to have resigned from the Foreign Ministry
in June 1948, and was appointed to the Chairmanship of the Yugoslav Federal
Committee on Social Welfare.
CPSU to CPY, 27 March 1948


tends to use Velebit precisely as an English spy. As is known,
bourgeois governments think it permissible to have spies of great
imperialist States on their staffs with a view to insuring their
goodwill, and would even agree to placing their peoples under the
tutelage of these States for this purpose. We consider this practice
as entirely impermissible for Marxists. Be it as it may, the Soviet
Government cannot place its correspondence with the Yugoslav
Government under the censorship of an English spy. It is under-
standable, that as long as Velebit remains in the Yugoslav Foreign
Ministry, the Soviet Government considers itself placed in a
difficult situation and deprived of the possibility of carrying on
open correspondence with the Yugoslav Government through the
Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
These are the facts which are causing the dissatisfaction of the
Soviet Government and the CC of the CPSU and which are
endangering relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia.
These facts, as has already been mentioned, are not related to the
question of the withdrawal of the military and civilian specialists.
However, they are an important factor in the worsening of relations
between our countries.
CC of the CPSU
Moscow,
27 March 1948
CPSU to CPY, zy March 1948


CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF COMMUNIST PARTY
OF YUGOSLAVIA TO CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION
LETTER FROM J. B. TITO AND E. KARDELJ TO
J. V. STALIN AND V. M. MOLOTOV
13 April 1948
In answering your letter of 27 March 1948, we must first of all
emphasize that we were terribly surprised by its tone and con-
tents. We feel that the reason for its contents, that is, for the accusa-
tions and attitudes towards individual questions, is insufficient
knowledge of the situation here. We cannot explain your con-
clusions otherwise than by the fact that the Government of the
USSR is obtaining inaccurate and tendentious information from
its representatives, who, because of lack of knowledge, must
obtain such information from various people, either from known
anti-Party elements or from various dissatisfied persons. At the
Plenum of the CC of the CPY, it became abundantly clear and was
confirmed that S. Zhujovic and A. Hebrang 1 were the main cul-
prits in providing inaccurate and slanderous information to the
Soviet representatives in Yugoslavia, both about alleged state-
ments of certain leading people and about our Party in general. By
this inaccurate, slanderous information, they desired to hide their
anti-Party work and their tendencies and attempts, exposed earlier,
to break up the unity of the leadership and the Party in general.
Besides this, information from such people cannot be objective, or
full of good intentions, or accurate, and usually has a definite pur-
pose. In this concrete case, that information had as its aim to cause
difficulties for the leadership of our Party, that is, for the new
Yugoslavia; to make more difficult the already difficult task of the
development of our country; to make the Five Year Plan impos-
sible, and so to make impossible the realization of socialism in our
country. We cannot understand why the representatives of the
USSR, up to to-day, have not insisted on confirming such infor-
1 Hebrang and Zhujovic, formerly members of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia with high positions in the Government, were
expelled from the Yugoslav Communist Party in April 1948 and subsequently
arrested.


mation with responsible people in our country, that is, on verifying
such information from the CC of the CPY or from the Govern-
ment. We regard the issuing of such information as anti-Party
work and anti-State because it spoils the relations between our two
countries.
No matter how much each of us loves the land of Socialism, the
USSR, he can, in no case, love his country less, which also is
developing socialism —in this concrete case the FPRY, for which so
many thousands of its most progressive people fell. We know very
well that this is also similarly understood in the Soviet Union.
It particularly surprises us that none of this was mentioned when
Kardelj, 1 Djilas, and Bakaric 2 were in Moscow as delegates of our
Party and Government. As can be seen from your letter, your
Government had the information in question, and similar informa-
tion, prior to the arrival of our delegation in Moscow. It appears to
us that at that time the question of relations with military and
civilian experts, as well as other questions, could have been pre-
sented to our delegation.
We maintain that it was necessary to inform our Government
through this delegation, and even before, that the Soviet Govern-
ment was not satisfied with the behaviour of our people towards
the Soviet experts, and that the situation should be cleared up in one
manner or another. What happened was that the Government of
the USSR, by its decision to withdraw military experts without
any official notification, confronted us with a fait accompli, and in
this way created unnecessary difficulties for us.
As for the withdrawal of Soviet military experts, we see no other
reason for it than that we decided to reduce their number to the
necessary minimum because of financial difficulties. In 1946
Premier of the Federal Government Tito officially informed the
Soviet Ambassador, Comrade Lavrentiev, that, for many reasons,
it was almost impossible for us to pay such high wages to the
Soviet military experts and begged him to inform the USSR of this
and of our desire that it moderate the conditions for paying the
experts. Ambassador Lavrentiev received an answer from the
USSR that the salaries could not be decreased and we could do as
we pleased. Tito immediately told Lavrentiev that because of this
we would have to reduce the number of experts as soon as it was
1 Edward Kardelj, Yugoslav Vice-Premier, appointed Foreign Minister in
August 1948.
* Vladimir Balearic, Croat Prime Minister.
CPY to CPSU, April 1948


possible to do so without creating great difficulties in the building
up of our army. The wages of the Soviet experts were four times as
high as the wages of the commanders of our armies and three times
as high as the wages of our Federal Ministers. The commander of
one of our armies, a lieutenant-general or a colonel-general, then
had 9,000 to n,ooo dinars a month, and a Soviet military expert,
lieutenant-colonel, colonel and general, had from 30,000 to 40,000
dinars. At the same time our Federal Ministers had a salary of
12,000 dinars a month. It is understandable that we felt that this
was not only a financial burden but also politically incorrect be-
cause it led to misunderstanding among our men. Therefore, our
decision to decrease the number of Soviet military experts was
made for the reasons mentioned and for no other. On the other
hand, we do not exclude the possibility that some of our men made
untimely remarks. In these cases it is necessary to present us with
the relevant information, duly substantiated, and without a doubt
we would see that it did not happen again. Here we must mention
that some of the Soviet experts did not always behave as they
should and this caused dissatisfaction as a result of which, and
against our will, various remarks came to be made which were
later twisted and in this twisted version passed on to the command
of the Soviet army. However, we consider these matters too in-
significant to be allowed to play any part in straining relations be-
tween our States.
We were especially surprised by the part of the letter containing
old matters about Djilas. There it states: ‘ln the light of these facts
we can understand the insulting statement made by Djilas about
the Soviet army, at a session of the CC of the CPY, namely that
the Soviet officers were from a moral standpoint inferior to the
officers of the British army’. Djilas never made such a statement
in such a form. Tito explained this orally and in writing in 1945.
Comrade Stalin and the other members of the Politbureau 1 of the
CC of the CPSU were satisfied then with this explanation. We can-
not understand why you again repeat, as an argument, a charge
which was proved to be distorted and inaccurate. We again
emphasize that neither Djilas nor any one of our leading people
has such an opinion of Soviet officers. Only a person who is not
only an enemy of the USSR but also an enemy of Yugoslavia can
have such an opinion.
1 Political Bureau, the most powerful body in a Communist Party, composed
of members of its Central Committee.
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1348


There are matters which should be eliminated from our trade
relations so that they can develop properly. We do not deny, in
connection with this, that on our part there were oversights in com-
mercial affairs, but we cannot believe that they could be reason
enough to weaken our commercial co-operation. We cannot believe
that the incident between Krutikov and our Foreign Trade repre-
sentatives was a mere misunderstanding. Krutikov clearly told our
representatives that our trade delegation, which was already wait-
ing in Belgrade to leave for Moscow, did not have to go because the
Government of the USSR would not be able to sign a protocol for
further exchanges of goods in 1948 and that it would not be pos-
sible to discuss this question again until the end of 1948. Krutikov
told this to our Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, Comrade
Cmobmja, and to our Commercial Attache in Moscow. When our
commercial representatives asked if that was the attitude of the
Soviet Government, Krutikov said that it was.
We think that if there were some irregularities on the part of our
trade organs—and we believe that there might have been such
cases in regard to the deliveries of materials and trade relations in
general—then some means could have been found to agree on and
eliminate all that interferes with the proper development of trade
relations between our two countries.
We think that we should jointly investigate and eliminate every-
thing which interferes with the proper functioning of economic
co-operation between our two countries.
The allegations in your letter that UDBa 1 follows Soviet special-
ists and other Soviet people are not true. No one has ever issued a
decision of this sort, and it is not true that Soviet citizens are fol-
lowed. This is some one’s fabricated information. It is even less
accurate that the representatives of the Soviet Government and
Comrade Yudin of the Cominform were followed.
We cannot understand for whom such a slander, which led the
Government of the USSR into error, was necessary. And in this
case we would again like to be given concrete facts.
Your letter of 27 March states that we are making anti-Soviet
criticisms and criticisms of the CPSU. It states that this criticism is
being made among the leaders of the CPY. It further states that
this criticism is being carried on behind the backs of the mass of the
Party members; that this criticism is dishonourable, underhanded,
hypocritical, etc. The names of Djilas, Vukmanovic, Kidric, and
1 Yugoslav State Security Department.
CPY to CPSU, 13 April ig 4 8


Rankovic are mentioned, and, it is said, some others. That is, the
letter mentions the names of some of the best known and most
popular leaders of new Yugoslavia, who have proved themselves in
many situations difficult for our Party.
It is very difficult for us to understand how such serious accusa-
tions can be advanced without mentioning their source. Further, it
is more amazing to compare statements by our leaders with the
one-time statements of Trotsky. The letter quotes parts of alleged
statements, for example, ‘the CPSU is degenerate’, ‘the USSR
is trying to dominate Yugoslavia economically’, ‘great-power
chauvinism is rampant in the USSR’, ‘the Cominform is a means
of controlling the other Parties by the CPSU’. Further ‘these anti-
Soviet allegations are usually camouflaged by left phrases, such as,
“socialism in the USSR has ceased to be revolutionary”, that only
Yugoslavia is the true exponent of “revolutionary socialism”.’
On the basis of this and similar information gathered through a
long period from various suspicious sources, which was tenden-
tiously attributed to the leading men of the new Yugoslavia as if it
were theirs and thus presented to the leaders of the USSR, it is
without doubt possible to draw wrong conclusions and describe
them as anti-Soviet statements. However, we feel that on the basis
of unidentified persons and suspicious information, it is incorrect
to draw conclusions and make accusations like those brought in the
letter, against men who have performed invaluable services in
popularizing the USSR in Yugoslavia and won priceless renown in
the war of liberation. Is it possible to believe that people who spent
six, eight, ten and more years in prison—among other things be-
cause of their work in popularizing the USSR —can be such as
shown in your letter of 27 March? No. But these are the majority
of the present high-ranking leaders of the new Yugoslavia, who on
27 March 1941, led the masses through the streets against the
anti-popular regime of Cvetkovic-Macek, which signed the anti-
Comintem pact and desired to harness Yugoslavia to the fascist
axis wagon. They are the same people who in 1941 organized the
uprising against the fascist invader, deeply believing in the Soviet
Union. They are the same people who, at the head of the insurgent
Yugoslav people, with gun in hand, fought under the most difficult
conditions on the side of the Soviet Union as the only true ally,
believing in the victory of the USSR in the darkest days, just be-
cause they believed and believe to-day in the Soviet system, in
Socialism.
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1948


Such people cannot work ‘to blacken the Soviet system’ be-
cause that would mean betraying their convictions, their past. We
feel that these people should not be assessed on the basis of
dubious information but on the basis of their long revolutionary
activity.
To call such people two-faced because, in front of the masses
they praise the CPSU ‘to the skies’—as stated in the letter —is
really terrible and insulting. In the letter it further states: ‘We do
not doubt that the Yugoslav Party masses would disown this anti-
Soviet criticism, as alien and hostile, if they knew about it.’ Yes,
and we believe it too, if it were as shown in the letter. ‘We think
this is the reason why the Yugoslav officials make these criticisms
in secret, behind the backs of the masses.’ However, there could be
no concealment from the masses for the simple reason that there
was not and could not be any such criticism of the Soviet Union or
the CPSU.
To oppose the leadership to the masses is incorrect. It is incor-
rect because the present leaders of Yugoslavia and the masses are
one; because they are inseparably tied by their struggle against the
anti-popular regime before the war, their struggle during the great
war of liberation, and today by the great working efforts for the
development of the country and the realization of socialism.
Among many Soviet people there exists the mistaken idea that
the sympathy of the broad masses in Yugoslavia towards the
USSR came of itself, on the basis of some traditions which go
back to the time of Tsarist Russia. This is not so. Love for the
USSR did not come of itself. It was stubbornly inculcated into the
masses of the Party and the people in general by the present leaders
of the new Yugoslavia, including, in the first rank, those so serious-
ly accused in the letter. The present leaders of new Yugoslavia are
the same who, long before the war, sparing neither efforts nor
sacrifices, persistently revealed to the masses the truth about the
Soviet Union and planted among the masses of Yugoslavia love for
the land of Socialism.
Comrade Molotov, for example, said that Djilas gave orders
that the History of the CPSU should not be studied in Party
schools and courses. This is completely inaccurate. Such an order
does not exist nor did any one give it. Even now the History of the
CPSU is being studied in all our Party schools and in many
courses. Of all this, the only thing true is that Djilas more than
once said at Party meetings that the undeveloped membership in
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1948


the basic Party organizations understood particular problems in
the History of the CPSU erroneously, and mechanically compared
them with the development of Yugoslavia. For example, the ques-
tion of two periods of revolution, the question of war communism,
the question of NEP, etc. He said it was better at the beginning to
give these members the Problems of Leninism by Stalin, to study.
In connection with this it is necessary to emphasize that the
History of the CPSU was issued four times illegally before and
during the war and that it was printed in all national languages in
250,000 copies after the war. It is the same with the other works of
Stalin and Lenin. The Problems of Leninism, for example, was
issued in 125,000 copies.
As regards the question of the internal life of the CPY which is
mentioned in your letter, it can be seen that you have received com-
pletely inaccurate information and have formed an erroneous
picture. Accordingly we cannot agree with your evaluation of our
Party.
The majority of the members of the CC of the CPY are not co-
opted as is alleged in your letter. The matter stands thus. At the
Fifth Party Conference, held in December 1940, when the CPY
was completely illegal, attended by no delegates from all Yugo-
slavia, and which, by a decision of the Comintern, had all the
powers of a congress, a CC of the CPY of thirty-one members and
ten candidates was elected. Of this number, ten members and six
candidates died during the war. Of the seven members of the
Politbureau elected in 1940, five are still alive and working to-day.
The Politbureau invites those members of the CC of the CPY who
are in Belgrade to its sessions. In the CC of the CPY, in all only
seven new members have been co-opted, and these were from the
candidates and best leaders of the Party. Finally, during the war,
two members were expelled from the CC of the CPY, so that there
remain at work to-day nineteen members of the CC of the CPY
elected at the Conference and seven co-opted members. Accord-
ingly, the CC of the CPY is composed of twenty-six members; this
is how the matter stands.
As regards the remark of not holding a Party congress, it is
necessary to mention here that the Politbureau of the CC of the
CPY has been making preparations for a congress of the CPY for a
year. We feel that this congress should be prepared so that it has
not only a demonstrational character, but that it be a congress in
which a statute and a Party programme will be brought forth. This
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 134.8


programme will later be adopted in its essentials by the People’s
Front at its congress.
What is the basis of the allegation in the letter that there is no
democracy in our Party? Perhaps information from Lavrentiev?
Where did he get this information? We consider that he, as an
ambassador, has no right to ask any one for information about the
work of our Party. That is not his business. This information can
be obtained by the CC of the CPSU from the CC of the CPY.
The fact that the Organization Secretary in the CPY is also
Minister of State Security in no case interferes with the self-
initiative of Party organizations. The Party is not placed under the
control of UDBa; this control is exercised through the CC of the
CPY, of which the Minister of State Security is a member. Be-
sides this, we must add that the chief of the Administration of
Cadres under the CC of the CPY is Zekovic and not Rankovic.
It is not true that there is no freedom of criticism in our Party.
Freedom of criticism and self-criticism exists in our Party and is
carried out at regular Party meetings and conferences of the aktiv. 1
Therefore, some one thought up this falsehood and passed it on as
information to the CC of the CPSU.
The allegation that the policy of the class struggle is not realized
in the CPY, and that capitalist elements in the villages and cities
are being strengthened, etc., is completely inaccurate. Where did
this information come from, when the entire world knows that
since the October revolution, nowhere in the world have there been
such firm, consistent social changes as in Yugoslavia? These are
facts which no one can dispute with us. Therefore, it is not under-
standable how any one can speak of Bernstein, Yollmar, Bukharin
and rotten opportunism in connection with our Party. We cannot
do other than defend ourselves against such inaccuracies and in-
sults to our Party.
The letter further mentions the report of Tito to the Second
Congress of the People’s Front in Yugoslavia. A small extract is
made from this report and a comparison is drawn with the attempt
of the Mensheviks to break up the Social Democratic Party forty
years ago.
First, that was forty years ago under Tsarism, and to-day we in
Yugoslavia have power in our hands. That is, the CPY has the
leading role in the Government. In watching social development in
1 Aktiv is used by Communists to denote those members of their Party holding
official Party positions and actively engaged in Party work.
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1348


process, it is inevitable that organizational forms must be changed
somewhat, methods of work changed, as well as forms of the
leadership of the masses in order to achieve specific ends more
easily.
Second, the People’s Front of Yugoslavia, by its quality, is not
only equal to some other Communist Parties, which accept any one
into their ranks, but is even better in its organization and activity.
Not every one can be a member of the People’s Front of Yugo-
slavia, even though to-day it has approximately 7,000,000 members.
Third, the CPY has a completely assured leadership in the
People’s Front because the CPY is the nucleus of the People’s
Front. Therefore, there is no danger of its dissolving into the
People’s Front —as is said in the letter. Through the People’s
Front the CPY gradually realizes its programme, which the
People’s Front voluntarily adopts, considering it as its own pro-
gramme. This is the basis of Tito’s statement that the CPY has no
other programme.
We are sorry that such things are written about us and we would
like to draw attention to the fact that in some countries some CPs
are changing, not only the forms of work but also the name of the
Party, as is the case in Bulgaria and Poland, and this not without
the approval of the CPSU. Probably in these countries it is neces-
sary for the Parties to take this course. However, here the com-
bination of the People’s Front, headed by the CPY, which is
firmly organized from within, and which strongly binds about it-
self the million-strong masses of the People’s Front, has shown
itself most correct. And yet no one tells these other Parties that
they will dissolve into the masses even though they have forms of
work and forms of organization in harmony with the new given
conditions in their country.
Why then does any one dispute facts which are undeniable
and have been known for a long time? We are deeply convinced
that the results achieved by our Party during the war and after the
war speak for themselves: that the CPY is strong, monolithic, cap-
able of leading the country to socialism, capable of leading the
people of Yugoslavia in every situation however difficult it be.
Our Party is not semi-legal, as is mentioned in the letter. It is
completely legal and known to every man in Yugoslavia as the
leading force.
The fact of the matter is that unfortunately you are not acquaint-
ed with the nature of the Front in Yugoslavia and criticize us for
CPY to CPSU, ij April 194.8


not publishing reports of Party meetings and conferences. All the
important decisions, from those of the Federal Government down,
regarding all questions of social and state life, are either decisions
of the Party or made on the initiative of the Party, and the people
understand and accept them as such. Therefore, we do not feel it
necessary to emphasize that this or that decision was made at this
or that Party conference. The great reputation of our Party, won
not only in our country but in the whole world, on the basis of the
results it has obtained, speaks for itself. On the other hand, we
emphasize that our Party achieved all this thanks to the fact that it
followed the doctrine of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin; that it bene-
fited by the experiences of the CPSU, applying these experiences
to the given conditions. Therefore, we do not understand the alle-
gation made in your letter that our leaders hypocritically and
‘pharisaically praise the CPSU to the skies’ and at the same time
work against it.
We cannot believe that the CC of the CPSU can dispute the ser-
vices and results achieved by our Party up to today because we
remember that such acknowledgement was given us many times
by many Soviet leaders and by Comrade Stalin himself. We are
also of the opinion that there are many specific aspects in the social
transformation of Yugoslavia which can be of benefit to the revo-
lutionary development in other countries, and are already being
used. This does not mean that we place the role of the CPSU and
the social system of the USSR in the background. On the con-
trary, we study and take as an example the Soviet system, but we
are developing socialism in our country in somewhat different
forms. In the given period under the specific conditions which
exist in our country, in consideration of the international con-
ditions which were created after the war of liberation, we are
attempting to apply the best forms of work in the realization of
socialism. We do not do this, in order to prove that our road is
better than that taken by the Soviet Union, that we are inventing
something new, but because this is forced upon us by our daily life.
As to Velebit and why he still remains in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. The matter stands thus. Kardelj and Djilas once told
Molotov that we are not all clear about Velebit, we never had an£
proof then and we have none to-day. The matter is still under in-
vestigation and we would not care to remove and destroy a man on
the basis of suspicion.
What induces us not to be too hasty with Velebit, is, first, that
CPY to CPSU, ij April 1948


he has been a Party member since 1939 and before that he did
great services for the Party. In 1940 Tito gave him the confidential
task of renting a villa in Zagreb in his name in which to place the
radio station of the Comintern, and in which Valdes lived with his
wife as wireless operator. Velebit was at the same time a courier.
All this continued some time under the occupation and of course
represented a danger to his life. Upon the decision of the Party,
Velebit joined the Partisans in 1942 and conducted himself well.
Later he received a task abroad and performed it well. We are now
investigating his entire past. If the Soviet Government has some-
thing concrete about him we beg it to give us the facts. However,
regardless of this we cannot immediately remove him from his
position in the Ministry.
Therefore, the accusations in your letter in this connection are
surprising and insulting to the CC of the CPY and to the entire
Government. You compare us with some bourgeois States which
tolerate spies so that they may curry favour with certain great
Powers. This is what is stated in your letter and what we consider
impossible about a Government which is more than friendly and
allied: ‘it is possible that the Yugoslav Government intends to use
Velebit precisely as an English spy. As is known, bourgeois
governments think it permissible to have spies of great imperialist
States on their staffs, with a view to insuring their goodwill, and
would even agree to placing themselves under the tutelage of these
States for this purpose.’ That is how it is written in the letter. A
man cannot read it without being deeply embittered and shocked
by its manner, in a letter to a Government which represents a
nation of 16 million people, which in the war of liberation on the
side of the USSR sacrificed the most, and which in the future, if
need be, will be a most faithful ally in the struggle.
If you were to ask us if there were anything with which we were
not satisfied on your part then we should openly say there are
many reasons why we are dissatisfied. What are these reasons? It is
impossible to mention all the reasons in this letter but we will men-
tion a few. First, we regard it as improper for the agents of the
Soviet Intelligence Service to recruit in our country, which is go-
ing toward socialism, our citizens for their intelligence service. We
cannot consider this as anything else but detrimental to the inter-
ests of our country. This is done in spite of the fact that our leaders
and UDBa have protested against this and made it known that it
cannot be tolerated. Those being recruited include officers, various
CPY to CPSU, ij April igj.B


leaders, and those who are negatively disposed towards the new
Yugoslavia.
We have proof that certain agents of the Soviet Intelligence Ser-
vice in recruiting our Party members cast doubts on our leaders,
sought to ruin their reputation, showed them as inefficient and un-
reliable. For example, Colonel Stepanov did not hesitate in 1945,
in recruiting one of our good comrades who was working in the
central division of coding and decoding in UDBa, to blacken and
cast doubts on all our leaders, stating ‘for the present Marshal Tito
works as he should.’ Such cases are still occurring to-day. This also
means that such recruiting is not done for the purpose of a struggle
against some capitalist country, and we must inevitably come to the
conclusion that this recruiting is destroying our internal unity,
that it kills confidence in the leadership, demoralises people, leads
to the compromising of leading people and becomes a channel for
collecting false information day by day. This work by the agents
of the Soviet Intelligence Service cannot be called loyal and
friendly towards our country, which is going toward socialism and
which is the most faithful ally of the USSR.
We cannot allow the Soviet Intelligence Service to spread its net
in our country. We have our state security and our intelligence
service for the struggle against various foreign capitalist elements
and class enemies within the country, and if the Soviet intelligence
agents need information or assistance in this direction they can
obtain it whenever they want to; on our part, this has been done
until now.
These and similar matters with which we are not satisfied are
numerous. However, can this be the reason for the straining of our
mutual relations? No. These are questions which can be elimin-
ated and explained.
It is evident that it is to the living interest of the USSR and
Yugoslavia to be firmly tied. However, absolute mutual confi-
dence is necessary for this; without it enduring and firm relations
between our two countries cannot exist. The Soviet people, and in
the first place the leaders, should believe the fact that the new
Yugoslavia, under its present leadership, is unwaveringly going
towards socialism.
Further, they must believe that the USSR has in the present
Yugoslavia under its present leadership, a most faithful friend and
ally prepared to share good and evil with the people of the USSR
in case of severe trial.
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1348


Finally, even though we know that the USSR has tremendous
difficulties with the reconstruction of the devastated lands we right-
fully expect the assistance of the USSR in the development of our
country and the realization of the Five Year Plan without material
deprivation to the people of the USSR, because we feel it is to the
interest of the USSR for the new Yugoslavia to be stronger, since
it is face to face with the capitalist world which is endangering not
only its peaceful development but the development of other
countries of people’s democracy and even the development of the
USSR.
On the basis of everything set out above, the plenary session of
the CC of the CPY cannot accept as justified the criticisms in your
letter about the work of our Party and its leaders. We are deeply
convinced that this is the result of a grave misunderstanding,
which should not have happened and which must rapidly be liqui-
dated in the interest of matters concerning our Parties.
Our only desire is to eliminate every doubt and disbelief in the
purity of the comradely and brotherly feeling of loyalty of our
CC of the CPY to the CPSU, to whom we will always remain
thankful for the Marxist-Leninist doctrine which has led us until
now and will lead us in the future —loyalty to the Soviet Union
which has served us and will continue to serve us as a great ex-
ample and whose assistance to our people we so highly appreciate.
We are convinced that this disagreement can be liquidated only
by full mutual explanation between our two Central Committees
on the spot, that is, here.
Therefore, we propose that the CC of the CPSU send one or
more of its members, who will have every opportunity here of
studying every question thoroughly.
In the hope that you will accept our proposal we send you our
comradely greetings.
By order of the CC of the CPY
TITO
KARDELJ
Belgrade,
13 April 1948
CPY to CPSU, 13 April 1348


LETTER FROM CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION TO
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF COMMUNIST PARTY OF
YUGOSLAVIA
4 May 1948
Your answer and the announcement of the decision of the
Plenum of the CC of the CPY of 13 April 1948, signed by Com-
rades Tito and Kardelj, have been received.
Unfortunately, these documents, and especially the document
signed by Tito and Kardelj, do not improve on the earlier Yugo-
slav documents; on the contrary, they further complicate matters
and sharpen the conflict.
Our attention is drawn to the tone of the documents, which can
only be described as exaggeratedly ambitious. In the documents
one does not see any desire to establish the truth, honestly to
admit errors, and to recognize the necessity of eliminating those
errors. Yugoslav comrades do not accept criticism in a Marxist
manner, but in a bourgeois manner, i.e. they regard it as an insult
to the prestige of the CC of the CPY and as undermining the
ambitions of the Yugoslav leaders.
So, in order to extricate themselves from the difficult situation
for which they are themselves to blame, the Yugoslav leaders are
using a ‘new’ method, a method of complete denial of their errors
regardless of their obvious existence. The facts and the documents
mentioned in the letter of the CC of the CPSU of 27 March 1948
are denied. Comrades Tito and Kardelj, it seems, do not under-
stand that this childish method of groundless denial of facts and
documents can never be convincing, but merely laughable.
I. The WITHDRAWAL OF SOVIET MILITARY ADVISERS
FROM YUGOSLAVIA
In its letter of 27 March the CC of the CPSU stated the reasons
for the withdrawal of the Soviet military advisers, and said that the
information of the CC of the CPSU was based on the complaints
of these advisers of the unfriendly attitude of the responsible Yugo-
slav officials towards the Soviet army and its representatives in


Yugoslavia. Comrades Tito and Kardelj denounce these com-
plaints as unsubstantiated. Why should the CC of the CPSU
believe the unfounded statements of Tito and Kardelj rather than
the numerous complaints of the Soviet military advisers? On what
grounds? The USSR has its military advisers in almost all the
countries of people’s democracy. We must emphasize that until
now we have had no complaints from our advisers in these coun-
tries. This explains the fact that we have had no misunderstand-
ings in these countries arising from the work of the Soviet military
advisers. Complaints and misunderstandings, in this field, exist
only in Yugoslavia. Is it not clear that this can be explained only by
the special unfriendly atmosphere which has been created in
Yugoslavia around these military advisers?
Comrades Tito and Kardelj refer to the large expenses in con-
nection with the salaries of the Soviet military advisers, emphasiz-
ing that the Soviet generals receive three to four times as much, in
dinars, as Yugoslav generals, and that such conditions may give
rise to discontent on the part of Yugoslav military personnel. But
the Yugoslav generals, apart from drawing salaries, are provided
with apartments, servants, food, etc. Secondly, the pay of the
Soviet generals in Yugoslavia corresponds to the pay of Soviet
generals in the USSR. It is understandable that the Soviet Gov-
ernment could not consider reducing the salaries of Soviet generals
who are in Yugoslavia on official duty.
Perhaps the expense of the Soviet generals was too great a bur-
den for the Yugoslav budget. In that case the Yugoslav Government
should have approached the Soviet Government and proposed that it
take over part of the expenses. There is no doubt that the Soviet Gov-
ernment would have done this. However, the Yugoslavs took an-
other course; instead of solving this question in an amicable manner,
they began to abuse our military advisers, to call them loafers, and
to discredit the Soviet army. Only after a hostile atmosphere had
been created around the Soviet military advisers did the Yugoslav
Government approach the Soviet Government. It is understand-
able that the Soviet Government could not accept this situation.
2. CONCERNING THE SOVIET CIVILIAN SPECIALISTS
IN YUGOSLAVIA
In its letter of 27 March the CC of the CPSU stated the reasons
for the withdrawal of the Soviet civilian specialists from Yugo-
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


slavia. In the given case the CC of the CPSU relied on the com-
plaints of the civilian specialists and on the statements of the
Soviet Ambassador in Yugoslavia. From these statements it can be
seen that the Soviet civilian specialists, as well as the representa-
tive of the CPSU in the Cominform, Comrade Yudin, were placed
under the supervision of the UDBa.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj in their letter deny the truth of
these complaints and reports, stating that the UDBa does not
supervise Soviet citizens in Yugoslavia. But why should the CC of
the CPSU believe the unfounded assertions of Comrades Tito and
Kardelj and not the complaints of Soviet men, among them Com-
rade Yudin?
The Soviet Government has many of its civilian specialists in all
the countries of people’s democracy but it does not receive any
complaints from them and there are no disagreements with the
Governments of these countries. Why have these disagreements
and conflicts arisen only in Yugoslavia? Is it not because the Yugo-
slav Government has created a special unfriendly atmosphere
around the Soviet officials in Yugoslavia, among them Comrade
Yudin himself?
It is understandable that the Soviet Government could not
tolerate such a situation and was forced to withdraw its civilian
specialists from Yugoslavia.
3. REGARDING VELEBIT AND OTHER SPIES IN THE MINISTRY
OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF YUGOSLAVIA
It is not true, as Tito and Kardelj say, that Comrades Kardelj
and Djilas, on the occasion of a meeting with Molotov, confined
their doubts regarding Velebit to the remark ‘that all was not clear
about Velebit’ to them. Actually, in their meeting with Molotov
there was talk that Velebit was suspected of spying for England. It
was very strange that Tito and Kardelj identified the removal of
Velebit from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with his ruin. Why
could not Velebit be removed from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs without being ruined?
Also strange was the statement by Tito and Kardelj of the rea-
sons for leaving Velebit in his position of First Assistant Minister
of Foreign Affairs; it appears that Velebit was not removed from
his position because he was under supervision. Would it not be
better to remove Velebit just because he was under supervision?
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


Why so much consideration for an English spy, who at the same
time is so uncompromisingly hostile towards the Soviet Union?
However, Velebit is not the only spy in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. The Soviet representatives have many times told the
Yugoslav leaders that the Yugoslav Ambassador in London,
Leontic, 1 is an English spy. It is not known why this old and
trusted English spy remains in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Soviet Government is aware that besides Leontic three
other members of the Yugoslav Embassy in London, whose names
are not yet disclosed, are in the English Intelligence Service. The
Soviet Government makes this statement with full responsibility.
It is also hard to understand why the United States Ambassador
in Belgrade behaves as if he owned the place and why his ‘intelli-
gence agents’, whose number is increasing, move about freely, or
why the friends and relations of the executioner of the Yugoslav
people, Nedic, 2 so easily obtain positions in the State and Party
apparatus in Yugoslavia.
It is clear that since the Yugoslav Government persistently
refuses to purge its Ministry of Foreign Affairs of spies, the Soviet
Government is forced to refrain from open correspondence with
the Yugoslav Government through the Yugoslav Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
4. CONCERNING THE SOVIET AMBASSADOR IN YUGOSLAVIA
AND THE SOVIET STATE
In their letter of 13 April 1948 Tito and Kardelj wrote: ‘We con-
sider that he (the Soviet Ambassador), as an ambassador, has no
right to ask any one for information about the work of our Party.
That is not his business.’
We feel that this statement by Tito and Kardelj is essentially
incorrect and anti-Soviet. They identify the Soviet Ambassador,
a responsible communist who represents the Communist Govern-
ment of the USSR, with an ordinary bourgeois ambassador, a
simple official of a bourgeois State, who is called upon to under-
mine the foundations of the Yugoslav State. It is difficult to under-
stand how Tito and Kardelj could sink so low. Do these comrades
understand that such an attitude towards the Soviet Ambassador
1 Leontic was officially recalled from London early in June 1948; he had left
earlier.
8 General Nedic was head of the puppet Serbian Government set up by
Germany in 1941.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


means the negation of all friendly relations between the USSR and
Yugoslavia? Do these comrades understand that the Soviet Am-
bassador, a responsible communist, who represents a friendly
power which liberated Yugoslavia from the German occupation,
not only has the right but is obliged, from time to time, to discuss
with the communists in Yugoslavia all questions which interest
them? How can they be suspicious of these simple elementary
matters if they intend to remain in friendly relation with the Soviet
Union?
For the information of Comrades Tito and Kardelj, it is neces-
sary to mention that, unlike the Yugoslavs, we do not consider the
Yugoslav Ambassador in Moscow as a simple official; we do not
treat him as a mere bourgeois ambassador and we do not deny his
‘right to seek information about the work of our Party from any
one he chooses.’ Because he became an ambassador, he did not
stop being a communist. We consider him as a comrade and a high-
ranking communist. He has friends and acquaintances among the
Soviet people. Is he ‘acquiring’ information about the work of our
Party? Most likely he is. Let him ‘acquire’ it. We have no reason to
hide from comrades the shortcomings in our Party. We expose
them ourselves in order to eliminate them.
We consider that this attitude of the Yugoslav comrades to-
wards the Soviet Ambassador cannot be regarded as accidental. It
arises from the general attitude of the Yugoslav Government,
which is also the cause of the inability of the Yugoslav leaders to
see the difference between the foreign policy of the USSR and
the foreign policy of the Anglo-Americans; they, therefore, put the
foreign policy of the USSR on a par with the foreign policy of the
English and Americans and feel that they should follow the same
policy towards the Soviet Union as towards the imperialist States,
Great Britain and the United States.
In this respect, the speech by Comrade Tito in Ljubljana in May
1945 is very characteristic. He said:
It is said that this war is a just war and we have considered it as such.
However, we seek also a just end; we demand that every one shall be
master in his own house; we do not want to pay for others; we do not
want to be used as a bribe in international bargaining; we do not want to
get involved in any policy of spheres of interest.
This was said in connection with the question of Trieste. As is
well known, after a series of territorial concessions for the benefit
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


of Yugoslavia, which the Soviet Union extracted from the Anglo-
Americans, the latter, together with the French, rejected the
Soviet proposal to hand Trieste over to Yugoslavia and occupied
Trieste with their own forces, which were then in Italy. Since all
other means were exhausted, the Soviet Union had only one other
method left for gaining Trieste for Yugoslavia—to start war with
the Anglo-Americans over Trieste and take it by force. The Yugo-
slav comrades could not fail to realize that after such a hard war
the USSR could not enter another. However, this fact caused dis-
satisfaction among the Yugoslav leaders, whose attitude was
described by Comrade Tito. The statement by Tito in Ljubljana
that ‘Yugoslavia would not pay for others’, ‘would not be used as a
bribe’, ‘would not be involved in any policy of spheres of interest’,
was directed not only against the imperialist States but also against
the USSR, and in the given circumstances the relations of Tito
towards the USSR are no different from his relations towards the
imperialist States, as he does not recognize any difference between
the USSR and the imperialist States.
In this anti-Soviet attitude of Comrade Tito, which met no re-
sistance in the Politbureau of the CC of the CPY, we see the basis
for the slanderous propaganda of the leaders of the CPY, pursued
in the narrow circles of the Yugoslav Party cadres, regarding the
‘degeneration’ of the USSR into an imperialist State, its desire to
‘dominate Yugoslavia economically’, also the basis for the slander-
ous propaganda of the leaders of the CPY regarding the ‘degenera-
tion’ of the CPSU and its desire ‘through the Cominform, to
control the other parties’ and the ‘socialism in the USSR, which
has ceased being revolutionary’.
The Soviet Government was obliged to draw the attention of the
Yugoslav Government to the fact that this statement could not be
tolerated, and since the explanations given by Tito and Kardelj
were unfounded, the Soviet Ambassador in Belgrade, Comrade
Sadchikov, was instructed by the Soviet Government to make the
following statement to the Yugoslav Government, which he did on
5 June 1945:
We regard Comrade Tito’s speech as an unfriendly attack on the
Soviet Union, and the explanation by Comrade Kardelj as unsatis-
factory. Our readers understood Comrade Tito’s speech in this way, and
it cannot be understood in any other. Tell Comrade Tito that if he
should once again permit such an attack on the Soviet Union we shall
be forced to reply with open criticism in the press and disavow him.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


From this anti-Soviet attitude of Comrade Tito to the USSR
arises the attitude of the Yugoslav leaders towards the Soviet
Ambassador, by which the Soviet Ambassador in Belgrade is put
on a level with bourgeois ambassadors.
It seems that the Yugoslav leaders intend to retain this anti-
Soviet attitude in future. The Yugoslav leaders should bear in
mind that retaining this attitude means renouncing all friendly
relations with the Soviet Union, and betraying the united socialist
front of the Soviet Union and the people’s democratic republics.
They should also bear in mind that retaining this attitude means
depriving themselves of the right to demand material and any
other assistance from the Soviet Union, because the Soviet Union
can only offer aid to friends.
For the information of Comrades Tito and Kardelj, we empha-
size that this anti-Soviet attitude towards the Soviet Ambassador
and the Soviet State is only found in Yugoslavia; in other countries
of people’s democracy the relations were and remain friendly and
perfectly correct.
It is interesting to note that Comrade Kardelj, who is now in
complete agreement with Comrade Tito, three years ago had a
completely different opinion of Tito’s speech in Ljubljana. Here is
what the Soviet Ambassador in Yugoslavia, Sadchikov, reported
about his conversation with Kardelj on 5 June 1945:
To-day, 5 June, I spoke to Kardelj as you suggested. (Tito has not yet
returned.) The communication made a serious impression on him.
After some thought he said he regarded our opinion of Tito’s speech as
correct. He also agreed that the Soviet Union could no longer tolerate
similar statements. Naturally, in such difficult times for Yugoslavia,
Kardelj said, open criticism of Tito’s statement would have serious
consequences for them, and for this reason they would try to avoid
similar statements. However, the Soviet Union would have the right
to make open criticism should similar statements be made. Such
criticism would benefit them. Kardelj asked me to convey to you his
gratitude for this well-timed criticism. He said it would help to improve
their work. The criticism of the political mistakes made in the Gov-
ernment declaration in March had been of great benefit. Kardelj was
sure that this criticism would also help improve the political leader-
ship.
In an attempt to analyse (very carefully) the causes of the mistakes,
Kardelj said that Tito had done great work in liquidating fractionalism
in the CP and in organizing the people’s liberation struggle, but he was
inclined to regard Yugoslavia as a self-sufficient unit outside the general
CPSU to CPY, 4 May ig4B


development of the proletarian revolution and socialism. Secondly, such
a situation had arisen in the Party that the Central Committee does not
exist as an organisational and political centre. We meet by chance, and
we make decisions by chance. In practice every one of us is left to him-
self. The style of work is bad, and there is not enough co-ordination in
our work. Kardelj said he would like the Soviet Union to regard them,
not as representatives of another country, capable of solving questions
independently, but as representatives of one of the future Soviet
Republics, and the CPY as a part of the All-Union Communist Party,
that is, that our relations should be based on the prospect of Yugoslavia
becoming in the future a constituent part of the USSR. For this reason
they would like us to criticize them frankly and openly and to give
them advice which would direct the internal and foreign policy of
Yugoslavia along the right path.
I told Kardelj it was necessary to recognize the facts as they are at
present, namely to treat Yugoslavia as an independent State and the
Yugoslav Communist Party as an independent Party. You can and must,
I said, present and solve your problems independently, while we would
never refuse advice should you ask for it.
As regards Yugoslavia we have obligations, undertaken by our
treaties, and still more, we have moral obligations. As far as possible we
have never refused advice and assistance, when these were needed.
Whenever I pass Marshal Tito’s communications on to Moscow, I
receive replies immediately. However, such advice is possible and bene-
ficial only if we are approached in time, prior to any decision being
reached or any statement being made.
We leave aside the primitive and fallacious reasoning of Com-
rade Kardelj about Yugoslavia as a future constituent part of the
USSR and the CPY as a part of the CPSU. However, we would
like to draw attention to Kardelj’s criticisms of Tito’s anti-
Soviet declaration in Ljubljana and the bad conditions in the CC
of the CPY.
5. REGARDING THE ANTI-SOVIET STATEMENT BY COMRADE
DJILAS ABOUT THE INTELLIGENCE SERVICE
AND TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
In our letter of 27 March, we mentioned the anti-Soviet state-
ment by Comrade Djilas made at a session of the CC of the CPY,
in which he said that the Soviet officers, from a moral standpoint,
were inferior to the officers in the English army. This statement by
Djilas was made in connection with the fact that a few officers of
CPSU to CPY, 4 May ig4B


the Soviet army in Yugoslavia indulged in actions of an immoral
nature. We described this statement by Djilas as anti-Soviet
because in referring to the behaviour of Soviet officers this pitiful
Marxist, Comrade Djilas, did not recall the main differences be-
tween the Socialist Soviet army, which liberated the peoples of
Europe, and the bourgeois English army, whose function is to
oppress and not to liberate the peoples of the world.
In their letter of 13 April 1948, Tito and Kardelj state ‘that
Djilas never made such a statement in such a form’, and that ‘Tito
explained this in writing and orally in 1945’ and that ‘Comrade
Stalin and other members of the Politbureau of the CC of the
CPSU’ accepted this explanation.
We feel it necessary to emphasize that this statement by Tito
and Kardelj does not correspond with the facts. This is how Stalin
reacted to the statement by Djilas in a telegram to Tito;
I understand the difficulty of your situation after the liberation of
Belgrade. However, you must know that the Soviet Government, in
spite of colossal sacrifices and losses, is doing all in its power and beyond
its power to help you. However, I am surprised at the fact that a few
incidents and offences committed by individual officers and soldiers of
the Red Army in Yugoslavia are generalized and extended to the whole
Red Army. You should not so offend an army which is helping you to
get rid of the Germans and which is shedding its blood in the battle
against the German invader. It is not difficult to understand that there
are black sheep in every family, but it would be strange to condemn the
whole family because of one black sheep.
If the soldiers of the Red Army find out that Comrade Djilas, and
those who did not challenge him, consider the English officers, from a
moral standpoint, superior to the Soviet officers, they would cry out in
pain at such undeserved insults.
In this anti-Soviet attitude of Djilas, which passed unchallenged
among the other members of the Politbureau of the CC of the
CPY, we see the basis for the slanderous campaign conducted
by the leaders of the CPY against the representatives of the Red
Army in Yugoslavia, which was the reason for the withdrawal of
our military advisers.
How did the matter with Djilas end? It ended with Comrade
Djilas arriving in Moscow, together with the Yugoslav delegation,
where he apologized to Stalin and begged that this unpleasant
error, which he committed at the session of the CC of the CPY,
be forgotten. As can be seen, the matter appears entirely different
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


when presented in the letter of Tito and Kardelj. Unfortunately,
Djilas’s error was not an accident.
♦ * *
Comrades Tito and Kardelj accuse the Soviet representatives
of recruiting Yugoslavs for their intelligence service. They write:
We regard it as improper for the agents of the Soviet intelligence ser-
vice to recruit, in our country, which is going towards socialism, our
citizens for their intelligence service. We cannot consider this as any-
thing else but detrimental to the interests of our country. This is done
in spite of the fact that our leaders and UDBa have protested against
this and made it known that it cannot be tolerated. Those being re-
cruited include officers, various leaders, and those who are negatively
disposed towards the new Yugoslavia.
We declare that this statement by Tito and Kardelj, which is
full of hostile attacks against the Soviet officials in Yugoslavia, does
not at all correspond to the facts.
It would be monstrous to demand that the Soviet people who
are working in Yugoslavia should fill their mouths with water and
talk with no one. Soviet workers are politically mature people and
not simple hired labourers, who have no right to be interested in
what is happening in Yugoslavia. It is only natural for them to talk
with Yugoslav citizens, to ask them questions and to gain informa-
tion, etc. One would have to be an incorrigible anti-Soviet to
consider these talks as attempts to recruit people for the intelli-
gence service, especially such people, who are ‘negatively dis-
posed towards the new Yugoslavia’. Only anti-Soviet people can
think that the leaders of the Soviet Union care less for the welfare
of new Yugoslavia than do the members of the Politbureau of the
CC of the CPY.
It is significant that these strange accusations against the Soviet
representatives are met only in Yugoslavia. To us it appears that
this accusation against the Soviet workers is made solely for the
purpose of justifying the actions of UDBa in placing the Soviet
workers in Yugoslavia under surveillance.
It must be emphasized that Yugoslav comrades visiting Moscow
frequently visit other cities in the USSR, meet our people and
freely talk with them. In no case did the Soviet Government place
any restrictions on them. During his last visit to Moscow, Djilas
went to Leningrad for a few days to talk with Soviet comrades.
According to the Yugoslav scheme, information about the Party
and State work can only be obtained from the leading organs of the
CPSU to CPY, 4 May ig4B


CC of the CPY or from the Government. Comrade Djilas did not
obtain information from these organs of the USSR but from the
local organs of the Leningrad organizations. We did not consider it
necessary to inquire into what he did there, and what facts he
picked up. We think he did not collect material for the Anglo-
American or French intelligence service but for the leading organs
of Yugoslavia. Since this was correct we did not see any harm in it
because this information might have contained instructive material
for the Yugoslav comrades. Comrade Djilas cannot say that he met
with any restrictions.
It may be asked now: Why should Soviet communists in Yugo-
slavia have fewer rights than Yugoslavs in the USSR?
* * *
In their letter of 27 March, 1 Tito and Kardelj again refer to the
question of trade relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia,
namely the alleged refusal of Comrade Krutikov to continue trade
negotiations with the Yugoslav representatives. We have already
explained to the Yugoslav comrades that Krutikov has denied the
statements attributed to him. We have already explained that the
Soviet Government never raised the question of suspending trade
agreements and trade operations with Yugoslavia. Consequently
we consider this question closed and have no intention of returning
to it.
6. ON THE INCORRECT POLITICAL LINE OF THE POLITBUREAU
OF THE CC OF THE CPY IN REGARD TO THE
CLASS STRUGGLE IN YUGOSLAVIA
In our letter we wrote that the spirit of the policy of class struggle
is not felt in the CPY, that the capitalist elements are increasing in
the cities and the villages and that the leaders of the Party are not
undertaking any measures to check the capitalist elements.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj deny all this and consider our state-
ments, which are a matter of principle, as insults to the CPY,
avoiding an answer to the essential question. Their proofs are
based only on the fact that consistent social reforms are being
undertaken in Yugoslavia. However, this is almost negligible. The
denial on the part of these comrades of the strengthening of the cap-
italist elements, and in connection with this, the sharpening of the
class struggle in the village under the conditions of contemporary
1 This should read 13 April.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


Yugoslavia, arises from the opportunist contention that, in the
transition period between capitalism and socialism, the class
struggle does not become sharper, as taught by Marxism-Leninism,
but dies out, as averred by opportunists of the type of Bukharin,
who postulated a decadent theory of the peaceful absorption of the
capitalist elements into the socialist structure.
No one will deny that the social reforms which occurred in the
USSR after the October revolution were all-embracing and con-
sistent with our teaching. However, this did not cause the CPSU
to conclude that the class struggle in our country was weakening,
nor that there was no danger of the strengthening of the capitalist
elements. In 1920-21 Lenin stated that ‘while we live in a country
of smallholders there is a stronger economic basis for capitalism in
Russia, than there is for communism’, since ‘small-scale individual
farming gives birth to capitalism and the bourgeoisie continually,
daily, hourly, spontaneously and on a mass scale’. It is known that
for fifteen years after the October revolution, the question of
measures for checking capitalist elements and later the liquidation
of the kulaks as the last capitalist class, was never taken off the
daily agenda of our Party. To underestimate the experiences of the
CPSU in matters relating to the development of socialism in
Yugoslavia, is a great political danger, and cannot be allowed for
Marxists, because socialism cannot be developed only in the cities,
and in industry, but must also be developed in the villages and in
agriculture.
It is no accident that the leaders of the CPY are avoiding the
question of the class struggle and the checking of the capitalist
elements in the village. What is more, in the speeches of the Yugo-
slav leaders there is no mention of the question of class differentia-
tion in the village; the peasantry are considered as an organic whole,
and the Party does not mobilize its forces in an effort to overcome
the difficulties arising from the increase of the exploiting elements
in the village.
However, the political situation in the village gives no cause for
complacency. Where, as in Yugoslavia, there is no nationaliza-
tion of the land, where private ownership of the land exists and land
is bought and sold, where considerable portions of land are con-
centrated in the hands of the kulaks, where hired labour is used,
etc. the Party cannot be educated in the spirit of camouflaging
the class struggle and smoothing over class controversies without
disarming itself for the struggle with the main difficulties in the
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


development of socialism. This means that the CPY is being
lulled to sleep by the decadent opportunist theory of the peaceful
infiltration of capitalist elements into socialism, borrowed from
Bernstein, Vollmar and Bukharin.
Nor is it by accident that some of the most prominent leaders of the
CPY are deviating from the Marxist-Leninist road on the question
of the leading role of the working class. While Marxism-Leninism
starts by recognizing the leading role of the working class in the
process of liquidating capitalism and developing a socialist society,
the leaders of the CPY have an entirely different opinion. It is
enough to quote the following speech by Comrade Tito in Zagreb
on 2 November 1946 (Barba, 2 November 1946): ‘We do not tell
the peasants that they are the strongest pillar of our State in order
that, eventually, we may get their votes, but because we know that
that is what they are, and because they should be aware of what
they are.’
This attitude is in complete contradiction to Marxism-Leninism.
Marxism-Leninism considers that in Europe and in the countries
of people’s democracy, the working class and not the peasantry is
the most progressive, the most revolutionary class. As regards the
peasantry, or rather its majority—the poor and middle peasants —
they can be or are in a union with the working class, while the
leading role in this union still belongs to the working class. How-
ever, the passage quoted not only denies the leading role to the
working class, but proclaims that the entire peasantry, including
that is the kulaks, is the strongest pillar in the new Yugoslavia. As
can be seen this attitude expresses opinions which are natural to
petty-bourgeois politicians but not to Marxist-Leninists.
7. ON THE INCORRECT POLICY OF THE POLITBUREAU
OF THE CC OF THE CPY ON THE QUESTION OF
MUTUAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE PARTY
AND THE PEOPLE'S FRONT
In our previous letter we wrote that in Yugoslavia the CPY is
not considered as the main leading force, but rather the People’s
Front; that Yugoslav leaders diminish the role of the Party and are
in fact dissolving the Party into a non-party People’s Front, allow-
ing in this way the same cardinal error committed by the Men-
sheviks in Russia forty years ago.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj deny this, stating that all decisions
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


of the People’s Front are decisions of the Party, but that they do
not consider it necessary to state at what Party conference these
decisions were approved.
In this lies the greatest error of the Yugoslav comrades. They
are afraid openly to acclaim the Party and its decisions before the
entire people so that the people may know that the leading force is
the Party, that the Party leads the Front and not the reverse.
According to the theory of Marxism-Leninism the CP is the
highest form of organization of workers, which stands over all
other organizations of workers, among others over the Soviet in
the USSR, over the People’s Front in Yugoslavia. The Party
stands above all these organizations of working men not only be-
cause it has drawn in all the best elements of the workers, but be-
cause it has its own special programme, its special policy, on the
basis of which it leads all the organizations of the workers. But the
Politbureau of the CC of the CPY is afraid to admit this openly
and proclaim it at the top of its voice to the working class and all
the people of Yugoslavia. The Politbureau of the CC of the CPY
feels that if it does not emphasize this factor, the other parties will
not have occasion to develop their strength in their struggle. It
also appears that Tito and Kardelj think that by this cheap cun-
ning they can abolish the laws of historical development, fool the
classes, fool history. But this is an illusion and self-deception. As
long as there are antagonistic classes there will be a struggle be-
tween them, and as long as there is a struggle it will be expressed
in the work of various groups and parties, legally or illegally.
Lenin said that the Party is the most important weapon in the
hands of the working class. The task of the leaders is to keep this
weapon in readiness. However, since the Yugoslav leaders are
hiding the banner of their Party and will not emphasize the role of
the Party before the masses, they are blunting this weapon,
diminishing the role of the Party and disarming the working class.
It is ridiculous to think that because of the cheap cunning of the
Yugoslav leaders the enemies will relinquish the fight. Because
of this the Party should be kept fighting fit and ever-ready for the
struggle against the enemy. Its banner should not be hidden and it
should not be lulled to sleep by the thought that the enemy will
relinquish the struggle. The Party should not stop organizing its
forces, legally or illegally.
We feel that this limiting of the role of the CPY has gone too far.
We refer here to the relations between the CPY and the People’s
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


Front, which we consider incorrect in principle. It must be home
in mind that in the People’s Front a variety of classes are admitted:
kulaks, merchants, small manufacturers, bourgeois intelligentsia,
various political groups, including some bourgeois parties. The
fact that, in Yugoslavia, only the People’s Front enters the political
arena and that the Party and its organizations do not take part in
political life openly under their own name, not only diminishes the
role of the Party in the political life of the country but also under-
mines the Party as an independent political force, called upon to
gain the confidence of the people and to spread its influence over
ever broader masses of workers through open political work,
through open propaganda of its opinions and its programme.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj forget that the Party develops and that
it can develop only in an open struggle with the enemy; that cheap
cunning and machinations of the Politbureau of the CC of the
CPY cannot replace this struggle as a school for educating Party
cadres. Their determined lack of desire to admit the error of their
statements —namely that the CPY has no other programme than
the programme of the People’s Front —shows how far the Yugo-
slav leaders have deviated from Marxist-Leninist views on the
Party. This might start liquidation tendencies regarding the CPY
which would be a danger to the CPY itself and lead eventually to
the degeneration of the Yugoslav People’s Republic.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj state that the errors of the Men-
sheviks regarding the merging of the Marxist Party into a non-
party mass organization were committed forty years ago and there-
fore can have no connection with the present mistakes of the
Politbureau of the CC of the CPY. Comrades Tito and Kardelj
are profoundly mistaken. There can be no doubt of the theoretical
and political connections between these two events, because, like
the Mensheviks in 1907 so, to-day, Tito and Kardelj forty years
later, are equally debasing the Marxist Party, equally denying the
role of the Party as the supreme form of organization which stands
over all other mass workers’ organizations, equally dissolving the
Marxist Party into a non-party mass organization. The difference
lies in the fact that the Mensheviks committed their errors in
1906-07, and, after being tried by the Marxist Party in Russia at
the London Conference, did not return to these errors, whereas
the Politbureau of the CC of the CPY, in spite of this instructive
lesson, are bringing the same error back to life after forty years,
and are passing it off as their own Party theory. This circumstance
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


does not lessen but, on the contrary, aggravates the error of the
Yugoslav comrades.
8. REGARDING THE ALARMING SITUATION IN THE CPY
In our previous letter we wrote that the CPY retains a semi-
legal status, in spite of the fact that it came into power more than
three and a half years ago; that there is no democracy in the Party;
there is no system of elections; there is no criticism or self-
criticism, that the CPY Central Committee is not composed of
elected persons but of co-opted persons.
Comrades Tito and Kardelj deny all these charges.
They write that ‘the majority of the members of the CC of the
CPY are not co-opted’, that ‘in December 1940, when the CPY
was completely illegal... at the Fifth Conference, which by the
decision of the Comintern, had all the powers of a congress, a
CC of the CPY was elected consisting of thirty-one members and
ten candidates. . . .’ that ‘of this number ten members and six
candidates died during the war’ that besides this ‘two members
were expelled from the CC’, that the CC of the CPY now has
‘nineteen members elected at the Conference and seven co-opted
members’, that now ‘the CC of the CPY is composed of twenty-six
members’.
This statement does not correspond to the facts. As can be seen
from the archives of the Comintern, at the Fifth Conference, which
was held in October and not in December of 1940, thirty-one
members of the CC of the CPY and ten candidates were not
elected, but twenty-two members of the CC and sixteen candidates.
Here is what Comrade Valter (Tito) reported from Belgrade at the
end of October 1940: ‘To Comrade Dimitrov: The Fifth Confer-
ence of the CPY was held from 19-23 October. One hundred and
one delegates from all over the country participated. A CC of
twenty-two members was elected, among them two women, and
sixteen candidates. Complete unity was manifested. Valter’.
If, out of twenty-two elected members of the CC, ten died, this
would leave twelve elected members. If two were expelled this
would leave ten. Tito and Kardelj say that now there are twenty-
six members of the CC of the CPY—therefore, if from this
number we subtract ten, this leaves sixteen co-opted members of
the present CC of the CPY. It thus appears that the majority of the
members of the CC of the CPY were co-opted. This applies not
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


only to the members of the CC of the CPY but also to the local
leaders, who are not elected but appointed.
We consider that such a system of creating leading organs of the
Party, when the Party is in power and when it can use complete
legality, cannot be called anything but semi-legal, and the nature
of the organization sectarian-bureaucratic. It cannot be tolerated
that Party meetings should not be held or held secretly; this
must undermine the influence of the Party among the masses;
nor can it be tolerated that acceptance into the Party is concealed
from the workers; acceptance into the Party should play an import-
ant educational role in linking the Party to the working class and to
all the workers.
If the Politbureau of the CC of the CPY had regard for the
Party it would not tolerate such a condition in the Party and would,
immediately on gaining power, that is, three and a half years ago,
have asked the Party to call a Congress in order to reorganize on
the lines of democratic centralism and start work as a completely
legal Party.
It is entirely understandable that under such conditions in the
Party, when there is no election of the leading organs, but only
their appointment, there can be no talk of internal Party demo-
cracy, and much less of criticism and self-criticism. We know that
members are afraid to state their opinions, are afraid to criticize
the system in the Party and prefer to keep their mouths shut, in
order to avoid reprisals. It is no accident that the Minister of State
Security is at the same time the Secretary of the CC for Party
cadres or, as Tito and Kardelj say, the organization secretary of the
CC of the CPY. It is evident that the members and cadres of the
Party are left to the supervision of the Ministry of State Security,
which is completely impermissible and cannot be tolerated. It was
sufficient for Zhujovic, at a session of the CC of the CPY, not to
agree with a draft of the answer of the Politbureau of the CC of the
CPY to the letter from the CC of the CPSU, to be immediately
expelled from the Central Committee.
As can be seen, the Politbureau of the CC of the CPY does not
consider the Party as an independent entity, with the right to its
own opinion, but as a partisan detachment, whose members have
no right to discuss any questions but are obliged to fulfil all the
desires of the ‘chief’ without comment. We call this cultivating
militarism in the Party, which is incompatible with the principles
of democracy within a Marxist Party.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


As is known, Trotsky also attempted to force a leadership based
on militarist principles on the CPSU, but the Party, headed by
Lenin, triumphed over him and condemned him; militarist mea-
sures were rejected and internal Party democracy was confirmed
as the most important principle of Party development.
We feel that this abnormal condition inside the CPY represents
a serious danger to the life and development of the Party. The
sooner this sectarian-bureaucratic regime within the Party is put
an end to, the better it will be both for the CPY and for the
Yugoslav Democratic Republic.
9. ON THE ARROGANCE OF THE LEADERS O F THE CC
OF THE CPY AND THEIR INCORRECT ATTITUDE
TOWARDS THEIR MISTAKES
As can be seen from the letter by Tito and Kardelj, they com-
pletely deny the existence of any mistake in the work of the Polit-
bureau of the CC of the CPY, as well as the slander and propaganda
being conducted among the inner circles of Party cadres in Yugo-
slavia about the ‘degeneration’ of the USSR into an imperialist
State and so forth. They consider that this arises entirely from the
inaccurate information received by the CPSU regarding the
situation in Yugoslavia. They consider that the CC of the CPSU
has been a ‘victim’ of the slanderous and inaccurate information
spread by Zhujovic and Hebrang, and maintain that if there had
been no such false information regarding conditions in Yugo-
slavia there would have been no disagreements between the
USSR and Yugoslavia. Because of this they came to the con-
clusion that it is not a matter of mistakes of the CC of the CPY and
the criticism of these mistakes by the CC of the CPSU, but of the
inaccurate information of Zhujovic and Hebrang who ‘fooled’ the
CPSU with their information. They feel that everything would be
put right if they punished Hebrang and Zhujovic. In this way a
scapegoat has been found for their sins. We doubt whether
Comrades Tito and Kardelj themselves believe the truth of this
version, even though they seize on it as if it were true. They do
this because they feel it is the easiest way out of the difficult situa-
tion, in which the Politbureau of the CC of the CPY finds itself. In
emphasizing this false and apparently naive version they desire,
not only to clear themselves of the responsibility for strained
Yugoslav-Soviet relations by throwing the blame on the USSR,
CPSU to CP Y, 4 May 1948


but also to blacken the CC of the CPSU by representing it as being
greedy for all ‘tendentious’ and ‘anti-Party’ information.
We feel that this attitude of Tito and Kardelj towards the CC of
the CPSU and their critical remarks regarding the errors of the
Yugoslav comrades is not only dangerously unwise and false, but
also deeply anti-Party.
If Tito and Kardelj were interested in discovering the truth and
if the truth were not painful to them, they should think seriously
about the following:
(a) Why should the CPSU’s information about the affairs in
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and
Albania appear correct, and not cause any misunderstanding
with the Communist Parties of those countries, while the
information about Yugoslavia appears, according to the
Yugoslav comrades, tendentious and anti-Party’ and causes
from their side anti-Soviet attacks and an unfriendly atti-
tude towards the CPSU?
( b) Why do friendly relations between the USSR and the
countries of people’s democracies develop and strengthen
while Soviet-Yugoslav relations deteriorate?
( c) Why did the CPs of the people’s democracies support the
CPSU’s letter of 27 March and condemn the mistakes of the
CPY, while the Politbureau of the CPY, which would not
admit its errors, remained isolated?
Was all this accidental?
In order to reveal the errors of the Politbureau of the CPY it is
not necessary to obtain information from individual comrades such
as, for example, Hebrang and Zhujovic. More than enough can
be found in the official statements of the leaders of the CPY, such
as Tito, Djilas, Kardelj and others, which appeared in the press.
We declare that Soviet citizens did not obtain any information
from Hebrang. We declare that the talk between Zhujovic and the
Soviet Ambassador in Yugoslavia, Lavrentiev, did not reveal a
tenth of what was contained in the erroneous and anti-Soviet
speeches of Yugoslav leaders. The reprisals taken against these
comrades are not only an impermissible settling of private accounts
incompatible with the principles of internal Party democracy, but
also bear witness to the anti-Soviet attitude of the Yugoslav leaders,
who consider talk between a Yugoslav communist and the Soviet
Ambassador a crime.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


We feel that behind the attempts of the Yugoslav leaders to
clear themselves of the responsibility for straining Soviet-Yugo-
slav relations, lies the lack of desire by these comrades to admit
their mistakes and their intention to continue an unfriendly policy
towards the USSR.
Lenin says:
The attitude of a political party towards its mistakes is one of the
most important and most significant criteria of the seriousness of the
party and the fulfilment of its obligations toward its class and towards
the working masses. To admit errors frankly, to discover their cause, to
analyse the situation which has been created by these errors, to discuss
measures for correcting them—that is the sign of a serious party, that
is the fulfilment of its obligations, that is the education of the class and
the masses.
Unfortunately, we must state that the leaders of the CPY, who
will not admit and correct their errors, are crudely destroying this
principal directive of Lenin.
We must also emphasize that, in contrast to the Yugoslav
leaders, the leaders of the French and Italian Communist Parties
honourably admitted their errors at the Conference of nine Parties,
conscientiously corrected them and thus enabled their Parties to
strengthen their ranks and to educate their cadres.
We feel that underlying the unwillingness of the Politbureau of
the CC of the CPY honourably to admit their errors and to correct
them is the unbounded arrogance of the Yugoslav leaders. Their
heads were turned by the successes achieved. They became
arrogant and now feel that the depth of the sea reaches only up to
their knees. Not only have they become arrogant, but they even
preach arrogance, not understanding that arrogance can be their
own ruin.
Lenin says: ‘All revolutionary parties, which have existed in the
past, perished because they were arrogant and because they did not
see where their strength lay and were afraid to speak of their weak-
nesses. We will not perish because we are not afraid to speak of our
weaknesses and we will learn to overcome them.’
Unfortunately we must state that the Yugoslav leaders, who do
not suffer from undue modesty and who are still intoxicated with
their successes, which are not so very great, have forgotten Lenin’s
teaching.
Tito and Kardelj, in their letter, speak of the merits and
successes of the CPY, saying that the CC of the CPSU earlier
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


acknowledged these services and successes, but is now supposedly
silent about them. This, naturally, is not true. No one can deny
the services and successes of the CPY. There is no doubt about
this. However, we must also say that the services of the Com-
munist Parties of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania,
Bulgaria and Albania are not less than those of the CPY. However,
the leaders of these Parties behave modestly and do not boast
about their successes, as do the Yugoslav leaders, who have pierced
every one’s ears by their unlimited self-praises. It is also necessary
to emphasize that the services of the French and Italian CPs to
the revolution were not less but greater than those of Yugoslavia.
Even though the French and Italian CPs have so far achieved less
success than the CPY, this is not due to any special qualities of the
CPY, but mainly because after the destruction of the Yugoslav
Partisan Headquarters by German paratroopers, at a moment
when the people’s liberation movement in Yugoslavia was passing
through a serious crisis, the Soviet army came to the aid of the
Yugoslav people, crushed the German invader, liberated Belgrade
and in this way created the conditions which were necessary for
the CPY to achieve power. Unfortunately the Soviet army did not
and could not render such assistance to the French and Italian
CPs. If Comrade Tito and Comrade Kardelj bore this fact in mind
they would be less boastful about their merits and successes and
would behave with greater propriety and modesty.
The conceit of the Yugoslav leaders goes so far that they even
attribute to themselves such merits as can in no way be justified.
Take, for example, the question of military science. The Yugoslav
leaders claim that they have improved on the Marxist science of
war with a new theory according to which war is regarded as a
combined operation by regular troops, partisan units and popular
insurrections. However, this so-called theory is as old as the world
and is not new to Marxism. As is known, the Bolsheviks applied
combined action of regular troops, partisan units and popular
insurrections for the entire period of the civil war in Russia
(1918-21), and applied it on a much wider scale than was done in
Yugoslavia. However, the Bolsheviks did not say that by applying
this method of military activity, they produced anything new in
the science of war, because the same method was successfully
applied long before the Bolsheviks by Field-Marshal Kutuzov in
the war against Napoleon’s troops in Russia in 1812.
However, even Field-Marshal Kutuzov did not claim to be the
CPSU to CP Y, 4 May 1948


innovator in applying this method because the Spaniards in 1808
applied it in the war against Napoleon’s troops. It thus appears
that this science of war is actually 140 years old and this which
they claim as their own service is actually the service of the
Spaniards.
Besides this, we should bear in mind that the services of any
leader in the past do not exclude the possibility of his committing
serious errors later. We must not close our eyes to present errors
because of past services. In his time Trotsky also rendered revo-
lutionary services, but this does not mean that the CPSU could
close its eyes to his crude opportunist mistakes which followed
later, making him an enemy of the Soviet Union.
* * *
Tito and Kardelj in their letter proposed that the CPSU should
send representatives to Yugoslavia to study the Soviet-Yugoslav
differences. We feel this course would be incorrect, since it is not a
matter of verifying individual facts but of differences of principle.
As is known, the question of Soviet-Yugoslav differences has
already become the property of the CC of the nine Communist
Parties who have their Cominform. It would be highly irregular to
exclude them from this matter. Therefore, we propose that this
question be discussed at the next session of the Cominform.
CC of the CPSU
Moscow,
4 May 1948.
CPSU to CPY, 4 May 1948


CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF COMMUNIST PARTY
OF YUGOSLAVIA TO CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION
LETTER FROM J. B. TITO AND E. KARDELJ TO
COMRADES J. V. STALIN AND V. M. MOLOTOV
17 May 1948
We received your letter of 4 May 1948. It would be superfluous
to write of the discouraging impression created on us by this letter.
It has convinced us of the fact that all our explanations, though
supported by facts showing that all the accusations against us were
the result of wrong information, are in vain.
We do not flee from criticism about questions of principle, but
in this matter we feel so unequal that it is impossible for us to
agree to have this matter decided now by the Cominform. Even
before we were informed, the nine Parties received your first letter
and took their stand in resolutions. The contents of your letter did
not remain an internal matter for individual Parties but were car-
ried outside the permissible circle, and the results are that to-day,
in some countries such as Czechoslovakia and Hungary, not only
our Party but our country as a whole is being insulted, as was the
case with our parliamentary delegation in Prague.
The results of all this have been very serious for our country.
We desire that the matter be liquidated in such manner as we
prove, by deeds, that the accusations against us are unjust. That
is, we will resolutely construct socialism and remain loyal to the
Soviet Union; remain loyal to the doctrine of Marx, Engels, Lenin,
and Stalin. The future will show, as did the past, that we will
realize all that we promise you.
order of the CC of the CPY
J. B. TITO
E. KARDELJ
Belgrade,
17 May 1948


LETTER FROM CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF SOVIET UNION TO
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF COMMUNIST PARTY OF
YUGOSLAVIA
22 May 1948
Your letters of 17 May 1948, and 20 May 1948, signed by Com-
rades Tito and Kardelj, have been received. The CPSU considers
that in these letters the leaders of the CPY have gone a step further
in aggravating their crude mistakes in matters of principle, the
harmfulness and danger of which the CPSU indicated in its letter
of 4 May 1948.
1. Comrades Tito and Kardelj write that they feel ‘so unequal
that it is impossible for us to agree to have this matter decided now
by the Informbureau,’ and further they allowed themselves the
allusion that the Yugoslav leaders had allegedly been placed in that
position by the CPSU. The CC of the CPSU considers that there
is not a scrap of truth in this assertion. There is no inequality for
the Yugoslav Communist Party nor can there be in the Inform-
bureau of nine Parties. All know that during the organization of the
Informbureau of nine Communist Parties, all Communist Parties
started from the indisputable position, that every Party should
submit a report to the Informbureau, just as every Party has the
right to criticize other Parties. From this point the Conference of
nine Parties started when, at its meetings in September 1947, it
listened to the reports of the Central Committees of all Parties
without exception. The Conference of nine Communist Parties
initiated the right that each Party has the right to criticize any
other Party. The Italian and French comrades did not dispute the
right of other Parties to criticize their mistakes, and they accepted
harshness of criticism in a Bolshevik manner.
It is a known fact that the Italian and French comrades did not
oppose the right of other Parties to criticize their mistakes. They
have, on the contrary, borne the brunt of Bolshevik criticism and
benefited from its conclusions. Moreover, the Yugoslav comrades
took advantage of the opportunity to criticize the mistakes of the
Italian and French comrades and did not consider that by so
doing they were infringing on the equality of those Parties.


Why are Yugoslav comrades making this radical change, and
demanding the liquidation of already established precedents in
the Informbureau? Because they believe that the Yugoslav Party
and its leadership ought to be placed in a privileged position, and
that the statute of the Informbureau does not apply to them; that,
having the privilege of criticizing other Parties, they should not
themselves submit to the criticism of other Parties. However, if
we may say so, beliefs of that kind have nothing in common with
equality. In fact this is nothing but a request from the Yugoslav
leaders for a privileged position for the CPY (in the Cominform),
a position which does not exist and cannot exist for any Party. We
have taken and continue to take this stand, for without it the work
of the Informbureau could not continue. Each Communist Party
is obliged to submit reports to the Informbureau, each Com-
munist Party has the right to criticize any other Communist Party.
The refusal of the Yugoslavs to submit reports on their actions to
the Cominform, and to hear criticisms from other Communist
Parties, means a violation of the equality of Communist Parties.
2. In their letter of 17 May, Comrades Tito and Kardelj
repeat the claim made in their previous letter, alleging that the
CPSU criticism of Yugoslav Communist Party leadership is based
on incorrect information.
But the Yugoslav comrades do not produce any evidence to
prove this statement. The statement remains without substantia-
tion and the CPSU’s criticism remains unanswered, even though
Comrades Tito and Kardelj state in their‘letter that they do
not seek to avoid criticism on questions of principle. Maybe
the Yugoslav leaders simply have nothing to say to justify them-
selves?
It is one of two things; either the Politbureau of the CPY, deep
in its soul, is aware of the seriousness of the mistakes committed,
but wishing to conceal this from the CPY and to deceive it, de-
clares that the mistakes do not exist, in the meantime laying the
blame on innocent men, who were supposed to have misinformed
the CPSU; or it really does not understand that by its mistakes it is
deviating from Marxism-Leninism. However, in that case it must
be admitted that the Politbureau’s ignorance of the principles of
Marxism is extremely great.
3. Although they refuse to answer the direct questions of the
CPSU and aggravate their mistakes by their stubborn unwilling-
ness to admit and correct them, Comrades Tito and Kardelj assure
CPSU to CPY, 22 May 1948


us with words that they will show with deeds that they will remain
true to the Soviet Union and the teachings of Marx, Engels, Lenin
and Stalin. After what has happened we have no reason to believe
in these verbal assurances. Comrades Tito and Kardelj have on
many occasions given promises to the CPSU which have not been
fulfilled. From their letters and especially from their last letter we
are becoming ever more certain of this. The Politbureau of the
CPY, and especially Comrade Tito, should understand that the
anti-Soviet and anti-Russian policy which they have recently pur-
sued in their everyday work has done all that was needed to under-
mine faith in them on the part of the CPSU and the Government
of the USSR.
4. Comrades Tito and Kardelj complain that they have got in-
to a difficult position and that the consequences of this are very
serious for Yugoslavia. This of course is true, but the blame for
this lies exclusively with Comrades Tito and Kardelj and with
other members of the Politbureau of the CPY, who have put their
own prestige and ambition above the interests of the Yugoslav
people, and, instead of admitting and correcting their mistakes in
the interests of the people, have stubbornly denied their mistakes,
which are fatal for the Yugoslav people.
5. Comrades Tito and Kardelj claim that the CC of the CPY
refuses to attend the meeting of the Informbureau to discuss the
question of the Yugoslav Communist Party. If this is their final
decision, then it means that they have nothing to tell the Inform-
bureau in their defence, and that they are tacitly admitting their
guilt and are afraid to appear before their fraternal Communist
Parties. Moreover, refusal to report to the Informbureau means
that the CPY has taken the path of cutting itself off from the
united socialist people’s front of people’s democracies headed by
the Soviet Union, and that it is now preparing the Yugoslav
Party and people for a betrayal of the united front of people’s
democracies and the USSR. Since the Informbureau is a Party
foundation of the united front, such a policy leads to the betrayal
of the work done for international solidarity of the workers and to
the adoption of an attitude of nationalism which is hostile to the
cause of the working class.
Irrespective of whether the representatives of the CC of the
CPY attend the meeting of the Informbureau, the CPSU insists
upon the discussion of the situation in the CPY at the next meeting
of the Informbureau.
CPSU to CPY, 22 May 1948


In view of the request of the Czechoslovak and Hungarian com-
rades that the meeting of the Informbureau take place in the
second half of June, the CPSU expresses its agreement with this
proposal.
CC of the CPSU
Moscow,
23 May 1948.
CPSU to CPY, 22 May 1948


STATEMENT OF CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF YUGOSLAVIA TO
COMINFORM CONFERENCE
20 June 1948
To the Informbureau:
Having received an invitation to send its representatives to the
meeting of the Informbureau, which has already met for ‘Discus-
sion on the Situation in the CPY’, the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia requests that the Informbureau
session be informed of the following:
The CC of the CPY is always ready to participate in the work of
the Informbureau. But it cannot send its representatives to this
meeting of the Bureau because it does not accept the agenda of
the meeting, considering that the solution of the question of dis-
agreement between the CC of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and the CC of the CPY, which constitutes the agenda sent
to us, has from the beginning up until this meeting of the Bureau
been put on an incorrect basis, for the following reasons:
1. The first letter of the CC of the CPSU to our CC was not
composed in a spirit of comradely criticism to which the CC of the
CPY could answer in the same tone, but was rather in the form of a
rude and unjust accusation which we, considering its falsity, could
accept only to the detriment of our Party and State, or not accept
at all.
2. The CC of the CPY considers it thoroughly incorrect to
base accusations of a brotherly Communist Party on one-sided
information of what some one said or on isolated quotations, and
not on the basis of analysis of the entire activity of our Party, which
passed through such great tests before, during, and after the war.
3. Some of the most serious accusations of the CC of the
CPSU are obviously based on the information of anti-Party ele-
ments against which our Party waged a struggle before, during and
after the war. The CC of the CPY considers it impermissible for
such well-known remnants of former fractionalism in the CPY to
receive the support of the CC of the CPSU.
4. The leaders of the member Parties of the Informbureau,
uncritically accepting the accusations of the CC of the CPSU


against our Party and without seeking any information from us,
condemned our Party in written statements and refused to take in-
to consideration the arguments in our answer to the first letter of
the CC of the CPSU. Some of them, both within broad circles
in their Parties and publicly, acted in a way harmful to our
country.
5. The CC of the CPSU did not accept even one argument
from our answer to its first letter but in response to that letter and
later, too, brought out ever greater and totally unfounded accusa-
tions against the CPY. It is clear that such a stand makes it
impossible for us to discuss matters on an equal footing.
All these facts are reasons why the CC of the CPY did not assent
to the bringing out of the disagreements before the Informbureau,
considering that this would only result in a deepening rather than
in a solution of the disagreements.
The CC of the CPY points out that it proposed to the CC of the
CPSU that it send its representatives to Yugoslavia for a joint
investigation of disputed questions on the spot. The CC of the
CPSU did not accept this procedure, which in our opinion repre-
sents the only correct one, but, even before receiving our answer,
laid the disagreements before the other Parties of the Inform-
bureau, that is, it sent them the text of the letter at the same time it
was sent to us, at which the leaders of all the Parties, except the
French and Italian, sent us written statements informing us of their
judgment of our Party.
Such behaviour is not in the spirit of understanding or according
to the principle of voluntariness upon which the Informbureau is
based.
The CC of the CPY continues to adhere to its conviction that
joint discussion of disputed questions by direct contact between
the CC of the CPSU and the CC of the CPY in Yugoslavia itself
is the correct way to solve the existing disagreements. The CC of
the CPY expresses its deep sorrow at the fact that the disagree-
ments have taken such a form on the part of the CC of the CPSU,
and again appeals, both to the CC of the CPSU and to the Inform-
bureau, that they agree with our opinion regarding the necessity
for direct contact between the CC of the CPSU and the CC of the
CPY for the solution of disagreements, and to this end to remove
from the agenda the discussion of the situation in our Party,
comprehending ,the incorrectness of such discussion without our
consent.
CPY to Cominform, 20 June IQ4B


The CC of the CPY greets the brotherly Communist Parties
and declares that no disagreements will prevent the CPY from re-
maining true to its policy of solidarity and of the closest co-opera-
tion with the CC of the CPSU and other Communist Parties.
20 June 1948 Politbureau, CC of the CPY
CP Y to Cominform, 20 June 1948


COMMUNIQU É ¹
MEETING OF INFORMATION BUREAU OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTIES
During the second half of June, a meeting of the Information
Bureau was held in Rumania. The meeting was attended by the
following representatives;
Bulgarian Workers’ Party (Communists), Comrades T. Rostov,
B. Chervenkov; Rumanian Workers’ Party, Comrades G. Georgiu
Dej', Y. Luca, A. Pauker; Hungarian Workers’ Party, Comrades
M. Rakosi, M. Farcas, A. Gero; Polish Workers’ Party, Comrades
J. Berman, A. Zavadski; Communist Party of the Soviet Union
(Bolsheviks), Comrades A. Zhdanov, G. Malenkov, M. Suslov;
Communist Party of France, Comrades J. Duclos, E. Fajon;
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, Comrades R. Slansky,
V. Siroky, B. Geminder, G. Bares; Communist Party of Italy,
Comrades P. Togliatti, P. Secchia.
The Information Bureau discussed the situation in the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia and unanimously adopted a resolution
on this question.
RESOLUTION
of the Information Bureau Concerning the Situ-
ation in the Communist Party of Yugoslavia
The Information Bureau, composed of the representatives of the
Bulgarian Workers’ Party (Communists), Rumanian Workers’
Party, Hungarian Workers’ Party, Polish Workers’ Party, The
Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Communist
Party of France, Communist Party of Czechoslovakia and the
Communist Party of Italy, upon discussing the situation in the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia and announcing that the repre-
sentatives of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia had refused to
attend the meeting of the Information Bureau, unanimously
reached the following conclusions:
1. The Information Bureau notes that recently the leadership
of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia has pursued an incorrect
1 Published 28 June 1948.


line on the main questions of home and foreign policy, a line which
represents a departure from Marxism-Leninism. In this con-
nection the Information Bureau approves the action of the Central
Committee of the CPSU (B), which took the initiative in exposing
this incorrect policy of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Yugoslavia, particularly the incorrect policy of Comrades
Tito, Kardelj, Djilas and Rankovic.
2. The Information Bureau declares that the leadership of the
Yugoslav Communist Party is pursuing an unfriendly policy to-
ward the Soviet Union and the CPSU (B). An undignified policy
of defaming Soviet military experts and discrediting the Soviet
Union, has been carried out in Yugoslavia. A special regime was
instituted for Soviet civilian experts in Yugoslavia, whereby they
were under surveillance of Yugoslav state security organs and were
continually followed. The representative of the CPSU (B) in the
Information Bureau, Comrade Yudin, and a number of official
representatives of the Soviet Union in Yugoslavia, were followed
and kept under observation by Yugoslav state security organs.
All these and similar facts show that the leaders of the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia have taken a stand unworthy of Com-
munists, and have begun to identify the foreign policy of the Soviet
Union with the foreign policy of the imperialist powers, behaving
toward the Soviet Union in the same manner as they behave to the
bourgeois states. Precisely because of this anti-Soviet stand,
slanderous propaganda about the ‘degeneration’ of the CPSU (B),
about the ‘degeneration’ of the USSR, and so on, borrowed from
the arsenal of counter-revolutionary Trotskyism, is current within
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia.
The Information Bureau denounces this anti-Soviet attitude of
the leaders of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, as being in-
compatible with Marxism-Leninism and only appropriate to
nationalists.
3. In home policy, the leaders of the Communist Party of
Yugoslavia are departing from the positions of the working class
and are breaking with the Marxist theory of classes and class
struggle. They deny that there is a growth of capitalist elements in
their country, and consequently, a sharpening of the class struggle
in the countryside. This denial is the direct result of the oppor-
tunist tenet that the class struggle does not become sharper during
the period of transition from capitalism to socialism, as Marxism-
Leninism teaches, but dies down, as was affirmed by opportunists
Cominform Communique, 28 June igqB


of the Bukharin type, who propagated the theory of the peaceful
growing over of capitalism into socialism.
The Yugoslav leaders are pursuing an incorrect policy in the
countryside by ignoring the class differentiation in the countryside
and by regarding the individual peasantry as a single entity, con-
trary to the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of classes and class struggle,
contrary to the well-known Lenin thesis that small individual
farming gives birth to capitalism and the bourgeoisie continually,
daily, hourly, spontaneously and on a mass scale. Moreover, the
political situation in the Yugoslav countryside gives no grounds for
smugness and complacency. In the conditions obtaining in Yugo-
slavia, where individual peasant farming predominates, where the
land is not nationalized, where there is private property in land,
and where land can be bought and sold, where much of the land is
concentrated in the hands of kulaks, and where hired labour is
employed—in such conditions there can be no question of educat-
ing the Party in the spirit of glossing over the class struggle and of
reconciling class contradictions without by so doing disarming the
Party itself in face of the difficulties connected with the construc-
tion of socialism.
Concerning the leading role of the working class, the leaders of
the Yugoslav Communist Party, by affirming that the peasantry is
the ‘most stable foundation of the Yugoslav state’ are departing
from the Marxist-Leninist path and are taking the path of a
populist, kulak party. Lenin taught that the proletariat as the ‘only
class in contemporary society which is revolutionary to the end. . .
must be the leader in the struggle of the entire people for a
thorough democratic transformation, in the struggle of all working
people and the exploited against the oppressors and exploiters.’
The Yugoslav leaders are violating this thesis of Marxism-
Leninism.
As far as the peasantry is concerned it may be that the majority,
that is, the poor and medium peasants, are already in alliance with
the working class, with the working class having the leading role in
this alliance.
The attitude of the Yugoslav leaders disregards these theses of
Marxism-Leninism.
As can be seen, this attitude also reflects views appropriate to
petty-bourgeois nationalism, but not to Marxists-Leninists.
4. The Information Bureau considers that the leadership of
the Communist Party of Yugoslavia is revising the Marxist-
Cominform Communique , 28 June 1948


Leninist teachings about the Party. According to the theory of
Marxism-Leninism, the Party is the main guiding and leading
force in the country, which has its own, specific programme, and
does not dissolve itself among the non-Party masses. The Party
is the highest form of organization and the most important weapon
of the working class.
In Yugoslavia, however, the People’s Front, and not the Com-
munist Party, is considered to be the main leading force in the
country. The Yugoslav leaders belittle the role of the Communist
Party and actually dissolve the Party in the non-party People’s
Front, which is composed of the most varied class elements
(workers, peasants engaged in individual farming, kulaks, traders,
small manufacturers, bourgeois intelligentsia, etc.) as well as mixed
political groups which include certain bourgeois parties. The
Yugoslav leaders stubbornly refuse to recognize the falseness of
their tenet that the Communist Party of Yugoslavia allegedly can-
not and should not have its own specific programme and that it
should be satisfied with the programme of the People’s Front.
The fact that in Yugoslavia it is only the People’s Front which
figures in the political arena, while the Party and its organizations
do not appear openly before the people in its own name, not only
belittles the role of the Party in the political life of the country, but
also undermines the Party as an independent political force, which
has the task of winning the growing confidence of the people and of
influencing ever broader masses of the working people by open
political activity and open propaganda of its views and programme.
The leaders of the Yugoslav Communist Party are repeating the
mistakes of the Russian Mensheviks regarding the dissolution of
the Marxist party into a non-party, mass organization. All this
reveals the existence of liquidation tendencies in the Communist
Party of Yugoslavia.
The Information Bureau believes that this policy of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia threatens the very
existence of the Communist Party, and ultimately carries with it the
danger of the degeneration of the People’s Republic of Yugoslavia.
5. The Information Bureau considers that the bureaucratic
regime created inside the Party by its leaders is disastrous for the
life and development of the Yugoslav Communist Party. There is
no inner Party democracy, no elections, and no criticism and self-
criticism in the Party. Despite the unfounded assurances of Com-
rades Tito and Kardelj, the majority of the Central Committee of
Cominform Communique, 28 June 1948


the Communist Party of Yugoslavia is composed of co-opted, and
not of elected members. The Communist Party is actually in a
position of semi-legality. Party meetings are either not held at all,
or meet in secret —a fact which can only undermine the influence
of the Party among the masses. This type of organization of the
Yugoslav Communist Party cannot be described as anything but a
sectarian-bureaucratic organization. It leads to the liquidation of
the Party as an active, self-acting organism, it cultivates military
methods of leadership in the Party similar to the methods advo-
cated in his day by Trotsky.
It is a completely intolerable state of affairs when the most ele-
mentary rights of members in the Yugoslav Communist Party are
suppressed, when the slightest criticism of incorrect measures in
the Party is brutally repressed.
The Information Bureau regards as disgraceful such actions as
the expulsion from the Party and the arrest of the Central Com-
mittee members, Comrades Djuiovic and Hebrang, because they
dared to criticize the anti-Soviet attitude of the leaders of the
Yugoslav Communist Party, and called for friendship between
Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
The Information Bureau considers that such a disgraceful,
purely Turkish, terrorist regime cannot be tolerated in the Com-
munist Party. The interests of the very existence and development
of the Yugoslav Communist Party demand that an end be put to
this regime.
6. The Information Bureau considers that the criticism made
by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (B) and Central Committees of the other Communist
Parties of the mistakes of the Central Committee of the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia, and who in this way rendered fraternal
assistance to the Yugoslav Communist Party, provides the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia with all the conditions necessary to
speedily correct the mistakes committed.
However, instead of honestly accepting this criticism and taking
the Bolshevik path of correcting these mistakes, the leaders of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia, suffering from boundless am-
bition, arrogance and conceit, met this criticism with belligerence
and hostility. They took the anti-Party path of indiscriminately
denying all their mistakes, violated the doctrine of Marxism-
Leninism regarding the attitude of a political party to its mistakes
and thus aggravated their anti-Party mistakes.
Cominform Communique, 28 June 1948


Unable to face the criticism of the Central Committee of the
CPSU (B) and the Central Committees of the other fraternal
Parties, the Yugoslav leaders took the path of outrightly deceiving
their Party and people by concealing from the Yugoslav Com-
munist Party the criticism of the Central Committee’s incorrect
policy and also by concealing from the Party and the people the
real reasons for the brutal measures against Comrades Djuiovic
and Hebrang.
Recently, even after the Central Committee of the CPSU (B)
and fraternal parties had criticized the mistakes of the Yugoslav
leaders, the latter tried to bring in a number of new leftist laws.
They hastily decreed the nationalization of medium industry and
trade, though the basis for this is completely unprepared. In view
of such haste the new decision only hampers the supply of goods
to the population. In a similar hurried manner they brought in a
new grain tax for which the way is also not prepared and which can,
therefore, only dislocate grain supplies to the urban population.
Finally, only recently the Yugoslav leaders in loud declarations
declared their love for, and devotion to the Soviet Union, although
it is known that in practice they are pursuing an unfriendly policy
toward the Soviet Union.
Nor is this all. Of late the leaders of the Communist Party of
Yugoslavia have, with perfect aplomb, been declaiming a policy
of liquidating the capitalist elements in Yugoslavia. In a letter to
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (B), dated 13 April, Tito and Kardelj wrote that ‘the plenum
of the Central Committee approved the measures proposed by the
Political Bureau of the Central Committee to liquidate the rem-
nants of capitalism in the country’.
In accordance with this line Kardelj, speaking in the Skup-
schina on 25 April, declared: ‘ln our country the days of the last
remnants of the exploitation of man by man are numbered.’
In the conditions prevailing in Yugoslavia this position of the
leaders of the Communist Party in regard to the liquidation of the
capitalist elements, and hence, the kulaks as a class, cannot be
qualified as other than adventurous, and non-Marxist. For it is
impossible to solve this task as long as individual peasant economy
predominates in the country, which inevitably gives birth to
capitalism; as long as conditions have not been created for the
large-scale collectivization of agriculture; and as long as the
majority of the working peasantry is not convinced of the advant-
Cominfortn Communique, 28 June igqB


ages of collective methods of farming. The experience of the
CPSU (B) shows that the elimination of the last and biggest
exploiting class —the kulak class —is possible only on the basis of
the mass collectivization of agriculture, that the elimination of the
kulaks as a class, is an organic and integral part of the collectiviza-
tion of agriculture.
In order to eliminate the kulaks as a class, and hence, to elimin-
ate the capitalist elements in the countryside, it is necessary for the
Party to engage in detailed preparatory work to restrict the capital-
ist elements in the countryside, to strengthen the alliance of the
working class and the peasantry under the leadership of the work-
ing class, to make socialist industry capable of producing machin-
ery for the collective administration of agriculture. Haste in this
matter can only lead to irreparable harm.
Only on the basis of these measures, carefully prepared and con-
sistently carried out, is it possible to go over from restriction of the
capitalist elements in the countryside, to their liquidation.
All attempts by the Yugoslav leaders to solve this problem
hastily and by means of decrees, signify either that the venture is
foredoomed to failure or that it is a boastful and empty demagogic
declaration.
The Information Bureau considers that by means of these false
and demagogic tactics, the Yugoslav leaders are endeavouring to
demonstrate that they are not only for class struggle, but that they
go even further, beyond those demands which—taking into
account the real possibilities—could be advanced by the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia in the matter of restricting the capital-
ist elements.
The Information Bureau considers that since these leftist
decrees and declarations of the Yugoslav leadership are demagogic
and impracticable in the present conditions, they can but com-
promise the banner of socialist construction in Yugoslavia.
That is why the Information Bureau considers such adventurist
tactics as an undignified manoeuvre and an impermissible political
gamble.
As we see, these leftist demagogic measures and declarations on
the part of the Yugoslav leaders are designed to cover up their
refusal to recognize mistakes and honestly correct them.
7. Taking into account the situation in the Communist Party
of Yugoslavia, and seeking to show the leaders of the Party the way
out of this situation, the Central Committee of the Communist
Cominform Communique, 28 June 1948


Party of the Soviet Union (B) and the Central Committees of other
fraternal parties, suggested that the matter of the Yugoslav Com-
munist Party should be discussed at a meeting of the Information
Bureau, on the same, normal party footing as that on which the
activities of other Communist Parties were discussed at the first
meeting of the Information Bureau.
However, the Yugoslav leaders rejected the repeated suggestions
of the fraternal Communist Parties to discuss the situation in the
Yugoslav Party at a meeting of the Information Bureau.
Attempting to avoid the just criticism of the fraternal parties in
the Information Bureau, the Yugoslav leaders invented the fable
of their allegedly ‘unequal position’. There is not a grain of truth in
this story. It is generally known that when the Information Bureau
was set up, the Communist Parties based their work on the indis-
putable principle that any party could report to the Information
Bureau in the same way that any party had the right to criticize
other parties.
At the first meeting of the Nine Communist Parties, the Yugo-
slav Communist Party took full advantage of this right.
The refusal of the Yugoslav Party to report to the Information
Bureau on its actions and to listen to criticism by other Com-
munist Parties means, in practice, a violation of the equality of the
Communist Parties and is, in fact, tantamount to a demand for a
privileged position for the Communist Party of Yugoslavia in the
Information Bureau.
8. In view of this, the Information Bureau expresses complete
agreement with the estimation of the situation in the Yugoslav
Communist Party, with the criticism of the mistakes of the Central
Committee of the Party, and with the political analysis of these
mistakes contained in letters from the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union (B) to the Central Com-
mittee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia between March and
May 1948.
The Information Bureau unanimously concludes that by their
anti-Party and anti-Soviet views, incompatible with Marxism-
Leninism, by their whole attitude and their refusal to attend the
meeting of the Information Bureau, the leaders of the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia have placed themselves in opposition
to the Communist Parties affiliated to the Information Bureau,
have taken the path of seceding from the united socialist front
against imperialism, have taken the path of betraying the cause of
Cominform Communique, 28 June igqS


international solidarity of the working people, and have taken up a
position of nationalism.
The Information Bureau condemns this anti-Party policy and
attitude of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
Yugoslavia.
The Information Bureau considers that, in view of all this, the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia has
placed itself and the Yugoslav Party outside the family of the
fraternal Communist Parties, outside the united Communist front
and consequently outside the ranks of the Information Bureau.
♦ * ♦
The Information Bureau considers that the basis of these mis-
takes made by the leadership of the Communist Party of Yugo-
slavia lies in the undoubted fact that nationalist elements, which
previously existed in a disguised form, managed in the course of the
past five or six months to reach a dominant position in the leader-
ship of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, and that conse-
quently the leadership of the Yugoslav Communist Party has
broken with the international traditions of the Communist Party
of Yugoslavia and has taken the road of nationalism.
Considerably overestimating the internal, national forces of
Yugoslavia and their influence, the Yugoslav leaders think that
they can maintain Yugoslavia’s independence and build socialism
without the support of the Communist Parties of other countries,
without the support of the people’s democracies, without the sup-
port of the Soviet Union. They think that the new Yugoslavia can
do without the help of these revolutionary forces.
Showing their poor understanding of the international situation
and their intimidation by the blackmailing threats of the imperial-
ists, the Yugoslav leaders think that by making concessions they
can curry favour with the Imperialist states. They think they will
be able to bargain with them for Yugoslavia’s independence and,
gradually, get the people of Yugoslavia orientated on these states,
that is, on capitalism. In this they proceed tacitly from the well-
known bourgeois-nationalist thesis that ‘capitalist states are a
lesser danger to the independence of Yugoslavia than the Soviet
Union’.
The Yugoslav leaders evidently do not understand or, probably,
pretend they do not understand, that such a nationalist line can
only lead to Yugoslavia’s degeneration into an ordinary bourgeois
Cominform Communique, 28 June igqB


republic, to the loss of its independence and to its transformation
into a colony of the imperialist countries.
The Information Bureau does not doubt that inside the Com-
munist Party of Yugoslavia there are sufficient healthy elements,
loyal to Marxism-Leninism, to the international traditions of the
Yugoslav Communist Party and to the united socialist front.
Their task is to compel their present leaders to recognize their
mistakes openly and honestly and to rectify them; to break with
nationalism, return to internationalism; and in every way to con-
solidate the united socialist front against imperialism.
Should the present leaders of the Yugoslav Communist Party
prove incapable of doing this, their job is to replace them and to
advance a new internationalist leadership of the Party.
The Information Bureau does not doubt that the Communist
Party of Yugoslavia will be able to fulfil this honourable task.
Cominform Communique, 28 June 1948


STATEMENT OF CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF
COMMUNIST PARTY OF YUGOSLAVIA ON THE
RESOLUTION OF THE INFORMATION BUREAU
OF COMMUNIST PARTIES ON THE SITUATION
IN THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF YUGOSLAVIA
29 June 1948
The Resolution of the Information Bureau ‘On the Situation in
the Communist Party of Yugoslavia’ has a previous history, as is
obvious from its contents.
Its basis lies in a number of letters dispatched by the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. The
first of these letters, dated 27 March of this year, in which the CC
of the CPSU sets forth its accusations against the CC of the CPY,
was also simultaneously dispatched to all other members of the
Information Bureau, a fact of which the CC of the CPY had not
been informed. In addition, a letter from the CC of the CP of
Hungary was received through the CC of the CPSU which sup-
ported the attitude of the CC of the CPSU in its entirety. The
letter of the Hungarian Central Committee was sent to the other
Parties also. Similar letters were received by the CC of the CPY
from the other member Parties of the Information Bureau except
from the French and Italian. The CC of the CPY points out that
the Parties mentioned accepted as their base the standpoint of the
CC of the CPSU without hearing the views or listening to the
counter-arguments of the CC of the CPY. After this letter from
the CC of the CPSU and the letters from the other Central Com-
mittees, as well as after the reply of the CC of the CPY dispatched
to the CC of the CPSU dated 13 April, other letters from the CC
of the CPSU were received on 4 and 22 May, which adhered more
or less to the line of the first letter. The Resolution of the Informa-
tion Bureau ‘On the Situation in the Communist Party of Yugo-
slavia’ is essentially a repetition of these letters from the CC of the
CPSU.
In these letters, the CC of the CPSU accuses the CC of the
CPY and demands that it admit its mistakes, as: firstly, that the
leading people of the CPY are paying lip service to the USSR


while secretly slandering it and the CPSU; secondly, that leading
personalities in Yugoslavia are slandering the Soviet army and that
specialists from the Soviet Union are surrounded by enmity while
Soviet citizens and Comrade Yudin are followed by state security
agents; thirdly, that the Party cadres are under the surveillance of
the Minister of Internal Affairs and that there is no democracy and
criticism within the Party but that it is ruled by a system of
military leadership; fourthly, that the Yugoslav Government
wishes to get into the good graces of the imperialist countries
through spies and to put itself under their control; fifth, that the
Party submerges itself within the People’s Front and cannot
therefore be regarded as a Marxist-Leninist organization, that it is
pervaded by Bernsteinist, Bukharinist and Yollmarist theories of
the peaceful withering away of the capitalist elements in socialism;
sixth, that the ambassador of a certain imperialist power behaves
as master of the house in Yugoslavia and that friends and relatives
of the hangman of the Yugoslav peoples, Nedic, have easily
found themselves positions of comfort in the Yugoslav Govern-
ment and Party apparatus; seventh, that the Yugoslav leaders
identify the foreign policy of the USSR with the foreign policy
of the imperialist governments; eighth, that the leading members
of the CPY have deviated from the Marxist-Leninist course in the
question of the leading role of the working class; ninth, that Ger-
man parachutists destroyed the ‘partisan’ headquarters in Yugo-
slavia, that as a result of this a serious crisis ensued in the National
Liberation Movement, and that thereafter the Soviet army came
to assist, liberated Yugoslavia and created the conditions which
enabled the Communist Party to come to power; tenth, that the
CPY has boasted excessively of its successes during the war
although its services do not exceed those of the Communist Parties
of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Hungary, Albania, Bulgaria,
etc., etc. To these accusations should be added those made in the
Resolution of the Information Bureau but not specifically enumer-
ated here.
From the statement submitted by the Politbureau of the CC of
the CPY to the session of the Informbureau, which will be given
as an appendix, 1 it is obvious that the CC of the CPY could not
agree to a discussion based on the accusations of the CC of the
CPSU founded on slanders, fabrications and ignorance of the
situation in Yugoslavia, before the actual state of affairs had been
1 This is the statement dated 20 June 1948.
CPY Statement to Cominform, sg June ig/f.B


verified, and before the falsities had been separated from the
actual grievances of principle, whether of the CC of the CPSU, or
of any other Central Committee of the member Parties of the
Information Bureau.
In connection with the publication of the Resolution of the
Information Bureau, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Yugoslavia makes the following statement;
1. The criticism contained in the Resolution is based on in-
accurate and unfounded assertions and represents an attempt to
destroy the prestige of the CPY both abroad and in the country,
to arouse confusion amongst the masses in the country and in the
international workers’ movement, to weaken the unity within the
CPY and its leading role. It is therefore surprising that the CC of
the CPSU refused to check its assertions on the spot as proposed
in the letter of the CC of the CPY dated 13 April.
2. The Resolution maintains, without citing any proof, that the
leadership of the CPY carried out a hostile policy towards the
USSR, The statement that Soviet military specialists in Yugo-
slavia have been treated with scant respect, and that Soviet
civilian citizens have been under the surveillance of state security
agents does not in the least correspond to the truth. Up to their
withdrawal not one of the representatives of the Soviet Union
brought such matters to the attention of the Yugoslav representa-
tives. That any of the Soviet citizens, and least of all Comrade
Yudin, were under observation in Yugoslavia, is altogether false.
This statement, and especially that in connection with Comrade
Yudin, is designed solely to discredit the CPY and its leadership
in the eyes of other Parties.
On the contrary, it is correct, as stated in the letter to the CC of
the CPSU of 13 April, and based on numerous reports of members
of the CPY to their Party organizations as well as on statements of
other citizens of our country, that from the liberation up to date
the Soviet intelligence service sought to enrol them. The CC of the
CPY considered and considers that such an attitude towards a
country where the communists are the ruling party and which is
advancing toward socialism is impermissible—and that it leads
towards the demoralization of the citizens of the Federated People’s
Republic of Yugoslavia and towards the weakening and under-
mining of the governmental and Party leadership. The CC of the
CPY considered and considers that the relationship of Yugoslavia
toward the USSR must be based exclusively on confidence and
CPY Statement to Cominform, sg June 1948


sincerity and, in keeping with this principle, Yugoslav State organs
never even dreamed of following or exercising any control over
Soviet citizens in Yugoslavia.
3. The Resolution criticized the policy of the CPY in regard to
the conduct of the class struggle and particularly the policy of the
CPY in the village. In connection with this, well-known passages
from Lenin are quoted. The CC of the CPY points out that in its
policy of restricting the capitalist elements in the village, it is
guided by the mentioned and similar passages from Lenin, which
the authors of the Resolution —had they taken the trouble —might
have read in the published Party documents and articles, and
might have convinced themselves concerning the practical exe-
cution of this policy. For this reason, the charges made in the
Resolution and by the CC of the CPSU in fact only knock on an
open door; objectively, they inevitably tend to encourage and sup-
port reactionary and capitalist elements in town and village, and to
provoke confusion among the population, as if the CC of the CPY
and its policy were to blame for objective difficulties especially in
regard to supply, in the period of transition from capitalism to
socialism. The CC of the CPY considers that as a method it is
impermissible to evaluate its activities on the basis of individual
quotations taken from the most varied periods of the struggle, or
on the basis of individual, isolated and distorted facts. The CC of
the CPY considers that in assessing the policy of the CPY, as
of other Parties, it is the practice of the Party that must be given
primary consideration —whether the Party scores or does not score
successes in the struggle for the socialist transformation of the
country, whether as a whole the capitalist elements are growing
weaker or stronger, whether the socialist sector of the national
economy is growing weaker or stronger.
4. The CC of the CPY cannot but reject with deep indignation
the assertions that the leading ranks in the CPY are deviating to
the course of a kulak party, to the path of the liquidation of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia, that there is no democracy in the
Party, that methods of military leadership are fostered within the
Party, that the most basic rights of Party members are trampled
upon in the Party and that the mildest criticism of irregularities in
the Party is answered by sharp reprisals, etc. Could the members
of the Party who dauntlessly faced death in thousands of battles,
tolerate in the Party a state of affairs unworthy of both men and
communists? The assertion that criticism is not allowed in the
CP Y Statement to Cominform, sg June IQ4B


Party and similar statements are a terrible insult to every member
of our Party, a degradation of the heroic and glorious past of the
Party and its present heroic struggle for the reconstruction and
development of the country. The CC of the CPY emphasizes that
because certain Party organizations have not yet held elections it
cannot be maintained that there is no democracy within the Party.
These are the remnants of the war period and the tempestuous
post-war development through which the CPY passed and in their
time they were to be found in other Parties and in the CPSU as well.
As regards the assertion that the Party is losing itself in the
Front, that the leading ranks are taking the path of a kulak party, it
leads objectively to the shattering of the union of the working
masses realized under the leadership of the working class in the
united organization, the People’s Front, to isolating the Party from
the working masses. The root of this assertion, apart from what
was said, is to be found in the misunderstanding of the relation-
ship between the Party and Front in Yugoslavia, in the lack of
understanding of the essence of the Front in Yugoslavia and the
manner of the realization of the leading role of the working class
in it. In this question also the point of departure is not facts but
fabricated assertions followed by polemics using well-known pas-
sages from Lenin which no responsible person in the CPY has ever
disputed. The facts, as well as numerous declarations made
throughout the war and after it—not only by communists but by
non-communists in the Front —show, first, that the CP is the lead-
ing force in the Front; second, that the CP does not lose itself in
the Front but that on the contrary the Party ideologically and
politically is raising the masses of Front members, educating them
in the spirit of its policy of Marxism-Leninism; third, that the
People’s Front of Yugoslavia is in practice fighting for socialism,
which surely could not be the case if motley political groups
played any important role in it —the bourgeois parties, kulaks,
merchants, small industrialists and the like, as is said in the Reso-
lution, or if it were a coalition between the CP and other parties or
a form of agreement of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie; fourth,
that the Party does not take over the Front programme but that
rather the Front gets its basic direction and its programme from
the CP, which is natural in view of its leading role in the Front.
The CC of the CPY emphasizes in this connection that the
further ideological and political closing of the ranks of the Front
masses, the linking of the political activity of the Party with the
CPY Statement to Cominform, sg June 1948


activity of the Front and the all -round activity of the Front —is one
of the most important tasks of the Party.
Finally, the CC of the CPY points out that the majority of its
members are not co-opted but elected. In its calculation, the CC
of the CPSU did not take into account members of the Political
Bureau who were separately elected at the Fifth national Confer-
ence. For this reason, the seven members of the Political Bureau
are to be added to the number of twenty-two members of the
plenum of the CC of the CPY which is mentioned by the CC of
the CPSU in one of its letters. It is odd to reproach the CC of the
CPY, which lost ten of its members in the war, for having co-
opted seven comrades in their place, chiefly from the ranks of
candidates of the CC of the CPY.
The CC of the CPY rejects as ridiculous and untrue the asser-
tion of the illegality of the CPY and considers that this also is a
confirmation of the lack of understanding of the form of work of
the CPY in the given conditions and at the given time. The forms
of work of the CPY grew out of the concrete conditions of the long
revolutionary practice of our Party; they were shown in practice
to be correct and were an important factor in the Party’s winning
the confidence of the masses.
5. The CC of the CPY rejects as unworthy the accusation that
a Turkish regime reigns in the CP and that the Yugoslav leaders
concealed from the Party the ‘criticism of the Central Committee’s
incorrect policy, concealed from the Party and the people the real
reasons for the brutal measures against comrades Hebrang and
Zhujovic’. The CC of the CPY could not publish the letters of the
CC of the CPSU until this was done by the CC of the CPSU itself.
The entire, broad, active body of the CPY, however, knows the
contents of the letters of the CC of the CPSU and all party mem-
bers are informed of the case of Hebrang and Zhujovic.
The CC of the CPY must express its amazement that repre-
sentatives of the member Parties of the Information Bureau could
take Hebrang and Zhujovic under their protection without asking
for any details from the CC of the CPY. The CC of the CPY
wonders why such men as Zhujovic are defended, for example, who
in 1937 by decision of the Comintern, was expelled from the CC of
the CPY together with Gorkic, or Hebrang who behaved treach-
erously before the Ustashi police, 1 on the subject of which he
1 The Ustashi were a Croat terrorist organization, used by the German
occupation forces as police during the war.
CP Y Statement to Cominform, 29 June 1948


deceived the Party; men who carried on fractionalist activity in
the CPY and worked for its destruction and to sabotage the tempo
of the development and industrialization of Yugoslavia. Is this not
an encouragement to fractionalist activity, to traitors and to disrup-
tive activity against the CPY? The CC in this connection publishes
as a supplement its material concerning Hebrang and Zhujovic.
6. The CC of the CPY rejects as absurd the assertion that re-
cently the Yugoslav leaders took measures for the nationalization
of small-scale industry and small shops in a great hurry and for
demagogical reasons. These measures as a matter of fact were pre-
pared six months before the charges made by the CC of the CPSU
against the CC of the CPY and are the result of the strengthening
and development of the socialist sector.
The quotation torn from the speech of Comrade Kardelj has
only a general significance, while the whole of his speech in point
of fact sets forth the line of the Party towards the gradual squeezing
out of capitalist elements in the present phase.
In connection with all this it is comprehensible why the organ
of the Informbureau, the Soviet press, and the press of certain
other Parties have not been publishing any news of late about the
successes in the economic development of Yugoslavia, as, for
instance, the measures for the further weakening of capitalist ele-
ments, the successes in the realization of the plan, the mass pre-
congress competitions of the working class and working people
rallied in the People’s Front, etc. But facts remain facts. By keep-
ing silent concerning them one cannot conceal the arbitrary and
completely unfounded criticism of the economic policy of the
Government of the FPRY and the line of the CC of the CPY in
economic matters.
7. The CC of the CPY asserts that none of its leaders con-
siders that Yugoslavia, in the struggle for the building of socialism
and the preservation of independence, does not need the help of
the countries of people’s democracy and the USSR. Only people
who have lost all contact with reality could assert anything of the
kind. The CC of the CPY must emphasize in this connection that
the extending of this aid and co-operation does not depend on it
alone but also on the countries of people’s democracy and the
USSR. The CC of the CPY considers that this aid must be linked
up with the internal and foreign policy of Yugoslavia and in no
way with the fact that it could not accept the unfounded charges
based on untruths.
CPY Statement to Cominform, sg June ig4.B


The assertion that the Yugoslav leaders are preparing to make
concessions to imperialists and to bargain with them concerning
the independence of Yugoslavia is completely invented and is
among the most grievous slanders against the new Yugoslavia.
The CC of the CPY must, however, emphasize that in certain
countries of people’s democracy a whole series of unprovoked acts
have been committed by Party and State organs which are insulting
to the peoples of Yugoslavia, their State and State representatives
and which lead toward the weakening of the mentioned co-opera-
tion, toward the deterioration of relations with Yugoslavia. The
CC of the CPY does not consider itself bound to remain silent in
the future concerning similar acts.
8. The CC of the CPY does not consider that by refusing to
discuss the mistakes of which it is not guilty, it has in any way in-
jured the unity of the communist front. The unity of this front is
not based on the admission of invented or fabricated errors and
slanders, but on the fact of whether or not the policy of a Party is
actually internationalist. One cannot, however, ignore the fact
that the Information Bureau has committed a breach of the prin-
ciples on which it was based and which provide for the voluntary
adoption of conclusions by every Party. The Informbureau, how-
ever, not only forces the leaders of the CPY to admit errors which
they did not commit but also calls members of the CPY to rebel-
lion within the Party, to shatter the unity of the Party. The CC
of the CPY can never agree to a discussion about its policy on the
basis of inventions and uncomradely behaviour without mutual
confidence. Such a basis is not one of principle and in this and
only in this sense the CC of the CPY considered that it was not on
an equal footing in the discussion and that it could not accept dis-
cussion on that basis. Further, in connection with the above, the
CC of the CPY resolutely rejects the accusation that the CPY
has passed on to positions of nationalism. By its entire internal and
foreign policy, and especially by its struggle during the national
liberation war and the proper solution of the national question in
Yugoslavia, the CPY has given proof of the exact opposite.
By the above-mentioned unjust charges, the greatest historical
injustice has been done to our Party, our working class and working
masses, the peoples in Yugoslavia in general and their unselfish and
heroic struggle.
It is clear to the CC of the CPY that the charges of the CC of the
CPSU against the CC of the CPY will be used by enemy propa-
CPY Statement to Cominform, 29 June 1948


ganda for the purpose of slandering the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia
and other democratic countries. The CC of the CPY, however,
declares that it bears no responsibility for all these phenomena as it
did not provoke them by any act of its own.
The CC of the CPY calls upon the Party membership to close
their ranks in the struggle for the realization of the Party line and
for even greater strengthening of Party unity, while it calls upon
the working class and other working masses, gathered in the
People’s Front, to continue to work even more persistently on the
building of our socialist homeland. This is the only way, the only
method to prove in full and by deeds the unjustness of the above-
mentioned charges.
The Plenum of the CC of the CPY
Belgrade,
29 June 1948
CPY Statement to Cominform, sg June 1948


CHATHAM HOUSE PUBLICATIONS
ATOMIC ENERGY: Its International Implications
A Discussion by a Chatham House Study Group
Papers by Professor J. D. Cockcroft, Sir Henry Dale,
Dr Cecil H. Desch, Sir Oliver Franks, Lord Hankey,
Professor M. L. E. Oliphant, Professor R. E. Peierls, Sir
Arthur Salter, Professor C. E. Tilley, Sir Charles Webster,
Dr H. E. Wimperis. 4s.net
LAND AND POVERTY IN THE MIDDLE EAST
By Doreen Warriner
An analysis of the basic problem of the Middle East economy,
the poverty of the peasants, in Egypt, Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon, and Iraq, with indications of the main directions
in which reform is neecfett/ 7s.4xi.net
NEW PATHS FOR JAPAN
By Harold Wakefield
The first half of this book contains a valuable account of the
evolution of modern Japan. In the second part the author
describes war-time developments in Japan, the policies
pursued by General Mic Arthur, and the effect of thtese
policies and of the impact of war upon the life of the
Japanese people. 15s. net
UNITED NATIONS
The texts of twenty:
from the Atlantic
ence of December
THE WORLD TODA
D
tp
ter
to
<5
T',
95
United Nations,
oscow Confer-
I Os. 6 d. net
A monthly review containing articles and notes designed
to give the facts about current international questions.
Annual subscription 12s. 6d.
The Chronology of International Events and Documents is
published twice a month as a supplement to The World
Today, and summarizes events throughout the world under
the headings of countries, international conferences,
United Nations organs and agencies, etc.
Annual subscription 17s. 6 d.
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
London: Chatham House, St James’s Square, S.W.I
New York: 542 Fifth Avenue, New York 19


Two Chatham House Publications
CALENDAR OF SOVIET DOCUMENTS
ON FOREIGN POLICY
Compiled by JANE DEGRAS
Students and research workers will find in this volume a com-
prehensive and reliable guide to source material on Soviet
foreign policy. It covers the period November 1917 to June 1941
and lists the items —treaties and agreements, diplomatic corres-
pondence, official Soviet statements on foreign affairs, impor-
tant speeches by Soviet leaders, and articles in the Soviet press
—by period and subject, giving the date, a brief description of
the contents, a reference to the Russian source, and, wherever
possible, to jk&ourcein the English, French or German language.
Price 18s. net
THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE
NATIONS
By NICHOLAS MANSERGH. 0.8. E., D.Phil., B.Litt.
Since 1939 there have been momentous changes in the fabric
and the character of the Commonwealth. What are their
implications ? What are likely to be their consequences ? These
are the questions to which this book seeks to find an answer.
Throughout it there is an over-riding preoccupation with the
politics and the psychology of nationalism, which the author is
convinced remains the most powerful force in the world to-day.
CONTENTS
SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE COMMONWEALTH TO-DAY; BRITAIN
AND THE DOMINIONS; CONSULTATION AND CO-OPERATION IN
FOREIGN POLICY; DOMINION CONCEPTIONS OF THE COMMON-
WEALTH; THE ASIAN CONFERENCE, 1947; THE LAST DAYS OF
BRITISH RULE IN INDIA: SOME PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS: BRITAIN,
RUSSIA, AND SOUTH-EAST ASIA; POLITICAL AND SOCIAL FORCES
IN IRELAND. 1916-48: THE IMPLICATIONS OF EIRE’S RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS.
Price Bs. 6d. net
London
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Chatham House, St James’s Square, S.W.I
Toronto • Bombay ■ Melbourne ■ Wellington ■ Cape Town
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
and of all booksellers
