

■
A LECTURE
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
PAST, PRESENT, AMD FUTURE:
COLLINS STREET, HOBART TOWN,
ON THE EVENINGS OF
JULY 7th, & AUGUST 17th, 1851.
WILLIAM SLADE SMITH.
FORMERLY MEMBER OF
AND NOW MASTER OF
CAMBRIDGE HOUSE ACADEMY,
BRISBANE STREET, HOBART TOWN
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST OF THE COMMITTEE
JOHN MOORE, PRINTER, 11, MACQUARIE-STREET
i* I A
rt j a ig)
(jJjlgJl'ttllwS of l(jc < S;
MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS, 1
DOWNING COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, If




A LECTUKE
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE;
kfm ffjc Hlwfers 0f fj}c
MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS,
COLLINS STREET, lIOBART TOWN,
ON THE EVENINGS OF
JULY 7th, & AUGUST 17th, 1851.
WILLIAM SLADE SMITH
FORMERLY MEMBER OF
DOWNING COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,
AND NOW MASTER OF
CAMBRIDGE HOUSE ACADEMY,
BRISBANE STREET, HOBART TOWN.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST OF THE COMMITTEE.
HOBART TOWN:
JOHN MOORE, PRINTER, 11, MACQUARIE-STREET.
1851.
55 I FI SSI 8
"bo ~L




PREFACE.
Some reason for permitting the meagre outline, at-
tempted in the following Lecture, on Van Diemen’s
Land, to be published, is doubtless due to the Colo-
nial reader, to whom, little contained in it is supposed
to be new or unknown; and also to those who con-
ceive that, the interests of the Colony are best
promoted by maligning its population, and misrepre-
senting its moral and material condition.
To the former, I need only observe, that it was
originally intended, not for circulation in the Colony,
but for the information of friends in England, who
have made enquiries as to the fidelity of that dark
moral picture, exhibited for the whole world to gaze
To the latter, I admit an earnest desire to contro-
vert the effects of ex-parte statements, made to the
prejudice of this fine Colony, by some, who, in the
pursuit of ambitious or selfish objects, have been so
dazzled by their lustre, as to regard all besides as
dark and gloomy.
The munificent sun tints, with the same rays, in
appropriate hues, the floweret and the cloud. How


different is the eye of man, that invests with fictitious
gold, the beams of seif-gratulation aud complacency,
while it darkens and magnifies the motes of human
imperfection found in others.
It remains only for me to state that in yielding to
the solicitation of the Committee of the “ School of
Arts,” and many friends who have requested its pub-
lication, I am actuated only by the hope of contribut-
ing, in some measure, to a faithful, but favorable
estimate of the resources and moral condition of Van
Diemen’s Land.


VAN DIEMEN’S LAND:
PAST PRESENT AND FUTURE.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
It is not without considerable misgiving, as to my
power to instruct or please you, that I venture to treat a sub-
ject which many of my hearers, from longer residence and
better opportunities of research, are qualified to dilate on
with much greater effect than myself.: under the impression,
however, that much misconception mingles in the common
estimate, of the material resources, the characteristics of
climate and soil, the social aspect, and the future prospects of
this beautiful Island, 1 willingly enter the field of investi-
gation, assured that if, in the exposition of my views I should
advance anything at variance with a more enlightened or
enlarged consideration, I shall meet with forbearance, and a
kind interpretation of motive.
Materials, for the execution of my plan, lie in the most
chaotic confusion ; and much diversity of opinion necessarily
exists, as to the causes which, at the present day, oppose a
geometrically increased ratio of social progression to that of
by-gone times, when “ Tasmania,” in the hour of her birth,
Minerva like, assumed the standard of adult prosperity.
I feel bound to state, in the onset, that I deem it necessary
only to introduce lights into those dark pictures drawn of her
condition, and distributed so widely ; unrelieved as they are
by truthful tint or artistic brilliancy; and to pourtray, in
outline only, from the limitation a single hour imposes, some
features of a redeeming and encouraging character, facts, sup-
ported by carefully collated statistics, cannot, at any rate,
mislead, and mere unsupported, opinions I desire to have as
little as possible to do with.


The eve of important constitutional change seems an
auspicious season to review the past history of our
island home-—to scan the labors of the past —to glance
at its resources already developed or indicated—and
to conjecture as to the ultimate status it is destined
to take among the new-born stars of civilization, emblazoned
on the recently baptized banner of the “ Southern Cross.”
It is both prudence and wisdom, at all marked epochs, to re-
trovert to the state of affairs at the beginning, and to contrast
the present with the past: and surely a retrospect of the past
fifty years will afford us matter for investigation, at once
interesting and instructive ; exhibiting the birth and early
progress of civilization in a land, once the abode of the rudest
barbarism, and demonstrating the colonizing prowess of the
Anglo-Saxon race. In examining facts and data collected,
few and inconclusive though they be, we shall doubtless find
much of mist and darkness, prejudice and misconception, and
discover that the lamp of reason has been frequently dimmed,
if not entirely extinguished, by those who have drawn such
distorted portraitures of our social, moral, and material
condition.
This island, second to no other in the wide world for beauty
of climate, fertility of soil, the virtues of her native bom
children, and nature’s best endowments, has been misrepre-
sented, both here and in the mother-land, by some who, in
the ardent pursuit of one object, have been so blind to all
others, as to leave a widely spread inference that it is not an
eligible home for any of the overcrowded thousands of Britain’s
voluntary emigrants, who yearly expatriate themselves ; it is,
say they, an insular Samaria, in which is found no good thing;
a society in which Religion and Virtue veil their faces, and in
which a gradually more and more deteriorating process has
been going on since the days when barbarism inhabited this
fair land.
In treating this part of my subject, as I intend to do at a
subsequent part of my lecture, I desire so to perform my self-
imposed and very pleasurable task, as to avoid those vexatce
guestiones, that agitate so tempestuously our social atmosphere.
It will be my object, in reference to the past, to impart some
information respecting this island—geological, historical, and
descriptive ; to dilate on its curious animal, vegetable, floral,


'luogress of
and ultimately to expatiate on the dignity oflahor, by wh
the “ Wilderness is made to blossom as the Rose.
Tn the second part, having reference to Van Diemens
t a -t ; 5 Toh all endeavour to describe some of its social
Social, Moral and Political; its cultivated
LrK its unsettled districts, its discovered resources, its need
of manufactures, and unrestricted inter-colonial commerce, its
advantages to emigrants of small capital, over all i other: colo-
ad vantages to emg „ Madeira » 0 f the Southern Hemi-
sphere affording a sanatorium to the health impaired residents
of India China," and the Australian Colonies ; and possessing
an atmosohere and temperature the most genial, to acclimatise
for ultimate tropical sojourn, and as a spot eminently adapted
bv geographical position and other natural advantages, to
centralize every condition of a highly organised civilization.
From the present and the past, with a just conception of
its resources, and with a united determination to make all the
elements of social regeneration and progression, conserve t
buld up its best interests, it is difficult only To assign a limit
to the rapid strides that Religion, Virtue, Civilization, Mo-
rality, and Social Improvement, may take among us during
the next fifty years.
To the lover of the picturesque, delighting only ‘ karrao-
nious tints and varying foliage there is much at the fir,
scenic glance, disenchanting and almost repelling, instead
of forests reflecting every hue of golden sheen, or brilliant
verdure! he behold? on all sides, the dullest and most sombre
hues of unvarying green ; he sees around
“ No vales in woods arrayed.
“ Their summits in the golden light
“ Their trunks in grateful shade,
but on all sides, bold forms, abrupt outlines dight in Nature’s
dreariest livery, and all the natural wonders of afire-reft land.
Botanical research, however, discloses an almost intermin-
able variety of shrubs, covering both hill and valley, bearing


the fairest blossoms, and introducing to a Flora, as variegated
j S rrr 11 / hlle n ° P ortion of the Earth’s surface
affords to the Geologist or Naturalist, more that is interesting
and instructive. He finds everywhere scattered, in unmistak-
able lineaments, indications of violent volcanic action ; the
undulating surface torn, rugged, and furrowed by igneous
action. Vulcanised dust and scoria, ashes of lava, basaltic
columns, and huge mountains of granite, upheaved from the
Eai th s crust, and piercing the deposition of lime-stone and
sand-stone lying at their bases, lead back the mind in wonder
paS f d when the site of this land was
the theatre of Mature s grandest operations—when Omnipo-
tence touched the mountains, and they sent forth fire and
The whole face of Nature seems to wear an earlier phase
of natural development than that of Europe, Northern Asia,
or Africa, and is a more eloquent exposition of geological
pnnctpia, than can be found in the elucidations of Humboldt
or Buffon. It exhibits the gradual gestation of Nature
itfsuTnT to v* hat °? th J. in u dividua l being, and demonstrates
its silent workings, ini which nothing of a startling or miraeu-
islandkm<!l dlsc , e] ; nibl ®* Geological development in this
indeed m the krge island of Australia, and the
other islands of the Pacific, has not yet passed through the
Biel e nd anf 3 - 68 !- t 0 * e late upHse of
the land, and civilized man seems to have seized upon it for
habitation, before it was prepared for liis residence. As
strata! developement appears to be incomplete, so, as we shall
hereafter demonstrate, is its Zoology and Botany ; a paral-
lelism, inasmuch as it has no native mammalia, the most
debased type of the “ genus homo” alone excepted, but those
lowly implacental kinds peculiar to an early geological mra
and a few rodents and reptiles. b
Professor Owen remarks how the fishes of the olitic era
acrodus, psammodus, &c., with the contemporary mollusks!
(tligonise and terebratuloe) which served these fishes for food
are represented in the living cestraceon which swims the Ausl
trahan seas, with exactly the same sea-mollusks to yield them
sustenance. _ “ Araucari® and cycadeous plants likewise,” he
°", the stal!a “ cominellt > where marsupial
quadrupeds abound, and thus appear to complete a picture of


an ancient condition of the Earth’s surface, which has been
superseded in the other hemisphere by other strata, and a
higher type of mammalian organization-” Thus there is, both
in the botany and icthyology, ascribed to the olitic era, a
striking analogy to types, at the present day found in this
Island and the adjacent Continent. A sketch of this geolo-
gical period, elucidated by forms and types prevalent amongst
us, and from which this island seems, geologically speaking,
only lately to have emerged, drawn by a master-hand, may
not be inappropriately introduced.
“ The imagination eagerly aspires to picture the world of the Olitic
Era, when there were scarcely any living creatures of more exalted
character than reptiles. There were then vast tracts of dry land, as
now; their surface bore a luxuriant vegetation of no mean kind. The
meteorie agencies, the rise and fall of tides, were common phenomena
of that time, as of the present. Day after day, through long drawn ages,
the sun passed on his course. Night after night, the sparkling garniture
of the sky looked down on this green world. But a being of super-
human intelligence, coming to examine our globe, would have seen all
this existing only for fishes, and still humbler creatures in the sea, and
for reptiles, insects, and perhaps a few birds, and still fewer opossums,
upon land. He would have beheld the tyrant sauria pursuing their
carniverous instincts upon the wave, upon the shore, and even in the
air : huge turtles creeping along the muddy coasts; still more huge
megalosaurs traversing the plain ; frog-like animals of the bulk of mo-
dern boars, croaking in the marshes ; and with all this, the air filled
with multitudes of insects. But no flocks would have met his eye upon
the mountain, no herds quietly roaming in the valleys. He would en-
counter no tiger or elephant -in the jungle. None of the smaller mam-
malian quadrupeds, as the dog, the genet, the hedgehog, the hare, the
mole, would have presented themselves. And not only were no human
beings to be seen, but our supernatural visitant would know that this
scene must lie spread out in perfect capability for their reception, during
whole millenniums before such beings were to exist; the stream flowing
and glittering in the sun, but not to cheer the eye of man; the season
passing, but not to yield its fruit to him ; the whole jocund earth spread
°" fc . h 1 unenjoyed beauty, as yet unwitting of the glory and the gloom
which human impulses were to bring upon it. How strange to reflect
on the contemplations of the supposed visitant. What a vast void!
What a stretch of time before there was to be even a commencement to
its proper filling! And yet, the certainty that in good time, in the
ripeness of the plans of the mighty Author, the higher animals were to
come, and among the last, the “ Creature of Creatures,” who, in his
infinity of device, was to turn it all to his use, the historical bein°- of
the world.” °
The soil of this island differs materially from that of the
neighbouring vast island. There, dreary wastes of sand
abound ; here, the detritus of volcanic rock forms the basis,
the most common formation being basalt and greenstone, both


of volcanic origin. 1 lie southern part of the island exhibits
rocks of limestone and freestone—granite being the peculiar
feature of the eastern. Slate and porphyry are also found to
the south and west of Emu Bay : the islands of Bass’ Straits
are formed of granite : the Frenchman’s Cap is of clay slate
having an apex of quartz : the coast near Port Davey is of
quartz: sandstone is the formation of Norfolk Plains, and
the greater part of Cornwall. 7he sandstone ranges near
Macquarie Plains, west of New Norfolk, formed of scoriaceous
basalt or vesicular lava, are also very rich in iron ore, which
prevails to a considerable extent throughout the island, vast
quantities being in the immediate vicinity cf Hobart Town.
Copper has also been discovered in the neighbourhood of
Green Ponds. Granite extends from Schouten Island to
Cape Hartland. Among curiosities may be enumerated many
fossilised pine trees, discovered in an erect position ; the
surface of one having been converted into agate by burning
lava—coral in the valley of the Franklin River—slaty forma-
tions at Eagle Hawk Neck, bearing a resemblance to tesselated
pavement —contorted or twisted slate found in the Fingal
district containing veins of quartz —it is in formations of this
kind that gold is to be found. Coals, of the anthracite and
bituminous varieties, have also been discovered on Tasman’s
Peninsula, at Schouten Island, near Ben Lomond, Fingal,
Douglas River on the eastern coast, and more recently, a
valuable mine has been opened on the estate of Captain
Spottiswood at New r J own, through the indefatigable and
praiseworthy exertions of Mr. Zephaniah Williams. This
discovery, and a more recent one, of the most useful and
valuable of minerals, contiguous to the metropolis, will be of
inestimable value to its inhabitants, and occur providentially
at a time when fuel of a good quality is becoming compara-
tively scarce. The utmost encouragement is due to the
discoverers of this hidden treasure, far more valuable to a
people than the revelation of gold itself. Gold has a magic
influence —it bewilders, it dazzles, but it enervates, and
generally ruins. The gold-producing and gold-possessing
nations of former ages are, at the present day, steeped in
poverty, moral degradation and ruin. May it be our prouder
and more enviable position to provide, by manufactures and
agricultural activity, our golden neighbours with food and
raiment to pursue their avocations ; thus shall we be far more
blessed, and lay the foundation of a community, at once vir-
tuous and prosperous. These gilded baits, to the ill-paid and


starving thousands of the mother-land, may well indeed be
regarded as a providential invitation, to people the wastes of
an almost interminable desert; who will, when the fever
of cupidity has been allayed, revert to the more peaceful and
blessed pursuits of cultivating the soil, and reciprocating its
munificence with the ends of the earth. Indications of the
presence of gold, platina, silver, and lead, however, are not
wanting ; and it is not improbable, but that a short time will
enable us, as a people, to solve the problem, whether, the
reward of persevering labor, such as I have briefly adverted to,
is not more advantageous, than the fortuitous possession of
mineral wealth.
There are many indications that this island Was, in former
ages, an integral portion of New Holland ; and, even now,
many islands of granite formation lie in the narrow strait that
separates them. It is even more evident that the whole
island, as well as the neighbouring continent, has been fre-
quently submersed by the ocean, as several of the strata
abound with mollusks and marine remains. It is also proba-
ble, that in the ages of transition, to its present condition, it
consisted of several islands, forming, in reality, a small Archi-
pelago. The five larger lakes in the interior, St. Clair, the
Great Lake, each at an elevation of 4000 feet above the level
of the sea, and containing 30 square miles—Arthur Lake,
Sorell Lake, and Like Echo, with others of less area, are
supposed to have been, in bygone ages, volcanic mountains,
belching forth the contending elements from below, as in their
vicinity scoria and volcanic dust are profusely found, an
hypothesis receiving much additional weight from their great
elevation, and the recently ascertained depth of their waters.
This may in some measure account for the profusion of
gigantic vegetation, found in their vicinity. Some of the
eucalypti, the gum, and stringy bark, fostered by supernatural
heat, having attained the almost incredible height of 300 feet,
being from 180 to 200 feet to the first branch, with a circum-
ference of 70 to 80 ieet.
When, with reflective mind, the tourist stands on the sum-
mit of Mount Wellington, and with steadfast gaze, takes a
wide survey of the undulating amphitheatre at his feet, he
cannot fail to be deeply impressed with feelings of the awful
and sublime, as he beholds the greatness and majesty of JS'a-


ture lying in repose before him, the dark umbrageous forest
contrasting finely with the silver outline of ocean liminating
the scene. If he descends and searches the structure of the sub-
strata,even to a very limited depth,he finds traces of revolutions
too stupenduousand magnificent for the human mind to dwell on
—he reverts to a period, when, the ungovernable ocean lifting
its crested waves above the summit of the mountain on which
he stands, swept from the valleys beneath their gigantic vege-
tation, depositing over its imbedded remains, layers of sand-
stone and soil, at first soft and sand-like, but ultimately, by
the pressure of super-imposed layers, forming an hermeticai
covering, essential to the transformation of vegetable debris
to carbon. How supremely wise, and yet, how inscrutable
are the ways of Providence, who, from the wreck of one exist-
ence, builds another for the use and comfort of man.
The similarity of the rocks of the first epoch formed in the
vicinity of St. Clair, the source of our magnificent Derwent,
and in thatpartofthe island represented hyaline longitudinally
drawn between it and the Frenchman’s Cap, is identical with
that of the now celebrated Bathurst district, being in fact, a
continuation of the same geological formations of auriferous
schists and quartzites, once in a state of fusion, and doubtless
abounding in golden deposits. This, in conjunction with the
other indications of a former disruption, or separation of this
island from the continent of Australia, is sufficient to prove
that it is a continuation of those ranges, and little doubt can
exist as to the fact of its being impregnated with the same
treasures. May they be reserved for future generations, to
gild the cupola of the social fabric with, after its strongly-
built walls have been made to garner all that its agricultural,
pastoral, and commercial resources are capable of producing
by the exercise of persevering and honest labour.
I can merely glance at the curious zoological types (animal
and vegetable) Van Diemen’s Land discloses, except to notice
the parallelism that exists between its geological formations,
and the primitive class of animals and vegetables found occu-
pying its surface. It becomes a source of deep and general
interest to ascertain the source whence they may have prima-
rily originated,and leads to a question,which, even hypotheti-
cally to account for, would outbound the limits of many
lectures. I allude to the geographical distribution of aaimals


and plants, found everywhere, occupying the smallest habit-
able area of Earth’s surface, congenial to their organization
and sustenance, In order to account for the propagation of
vegetation in the coral-formed islands, of recent formation,
Henderson observes —“ Science has been contented with the
hypothesis, that seeds have floated to their present situation
on the waters of the ocean, and, that birds have been instru-
mental in their transmission, where saline impregnation might
have been destructive to vegetable life,” In the older coun-
tries it has long been a favorite theory, that vegetation has
been gradually propagated by the mountain ranges. But a
large proportion of the plants of this island are peculiar to it,
and each is found to select a description of soil and situation
most congenial to its existence. Many of the trees and plants
on its coasts also differ from those in the interior. This hypo-
thesis therefore does not furnish us with a solution of the
mystery. Upon sinking a shaft or digging a well, it is known
that the excavated soil produces, in a short time, a different
description of smaller plants to those found in its vicinity.
Thus are we necessarily restricted to one of two conclusions—
either the soil, through exposure, has exerted the power to
produce these varieties, or the germs from which they have
sprung, would have remained in a dormant state since the
occurrence of some natural catastrophe, in consequence of
which this soil has been transferred from the surface, to the
situation it occupied previous to being disinterred from the
well. It is stated, that in certain parts of America, when the
older forests have been cut down, plants and shrubs, previ-
ously unknown, spring up in their places. A somewhat
similar effect takes place in this island—when cultivated land
has for a time been abandoned. If quicklime is sprinkled
upon certain soils in Britain, white clover is said to be pro-
duced. A similar result is here effected by the burning of
vegetation, in conjunction with the superficial soil in the pro-
duction of the wattle, or acacia inermis,on certain situations.
Fungi are produced by different artificial processes, while
proofs are abundant that an interminable variety of micro-
scopic insects, inhabiting liquids, can be called into existence
by minute changes in their chemical composition. It is no
more extraordinary, therefore, if each kind of soil should
be able, under certain circumstances, to produce a vegetation
peculiar to itself. It were to limit the Creator’s power to
assign either time or place to His Omnipotence ; creative
energies are confined to neither!


Vegetation, as well as geological formation, seems to pro-
claim that civilized man has visited these islands, many ages
before they were prepared by gradually gestating nature for
his residence —not a single plant or fruit does he find adapted
for his existence.
The vegetable world, however, riots in her lowliest types,
in immense profusion. Trees of gigantic size and stature,
everywhere abound, being generally extremely valuable for
ship-building, affording a material more durable than Birmese
teak, or the vaunted oak of Northern climes—the most inter-
esting of which is the Eucalyptus tribe, the different kinds of
which are used for almost every valuable purpose. Their
outer bark is deciduous, falling off in longitudinal strips. The
leaves of many—the myrtle, sassafras, and pepper trees, are
aromatic, and from one species, an essential oil of great value
has been extracted. Many of them also produce a saccharine
secretion, and a powerfully astringent gum exudes from their
bark. They attain generally a great size, both in girth and
length, in sheltered situations. A blue gum near Tolasa,
is now standing, upwards of 90 feet in circumference ; and
near Brown’s River, a swamp gum has been measured 102
feet, at four feet from the ground.
Near the Cam River it is stated a stringy bark is known
to exist, measuring 64 feet of solid timber, at four feet from
the ground. It is 200 feet to the first branch, where it is
estimated to be more than 4 feet in diameter, giving a total
cubic admeasurement of 245 tons of timber.
The blue gum tree from which the plank recently sent to
the Exhibition of all Nations, by Mr. John Watson, was,
compared with these, of dwarf dimensions. It measured at
four feet from the ground, 23 feet round ; at 187 feet from
the ground, the first branch was given off, and there the girth
of the tree was 7 feet, the total height being 275 feet. The
closeness, hardness, toughness, and evident durability of this
wood, will, it is hoped, attract the attention of the Lords of
the Admiralty, and Marine Architects, who can he supplied
in illimitable quantities, and in lengths double or treble those
derivable from the oak or teak trees. In enumerating its
varieties, the variegated and beautiful podocarpus, or Huon
pine, and musk tree, admitting the most brilliant polish for


ornamental purposes, must not be omitted. Tim beautiful
flowered black and silver wattle belong also to this variety.
Many specimens of the callitris, or cypress family, are also
prevalent. The casuarinse tribe are also multitudinous, and
exhibit a very uncommon appearance ; leafless, and almost
like the cactus, they comprise a group of trees more singular
than beautiful, having branches resembling the equisetum or
horse-tail, exhibiting a remarkable contraction of the folia!
vessels The well-known she-oak or sheak-tree, whence our
common designation, is of this class. Among many varieties
highly interesting to the Naturalist, I need only enumerate
the graceful cherry-tree, with the stone outside—the native
pear-tree, remarkable for its pear-like fruit and rigid leaves—
native currants and tea-plants—the graceful fern-tree, luxu-
riating in gulleys and valleys—the moss-tree, abundant on
the western side of the island—the grass-tree, with its c üb-
shaped spikes from 8 to 10 feet long ; these, and many others
almost equally curious, make up the catalogue of as distinct
and singular a vegetation, as can be found on the surface ot
the earth. In floral varieties, Van Diemen’s Land is very
prolific ; 800 distinct species having been already enumerated,
among which the tulip-tree, or woratah, bearing brilliant
scarlet flowers at the extremity of its branches. The native
lilac, or prostantheria, with its beautiful purple flowers, and
the superb blandfordia, a variety of the graceful lily tribe,
remarkable for its splendid orange and scarlet blossoms,
deserve especial notice from the harmony of their tints and
their graceful forms.
A sketch of the Aborigines may not here be inappropriate
or nninstructive. It is, in fact, so illustrative of the
early history of the Colony, that to omit some notice ot
them would be inexcusable. They may indeed truly be
described, as to their physical and moral attributes, the last
link in the human family. Man, in a savage or barbarous
state, is little elevated above the brute creation, and is in a i
respects, nearly the same. Yet the moral principle, although
slumbering, is inherent in his nature : and it is compatible
with reason to conjecture, that his retrogression to a higher
state of civilization and intellect, is not less possible, than his
continued departure into increased ignorance and moral degra-
dation. Variations in the human family arise from inexplic-
able causes, although it is satisfactorily ascertained that colour


and other physiological characteristics, are of an entirely
dosta r n Cl f al and accidental . natuf e. The inhabitants of Hin-
S ' l , mstanc f’ ° ne 111 descent, contain groups of all
shades of colour and other physical discrepancies. Naturalists
7 ? SCnbe tathe ; nhab itants of this island a Malayan
f rV/ nd ?r? fsof its great probability mayTe
adduced from the similarity of contour, physical development
the
the whole family of man, extending from Madagascar on the
rf the Paclc OcU and the islands
This view of the human family diverging- from one central
S s t”nt Th themSe , l , Ve ? ovei aa *h> « extremely
11 1 J hat are all descended from one pair, and
7Z l0 f Cal - ity ’ We / U admit - that Eden wherever
the heir &St Slt "’ and Ararat « the *>eond, on which
tsentZ How W th le tV Cted *? °” e family > we universally
absent to. How then, before the birth of nautical science
lands ” a Yet°r °ff an - and find way to distant’
lands? Yet in every habitable island, or nook, of Earth’s
surface we find that branches of the human family precede
the first approach of modem discoverers. Crnsar in Britain
ln Amen f. a nd Tasman in this Island,-found, not
unpeopled wastes, but areas thronged with tribes of their
fellow-men, immersed in ignorance: and exposed to every
over th“ ! t WhlCh - W6re * he T6ry ” eans of disposing them
ZLI I , terV T‘ ng S T’ and P lanti ”S their habitations hi
distant lands. As proofs of this, we may adduce three of the
mhabitants of Otaheite, found in th/ island If Wateoo
whither they were drifted in a canoe 550 miles ; two canoes
to onTofthe Ph-ir n - S ’ contrary winds from Aricoso
to one of the Phillipme Isles, a distance of 800 miles. Kot-
n«HvLTf S Tn erS ° na E J ac( l uainted with three of a party of the
natives of Ulea, who were drifted about in a boat for eight
months subsisting during that period on food which they
obtained by fishing, and traversing a distance of 1500
recently, I believe, within our own recollection, two or three
isknd nS ’ W r\° had b f? Carried a great distance from their
ntrt ’hTwl ?r red sorae whalers belonging to this
by whom they were brought to Hobart down, and
been ? red native land 5 the frail canoe having
Gardens


These facts may enable us to understand how mankind,
from the contracted span of one locality, have planted their
habitations over the wide surface of the globe.*
Southern Asia was doubtless the scene of all the secondary
migrations of antiquity. Ihe foci of migration seem here to
converge ; America receiving her population, language, and
mode of reckoning time from North-eastern Asia.
The Celtic and Teutonic tribes evidently diverged to the
North-west of Europe. So also the line of Iranian races
which peopled the east and south shores of the Mediterranean,
Syria, Arabia, and Egypt. Still regarding this point, the
Malay variety, differing in aspect and language as it spread,
proceeded towards the Oceanic region, peopling, in the lapse
of time, this and the other islands of the Pacific Ocean.
Of all these varieties, the natives of this island may he placed
in the lowest scale. A black complexion, woolly hair, high,
but narrow foreheads, flat, and ill-formed features, abnormal
slenderness of limbs, all outward marks of a low and debased
condition. Without clothing, or fixed habitations, dwelling
in the woods, they were found living in distinct tribes, each
with its chief or leader, tribe being arrayed against tribe
frequently in fatal conflicts, without rites or ceremonies, in a
state of brute nature. Their food consisted of Kangaroos
and other wild animals, which they slightly warmed on live
embers, shell-fish, roots, and the native bread-fruit, Mylitta
Australis, a kind of fungus found under-ground.
The aggression of the British seems to have sharpened
their natural cunning, treachery, and fieroeness; and although
instances are not wanting to prove that the spark of reason
was not extinguished, still quickness of perception, and acute-
ness of the senses, were the only instincts exhibited by them.
Their language was not unmusical, abounding in vowel ter-
minations, and based on monosyllabic words, by which all
their primary ideas were expressed. The letter R was
sounded with a rough deep emphasis, when excited by surprise
* The two men, rescued by Captain Gardiner in the Prince Regent ,
whose rude prahue was presented by the Messrs. Moses to the Itoyal
Society of Van Diemen’s Land, were natives ot Henderville Island, and
were found under precisely similar circumstances, driven, by adverse gales,
a great distance from their fishing grounds.


or anger. The cadences and vocal inflexions were multitudi-
nous, and served to affix varieties of import to the same word ;
a considerable portion of the terminations being similar to
those of the Malay. They were, however, very dexter-
ous with their spears, seldom missing a mark at a great
distance, and in the management of their waddies, displayed
great skill and prowess. Their ordinary weapon was a short
club, which they wielded with considerable address, brandish-
ing it in the air, accompanied with boisterous threats and
gestures. They are said to have been extremely fond of their
children, and to have treated their women kindly, assigning to
them, however, all the drudgery, as is customary with all
barbarous nations. They were, doubtless, in times antecedent
to the visit of Europeans, very numerous, amounting to many
thousands. Extirpated by feuds and mortal encounters
between rival hostile tribes, their numbers were greatly
diminished, and they presented to their earliest visitors the
anomaly of a population comprising six times as many males
as females, the probable result of infanticide practised towards
their female children; a supposition scarcely reconcilable
with my prior assertion relative to their parental kindness.
Expelled from their favorite localities and hunting-grounds,
goaded to desperation by miscreants far less human than them-
selves, hunted like wild beasts from place to place, shot, their
wives and children taken violently from them by their Christian
oppressors, well might they in the very riot of wildness, in
which they had formerly lived, turn on their ruthless perse-
cutors.
On the first landing of the settlers, they were permitted
for a time to proceed in their operations with little feeling of
opposition ; and the first act of aggression important in its
consequences, did not occur until nearly 20 years afterwards,
during which period their sufferings may be well imagined.
Can England, with all her victories in Art and War, obli-
terate this foul stain from her history ? Can she, the proud
ambassadress of Christianity, reconcile this conduct of her
sons, with the dictates of the gospel of love ?
Each of her colonies has been a usurpation unmitigated by-
mercy or compassion. The progress of her civilization is here


traced by tears; the children of the soil are driven from the well-
known recesses of the forest, and the wild scenes which they
loved from childhood ; and the first lines of Tasmanian history
must record their total extinction as a race. She seems indeed
in the pursuit of conquest, to have forgotten, in common with
all other powerful nations, every other law than that of expe-
diency. It was not thus barbarous Rome treated her. Her
victors imposed fetters which proved to be of gold ; under her
conquest she learnt the arts of War and Peace, and became
rich and luxurious. England affords a striking proof of the
success which may attend an amalgamation of conquerors with
captives—strangers with the original possessors of a soil.
How striking is the contrast! Can we forget that on the
spot on which we are now assembled, his rude hut once might
stand ! May we not reflect what they might have eventually
become, had not the light of civilization reached them too
prematurely! As it is however, they are epitaphed in the
page of history, as a race swept from the surface of the earth.
Materials for a vivid sketch of the past, present, and future
of \an Diemen’s Land, suggested themselves at your recent
triumphal reception of Constitutional extension. In the
Domain, gazing on the busy scene, itself a symbol of a bright
present, was seen a group of three or four Aborigines, almost
the relic of their race, habited in the garb of civilization, but
wearing the physiognomy of despair and desolation, while
hundreds of the nascent race, preceded by banners and martial
music, advanced in imposing array to take their part in the
celebration, How suggestive of their feelings are Bryant’s
beautiful lines representing an Indian at the burial place of
his. fathers.
It is the spot I came to seek
My father’s ancient burial-place,
Ere from these vales, ashamed and weak,
"Withdrew our wasted race.
It is the spot—l know it well—
Of which our old traditions tell.
For here the upland bank sends out
A ridge toward the river side;
I know the shaggy hills about,
The meadows smooth and wide;
The plains, that toward the southern sky
Fenced east and west by mountains lie.


The sheep are on the slopes around,
The cattle in the meadows feed,
And labourers turn the crumbling ground,
Or drop the yellow seed,
And prancing steeds, in trappings gay,
Whirl the bright chariot o’er, the way.
They waste us—aye, like April snow,
In the warm noon we shrink away;
And fast they follow, as we go
Towards the setting day—
Till they shall fill the land, and we
Are driven into the western sea.
But I behold a fearful sign,
To which the white men’s eyes are blind;
Their race may vanish hence, like mine—
And leave no trace behind —
Save ruins o’er the region spread,
And the white stones above the dead.
Before these fields were shorn and tilled,
Full to the brim our rivers flowed;
The melody of waters filled
The fresh and boundless wood:
And torrents dashed, and rivulets played,
And fountains spouted in the shade.
Those grateful sounds are heard no more:
The springs are silent in the sun,
The rivers by the blackened shore,
With lessening current run ;
The realms our tribes are crushed to get,
May be a barren desert yet.
It seems that the Local Government of the day was ineffec-
tual to repress these atrocities, and that on the part of the
marauders who committed them, there was no recollection of
the ordinary rights of their fellow-men, to which, as human
beings, and as the original occupants of the soil, these de-
fenceless and ignorant people were justly entitled, whose
revenge was now directed not only towards their actual op-
pressors, but towards all who differed from them in complexion.
The white man, the denizen of civilization, the fortune-fa-
vored inheritor of Christianity, became to them the symbol
of oppression, and their long-suppressed resentment was
directed towards all, even those who had humanely treated
them, becoming, in the indiscriminate rage excited by their
wrongs, the common enemies of all, even of those who pos-
sessed hearts to feel for their benighted fellow-creatures.


The sufferings and dangers of the early settlers in a state
of things like this may well be conceived, and offers a striking
contrast to the peace and security of the present day.
Van Diemen’s Land was among the discoveries of the 17 th
century, (an age more prolific than any other in geographical
discoveries) having been made known by Abel Jansen Tasman,
a Dutch navigator, who visited it in the course of an eastward
voyage from the Isle of France, in quest of the Great South-
ern Continent. He sailed in a southerly direction, and first
sighted land in the middle of its western coast, near Port Hibbs.
He afterwards discovered and named Storm Bay, rounded the
Peninsula, and on the Ist December, 1642, anchored in a bay
named Frederick Hendrick Bay. On the subsequent day he
despatched two armed boats to an inner bay, now North Bay,
and landed on its beach, taking formal possession of the coun-
try, and the flag of the Prince of Orange, then ruler of
Holland, was unfurled on its shores. About 180 years sub-
sequently, Captain Mario visited the island in quest of a
land the centre of which was said to be of gold. Having
entered Hendrick Bay, he tried to hold friendly intercourse
with the natives, but without avail. The voyagers could not
induce them to accept their proffered presents. They are
described as entirely destitute of clothing, the children being
fastened to their mother’s backs by bark or rush ropes. The
island was subsequently visited by Furneaux, and the illus-
trious Cook, who gave names to many of the bays and capes
on the southern and eastern coasts. To the flattering descrip-
tion of the climate, and of the peaceable disposition of the
Natives given to his Government, may be attributed the sub-
sequent possession of the island by the British.
In 1803 the island was formally taken possession of, by a
small detachment under Captain Bowen, who, having arrived
from Sydney, selected Risdon as the site of the future metro-
polis. In the following year Colonel, afterwards Lieutenant
Governor, Collins, followed with a considerable expedition,
having in vain attempted to form a settlement at Port Phillip ;
who after many surveys selected the present site of Hobart
Town, named after Lord Hobart, the then Secretary of State
for the Colonies. Well may the astonishment of the world
be occasioned by the spectacle we daily witness—a well-built
town, the growth of less than half a century ! History cannot


furnish a parallel! It is a glorious monument to,the indomit-
able eneigy of the Anglo-Saxon race!
The progress of this colony, a very Switzerland, (despite
its fertility) as to its barriers and mountain ranges, is highly
creditable to its early settlers, and to those whose high destiny
it has been to guide their energies, and direct its administra-
tion. From its settlement in 1804 to the present day, a
period of less than 50 years, many men of high qualification,
both governmental and legislative, have guided its vice-regal
car; among which, the names of Collins, Sorell, and Arthur,
stand conspicuous—the first of whom found it an unproductive
desert, incapable of producing any of the necessaries of life;
during the three first years of his administration, the few
persons over whom he ruled being entirely dependent on
foreign supplies. An enumeration of the obstacles then
overcome, and the hardships endured, is a striking lesson to
the whole world—it shows the powers and energy of man,
when thrown on his own resources, and teaches that no diffi-
culties at the outset of any undertaking, should deter him
from steadily pursuing his object.
At his death, in 1810, the government successively reverted
to three locum tenentes , —Lieut. Edward Lord, Capt. Murray,
and Colonel Geils, About this time (10 years from its first
occupation), the importance and value of the colony began to
develope itself, and it now began to wear the aspect of an
Englishman’s home. Land was brought into cultivation—
houses were built—the site of towns selected—farms enclosed
—and the star of civilization began to shine on a territory
before dark as extreme barbarism could make it. The year
1816 is memorable as first yielding enough and to spare, as
then corn was first exported—and the first bale of wool
transmitted to England. It is also to be mentioned, that in
this year whales w ere first caught in the Derwent: a branch
of commerce being thus introduced, which deserves to be
considered one of the most vital resources of the colony. On
the arrival of Colonel Sorell, in 1817, he found the island
emerging from its infant state, and ministered to its increasing
energies with consummate address. He repressed social dis-
turbances of the most alarming character, invoked the spirit
of order and discipline, and thus relieved the colony of a soli-
<‘i tiide that had well nigh suspended its industrial energies.


He then projected the magnificent line of road that now
connects the metropolis with Launceston ; a work of the
utmost importance, and a memorial, more eulogistic than human
praise. Yan Diemen’s Land, about this time, began to be
spoken of,as an eligible spot towards which the stream of emi-
gration might be successfully directed : inter-communication
with Sydney, her elder sister colony, tending much to
gate her beautifuldimate, and numerous resources. The tide
of immigration set in, capital was introduced, and the colony
extended on all sides. The Law sent its representatives-
Religion its apostles—Education its emissaries— Trade its
artizans—Commerce its merchants—Banks were founded—-
Distilleries and Breweries erected—Churches built—Public
and Private Institutions founded—and.this city began to wear
the appearance of an English town of older growth : while by
the Government, roads were formed —bridges built—schools
founded—and all that an earnest, but physically feeble, right
'■hand could do to avert evil, and do good, was energetically
effected. All seemed at this period the work of enchantment:
prospective wealth and affluence dazzled all eyes all were
pleased and prosperous —everything was invested with. the
crimson and gold of adventitious prosperity, and a spirit of
recklessness was induced, calculated to retard materially the
onward progress of the colony. Allured by high prices the
farmer, and by great profits the dealer-—estates were mort-
gaged—credit risked—and an almost universal bankruptcy
ensued. The face of society, stripped of its false colors, has
since assumed the more placid expression of industry and
persevering labour.
It had been Governor Sorell’s province to collect materials,
and to lay the foundation: it was reserved for his successor,
Colonel Arthur, to rear the social edifice, and to bring into
play the enlarged powers placed in his hands; and it must be
recorded, that seldom has the mantle of an able energetic
Governor fallen into such hands. He repressed, by fiscal
enactments, the license of an almost fictitious currency, and
adjusted the scales of Colonial Society, which, for the time,
made him a far less popular Governor than his predecessor :
who, urbane and accessible to every supplicant, had oft ex-
pressed the sorrow he felt, in negativing any request made to
him ; a sentiment which, if proceeding from the lips of a
monarch, would have rendered him immortal. Still it must be


admitted that like a skilful physician, Colonel Arthur adminis-
tered wisely for the maladies of the people over whom he ruled.
A stern disciplinarian, active, energetic, and enlightened, he’
carried through the duplex term of his Government, the pres-
tige of wise and astute statesmanship. He meditated many
great works, —that of the noble Causeway and Bridge at
Bridgewater, since completed by our present Governor, ohav-
ing been projected and commenced during his administration
—also the formation of the New Wharf, which, with the
recent additions made during the administration of Sir John
Eranklin, and our present Governor, Sir William Denison,
render our harbour as convenient as any in the world.
I need not trace the progress of colonial history farther.
Time would fail me, and we have the labour of succeeding
Governors and a subsequent period, amply illustrated in the
really splendid town in which we are assembled, abounding
in everything that can minister to the wants or luxury of its
inhabitants.
See its Churches and its Chapels, its Literary Institutes,
its Educational Establishments, its handsome public and pri-
vate edifices, its large well-furnished shops, all now assuming
the grandeur of British magnificence! Count the fleet of
bold, but peaceful, whalers that crowd your harbour, second
to no other in the world, reminding, as it does, of the glorious
Bay of Naples ! and see the piles of glittering merchandize
daily landed on its shores ! Behold the busy merchant fleets
both British and Colonial, freighted with your wool and superl
abundant agricultural productions ! Witness the regularity
and width of ycur streets, and the commodious and yearly-
increasing number of your Docks and Wharves ! Look on
the stately villas of your merchant princes, and throw into the
picture, as proofs of daily development, the projected Hall of
Commerce, and the magnificently planned New Market Place!
not to be confuted by details of an unpromising chal
racter. No: despite all her social shadows, and she has
doubtless them, Tasmania has progressed in material wealth,
and social conveniences, to an extent unparalleled in the
history of communities.
Sons of labour, whose well-nerved arm and persevering’
industry have effected all these, well may you feel elated in


contemplating your proud creations ; and on good grounds
do you seek to elevate your social condition, and to uplift a
moral and intellectual standard that may fit you, the true
benefactors of the land in which you dwell, for the discharge
of higher and more important duties. Yours is a pre-emi-
nence that nothing but ignorance and moral degradation can
take from you ; for who will deny the dignity of that enduring
toil, which penetrates earth’s treasure-deeps, and ploughs her
sunny soil,—
“ That battles with the elements,
“ That conquers clime, that cleaves the wave,
“ And bears from every strand,
“ The sweetest, best of all we have,
“ Gifts of the toiling hand.”
Almost all the quadrupeds indigenous to this island are
marsupial, or pouch-bearing, and nocturnal, or night-roaming.
They comprise three kinds of Kangaroo; the forest, brush,
and the wallaby, each species residing in particular districts.
The rat and mouse resembling, as nearly as possible, in dis-
tinguishing characteristics, the Kangaroo —the Wombat—the
Opossum—the Porcupine ant-eater with short quills—the
Bandicoot—the Native cat—Tiger-cat—the Hyaena-opossum
or tiger, sometimes measuring 6 feet in length—its skin is
beautifully striped with black and white on the back, while
the sides are of a grey colour. The dasyurus ursinus is also
a very curious animal. This island is more remarkable for
the numbers, than for the varieties of the feathered tribes.
Their characteristics are a gaudy plumage, and a note anything
but suggestive to a European ear of Philomel. The magpie,
however, when properly trained, can scarcely be surpassed in
sweetness of note. It has a considerable resemblance to the
thrush. The accipitrine order is particularly numerous,
comprising the eagle-hawk, sparrow-hawk, and falcon. Of
the omnivorous order, the crow and magpie may be enume-
rated. The parrot tribes are abundant, slightly differing,
and some being migratory. The passerines and grallse are
by no means common; and only one species of pigeon, a
bronze-winged variety is found. The emu has now become
almost extinct. Of the gallinaceus order, the quail is abun-
dantly found. A migratory kind of bustard is also met with.
That rara avis of Northern climes, the black swan, is still
seen in the bays and estuaries. The penguin, black petrel,


owls, albatross, cormorant. Mutton-birds flying in flocks of
several thousands are also commonly met with. The common
platypus must not be passed by without notice; being the
connecting link between birds and quadrupeds, as its young
are said to be viviparous. Ducks, geese, musk-ducks, the
butcher-bird, fly-catcher, cuckoo, sand-lark, snipe, wood and
ground thrush, the miner, a mocking-bird. The blue-crested
wren changes its plumage in the spring, the crown of the
head and the coverts of the ears then become a brilliant blue
color ; a crescent also appears on the upper part of its back.
The diamond bird, the most beautiful variety in the colony,
builds its nest underground, frequently at a depth of three
feet from the surface. The fan-tail, or grass-finch, has a bill
and tail of a brilliant red color, and the diminutive emu-wren
is adorned with tail feathers, 7 in number, and 4 inches long.
The black whale and black fish are still found in the many
estuaries and bays of the island, although in daily lessening
numbers, owing to the keen and incessant pursuit of them by
our enterprising whalers : it is perhaps worthy of notice, that
no species of fish is known to exist in the fresh water streams
of the interior, incapable of also subsisting in salt water.
Marine forests of gigantic sea-weed girt the island, prolific in
edible fish, and the insects on which they feed, ample to
supply a dense population, whenever need shall render it
desirable to avail of such resources.
The insect tribe alone seems to possess no distinguishing
character, from those of other countries in similar latitudes.
Some of the coleopterous class, however, exhibit brilliant
colors, and many of the papilio, or butterfly species, are beau-
tifully marked and dyed with the richest hues.
Let us now glance at some of the labors of the early colo-
nists, who may be justly termed the pioneers of civilization,
and consider the obstacles that in every direction presented
themselves, and trace the gradual development of social con-
veniences and public utilities, so magically introduced. H ear
the echoes of the first axe—see the stalwart bushman, fired
with the indomitable enthusiasm of the Anglo-Saxon, has
lowered the mighty monarch of the forests—the wedge of
civilization has been introduced by a mighty power able to
overcome the very stubbornness of Nature, “ and make the


crooked places straight”—to drain the morasses build cities
—found empires—and to plant the glorious standard of
Christianity. See the green footsteps of these sons of labor!
Behold the golden grain waving in the fair sunlight of heaven !
See the fruits of man’s labor in the. formation of roads and
causeways ; he builds bridges over the rapids, makes wharves,
founds townships; obedient to the instinct that leads him to
share his sorrows and his pleasures with his fellow-men.. Can
any one contemplate the many great works achieved in this
colony, without feeling astonishment at the energy which
accomplished them! The soil of the island must, on the
whole, be pronounced uncommonly fertile, those parts not
liberally repaying the labor of the agriculturist, affording
excellent herbage for sheep and cattle. Notice here the
labor requisite to produce that admixture of soil best fitted
to produce the common requirements of civilized man.
Throughout the arable parts of the colony, a diversity of soil
prevails, comprising calcareous, argillaceous, and sandy, each
found in strata or beds of their own, but requiring admixture
before abundance can crown the labours of the cultivator. A
finished style of agriculture cannot be ascribed to the early
settlers—nay, at the present day, a comparatively lax and
imperfect mode of culture is too prevalent; but we are con-
sidering the mighty natural difficulties opposed to the gigantic
. exertions that have been put forth : and our utmost surprise
and admiration are necessarily excited.
The present is an cera of hope and promise : it has been
-well said, “ that the sun of liberty has risen in our horizon,
and the star of intellect hangs o’er usmay they ascend and
re-ascend until meridian heat and light invigorate and influ-
ence all hearts, causing a fusion of all that is good. Thus,
and thus only, can an effectual antidote be produced, potent
to controvert all the social and moral evils existing amongst
us. In no part of our brief history has there been a more
satisfactory earnest of a better advent, than the present
unfolds to us. See the triumphs that statistics proclaim.. A
science that more than any other reveals the hidden springs
of action ; to its tables let us look for details, remembering
that all speculations, unsupported by facts, are merely aerial
hypotheses.


The following decennial tabula, collated from statistics published by
the Government, affords a complete refutation of the unsupported state-
ments so widely promulgated of retrogression in wealth, morals, and
civilization.
| 1829 | 1839 | 1849
Net Revenue
Expenditure
Vessels entered inwards
Ditto outwards
Ditto belonging to V. D. Land
Ditto built in ditto
Ditto employed in fisheries
Imports
Exports
Average price of land per acre
No. of acres in crop
Colonial produce, bushels
Ditto tons
Population, males
Ditto females
General totals
Births
Deaths
Marriages
Publicans’ licenses
Places of Public Worship
Expenditure
Government schools and pupils
Actions brought in S.C. & tried
War. of att. and cognovit
Capiases and writs of exon
Actions brought in C of R & tried
Convictions bef. S. C. & Q. S.
Executions
Gaols
Post-offices
Miles of post roads
Newspapers sent
Letters received
Meat per lb.
Wheat per bushel
Barley ditto
Oats ditto
Peas ditto
Beans ditto
Potatoes ditto
Turnips ditto
Hay ditto
£64,164
£47,357
No. 'Tons
110-24,717
111-25,742
27- 1,625
3- 248
£272,189
£127,184
6s. lOfd.
38,801
422,482
18,345
15,273
4,992
20,265
No. £
111—2,775
No. Sitgs.
9- 3,524
£3,495
9-524
476-41
156
289-168
474-301
7s. 6d.
ss. 6d.
£6
£2
£6
£153,917
£142,524
No. Tons
452-
453-
123-10,883
13- 651
24- 3,146
£746,887
£875,165*
11s. B*d.
£ll 0s 3|d
100,348
1,044.857
82,205
31,010
13,101
44,111
No. £
291-7,275
No. Sitgs.
35-14,750
£11,208
24-1,190
962-69
172
33-348
17,354
118,307
265.*
Bs.
7s. 6d.
£2 ss.
£6
£153,306
£156,434
No. Tons
648-99,063
654-99,130
221-21,532
22-20 to 300
34- 7,791
£573,730
£559,682
245. 3|d.
£5 4s. lid.
166,228
1,900,818
95,772
47,828
22,336
70,164
1,766
1,023
734
No. £
569-9,225
No. Sitgs.
148-27,971
£19,324
74-3,405
374-21
73
36-102
1,903-1,221
222,267
152,776
£1 10s.
£1 10s.
£2 10s.
* A year of scarcity in the
neighbouring colonies.


Wool bales
Tallow casks
Sperm oil do.
Black oil do.
Leather bales
Wheat quarters
10,850
123
562
326
424
825
. £246,022
7,112
62
3
27
19
4,593
. £155,195
trades and manufactures. | 1829 \ 1839 j
Agricultural implement makers 4 11
Breweries . ~ 5 16
Candle manufactories o 9 26
Cooperage 2 7
Coachmakers prohib. by ActofCncl.
Distilleries M F 4 2
Dyers 7 10
Engineers o 6 28
Fellmongers 36
Foundries 5 0
Farrieries 5 1
Mast & block manufactory ig
Mills, steam 07 46 56
Mills, water and steam o 1 4
Potteries 9 7 9
Printing offices 1 1 3
Ropemakers 1 5 5
Sailmakers o 6 2
Saw mills 35
Shipwrights < . 2
Soap manufactories * 14 33
Tanners 15 5
Woolstaplers
Sy, ai of the following six staple Prodoetto™ was
effected, from this island to Great Britain alone, amounting to £401,217
viz.
Hobart Town. Launceston.
£401,217
The value from which the foregoing amounts are drawn being thus
. £2O per bale
Tallow . . 38s. per cwt. of 7\ cwt. casks
Snprm oil . £3O per cask
Tallow . . 38s. per cwt. <
Sperm oil . £3O per cask
Black oil . £lO per cask
Leather . . £l2 per bale
Wheat *. 50s. per quarter
Hides . • 10 s - P er hlde *
The following extract recently re-published in the columns
of the Hobart Town Courier, and received by this community


as a recognised fact, affords an appropriate sequel to the fore-
going, in proof of the success that has attended an introduc-
tion to this colony, of capital and judicious enterprise in
by-gone times, and affirms an irrefutable* although rarely
asserted fact, that the fate of the settler has not always been
unpropitieus.
“ It is stated in an Irish Journal that Mr. Chisholm Anstey, M.P., is
the second son of a Mr. Thomas Anstey, who, having had £lO,OOO left
him by an uncle, embarked amongst the first settlers for Van Diemen’s
Land, with a fortune accumulated in flocks, herds, and cattle, of
£200,000! the natural growth of his imported capital.”
Among the most cheering of its disclosures, is the rapidly
increasing growth of one section of the community, that may
justly be termed the base of the future social fabric. From
the late census returns it appears that the colonially born
numbered, on the Ist day of March last, 21,590, viz , 10,649*
males, and 10,694 females* or very little less than one-third
of the entire population. Well may they be designated the
hope of Tasmania, as upon them the future prosperity of their
native land mainly depends. Born in a country congenial as
that of Greece to the development of fine forms, and intellec-
tual supremacy, the native born race afford high promise of
uniting the lofty mind of that enshrined country, with the
more practical and persevering qualities of their Anglo-Saxon
forefathers.
It is not my intention to-flatter undeservedly, and thus to
unfit them for arduous study and persevering application,
which can alone qualify them for the creditable discharge of
their future duties; these are the terms on which all men
labor successfully ; but the reverse has been too often done;
disparaging comparisons have been drawn, both of their
moral and intellectual capabilities, the united testimony of
all engaged in the work of education among them, declares
that, in intellect and moral attainment, they are equal to the
youth of any other community: let the truth, for their en-
couragement, be known among them*.
In all the desirable qualities of heart and head, they indeed
afford ample promise of realising the bright visions of those
whose very existence is wrapped up in theirs. May they re-
member that this is the especial season to qualify themselves


for the enlarged requirements of a near futurity* when they
will be called on by a united suffrage, if not to rule over, at
least to guide the helm of this community. Allied to them
by the conjugal and parental-ties, I may be fairly presumed
to have a warm appreciation of their better qualities, and to
feel an earnest desire that all the bright promises they afford,
may be fully realised. Already do they fulfil high and re-
sponsible positions, in the Law and in the Church, in the
busy marts of Commerce and in the thousand forms of trade.
As legislators and magistrates,as physicians, as citizens, as sons
they have performed their duty well; nor must we fail to notice,
that, a portion of the Colonial Press is now conducted by
them, in a manner that bespeaks for them, a high place among
the older established historians of the day.-
Neither must the quiet virtues of the daughters of the soil
be passed over without commendation, some flowers from
whom have been inserted into the wreath of England’s aristo-
cratic loveliness, without bespoiling its brilliancy, or detracting
from its fragrance ; these high, social and domestic qualifica-
tions best bespeak a virtuous future race.
No enlightened traveller can have lately visited this colony
without being amazed at the discrepancies existing between
Van Diemen’s Land as it has been represented, and Van Die-
men’s Land as it is. Expecting to witness the utmost laxity
of morals, and contempt for the obligations and observances of
religion, he sees, on all sides, order and propriety, and an evi-
dent superiority over all settlements, not planted by the sons
of Britain ; he traces the unmistakable indications of her na-
tural resources, evident in the splendid creations on all sides
visible; he gazes with insuppressible rapture on virtuous
parents, surrounded by their olive branches, he remarks the
fervour and self-sacrifices of her religious communities —he
enters her Sunday-schools and listens to the music of prayer
and praise, made by a thousand lisping tongues —he realizes
her hospitality' to the stranger, and recognizes her melting
sympathy for distress and sorrow—he notices the quietude of
her streets, the religious observance of her Sabbath, and sees
on all sides those who were lost and are found, and in vain
seeks for that contagion of vice and immorality said univers-
ally to prevail.


When angels oft-times have triumphantly rejoiced over re-
pentant sinners, reclaimed by the happy circumstances of
newly-horn association, and the less perplexing snares than
those besetting so many, amid the blaze of British ultra-civi-
lization, it must surely he an apostate Christianity, and a
spurious patriotism that can gloat over, and I may say fatten
on, the moral imperfections found among us. It were truth-
less to say, they do not exist—they exist in all communities,
and virtue perhaps derives its sole lustre by contrast with
these dark shadows. The truly virtuous do not fear the con-
tagion of iniquity. Virtue is immortal as its author, it may
he bruised, beaten,and crushed by the iron hand of wickedness
and oppression, hut like Him it will rise again, indestructible
and renewed, in beauty and strength.
Oh ! what a field of usefulness presents itself in the ant-
lying classes of society, found in the many walks of daily life,
in this and every other community, “ more rude, more demo-
ralised, and more irreclaimable, because unministered to by
those who, having succeeded in the more personal work of
self-reformation, care not to evoke the moral germ implanted
in the most depraved heart.” The heart within—the heart
in virtue of which man is God-like, be he ever so debased,
and without which he scarcely rises above the brute creation,
has been made to pulsate in the bosom of the most abandoned.
See ye to it Ministers of the blessed gospel of love, and ye
who prefer the mere bubble reputation of political leadership,
to the glorious and everlasting seals of Redemption. Heads
of families, and ye who exert so signal an influence over those
around you, take heed, lest this be added to your personal
responsibilities, that ye cared to avert the moral plague without
attempting to minister to the exigencies of the afflicted,
to those who,in the widest sense,are the impoverished in body
and in mind. Glorious indeed is the fruit of such labors of
love, vast the vintage, few the laborers, willing to devote
themselves to the work.
I have briefly adverted to some advantages peculiar to this island,
itsfine climate, and its resources,agricultural and commercial.
I should ill fulfil my promise were I not to prove that it affords
more direct advantages to emigrants of small capital than any
colony in the world, how many families of limited means are
there in England who, if they only knew a tithe of the ame-


3ioration, a passage to this distant settlement could afford them,
would gladly avail themselves, to rid them of a slavery, im-
posed by the conventialisms of England, anomalous as she is,
in her magnificence, and her squalor, her high civilisation,
and her redundant crime—it cannot be doubted that had not
misrepresentation turned the tide of immigration, from these
shores, thousands would have now been eating-the Jb read of
plenty here, who, at the present hour, are a portion of England’s
famishing multitude. The adjoining Colonies, Jndia f and even
California, the very scum; of all nations, have heard her suici-
dal cry of moral contagion, and,in vain is she universally held
to possess a health-inspiring climate, more invigorating than
any other to the invalids of tropical lands, and more congenial
to those nf colder climes. She is the unvisited Madeira of the
Southern Hemisphere, her natural riches are overlooked, her
people are. maligned, and she is the reproach even of the mo-
dern Babel of the West.
Politics have here resolved themselves into two broadly
distinguished sections, the one distinctly asserting and advo-
cating imperial interests, the other the local and all-paramount
exigencies of the colony. Can it be assumed that the latter
will not speedily be triumphant. The honor of Britain de-
mands her secession from this contest, and the proverbial good
sense, and generosity of that nation, forbid to doubt that she
will speedily put an end to this estrangement of by
the declaration, that they are identical and indissoluble.
When the delusive mist that hangs o’er us, is cleared away,
and the now uncultivated tracts, ostensibly occupied by the
u Lords of wastes, and Princes of deserts,” shall have passed
intq the hands of a thrifty and industrious peasantry, and the
spirit of persevering labor illustrated by the lately revealed
settlers of the now celebrated Huon district, shall have pene-
trated into the densely wooded prairies of the recently dis-
covered West. When our useful mineral treasures, shall
have been developed. When more frequent intercourse be-
tween the now scattered inhabitants, shall have engrafted bet-
ter modes of agriculture, and engendered an emulation to
excel in all the arts of a highly organised civilisation. When
the mere struggle of parties for supremacy or distinction, ab-
sorbing as it does, all thought and energy of action, shall have
ceased among us. When manufactures shall have been more


generally introduced, and when a preference for native over
imported manufactures, shall be cherished. When England
shall have thrown o’er the intervening seas, her “flying
bridges”, the fleet messengers of commerce, civilisation, and
artistic industry, conducting and reconducting mutual amelio-
rations, and numerous blessings, religious, moral, and ma-
terial ; when the germ of independent life, minute as it is,
lately, implanted in our extended constitution, shall have
grown and developed itself, and when the principle of
self-action, now first invoked, shall have gradually led to
the introduction of laws, tending to foster and promote
colonial interests.
When Tasmania becomes, as all the colonies of Britain must
become, an integral portion of the British Empire, acting and
acted upon, uniformly, by a Commercial Tariff, based on the
principles of Free Trade, or, at most, imposing prohibitory
duties, only on the productions of countries retaining hostile
Tariffs against them, then, will Britain, with her gigantic Co-
lonial Empire, assume the majesty of an imperial unity; and
this colony will be a splendid monument to her colonising
prowess.
I will, in conclusion, observe, that this island possesses
every element essential to ultimate national importance, its
extreme geographical insignificance tending in no way to
lessen its many advantages. A confined insular position is
perhaps, more than any other, conducive to a high state of
civilisation ; fixity of residence, and thickness of population,
being its prime requisites. It may indeed be stated, that all
civilisations, historically recorded, have taken place in regions
physically limited. Egypt, the cradle of Arts and Sciences,
arose in a narrow valley, skirted by deserts. Greece was
founded in a confined peninsula, bounded by rock and ocean.
Phenicia was a narrow strip of land, only 5 miles in width,
and 35 in length, bounded on one side by the Mediterranean,
and on the other by the ranges of Lebanon. _ Rome and Car-
thage were geographically limited territories. Civilisation
has flourished at both the extremities of the old world ; Ger-
many, Holland, France, and Britain, oil the one side, and
China and Japan on the other. How can this be accounted
for, except that mankind, hemmed in by the barriers of na-
ture have been compelled to settle and condense the terms as


it were of nurturing civilisation. How significant is this
appeal to history, in our case ; hitherto the efforts of the Co-
onists (triumphantly as they have been rewarded, by a
bounteous soil and favouring clime),—have been only migra-
tory and fitful, put forth frequently for the sole purpose of
realising the means of transit to other lands,—hereafter, the
sons of the soil will, with a patriotic attachment, delight to
reveal all its natural resources, and this land will become the
chosen home, of the happy, the united, and the free.
The social phases I have so feebly illustrated, doubtless
form the fair side of the picture ; but the obverse has been
so frequently exhibited, that I conceive it only common jus-
tice to have noticed them, leaving details on both sides, to be
balanced by the future historian of Van Diemen’s Land.
JOHN MOORE, PRINTER. HOBARTON.


jAFf
klbUO


■«r
'




