













AN
ADDRESS
TO THE
INHABITANTS
OF THE
COLONIES,
ESTABLISHED IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
AND
NORFOLK ISLAND.
By the Rev. RICHARD JOHNSON, A.B.
CHAPLAIN TO THE COLONIES.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR:
And Sold by MATHEWS , Strand; DEIGHTON, Holborn
TRAP , Paternester-Row ; and GoFF and AMEY,
No. 8, Ivy-Lane. MDCCXCIV.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1792.


■ft , • CJ >/$ sf-ST
j&J V s .a Jt- ‘ /? A
w rf' yb&m * « *NP, •£?& $ *%■
... #«w y**,*cjJ2jr
■


TO ALL 1 5
THE INHABITANTS,
AND ESPECIALLY TO THE
UNHAPPY PRISONERS and CONVICTS,
IN THE COLONIES
ESTABLISHED AT
PORT JACKSON,
A n B
NORFOLK ISLAND ,
THIS AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS
IS DEDICATED AND PRESENTED,
BY THEIR VERY SINCERE
AND SYMPATHIZING FRIEND,
AND FAITHFUL SERVANT,
IN THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST,
RICHARD JOHNSON.
b




To the British and other European Inha-
bitants of NEW SOUTH WALES
and NORFOLK ISLAND.
My Beloved,
T Do not think it neceffary to
make an apology for putting this
Addrefs into your hands; or to enter
into a long detail of the reafons
which induced me to write it.
One reafon may fuffice. I find I
cannot exprefs my regard for you,
fo often, or fo fully, as 1 with, in any
other way.
On our firfl arrival in this diftant
part of the world, and for fame time
afterwards, our numbers were compa-
ratively final 1; and while they redded
nearly upon one Ipot, I could not only
preach to them on the Lord’s day, but
alfo convene with them, and admo-
nilh them, more privately.
• k 2 But


But fince that period, we have gra-
dually increafed in number every year
(notwithftanding the great mortality
we have fometimes known} by the
multitudes that have been fent hither
after us. The colony already begins
to fpread, and will probably fpread
more and more every year, both by
new fettlements formed in different
places under the crown, and by a
number of individuals continually be-
coming fettlers. Thus the extent of
what I call my parifh, and confe-
quently of my parochial duty, is en-
larging daily. On the other hand,
my health is not fo good, nor my
conftitution fo ftrong, as formerly.
And therefore I feel it imprafticable,
and irnpoffible for me, either to preach,
or to converfe with you fo freely, as
my inclination and affe6lion would
prompt me to do.
I have


I have therefore thought it might
be proper for me, and I hope it may
prove ufeful to you, to write fuch an
Addrefs as I now prefent you with. I
tranfmitted a copy of it to my friends
in England, with a requell, that if they
approved of it, a fufficient number
might be printed, and fent to me. Thus
I am now able to leave with you a
teftimony of my aifeftion for you, and
of my fincere and heart-felt concern,
for your bejl , becaufe your eternal ,
welfare. My times are in the hand
of God. He, and He only, knows
how long I may live, or how long my
prefent connexion with you, may con-
tinue. I trull, however, that lo long
as the all-wife Difpofer of all events
fliali be pleafed to fpare my life, and
flrength ; and government lhall deem
my fervices in this remote land, ne-
celfary, it will Hill be, as it has hitherto
i been.


been, my mod ardent defire, my uni-
form endeavour, and my greatefl plea-
lure, to promote your happinefs. And
when recalled to my native country,
or removed by my God to my eternal
home, to receive that crown of righte-
oufnefs, which I humbly truft is laid
up for me, by reading and carefully
pending the following pages, I hope
you will be convinced, and reminded
how fmcerely you were pitied, and.
how dearly beloved by
Richard Johnson.
Port 'Jackftn, Ofl. 30. 1792.
At this date, exclufiveof thofewho
died or were born on the voyages
from England :
Baptifms - - - 226
Marriages - - - 220
Burials - - - - 854


ADVERTISEMENT.
npilE Author hopes that all well-
difpofed perfons will excufe the
imperfefhons they may meet with in
this Addrefs. It is the firft time of his
appearance in print, and may be the
lafl. Isor would he have attempted
it now, were it not for the very pecu-
liar fituation he is in, and the hope he
entertains, that his feeble, but he trufts,
lincere, attempt, may, by the bleUing
of God, be made ufeful to thofe un-
happy perfons, with whom he is fo
nearly connefted, and for whofe falva-
tion and happinefs he is fo deeply
concerned.
And


And he returns his moll hncere and
hearty thanks to true Chriftians of
every denomination, for their kind re-
membrance of him at the throne ol
grace. He Hill hopes, becaufe he ftill
needs, a continuance of their fervent
prayers to God for him. That he may
be endued with thofe gifts, and with
that wifdom, zeal, and faithfulnefs
which are fo needful to direft, fupport,
and llrengthen him—and may be fa-
voured with more manifold and
abundant fuccefs in that arduous, try-
ing, yet honourable, and, at times he
can fay, pleafant and delightful work,
in which he is engaged.


ADDRESS, &c.
PART I.
T BESEECH you, brethren, fufFer this
A word of exhortation. Your fouls are
precious. They are precious in the fight of
God. They are precious to the Lord Jefus
They are precious in my efteem.
Oh that you yourfelves were equally fenfible
of their value.
We have now been here almoil five years.
During this time, I truft, I have been faithful
in the difeharge of my duty, faithful to my
God, my country, my confcience, and to your
immortal fouls.
B I would.


I would, nay I do, humbly hope, that my
labours have not been wholly in vain. Some
of you, I truli, have been convinced of your
folly, fin and danger; you have earneflly
fought, and happily found mercy with God
through a Mediator. You can now ap-
proach him as a God reconciled, a merciful
Father and Friend, and are evidencing the
reality of you converfion, by an upright life
and converfation.
But I muft exprefs my fear, that thofe of
you, who are thus convinced of fin, and
converted to God, and reformed from your
evil courfes, are comparatively very few. It
is too evident, that the far greater part of
you difeover no concern for religion. The
Great God, the Lord Jcfus Chrift, the Holy
Spirit, death, judgment, eternity, heaven
and hell, —thefe are fubjefts which feldom,
if at all, engage your attention; and there-
fore you fpend days, weeks, months and
years, in a profane and carelefs manner,
though


though you are repeatedly informed and re-
minded in the moft plain, faithful, and alarm**
ing language I can ufe, that the wages of fin,
without repentance, is death *, the curfe of
God, and the eternal ruin and damnation of
your fouls!
Oh, I intreat you, brethren, to confider
what is contained in thefe two words, falva-
iion and damnation! The one implies every
thing that an immortal foul can want or de-
fire to make it happy. The other includes
an idea, the moft gloomy and dreadful that
can be conceived. The former will be the
admiration of angels, and the fong and joy of
the redeemed j the latter will be the torment
of devils, and of all impenitent fmners, for
ever and ever j-.
Remember likewife, that ere long, either
this endlefs inconceivable happinefs, or unut-
* Rom. vi. 25.
f 1 Pet, i. 12. Rev. vii, 9—17. Rev. xxv. ir.
B 2
terable


terable mifery will be your portion, or your
doom, and mine. Our glafs of life is running
away apace. Our time is fall haftening to a
period. Death is making fure and fpeedy
ftrides towards us daily, judgment is at hand,
and the Judge himfelf is at the door. And
oh! confider, when the breath w>e now draw
fhall depart, the tender thread of life be cut,
our (late will be unalterably and for ever
fixed; either to live with God, with angels,
and glorified faints, in heaven j or to dwell
with devils, in the darknefs and torments of
hell.
On thefe accounts your fouls are, as I have
already obferved, very precious, not only in
the fight of God, but alfo to me. My bre-
thren, God is my record, how greatly I long
after you all, in the bowels of Jefus Chrift**
Next to the falvation of my own foul, nothing
in this world lies fo near my heart, as the
converfion and falvation of my fellow crea-
* Phil. i. 8.
tures j


tures; and efpecially of you, over whom I
am appointed more immediately to watch,
as one who mult give an account *j*.
And oh, my friends, if this affectionate,
though plain addrefs, fhould anfwer my ar-
dent wifhes and prayers, if it fhould prove
the happy means of converting even one foul
to God, I fhould indeed rejoice, as one that
findeth great fpoilj. For once, at leaft,
endeavour to lift up your hearts with me in
prayer to Almighty God, the bountiful giver
of all grace. He only can make this or any
other means effectual; and fhould it pleafe
Him of his abounding mercy to make a lav-
ing impreffion upon your hearts, you will
reap the happy fruits of it in life, at death,
and to eternity. Oh that the gracious Spirit
of the Lord may open the eyes and the ears
of all who may read or hear what 1 am writ-
ing. May they who are afleep, awake! May
they who are fpiritually dead, be made alive!
+ Heb.xiii, 17.
$ Pf, cxix. 162.
B 3
May


May bacldliders from God be reclaimed !
May every one be ftirred up to confider.
What will become of him in another world!
For who amongft us can dwell with everiaft-
ing burnings*? Yet fuch muji be our lot,
unlefs we repent. May the Lord God give
to each of you. repentance unto life, that you
may be holy in this world, and happy in that
which is to come!
My brethren, I truft I can fay in truth,
and with a fmcere confcience. That I am not
afhamed of the gofpel of Chriftf. It is a
knowledge, and I hope an inward experience
of this precious gofpel, that bears up my fpi-
rits when I am ready to fink as in deep wa-
ters, and when I am almoft overwhelmed
by the many heavy and daily trials, croffes,
difficulties and dilappointments, that I meet
with in this, alas ! moft uncomfortable fitua-
tion. An acquaintance with this gofpel, an
experience of its truth and power, fweetens
* Ifa, xxxiii. 14.
+ Rom. i, j 6.
2
every


every bitter, makes my croffes comforts, and
my loffes gains. It is by this knowledge that
I am enabled to bear the crofs of Chrift, not
only with Tome degree of patience and refigna-
tion, but at fome feafons, with confolation
and joy; while lat one time reflect on what
our dear Lord and Saviour endured for me,
and at another anticipate the unfpeakable ho-
nour and pleafure, which, through grace, I
hope ere long to enjoy at his right hand for
evermore. And to endeavour to bring you,
my dear friends, to a faving knowledge of
what is contained in this gofpel, is not only my
duty and inclination as a minifler, but alfo my
earned: defire and pleafure, and that which I
long for more, than for any other thing that
can be named *.
I have often explained to you, according
to my fentiments, what is contained in the
gofpel. But as I fear, and am indeed well
aware, that many of you, after all you have
* Rom. x, i.
. heard,


heard, (till remain ignorant, I will now tell
you again briefly and plainly, what my views
of the gofpel are; that by putting this book
into your hands, you may, if you pleafe,
more carefully and attentively examine and
fearch for yourfelves, whether what 1 lay be-
fore you be agreeable to the holy fcriptures,
or otherwife and confequently, whether you
ought to believe, or to rejedt it.
The gofpel, I conceive, in its moft exten-
flve fenfe, comprehends the whole revealed
will of God, recorded in the holy fcriptures
of the Old and New Teftament*.
This facred book, which we call the Bible,
deferibes the original ftate of man, as a ftate
of perfedt purity and innocence. He was
made in the image of God. He was made
upright f. His underftanding, will, his af-
fedtions and confcience, his body and foul,
were free from defilement, guilt, or guile;
* 2 Tim. iii, 16.
+ Gen, i. 26, 27. Ecelef. vii. 29,
and


and while he continued To, he was not liable
to pain, nailery, or death.
But man did not continue in this ftatc.
Our firft parents difobeyed their Maker. By
finning againft God they loft their original
righteoufnefs, and became earthly, fenfual,
devilifh. Such are all his pofterity: for who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean ?
Man is now the very reverfe of what he was
when firft created. His underftanding *is
darkened, yea darknefs itfelf; his will, his
carnal mind, is enmity againft God; his con-
fcience is defiled; his affedlions, no longer
fixed upon God his Creator and Benefadlor,
are engrafted by the vain and perifhing things
of this world; by fin his body is become
mortal, fubjedt to pain, difeafe, and death f;
and his foul is expofed to the difpleafure of
God, and to the curfe annexed to the tranf-
greflions of his holy law. All this mifery is
* 2 Cor. iv. 5. Ephef.iv. 18. Titus i. 15. Rom.viii.7.
t Ram. v. 12.
implied


implied in that awful threatening, In the day
that thou eateft thereof thou fhalt furely die*.
And is not this threatening, at leaft in part,
already put into execution? Whence is there fo
much ignorance and contempt of God ? Why
do mankind fo eagerly, fo univerfally purfue
the vain pleafures and follies of the world,
while they feldom think of God their Maker ?
From whence proceed the infidelity, blafphe-
my, lying, theft, fabbath-breaking, fiandering,
and the many horrid evils, which every where
abound ? Whence is it that fo many in this
colony, labour under fuch fore and compli-
cated diforders, pains, and miferies ? Why
are fo many, both young and old, taken away
by death ? And why is it that others, who
fee all thofe things, do not take warning by
them, to prepare for their own latter end ?
Brethren, all thefe are fo many undeniable
proofs and evidences of what I have faid j
namely, that we are fallen and guilty creatures.
* Gen. ii. 17.
Thefe


Thefe are the effedhof Adam's fin and difo-
bedience. The certain confequences of which
would have been unavoidable and endlefs mi-
fery, both of foul and body, to himfelf and all
his pofterlty, had not forne means been pro-
vided, fome way laid open, for his and their
recovery.
But, bleffed be God, a door of hope is
opened by the gofpel for miferable Tinners!
A gracious promife was given early, even to
our firft parents, immediately after their fall,
The feed of the woman fhall break the fer-
pent’s head*. This promifed feed is the
Lord Jefus Chrift, who, in due time, was to
appear in the world, to be born of a woman,
that by his life, fufferings, and obedience unto
death, he might recover fallen man from the
mifery and ruin in which he was involved.
Brethren, this gofpel which, as the minifters
and ambafladors of God, we are commuTioned
and commanded to preach to Tinners, pro-
* Gen. iii. 15.
pofes


pofes a free and gracious pardon to the guilty,
cleanfing to the polluted, healing to the Tick,
happinefs to the miferable, light for thofe who
fit in darknefs, ftrength for the weak, food for
the hungry, and even life for the dead *.
All thefe ineftimable bleffings are the fruits
and effefts of the death and mediation of
Jefus Chrift. His great defign in coming
into the world was to feek and to fave thofe
who are loftf; he came from heaven, that he
might raife us to thofe holy and happy man-
fions; he endured the curfe, that we might
inherit the blefllng - y he bore the crofs, that
we might wear the crown ; he died, that we
might live; he died, the juft for the unjuft,
that he might bring us to God
Thefe bleffings become ours, only by be-
lieving, or faith. Thus it is faid, God fo loved
* Gal. iv, 4, 5. Gal. iii. 1 3. 1 John i. 7.
Matt. xi. 28. Matt. xi. 3.
+ Lukexviii. 10. 1 Tim, i, 15. X 1 Pet, iii. 18*
the


die world, that he gave his only begotten Son
—For what purpofe ? Why, That whofoever
believeth in him fliould not perifh, but have
everlafling life *; —he that believeth in him is
not condemned j—he that believeth in him who
juflifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to
him for righteoufnefs f. My friends, fearch
the fcriptures, and you will find that this is
die tenor of the whole Bible j I may add of
our church alfo, in the Articles and Homilies.
This believing is fometimes called a coming
to Chrift, a looking unto Chrift, a trufting in
him, a calling our burden upon him And
remember, that until we do thus come to
Chrift, trull in him, call our cares and bur-
dens upon him, we have no part or interefl
in what the gofpel unfolds and offers 1 how-
ever others, who have believed, and daily
a6l faith upon him, are rejoicing in the par-
ticipation of thofe rich benefits and bjeflings
* Johniii. 16, 18. + Rom. iv. 3, 6.
t J ohn vi. 37. I fa. xlv. 22. Eph, i. 12. Pf m h. 22.
C
which


which the gofpel freely offers to guilty and
perifhing fmners.
The faith whereby a fmner receives Chrift,
and becomes a partaker of all the bleffmgs of
the gofpeh is the foie gift of God, wrought
in the heart by his Holy Spirit*. This Holy
Spirit produces an inward change in the foul,
called, ‘in the fcripture, the new birth, rege-
neration f, or converfion, and thus enables a
Tinner, convinced of his fin and mifery, to
look to Jefus, and to believe on him.
But though repentance and faith are the
gifts of God, which none can obtain by any
endeavours of their own, yet we are encou-
raged and commanded to pray for them*.
/B 1 who have thus, through grace, believ-
ed, and are daily living a life of faith in the
Son of God, fliall be faved : but fuch as care-
lefsly neglect, or wilfully rejeft this gofpel.
* Eph. ii, 8, + John in. 3—7. t Luk « xi - 1 7*
mud


muft be damned*. Think, I befeech you,
of this! Remember, that it is the folemn
declaration of the Lord Jefus Chrill himfelC
Now is the time to obtain the blefnngs re-
vealed in the gofpel, and which are fet before
you when it is preached. Many have had
thefe gracious declarations made to them, be-
fore we were born, and they will be repeated
to many after we are dead. But this is our
day. Now is the accepted time, now is the
day of falvationf. To-day —for you and I may
not live to fee to-morrow. To day, if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts J.
My brethren, it is your duty, your wifdom,
and will finally prove to be your greateft hap-
pinefs, to feek an interefl in this falvation for
yourfelves. It is your perfonal, and muft be
your heart concern, to make your calling and
eledion fure§.
* Mark xvi. 15, +1 Cor vl. 2. + Heb. Hi. 7, 8.
§ 2 Pet. i. 10.
C 2
For


For death will foon put a period to all the
overtures of grace and mercy, with which
many, and particularly you, are now favour-
ed. It is, as I have faid, both my duty and
my pleafure, to preach and proclaim thefe glad
tidings. But to whom ? Not to the dead,
but to the living; even to you f. To you
is the word of this falvation lent. But, alas!
fhould you ft ill put it from you, and fhould
death at laft find you in an unprepared ftate,
it will then be too late for you to begin to cry
for mercy J.
A day is likewife coming, when our mor-
tal bodies, which mull fhortly moulder into
duft, will be raifed again from the dead.
Whether believers or unbelievers, whether
faints or Tinners, we muft all appear before
the judgment-feat of Chrift §. For the "Lord
Jefus will fhortly appear in the clouds of hea-
ven, the laft trumpet fhali found, the graves
+ Ads xv, 22. JEccl, ix. 10.
§ zCor.v. jo. Dan, 12. 2. Matt.xxv. zi.
fhall


fhall open, the fea give up her dead, and all who
have lived upon earth, from the creation to
the final confummation of time, will then be
judged, and rewarded or punifhed according
to their works. Mark well St. John’s re-
prefentation of this folemn tranfaftion, (i I
faw the dead, fmall and great, ftand before
God, and the books were opened, and ano-
ther book was opened, which is the book of
life, and the dead were judged out of thofe
things which were written in the books, ac-
cording to their works*.” Such are the de-
clarations of fcripture refpefting this awful
feafon! Sinners, whatever you may now
think of thefe things, or think or fay of me,
for declaring them to you, in this plain and
folemn manner, I muft and will tell you, that
there is not a profane oath which you have
uttered, nor a lie which you have told, nor
a fabbath which you have broken, nor a Tin-
gle aft of adultery, fornication, theft, or any
wickednefs of which you have been guilty;
* Rev, xx. 12, 15,
Cj
in


in a word, there is not an evil you have
committed, nor a duty you have omitted to
perform, but what is noted down in the book
of God’s remembrance, and will be produced
againft you in the day of judgment, unlefs you
repent, and believe the gofpel. You mud
then give an account how you improved the
advantages now afforded you, for attending
to the things pertaining to your peace. If
you do not improve them, the Bible will con-
demn you, every faithful fermon you have
heard will condemn you, nay, every fermon
which you might have heard, but would not,
becaufe you defpifed and neglected the ordi-
nances of public worfhip, will condemn you :
And alas ! this addrefs, by which I try to
warn you, becaufe I love you, and wifh well
to your fouls; which you are now reading,
or perhaps, about to throw a fide with fcorn,
will then condemn you. The admonitions,
intreaties, prayers, and tears of godly parents,
the advice and reproofs of pious friends, the
warning and expoftulations of faithful minif-
x ters.


ters, will all witnefs againft you. My bre-
thren, what fhall I fay ? The law of God, the
gofpel, faints, Tinners, angels, your own con-
fciences, the Holy Spirit, the Lord Jefus, the
great Judge himfelf, will all witnefs againft
you, for your contempt and negleft of that
mercy and falvation, which are fet before you
in the gofpel.
Then all ungodly and impenitent Tin-
ners, being tried, caft, and condemned, muft
hear that final terrible fentence pronounced
upon them, Depart, ye curfed, into everlaft-
ing fire, prepared for the devil and his an-
gels *! And remember that thofe who have
been your aftbciates in wickednefs here, will
then be your companions in mifery. This
will, if poffible, aggravate your torment.
You and they will rue the day when you firft
met •, and mutually charge the ruin of your
fouls upon each other. Oh, think of this.
* Matt, xxv, 4i.
and


and pray for grace to repent, before it be too
late!
At that folemn feafon, the righteous fhall
be publicly and fully acquitted before the af-
fembled world. The Judge will fay to them,
Come, ye bleffed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foun-
dation of the world*. The holy angels will
then conduct them to the manfions of eternal
blifs. Happy fouls! They will then have no
more caufe to weep and mourn, to fight and
wreftle. They will no more be exercifed with
darknefs or temptation; for fin, which is the
caufe of all their conflicts and forrows, fhall
be done away; and God their gracious Father,
and everlafting Friend, fhall wipe all tears
from their eyes f.
The righteous, however obfcured and re-
proached upon earth, fhall then fhine forth
like the fun in the kingdom of their Father.
* Matt, xxv, 34. + Pvev.vii, 17.
They


They are reprefented to us, as Handing before
the throne, clothed in white robes, with palm-
branches (the emblems of vidory) in their
hands, and Tinging to their harps their Re-
deemer’s praife*. There they will join in
company with Abraham, Ilaac, and Jacob,
with the apoftles, prophets, and maityi s, witn
their dear friends and relatives, who died in
the faith before them, and with the glorious
angels; and above all, (without which heaven
itfelf would be n 6 heaven to them) they will
enjoy the unclouded prefence of their Lord
and Saviour, who once fuffered pain, and
fhame, and death for them. They will fee
him feated upon a throne of glory, and unite
with all the heavenly hoft, in afcribing falva-
tion, glory, and honour, and praife to him
who loved them, and wafhed them from their
fins in his own blood j and has made them
kings and priells to God, and to the Lamb,
for ever and everf.
# Matt, xiii. 4.3, Rev, vxi. 9,10. + Rev. v. 9,
For


For the joys of heaven, and the pains of
hell will be eternal, Otherwife, indeed, nei-
ther the happinefs nor the mifery of a future
ftate could be complete. It would damp the
joys of the blefied, to apprehend that they
muft at length terminate. And the horrors
of the damned would be in a degree alleviat-
ed, if there was the moft diftant profpeft, that
they would have a period. But the word of
God allures us, that believers, after death,
enter into life eternal, and that the punilhment
of the \vicked will be everlafting*.
I have now given you a fummary of the
great truths, which, as a minifter of the gof-
pel, I am commiflfioned and commanded to
preach. And I can call God and your con-
ferences to witnefs, that I have not fhunned
thus to declare to you the whole counfel of
God f. I have explained to you the meaning,
and I have urged the importance of thefe
* Matt. xxv. 4 6, Dan. xii. 2. z Thef. i. 7—lo,
f Afts xx. 27.
things


things over and over. I have pointed out to
you, the wretched and dangerous condition of
Tinners, the neceflity of converfion or the new
birth, the nature of this change, and by what
power it is wrought, and the fruits and effeds
which fuch a change will produce in a man’s
tempers, words and aftions. I have alfo
fliewn you the way, in which you may and
muft be haved, if you are faved at all. 1 have
told you again and again, that Chrift is the
way, the truth, and the life, and that there is
no coming to God with comfort, either in this
world, of in that which is to come, but by
him. He has told you fo himfelf*. And
the apodle alfures you, that there is no other
name under heaven, given unto men, whereby
they can be faved. Look unto him, and
you fhall be faved 5 if not, you muft be damn-
ed. This is the plain truth, the exprefs de-
claration of the Bible. Life and death are fet
before you
* John xiv. 6. Aftsiv. 12. f Deut. xxx. i£.
Permit


Permit me then, as your minifter, your
friend, and a weU-wifher to your fouls, to
prefs thefe ferious and weighty confiderations
home upon your confciences once more. I
hope and believe that I have afferted nothing,
but what can be proved by the higheft au-
thority, the word of the living God. They
certainly deierve your clofeft and moft careful
attention, fince it is plain beyond a doubt, that
upon your knowledge or Ignorance, your ac-
ceptance or lejeftion of this gofpel, your
everlafting happinefs or mifery muft depend.
Brethren, I do not afkyou, what religious
perfuafion or denomination you have ef-
poufed. I fear, that, if 1 may judge of your
hearts by your actions, too many are defti-
tute of any ienfe of religion at all. But Ido
not addrefs you as Churchmen or Diffenters,
Roman Catholics or Proteftants, as Jews or
Gentiles; 1 fuppofe, yea, I know, that tnere
are perfons of every denomination amongft
you. But I fpeak to you as men and women,
as


as intelligent creatures, poffelTed of under-
ftanding and reafon. I fpeak to you as mor-
tals, and yet immortals j as Tinners, who have
broken the laws of God, and are therefore
obnoxious to his difpleafure. And my foie
aim and defire is, to be inftrumental in turning
you from darknefs to .light, from fin to hoii-
nefs, from the power of Satan to the fervicc
and favour of God *.
Seek then, I befeech you, above all things,
an intereft in the bleffings of the gofpel. Be
affured it is a matter of much lefs moment,
whether you are rich or poor, refpeded or
defpifed in this world. The rich have their
cares, fears, crofTes, and vexations, no lefs
than the poor; but admitting that they could
pafs through life with greater eafe than others,
we all know that they cannot efcape death.
The great point is, how we fhall die ? whe-
ther as believers or unbelievers, as faints or
finners. One foul, according to our Lord’s
* Afts xxvi. 18,
D
declaration*


declaration, is of more value than the whole
world *. If you lofe your foul, you lofe all
at once. You lofe heaven and happinefs for
ever. Whatever, therefore, you do, or leave
undone, for God’s fake, and for your own
fakes, negled not for one day or hour longer,
the vaft concerns of another life. Delays are
dangerous. The more we have to rifk or
lofe, the greater folly it would be accounted,
to defer fecuring our property and goods,
which we know to be in danger. What
folly, therefore, what madnefs mull it be, to
put off with carelefs indifference, the con-
cernments of eternity; and to prefer the
trifles of this tranfitory life to heaven, and
the favour of God ! Let the parable of the
rich man, who pleafed himfelf with the
thought of having much good laid up for
many years, be a warning to you f! That
very night his foul was required of him.
Such perfons may now deem rhemfelves wife;
* Mark viii. 36. t Luke xii, 16—28.
but


but ere long they will be fenfible they were
fools.
If you confider what a valuable price was
paid for our redemption, you mult be con-
vinced that the foul of man is very precious in
the fight of God, and that fin is not fo light
and fmall an evil, as many of you have fup-
pofed. To difobey the commandments of
the juft and holy God, is, as far as in us lies,
to renounce our allegiance to him, and our
dependence upon him, and to fet up for our-
felves, and even to join with the devil in
open rebe&ion again!!: our Maker. 'lt is, in
plain terms, to fiy in his face, and to bid
defiance to his almighty arm. Sin is fuch a
horrid evil, that unlefs it is forgiven, and
blotted out, by the blood of j efus, it will fink
your fouls lower than the center of the earth,
even into the very depths of hell, never,
never, never more to rife*.
* Mark ix. 44 —48,
D 2
So


So heinous was fin, in the fight of God, that
rather than permit it to pafs unpunifhed, he
would punifh it in the perfon of his own, his
only, his well-beloved Son, who was made fin,
that is, treated as a finner deferved to be
treated, for us. He was delivered up into
the hands of wicked men, and crucified, that
by his fufferings and death, he might make
atonement for our fins, and procure an
honourable and happy reconciliation, between
a righteous God, and offending finners *. I
befeech you, therefore, to prize and to ftudy
this gofpel, that you may obtain a growing
experience of its benefits. Praife God for
fuch a Saviour, and fuch a falvation as he has
provided. Adore him, for that infinite wif-
dom and boundlefs mercy which he has dif-
played in the redemption of fallen man ; and
never reft, nor be fatisfied, till you have good
and fcriptural reafon to hope, that this Saviour
is yours, with all the blefiings he is exalted to
beftow without money and without price.
* 2 Cor. v. 18—20.
Our


Our food, my brethren, then only can
nourifh us, when it is eaten and digefted.
Medicines can only profit us, by being applied
and taken. It is exaftly thus with the gofpel.
We may hear, and talk of thcfe things, but
fo long as they remain matters of fpecularion,
and do not enter into our hearts, into the very
vitals of our fouls, (if I may fo fpeak) we
cannot be the better for them. Chrifl is the
bread of life. His flefh is meat indeed, and
his blood is drink indeed! But unlefs we
ourfelves do Jpiritually eat the flefli and drink
the blood of the Son of man (for our Lord
Ipeaks of food for the foul, not for the body)
we have no life in us *.
Mofes, by the exprefs command of God,
erefted a brazen ferpent upon a pole, in the
view of the camp of Ifraelf. Such of the
people as were flung by the fiery ferpents,
were directed and commanded to look up to
the brazen ferpent. They who did fo were
* John vi, 52-58. f Numb. xxi. g.
DJ
healed.


healed. But if any refufed, they were fare
to die. For no other means or phyficians
could relieve them. In like manner Chrift
Jefus our Saviour, once lifted up on thecrofs,
is exhibited in the preaching of the gofpel.
Sinners, who are wounded and difeafed by fin,
are directed, exhorted, encouraged, and com-
manded to look up to him*. And they who
are pe; fuaded fo to do, are infallibly cured of
all thofe fpiritual maladies, under which they
have long and forely laboured. But all, who
defpife and reject this fovereign remedy of
God’s gracious appointment, either by a total
indifference to religion, or by expecting fal-
vation in any other way, will be left, and that
moft defervedly, to perifh in their wilful
obftinacy and unbelief-}-.
* John iii. 14, 15. + John iii, 36,
PART


PART II.
T N the former part of this addrefs, I have
“*■ already laid before you, in the plained
manner I was able, my views of the gofpel of
Chrift. And as an experimental knowledge
of this gofpel is fo very important, I have
endeavoured to prefs that importance upon
your confciences. Whether you have paid
that attention to the fubjeht, which it defervcs
and requires, yourfelves bed know. 1 can
only fay, that if 1 did not know it to be of
great weight, I fhould not either fpeak or write
of it with fo much earneftnefs. But being
perfuad< d and aflured, by the exprefs tcfti-
mony of the holy fcriptures, that thefe things
are true j and truths, the knowledge of which
is


is eflentlal to your prefent and future happi-
nefs, I muft bt plain and faithful in declaring
them. 1 ought to be very indifferent what
men of depraved morals, and corrupt princi-
ples may fty, or think of me, if 1 have the
witnefs of a pood confcience, and the appro-
bation of the Goa whom 1 lerve. My con-
cern is {oxyour welfare and faivacion; for lam
certain, as t have told you before, and now
tell you again, that unleft the gofpel is made
the power of God to your fouls, you muft be
miferable in time, and to eternity.
I propofe now to give you fome advices,
to affift you in underftanding the gofpel for
yourfelves, which if you obferve, I truft, you
will attain to the poffeftion of thofe principles,
and walk by thofe rules, which will both
afford you prefent peace, and fecure your
future happinefs. For godlinefs has promifes
pertaining to the lift that now is, and to that
which is to come.
Let


Let me then exhort you to attend ferioufly
lo what you are to believe; and to what you
are to do. Thefe two points include the fuin
and fubftance of the gofpel, the whole of the
chriftian life, and may be comprifed in two
words, faith and practice.
I. You mud learn from the word of God,
what you are to believe. True faith is the
root and foundation of all real religion. With-
out this inward principle, nothing that wc
have done, or can do, will be acceptable to
God*. I have briefly informed you what
you are to believe—That you are Tinners,
that Jefus Chrift is an all-fufficient and wil-
ling Saviour-—and that the word of God both
warrants and commands you to look to him
for falvation. This looking unto Jefus, is
what we particularly mean by faith or
believing. When we cordially and entirely
rely upon him, upon the invitation of the
* Heb. xi. 6.
promifes


promiles of God, for pardon, peace, and
eternal life, then we believe.
All who thus believe, through grace, arc
required and commanded to be careful of
maintaining good works*. As our moral,
and what are often called, our virtuous actions,
are to be tried by our religious principles j
it is equally true, that our religious princi-
ples, or at lead: the proof that they are Indeed
our principles, mud be evidenced by our
moral conduft. Thefe two are fo infeparably
connected, that you may depend upon it,
where one of them is wanting, what bears the
name of the other, is no better than pretended.
If what we profefs to believe does not make
us humble, honed, chade, patient, and thank-
ful, and regulate our tempers and behaviour,
whatever good opinion we may form of our
notions or date, we are but deceiving our-
felves. The tree is known by its fruits -j-.
In this way true believers are equally didin-
* Titus iii. 8, + James ii. 17, 18, Matt. vii. 20.
guilhed


guilhed from profane finners, and from fpe-
cious hypocrites. The change in
always produces a change in their whole
deportment. Sin, which was once their de-
light, is now the objeft of their hatred. It
was once needfary as their food, but now
they avoid it as poifon. They war, watch,
and pray againft it. And their delight is to
ftudy the revealed will of God.
By thefe tells you may judge of your true
Hate before God. Surely you cannot fuppofe
that your inward Hate is goody while your
outward conduct is bad. Hence you may
be allured that no unclean perfon, or profane
fwearer, no one who lives in direfl oppofition
to the commands ol God, can be, while he
continues in this courfe, a true chriftian.
Such a fuppofition would be no lefs abfurd,
than it would be to fuppofe, that a man is a
good and peaceable fubjeft, though he lives
in open rebellion againft the king. You may
as


as well conceive of a holy devil, as of an
unholy chriftian.
I hope you will not miftake me. Ido not
mean that true chriftians are without fin. But
I affirm, that no true chriftian can live in an
habitual courfe of fin. No, fin is their griefj
their burden*; and when through temptation,
or unwatchfulnefs, they are drawn afide, like
the dove fent out of the ark, they can find no
reft, till by hearty repentance, and true faith,
they obtain a new fenfe of forgivenefs.
I now proceed to offer you fome dire&ions,
with which if you comply, I truft, that by the
bleffing of God, you will enjoy peace in your
fouls, and be enabled to regulate your con-
duct and converfation, as becometh the gofpel
of Chrift.
Read and ftudy the feriptures. This was
our Lord’s dire&ion to the Jews. Search
* i John iii* 8, 9. Rom. vii. 23, 24.
the
I


the fcriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, and they teftify of me*. The
Bereans were commended for their atten-
tion and diligence in this refped. They
received the word with all readinefs of mind,
not with a blind and implicit faith in what
they heard, even from an apoftle, but they
fearched the fcriptures daily, to know whether
what he taught them was agreeable to the
word of God.
The Bible is our only fure and infallible
guide. It was given by inspiration of God.
All other books,. however good and ufcfu!,
are but of human competition, and are
therefore not perfed f.
This facred book, as I have already
obferved to you, contains all that is needful to
make us wife unto falvation.. It informs us
of our original, how pure and innocent j and
* John v. 57. Adsxvii. ii.
f 2 Tim. 3—16. I fa, viii. 20,
E
our


our prefent condition, how guilty, polluted
and miferable 1 and the happinefs or nailery
which awaits us in a future Hate. From this
book we may learn, the malignity of fin, the
holinefs, fpirituality, extent, and fandlion
of the law of God; and confequently, the juft
and certain condemnation due to our difobe-
dience. It Ihews us, like wife, the way of our
recovery. Flow perfectly the mediation of
Chrift is fuited to vindicate the honour of the
law, and to difplay the juftice of God, in
harmony with his mercy, and thereby to give
peace to the confidences of convinced Tin-
ners.
I intreat you, therefore, to read the word
of God carefully. Many of you have had
Bibles or New Teftaments given to you, and
others might have them, if they had but an
inclination to read.
Some of you will perhaps objed, and fay,
as you have already faid to me, We cannot
read.


read. Others, We have no time given its.
If you cannot read yourfelves, you might
prevail on fome of your comrades to read to
you*. As to your having no time, I much
queftion it. Rather you have no inclination.
Too many of you can find time to jefl, to
talk obfcenely or profanely, to read and fing
idle fongSi why might not fome, or rather the
whole of this time be employed in reading or
hearing the Bible? You might find time, if
you could find a will. But remember, that
fuch excufes as you now make, wii ftand you
in no Head when you appear berore God in
judgment. There are few, if any of you,
* Two or three hoars thus fpent on the Lord’s-day,
in inftrufting each other to read, would be a very
commendable employment. I have often exprefied
my longing defire that fuch a plan was fet on foot
among you. And if there could be a convenient
building erefted for this purpofe, I (hould think
tnyfelf happy, not only to furnifh you with books,
fo far as I am able, but alfo perfonally to attend and
affift you, as much as my immediate calls of duty
would permit.
E 2 but


but might have opportunity of attending to
thefe things, if you were but willing.
11. Obferve and reverence the fabbath, or
Lord's day. Remember the fabbath'day,
to keep it holy*, is a folemn and pofitive
command of God. To live in the negledl of
this commandment, is abfolutely to defpife
God, and to defy him, as it were to his face,
Conftder, my friends, you have orders fre-
quently given you here, by your fuperiors,
which you know you mud obey, or you
know the confequences of difobedience.
Judge then for yourfelves, what have thole
perfons to expedf, who, in defiance of the
authority of the great God, prefume to
negled and profane the day which he has fo
cxprefsly enjoined to be kept holy ?
It gives me a deep and continual concern
to obferve how the Lord’s-day is fpent by
many of you. What would a ftranger think.
* Exod» xx, 8.
who


who regards the fabbath, if he vifited every
part of this colony on the Lord’s day ? Ah!
my brethren, I have feen and heard enough
(alas! much more than enough) to form my
own judgment on this fubjedt. If my duty
did not require my attendance on the public
worfhip, and were I to vifit your different
places and huts, I fear I fhould find fome of
you fpending the hours appointed for divine
fervice in cultivating your gardens ' and
grounds, others indulging themfelves in mere
floth and idlenefs, others engaged in the moft
profane and unclean converfation, and others
committing abominations, which it would
defile my pen to defcribe. Now what muft
be the end of thefe courfes ? God fays. Re-
member the fabbath day to keep it holy.
But the language, both of your hearts and
aftions, is, “We will not keep it holy. It
is a day given us for ourfelves; and we wifh,
and we are refoived to fpend it as we pleafe.
We do not chufe to be confined, or compelled
to hear fo much preaching and praying.” Is
E 3 not


not this the language of your hearts ? Your
conduct too plainly proves it: but, my bre-
thren, let me reafon and expoftulate a little
with you upon this head.
Confider, what have been the confequences
to many who have thus broken God’s com-
mands. I have known, and you likewife
have known, thofe who have been brought to
an untimely and difgraceful end, and who
have dated their ruin from this one evil, the
profanation of the Lord’s day. Inftead of
{pending it in the manner which he has
enjoined, they kept bad and profligate com-
pany. By this praftice, all ferious imprefli-
ens (if they formerly had any) have been
driven from their minds. Their hearts have
become more and more hardened and infenfl-
ble till at length, loft to all prudent reflexion,
they have regarded neither the tender felici-
tations and tears of relations, and
friends, the faithful warnings of minifters, nor
the checks and rebukes of their own confer-
ences.


ences. And what has been the event ? I need
not tell you, that having given way to their
own wicked wills, the advice and example of
their ungodly companions, and the temptations
of the devil (for, be allured, that he is always
at the bottom of thefe mifchiefs) they have, at
length, committed Tome adt of depredation
and villainy, which has brought them to an
untimely grave.
Such, brethren, have been the free and
ingenuous confeffions of many of thofe un-
happy people who have fuffered death. And
if you were to fpeak the fentiments of your
hearts, 1 doubt not, but many of you, who
by the mercy of God are yet living, would
make the like acknowledgment j that break-
ing the fabbath was the firft ftep towards
bringing you into that pitiable flotation, in
which you either have been, or Hill are fuffer-
ing. And will you (till perfevere in the road
of mifery ? Will you ftill prefer the chains of
your own depraved inclinations, to the fervice
of


of God, which is perfect freedom ? Accord-
ing to the Jewifh law, a man was floned to
death, for gathering flicks on the fabbath
day*, whereas yon are doing a number of
things on the Lord’s day, which might as well
be done before, or left undone till afterwards.
But fuch is the long-fuffering of the Lord,
that though others have been cut off, you are
fpared to this hour. May his goodnefs lead
you to repentance! Or otherwife, light as
thefe things may appear to you now, and
though you may plead a neceffity for what
you do, I tell you again, as I have often told
you before, that a day is coming when God
will call you to a ftrift account.
Befides, If you would reafonably hope for
the bleffmg of God to fucceed your labours,
it is certainly your intereft, as well as your
duty to obey his commands. And this in
particular. Keep the fabbath day holy.
in direct oppofition to this plain precept, you
* Numb, xv, 32 —36,
will


will work and labour, as on other days, what
ground can you have to expect that God will
blefs and profper your undertakings ? You
have much greater caufe to fear that his curfe
will follow you in your affairs, and blafc and
difappoint all your wifhes and profpeCls.
Let then the mifconduCt and fatal ends of
others, and the calamities and troubles that
you have brought upon yourfelves—Let the
gracious promifes of God, on the one hand,
and his awful threatenings on the other, in-
duce you, in future, to remember the fabbath
day, to keep it holy!
And let me offer you a few plain directions,
as to the obfervance and improvement of the
fabbath;
Begin the day with prayer; and for this
purpofe feck fome place of retirement, if you
find it impracticable to meditate or pray, from
the interruptions you are expofed to, in your
dwellings.


dwellings ♦, from thofe who ridicule and feoff
at every appearance of religion. Retire from
them, and pray to him who feeth in fecret ;
and praife him for the many mercies you
have received. Confider with yourfeif, how
little you have improved them. Humble
yourfelves before God, under a fenfe of your
fins and imperfections, and pray for pardon
and repentance. Intreat him, to enable you
to watch over your hearts, words, and adtiuns,
throughout the day, and that you may not be
hindered or hurt by the fnares and tempta-
tions around you. Intreat God to affifl your
minifter, and to accompany what you may
hear from him, with a bleffing to your foul,
and to all who fhall be prefent with you.
If you have families, you fhould call them
together, and pray with them, and for them.
There are many promifes made to worihiping
families, and to thofe who, like Abraham,
* Many complaints have been made to me on this
head.
endeavour


endeavour to teach their children and houfe-
hold to know and ferve the Lord*. And
the negledfc of this is one reafon, why many
families live uncomfortably. They live with-
out prayer, and therefore without peace.
Having thus endeavoured to imprefs your
minds with ferious thoughts, in fecret or at
home; attend conflantly upon the public
worfhip, and there pay a ciofe attention to
every part of the fervice. Remember that
the eye of God is particularly upon you
there. He has promifed to be with two or
three that meet together to call upon his
name-}-. He is to be worfhipped in fpirit and in
truth ; and whether they affemble in a church,
or in the open air, he can give them caufe
to fay with Jacob, This place is furely the
houfe of God, and the gate of Heaven J.
Attend the public worfhip again in the after-
noon, with your hearts lifted up to God, that
* Gen. xviii. ig. Prov. iii. 33.
+ Matt, xviii. 20. John iv. 24. $ Gen, xxviii. 17.
i
you


ymi may not hear in vain; and accuftom
yourfelf in the evening to recolleft what you
have heard., concerning the miferies which
fin has brought into the world; the love of
God in fending his own Son to redeem finners
from thofe miferies; the bufferings, life, death,
and refurreflion of the Saviour; and that
eternal reft, which remained! for the people
of God —For you , and for me , if we are be-
lievers in Chrift.
If, by the blefling of God, I can happily
perfuade you thus to obferve and improve the
Lord’s day, I am fure it will promote both
your plcafure and your profit. Can it be a
queftion with you, whether the God who made
heaven and earth, or Satan, the god of this
world, is the beft matter ? Indeed 1 too well
know the indifpofifson and averfenefs of the
carnal mind to God and his ways. Hence
the thought of many is, What a wearinefs is
it ? And, When will the fabbath be ended ?
Hence that open contempt and fcorn, which
is


is call upon the fabbath, and upon public
worfhip by many, both high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free, old and young,
men and women. To them the worlhip of
God is tedious and difagreeable. They nei-
ther find pleafure in it, nor expert benefit
from it. And therefore their attendance is
not from choice, but from conftraint.
But the thoughts and the conduct of true
Chriftians are very different. No day is fo
welcome to them as the Lord’s day; not
merely confidered as a day of reft from
labour; but becaufe, having their heads and
hearts freed from the cares and incumbrances
of the world, it affords them opportunities
of waiting upon God. And, brethren, you
muff allow that thefe perfons are beft quali-
fied to judge of the queftion I have propofed.
Whether is beft, to walk in the ways of
God, or in the ways of fin ? For they have
experienced both Tides of the queftion. They
have tried the pleafures of the world, and
F they


they have alfo tried the pleafures of religion.
And they will readily allure you, that in their
deliberate judgment, one day thus fpent in
devotion, and the exercifes of religion, is
preferable to a thouland days walled in the
vain and unfatisfying pleafures, which they
fought in their former wicked practices *,
I have written thus largely upon the due
obfervance of the Lord’s day, becaufe of that
ihameful, open, and general negleft, that
daring profanation of the Sabbath, which
abounds amongll us. It is well known, and
it is matter of great grief and concern to me,
that numbers of you pay not the leall regard
to this day. Numbers of you will not come
to public worlhip at all, others but feldom,
and then with much reluftance. And when
fpoken to, different perfons frame different
excufes, all which, when examined, amount
to little more than a want of inclination.
* Pf. Ixxxft, io.
t have


I have here a more fpecial reference to thofe
of you, who are called Settlers and Free Peo-
ple, You think, perhaps, and fome of you fay.
That having ferved out your appointed term,
you are now your own mailers, and have there-
fore a right to employ your time as you
pleafe. But, indeed, it is not fo. I mull tell
you, brethren, that my commiffion from
God, and my appointment from govern-
ment, extend equally and alike to all the
inhabitants, without diflinftion. It is my
duty to preach to all, to pray for all, and to
admonifh every one. And it is no lefs the
duty of all, to come to public worfhip, to
hear thegofpel, and to pray for me. Thefe
mutual ties and obligations between you and
me, are not leffened by any change in your
circumftances. And remember, that the
flight you put upon the public worfhip, is
not properly a flight of me (if that was all, it
would be a matter of utter indifference) but
upon the Lord himfelf 3 for I trufl it is his
meffage, and not my own, that 1 deliver
F 2 to


to you *. I wilh, therefore, what I have faid
upon this fubjed, to be underftood as ad-
dreffed to all , whether of higher or lower
rank, who are guilty of breaking the fabbath.
Whatever our ftation or calling may be, our
obligations to keep holy the fabbath-day,
are precifely the fame. If any are more
inexcufable than the reft, it muft be thole,
who, from their ftation and office, are pecu-
liarly bound to let a good example to others.
I hope this friendly hint will be received in
good part. I mean not to offend. But I
muft admonifti you, that whatever be your
fituation in life, you will gain nothing in the
end, by doing what God forbids, nor will
you be a lofer by yielding ft rid obedience to
his commands.
111. Be conftant and diligent in prayer to
God. Intreat him to give his bleffmg to
what you read and hear, and to all your
concerns. As we are weak and needy crea-
* Luke x, 16.
tures.


tures, always dependent upon God, and always
receiving mercies and favours from him, we
ought to be frequent and earneft in prayer,
Daniel was accuftomed to pray three times in
the day*. I hope you will be pundual in
prayer, morning and evening, at leaft. So
long as any of you live without prayer, you
live without Chrift, without hope, and with-
out God in the world. They, who do not
pray to God while upon earth, will not be
admitted to praife him in heaven. When
the rich carelefs man who had fared fumptu-
oudy everyday, for a time, lifted up his eyes
in torments, he only defired and prayed for
a drop of water to cool his tongue, but it was
not granted to him. Oh ! if you value your
fouls, pray earneftly to God. Confider your
obligations to do fo. He is your Creator,
Preferver, Benefador. In him you live and
move, and have your being. And therefore
not to acknowledge, by prayer, your depend-
ence upon him, would mamfeft the greatdl
* Dan, vi, 10. Ephef. ii. 12.
F 3
ingratitude


ingratitude and infenfibility. Confider, like-
wife, the encouragement you have to pray.
Though you are by nature fmners, and by
praftice enemies and rebels, he gives you free
and fure promifes, that whoever is difpofed
to return to him, and feek him by earned;
prayer, fhall not feek him in vain. Oh! my
brethren, that there was lefs curfing and
fwearing, and more prayer among you!
After thefe pofitive direftions what you
ought to do y I proceed to fome neceflary cau-
tions, againft what you ought to avoid.
I. Profane fwearing is one thing againft
“which I am efpecially bound to warn you,
becaufe it is an evil which fo much abounds
amongft you.
God has faid. Thou fhalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltlefs, that taketh
bis name in vain, Our Saviour likewife has
faid.


laid, Swear not at all *. But how can you
reconcile thefe prohibitions to your conduft 5
or your confidences ? When inftead of not
fwearing at all, many of you feldom open
your lips, but the firft and laft words which
you utter, are blafphemous oaths, and horrid
imprecations ? Is this afting like rational or
accountable creatures ? Who gave you the
powers of reafon and fpeech ? Was it not
God ? And can you think that he gave them
to you, that you may blafpheme his holy
name, and to ufe the moll: profane, obfcene,
and defperately wicked language your hearts
can invent; a language only fit for incarnate
devils, and (hocking to the ears of the igno-
rant heathens ? This is a dreadful evil which
you may be allured, will not pafs unpunifhed.
This fin has often brought heavy judgments
upon individuals, families, and kingdoms.
Becaufe of fwearing the land mournethf.
Shall not I vifit for thefe things, faith the
Lord ?
* Exod. xx, 7, Matt.v, 34. t Jcr, xxxii. to.
As


Asa proof of the enormity of this fin, you
read, that Mofes, by the command of God,
ordered a man to be ftoned to death, for curf-
ing and blafphcming* j and it would be well,
both on their own account, and for the good
©f others, if magiftrates would ftriftly dif-
charge their duty, by enforcing the laws of
our land, which are enafted againft this
horrid praftice. And in few places, perhaps
in no place, fuch ftridnefs would be more
needful, or more faluiary, than in this
colony.
Our Lord aflfures us, that for every idle
word that men fhall fpeak they (hall give an
account in the day of judgment f! How
dreadful then will be the cafe of thofe perfons,
who during their whole life have employed
their tongues in curfing, fwearing, lying, and
all manner of vile and unclean converfation.
Oh 1 think of this in time, and tremble and
repent, and learn to ufe your tongues to
* Lcv.xxiv, 10—16, + Matt, xii. 36.
better


better purpofc in future ! Read carefully the
third chapter of James, and pray to God for
his grace, and ufe your bed endeavours to
bridle your tongue, which, if you do not
fubdue and conquer, will furely dedroy and
ruin you.
11. Confider, alfo, what mull be the con-
fequence of that unclean and adulterous
courfe of life, which many of you follow.
Common as this wickednefs is in our colony
(I believe no where more fo).do not fuppofe*
that the frequency will take away, or in the
lead abate the criminality of it. Neither
fuppofe that this fin is lefs odious in the fight
of God if committed in Port Jackfon, than
in England. You may frame excufes or
plead neceflity, for what you do, or permit
to be done ; but the word of God by which
you mud be at lad judged, admits of no
plea, or excufe. The command is pofitive
and abfolute, The declaration of God, Thou
fhalc


fnalt not commit adultery*, is equally bind-
ing upon perfons of ail ranks, to whom it is
known, at all times, and in all places. Think
not, that the holy and juft God will difpenfe
with his law, or relax the fentence he has
denounced againft the breach of it, that you
may with impunity indulge your corrupt
defires. Noj it is written, whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. The apoftle
declares that no fornicator, adulterer, or un-
clean perfon, can enter into the kingdom of
God ; he repeats this warning nearly in the
fame words, a fecund and a third time. The
heavens and the earth fhall pafs away; but
not one jot or tittle of his word can fail. All
fhall be fulfilled-}-. And therefore, however
this fin may be connived at by fome, and
committed by others, God will feverely
punifh offenders, unlefs they repent of their
wickednefs and forfake it.
* Exod. xx. 14.
f Heb. xiii. 4. Gal. v, 17 — 21, Epft. v, 3 —5,
But


Bat I need not enlarge upon this fubjeft,
I have told you my thoughts of it again and
again with faithfulnefs. It Teems the plain-
nefs of my language has hurt the delicate
feelings of Tome; and the faithfulnefs I have
ufed has excited the cenfure and ill-will of
others. But why am I blamed, if I have
only affirmed and proved from the Icrip-
tures, that no fornicator, adulterer, or unclean
perfon can go to heaven when he dies y unlels
he repents of his evil pra6lices, and turns
from them, while he lives ?
But whether you will hear, or whether
you will forbear, I mull repeat the unwel-
come truth. My confcience, my duty, and
my companion, all urge me to deal faithfully
with you. I mean and delire to be under-
Itood, and therefore I mull fpeak plainly. It
is my intention and delire to awaken and
alarm your confciences; but alas I after all 1
Can fay or do, I am too little underllood or
regarded. But I mult deliver my own foul,
i whether


whether you will regard me or not. The
day is coming when the Lord himfelf will
judge between you and me. Oh, repent,
repent, before it be too late.
111. The conduct of too many of you
induces me to exhort and caution you farther
againft theft, and all kinds of difhonefly and
villainy.
I have often told you,~ both publicly and
privately, that honefty is the beft policy.
None have more reafon to be convinced of
this, than you who come hither as convifts.
You have known by bitter experience, the
unhappy confequences of difhonefly. Have
not many of you, for the fake, perhaps, of a
few fhillings, unjuftly obtained, plunged your-
felves into mifery for the remainder of your
lives ? Several have made this acknowledge
ment to me, in their dying moments. Learn
therefore, ftrive, and pray to be honeft.
Honefty has its prefent advantages. An
honeft


honeft man, however poor, can face this
world with confidence. But a difhonefi: be-
haviour, with its conftant attendant a guilty
confidence, will always fill the mind with fear
and difinay *.
I do not mean, my friends, to refled;
harfhly upon you for what is paft, and cannot
be recalled. I pity your pail mifconduCb; I
lympathize with you under your preheat buf-
ferings. And therefore I admonifli and
caution you to abftain from this courfe for
the time to come. Let then the troubles
and afflictions you have brought upon your-
lelves be a warning, to regulate y r our future
behaviour. Learn to be thankful for what
God in his providence gives you, whether it
be more or lefs. Attend to what our Lord
fays, Whatfoever ye would that men fliould
do unto you, do ye even fo unto them. And
to his apoftle’s direction, Let him that hath
ftolen, fteal no more, but rather let him
* Job xxiv. 16, 17.
G
labour.


labour, working with his hands the thing
which is good, that he may have to give to
him that neededi*. Follow this advice, and
you will foon experience the benefit.
IY. Beware of idlenefs. This is the fore-
runner of many evils. Poverty, difeafe, dif-
grace, mifery, and too often an untimely death,
are the confequences of fioth and indolence.
Yield not to idlenefs ; if you indulge it, you
will find it grow upon you. Therefore, be
diligent and induftrious in your lawful call-
ings. It is written in the Bible, and con-
firmed by experience and obfervation, The
idle foul fhall fuffer hunger, but the foul of
the diligent fhall be made fatf.
V. Be careful alfo to pay due refpeft, fub-
miffion, and obedience to your fuperiors. It
is the good pleafure of God that fome fhould
be placed in more exalted, and others in a
* Matt. vii. 12. Eph. iv. 24.
* Prov. xix. 15. & xiii. 14.
more


more humble Ration. And it is a proof of
his wifdom and goodnefs. The prefent Rate
of the world, and the general good of man-
kind, render fuch dißindlions neceflary. But
whether we are high or low, whether called
to command, or required to obey, our duties
and obligations are mutual. It is in fociety
as in the human body. There are many
members, and every member has its proper
place, and its proper office. Let every foul
be fubjedt to the higher powers*.
I have thus given you my beft advice
refpedling what you ought to do, or to avoid.
Permit me to invite your ferious attention to
what I have written. Corffider it carefully
for your own Jakes. It concerns your prejent
comfort. For though no works of ours, or
what are called, moral virtues, can poffibly
procure us the favour of God, (for our bed;
fervices are imperfedl and defiled, and need
forgivenefs) yet that knowledge and experi-
* Rom. xiii. i.
G 2
ence


ence of the gofpel, which I have explained
to you in the firft part of this Addrefs, (and
of which I earneftly pray you may be made
partakers) muft be accompanied by a corre-
Ipondent conduCt, fuch as I have fet before
you in the fecond part. And this knowledge
and this conduct will always be attended,
though not always in the fame degree, with
an inward fettled peace, whereby the mind is
reconciled to fupport crofles and afflictions,
however great, or of long continuance, with
a degree of fortitude and refignation. Per-
rons under this influence will fay, when they
meet with troubles, I will bear the indigna-
tion of the Lord, becaufe I have finned againfl;
him*. Should it pleafe God, to anfwer the
carneft defire of my foul, by giving you an
experience of the gofpel peace, you will thank
andpraife him, even for bringing you hither;
and you will fee and confefs, that your heaviefl;
afflictions have, in the event, proved to be
your greateft mercies.
* Micah vii. g.
Your


Yonr future comfort and welfare in this
world, depends upon this knowledge. For
though no one knows what may befal him in
this life, yet the real chriftian has the comfort
of knowing, that however it may go with the
wicked, or whatever may happen to himfelf
of a temporal nature, or whatever may be-
come of his body, he is fure (becaufe God
has promifed) that it fhali be well with his
foul at death. Ah! my brethren, then,
more efpecially then, believers will find the
advantage of having made the word of God
the foundation of their hope, and the rule of
their life!
Several of you, fome to my knowledge,
have left affedionate, tender, and ferious
friends, hufbands, wives, parents, brothers,
fillers, or children, in your native country, to
lament your mifconduCl, the fufferings you
have brought upon yourfelves, and the dil-
grace in which you have involved your fami-
lies. Let me intreat you, for the fake of
‘ G 3 thefe ,


ihefe , to confider your ways. Great comfort
it will afford to thofe who are now almoft
overwhelmed with grief on your account, to
hear of your reformation and converfion.
Thefe would be glad tidings, indeed, from a
far country. The hopes they might then
form of feeing you again, would be truly
pleafing; it would be little lefs than receiving
you again from the dead. Or if they never
fee you in this world, the profpedt of meeting
with you in heaven, would add comfort to
their dying hours. Oh! let not their prayers
and their tears be loft upon you 1
Attend to thefe things, for the Jake of
others , who may follow you hither, in the
like unhappy circumftances. When they fee
your reformation, and that, in confequence of
it, you are more comfortable here, than you
were at home, they may be induced and
encouraged to follow your examples. Thus
you will be inftrumental in faving fouls from
death,
I would


I would farther plead with you, for the
fake of the poor unenlightened favages, who
daily vifit us, or who refide arnongft us. If
thefe ignorant natives, as they become more
and more acquainted with our language and
manners, hear you, many of you, curfe, fwear,
lie, abound in every kind of obfeene and
profane converfation * and if they obferve,
that it is common with you to ileal, to break
the fabbath, to be guilty of uncleannefs,
drunkennefs, and other abominations ; how
mull their minds become prejudiced and their
hearts hardened againil that pure and holy
religion which we profefs ? Oh beware of
laying Humbling-blocks in the way of thefe
blind people*, left the blood of their fouls
be one day required at your hands.
And yet I fear, yea, I well know, that they
have already heard and feen too much of fuch
language, and fuch pradices arnongft us.
Already fome of them have been taught to
* Lev. xix. 14.
fpeak


fpeak fuch language as they continually hear,
and though they do not yet underftand the
meaning of the words they ufe, they can utter
oaths and blafphemies almoft as readily as
their Chrijlian inftrudors. By-ftanders divert
themfelves with their attempts in this way,
and think it is fine fport. But, my friends,
the fcripture declares they are fools who make
a mock at fin*. But thefe things caufe
much forrow to thofe who have any reverence
for God, or pity for their fellow creatures. 1
readily profefs my own deep concern for thefe
proceedings, and my utter abhorrence of
them. And I moft earneftly intreat yon, if
you cannot inflruft them in what is better,
to have no communication at all with them.
For if you make them partakers of your fins,
you muft anfwer for it at the great day of
judgment; if they then rife up againfl you,
for mifleading them, it will be much more
tolerable for them than for you.
* Prov. xiv, g*
But


But confider, on the other hand, what
may be the happy effeds, were the natives to
fee, hear, and obferve in you, and in all the
Europeans here j in miniders and people,
high and low, a conduft anfwerable to the
dodirine and precepts of the golpel. This
might, by the blefling of God, be one of the
mod effectual means, to bring them to re-
flection, and to engage them to feek an
intered in the bleflings of the gofpel for
themfelves.
Shall I beg and intreat you, for my fake ,
to attend to the things pertaining to your true
peace. My dear people, I will again declare
(1 can appeal to the great God, who fearcheth
the hearts, that I fpeak the truth) to fee you
converted from your evil ways, and feeking
the falvation of God, Yes, to fee you pay a
due regard to thefe mod important concerns,
and to have reafon to hope and believe, that
you were brought to a faving acquaintance
with the truths which you hear of, or might
hear,


hear, as often as the Lord’s day returns,
would indeed greatly rejoice rny foul. But
to fee fo many of you turn a carelefs and deaf
ear, this, my dear friends, is a caufe of great,
conftant and increafing grief to my foul. It
wounds me to think, that any (alas! what
numbers) fhould thus refufe and rejedl their
own mercies; and rifk the ruin of their
immortal fouls, for the profpedt of a fmall
gain, or a fhort fmful gratification.
My brethren, what fhall I, what can I fay
more. I neither know what to add, nor how
to leave off: once more, I befeech you, for
God’s fake, for the fake of Jefus the Saviour,
who fhed his precious blood to redeem Tin-
ners, and for the fake of your own fouls:
by the holy incarnation of the Redeemer, by
his agonies, temptations, death and refurrec-
tion, by all the terrors of his frown, and by
all the bleffings of his love, by the joys of
heaven, by the torments of hell, and by the
foiemnities of the approaching day of judg-
ment,


ment; by all thefe con federations, I mod ear-
ned ly, affcftionately, and faithfully admonifh
and intreat you, carefully to weigh what I
have now fet before you. And oh ! that the
holy angels may carry to heaven the joyful
news * of fome finners being awakened and
born to God, by reading or hearing this little
book. O gracious God, do thou, by the
power of thy Holy Spirit, make it thus effec-
tual to the falvadon and happinefs of this
people!
And now to this gracious Lord, and to his
care and blefling, I commend you., May he
enable you to examine your hearts, princi-
ples, and praftice, by the ftandard of his holy
word. If you are flili ignorant and carelefs,
it is a proof that you are, as yet, in the (late
of nature, which is a date of darknefs, guilt,
condemnation, and death. Will you not
pray to be delivered from it? You mud, at
lead, allow, that perhaps what you have
* Luke xv. 10.
read,


read, may he the truth. And even, of a
poflibility of thefe things being true, they
deferve your earned: attention. For fhould
they be found fo at lad, what will become of
you, if you live and die impenitent ? There-
fore, read this plain, affectionate Addrefs feri-
ouOy. Read it a fecond, a third, and a
fourth time, till your hearts are affeCted by
it. Remember, this is the advice of a
friend, of one who fmcerely feeks, wifhes, and
longs for your happinefs. It is the advice of
your minider, exprefsly appointed to watch
over your fouls, and who mud fhortly give
an account of his miffion to the Great Judge
of all. Whether I fhall die amongd you, or
be feparated from you while living, we fhall,
at lad, meet before him. Then I mud
anfwer for my preaching, and you for your
hearing. Oh that this awful day of judgment
may be often, yea, always, prefent to your
thoughts, and to mine ! that we may live in
condant expectation of its approach! So that
when the lad loud trumpet fhall found, we
i may


may ftand with acceptance and boldncfs in
his prefence, and be admitted as believers in
the great Saviour, into his heavenly king-
dom, with a c Well done, good and faithful
fervant, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord*.’
This will be my daily prayer to God for
you. I fhall pray for your eternal falvation,
for your prefent welfare, for the prefervation,
peace, and profperity of this colony ; and
efpecially for the more abundant and manifeft
fuccefs of the Redeemer’s caufe and kins-
dom, and for the effufion and out-pouring
of his Holy Spirit, not only here, but in
every part of the habitable globe. Longing,
hoping, and waiting for the dawn of that
happy day, when the heathen fhall be given
to the Lord Jefus for his inheritance, and
the uttermoft parts of the earth for his
poffeffion : and when all the ends of the
* Matt. xxv. 23,
earth


earth fhall fee, believe, and rejoice in the
lalvation of God*.
I am yonr affectionate Friend and
Servant in the Gofpel of Chrift,
RICHARD JOHNSON.
* Pf. ii. 8. & xcviii. 3.
FINIS.












