

4 94
EASTER HOLIDAYS.
EXCUESIOH
AUSTRALIA
AND BACK,
CALLING AT
Van Diemen’s Land and Norfolk Island.
Fare, One Shilling.
PROWS DIORAIIC VIEWS
Sstiaw sovom wiiaiss
AND TASMANIA,
THE PENAL SETTLEMENTS, &c.
Progress of the EMIGRANT;
LIFE IN SYDNEY;
Forest Solitude, Bush Clearing, Emigrant's Residence*
&c.
IN THE THEATRE
OF THE
WESTERN LITERARY INSTITUTION,
LEICESTER SQUARE,
(Entrance also in Princes Street.)
DAILY, at THREE AND EIGHT,
{Saturday Evenings excepted.)
Admission, One Shilling,
Reserved Seats, 2s. Children & Schools, Half-price.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“ Prout’s Dioramic Views in Australia. —Under this title a new exhibition has been pre-
pared at the Western Literary and Scientific Institution in Leicester-square. Among the
various things of the kind which have lately sprung up under the influence of the augmented
taste for dioramic and panoramic views, this bids fair to be one of the most useful as well as
the most interesting. Mr. J. Skinner Prout, the artist from whose sketches the views have
been painted, has spent a considerable time in Australia, from whence he has contributed
some drawings to our picture exhibitions. He is, we believe, a near relative of Mr. Front,
the well-known artist. The views embrace some of the most interesting features in Van
Diemen's Land and New South Wales, commencing with Tasman’s Island, and including
Hobart Town, Port Arthur, Eagle Hawk Neck, Mount Wellington, Norfolk Island, Port
Jackson and its harbour, Sydney, Woolooraooloo Bay, the Willoughby Falls, Wollongong,
and some very interesting scenes in the interior, concluding with an encampment of the
aborigines. The chief merit of these views of course lies in their accurate representation of
places in which all Englishmen must feel so lively an interest, more especially in connection
with the subject of emigration. But they have also a very considerable amount of artistic
merit, and they generally reflect very great credit on the enterprising artist, who has devoted
himself to the delineation of scenes at present so little known in this country, although so
much the subject of public consideration. An intelligent viva voce description very much aids
in the enjoyment derivable from the entertainment.” — Morning Chronicle.
“ Prout’s Dioramic Views of Australia. —We were on Monday evening present at the
private view of the exhibition of Prout’s Dioramic Views of Australia, which is to be opened
to the public to-day, in the theatre of the Western Literary Institution, Leicester-square.
These views are painted by Mr. J. Skinner Prout, from sketches made by himself on the spot,
and their accuracy may be therefore depended on. These dioramic (or, to speak more pro-
perly, dissolving) views, are twenty-four in number, and illustrate every phase of emigrant,
convict, and aboriginal life, while they, at the same time, convey a much more lively, and a
much more accurate idea of the splendid scenery of these magnificent colonies than can pos-
sibly be conveyed by any verbal description. The scenery of Van Diemen’s Land is of a very
grand and sublime character, consisting of hold headlands, lofty mountains, and towering
precipices; that of Norfolk Island is beautiful exceedingly—it is a paradise, of which man
has made a hell —while that of New South Wales, combining the sublimity of that of Van
Diemen’s Land with the beauty of that of Norfolk Island, possesses greater variety than
either. Mr. Prout was present, and explained the different points of interest iq each view as
it was exhibited, imparting, in a pleasing manner, a variety of useful and entertaining in-
formation on colonial matters, manners, and people. All who intend to emigrate—all who
have friends in the Australian colonies, —all who take an interest in our colonial empire, or
on the subject of penal discipline, should pay a visit to this very interesting exhibition.”—
The Sun.
“Prout’s Australia. —It is only this week that a diorama of Australia has been opened
to the public in the Theatre of the Western Literary Institution, Leicester-square. It is
painted by Mr. J. Skinner Prout, from sketches taken on the spot by that gentleman during
his residence in the country. The exhibition will prove attractive, not only to those who may
think of emigrating, but to many who have already friends in that distant and flourishing
colony. And it will also be extremely interesting to the lover of nature, and to all who feel
a delight in the development and resources of our country’s power and greatness. In this in-
teresting series of pictures we have views of the most thriving settlements, such as Sydney,
Port Jackson, &c., also Norfolk Island and its convict establishment; the character and
peculiarity of various portions of the coast, with the most picturesque views of the interior—
comprising bivouacs of emigrants on the Blue Mountains, encampments of settlers, &c., &c.
Mr. Prout himself delivers a kind of lecture on the various views, and gives us characteristic
anecdotes of some of the well-known convicts, Beaumont Smith, Frost, and others, as well as
of the natives and denizens. We shall give a view of forest-clearing and emigrants’ residences
in our next, as shown in this truly interesting exhibition.”— Lady's Newspaper.
“ Landscapes in Australia. —We were greatly pleased, on Monday last, at the private
exhibition of Mr. Prout’s Diorama of Australia, at the Western Literary Institution, Leicester
Square. They are full of interest, and will be found really valuable to those who project
emigration to that beautiful country. Port Jackson, Sydney, Norfolk Island, and, indeed,
the interesting portions of all the surrounding district, are by turns brought under the eye,
which becomes familiar with the aspect of Australian scenery through a peculiarly pleasing
medium. Some of the views are exceedingly romantic, and possessed of much natural beauty.
“ The Suicide’s Grave ” struck us in a remarkable degree ; and the whole exhibition, enlivened
as it is by Mr. Prout’s illustrative observations, interspersed with anecdotes, is well worthy
the public attention.” — Sunday Times.
“An exhibition is opened at the Western Literary Institution, Leicester Square, for the
purpose of displaying representations of the scenery of Australia, and of life and manners as
they prevail at the present day in that colony. The paintings are executed from sketches
made in Australia by J. S. Front, and are exhibited by reflection on a transparent screen.
They convey a lively idea of convict and emigrant life in that settlement, and the gentleman
who attends the exhibition furnishes a variety of interesting and amusing information con-
nected with the subjects of the different scenes. The exhibition is well worth a visit.”—
Lloyd's Weekly London Newspaper.
Printed by M. Snell, sa, Newcastle Place, Edgewaie Road,
