

REPORT ON REVENUE POLICY
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA
COMMISSION OF FINANCIAL EXPERTS
Submitted to the National Government through
the Minister of Finance by the
Commission of Financial Experts
on December 10, 1929




December 10, 1929.
Sir :
We have the honor to present to the national Government
of China, through your high office, a REPORT Oh REVENUE POLICY.-
With expressions of the highest regard, we are,
COMMISSION OP FINANCIAL EXPERTS
E. W. Kemmerer, President of the
Commissioni Expert
in Currency and
. . Bank ing
0. C. Lockhart, Expert in Taxation
Arthur H. Young,Expert in Public
Credit
Edward P. Feely, B. B. Wallace, Expert in Tariff and
General Secretary Tariff Policies
William Watson, Assistant Expert in
— 77r —-fv-T-r Budget, Accounting
1 . W. Fetter, and Fiscal Control
Under Secretary
W. B. Poland, Expert in Railroad
Finance
J. McGregor Gibb, p. A. Cleveland,Expert in Budget,
Assistant Secretary Accounting and
Fiscal Control
John P. Young, Assistant Expert in
Currency and Banking
F. B. Lynch, Assistant Expert in
Currency and Banking
To
Mr. T. V. Soong, R. W. Bonnevalle,Assistant Expert in
Minister of Finance, Budget, Accounting
Shanghai. and Fiscal Control




REPORT ON REVENUE POLICY
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Commission of financial experts
Submitted to the National Government through the Minister
of Finance by the Commission of Financial Experts
on December IC, 19£9


REPORT OR REVENUE POLICY
Introduction
In developing the revenue side of financial rehabilitation,
the Chinese Government cannot now afford to experiment with un-
tried sources of revenue, but should devote careful attention to
improvement of the sources it is now using. One of the principal
reasons for this conclusion is the state of development of fi-
nancial administration in China, Outside the customs and salt
revenue services, there is little tradition in China of admins-
trative efficiency and control in tax matters, no generally recog-
nized body of technical rules of procedure, and no satisfactory
standards of performance. Furthermore, there is little or no
comprehension on the part of taxpayers that taxes are a contribu-
tion to the expense of maintaining essential public services, and
all to little evidence of the recognition of this truth in practi-
cal ways by public servants themselves. This is an historical
situation, the statement of which implies neither praise nor blame.
The realization that taxes are in fact a contribution to
collective purposes, not a m&re ”one-sided” compulsory exaction of
wealth by the Government (or, it may be, by officials, largely for
their private and personal benefit), must be gradually built up
through the devotion of public funds to useful public purposes; to
schools, public health, roads, suppression of banditry and of other
forms of lawlessness i not to civil warfare, or to improvements of
limited importance to the public, or to salaries of a multiplicity
of officialso In the process of building up a proper view of tax-
ation on the part of the public, consciousness of the validity of
this view and a tradition of administrative efficiency, procedure,
and standards will tend to be developed on the part of tax adminis--
f
trators* While this development will of necessity be a slow
process, it will be furthered by the adoption of a plan of tax


ation adapted to the peculiar conditions found in China.
In practically all countries, finance ministers find their
time and energies largely absorbed in the problem of "making ends
meet". Adequacy of revenue is, beyond doubt, the first canon of
taxation, the prime requisite of a revenue system. Unfortunately,
expenditures are often so insistent that the proper development of
the nation's revenue is neglected, even prejudiced, in the search
ior mere immediate yield. But a broader view of the revenue ques-
tion makes it clear that adequacy of revenue in the long run may
oe had only by attention to the form of the revenue system and to
its administration? for the yield to the government should be com-
mensurate with the burden it imposes upon taxpayers, and not dry
up the sources* of revenue, as it may do if it unduly burdens the
industry and business of the country.
Trade and Taxation
Early forms of taxation in western countries were in the
main adaptations of feudal dues, hot only was land or its produce
taxed 5 but various sorts of tolls and market dues, as well as cus-
toms duties, were levied upon trade and commerce. As trade de-
veloped and new commodities came on the market, these afforded
additional sources of revenue to me.,t growing public expenditures.
In this way, the field of taxation was extended until most of the
ordinary activities of human society were made the occasion for a
tax.
Modern states are tending toward a concentration of taxation
upon a smaller number of sources. There is a growing realization
that the burdening of trade by manifold taxes constitutes a drag
upon prosperity and therefore reacts unfavorably upon the interests
ol the treasury, and that taxes on a limited group of properly se-
lected commodities can be more economically administered and can be
levied at higher rates than taxes on a wide group.


China still affords an example of multifarious taxation*
This is a heritage from the past which has been changed but little
since the overthrow of the imperial government. Political and
•ivy
Military unsettlement has turned financial thought from questions
of tax reform to questions of immediate revenue and has at
the same time upset the financial relationship between central and
local governments and with it the administrative control on which
all sound revenue reform must rest.
China’s new tax policy should aim first at reduction in the
number of taxes. Such a policy should seek particularly to do
away with repeated levies upon the same taxable object, which in
the case of articles of commerce often have the effect of advancing
the cost beyond possibility of profitable sale.
Perhaps the most important result of redaction in the number
of taxes and of successive levie*Sr would be the freeing of trade ,’x.
from the burdensome restrictions which are laid upon it by these
taxes and esxjecially by the manner in which they are sometimes ad-
ministered. These restrictions keep the total volume of trade at
a lower level than it would otherwise attain and thus limit the
commercial earnings of the people engaged in trade? and the limi-
tation of potential earnings reacts unfavorably upon the prosperity
of China as a whole. The increased freedom of enterprise which
would in time result from the removal of existing limitations would
ultimately increase in marked degree the taxable resources of the
nation, as similar developments in the western "World have done.
Among the levies which have been most harmful to China’s
trade and prosperity is that of likin in its various forms. This
subject has previously been discussed by the Commission of Fi-
nancial Experts and recommendations have been made which, if car-
ried into effect with respect to the taxation of commodities gener-
ally , would greatly reduce the scope of likin taxation and should


( 1 )
ultimately induce its abandonment. Other taxes of somewhat simi-
lar character should likewise be abandoned, particularly native
cuocorns duties s coast trade duty, and export duties on goods ship-
ped from one Chinese port to another.
Effect on Revenue
Reduction in the number of taxes need not have an unfavor-
able effect upon revenue. It will be necessary, no doubt, to in-
crease the rate of tax now levied upon some items which may bo re-
tained in the taxable list. It is quite feasible to select com-
modities which can readily bear higher rates if repeated levies
are eliminated and if only a comparatively small number of such
commodities are taxed. Of course, rates must not be increased
olindly, but must be adjusted with due regard to their effect upon
the market for the taxed commodities, since the revenue yield is
intimately connected with this effect/''' furthermore, reduction
in the number of taxes should tend to increase the net yield be-
cause of the economies in administrative expense made possible by
simplification of taxes. This raises the question of revenue ad-
ministration in China, which will receive fuller consideration in
a later part of this Report.
If the foregoing argument is valid, it is unnecessary to
provide taxes in substitution for those repealed, although it
may be deemed expedient to do so as a precautionary and temporary
measure intended to obviate any fiscal inconvenience which might
HT Projects oi law for special consumption taxes on matches and
°0, P 1929? nd submitted September 5, 1929, and December
Tfullvv 1 bv 1 ?hp S n° f oomEoclit y taxation have been discussed more
nf G ° k SBI °? °5 | >lno “ clal Ex P et 'ts in their Report
on : u : E ' v,f a Special Consumption Tax
on Matciiuo, submitted beptember 6, 1929,


result from errors of judgment in fixing rates or in eliminating
particular commodities from the list of taxables. In general,
however, the introduction of substitute taxes should be rendered
unnecessary by making the suggested changes gradually.
A Balanced Revenue System
So far, the revenue system has been considered chiefly from
the point of view of its effects on trade and commerce* It must
now be considered from the related point of view of equity and
balance as among the various classes of people who actually bear
the taxes, even though they may not'immediately pay them.
There would seem to be little doubt that most taxes the
proceeds of which now accrue to the ITationah Government are borne
by the users of the things taxed. To many, such an incidence w of
the tax will seem satisfactory; to others, its satisfactoriness
will depend on the distribution of the tax burden in accordance
with ability to pay. Law-makers in most countries have considered
that a tax system which relies so largely on commodity taxation as
does China's should be modified or supplemented by the introduction
of such direct taxes as those on income and inheritances*
In a Memorandum on Income Tax, submitted September 4, 1929,
it was recommended tnat no attempt be made to introduce a general
China at the present time. Further investigation of
the possibility of a specific or partial income tax has not con-
winced the Commission of Financial Experts that even this limited
application of income taxation would now be desirable. These judg-
ments are based in part on the character of income and in part on
the state of development of private accounting practice in China;
but in the main on considerations of an administrative character.
As the conditions which have elsewhere been found to be essential
to satisfactory operation of income taxation develop in China, it
will no doubt prove desirable to tax income, though perhaps at
first in a partial and tentative way.


For somewhat similar reasons, the Commission of Financial
Experts find themselves unable to recommend the adoption of in-
heritance taxation in China at this time* This form of taxation
is. based on ideas of family and of property and its devolution
that are peculiarly western- There appears to be in China no
sharply defined change in the status of the children of a de-
ceased parent with reference to the property of the decedent,
either in the degree of their dependence upon that property as a
means of support or in their individual control over the property
and its use. The most commonly accepted justification of the tax
in western countries - the sudden increase in the heir r s ability
to contribute to the support of the State - would therefore seem
to be wanting in China, except in rare cases.
Available information on this subject 'is admittedly meager ,
but it supports the view that Chinese ideas and practices with
regard to family and property, including the registration of
titles thereto, are not sufficiently similar to those which con-
dition inheritance taxation in western countries to warrant much
nope of successful application of such a tax in China at the
present time.
ho other important direct taxes remain to be considered
except the land tax. This is properly regarded as better suited
to local than to national taxation, although in not a few coun-
tries the central government received part of the proceeds of land
taxation. Something may be said in passing, however, on two
points connected with land taxation which have more than local
significance.
There is in China no adequate system of records of land
titles and no satisfactory means of determining the precise bounda
ries 01 particular parcels of land. The correction of these de-
fects implies a -comprehensive survey of the entire area of China,
and is obviously financially impracticable at this time. It is.


however 5 an undertaking which can be carried out gradually, and
which should be begun under national supervision in one or more
provinces , or parts of provinces, as soon as offers<>
On the basis of such surveys, an accurate record of landed
properties may be made for tax purposes. With this should go an
appraisal of the taxable value of the property, in order to cor-
rect the inequalities which now exist in the cadastre or list of
taxable lands which was made some centuries ago.
Fui thermore, in many cities of China, notably in the Na-
tional capital, extensive public improvements are being made which
will add materially to property values* It is entirely just that
a considerable portion of these increases in the value of private
property should be taken by government to defray the cost, or part
of the cost, of the improvements which caused the increases. This
cost should, of course, include compensation to the owners of
property taken damaged in the course of the improvements. It is
not appropriate here to discuss methods for the application of such
increment taxation, as it has come to be called* The first example
of such taxation was in China, in the German leased territory of
Kiaochow (Tsingtao)* Consideration was also given a few years ago
to the application of such taxation in Canton* It is suggested that
the methods and results of these experiments be inquired into with
a view uo the possible introduction of similar taxes wherever con-
ditions warrant*
The place of indirect taxation in China's revenue system may
now be considered. The stamp tax has already been dealt with in a
Projecu of Lav/ for a Documentary Stamp Tax and Report in Support
Thereof, submitted by the Commission of Financial Experts on Novem-
ber 18, 1929. There remains the question of the use to be made of
commodity taxes.
At the present time, the great bulk of the revenues of the
National Government is derived from the Maritime Customs. Import


duties form much the larger part of these revenues, and it seems
both likely and desirable that they should for many years remain J
China’s chief reliance for revenue. Customs taxation has long .
been accepted as a part of China's tax system, and old taxes are
proverbially more easily collected than new ones. Perhaps be-
cause of its relative freedom from political uncertainties, the
customs service has developed and maintained a higher level of
administrative efficiency than is to be. found generally in in-
ternal revenue administration in China, for these reasons, it
would perhaps be easier to obtain additional revenue from customs
import duties than from any other source, provided the tariff of
duties be worked out with due care.
While administrative considerations thus appear to favor
continued and even increased reliance on import duties, a final
judgment on the question must take account of other factors as
well, particularly of the incidence of the tax. The point of im-
mediate interest is the extent to which the prices of goods used
by the poorer classes are affected by the import duties levied on
such goods* A satisfactory determination of this point would re-
quire extended investigation, but some of the elements of the
problem can be stated, at least approximately.
Among imported goods which would appear to be used to a con-
siderable extent by the poorer classes of China’s population, per-
haps the most important are cotton goods, kerosene oil, cigarettes,
matches, softwood lumber, and needles. The average annual value
of these items imported from abroad from 1925 to 1928 was Hk.
1353,000,000, or practically one-third of total imports from h
abroad. These figures do not of course indicate the extent to
which the poorer classes are burdened as a result of the customs
tariff. It is evident, however, that by confining increases of
duties to imported commodities other than those just enumerated
and by a wise determination of rates to be imposed, a larger reve-


nue might be obtained from import duties than is no?/ obtained *
without appreciably increasing the burden now resting upon the
poor and without unduly burdening any element of the papulation.
While there is some ground for believing that customs im-
port duties are not now especially burdensome to the poorer class-
es 9 there is no doubt that other parts of China’s revenue system
bear heavily upon them.
The salt revenue is a case in point. Here is a tax upon
an absolute necessity of existence* which rich and poor consume
in quantities not greatly dissimilar. Even if the tax were
properly administered* as unfortunately it is not* the amount of
tax paid by different individuals would not vary with their re-
spective capacitities to pay? indeed* it would tend to vary in-
versely w r ith wealth or income* which is commonly regarded as in-
dicative of capacity to pay. In other words* the tax is regres-
sive* burdening the. poor more heavily than the rich. Although this
tendency to regression is more or less characteristic of all com-
modity taxes* it is especially marked when the tax falls upon such
a necessary commodity as salt. Furthermore* it probably applies
with especial force to the native customs duties* the coast trade
duty* and the export duties on goods shipped from one Chinese port
to another.
Since these taxes fall heavily upon the poorest classes* it
is both wise and humane to endeavor in framing a revenue system to
avoid taxes which would have a corresponding regressive effect.
With thesac considerations in mind* the Commission of Fi-
nancial Experts have recommended taxes on matches and on Portland
cement. These commodities fall within those now subject to the
Ordinance for the Special Consumption Tax* although the tax on them
is to be assessed at the point of production rather 'than at the
point of consumption. Warrant for the term ”consumption tax”* how-
ever* is found in the fact that such a tax is ordinarily added to


the price of the taxed commodity ana is thus borne by its users.
The Ordinance for the Special Consumption Tax is open to
objection on several counts. It comprises so extensive a list of
commodities that the probable effect of the tax upon the community
would be difficult to gauge? neither in the determination of rates
of tax nor in the choice of commodities subject to tax, does proper
consideration seem to have been given to the position of the in-
dustries affected? and in many cases the tax is imposed at dif-
ferent stages in the processing of the finished product and
cumbersome provisions for refund are thereby necessitated in order
to avoid multiplication of the tax. Before enforcing the tax gener-
ally » careful study should be made of its scope and probable ef-
fects, including the possible duplication of taxes. The selection
of commodities most suitable for this sort of taxation should be
carefully made? rates of tax should be determined with a view to
long-run productivity of revenue; the administrative organization
should be set up with a view to economy and efficiency? and methods
of administration should be devised to meet the peculiar conditions
obtaining in the industry. The Projects already submitted by the
Commission of Financial Experts for taxes on matches and on Port-
land cement indicate the possibility of adjustment of administra-
tive methods to the particular commodity to be taxed.
In planning a system of excise taxes, the interrelations of
customs and internal excise or commodity taxation must be kept in
mind. Customs import duties should not be increased to such a
point as to attract capital and labor from industries that are
naturally profitable to those that are made profitable only as a
result of higher prices induced by the shutting out of foreign
produce., Such a result might have very unfortunate effects on the
national finances, first, by cutting down revenue from import du-
ties, and, second, by impairing the productivity and thereby the
tax-paying capacity of the domestic industries from which capital


and labor had been diverted by artificially high prices in certain
lines. It will prove necessary, in imposing tariff duties on im-
ports 9 to consider the advisability of imposing countervailing ex-
cise taxes on goods of the same sort produced in China. Similarly
excise or commodity taxes should not be imposed on goods produced
in China without imposing a countervailing customs import duty of
corresponding amount, else foreign imports might displace domestic
produce to the detriment of the Treasury. Considerations of this
sort led the Commission of Financial Experts to propose that taxes
on matches and Portland cement should be applied to imported goods
as well as to goods of domestic manufacture.
Among consumption taxes levied in China, but under separate
legal provision, are the taxes on tobacco, wines and, liquors. The
taxes on cigars and cigarettes are not seriously out of harmony
with the ideas of this Commission with respect to commodity taxation
as those ideas have been indicated in Projects previously referred
to. Taxes on other forms of tobacco, however, appear to need care-
ful revision. The Commission are not prepared to make recommenda-
tions. In detail in this regard; but it seems clear that all taxes
on tobacco and wine should be combined into one levy. On first
view it would seem desirable to make the business license fee part
of a general system of business licenses or taxes; but inasmuch as
such taxes are now assigned to the provinces, the ultimate solution
requires more thoroughgoing consideration than has yet been given
to it.
The taxes on wines and liquors are imposed both on domestic
and on imported products. Imported products should be taxed under
the Maritime Customs only, at rates to be determined, but probably
higher than existing rates. A corresponding tax should be levied
upon domestic foreign-style wines and liquors, with due allowance
for quality. This tax and the tax on native wines should be ad-
ministered as an internal tax.


There can be little question that the administration of the
taxes on wine and tobacco could be improved in effectiveness and
economy by merging the Wine and Tobacco Tax Bureau with the Roller
Tobacco Consolidated Tax Administration.
Administrative Organization
This suggestion leads to a more comprehensive question of
internal tax administration. In other reports submitted by the
Commission of financial Experts, attention has been directed to
this question* It is proper here to reiterate the view previously
(i)
expressed that the revenue administrations dealing with internal
taxes other than the tax on salt should be consolidated into one
department or bureau.
The salt tax is a very ancient source of revenue in China
and its administrations partly as a result of internal political
disturbances which in recent years have interfered with its normal
functioning, involves problems unlike those presented by most other
taxes. for these reasons it seems desirable to omit the Salt In-
spectorate from the suggested program of consolidation of internal
revenue administrations* But there is good reason, as pointed out
in the Report in Support of a Project of Law for a Special Consump-
tion Tax on Matches, submitted September 6, 1929, for creating one
bureau, department, or administration (the precise name is for the
present a matter of indifference) to be directly under the Minister
of finance, and to have supervision over the administration of all
other internal taxes, new or old, including;
The Rolled Tobacco Consolidated Tax
The Taxes on Wine and Tobacco
The Stamp Tax
The Special Consumption Tax, including the proposed
taxes on matches and Portland cement.
("iy Especially in the Report in Support of a Project of Law for a
Special Consumption Tax on Matches.


A somewhat similar question of organization presents itself
with regard to the collection of revenue by various ministries and
ochei organs of the central government. There has been too green
freedom in imposing taxation by other divisions than the Ministry
of finance 9 although it may have been done in most cases under the
guise of a fee for inspection or other presumed service. The pro-
priety of charging fees to cover the cost of services actually
rendered is not in question, but unless all measures which result
in the raising of a clear revenue are administered through one of-
fice or agency, duplication and confusion of levies are inevitable^.
The methods of administration recommended in other Projects
suomitted by the Commission of Financial Experts are based on sepa-
ration of administration proper from collection, and on strict con-
trol of all collections and the deposit of their entire amount to
the credit of the national Treasury. If these methods are put into
effect, the practice of assigning quotas to be remitted to the Cen-
tral Government will of necessity be abandoned, and in place of al-
lowing collections over and above the amount of the quota to be
dissipated as presumptive expenses of collection, the Government
will control the amount of these expenses and defray them directly
from the Treasury* There will likewise be no room for tax farming
if these methods are adopted, for this practice can thrive only
under an inadequate organization of governmental machinery. Of the
desirability of eliminating the quota and tax farming systems there
can be no doubt whatever* They are utterly at variance with modern
conceptions of the orderly operation of government finances.
One final problem which touches broadly the question of ad-
minis bra uion is that of demarcation of sources of revenue for the
use, respectively, of the central and local governments. The tr Prc
posal for Standard of Division between National and Locan Revenue’
as amended in accordance with the recommendations of the National
Economic Conference may be regarded as a reasonably satisfactory


approach to the solution of this problem* It remains to make this
or a similar solution effective through amendment of existing reve
nue legislation and particularly through a reorganization of ad-
ministrative arrangements between central and local governments
which will leave to each effective control over the sources "•*
ly devoted to its use* This particular problem is 9 of course,
political in natures it should be sufficient here to suggest that
such control is indispensable to a really effective national reve-
nue administration and that grants of revenue from one grade of
government should in principle run from the central government to
the local governments 9 and not vice versa; otherwise the central
government is to that extent dependent for its existence on the
local governments.






