

TUBERCULOSIS
AND THE
PUBLIC HEALTH.
BY GEORGE LANE MULLINS, M.A., M.D.,
TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN ; FELLOW OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY ; ASSISTANT
PHYSICIAN TO ST. VINCENT'S HOSPITAL, SYD-
NEY; PHYSICIAN TO THE HOSPICE FOR THE
DYING.
Read in the Sanitary Science and Hygiene Section of
the Australasian Association for the Advancement
of Science, Sydney, January 7, 1898.
SYDNEY:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, GEORGE STREET.
1898.


TUBERCULOSIS
AND THE
PUBLIC HEALTH.
BY GEORGE LANE MULLINS, M.A., M.D.,
T.C.D., F.S.S. ; Assistant Physician to St.
Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney; Physician to
the Hospice for the Dying




TUBERCULOSIS
AND THE
PUBLIC HEALTH,
Tuberculosis is the most deadly disease that
the world knows in the present generation-
In most countries of the habitable globe and
in all of the Australasian Colonies it stands at
the head of the list of the causes of death.
STATISTICS.
During the past forty years (1857-96) 26,712
deaths from phthisis alone have been registered
in the colony of New South Wales. As
phthisis accounts for 73 - 5 per cent, of all the
registered deaths from tubercular affections,
we may add 26 - 5 per cent., or 7,078, for other
tubercular diseases, and we get the enormous
number of 33,790 deaths from tuberculosis.
The following table shows the number of
deaths from phthisis in New South Wales
during the past forty years, in quinquennial
periods, and the annual death-rate from the
disease per million inhabitants :


Period.
Deaths
Annual death-rate
per trillion.
M.
F.
M.
F.
*1857-59
536
366
974
895
1860-64
809
633
795
794
1865-69
1,176
736
985
745
1870-74
1,373
953
955
796
1875-79
1,888
1,298
1,096
899
1880-84
2,726
1,788
1,238
987
1885-89
3,172
2,004
1,157
886
1890-94
3,253
1,958
1,024
726
fl895-96
1,265
778
924
657
* 3 years. f 2 years.
During the years 1885-96, a period of twelve
years, there were 17,114 deaths from tubercular
diseases in New South Wales. Of these,
12,430 were from phthisis, 2,241 from tabes
mesenterica, 1,325 from tubercular meningitis,
and 1,018 from other forms of tuberculosis.
During the same period there were 12,884
deaths from the six chief zymotic diseases, viz.,
smallpox, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough,
diphtheria, and typhoid fever.
Within the metropolitan area (Sydney and
suburbs) there were 4,726 deaths from tuber-
cular diseases, and 2,925 from the above-named
zymotic diseases, during the past seven years
(1890-96).
We spend immense sums of money every
year in the prevention of infectious fevers, yet
we neglect the most dead I y disease in the world.
Fevers usually attack children, run a short
course, protect from subsequent occurrence, and
leave their subjects able to work. Tuberculosis,
on the other hand, strikes down those in the
prime of life, runs a chronic course, and causes
permanent incapacity for occupation. Surely
the restriction of this terrible disease is one of
the most pressing questions in preventive medi-
cine in the present da}’. That tuberculosis is com-
municable there can now be no shadow of doubt.


Experiments have demonstrated this only too
clearly. The communicability of the affection
being granted, we are bound to protect the
healthy members of the community against the
ravages of the disease. To suggest how we
may best effect this purpose is the object of this
paper to-day.
THE CAUSE OF TUBERCULOSIS.
Tuberculosis is caused by the tubercle bacillus
of Koch, which gains an entrance to the body
from without. It affects man and many of the
domestic animals, such as cattle, horses, pigs,
&c. Heredity plays a very unimportant part
in the production of the disease, and, although
the bacillus has in some instances been found
in the foetus, this mode of infection must be
extremely rare. It is the predisposition which
is so often confounded with the transmission of
the disease. The chief modes of communication
are inhalation and ingestion, but the disease
may be inoculated. The bacilli may be received
from the air by inhalation, and from tubercu-
lous food, such as milk or meat, by ingestion.
Probably, in adults, at any rate, inhalation is
the chief mode, and next to that ingestion.
THE IDENTITY OF HUMAN AND BOVINE
TUBERCULOSIS.
There are some who doubt the identity of
human and bovine tuberculosis. But there are
on record numerous instances of infection from
human beings to lower animals, from one
animal to another, and from the lower animals
to man. The following are some cases in illus-
tration of these modes of conveyance :
Tscherning, of Copenhagen, relates the case
of a veterinary surgeon who cut his hand when


making a post-mortem examination on a tuber-
culous cow. The wound healed, but a swelling
remained which became ulcerated and refused
to heal. Eventually the whole mass was re-
moved, and the tubercle bacilli were found
under the microscope.
Pfeiffer, of Weimar, reports that in 1885 a
veterinary surgeon, 34 years of age, of good
constitution, and free from hereditary taint,
wounded himself deeply in the thumb of the
left hand. The wound healed well, but six
months later a cutaneous tuberculosis was
diagnosed at the site of the scar. After the
autumn of the following year the patient
showed unmistakable signs of pulmonary tuber-
culosis, his sputum contained tubercle bacilli,
and he died two and a half years after having
received the wound. A post-mortem examina-
tion revealed tubercular arthritis of the wounded
thumb, and extensive tubercles and cavities in
the lungs.
Law, of the Cornell University Agricultural
Experiment Station, cites the case of another
veterinarian who was wounded in the hand in
opening a tuberculous cow, and suffered from a
tumefaction of the resulting cicatrix, with dis-
tinct tubercle bacilli. The surgical removal of
the tumefaction manifestly saved the subject
from a generalised tuberculosis.
Williams collected the dust of the ventilating
shaft of the Brompton Hospital, and found the
characteristic bacilli after five days. Klein
found that guinea pigs kept in this ventilating
shaft became tubercular. Cornet produced
tuberculosis in rabbits by inoculating them with
dust from the walls of a consumptive ward.
Cozette, veterinary surgeon at Noyon, France,
relates that in a farm at Beauce, an admirably


kept stable contained 24 cows and one bull, all
in good condition. Tuberculosis had never
before been known in the stable, but in 1886
two of the cows began to cough. They were
handed over to the butcher for slaughter, but
one was so markedly tuberculous that it had to
be condemned. In due course all the cows in
the same row were attacked one after the other.
They were sent to the slaughter house as soon
as the}' became ill, but in 1892 the tuberculin
test showed that of the 20 animals composing
the herd seven were tuberculous. All these
seven animals belonged to the same row, the 12
in the other row being quite sound ; and the
autopsies on the seven animals confirmed the
diagnosis. An inquiry, instituted for the pur-
pose of discovering the cause of the contamina-
tion of the stable, revealed the fact that in
1883. three years before the recognition of the
first cases, the farmer had engaged, as cowherd,
a man who suffered from pulmonary tubercu-
losis. This man, who used to cough and
expectorate constantly, used to sleep in the
stable immediately over the two cows which
were the first to fall ill. This cowherd resided
here until 1891, having been treated for con-
sumption in the meantime. There can be no
douht that these two cows in question were
contaminated by the sputum of this man.
A boy, aged five years, at Amorback, New
York, well developed, and of healthy parents
with no tuberculous family history, died from
miliary tuberculosis of the lungs and enor-
mously enlarged mesenteric glands. About the
same time the family cow, which had been a
good milker, was slaughtered and found to be
suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis. The
boy had been for a long time in the habit of
drinking the milk fresh from the cow.


Demme, of Berne, records a case where four
infants in the Hopital Jenner, the offspring of
healthy parents, with no tuberculous family
history, died of intestinal and mesenteric tuber-
culosis, as the result of drinking the unsterilised
milk of tuberculous cows. These were the only
cases out of 2,000 treated by Demme in which
he was able .to eliminate with certainty any
other cause for the disease.
Law quotes a case where a strong, healthy
boy, of one and a half years, went to an uncle’s
for a week, and drank the milk of a cow which
was shortly afterwards condemned and killed
in a state of generalised tuberculosis. In six
weeks the child was noticeably falling off, and in
three months he died, a mere skeleton, with
abdominal tuberculosis.
Gosse, of Geneva, lost a daughter from intesti-
nal and mesenteric tuberculosis. There was no
family history of tuberculosis. Suspicion fell
upon some of the cows whose milk the girl used
to drink fresh from the udder. Four out of the
five cows on the estate reacted to tuberculin,
and were slaughtered. Two of them showed
tubercular disease of the udder.
Brouardel cites a case where five out of 14
young girls living together in a boarding school
became consumptive, subsequent to the daily
use of milk from a tuberculous cow.
That there is an intimate connection between
tubercular diseases in man and animals is plainly
shown by the fact that where cattle are few or
absent consumption exists in man to a much
smaller extent. In the northernmost countries
of the world, where reindeer take the place of
cattle in the farms, tuberculosis is far less pre-
valent in man than in those countries where
cattle abound. Norway and Sweden, Finland
and Lapland, are instances of this. • On the


other hand, in Italy and in Ireland, where the
cattle are kept in the houses, tuberculosis is
frequent in both man and the lower animals.
Colorado, U.S.A., is remarkably free from
tubercular diseases in human beings, and the
reports of the State "Veterinarian show that
only 2 per cent, of the cattle react to tuber-
culin. The disease is so rare among Colorado
cows as to be almost a curiosity. When it
does occur, it is usually either in animals which
have had the worst of care as regards over-
crowding, or in imported animals; native
animals are entirely immune.
Dr. Charles Creighton goes so far as to say :
“ I cannot escape from the conviction that the
peculiar errors of nutrition in the domesticated
bovine species all over the world are the real
fountain and source of human tubercle.”
The remarkable fall in the death-rate from
phthisis in New South Wales since the intro-
duction of the Dairies Supervision Act of 1886
is, in my opinion, very significant.
TUBERCULOUS MILK.
That tuberculous milk may, and frequently
does, cause tuberculosis in human beings is
beyond all doubt. The milk containing the
tubercle bacilli enters the mouth and passes on
to the throat. During the time of its passage,
the bacilli may be deposited in the mouth,
tonsils, pharynx, or adjacent structures. More
bacilli are added every two, three, or four
hours, according to the frequency of feeding.
These bacilli may be washed further down and
into the stomach, or may cause infection in the
mouth, etc., or may be inhaled into the lungs.
The milk that passes into the stomach may
deposit more bacilli, or may continue its


journey into the intestine. Strauss and
Wurtz* have shown that the bactericidal
quality of the gastric secretions is insufficient
to destroy the bacillus tuberculosis. Infection
may thus arise in the mouth, tonsils, throat,
lungs, or intestinal canal from tuberculous
milk. The lung infection may be primary
from direct inhalation of the bacilli lodged in
the mouth, or may be secondary to infection of
other parts.
Woodheadf reports that in 127 cases of
tuberculosis in children that ho examined,
tubercular ulceration of the intestine was
found in 43 ; whilst in 100 cases, or nearly 79
per cent, of the whole, the glands connected
with the intestinal tract were in some stage or
other of tubercular degeneration. He argues
that tuberculosis connected with the intestine
is of frequent occurrence in children, and that
the infection frequently takes place by the
alimentary canal. The age at which these
tubercular glands were found is very significant.
During the first year of life there were 4 cases;
from 1 to 21 years, 33 ; from 3 to 51, years,
29 ■; from 6 to 7-| years, 12; from 8 to 10
years, 13; and from 11 to 15 years, 9 cases.
In 14 cases these glands only were affected.
The London milk supply is undoubtedly good
and pure, and this is due chiefly to the careful
supervision exercised by the medical officers of
health, and also by the large dairy companies.
Dr. Arthur NewsholmeJ describes the means
taken to ensure the purity of the milk supplied
to the public in London :
Large dairy companies have been formed, whose sup-
ply of milk is based on most minute and vigorous regu-
lations. By their contracts, these companies have the
* “ Arch, de Med. Experim., ’ 1889* p. 379.
f “ Bacteria and their Products.” London, 1891, p. 2*22.
X “ Public Health, and its Applications,” 2nd Ed., p. 116.


right to inspect the farms and cow-sheds before accept-
ing the milk of any farmer, and can order any neces-
sary measures to be taken. Thu state of health of any
cow can be examined by a veterinary surgeon, and the
milk from any animal rejected. He can give instruc-
tions as to fodder, the maintenance of cleanliness, and
the treatment and cooling of the milk.
To prevent the spread of infectious diseases by milk,
the farmer is required in these contracts to call in a
doctor, if any person employed in the dairy falls ill. If
the disease is infectious, the secretary of the company
must be at-once informed, who will indicate the
measures to be taken. In the event of serious disease,
the delivery of milk from the farm is forbidden, but
the farmer is paid as if he delivered it. The company
send inspectors to see that the necessary measures are
taken. Arrangements may be made with the local
Medical Officer of Health to obtain information as to
each case of infectious disease arising in the neighbor-
hood of a cow-shed or dairy.
Twice a day the milk is brought to London by rail-
way. A sample is taken of each instalment, and its
temperature and density are examined.
The vessels in which milk is brought to town are
ordinarily sealed and furnished with a tap near the
bottom. They are generally of tin, not painted, but
always clean and polished.
I may here repeat my protest against the use
of ordinary metal taps for milk cans. The
thorough purification of such is very difficult,
and in the limited time at the disposal of dairy
hands for cleansing utensils, is very probably
omitted, or is done in a careless manner. The
consequence is that some of the milk remains,
and contaminates the whole of the contents of
the vessel. Removable taps, which could be
taken to pieces, cleaned thoroughly, and steri-
lised, would improve matters. I believe, how-
ever, that some of our largo dairy companies do
use such taps as these.
In Paris the dairies arc subject to the follow-
ing regulations : —They must be well ventilated;
the floors must bo paved or cemented, so as to


be impervious to wet, and must be supplied
with a subterranean drain for carrying off
refuse water to the sewer ; the walls must be
faced with marble or tiles, or cemented; all
wainscoting must be painted in oil; the dairies
must have an abundant supply of water, and
the floors and walls must be frequently washed ;
pigs must not be kept.
In Berlin it is forbidden to sell the milk of
diseased animals.
Two years ago the British Medical Journal
published a report on the milk supply of London.
Mr. Sidney Rowland examined twenty-five
samples of milk bacteriologically, and found on
an average 500,000 bacilli per cubic centimetre.
The Bacillus Coli Communis was the form
found in the greatest abundance, it constituting
fully 90 per cent, of all the forms found. Mr.
Rowland suggested the following reforms :
1. That all milking be carried on in the open air,
the animals and operators standing on a material
which is capable of being thoroughly washed, such as
a floor of concrete or cement. Such a floor could be
easily laid down in any convenient place which can be
found. The site chosen should be removed from the
inhabited parts as far as possible, and should be pro-
vided with a plentiful water supply.
2. That greater care be expended on the personal
cleanliness of the cows. The only too familiar picture
of the animal’s hindquarters, flanks and side being
thickly plastered with mud and fames is one that
should be common no longer. It would not be difficult
to carry out this change.
3. That the hands of the milker be thoroughly washed
before the operation of milking is commenced, and
that after once being washed they be not again em-
ployed in handling the cow, otherwise than in the
necessary operation of milking. Any such handling
should be succeeded by another washing in fresh
water before again commencing to milk,
4. That all milk vrndors’ shops should bo kept far
cleaner than is often the case at present. That all


milk retailing shops should be compelled to provme
proper storage accommodation, and that the counters.
&c.. should be tiled.
With all these suggestions I heartily agree.
Thorough cleanliness of dairy premises,
workers, cows and vessels should be rigidly
enforced.
All cattle should be tested with tuberculin,
and strict isolation of those reacting to the test
should be enforced. The public should demand
from dairymen a certificate from an expert that
the dairy contains no tuberculous animals. No
cattle should be admitted to a dairy until they
have passed the test. Tuberculosis in man
should be declared an infectious disease under
section 12 of the Dairies Supervision Act of
1886. No consumptive should be allowed ac-
cess to dairies or to take part in milk selling.
All milk should be sterilised by boiling, or it
should be Pasteurised. No cattle should be
allowed to enter the colony until they have
passed the tuberculin test.
The use of tuberculin is now an established
means of diagnosis for tuberculosis in cattle.
On this subject I shall not say more, but I may
refer you to an excellent paper on the subject
by Dr. Ashburton Thompson, which appeared
in the Australasian Medical Gazette for Decem-
ber, 1897.
Dr. Sims Woodhead* in the course of an ad-
dress on “The Channels of Infection in Tuber-
culosis,” offers the following remarks ;
There appears to be even now too little attention
paid to the question of infection commencing in the
alimentary tract. We speak glibly of infection by
tuberculous meat and milk, we think of a few cases
that have come under our observation, in which one or
% Lancet , October 27th, 1891, p. 960,


other of these agents (especially milk) was thought to
have played a casual role, but that ingesta of various
kinds are daily adding to our numbers of cases of tuber-
culosis is not yet, I am sure, fully realised in this
country. How real the danger appears, however, to
those who have been engaged in the careful study of
the question of tuberculosis for many years in a coun-
try where tuberculosis amongst cattle has come to be
an important question, not merely with the scientific
authorities, but with the farmers themselves, may be
gathered from the fact that on many faims in Denmark
constant fortnightly inspection of cattle is carried on,
on, and from the knowledge gained through this fort-
nightly inspection it has quite recently been deter-
mined by the Danish Government to hand over to their
head veterinary adviser, Dr. B, Bang, a considerable
sum of money (£3OOO) —a sum which is to be granted
annually for five years—with which it is proposed to
carry on a systematic inspection of all cows not previ-
ously under observation, to use tuberculin as a diagnos-
tic agent, to kill off the cattle that are undoubtedly
affected with tuberculosis, and to keep under observa-
tion every animal in which there is any suspicion that
the disease exists. It is hoped, in this manner, to
stamp out the disease in the present generation, and I
am convinced that if this once be thoroughly done, and
the inspection be continued, the comparatively trifling
amount spent by the Government will prevent a loss to
the Danish farmers, and will cause a gain to infant life
almost incalculable. If Koch’s tuberculin had done far
more harm than it ever has done, the saving of human
life indirectly, through its efficacy as a diagnostic
agent, will be so enormous that the account to the
credit side of the balance will have to be reckoned not
as hundreds to units, but as thousands. I may appear
to bo speaking extravagantly, but from what I have
seen of the effect of milk from tuberculous udders when
given raw, even to comparatively insusceptible animals,
I feel no qualms of conscience in making even these
apparently exaggerated statements.
TUBERCULOUS MEAT.
The danger to be apprehended from tuber-
culous meat is not so great as that from the
milk of tuberculous cows. Meat being eaten
cooked is more likely to have the bacilli it con-
tains destroyed, except in the case of large


joints, or when imperfectly cooked. On this,
subject I cannot do better than refer to the
Report of the Royal Commission on Tubercu-
losis. Dr. Woodhead took “ rolls” of meat con-
taining tuberculous matter. With specimens
of this meat ho noted the temperatures at
various depths below the surface during
various periods of boiling or roasting, and, at
the conclusion of the process, took the central
portions and used them for feeding pigs.
The results, as expressed in his own language,
are as follows :
In the boiling and roasting experiments, as orcii"
narily carried out in the kitchen, the tcmperaturei
however high it may be near the surface, seldom
reaches 00° 0. (140° F.) in the centre of a joint, except
in the case of joints under S lbs. in weight. Ordinary
cooking is quite sufficient to destroy any smeared mate-
rial that remains on the outer surface of the meat, but
it cannot be relied vj/on in the slightest degree to render
innocuous the same smeared material when in the centre
of a roll.
In another place he says :
Ordinary cooking, such as boiling, and more es-
pecially roasting, though quite sufficient to sterilise the
surface, and even the substance for a short distance
from the surface of a joint, cannot be relied upon to
sterilise tubercular material included in the centre of
rolls of meat, especially when these are more than
3 lbs. or 4 lbs. weight. The least reliable method of
cooking for this purpose is roasting before the fire,
next comes roasting in an oven, and then boiling.
I do not intend to go deeply into the vexed
question as to whether an animal in which the
tubercular lesions are strictly localised should
be wholly condemned for food. lam of opinion,
though, that in the present state of our know-
ledge on this subject it is safer to reject the
whole carcase. This is now the practice in
Sydney, and I can see no reason for altering it.
In France, by an order of the Minister of


Agriculture, dated September 28th, 1896, the
flesh is to be seized and totally condemned :
1. When the tuberculous lesions, whatever their im-
portance, are attended with wasting.
2. When there are tubercules in the muscles or in
the glands in the muscular tissue.
3. When generalised tuberculosis is present with
miliary deposits on all the organs, and notably on the
spleen.
4. When important tuberculous lesions exist at the
same time both on the organs of the chest and of the
abdominal cavity.
It must be seized and partially excluded from
consumption :
1. When the tuberculosis is localised either in the
thoracic or abdominal cavity.
2. When the tuberculous lesions, even though they
exist at the same time both in the thoracic and ab-
dominal cavities, are not extensive.
The seizure in this case only extends to portions of
meat (costal or abdominal walls) which are directly in
contact with the diseased portion of the pleura or peri-
toneum.
In every ease the tuberculous organs must be de-
stroyed, whatever the extent of the lesion.
In all cases meat that is fairly fat can be handed
over to the owner after being sterilised for at least an
hour, either in boiling water or in a steam steriliser,
but the sterilising must be carried out at an abattoir,
under the control of a veterinary surgeon.
These regulations appear to me to be wholly
inadequate.
PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS.
In this paper I have avoided the strictly
medical aspect of tuberculosis, but I have
endeavoured to indicate the line of preventive
treatment which might be adopted by the
public at large, On the general subject of
prevention of the disease the following rules
may be laid down :
Overcrowding should be prevented. This over-
crowding may be of two kinds :—(a) A district
may consist of a large number of small houses


built back to back, and without yard space ;
the streets may be narrow, or may end in
blind alleys; or, (b) in the poorer quarters of
towns, a large number of persons may live in
small houses, sometimes even whole families,
consisting of perhaps seven or eight persons,
may inhabit one or two rooms.
Sunlight and fresh air should be allowed
free access to all habitations Sunlight alone
is a valuable germicide. The houses should be
well ventilated. A broken pane of glass in a
badly ventilated house often does more good
than harm. The sub-oil should be well drained.
All rooms should be well swept while the
windows are open. The old-fashioned plan of
sprinkling tea leaves on the floor is to be
recommended, as it serves to prevent the dust
from rising and afterwards settling down in the
room. All houses intended for habitation
should be inspected by public officers before
they are used for residence. Dirty trades
should be regulated, and all buildings sub-
jected to periodical sanitary inspection.
Consumptives should be isolated as far as
possible. They should spit into small pieces of
rag or paper, which can be burned, or into a
small spitting cup containing an antiseptic
solution, such as carbolic acid or corrosive sub-
limate. They should, sleep in well-aired rooms
by themselves, and should not have more
communication with the other members of the
household than is absolutely necessary. They
should not marry.
Consumptive children should not be admitted
to boarding schools unless they can have
separate rooms for sleeping in, and provision
can be made for the destruction of the expec-
toration.


Consumptive mothers should not nurse their
children, nor should phthisical wetnurses be
employed.
CLIMATIC TREATMENT.
We cannot allow phthisical patients to enter
the wards of our general hospitals for treatment,
for we are unable to prevent communication
between the consumptive and other patients in
these institutions. Experiment has shown
that the air which a consumptive breathes
becomes charged with the bacilli of tubercu-
losis ; the expectoration, which is usually
copious, dries up and leaves the bacilli to
mingle with the dust in the room, and cause
infection among others. If, then, consumptive
patients occupied the same wards with others
in the hospitals, they might communicate the
malady to those who are debilitated by disease
or accident. The power of resisting disease is
at a minimum among hospital patients, and
thus they are peculiarly susceptible to the
bacilli, to which they fall an easy prey. In
time, then, every ward would become a per-
manent centre of contagion. With these facts
in mind, it has been suggested that special
hospitals or homes should be established for the
treatment and observation of phthisical patients
in various parts of the colony.
There are to my mind many objections to a
large consumptive hospital within our city
boundaries. While I believe that the segrega-
tion of consumptives would be beneficial to the
community at large, I am afraid their isolation
in the bacilli-laden atmosphere of the town
must prove injurious to the patients themselves ;
but I am heartily in accord with the plan of
erecting a home for those who are in too


advanced a stage to travel to the country
districts and benefit by the climatic treatment.
A well-ventilated building containing a small
number of beds would be ample for such cases.
To this institution an out-door department
should be attached, where patients who are
unable to leave the city might be treated in the
early stages. Such a hospital, together with
the existing Hospice for the Dying in Darling-
hurst, would be as much as, in my opinion, it
would be wise to establish. If a patient be found
to be suffering from phthisis, and removal from
the impure air of the city be impracticable, he
might be treated as an out-patient ; but such
cases should not be treated within the walls of
a city building. I would, therefore, advocate
the erection of a small hospital, such as I
have described, in Sydney, together with three
or four Homes in the country districts, which
might be used by those who are in the curable
stage, or in the progressive stage, before all hope
is abandoned. lam opposed to the erection of
a large Consumptive Hospital in the metropolis.
At the Brisbane meeting of this Association
in 1895, I had the honour of contributing a
paper,* in which I showed the death-rate from
phthisis for every district in New South Wales.
The figures which I brought forward on that
occasion showed that in the city of Sydney there
were l - 96 deaths from phthisis per 1,000 living
inhabitants annually, while in the suburbs the
rate was IT6, and in the country 0 - 66. In
other words, the ratio of deaths in the city,
suburbs, and country was as 3,2, 1, The
northern boundary of the colony, what was then
known as the Gwydir Electorate, had one
death annually in every 6,225 inhabitants.
♦Published iu the Australasian Medical Gazette, August 20th,
1895.


Next to this came the Kiatna district, with one
in 6,061. Following closely upon these came
the Hastings and Manning (1 in 5,755), Hart-
ley (1 in 5,301), Carcoar (1 in 5,202). These
statistics (which, I believe, are the only ones of
the kind ever published) show the death-rate
from phthisis in every electorate in the colony.
With their help, I believe we might mark off
on a map suitable centres for the erection of the
proposed Homes for the climatic treatment of
consumption.
It is useless to erect one home and send all
patients there indiscriminately. What will
suit one patient will not suit another, and even
what will suit a patient in the summer months
may aggravate his malady in the winter. We
must, therefore, erect homes in localities having
different climates. These climates may be
divided into three, viz.:—
1. Warm and dry
2. Cold and dry.
3. Warm and moist.
Warm dry climates are suitable for elderly or
weak persons, those with large secreting cavi-
ties or catarrhal complications, and chronic
cases when free from fever.
Gold dry climates are suitable for those in the
incipient stage, or the predisposed, for the
young patients who can take exercise, and for
those in whom the disease is quiescent.
Warm moist climates suit those who are un-
able to take exercise, those who are feverish in
the early stage, and patients who suffer from
bronchitis.
Cold moist climates are totally unsuitable for
consumptives.


Stage of
Numb* r.
Cured.
Nearly Cured.
Total.
Disease,
P.C.
P.C.
P.C.
P.C.
I, ..
1,390—27*62 .
. 387—27-8
.. 430—31-0 ..
817—58-8
II. ..
2,225—14-21 .
. 152— 6-83 .
325—14-6..
477-21-43
III. ..
1,517-28-17 .
. 12— 0-84 ,
.. 33-2-3..
45— 3*14
To sum up, then, I consider that the climatic
treatment of phthisis may be carried out by
erecting a small hospital in Sydney, to which
an out-patient department might be attached.
In the country districts sanatoria or farm
homes should be established in different
climates, so as to suit all persons according to
their condition. I cannot now do more than
indicate some of the districts which might be
suitable for climatic treatment. Probably the
most appropriate situations for these sanatoria
would be on the western slopes of the Blue
Mountains, the Riverina, Hew England, the
Queensland border, on those extensive open
plains between the Maclntyre and Gwydir
Rivers. A coastal station might be established
in the Illawarra or Shoalhaven districts.
On the Continent of Europe and in America
the climatic treatment of phthisis has met with
gratifying results. In Dr. Brehmer’s Sana-
torium at Goerbersdorf, in Prussian Silesia,
5,410 patients were treated during 1876-86. Of
these no detailed reports are available in 408,
leaving 5,032, which may be tabulated accord-
ing to Dr. Brehmer’s notes as follows :
In. 1890 special inquiries were made in order
to ascertain how long the cure lasted in the
case of those discharged from the Institution as
cured, or nearly cured. The results showed
that in five cases the cure had lasted for 20 to
29 years, in 52 cases from 12 to 21 years, in 38
cases from 7 to 12 years.
In the Falkenstein Sanatorium, on the
southern slope of the Taunus Hills, near Frank-


fort-on-the-Main, 132 out of 1,022 patients
were discharged as cured—l 3-2 percent; 110 as
nearly cured—ll*o percent., giving a total of
242—24-2 per cent.
In Dr. Haufe’s Sanatorium at St. Blasien,
in the Black Forest in Baden, corresponding
inquiries into the fate of 324 patients who had
been treated in the Sanatorium during the
years 1878 to 1889 showed that of 288, about
whom information could be obtained, 72 were
living in good health from 3 to 12 years later,
201 had suffered more or less from pulmonary
catarrh from 2 to 12 years, without, however,
having had to suspend their ordinary business ;
in 12 cases the health got worse, and five pa-
tients had died.
The statistics from Dr. Driver’s Sanatorium
at Reiboldsgriin in Saxony, gave the following
results of 2,000 cases : —Cured 13*66 percent. ;
materially improved, 28 - 02 per cent. ; improved,
28-00 per cent. ; unimproved, 25 - 20 per cent, j
and 4 - 52 per cent, died. 51,
I have already taken up much time in the
consideration of the climatic treatment of con-
sumptives, but I have done so in order to draw
attention to the neglect which has been shown
towards this method of curing phthisis. We
have in Australia many and varied climates,
which, so far, we have made no serious at-
tempt to take advantage of in the treatment of
disease, f
* For the above statistics relating to the Sanatoria I am indebted
to Dr. A. von Jaruntowsky’s work on “Sanatoria for Consump-
tives.” translated by Dr. E. Clifford Beale. Loudon : The Ilebman
Publishing Co., Limite J.
f To those who wish to go deeper into the subject I would recom-
mend the perusal of an interesting work by Dr. S. E. Solly, of Colo-
rado. U.S.A., on “ Medical Climatology.” London: J. A. Church-
ill, 1897.


CONCLUSION.
What is required most of all is the sanitary
education of the masses, and the co-operation
of individual members of the community. The
public must be made to understand that con-
sumption is a preventable disease, that their
lives depend, to a great extent, upon the actions
of one another, and that the causes of prevent-
able diseases are, as Sir John Simon has pointed
out, local conditions of filth and nuisance, pol-
luting air and water, and the reckless dissemina-
tion of contagion.
John Sands, Printer, George Street, Sydn




