

PerW V*nn c „ * tt,
dt Jit*. d*.
R.EMWOOS PM*P-
&o* 2>
A LETTER
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OE NEWCASTLE,
SECRETARY OP STATE FOR THE COLONIES,
&c. &c. &c.
ON BEHALF OF THE
lErlancstan iEtsston of flje Bisjop of Nr to Zealand,
AND ALSO ON BEHALF OF
MISSIONS TO THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
LEWIS M. HOGG,
RECTOR OF CRANFORD, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE,
LONDON:
GEORGE BELL, 186 FLEET STREET.
MDCCCLIII.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY ROBSON, LEVEY, AND PRANKLYN,
Great New Street and Fetter Lane.


A LETTER,
MY LORD DUKE,
Having lately returned from a trip to Australia and
Hew Zealand, in the course of which I could not but feel,
from what I saw and heard, that there is great and pressing
need for more energetic efforts on the part of the Church at
home to aid our Australasian brethren in working the two mis-
sion-fields which more immediately fall within their province,
viz. the aborigines of Australia and the South-Sea islanders,
I am anxious to do what I can, respectfully but earnestly, to
call the attention of your Grace, and of the members of the
Church in general, to both these points; for I feel sure, that if
I could but convey to others a like impression to that which I
have received from actual sight and hearsay on the spot, a
lively interest would be roused, and those who are so devotedly
and successfully labouring in these fields would receive a fair
share of the support which mission work throughout the world
does largely draw from England. The warm interest your
Grace is well known to take in Church work in general, and
the special interest your present official position gives you in
all that concerns the Church in the colonies, have emboldened
me to request your Grace’s particular attention to this subject,
for I cannot doubt that your influence may, under God’s bless-
ing, powerfully tend to forward the cause I have ventured to
bring before you. First, I may mention that both these mis-
sions have the hearty sanction and support of the whole Aus-
tralasian branch of our Church, as is shown by the notice issued
by the Bishops of the six dioceses when assembled in Sydney
in October 1850, calling “ A public meeting of the Bishops,
Clergy, and Laity of the Church of England, for the purpose
of establishing an Australasian Board of Missions from the six
Dioceses of Sydney, New Zealand, Tasmania, Adelaide, Mel-
bourne, and Newcastle, having for its object the propagation


of the Gospel among the heathen races in the
Australia, New Caledonia, the Loyalty Islands, the New He
brides the Solomon Islands, New Hanover, New Britain, and
theohr islands in the Western Pacific ” The above-named
islands, which are the scene of the Bishop of New Zealand s
Melanesian Mission, include the groups lying between the
meridian of the East Cape of New Zealand, or nearly 180 .
and the meridian of Cape York, and the eastern coast of Aus-
tralia about 140° E.; the nearest of them lying about lUUU
miles’north of New Zealand Those who may wish to see
how eloquently all the assembled bishops, well aided by zea-
lous and influential laymen, pleaded the cause cs
sions, will find an interesting report of the
meeting, extracted from the Sydney Herald, and published by
Bell, Fleet Street, and Hatchard, Piccadilly, which
a store both of arguments and facts shewing the need of mis-
sion efforts; and also proving, by many cheering instances
that there is reasonable and good ground for feeling assured
that, under God’s blessing, both these fields may be, and ought
to be, successfully worked. , . . . . •
Many interesting details connected with these missions,
more especially of the Bishop of New Zealand s labouis
amongst the islands, have since, from time to time, appeare
in the publications of the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel, and in letters from the Bishop of New Zealand, and
other friends, printed for private circulation by the iiev.
Edward Coleridge, Eton College. But for the information
of those who have not fallen in with any of these previous
notices, I ought to state, that two years before the Sydney
meeting took place, the Bishop of New Zealand commence
his mission totfie South Sea Islands (no light addition to the
burden of a diocese which, if limited to New Zealand done
would heavily task the energies of most men, from the g :e
amount of walking through the bush, and ™
coast, required for the proper oversight of it) because, to
use his own words, “ the venerable primate at whose hands I
received my episcopal consecration charged me, in the name
of the Archbishops and Bishops of the mother Church, not to
confine my efforts to New Zealand, but to watch over the pro-
gress of the Gospel throughout the coasts and islands of the
Pacific.” In his island visits his Lordship’s course is first to
make the natives understand that he does not come as a trader ;
then to try and give them some idea of his re d °bject in
coming amongst them; and after friendly and confidential in-
tercourse is fairly established, to induce them to intrust him


with some of their youths, whom he carries to St. John’s Col-
lege, Auckland, where they are instructed in Christian truths,
taught English, and trained in industrial pursuits and useful
arts of life during the eight warmer months of the year. On
the approach of winter, which in New Zealand is too severe
for their tropical constitutions, the Bishop takes them back to
their own homes. By this means a knowledge of what they
have learnt is spread amongst their friends, and kindly inter-
course between the white missionaries and native races is
greatly extended. On several islands the Bishop has found
native missionary teachers, chiefly Samoans, from the Navi-
gators’ Group. These men are the fruit of the remarkable
labours of John Williams, at Rarotonga, and his successors of
the London Missionary Society, through whose happy influ-
ence a great number of natives, after embracing Christianity,
went forth, and in their turn spread to neighbouring islands
a knowledge of the truths they had received. So great has
been the zeal of these men, and their willingness to lay down
their lives for Christ’s sake—frequently at long distances from
their own homes—that Archdeacon Abraham, the Bishop’s
chaplain at St. John’s, in one of his letters says, “ The Bishop
knows of forty within the last eight years who have either
been murdered or fallen victims to the fever of these islands ;
every fresh set of boys that comes here has a story to tell of
murdered Samoans, who came to preach to them of ‘ Jesus up
above, and Satan down below.’ ” With these native teachers
the Bishop is able heartily to co-operate, as will be seen in the
extracts appended to this letter from a journal of Rev. W.
Nihill, kindly furnished to me by his father, Rev. Daniel
Nihill, rector of Fitz, Salop. Mr. William Nihill accompanied
the Bishop on his cruise last year, and was stationed on the
island of Mare three months, while the Bishop touched at forty
or fifty other islands, coming up within 10° of the line. Mr.
Nihill’s remarkable facility in mastering the Polynesian dia-
lects enables him to render invaluable help to the Bishop in
this branch of his Lordship’s wide-spreading mission-labours—
labours which, from their vast extent, and from the devoted
and untiring energy displayed by the Bishop in the prosecution
of them, have so nobly won for him his fitting and hard-earned
title of “ the Apostle of the Pacific.”
I would now venture to urge that the Bishop’s success thus
far in this Melanesian Mission gives it a strong claim for greatly
increased support ; for, through God’s blessing on his past ef-
forts, a remarkable opening now appears to exist for the Church
of England (especially in contradistinction to the Church of


Home) influentially to occupy a large field in that quarter of
the globe. Year by year, since the Bishop took back the first
youths intrusted to his care, and with happy tact won the
confidence of the parents, while yet unable freely to speak
with them, by contrasting the condition of the then half-
starved islanders with that of the well-fed returned boys, —
putting his fist into the hollow cheek of the one, and pinching
out the plump round cheek of the other; on which the parents
(at once catching the Bishop’s meaning) clapped their hands,
and danced with delight, and readily put more boys into his
hands, his Lordship has been welcomed, and his influence
felt through a widening sphere. On his return to Auckland
last October, when I had the pleasure of being present at St.
John’s College, no less than twenty-five youths of various
ages, and two young Polynesian females, accompanied him
(and these, be it remembered, were carefully selected from a
much greater number offered); and a gladdening sight it was
to see them neatly dressed in European clothing, with quiet
cheerful faces, and also to see the kindly way in which the
New Zealand youths at the college welcomed them. I may
mention, by the way, that the dresses in which the two young
island maidens arrived might well be kept in some of our
mission museums, in token of the Bishop’s manual skill; for,
since the days when St. Paul plied his needle, few mission-
aries, I fancy, have more happily turned their handicraft skill
to account than his Lordship, when he managed, with his own
hands, to convert a patch-work bed-quilt into becoming gar-
ments for these damsels, hitherto unaccustomed to encumber
themselves with many additions to Nature’s garb.
The fact of the young women returning is, in the Bishop’s
eyes, of no small importance. One of the youths, Siapo,
whose touching death a few weeks after his return to New
Zealand has since been recorded, and who for three succes-
sive years had accompanied the Bishop, last year came for-
ward, and modestly announced his wish to take back one of
these girls, whom he hoped, poor fellow, one day to make his
wife; but he said he should like her first to have the benefit
of the Bishop’s training; and thus a prospect was opened that
civilising influences would gradually be brought to bear at
the fountain-head; for when civilised wives can be found for
civilised men, there is good hope that, when settled in their
own homes, they will be able to withstand the influence of old
native habits and tribe associations, which otherwise cling
round them as a chain too strong to be broken where either
husband or wife only has been improved. As a proof of the


increasing welcome the Bishop meets with, I may mention,
that on the last visit but one his Lordship was roughly han-
dled, and his life and the lives of his companions perilled, by a
party of heathen natives on the island of Mallicolo ; last year
the ringleader of that attacking party, on the Bishop’s return to
the island, swam off and carried him ashore on his shoulders;
and one of the most influential young chiefs gladly accompa-
nied the Bishop to New Zealand—a noble-looking fellow—
whose finely developed head might form a model for a sculp-
tor. This striking change in the disposition of the Mallicolo
men was (as far as the Bishop’s imperfect power of communi-
cating with them enabled him to judge,) owing to the fact, that
during the interval between his visits intestine war had pre-
vailed amongst them to a great extent, and eight or nine men
of that attacking party had fallen in tribe-fights ; and the sur-
vivors had come to the conclusion, that this loss was a visita-
tion consequent upon their ill-treatment of the white Christian
teacher. Such a conviction in their minds is of course steadily
paving the way for the extension of the Bishop’s influence.
A young man from the Solomon’s Islands was also pointed out
to us in the College Hall, who, during the Bishop’s absence,
had put himself on board a whaler bound for Sydney, thence
run down to Auckland, and walked out to the College, to beg,
on behalf of his countrymen, that the Bishop would either
come or send them a white teacher, so much were they im-
pressed with the reports they had heard of his good influence
among neighbouring Islands. Shall we then be backward to
hold out a helping hand to the Bishop, when we see him, in the
orderings of God’s Providence, plainly called by occurrences
like this, to press forward in this work ? Can we not picture
him to ourselves standing with eye intently fixed on, and heart
yearning over, the vast expanse of heathen darkness lying
outstretched before him; “ pressed in the spirit,” as he longs
to lift the veil, and bring to the distant isles “ life and immor-
tality to light through the Gospeland then see him beckoned
onward by the advancing form of this poor heathen native,
coming out from the darkness, and earnestly crying to him
for aid ? Does it not vividly recall to mind St. Paul at Troas,
when, in the visions of the night, a form appeared and stood by
him ; and he recognised in the supernatural visitant “ a man
of Macedonia” come to plead the spiritual wants of his country?
And must not the Bishop on hearing this cry, “ Come over
and help us,” follow the example of the Apostle, “ and imme-
diately endeavour to go ... . Assuredly gathering that the
Lord hath called him for to preach the Gospel unto them ?”


And shall our supineness disable him from effectually doing
this? Surely not. It is worth notice that the young man above
mentioned came from an island where Romish missionaries were
close at hand, a clear proof of what I before asserted, that the
Church of England has a remarkable opening in these Islands
as distinct from the Church of Rome, and that she has nothing
to fear from the efforts of Rome, if she will but fairly work the
field into which Providence appears to be calling her. In-
deed, I was struck with the forcible manner in which the
Bishop dwelt upon this view of the Mission. His Lordship
testifies to the spirit of devotion and ready obedience to the
call of the Church of Rome, which has drawn numbers both
of male and female labourers to this Mission-field. Our own
whalers and sandal-wood traders have, he says, not unfre-
quently remarked to him, that great as may be the errors of
Romish teaching, none can deny the earnest spirit and good
intention which prompt these missionaries to station them-
selves on a scanty pittance in these far-off isles. And yet,
with all this, from some cause or other, whether the form in
which their teaching is presented be less suited to the native
mind than our own, which offers, as we believe, so much
larger a portion of pure and simple scriptural truth; or whe-
ther as Frenchmen (from whom the bulk of these Romish
missionaries are drawn,) they have less natural tact than the
English in sympathising with and winning the confidence of
the natives; the result, in a marked degree, appears to be
that they do fail in many instances to gain a lasting hold ; and
station after station the Bishop finds gradually abandoned
after years of trial; and his Lordship’s own expression is, “ I
believe, as regards mission-work in this field, that Lord Nel-
son’s saying will hold strictly true —‘ That one Englishman
is worth three Frenchmen.’” Can we wonder then, that
when, in that distant diocese, they hear much of resistance to
Papal aggression at home, they earnestly call for their hands
to be strengthened on a field where, if they had but means
and men, they feel assured that, under God’s blessing, the
efforts of Rome may be fairly met and overcome ?
On the score also of having made the most of the means
at hand, the Bishop surely deserves support. He has ma-
naged to work this Mission, including the maintenance of
his vessel* (which was bought for him by contributions
* Since the Bishop’s return from his last year’s cruise he has been obliged
to part with his vessel, as his present scanty funds will not suffice to meet the
great rise in seamen s wages, consequent upon the Australian gold-discoveries.
This inconvenience, experienced in greater or less degree by all in the Australian


from the Australian dioceses), and the expense of keeping
the Island youths for eight months out of twelve in his Col-
lege for some 500/. a-year, a sum not greatly exceeding the
annual expenditure upon a single Mission station in New Zea-
land, Yet last year his Lordship touched upon the outskirts of
a population which, judging from the present imperfect data,
cannot number less than 200,000 souls, —a number double that
of the New Zealanders, on whose behalf (and with a wise
liberality, as I believe from what I saw,) not less than 10,000/.
of Mission funds have long been annually spent. I may add
too, in order to remove misconceptions I have found existing,
that the Bishop fully recognises the importance of using the
native languages as the surest means of touching the hearts of
the people, whilst, at the same time, he is trying gradually
to introduce English as a general medium of communication
amid the Babel of dialects that prevail. He is also establish-
ing permanent mission work in these islands. Last year, as
will be seen by the extracts from Mr. Nihill’s Journal, a great
step was taken in this direction.
While the Bishop cruised to some forty or fifty islands
within ten degrees of the line, Mr. Nihill was stationed on
the Island of Mare, where his daily occupation was school-
keeping with young and old, with the aid of native teachers.
Frequently one hundred and thirty scholars were gathered
in a coral cavern on the shore, whose blackened walls, once
lighted up by the fires of cannibal feasts, now flash back the
harmless glare of a huge evening-school fire, and resound
with prayer, and praise, and useful instruction; so great has
been the transforming peaceful influence of that better light
which has reached the inmates from above. Mr. Nihill also
spent much time in translating, with the aid of native teachers,
the Lord’s Prayer, simple portions of Scripture, and of our
own Liturgy, that the natives might join in Common Prayer,
which they gladly did in large numbers daily. In addition to
these labours he took a census of the chief part of the island,
visited the heathen districts, and prepared the way for the
Bishop’s favourable reception by the most influential heathen
chief on his Lordship’s return from his cruise; and so well
did matters progress, that Mr. Nihill is probably at this time
again at Mare with the view of remaining, with Mrs. Nihill,
for a longer period; and the Bishop expressed a strong hope
of being able, after a short time, permanently to establish a
colonies who are connected with shipping, will, I trust, prove to his Lordship
but temporary. We need not, lam sure, take it as a type that the ark of the
Church will sink in the new found sea of gold.


Central Mission School on an adjoining island for the benefit
of a considerable district. Mr. Nihill was throughout most
zealously aided by the Samoan teachers who first introduced
Christianity to the island; and he was greatly delighted and
impressed with their simple unaffected earnestness in frankly
yet kindly delivering their message in the heathen and once
hostile districts through which they accompanied him.
It may serve as a proof of the friendly relations existing
between his Lordship and other missionaries in these islands,
that while he last year carried, as a sharer in his cabin, Mr.
Inglis, a Presbyterian missionary, with Mrs. Inglis, to be
stationed on the Island of Anaiteura, which he is sharing
with Mr. Geddie, who (as I understand) directs the missions
in connection with the Nova Scotia Presbyterian Missionary
Society in those seas ; Mr. Geddie gave the Bishop the in-
teresting letter inserted in the Appendix, directing the Mare
teachers heartily to work with the Bishop and Mr. Nihill,
which they did. His Lordship holds much friendly inter-
course with the other Protestant missionaries amongst these
islands: his rule is not to join in their public services, but
otherwise to afford them such aid in the way of advice and
encouragement as his own experience suggests ; and his de-
sire, as he has expressed it, is, that their work may run, not in
opposite, but in parallel lines, where it cannot be in ponjunc-
tion. His feeling indeed appears to be that there is ample
scope throughout these islands for the Church of England, of
Rome, and other religious communions fairly to try their re-
spective mission systems; and confident as he is that our own
system brings the largest amount of truth to bear, he has no
fear that its results will fall short of what ought consequently
to be expected from it. No one indeed, I think, could fail to
share the Bishop’s confident hope who saw, as we had the pri-
vilege of seeing, the striking scene in St. John’s College Chapel
on the Sunday evening after the Bishop’s return, when, at the
“ Unity Service,” * were gathered together representatives of
* The Unity Service above alluded to consists of a short selection of Psalms
and Collects bearing upon Unity, with the Versicles and Preface in the Com-
munion Service, the Prayer for Unity, a Prayer for the College, and one for the
Bishop, when absent. It was drawn up by the Bishop for use on Sunday even-
ing, when those members of the College who have been ordained, and placed in
charge of the pensioner villages and native settlements in the neighbourhood of
the College, reassemble and unite in this short service, which is chiefly choral,
and forms a cheerful conclusion to the labours of the day. It is conducted in
English, and the natives were not required to attend ; but the object of it was
explained to them, and their fondness for and aptitude in English chanting and
singing have given them great interest in it. Two or three of the clergy are now
settled on their cures, but near enough to admit of their occasionally joining in


eight different island dialects, two native Australians, a large
body of New Zealanders, and a body of Europeans, eleven
different “ nations, people, and tongues”—many doubtless, to
a great degree, dark in mind as well as body, yet all, I believe,
so far intelligent and instructed as to know that we were met
to pray to one Father, to lead us on, through one Saviour, to
our common home above. I will only add, with reference to
these Melanesians, that though time may have been when
their remote position may have seemed to render their claim
on mission efforts less urgent than that of others in more im-
mediate contact with Christian nations, that time must surely
now have passed away. The gold-fields of Australia, the
fountain-head, it would seem, of one of the mightiest streams
of influence which Providence has yet brought to bear upon
the destinies of the southern hemisphere and of the globe,
must rapidly cause the route by Panama through these islands
to be the highway of communication between our Australasian
colonies and home ; for good or for evil, a vastly increased in-
tercourse between Polynesian and European races must take
place; surely then we ought to lose no time in bringing Chris-
tianity and civilisation to bear upon them hand in hand, lest,
by our neglect now, we add another to the sad instances which
unhappily abound, in which the influence of the white man
and professing Christian, instead of raising, as it ought to raise,
our fellow-men of different hue to our own higher standard in
the world, has tended only to sweep off the dark races from
the face of the earth.
I trust I may not be trespassing too long upon your Grace’s
patience, whilst I venture briefly to press the not less urgent —
indeed, I think, still more urgent —case of the aborigines of
Australia. What I have last said with reference to the island-
ers unhappily applies, and for years past has been applying,
with tenfold force to them. Their country, not merely visited,
but occupied by Englishmen —their native sources of food in
great measure dried up by the advancing flocks of the white
man —themselves, in many instances, in the early days of the
colonies, through fear, or misunderstanding, or thoughtless-
ness, cruelly wronged, though, thank God, I fully believe a
far different spirit now generally pervades the settlers, and
they, as well as the government in each colony, are earnestly
this service; after which the Bishop delights in gathering round him as many
of the party as his room will hold, at a cheerful evening meal, when his Lord-
ship's conversational powers come out in great force. Might not some similar
service be beneficially adopted in many of our large parish churches to which
districts and a staff of clergy are attached ?


desirous to spare the remnant that is left; and could they
but see practical results springing from mission efforts, they
would, I believe, thankfully support them. The Government
indeed have throughout shown, and are showing, the greatest
anxiety to forward, by grants of land and other aid, any well-
devised schemes that may be brought to bear for Christianising
and civilising the natives.
But can we rest satisfied that the Church of England is
doing what she ought, so long as one single successful mission
(that of Archdeacon Hale at Port Lincoln, South Australia) is
the only manifestation of her desire to reclaim these wandering
tribes of the wild ? True that many attempts have been made
by the Government, and through other agencies, at no small
cost, and that the measure of success which has hitherto at-
tended them is, when compared with other missions, but very
small, though quite sufficient results have been, and are being
produced, to shew that the minds of the natives are fully
capable of receiving instruction, and that their hearts are as
open to good influences, when rightly brought to bear, as our
own. I might again refer, if proof of this were needed, to the
speeches delivered at the meeting in Sydney above alluded to,
especially to the instances brought forward by the Bishop of
Adelaide in moving the resolution, “That it is the duty of the
Church to use its unceasing endeavours, by direct mission-
ary agency, as well as by educational institutions, to bring
the Australian natives under the teaching of the Gospel; and
that sufficient evidences of God’s blessing upon the past work
have been afforded, to encourage us to expect more enlarged
success for the future.” These two points are also thoroughly
borne out by the recorded experience of such men as Sir
George Grey and Mr. Eyre, who, from their constant inter-
course with natives during their arduous explorations of the
country, and afterwards from their official positions, the for-
mer as Governor of South Australia, the latter as resident
magistrate (for the especial benefit of the natives) on the
Murray for some years, have spoken, with authority that none
can gainsay, upon all points connected with the character
and capabilities of the natives. To Sir George Grey the na-
tives of South Australia are deeply indebted for the energetic
efforts he made to carry out his designs for their improve-
ment, by the establishment of Industrial Training Schools, in
which his Excellency took constant and deep personal interest
during his residence in Adelaide. It is, as I understand, to
the all-important point of keeping up and promoting the
growth of the Christian and civilising influences under which


the youths and girls in those schools have been trained, that
the zealous Archdeacon at Adelaide has successfully directed
his mission efforts at Port Lincoln. There (at Poomindie, on the
river Tod), separated from the strong influence of old tribe habits
and associations, several married couples are reaping the benefit
of their previous training, and are making good progress in the
useful arts of life.* The same satisfactory results attended the
efforts of the Rev. George King (now of St. Andrew’s, Syd-
ney), who for several years with great success worked a mis-
sion in West Australia, until unfortunately compelled, by
failure of health, to resign it. Mr. King’s plan was similar
to that of Archdeacon Hale, and also to that which the Bishop
of New Zealand is carrying out for the Melanesians, viz. train-
ing the natives when young, and affording facilities for mar-
riage, when both husband and wife had been improved. The
Bishop of Adelaide on one occasion, during his stay at that
station, married four couples of the native race; and testified
that he had never seen more complete attention to the service,
or a more perfect comprehension of its sacredness, than was
exhibited by those people. The newly-married couples also
all subscribed their names to the parish register ; writing, the
Bishop declared, far more legibly than very many of those to
whose marriages he had been a party in England. No one
indeed, I think, could hear, as I had the pleasure of hearing,
Mr. King’s own simple and unpretending account of his
efforts in that Mission, and not feel convinced that, if it please
God to raise up such men as he is for the work, a considerable
measure of success may, with patience and perseverance, rea-
sonably be looked for. I may add one instance, which fell
under my own observation, in which a native showed a sound
mind and a good heart ; and that in a way that I could not
but feel was deeply humbling to ourselves. On my way up
the country I stayed a night at a roadside inn, not far from
Mount Alexander; a labourer, who had been working in the
innkeeper’s harvest-field, came drunk to the bar, and frantic
for more drink, which was refused him. His wife vainly tried
to drag him away, when a native quietly came up, and with
imperturbable temper carried him off, despite all his kicking
and swearing, to the hut half a mile from the house j and the
innkeeper’s remark was, “ That native has done the same
thing for that man not once nor twice only; and, as far as lies
* This mission now consists of fifty-four natives, comprising eleven married
couples, the rest children of either sex; for full details of it see a very interesting
letter of the Bishop of Adelaide just published by the Society for Promoting
Christianity.


in him, is doing his best to save him: and,” he added, “ I have
known him, when at work with a band of white men in the
harvest-field, quietly turn round to them when swearing, and
say, ‘Why you curse so?—Jesus Christ might strike you
dead.’” The native afterwards came back, and seeing I was
a clergyman, asked me for some books; and I was delighted
to find how well he understood English, and what a thought-
ful man he appeared. He had gained his knowledge of read-
ing while serving in the Native Mounted Police ; a school
which perhaps at first one would hardly have expected to
produce such a scholar, but which has, in many instances,
remarkably brought out the good points in the native cha-
racter; and shown how thoroughly it is capable, under proper
management, of becoming orderly and disciplined. My own
short experience, indeed, during a stay of a few months in
Port Philip and New South Wales, in the course of which I
twice visited, and spent several weeks at my brother’s station
on the River Murray, where the natives are numerous, and
present a favourable specimen of their race, greatly raised
my own estimation of their powers, both mental and bodily ;
and I feel sure that any one, who had a like opportunity of
intercourse with them, would, in like manner, find that the
impressions which too generally prevail amongst us as to the
inferiority of this race, and their incapability of improvement,
would be greatly modified. The great difficulty, no doubt, in
dealing with these blacks, is their innate love of a wandering
life. Love of fixity of tenure in any shape, except that of te-
naciously keeping their tribe boundaries, seems alien to their
nature ; and consequently it must be far more difficult to gain
a lasting hold upon these mere skimmers of the soil, than
upon tribes like the New Zealanders, who, from force of cir-
cumstances, had been driven through the preliminary stage
of civilisation, and were tillers of land, and dwellers in settled
houses, before the white man came in contact with them. Yet
I trust the few instances I have given may serve as cheering
tokens that good may be looked for from earnest mission
efforts; and even were such instances fewer and less hopeful
than they are, it would be no excuse for our neglecting to do
all that lies in our power to discharge what is but a bare debt
of justice to those whose country we have been called, in the
orderings of God’s Providence, to fill. Ought we then to rest
satisfied, that while of late years such vigorous and successful
efforts have been made to plant the Church in its fulness in
the colonies of Australia, that we have now four bishops (a
metropolitan and three suffragans) on the mainland, with a


speedy prospect of a fifth, one only of these dioceses should
be effectively working a portion of the vast extent of its
heathen mission field ? Beyond the northernmost limits of New
South Wales, and of the Diocese of Newcastle, the settlers
are fast pushing on stations to the tropical districts, where the
natives are numerous and dangerous, and frequent conflicts
are taking place. Yet no attempt, I believe, is being made to
bring them under subjection to the law of Christ, however
rapidly they may be brought to succumb to our own rule. In
the more thickly-settled districts of New South Wales and
Port Philip, so speedily have the natives disappeared, that
around Sydney the native names of various spots form the
only memorial of their race; and though seventeen years have
barely passed since the first colonists set foot on the present
site of Melbourne, then held by wandering tribes, now a city
of 80,000 souls, but a few wretchedly degraded specimens
are left in the neighbourhood of the city, and not a child is
to be seen. Of one tribe, along the course of the River
Loddon, not far from the present gold-fields round Mount
Alexander, which came under the observation of a brother of
my own some ten or twelve years since, and was then believed
to number 300 souls, scarcely an individual is now left. Dis-
eases and vicious habits, contracted from the white men, when
added to their own wretched superstitions, which alone must
always have greatly tended to keep down their numbers, have
rapidly done, and are doing, grievous work of destruc-
tion. Yet, in the more remote districts of these provinces,
and especially along the course of their boundary river, the
Murray, a considerable number are left, quite sufficient to
justify earnest mission efforts. And were such efforts fairly
started from home, they would, I believe, be more largely
supported on the spot than missions planted in almost any
other field to which we have directed attention.
The Diocesan Society of Melbourne, just before the disco-
very of gold, sent home for two missionaries, to whom they
guaranteed a maintenance; and though they withdrew their
proposal when the vastly-increased tide of emigrants threat-
ened (as it still does) to tax their efforts to the utmost, yet it
will be seen from the appended letter of the Bishop of Mel-
bourne, with whom I had the pleasure of conversing on the
subject, that the earnest Churchmen, as well as the govern-
ment in his diocese, would no doubt heartily co-operate in the
work. The attempts made by the government protectors in
that colony to improve the condition of the aborigines, have,
it must be owned with regret, almost entirely failed. Yet I
was thankful to find on the station of Mr. Parker, one of the


most intelligent and influential protectors, that a few young
men were settling on small government allotments of land,
and giving good hope of being fairly reclaimed from savage
life. At Lake Boga, on the Murray, not far from Swan Hill,
two German Moravian Missionaries are stationed, simple,
earnest-minded men they appeared; but they had been but a
short time there when I visited them, and no natives had
joined them.
Since the gold discoveries, and the consequent scarcity of
labour, the Murray natives, as well as those in other districts,
have been more generally employed by settlers than before;
though, to a certain extent, they have for some time been
found very useful, in sheep-washing especially, as they de-
light in the excitement of plunging the sheep into the river,
and the work does not last long enough to make them weary
of it. They would be first-rate shepherds if they would stea-
dily continue at work, as their extreme keenness of sight
and wonderful power of tracking, enable them to let their
flocks wander almost at will, without fear of loss. On the
whole, there is certainly an increasing tendency at this time
amongst them to betake themselves to settled work; and this,
as far as it goes, is an important point. One station I heard
of on the Murray, which for two years has been entirely
shepherded by blacks; and they are reported to be making
good progress in settled habits. Since my return home I
have had the pleasure of meeting a zealous, warm-hearted
person, Mrs. Eichard Heaver, who, with her husband, has
just returned to their station at Albury on the Murray, about
300 miles above the Moravian missionaries. Mrs. Heaver
was born in New South Wales, and from her earliest days
has been accustomed to the natives, and understands their
language. She and Mr. Heaver are very anxious to do all
they can to aid in establishing a native school in their own
neighbourhood. (I may add, as a proof of Mr. Heaver’s
earnestness in a good cause, that he gave up 160/., his share
of a reward granted for the discovery of a gold-field, for the
purpose of building a Church in the township of Albury.)
I cannot but hope and trust that sufficient means might
be raised, if suitable persons could be found, to start a native
school in that neighbourhood, on the same principles that
have already been found to answer in South and Western
Australia. It is, of course, with the greatest diffidence that I
venture to suggest any particular locality as the site of mission
efforts; but I think that such an indication as the desire of a
settler to begin and help on the work should not be lost sight
of ; and no step, of course, would be taken without the advice


and sanction of the Metropolitan, who is about to be appointed
as successor to the late lamented Bishop of Sydney. As Al-
bury is on the frontier line between Sydney and Melbourne,
probably arrangements would be made by which, if an efficient
school were started, it would receive the joint support of the
two dioceses, and no doubt these would speedily render it
independent of aid from home.
To one other point I will, in conclusion, venture to call
the special attention of the supporters of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, and that is the great desirableness
of resuming the mission which (as I have already mentioned)
that Society formerly supported in Western Australia. The
past success which attended the efforts of the Rev. George
King on that mission is the best warrant for the beneficial
results that might reasonably be hoped for from its resump-
tion. I will add only one reason —but that, to my mind, no
light one—why it ought to be started anew without delay.
Amongst our fellow-passengers home from Australia was the
Roman Catholic Bishop, who is Vicar Apostolic of Western
Australia, and in the course of much interesting conversation
with him, he spoke of the Native Mission which he is work-
ing with the aid of Sisters of Mercy; and though he dwelt
with great moderation on its success at present, yet it was
quite clear that the mission is beginning fairly to tell upon
some of the tribes in that district. Deeply as I regretted,
while the Bishop told me this, the unavoidable abandonment
of Mr. King’s efforts to bring the purer scriptural teaching
of our own Church to bear, I could not but feel very thankful
to learn that Sisters of Mercy were found willing to devote
themselves to a work so befitting their name, as well as to
learn that the Wesleyan Mission was making progress also.
But one fact the bishop mentioned which, I thought, ought
to startle us, as Englishmen and Churchmen. Some two
years since, a body of Spaniards, twenty in number, came
out to join him, with a free passage granted by the Spanish
government. Four or five were in holy orders, the rest useful
artisans and labourers of different kinds, sent for the purpose
of forming a large Industrial Mission Station for the natives,
which they are proceeding to do. They have five years’ pro-
bation allowed them, during which time any one who grows
faint-hearted may withdraw from the work; and a few have
betaken themselves to work at their trades, &c. on their own
account, but the bishop hopes that half will remain stedfast.
Now is it not a hard case that these poor natives, whose
country we are gradually occupying, and who, if neglected


as they have been, will quickly fade away before us, should
be driven, through our neglect, to look up to Romanists and
to foreigners as their best friends, not only for this world, but
also for that to come ?
With many apologies for the length to which these remarks
have run, but with earnest hope and prayer that they may help
to stir the sympathies of your Grace, and of the many in Eng-
land who are able and willing to forward a good cause, I re-
spectfully subscribe myself.
Your Grace’s obliged and faithful servant.
September 20, 1853. LEWIS M. HOGG.
The Bishop of Melbourne kindly gave me leave to make
known the contents of the following letter, in furtherance of
mission efforts amongst the aborigines in his diocese :
The Rev. Septimus L. Chase (an old college friend of
mine), to whom it is addressed, is incumbent of St. Paul’s
Church, Melbourne. Mr. Chase takes a deep interest in the
aborigines; and when in England two years ago he was de-
puted by the Melbourne Diocesan Society to engage two mis-
sionaries ; but the influx of the digging population, as I have
above mentioned, led the Society to withdraw their offer at
that time. This letter was written in consequence of conver-
sations on the subject which Mr. Chase and I held with the
bishop just before I left Melbourne,
Mv DEAR Mr. CHASE, Bishopscourt, Feb, 10, 1853,
If the Lord put it into the heart of any Christian
clergyman or layman in England to come and devote himself to
missionary work among the aborigines, I feel confident that the
earnest members of our Church in this colony would heartily co-
operate with him in his undertaking ; nor have I any doubt that
the government would assist in promoting his object, by granting
him a location, and otherwise, consistently with their regulations.
It is not in my power to guarantee a missionary any definite sum ;
but I have not the slightest fear of his obtaining, if he be really
qualified for the work, and willing to endure the privations neces-
sarily connected with it, that with which the Apostle teaches us we
ought to be content, viz. “ food and raiment.”
I am, my dear Mr. Chase,
Your faithful brother in the Lord,
C. Melbourne.


The following extracts from the Rev. William Nihill’s Journal
principally relate to his residence on the Island of Mare.
On June 19th, 1852, the Bishop and Mr. Nihill embarked with
twelve out of thirteen island boys, who had been brought to New
Zealand in Nov. 1851, one little fellow, Thol, had died. Three
New Zealanders accompanied the party, one of whom, Henare, or
Henry, stayed with Mr. Nihill and aided in his mission work—fre-
quent mention of him is made in the journal. It is, indeed, one of
the most cheering tokens of good resulting from this mission, that
it is beginning to raise a missionary spirit amongst the New Zea-
landers themselves. They have begun to devote their substance to
its support; and a few have volunteered to accompany the Bishop,
and act as missionaries themselves. One man I saw, at Mr. Ash-
well’s mission station, on the Waikato river, who had accompanied
the Bishop for this purpose in 1851, and had gone down to Auck-
land to join the party again last year; but he had been disap-
pointed, as, owing to the illness of one of the island boys, the Bi-
shop was obliged to start before the time fixed for this man to join
the vessel. There is no lack of useful employment for every one
on board during these cruises. One day we find the Europeans all
employed in learning from the Bishop to take lunar observations—
for his Lordship is as much at home in navigating his own vessel
as in his episcopal work ashore; plenty of school-work goes on.
On another day “ lots of scrubbing and cleansing above and below
deck,” for promotion of health and cleanliness; the boys wash their
own clothes. Mr. Nihill notes the amusing contrast between this
and the preceding return voyage from the islands, brought about
by English clothing and language, which seemed to have quite
changed the same individuals. Yet as they draw nearer home,
their native traits naturally reappear, “ they seem to get wilder
again; tie on handkerchiefs in room of native head-dresses; talk
more of their own tongue, and in louder tones.”
On July Ist comes the welcome cry of “ Land ahead !” and
Anaiteum is reached. Here they land Mr. Inglis (coadjutor of
Mr. Geddie, the zealous Presbyterian missionary on Anaiteum),
with Mrs. Inglis, and their live stock; and “ with good hope that
the friendly relations between the bishop and these missionaries
will continue.”
A quiet Sunday was spent off this island; all comfortable, with
clean decks, and the boys in white frocks and trousers, with red
neckerchiefs. Tanna and its volcano, and Futuna, in shape of a
frustrated cone, in sight. An old Tanna chief was on board, a fine
specimen of a fighting man, with one eye knocked out, and divers
other scars ; every lock of his hair, as their custom is, twisted round
with grass ; tortoise-shell earrings, armlets of shells, &c., and a
white plume, some two feet long, of which the old man was spc-


daily proud. On July sth they reached Futuna, where the Bishop
landed with two boys, “very different in appearance from what
they were when first brought on board eleven months ago. Though
they had made less progress in school-work than others, yet their
thoughtful and gentle expression of face would, Mr, N. thought,
point them out to a stranger as having been under instruction.”
Again, guided through the night by the light of the volcano of
Tanna, they reached that island next morning, where the Bishop
landed, and left the old chief with all his treasures.
On July 7th they touched at Erromango—the savage island
where the missionary Williams was murdered. Here the Bishop
took ashore one little fellow, Tom, and brought off Bob, who had
been left last time, and two other nice little boys. A very friendly
feeling is growing up towards the Bishop at this place. In the
evening they stood away to the southward, with a fair breeze for
Mare, which they reached next morning, July Bth, being the day
that the Bishop, in his list of “ agenda,” had set down for arrival at
this island. On their leaving Anaiteum, Mr. Geddie had kindly
furnished them with the following letter to the native teachers on
Mare:
(Translation.) Anaiteum, July 3d, 1852.
“ This is my letter to you teachers at Mare, to Maka, Mita, and
Paripoa. The chief minister from New Zealand arrived here yester-
day ; we have held a consultation about the thing of which Mr.
Murray and Mr. Sunderland told you. This, then, is my speech to
you, teachers at Mare : it is right that a clergyman, Mr. Nihill, and
an English teacher, should live in Mare. Do you all be kind to
them, and help them, and labour together with them in the work
of God in Mare.
“ Peace be with you all in God !
“ From Mr. Geddie.”
This letter proved a very satisfactory introduction ; but we must
now leave Mr. Nihill to speak for himself,
“ We hove-to,” he says, “ off Guama, to wait for a canoe that
was coming off to us (Guama and Siwarcko are two Christian settle-
ments at opposite extremities of the island). When they came along-
side, we recognised Bula the young chief, Narsilini, and others, all
old acquaintances. They brought most encouraging accounts of the
progress of religion in the island. When we were here before there
were five teachers on the island—three Samoan and two from Raro-
tonga. Since then one Samoan, Fili, has died; and another, Solia,
is gone to live on a small island to the north, called Toka. For the
next two months, there will be a good deal in my journal about the
teachers Solia, Maka, Mita, and Paripoa, and the chiefs Narsilini
and Bula. Maka, or Mark, is a fine tall Rarotonga man, about


twenty-six; was a child when Williams Was at Rarotonga, but re-
members him, and had the place where the “ Messenger of Peace"
was built pointed out to him by his father. He has had a very
good education ; but does not wiite as well, nor possess as much
information as the college boys. He and Paripoa are both good
carpenters, and handy men in every way.
Mita, the Samoan teacher, is a dear old man. He is neither a
good scholar nor a good workman, but he is an honest, upright
teacher. His wife talks villanous Nengone, but seems to be be-
loved by them all.
We hear that we shall only find Maka at Guama, Paripoa having
gone to Siwarcko to help Mita to put up a house.
Narsilini the elder, one of the chiefs, is a quiet, amiable man,
who, in his father’s lifetime, withstood all the attempts of a brother,
younger in years but superior in rank (since dead), to cut off boats
coming ashore from vessels. It is principally owing to him that
the teachers have been allowed to pursue their labours among the
people in peace.
Hezekiah, the younger Narsilini, was, when a heathen, always
foremost in fighting and all sorts of evil. He is now one of the
steadiest friends of the teachers. Bula, a younger brother of the
two others, is the principal chief here, and receives tribute from a
large part of the island. He is a young man about seventeen, and
has put away seven wives (only retaining the eighth), because he
wishes to become a Christian, at an age when no other youth would
be allowed to think of marrying. He is superior to the two Nar-
silinis and all the rest of his elder brothers, men old enough to be
his fathers; and the only reason I have ever heard is, that his father
chose him out of the rest of his sons to be the chief.
July 9. lam now in the teacher’s house. The three chiefs and
one of the teachers came on board this morning and had a very
satisfactory conversation with the Bishop ; and the whole party
shook hands with me, and expressed their readiness to be kind to
me, and work together with me.
July 10. The Bishop came on shore this morning, and stayed
four or five hours with us. He said that he had made up his mind
to baptise the four eldest boys (who had been in New Zealand),
Siapo, Napai, Kaiwhat, and Clio; and asked me to explain to Ka-
tiengo that he had better wait another year, and go on conducting
himself properly. He had not been recommended by the teachers
the year before, because, on returning to the island from their first
year’s schooling, he had gone off with his companion Uriete to fol-
low their own devices, and had not stayed with the Christian party,
or come to church regularly.
Sunday, July 11. The Bishop came on shore after breakfast;
and soon after we went to the church. The service was very inte-
resting. The baptismal service was in English, with the exception
of the particular words accompanying the act of baptism, which


were in Nengone. Although the prayers and exhortations were in
English, the meaning of them was explained by the teachers in the
language of the people ; and the extempore prayers of the teachers,
and the address given by one of them to the young men, were of
the same purport as those in the Prayer-book. Nothing here is so
wonderful to me as the people’s singing; there is all the Maori cor-
rectness of time without anything flat; the boys’ and women’s voices
keep up the pitch wonderfully—it is quite deafening. There were
at least 1000 people in the church, and, I suppose, every one of
them singing with the whole strength of his voice.
Siapo was called George, after the Bishop; Napai, Charles, after
Mr. Abraham; Kaiwhat, Mark, after the teacher; and Clio, Solo-
mon, a name of his own choice. After the service the Bishop left
us and sailed away.
The Bishop took Cho and Siapo with him, intending to call at
a good many places on the island of Lifu, and to land them again
on the north shore of this island. They can both talk Lifu well,
and were with poor Apalc when he died.
We are living amongst a most interesting set of people. There
are perhaps 2000 in our immediate neighbourhood (Guama), and
500 or 600 at the other end of the island, who have been for the last
three years professing Christians, who have had no other teachers
than' men from Rarotonga and Samoa. The two with whom we are
living are both young, unmarried men, who have been working
steadily here for the last six years, a great part of which time they
were without any resources but their own. They have gained the
respect and attention of all the natives ; and from these two places,
Guama and Siwarcko, converted natives are constantly going out
every Saturday morning to preach at other settlements, where the
people have not yet decided in favour of Christianity, thus extend-
ing the knowledge of the Gospel through the whole island by little
and little.
The early morning we spend in school and church. After break-
fast we devote two hours and a half to instructing the young men
who act as teachers. During this time, Henry writes out lessons,
&c. ;in the afternoon, he teaches, I print. On Thursday and Fri-
day evenings there are classes in the church. .Every night we
translate for about an hour and a half. The natives supply us with
food in abundance. They treat us just as they do their own chiefs;
and their teachableness is shown by the congregation on Sunday
amounting to 1000, and by Henry and myself receiving each a
regular daily attendance of about 25, -who spend two hours most
patiently and attentively in being instructed by us; having already
been two hours in the church, either teaching or being taught.
I write down the names of all the people at every village I visit,
and find it of the greatest use. I collect seeds, ferns, leaves, shells,
&c. as I walk through the woods and on the beach. I find-all these
things are so many pegs to hang words on. The children have


found out my propensity, and they bring me insects and flowers to
bottle up and write down. lam afraid my notes are getting unin-
telligible; for lam writing in public. I counted the row of faces
just opposite to me a short time ago, and they amounted to forty-
five. I have no table, and cannot write so well without as with
one. The light is not very good, although a little maiden takes her
place at the fire, in the centre of the room, as soon as it is dark, and
keeps feeding the flame with the dry stalks of the cocoa-nut-tree,
which she splits up with her teeth. She never moves from her
place, and never speaks till she is relieved by another. These people
spend more time in worship and religious exercises than any I have
ever known. Ido not know what time monks in religious houses
are supposed to spend in common worship; but every Sunday these
people devote seven or eight hours to it. During the whole time,
broken up into five parts, they are either hearing prayer, or reading,
or being catechised, or singing. Every thing is conducted with the
greatest solemnity and decorum; and lam quite anxious and per-
plexed, because I fear that this cannot last, and that, unless God
gives these simple converts a greater share of grace to keep them
steadfast than is usually vouchsafed to men, there must be a falling
away. Religion has become the business of their lives; and unless
something is given them to do, they cannot, I fear, withstand the
temptations which their easy mode of life must continually expose
them to when the novelty is worn off. The interest seems likely to
be kept up at present by their missionary efforts among the neigh-
bouring wild tribes; for every week six or eight poor missionaries
set out on a long and weary path, with no other dress than a bundle
of leaves round their waist, and no better stock of knowledge than
they have been able to pick up from the Samoan teachers —broken
Nengone. These Samoan teachers, themselves the fountain of in-
struction, having had no other help to draw upon than the portions
of Scripture translated into their own language. But can one
doubt that the Spirit of God goes with them 1 Most of the teachers
scattered through these islands were young men when they came;
and, with very few exceptions, they have been enabled to keep their
own good name, and to raise their hearers from the deepest hea-
thenism to a state of professed Christianity. The two things that
seem to have been wanting in New Zealand are now in a great
measure supplied there by the recent introduction of missionary
efforts for the benefit of the other islands, and by the establishment
of children’s schools. The Waikato tribe have regular missionary
meetings, and have contributed both men and money to the work.
The Sunday before we left, my own little congregation at Orakie,
entirely of their own accord, subscribed nearly 4 1, at the offertory.
I wish I could introduce something of the kind here; for the spirit
of contribution is very powerful. The people frequently bring us
presents of pigs, fowls, fish, yams, &c.; and little children, whom I
pass in the woods with bundles of sugar-canes on their backs, while


they draw up in a line on one side of the path amongst the bushes,
half frightened at the unwonted appearance of a white man, Whis-
per, as I pass, “Waca” (sugar-cane), or “waum” (cocoa-nut); “give
him some sugar-cane,” and hand me a present, or if I have been too
quick for them, run after me with it. Truly, they deserve to be
taught; and the little which Henry and I are able to do for them
in our short stay, is repaid over and over again every day by sub-
stantial marks of gratitude, and a thousand little attentions and
kindnesses from young and old, —from Old Sarai, who creeps into
the house while we are away to shake the mats; and Cho’s mother,
who follows me into the canoe, to ask where she shall bring some
cocoa-nuts which she has been keeping for me, and then jumps
up to her shoulders in the sea, the canoe having set sail while she
has been talking, down to little Tewene, who brings me a live mouse,
and then crouches down at my feet to see whether I will eat it up,
or skin it, or put it in a box, “ bane hue New Zealand” (to take to
New Zealand).
This evening, in taking my usual walk (to the top of the hill,
from whence one gets a good view of the sea), I met three children
carrying firewood. They stood aside, as all the people here do, to
let me pass, the path through the wood being narrow; but instead
of going on quietly, as they generally do, they began to talk to me
like the little New Zealand children, with their white teeth and
laughing eyes, instead of showing the gravity and thoughtfulness
which seems to weigh the Nengone children down;- but perhaps it
is only excessive respect after all. “ Lengenge re bua 1” “ Where
are you going to, sir 1” for they are all very ceremonious, and I am
never addressed with the common expression of “HuengeT “Where
are you going to 1” “I am going for a walk.” “ May Igo with
you to New Zealand T “ What for 1” “To learn to read.” “What
is your name 1” “ Keddine; you wrote it down in your book yes-
terday.” I shall keep an eye on Keddine, for he seemed an intelli-
gent-looking little fellow.
These people are certainly willing to support their ministers.
They bring presents of yams, taro, kumara, every day; and to-day
our little friend Katiengo and our old reprobate scholar, Uriete,
brought me a present of half a pig. I met a party of young men
this evening; and as I was sitting down to rest, they made me a
present of cocoa-nuts, each one contributing a cocoa-nut.
The native teachers have a very good standing here, and they
seem to behave with so much good sense and circumspection, that
I can quite safely take them as a guide in all intercourse with the
natives.
One day a canoe arrived from Lifu with some Tonga people
from this place on board. One of the Tonga men, Samuela, said
that 5700 people at Lifu had embraced the Gospel (Elenia afi epta
lau), I hardly know how much of this is likely to be true till I
can form some more correct idea of the number of people on this


island* Samuela is a Tonga man, the son of old Sarai, who was
one of a party of Tonga people, who drifted away from their own
island some fifty years ago. He makes his arrangements about his
work so as to accompany me on every long journey. I always find
him ready to go, and am glad of his company. He talks the Elzeri,
Nengone, New Caledonia, Samoan, and Lifu languages, none of
which, as far as I know, have any affinity, equally Well. He is a
vigorous-minded, zealous man, was the first in this island to put
away his numerous wives, is always first in good. God grant he
may never be foremost in evil, like many relapsed New Zealanders
of his character whom I have known !
Saturday, July 17. This is a working day amongst the scholars
here, as it is in New Zealand. Part of them are away, bringing food
from the plantations, some are washing clothes, &c. This morning
I occupied myself in putting up the little printing-press and two
cases of type, which we brought from the college.
Monday, July 19. Set up the Lord’s Prayer in Nengone, and
took off two or three proofs.
Applications for admission to the school in New Zealand are
crowding in every day.
All my spare time I employ in learning the language. The
translation of the Scriptures gets on very slowly at present. There
are never less than three of us employed at a time ; and as we have
two different languages to consult before it is turned into Nengone,
each verse takes about a quarter of an hour.
Aug. 1. This evening I went to see Kelesiano’s father, who is
ill. I found a fine, white-haired old man lying on the ground, with
his head resting on his son’s arms and knees. One hand of Kelesi-
ano’s was supporting the old man's head; with the other, he every
now and then broke off a leaf from a branch which he had lying by
him, and wiped the old man’s lips. I found that he was not an Isle
of Mar 6 man, but that he belonged to Lifu. They spoke to him in
Lifu, and told him I wanted to know how he was. He pressed my
hand, and said, “It is very good of you to come and see me.” He
used to live at some distance; but now he lives in this settlement, his
sons representing to him that he was too old to take a long journey
backwards and forwards to church every day. I found that his son
Kelesiano, and a young Tonga man, born on this island, had been
his instructors.
Some twelve miles to windward, a canoe laden with Monte
Kurabi people has been upset. All the people were drowned but
one woman, who swam ashore ; but it was to an enemy’s country (a
tribe at war with the Monte Kurabi), and she was killed. The
others preferred remaining in the canoe to attempting to gain the
shore. Oh, may God in His mercy speedily enlighten the hearts of
these people, and make every little coral reef and inlet what he
seems to have intended them for—places where shipwrecked stran-
gers may “be minded if possible to thrust in the ship !” And I


have no doubt that in a few years the whole island will have become
what this place is now—a settlement of quiet, peaceable Christians,
having had light vouchsafed to them, and endeavouring to impart it
to others.
Aug. 18. Went to Aaitcheue with Siapo, to see a poor dying man.
He was one of their best warriors, but was reduced to a mere ske-
leton when I saw him. Finding it difficult to make him hear me,
I asked Siapo to speak to him; and he bent over him, and spoke in
his ear such words of consolation as could be offered to a man who
had never during his lifetime taken any interest in religion, but who,
in his last moments, knew enough to be able to answer the question
of “Who is alone able to save sinners 1” by “ Jesu Mesia.”
Aug. 22. The native missionary teachers, on their return from
Liguresaba, said that a sick man had been buried alive there, that
is to say, put in a deep coral hole, where, if he lives, they will sup-
ply him with food, and pull him up again if he recovers. It was a
very common practice here before the people became Christians,
and I have heard some horrible stories about it.
Aug. 24. Started on a visit to some of the heathen parts of the
island; Narsilini and Bula, Samuela and others, accompanying us.
We were very well received, and Narsilini and Bula were introduced
by one or two others who happened to know them, for the chiefs
rarely venture amongst hostile tribes, except to fight in war time.
I never saw a greater contrast than the wild heathen tribe presented
to our quiet-looking, dressed Liguama. The chief .received us very
well; listened to old Narsilini’s introduction of himself and Bula,
and the two messengers, and said, much in the same way as an
English gentleman would beg one to make his house one’s home,
“ My country is at your disposal, and if you are thirsty take the
cocoa-nuts, if you are hungry take yams, and kill fowls—all is
yours.” We then introduced the subject of our visit, and dear old
Narsilini spoke out boldly, but with the greatest courtesy, contrast-
ing the way in which they used to come, with spears and clubs, and
hundreds of people at their feet, with our present peaceful visit;
and again contrasting even the way in which we now came, not
boldly, and assured of a friendly reception, but rather throwing our-
selves on their good feeling and sense of hospitality, with what might
be the case were the whole island Christianised.
The chief listened to us all with the greatest courtesy, and said
that all his people wished to hear the Gospel, and would willingly
embrace it if it was taught to them. We then proposed to take two
young men back with us to be instructed, and he promised to choose
out two for us. We then said we were going on to Cherrethei next
day, and if he would collect his people in the meantime, we would
speak to them on our return.
Aug. 25. Started early for Cherrethei, passing through several
villages of the Sihmedda (or inhabitants of Himedda), in each of
which one of the chiefs stepped out, and handed Narsilini and Bula


a spear or a long strip of native cloth, or a pipe, as a token of amity.
In the largest of these villages an old spokesman, called Tebuama,
made an excellent speech, saying, he had heard of our arrival, and
had ordered his young men to lay aside their spears and clubs, and
to meet us as friends. “ I have seen some of you before in war,” he
added, “but now I have a good view of your faces; this is as it
should be. Stay with us ; tell us of the new doctrine you have em-
braced ; let us all be friends; let the chiefs of both people act
together in peace.” On hearing that we were going to Cherrethei,
he asked us when we intended to return. We told him we thought
the next day, but could not be sure. He interrupted us by saying,
“ Never mind; why should you name a day? Go wherever you will;
return when you like; be as free in our country as in your own.”
In the evening all the heathen party assembled for a native
dance, at least most of the young men ; the elder ones stayed with
Maka, Narsilini, Samuela, and myself, in friendly conversation. The
principal difficulties in the way of embracing Christianity seemed to
be, first, the fear of the neighbouring tribes if they gave up war;
and second, a dislike to part with their supernumerary wives.
The dance was suddenly broken up by the chief giving a shrill
whistle, and saying, in clear, calm tones, which made me wonder
why he countenanced the whooping and screaming which had just
been deafening us all, “Let two men go to the villages of the
Sigure-wotocha and Li and Si, and invite them all to come to-
morrow to see the Liguama chiefs, and hear the words of the two
messengers; and let each man bring some food for the strangers.”
A voice from the crowd cried out, “ When are we to go V' “Now.”
In five minutes the whole circus was cleared; the fire scattered in
all directions, each little party of. men taking a stick to light them
home. For a quarter of an hour one could hear a shrill whistle or
cry from the numerous paths in the neighbourhood, and for the rest
of the night all was still and orderly.
Aug. 26. Towards the middle of the day a large number of
people from the neighbourhood had assembled, and we had a good
deal of talk wuth the old men, the chiefs not giving any answer
themselves, but putting forward the old “ men of words.”
I have not time to give an abstract of their speeches; but old
Waga declared it was easy to give an opinion about the different sorts
of food, or different trees, their good and bad qualities ; but this
was a thing that required thought and consideration, and he could
not tell which course to pursue till he had learnt more about it.
We then tried to press the point of their sending men with us to
learn our religion at Guama; and they all agreed that it was a good
plan, but none of the youths would venture. The conference was
very friendly; and if no other good had resulted from it than my
obtaining the names of the people of three of the principal tribes,
and making the acquaintance of the chiefs, I could not call it lost
time.


We started on our return in the evening. At a place where a
cross road turns off to Guama we all set down, and a serious consul-
tation was held whether Bula and a larger part of our company should
not go straightway home, instead of accompanying us to a hostile
tribe. We remained perfectly quiet while the pros and cons were
discussed, till Narsilini and Samuela, and one or two others, said,
“ Balm” (Let us go on). “We carry the word of God. Why
should we fear ? Let us go with the f rue natta.’ ” This night we
slept in the wood, just within the country of the Sihmeddu. The
next morning we met old Tchuma and all his tribe, the chiefs, and
the old “ men of words,” and nothing could be more friendly than
our reception.
I have just forgotten to say, that at our sleeping-place last
night we hailed an unexpected addition to our party, a young lad
from Cherrethei, who had followed in our track to go to Guama,
and “ ienno 16 tusi ” (leam to read book). This step he had taken
with the usual independence of savage life, not staying to ask his
friends to give their consent. I need not say he was joyfully re-
ceived.
Dear old Narsilini, I cannot express the respect I feel for him.
He is not at all cut out for active exercise, but for the last three
days he has toiled along in front of us, stopping in places where he
has been half afraid for his life, and trying to persuade savage can-
nibals, very lately determined enemies, to open their eyes to the
truth which has dawned upon him. Ido believe our little trip has
been productive of good effects ; if we have brought back no scho-
lars, or only one, there must at least have arisen a great deal of
good feeling between the chiefs of the respective tribes, which is
one of the principal things wanted.
Sunday, Sept. 5. Preached twice. Catechised Napai’s and Cho’s
class of 133 boys, who assemble directly after morning and evening
service to be questioned about the sermon. Their schoolroom is a
cavern in the face of the limestone rock. The boys sit on the broad
ledge of rock which forms the floor, and the teachers sit on the little
projecting ledges of the side. In the evening we had a large fire,
lighting up the pillars and hanging stalactytes of the cave, already
blackened by the smoke of fires ages ago, when the assembly pro-
bably did not consist of innocent children, but of savage cannibals.
I wish you could see us. Cho and Siapo in their white frocks and
trousers, and the 130 children repeating the Lord’s Prayer, almost
for the first time in their lives, congregational prayer never having
been introduced by the teachers, and the Lord’s Prayer not trans-
lated. Under the cocoa-nut trees, at a little distance, Mita’s wife
had assembled her class of young girls, and all around us, in front
of every house, was a little company of 30 or 40 people, with their
teacher, all hidden from us by the thick cocoa-nut palms, but the
whereabouts of each class was quite evident from the hymn that
began and finished the school.


Sept. 13. Started to Siwarcko, bearing in mind wlxat the Bishop
said one day, that if missionaries of the present day were to act
more up to the spirit of the instructions which our Lord gave his
disciples, to take neither bread, nor scrip, nor money, nor two coats
a-piece, they would be able to go into places where now they dare
not venture : we did not even take a blanket with us.
Sept. 14. Started early to Titi, Buama’s place, our little party
of carefully selected “ eligibles ” for a visit to a hostile tribe being
increased by the addition of two men from Nungode, and two highly
eligible companions from the Monte Rurube, fine tall fellows, in
Adam’s costume. To this place two men from Siguamba and Si-
warcko stations go alternately every week to meet a congregation of
Jive, amongst at least one thousand. Sometimes they are laughed
at, and sometimes threatened; but they keep on steadily, drawing
upon as slender a stock of information as a Christian teacher can
well be supposed to possess.
The “ Titi” is a high, steep crag, rising like a comb from the
surface of the island. Buama is a perfect “ refuge for the desti-
tute ;” and small tribes and families have assembled round him
from all quarters, besides single men who join him, as David’s fol-
lowers did.
We had to wait a long time before he honoured us with his pre-
sence, but when he did, I was agreeably surprised with his appear-
ance. He is a middle-sized, thoughtful, intelligent-looking man.
He was very civil, and listened attentively to all we had to say. I
could not help admiring the boldness and clearness with which
Maka and the Nengone and Tonga Christians stated the reason of
our visit.
Sept. 25. This evening the joyful cry of “ Koi ni Bishop” sounded
from one end of the village to the other ; and at night I had the
satisfaction of receiving a note from the Bishop, brought by one of
our boys, who had pulled off to the vessel as soon as she came near.
Thank God, they are all safe and well, and had suffered nothing but
influenza, which seems to have been felt far and near. We heard
that they had been to Futuna, Tanna, and Anaiteum, and that there
were two Mallicolo men on board.
Sept. 26. The Bishop came on shore this morning, with a boat-
ful of boys under the care of Nelson. The two Mallicolo men were
the only new ones, as we had already seen the four little Erromango
boys before we were left at Mare. In service this morning, sixteen
adults and ten children were baptised.
Sept. 27. This morning we chose out the five boys from this
place who are to go to New Zealand, the Bishop having allowed us
to take this number. The candidates were many ; but with the
usual good sense and proper feeling of the people of this place, they
made no difficulty whatever about abiding by our choice. This time
we have ventured upon taking two young ladies, one of whom is to
be Mrs. Siapo.


Sept. 28. Landed at Siwarcko; and having left all the boys and
girls under the care of Mita and his wife, we set off for the Titi, to
pay a long-promised visit to Buama, the Bishop having sent a mes-
sage to him by three young men who came on board the last time
we were here.
Davida and one of our boys went on as messengers, and towards
evening we found Buama at a place about two miles short of his
own village. The Bishop introduced the reason of his visit, that
if he had found that the southern side of the island was the only
one on which there were yams and cocoa-nuts, he would have gone
off in the vessel to bring all sorts of food from Tanna and Anaiteum,
to be planted here for the benefit of the Siguresaba; but that he had
found there was plenty of all sorts of food, and only one tree want-
in o —the tree of the Gospel; which had been planted at Guama,
and had spread and borne fruit among the Siguamba, but had not
yet been planted among the Siguresaba. To plant this tree was
the reason of his visit. Buama listened with great attention ; and
in the course of the evening gave his consent to two out of three
points which the Bishop proposed to him. Ist. That Davida should
be allowed to visit his tribe, and teach them as well as the Cher-
rethei people, with whom they are at war. 2d. That he would send
two of his young men with us to New Zealand to be taught. 3d.
That on our return, in six months, the chiefs would meet the chiefs
of other tribes, either on board our vessel, or at one of their
own villages. To this we could get no decisive answer, as it was,
perhaps, not very much to be expected we should.
29th. One lad came with us ; and it was with very great plea-
sure that I afterwards welcomed an old man who brought off his
son, a boy whom the Bishop chose last year, but who was kept back
by his mother. The poor old man placed him in our hands, saying,
“ I have brought you Thamma, he is my only son; take care of
him.” As his canoe pulled off, he kept shouting out, “ Thamma,
good-by. Take care of Thamma.”
Oct. 4th. This is the day of the Ladies’ Stitchery at Auckland,
and we have had an opposition one on board. Our twenty-three
boys all want clothes; and to-day we commenced our tailoring in
good earnest. I wish you could have seen the sempsters. First,
the Bishop, with Tol and two other Lifu boys, basting, felling, sew-
ing, stitching, &c. Each of us takes two boys to instruct and
superintend; and with the very raw materials, like the Mallicolo
boys, who do nothing but gape and stare about for some months,
one has to make the clothes. My two are a couple of little bright-
eyed Doka boys, one of whom made very fair button-holes at°the
end of this our first day’s sewing-school. Sydney had the two Lifu
men, steady, slow-going old fellows, between twenty and thirty.
Every sailor is also by profession a tailor; so that we had the four-
men and the two boys all at work, besides Champion. Our whole
party at work amounted to nineteen.


Bth. Once more safe back again; all our friends, thank God, quite
well, and glad to see us. There is nothing in this life like a warm
welcome home again, and nothing to which I look forward with
greater pleasure than the kindly greetings that always await us on
our return, when we march up with our new scholars, and some old
ones too, to settle down again at the College.
1853. In January last, the Melanesian School sustained a severe
loss in the death of another of the earliest pupils, George Siapo.
Siapo was a noble specimen of his race. His handsome, thoughtful
countenance was a true index to his mind.
The Bishop made his acquaintance four years before, when he
went down to the bottom of one of the coral-pits in his own island,
to draw water for the strange white man. The Bishop, who is an
accomplished physiognomist, was struck with his expression as he
looked up at him from the bottom of the pit, and resolved, if pos-
sible, to induce him to come to New Zealand. He came with two
companions; and from that time till his death continued to be a
steady friend and helper to the cause of Christianity, using his in-
fluence (which was considerable, from his being a near relation and
the intimate friend of the young chief) always in the best way, both
among his school-fellows in New Zealand and his friends the young
men at home. At Mallicolo he risked his life on shore with the
watering-party, when the Bishop and his companions were in dan-
ger. Before returning to the College for his last visit, he had said
to one of the chiefs, who had adopted him when a boy, “ I am afraid
I shall die some day in New Zealand.” And his friend replied,
“ Even if you do, it is better that you should go.” So he came,
bowing meekly to the decision of the chief of his tribe, and of the
Bishop, his English father. This is the spirit in which he always
acted. In danger, and difficulty, and disappointment, his ready,
cheerful, unquestioning obedience could always be counted on.
On his death-bed he was very anxious that his younger brother
should be brought from Mare on the Bishop’s next visit. For an
hour or two before he breathed his last, he was constantly giving
kind messages by the boys to his friends ait home on Mr. Nihill’s
behalf: “ Wadokala, take care of Mr. Nihill when I am gone.
Poor Mr. Nihill, you and I have gone together, and now I die,
and you go alone !”
Persons wishing to aid the Bishop of New Zealand in his Mela-
nesian Mission, may send their contributions to the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, 79 Pall Mall ; or to the New Zealand
fund at Messrs. Herries, Farquhar, and Co., St. James’s Street; or


to the Rev. Edward Coleridge, Eton College, who will also grate-
fully receive and forward to the Bishop, books, scripture prints,
cloth, linen, or any other articles likely to prove useful or instruc-
tive to the natives.
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel will also gladly
receive contributions for Missions to the Australian Aborigines, and
will transmit them to the metropolitan at Sydney, on behalf of this
object of the Australasian Board of Missions ; or, if specially re-
quested, will transmit them to the Bishop of any one of the Austra-
lian Dioceses in which Mission work may be attempted.
THE END.
LONDONi
PRINTED BT ROBSON, LEVEY, AND FRANKLTN,
Great New Street and Fetter Lane.
