

iftlO
tribute
of tI{C
JWmtWg
of pefu Jioutlr Wales
to the of
decree |WfJmt pUilsoo,
Jzsqxtirc,
of ilje (Assembly
■Nebi Jioutb pialcs.


■


NEW SOUTH WALES.
EXTRACT FROM VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS,
No. 59.
Tuesday, 28th April, 1942.
Death of
George Alan Lachlan Wilson, Esquire,
Member for Dubbo.
Mr. McKell moved (by consent), without notice, —
(1) That this House desires to place on record its sense of the loss
this State has sustained by the death of George Alan Lachlan
Wilson, Esquire, Member for Dubbo.
(2) That Mr. Speaker be requested to communicate to Mrs. Wilson
the above resolution, together with an expression of the
sympathy and sorrow of the Members of the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales in the loss she has sustained.
(3) That, as a tribute of respect, this House do now adjourn.
The motion having been seconded by Mr. Mair and supported
by Lieut.-Colonel Bruxner, Mr. Kelly, Major Shand,
Mr. W. McC. Gollan, Mr. Treatt and Mr. Macdonald, —
Question put and carried,—Members and Officers of the
House standing.
Speaker.
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly.
3


4


Extracts from the New South Wales
Parliamentary Debates,
Tuesday, 28th April, 1942.
®re ~ftik
George JMmr ;Eltlsott,
Jcsqurre,
Mr. McKELL, Premier and Colonial Treasurer: I move:
(i) That this House desires to place on record its sense of the loss
this State has sustained by the death of George Alan Lachlan
Wilson, Esquire, member for Dubbo.
(2) That Mr. Speaker be requested to communicate to Mrs. Wilson
the above resolution, together with an expression of the
sympathy and sorrow of the members of the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales in the loss she has sustained.
(3) That, as a tribute of respect, this House do now adjourn.
To-tky we mourn the loss of a distinguished and faithful
member of this House, and a great Australian. Ten years
ago George Wilson joined us in this Chamber. To-day he
is gone. He has left us as a comparatively young man. His
passing brings poignantly home to me, in looking down
the history of the years, how few there are in this Chamber
to-day that were here when I first entered Parliament. When
5


I realise just how many gentlemen with whom I was
associated in this House have passed to the Great Beyond,
I appreciate to the full the terrific toll that public life takes
of the lives of those who have a part in it. That is an
answer to those who never hesitate to suggest that in public
life the road is easy, and the work accomplished compara-
tively small. George Wilson represented his constituency
faithfully and honourably. He represented not only his
constituency, but also his country, and in serving his
constituency as he did he gave noble and loyal service to
the State of New South Wales. He was a man who endeared
himself to every other hon. member, and in so doing he
manifested his character and worth; for, when all is said
and done, what is there that counts more in life than that
a man shall pass out honoured, respected and loved by those
with whom he has worked? George Wilson was a great
Australian, and for two specific reasons. When Australia
was in danger he went forth nobly and courageously to
defend her, and in defence of the country that he loved
he made the supreme sacrifice—not at the moment when
a great tragedy fell upon him, but somewhat later. George
Wilson made the supreme sacrifice on the battlefield of
France, when he sustained the severe wound which meant
pain and suffering to him for the rest of his life, and which,
I think, was eventually responsible for his death. He was a
great sufferer. No one except George Wilson knew what
he went through after being wounded in action, but, like
the man he was, exhibiting that courage which was so
characteristic of him, he took it all with a smile. He was
never known to whinge—his smiling face always hid the
terrible suffering he endured. He was a great Australian
in another sense in that he undertook all the obligations of
citizenship. What more can a man do for his country than
to go forth and defend her when she is at war, and after-
6


wards accept all the obligations of peace? He was a great
citizen, and gave great public service. He served in this
House; he served in the sphere of local government; he
served in association with the men with whom his economic
interests lay. George Wilson was a man who loved the wide
open spaces as a true Australian and with a love that was
inherent in him. Because George Wilson loved the land
he always sought to preserve it. The land-lover is not one
who exploits the land for what he can get from it. The land-
lover of the type of George Wilson, regarded as one of the
obligations of his life a duty to see that the land was
preserved, and the soil conserved, so that it would be possible
to hand down to those who followed him the glorious country
that he inherited. His contributions to methods of soil
conservation and pastoral improvement will remain as
monuments of his love of Australia and his devotion to the
interests of his country. We shall miss his smiling face, we
shall miss his pleasant personality, and we shall miss the
contributions that he made to the debates in this House. We
shall miss him because he was distinguished by those two
great essentials to the representation of democracy to-day—■
character, and courage to do what is right. Democracy
to-day is passing through the crucible. Democracy can live,
and will live, only if its parliamentary representatives are
possessed of the two essentials to which I have referred. On
behalf of the Cabinet and other hon. members on this side
of the House, I desire to extend to his sorrowing widow
and to his relatives our deepest sympathy in the great loss
that they have sustained.
Mr. MAIR: I join with the leader of this House, albeit
with much sorrow, in his great tribute to our late colleague,
Mr. George Wilson. The Premier spoke feelingly, as one
would expect him to do in such sad circumstances. Every
7


member of this House must have noticed how George Wilson
was failing. We could see the courageous fight that he was
putting up against a combination of war injuries and illness.
He suffered a great affliction caused by serving his country.
That alone was enough to dispirit anyone, hut George Wilson
had the spirit and courage to overcome his great disability.
Afterwards, when he was stricken with illness, the same
spirit was evident. His fight was admired by all of us.
Latterly it has been most noticeable how this hon. gentleman
was suffering and failing in his power of resistance. The
Premier has made mention of the number of his colleagues
who have passed from this House. It is so; there have
been many who have thus left us. Public life to-day is most
strenuous. One who fully feels his public responsibilities
must gradually wear himself out. We had little direct
opportunity in this House to know how much work the late
Mr. George Wilson had been doing in connection with the
Liquid Fuel Control Board, , under the Commonwealth
Government. That work necessitated his travelling a great
deal, though he was suffering so, and we know what travel
means in such distressing circumstances. I believe that his
sense of duty to his country was just as great as that of a
man fighting on the battlefront.
I am pleased that the Premier made mentioned of the love
of our late colleague for his native soil. He was of the
earth, and loved the soil, and made a most substantial
contribution to the general understanding of scientific
methods of farming. Not privileged to work hard physically,
because of his disability, he made an intensive study of such
matters as pasture improvement, and anyone who has been
privileged to converse with him on this subject must have
been impressed by his great enthusiasm and the intensity of
his efforts to ensure for posterity the preservation of the
8


soil of this land. After all, it is from the soil, as he knew,
that Australia derives her wealth. It is a sad day indeed.
We all loved him. He was one of those few in the world
to-day who valued a man according to his worth and not
according to his possessions. He knew that character was
the greatest of all measuring rods. He was lovable, and one
was instinctively drawn closer to him. I remember how wan
he looked when he passed me here only last Thursday; I
said then to one of my colleagues, “George is not long
with us. lo some it comes that in life they reach the point
of knowing that they will not be long here; he seemed to
have that understanding, and it surrounded him with an
aura of great personal charm and beauty. I feel very
grieved, and I am sure that we all are. May God show
His mercy to the relatives in their great sorrow.
Lt.-Colonel BRUXNER; It was my honoured privilege
yesterday to address at the church a very great gathering
which assembled to pay a wonderful tribute to our late
member. As I said then—and I can find no other words
to express my thoughts now —the country and this House
have lost a man of splendid spirit and a very gallant soul.
During the years in which I was associated with George
Wilson I always wished I had more of his qualities, and I
always hoped that when my boys reached manhood they,
too, would acquire his splendid characteristics. I have
listened to the Premier and the leader of the Opposition
saying what was in my mind yesterday when I was speaking
at the church. George Wilson was not only admired and
esteemed by everybody; he was loved. He had the faculty
of making men love him. He had all the qualities men like
to possess—loyalty, courage, self-sacrifice, unselfishness,
tolerance and kindness, and the last was by no means the
least. He took an atmosphere and friendliness with him
wherever he went.
9


Those who had the privilege of working with him in the
same political organisation knew him to be a man of very
strong principles, but he was able to expound his ideas and
beliefs with a calmness and easy approach that are denied
many public men. Only those closely associated with him
over the last months can describe the closeness with which
he stuck to his work. Time and time again I asked him
to “let up,” or suggested that other members might take
over some of the routine of his work, but no letter was
received from his electorate that did not receive his personal
attention. Those to whom he paid most heed were humble
people whose difficulties and worries were his own. I wonder
now what many will do without George Wilson. I could
give the House details of some of the things that he has
been doing, but I shall not do that. Many men who have
gone on active service owe a great deal to George Wilson
who, more or less, undertook the responsibility of caring for
their wives and children. No one will know the number
for whom he made himself responsible. I never heard him
boast of it and I am aware of it only because of my very
close association with him. The Premier has said that George
Wilson died on the battlefield, and I agree. No man can
sutler such an ordeal as he did without impairing his general
physical structure, but into the years between that happening
and his death he crammed more than do most men in pos-
session of full physical strength. George Wilson was full
of energy. Not only was he a shire councillor, but he also
was one of those who led local government in this State.
In the pioneering days of road development he was a leader
of new methods of construction and maintenance. As
president of the Shires’ Association, he was not a mere
figurehead, but a man who led with new and progressive
ideas. He was also a councillor of the National Roads and
Motorists’ Association. Already mention has been made of
his great love for the land and his untiring service to it. At
10


one time he disposed of most of the properties in which he
was interested, with the idea of having a little relaxation, but
he could not resist purchasing a small property near Bathurst
for the purpose, in his own words, of showing the people
in the district that the country was not worn out, and that
if given reasonable care it would still be profitable to them.
At one time I had the privilege of visiting that property
and of seeing what had been done by George Wilson on
one side of the fence as compared with what had happened
to the unattended land on the other side. That experiment
farm was an object lesson to ail his neighbours. Every
moment he was devising means to help the man on the
land.
Though nearly all of us, strangely enough, were away
in the country when this tragedy took place, we all know the
influence that George Wilson exercised in our party room.
Everyone who works within the precincts of this old House
knows that there are certain men around whom all in the
party room rally. George Wilson was one of those men.
He could always raise a laugh, and in critical times would
relieve the tension by some quip. He would not allow anyone
to quarrel with him, anywhere. We have now lost him, and
what is more, this country has lost him. I agree with what
the Premier has said about democracy. Our governmental
institutions will prevail only so long as men of the character
and sincerity of purpose and the standard of George Wilson
are prepared to give their time and service for the benefit
of the country. We seem to leave it until one of them dies
to disclose to the public the worth of the men who are elected
to this House. Normally, and unfortunately, this insti-
tution is generally depicted as being composed of a lot of
place-seekers, and men who spend their time doing virtually
nothing. Such a presentment is calculated to destroy
Parliament and deter men like George Wilson from entering
11


it. If more were known of the kind of service that members
render in this House the better would it be for the country.
After all, unfortunately, we are not all George Wilsons, but.
at least, we are privileged to be in contact with men of his
kind, and some of the late hon. member’s spirit and qualities
must have influence on even the most hardened of us. He
had many virtues and he has left a great record of service,
but what would it have meant to the people had they known
of that service during his lifetime? We are the poorer for
his passing. George Wilson was only 47, and he could
have been a power in this Legislative Assembly for many
years. That is not to be, but all of us were privileged to
work with him, and, to some extent, benefit from the
example that he set. I join with the Premier and the leader
of the Opposition in conveying to his widow and relatives
our deepest sympathy in the great loss they have suffered.
Mr. C. A. KELLY: I ask the indulgence of the House
to associate myself with the motion so ably moved by the
Premier and supported by the leader of the Opposition and
the leader of the Country party. Ido so for three reasons
—first, because of the great personal friendship that existed
between the late hon. member and me; secondly, because
he was a fellow “digger” in the last war, and, thirdly,
because he was a constituent of mine. When I first met the
late George Wilson we formed an acquaintance that ripened
into a beautiful friendship. During my membership of a
select committee of this Plouse that sat some years ago, of
which George Wilson was also a member, I realised his
true worth and then learned of his physical sufferings, the
result of injuries he sustained in the war. Like the leader
of the Opposition, I had my last talk with the deceased
gentleman only last Thursday, but did not notice the pain and
suffering that he was then enduring. Secondly, as a fellow
“digger.” I knew of some of the trials and tribulations that
12


he went through in France between 1914 and 1918, Mine
were not so great as his, nor did I serve with such gallantry,
but having shared with him some of those tribulations, I
developed a very kindly feeling towards him. Thirdly, as
a constituent of mine he was never slow to tell me of the
agricultural potentialities of the electorate that I represent,
and of what could be done in various parts of the district
if scientific means were adopted. George Wilson, speaking
in boxing terms, never “pulled a punch.” When he hit, it
was always with a smile. There was never any thought of
malice or vindictiveness, and when the history of this House
comes to be written it will be truly said that George Wilson
was one of nature’s gentlemen.
Major SHAND: I rise with feelings of profound regret
to add my tribute to the wonderful eulogies of the Premier,
the leader of the Opposition, the leader of the Country
party and the Minister for Health. This occasion is
hallowed, for within the precincts of the House a man who
was honoured, respected and esteemed has passed over the
Great Divide. His personality will be sadly missed. He
was most unassuming, and his genial companionship and
sincere friendship were tokens of a man who had inherited
great riches of character. Particularly at the present time
we can ill afford to lose one whose personal qualities gained
the esteem and respect of all with whom he came in contact.
To his service to his country we all pay tribute. He went
forth in the full flush of young manhood and took up the
duties that war imposes. He fought gallantly, but he
suffered man’s inhumanity to man, and he bore his cross
with stoical fortitude. He was of the Anzacs, whose name
resounds throughout the world. We, his comrades, are
proud to have been associated with one who served so well
13


his King and his country. We all know of his many
activities. The late George Wilson followed the lines of
Robert Louis Stevenson
The world is my school; Nature my book;
Travel my teacher, and God my friend.
George Wilson lived up to all the highest thoughts that
humanity knows. He gave practical support to all move-
ments that were for the good of Australia. In the great
open spaces, with their wide horizon, the soul of George
Wilson rose to imposing heights. His utterances in this
House were based on sound premises. He gave freely of
the experience and knowledge he had acquired through
his extensive travels. His memory will be kept evergreen
to all of those who have been associated with him through
life. I close by quoting from a sympathetic sonnet written
by an Australian, which, I think, aptly applies to our late
colleague, George Wilson:
No life of high activities is brief.
True hero souls, strong-willed, alert, elate,
Live years in days; they laugh at Time, the thief;
They rule Desire and Circumstance and Fate;
And Death but calls them, as a glad relief,
To nobler labours in a higher State.
Mr. W. M. GOLLAN: As chairman of the select com-
mittee of which the late hon. member was a member, I
desire to place on record an expression of sympathy from
the personnel of that committee to the widow and relatives.
Until the setting up of that committee I had not the pleasure
of knowing Mr. Wilson, but upon meeting him I was
immediately impressed with his charm and personality. He
was most sincere, he had honesty of purpose, and this House
and the country are the poorer for his passing.
Mr. TREATT: It is a sense of personal loss that prompts
me to pay a tribute to the memory of George Wilson. Over
14


the last few months I have been frequently in his company.
I have crossed his threshold; he has been in my home. I
have talked with him on the fields, which he loved, and
again in this House; and over those months, perhaps un-
suspected by him, I learnt to love him. It may be that my
emotions were stirred by my realising during all those
months that the hand of death was drawing closer and
closer. It seems to me that George Wilson represented in
this House a personality that unfortunately cannot flourish
as richly as it should in the constant attack and counter-
attack, sometimes baseless and always exaggerated, of party
politics. It is sometimes difficult for a man to achieve at
once that generous, loyal friendship, and judicial calm that
George Wilson displayed. If he were able to realise their
feelings now, he would know that he has left behind him
many men who say, “He was my friend, faithful and just
to me.”
Mr. MACDONALD: As a new member, I take the
privilege of associating myself with the motion that has
been moved and so fittingly supported in this House this
morning. Mr. George Wilson was a man whom one had
merely to meet to understand, and to know that he possessed
a rare and rich capacity for friendship. He grappled to his
soul with hoops of steel the men who loved him. In the
course of the addresses this morning it surely became clear
to every hon. member that underneath the surface cross-
currents of public life there is a deep-flowing stream of
human kindliness and human worth, and we are re-assured
that in the final analysis of every man’s life, it is character
that counts. We have been reminded that we are here as
public servants; and of public servants George Wilson was
a perfect example. His fine, forthright nature would never
have allowed any thought of private advantage to invade
15


the field of his public service; his native honesty would have
spurned such a suggestion. Meeting him in the brief period
—all too brief —of my acquaintance, it comes strongly to my
conviction that he will stand forth in our memories as the
beau-ideal of a Christian gentleman. He followed that
great Old Testament command, “to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.”
Now his name is added to the roll-call of happy warriors
victorious. No man ever more gallantly faced a losing
battle. He has gone from our sight and from our ken, and
has bequeathed to those who loved him and knew him, and
to us, his colleagues in this House, the rich legacy of one
who loved his fellow man, was devoted to the service of
his country, and honoured his God, Whom we all honour.
Question put and carried unanimously, lion, members
and officers of the House standing.
Legislative Assembly Chamber,
New South Wales, 28 th April, 1942.
A. H. Pettifer, Acting Govt. Printer.


