





Filtj
DEED OF SETTLEMENT
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
JOINT STOCK BANK.
ESTABLISHED 1852.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
Lower George Street.
1853.
* *■


■


INDEX
TO THE CONTENTS OF THE FOLLOWING- DEED, BUT FORMING NO PART
THEREOF.
Adjournment— Clause.
Of Meetings if insufficient number,. .. .. .. .. .. ..92
„ if business not completed .. .. .. .. .. 94
Agency—
Directors to arrange conduct of .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 55
Association—
Formation of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Auditors—
Appointment of first .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
Necessarily a Proprietor .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
When Directors ineligible as .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
Qualification of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100
Election and powers of .. .. .. .. .. .. ..101
Appointment of, ad interim .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
Remuneration to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Equality of Votes on election of.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
Half-yearly Audit and Balance Sheet .. .. .. .. .. 104
Special Appointment of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... 105
Balance Sheet—
To be prepared half-yearly .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
To be sent to Proprietors,. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 84
Bad and doubtful debts to be deducted .. .. .. .. .. 83
Bonus—
See Reserve Fund..
Books—
To be kept and balanced .. .. .. .. .. .. ••• 64
Branch Banks—
Place of business .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Directors may establish .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 54
Managers and Local Directors .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Who shall give security .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 67
Remuneration to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68
Removal of Manager or Director .. .. .. .. .. .. 69
Calls—
Agreement to pay.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
To be advertised ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Interest upon and recovery of ... ... .. ~ .. .. ..26
If not paid Shares forfeited .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
May be enforced though Deed unexecuted ~ .. .. .. .. 70
No Dividend if in arrear .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 115
Capital—
Amount of and how divided .. .. ... .. .. .. ..6
To be personalty .. ~ .. .. ~ ~ .. .. 7
May be reduoeciand Teturned .. ... .. .. .. .. ..85


Chairman— Clause.
Of Bank how elected.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 41
To preside at board meetings .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 41
Casting Vote .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 45
Of Meetings of Proprietors .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Company—
Style of 1
Objects of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Management of. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Place of Business of .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. 5
Not bound by Trusts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Taking benefit of Insolvent Act .. .. .. .. 129
Dissolution of, by resolution.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 124
Powers retained notwithstanding . .. .. .. .. .. ..125
Dissolution of, in case of loss .. .. .. .. .. 126
Not to be dissolved except under Deed .. .. .. .. .. ..130
Confirmation—
Of preliminary Expenses and Proceedings .. .. .. .. .. 132
Covenant—
To observe Articles, .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 2
Deeb of Settlement—
Construction of Clauses .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 65
To be produced on Trial .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75
Printed Copies to be Evidence. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. 121
Custody of, on Dissolution .. .. .. .. .. ..127
Directors—
Management of Business by .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 4
May make calls .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Constitution and general powers of .. ~ .. .. .. ~ 28
First appointment of, aud Chairman .. .. 28
Qualification and Disqualification .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Betirement of ~ .. 30
Removal of unqualified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Resignation by, and removal by Proprietors .. .. .. .. .. 32
Filling up casual vacancy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
Suspension of .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 34
After Suspension not to interfere .. ~ .. .. .. .. 35
Notice by Candidates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Mode of Election .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
Equality of Votes on Election . .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
Defects in Election .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 39
Unqualified or disqualified acting as .. .. .. 40
To elect Chairman , .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Remuneration to .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 42
To regulate order of Proceedings . .. .. .. .. .. .. 43
Resolutions of, may be rescinded .. .. .. .. .. .. 44
Majority to decide.. .. .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. 45
Not to vote when interested .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
Protest by two against Discount.. .. .. .. . .. .. 47
To keep Minutes .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 48
General powers of. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
To prepare half-yearly Balance Sheet .. .. .. .. ... 50
To commence and defend Actions, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
To make Bye-laws .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
To apply for Act of Council ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 53
To establish branches.. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 54
To arrange for Agency and Exchanges .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
To regulate form of Notes ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 56
To take Offices .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 57
To take Land, &c,, in payment .. .. .. .. .. ... 58
To take Land, &c., in security .. .. .. .. .. •. .. 59
To take Liens and Mortgages .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60
May delegate power, &c .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61
To appoint Officers, &c. .. .. ~ .. .. ■ .. 62


Directors ( continued )— Clause.
To make half-yearly Report .. .. .. .. .. .. 63
May convene Special General Meetings,. .. .. .. .. .. 88
When ineligible as an Auditor. .. ... .. .. .. .. 99
To recommend Reserve Fund .. .. .. . • .. .. ..112
To declare Dividends .. ~ .. .. . - •. ••• .. 114
To appoint Trustees .. .. .. .. .. •. •• ..117
Indemnity to .. .. .. .. •• ••• 122
Answerable for their own acts .. .. .. .. .. ... ..123
May take benefit of Insolvent Act... .. .. .. .. .. 129
Dividends —
Unclaimed.. : .. .. .. .. .. .. ••• ..113
Declaration of . ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. H 4
On Shares, if calls in arrear .. .. .. .. .. .. ..115
On forfeited Shares .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 115
Dissolution—
Of Company by resolution . .. .. .. .. .. .. ..124
In case of Losses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
Custody of Deed, &c., upon .. .. .. .. .. .. ..127
Winding up of affairs.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 128
Except under Deed of Settlement .. .. .. .. .. ..130
Forfeiture—
Of Shares .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. 8& 17
Sale of Shares under .. .. .. .. .. .. ..18
Of Shares if calls unpaid .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
If Proprietor pleads Partnership.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75
Indemnity—
To Officers, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 122
Insolvency—
Of Company .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..129
Interpretation—
Clause .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 131
Manager—
May convey forfeited Shares.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
New Shares vested in .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
„ conveyed by .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 21
Appointed by Director .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 62
To have a seat at the Board ... ... .. .. .. .. .. 62
Mode of Removal ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 62
To give Security ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. ~ 63
To call Half-yearly General Meetings ~ .. .. .. .. .. 80
Service of Notices on . .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 120
Meetings of Proprietors—
General, may create new Shares.. .. .. ' * ~ .. ..19
„ may remove Director .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 32
„ may make new Laws, &c. .. .. .. .. .. ... 91
„ adjournment if Meeting insufficient .. .. .. .. 92
„ to be notified .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. ~ 93
„ adjournment if business incomplete .. .. .. .. 94
„ Chairman of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
„ Delay in election at.. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 96
„ Minutes of .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 97
„ defective votes at .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
„ voting at 106
Half-yearly, Appointment of first and successive ... .. .. .. 80
„ Business thereat .. .. .. .. .. .. ..81
„ Director’s Report at .. .. .. ~ .. .. 82
„ Balance Sheet to be made up .. ~ .. .. .. 50
„ Reports, &c., at to be circulated . ~ ~ .. .. 84
„ May diminish Capital .. .. .. .. ~ .. 85
„ For election of Auditors . .. .. .. .. .. 101
„ Audit and Balance Sheet .. .. .. .. .. ..104
„ May direct further Audit .. .. .. .. 105
„ To determine Reserve Fund.. .. .. .. .. ..112


Meetings of Proprietors ( continued ) — Clause
Special, Fill up vacancy in Directors . .. .. ~ . # 33
„ Confirm or annul suspension .. .. .. ... 34
„ Determine construction of Deed .. .. .. * 65
„ Calling of *' g 6
„ Notice thereof .. .. .. .. , # ’ *B7
„ In case of emergency .. .. ~ .. , # .. ".. 88
„ May resolve on Dissolution .. .. .. .. *194
Notice—
Of Special General Meetings .. .. ~ .. # , 87
By circulars .. .. .. .. ~ .... * 89
Proof thereof ... * 00
riuui Liiereoi B # qq
Of adjourned Meetings ~ .. .. .. 93
Service of, on the Company ... .. ~ ># ..120
Officers—
Defects in appointment of .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 39
Appointment of .. .. 62
To give Security .. .. .. .. # ' 63
Not to vote ...... . in
jnol to vote
Obligation of Secrecy,. .. .. .. .. .. .. ng
Indemnity to .. .. .. .. .. mt ..122
Answerable for their own acts .. .. .. .. .. .. 123
Proprietors—
Renunciation by .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 4
To hold limited number of Shares .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 8
Shares of Deceased .. .. .. .. .. .. ..10
Husband of Female—Executor of Deceased—Committee of Lunatic—or j
Assignee of Bankrupt . .. ~ .. j 1 1
When released from Liability .. .. .. .. .. .. 15&17
To execute Deed .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 17 & 70
Eights and Liabilities of.. .. ~ .. .. .. .. ..71
To pay individual Debts 72
Debts of, to give a Lien on Shares .. .. .. .. .. .. 73
Of joint, one to be recognised .. .. .. .. .. ~ 74
Not to plead Partnership.. ~ .. .. .. .. .. ..75
Submit to be Sued .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. 76
May give Evidence . .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 77
To be re-imbursed by Company .. .. .. .. .. 78
Remedy if not re-imbursed .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
Limitation of Liability .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
May call Special General Meeting .. .. .. ... .. ..86
When interested not to Vote. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Reserve Fund—
Payment to, out of Profits .. .. .. .. ~ .. ..112
Augmentation of .. .. .. ; .. .. .. .. 113
Bad and doubtful Debts to be charged .. .. .. .. ~ .. 83
Proxy—
Vote by . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 106
In writing and form of .. ~ .. .. .. .. ~ ..108
Effect of * .. 109
Not to be a Paid Officer .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..11l
Secrecy—
Obligation of by Officers ... .. .. .. .. .. .. 116
Shares—
Division of Capital into .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
To be personalty . .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 7
Limit of, to one Proprietor .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Forfeiture of ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Held in trust .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Of deceased Proprietor .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 10
Of female Proprietor marrying, Executor, Committee of Lunatic, or Trustee! jj
of Bankrupt ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. /
Transmission of, to be authenticated . .. .. .. .. .. 12
Proof of, by Marriage .. .. .. .. .. .. ..13


Shares ( continued) — Clause.
How transferable .. .. .. .. 14
Not to be held by Corporation .. .. .. .. ~14
Not to be transferred if calls unpaid.. .. .. ~ .. .. 14
Transferee of, to sign Deed .. .. .. .. .. .. ~17
Sale and Transfer of, forfeited .. .. .. ~ ~ .. 1 g
Creation of new .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. mm ~19
Vested in Manager .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . # 20
Assignment of new. .. .. ~ .. .. . # .. 21
Forfeited on non-payment of calls .. .. .. .. .. ~ 27
Share Register—
To be kept., .. .. .. .. .. ..22
Evidence of Ownership .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
To determine number of Votes .. .. .. .. .. ..107
Transfer—
Of Shares .. .. ~ .. .. . # . t _
In excess of limited number .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 8
Custody of Deeds of .. .. .. .. .. ..... 16
Trusts—
Need not be noticed.. .. .. .. .. .. . t ~ 9
Trustees—
Appointment of and duties .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 117
Resignation and Removal.. ~ .. .. .. .. .... 1 1 8
Receipts by .. ~ ~ .. ## # ~..118
To execute necessary powers .. .. .. ~ t> ..119
Answerable for their own acts .. .. .. >t 123
Votes—
In cases of equality for Director, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38
Questions to be decided by Majority of .... 45
Of Chairman .. .. ./ ~ .. ' 45
By Director interested * 46
Of Minority in certain cases .. .. .. .. . # 47
Of Joint Proprietors .. .. .. .. .. ... * 74
Of Chairman of Meetings, .. .. .. .. .. 95
Defective .. .. .. .. ’ * *' gg
Number and mode of taking .. .. .. 10 g
O •• ** •• •• . . ..iVU
By Proxy ~ t , 0 106
Determined by Share Register .. .. ......... 107
If interested Proprietors . ~ .. ’ no
Of Paid Officers .. ~ .. . ” ” n ,,
7




Cjjis Unkitm made twent y - ninth °*
December A.D. 1852 between the several persons whose
names and seals are or shall be hereunto subscribed and
affixed sBjlat a Meeting held at the Royal Hotel Preamble
in Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales on the
twenty-seventh day of October last it was agreed by the
several persons attending the same that a new Joint Stock
Bank of Issue and Deposit should be established to be
called “«jp austrata Sniut Itlirk *ank/ ; the Capital whereof
should consist of Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds
divided into Twenty-five Thousand Shares of the value of
Ten Pounds each and that the owner of each share
should upon allotment thereof pay a Deposit of One
Pound in respect thereof and the further sum of One
Pound per share upon notice being given of this present
Deed of Settlement being ready for execution And
Whereas at such meeting Thomas Barker, John Walker,
Clark Irving, Michael Egan Murnin, Thomas Chaplin
Breillat, Joshua Richmond Young, John Alexander,
William Bradley, John Bay ley Darvall, James William
Bligh, James Henderson, William Richardson, A.
Moses, Thomas Holt the younger, Didier Numa
Joubert, David Jones, and George John Rogers, were
appointed and have acted as a Provisional Committee to
carry out the objects then proposed at the said meeting
And Whereas in pursuance of the said agreement the said
Capital has been divided into Twenty-five Thousand shares
each share representing the sum of Ten Pounds which said
shares have been allotted to the several persons who
have executed these presents in the proportions set
opposite their respective names Unm tjjis
that each of the said several persons parties


hereto for himself and herself severally and respectively
and for his and her several and respective heirs exe-
cutors and administrators doth hereby covenant agree
and declare with and to the others and each and every of
the others of them their and each and every of their heirs
executors and administrators as follows.
I. The several persons parties to these presents shall and
will whilst holding shares in the capital of the Company
be and continue a Joint Stock Company or Partnership
for the express object of carrying on the business thereof
under the name style and title of the “ The Australian
Joint Stock Bank” subject to the provisions and agree-
ments herein contained from the day of the date of these
presents until the said Company shall be dissolved under
the provisions in such behalf herein contained and they
the several parties hereto shall at all times so long as they
shall continue proprietors of the Company advance the
interests of the same to the utmost of their power.
Agreement to 11. Each of the several persons parties hereto whilst he
Articles. the shall be a holder of any shares in the capital shall and will
observe perform and keep all the covenants articles and
provisions in these presents contained and all additions
alterations and modifications which may be made in
pursuance of the provisions herein contained which are or
ought to be observed performed and kept by him in
respect of or in relation to such shares and in relation to
the Company and its affairs according to the true intent
and meaning of the same covenants articles and
agreements respectively And the same shall be binding
upon the heirs executors administrators and assigns of
every such proprietor.
Objects of the 111. The objects of the Company are and shall be
company formation and carrying on of the business of a Bank


of issue discount and deposit the loan of money on cash
credit accounts promissory notes bills of exchange or
letters of credit and on other securities the dealing in
money bullion specie gold and exchanges of and with all
countries and in notes bills or other securities for money
and generally the transacting of all such other business
as it is or shall or may at any time hereafter be usual and
lawful for establishments carrying on banking in all its
branches or dealing in money bullion specie gold
exchanges or in notes bills or loans to do or transact
and the establishment of agencies or connexions in
relation to the said business in any part of the British
dominions as may be considered desirable for the Company
or calculated to promote the convenience of merchants
and others and the granting of letters of credit on agents
and banking connexions abroad and the establishing
Branch Banks within the British dominions and agencies
in such places as may be thought expedient.
IV. The whole management of the business of the Man agement
, tobemDirec-
Company shall be and the same is hereby reposed in the tors ami rights
Board of Directors herein more particularly mentioned partners re-
And subject to the limitations herein contained and the n ° uncea ’
powers hereby vested in general meetings of the proprietors
the individual parties hereto do hereby for themselves
severally and respectively and for their several and
respective heirs executors and administrators renounce and
disclaim all right to interfere in the management of the
affairs of the Company or to inspect the books accounts or
writings of the Company except the Deed of Settlement
and the Share Register or unless appointed as herein
provided to sign accept or endorse any bill note or
negociable security in the name of the Company or to
enter into any other contract or engagement so as to charge
or bind the Company or the properties funds securities or
moneys of or belonging to the Company.


Place? of bu-
eme^s.
V. The principal business of the Company shall be
carried on at such place in the city of Sydney as the
Board of Directors shall from time to time determine on
And also if it shall be determined according to the
provisions herein contained to establish Branch Banks or
Agencies, such Branch Banks or Agencies shall be carried
on at such places as the Board of Directors may from time
to time determine upon.
CAPITAL.
Company^ the VL The Capital of the Company shall consist of
two hundred an : fifty thousand pounds sterling to be
contributed in twenty-five thousand shares of ten pounds
each and of such further sum or sums of money as may
hereafter be raised by the creation and sale of new shares
of the like amount as herein provided.
Capital and yjj \ s between the Proprietors of the several shares
property ot 1
the Company an d their respective real and personal representatives the
aity 6 without said Capital and all the funds and property of the Com-
uivivorship. p an y an( j the share and shares of each proprietor shall be
deemed personal estate and be transmissible as such and
there shall not be benefit of survivorship among the pro-
prietors in respect of the said capital funds and property.
SHARES.
Limit to num- VUL No person shall be allowed to subscribe for or by
ber of shares r . tit . ,
held by one reason of purchase or otherwise to hold more than eight
proprietor. hundred s h ares [ n the capital of the Company and if
any transfer of shares shall be executed in favor of any
proprietor by means of which the shares of such proprietor
would if the same were allowed to take effect exceed the
above prescribed number such transfer shall be wholly
inoperative in respect of so many of the shares comprised


therein as would be in excess of such number But if any
person shall by means of marriage or as executor or
administrator of any deceased proprietor acquire so many
additional shares as with those previously held by him
shall amount to more than eight hundred shares such person
may transfer the shares exceeding the number hereby
allowed to be held as aforesaid and in case such transfer
shall be made within six calendar months next after the
right of such person as aforesaid shall have accrued then
but not otherwise the transferee shall thereby become
entitled to any dividend or bonus previously declared in
respect of such shares and if no such transfer shall be
made within such period of six months the dividends and
bonuses (if any) due on such shares so in excess shall be
forfeited to the Company and in case such transfer shall
not be made within twelve months after the accruing of
the right thereto the same shares together with all dividends
and bonuses due thereon shall be absolutely forfeited to the
Company.
IX. The Company shall not be bound in any manner by No trusts to be
, , . • *1 r* noticed unless
any trusts or equitable interests affecting any shares of the the Directors
capital standing in the name of any person or to take any thmk fit ‘
notice of any such trusts or equitable interests but the
receipt of the proprietor in whose name the shares shall
stand in the books of the Company shall notwithstanding
any such trust or equitable interest and notice thereof to
the Company be a good and sufficient discharge for the
money which may become payable by the Company in
respect of the shares standing in the name of such
proprietor and the Company shall not be bound to see to
the application of the money paid upon such receipt and a
transfer of the shares by such proprietor shall ’when
complete be binding and conclusive against all persons
claiming by virtue of such trusts or equitable interests
whether or not the Company have had notice of such


trusts or equitable interests Provided however that when
the Company shall have had such notice it shall be in the
discretion of the Board of Directors to refuse to sanction
any such transfer and to require the concurrence of the
person or persons so claiming And in case such sanction
shall be refused then any deed or instrument whereby a
transfer of such shares shall be attempted shall be wholly
inoperative And provided also that when the Company
shall have had such notice it shall in like manner be in the
discretion of the Board of Directors to refuse to pay any
dividend or bonus to the legal proprietor without the
concurrence of the persons claiming in respect of such
trusts or equitable interests.
next of Junior X. Xo e g atee next of kin or cestui que trust claiming
trultto b e q re e unc * er ie °f an y deceased proprietor shall as such
cognized but become a proprietor of any shares of the said Capital
executor or, r
administrator but in all cases where legatees or next of kin of deceased
proprietors or such cestui que trusts shall become entitled
to or interested in any such shares the executors or ad-
ministrators of such deceased proprietors shall be con-
sidered as the holders of the shares and shall be the only
persons entitled to become proprietors or to procure some
other persons to become proprietors in respect thereof.
of B femaie^pro- XI. The husband of any female proprietor or the
marrying 11 and execu t° r or administrator of any deceased proprietor or
of deceased the committee of any lunatic proprietor may on notice in
lunatic andm- . J r 1 J
solvent or writing to the head banking-house of the Company
prictor. pIJ and production of satisfactory evidence of title either
elect to become a proprietor in respect of the shares to
which he* shall be entitled in either of these capacities
or procure any other person to become a proprietor in
respect of such shares but the trustees or assignees of
any insolvent or bankrupt proprietor shall not be entitled
to become a proprietor in respect of the shares of such


insolvent or bankrupt proprietor but shall procure some
other person to become a proprietor in respect thereof
Provided always that no person shall be entitled to receive
any dividends or other profits which shall be declared
on the shares of such female deceased lunatic insolvent
or bankrupt proprietor accruing after his or her marriage
death commission of lunacy insolvency or bankruptcy
until some person shall have become a proprietor
in respect of such shares and the person who shall
ultimately become a proprietor in respect of such
shares shall be entitled to such last mentioned dividends
and profits and the full right and interest of and in
such shares And provided further that if no persons Sale of such
\ m . , . Shares if not
shall become a proprietor in respect of such shares within taken up by
the period of two years from the date of such marriage p J
death or commission of lunacy respectively then the
rights herein reserved to such husband executor adminis-
trator or committee respectively shall cease and
determine and it shall be lawful for the Board of
Directors to sell the said shares by public auction and to
retain the proceeds together with the interest and divi-
dends which shall have accrued previously to such sale
until the person legally entitled thereto shall establish his
claim to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors And
such person shall not be entitled to claim interest on the
amount so retained And if no person shall have become
proprietor in respect of the shares of such bankrupt or
insolvent proprietor within the period of three months
after the bankruptcy or insolvency of such bankrupt or
insolvent proprietor it shall be competent to the Board of
Directors if they shall think fit to sell the said last men-
tioned shares by public auction and the net proceeds of
such sale shall in such case be paid over by the Board of
Directors to the said trustee or assignee for the benefit of
the said insolvent or bankrupt.


Transmission XII. All persons claiming any shares by transmission
of shares by . r . . ° J
other means or claiming a right to procure another person to be a
to be Sen- proprietor according to the provisions of the last preceding
declaration. & clause shall before he shall be recognised as a proprietor
of such shares or before he shall be permitted to procure
another person to become a proprietor as the case may
require and every guardian committee of a lunatic or other
person claiming a right to act in a representative character
on behalf of a proprietor shall before he shall be permitted
to become a proprietor or receive any dividends or transfer
any shares or exercise any of the rights and privileges
conferred by this deed authenticate such transmission or
right by a declaration in writing setting forth the material
facts which declaration shall be made and signed by some
credible person before some Justice of the Peace or
Notary Public and shall be subject to the consideration
and approval of the Board of Directors.
Proof of trans- XIII. If such transmission be by virtue of the marriage
marriage wSof a female proprietor the declaration shall contain a copy
of the register of such marriage or other particulars
of the celebration thereof and shall declare the identity of
the wife with the holder of such shares and if such trans-
mission have taken place by virtue of any testamentary
instrument or by intestacy the probate ot the will or the
letters of administration or an official extract therefrom
shall together with such declaration be produced to the
Manager of the Company and if such right be claimed
in consequence of insolvency or bankruptcy or of any
appointment as a guardian or as a committee of a lunatic a
certificate signed by the Commissioner of Bankrupts or
Insolvents or the Master in Equity as the case may
require shall together with such declaration be produced
and left with the Manager And if such right be claimed
by virtue of any power of attorney the power of attorney


shall be so produced and left And upon such production
and the due execution of these presents in either of the
cases aforesaid the shares shall be transferred in the books
of the Company to the name of the person entitled to
become a proprietor in respect thereof.
XIV. Subject to the provisions and restrictions herein Shares
contained and to the approbation of the Board of Directors
every separate share in the said capital but not any frac-
tional part of a share shall be transferable and assignable
by the proprietor of such share to any other person as fully
and effectually as any other interest is by law assignable
so as such assignment and transfer be made in such
manner and form as the Board of Directors shall from time
to time settle and determine and the execution thereof be
duly attested to the satisfaction of the said board Provided
that no body corporate shall hold any shares in the said
capital Provided also that no shares shall be transferred
after any call shall have been made by the Board of
Directors until the amount of such call in respect of such
shares with the interest due thereon if any shall have been
paid.
tranß-
XV. On the completion of the transfer of any shares Transferor re-
and the execution of this Deed or a duplicate thereof by liability,
the person to whom the same shall be transferred the
previous holder of such shares shall as between the proprie-
tors be exonerated and released from all claims demands
obligations and liabilities in respect of such shares and
from all further observance and performance of any cove-
nants conditions stipulations or agreements herein con-
tained or which may be contained in any supplementary
deed bye-law or regulation of the Company And the
person to whom such transfer shall be made shall have the
same privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as the
original proprietor.
9


deeds of trana- XVI. Every deed or instrument of transfer and every
fer - other deed or instrument in writing on which the right of
any proprietor may be founded or an attested copy of every
such last mentioned deed or instrument of transfer shall
be deposited and kept at the office of the Company
and no such deed or instrument of transfer shall
be valid or effectual until so deposited But every such
proprietor shall be entitled at all times by writing under
his hand to require the same to be produced and shown
forth to himself or to such person as he shall require on
payment of all reasonable costs and charges attending the
production and showing forth of the same.
Transferee of XVII. Every person to whom any original new or
shares to exe- . * 1 °
cute deed un- forfeited shares shall be allotted or assigned or to whom
iy 68 Executed any shares shall be transferred shall within six months
respect 111 of after the date of such allotment assignment or transfer
other shares. execu t e this deed or a duplicate thereof unless he shall
have previously executed it in respect of shares held by
him at the date of such allotment assignment or transfer
in which case such execution shall take effect in respect of
the newly acquired shares of such person and shall apply
to the same fully and effectually notwithstanding that such
person shall afterwards sell and transfer the shares in re-
spect of which he originally executed the deed and in
default of such execution within the time limited the shares
in respect of which default shall have been made shall be
absolutely forfeited to the Company Provided nevertheless
that the Board of Directors may if they think fit upon the
application of the party to whom such allotment assign-
ment or transfer shall have been made discharge the shares
from forfeiture and restore the same or any part thereof to
such proprietor on such terms as the Board of Directors
may think proper and in the event of such discharge the
forfeiture shall upon such execution of this deed or a
duplicate thereof as aforesaid be held not to have occurred


and the rights and liabilities of the proprietor making
default shall be deemed not to have been in anywise
affected Provided also that in the case of a transfer of
shares the transferor shall until such execution of this
deed by the transferee or until such forfeiture of his shares
transferred be deemed and taken to be the continuing
proprietor of the same except only as against the transferee
and in respect of the receipt of dividends and the disposal
of the shares.
XVIII. All shares forfeited in pursuance of any provision f r * l * Bferof
herein contained shall in a reasonable time after such feited BhartiB *
forfeiture in the discretion of the Directors be disposed of
by public sale or private contract to such persons as may-
be willing to accept the same and to execute these presents
and thereupon a transfer or assignment of such shares shall
be made by the direction of the Board to the purchaser
thereof by the Manager of the Bank or by such Director
as the Board of Directors may appoint Provided neverthe-
less that it shall be lawful to withhold any such forfeited
shares from immediate sale and to retain the same for a
reasonable time in every case in which it is hereby made
competent to the Board of Directors to discharge such
forfeiture and in which they shall think it probable that
an application for such discharge will be made by the
proprietor or late proprietor and that it would be proper
to discharge the same upon such application being made
and in case of forfeiture for non-payment of calls the
proceeds arising from any such sale shall be applied in
payment of the call or calls in respect whereof default shall
have been made and the surplus thereof if any after
deducting the expenses of such sale shall be placed to the
credit of such defaulter with the Company.
XIX. After the original capital of two hundred and C r e ation of
fifty thousand pounds shall have been fully paid up but* 6 " 6 *™


not sooner it shall be lawful for a general meeting of the
proprietors constituted as hereinafter mentioned and called
for the purpose of considering the propriety of increasing
the capital of the Company by the creation and sale of new
shares by a resolution to be passed by the majority of votes
of the proprietors present at any such meeting in person or
by proxy to create such further and additional shares of
ten pounds each as may from time to time be deemed
advisable and to direct the mode in which such additional
shares shall be allotted and disposed of and to determine
the time for the payment of the amount thereof Provided
always that the proprietors actually present at such meeting
in person or by proxy shall be possessed in the aggregate
of not less than half of the actual paid-up capital of the
Bank.
vested BhaT in XX. All new shares which may be created by any
aßB?gifed Un to res °l u ti°H for the increase of the capital of the Company
purchasers, as hereinbefore provided and all forfeited shares shall
until the same shall respectively be assigned to the
purchasers thereof be vested in the Manager of the Bank
in trust nevertheless for the benefit of all the proprietors.
signment & of XXI. All such new shares when they shall have
new shares, been alloted or disposed of and so soon thereafter as
the amount thereof together with such premiums as may
be payable thereon shall have been duly paid accord-
ing to the provisions to be made in that behalf shall be
assigned to the persons entitled thereto by memorandum
of assignment and agreement to be made and entered
into under the direction of the Board by the Manager of
the Bank or by any Director appointed by the Board of
Directors for that purpose whereby the said Manager or
Director shall declare that such person has become entitled
to so many new shares of the amount of ten pounds each
in the capital stock of the Company and shall assign the


same to him accordingly and whereby the latter shall agree
to accept the said new shares and to submit to and conform
himself to all the articles stipulations and agreements in this
Deed of Settlement contained And thereupon the persons
becoming proprietors of such new shares shall have in
every respect the same rights and be subject to the same
liabilities as the proprietors of the original capital.
SHARE REGISTER.
XXII. The name and place of abode of every Share Regia-
proprietor with the number of shares held by him shall
from time to time be entered in a book to be kept for
that purpose to be called the “ Share Register” and every
proprietor who may change his name or place of abode or
being a female shall marry and the assignee or trustee of
every proprietor who shall become bankrupt or insolvent
and the committee of every proprietor who shall be
duly found a lunatic and the executor or administrator
of every proprietor who shall die shall immediately upon
and after any of the said events leave a written notice at the
head office of the Company stating his or her name or new
name and place of abode and when a female proprietor
shall have been married then the name and place of abode
of her husband And the Share Register shall be open to
the inspection of the several proprietors at all reasonable
times.
XXIII. The share register shall at all times be prima share
facie evidence to show who are the proprietors for the dence of own-
time being entitled to a share or shares of the capital o f e,6hip ‘
the said Company and the number of their respective
shares.
CALLS.
XXLV. The several persons parties to these presents Agreement to


S u££u sliail and will severally contribute to the said original
ahlres. on capital in proportion to the number of shares set against
their respective names in manner following that is to say
A deposit of two pounds upon every share of the original
capital shall be paid before the execution hereof and
the further sum of three pounds per share shall be
paid in instalments of one pound upon every share during
the first six months after the date hereof at such times and
places as the same may be called for by the Directors
hereinafter named upon notice according to the terms of
this deed of not less than thirty days and the remaining
Five pounds per share in calls of One pound per share
upon similar notices.
Calls of in- XXV. The Board of Directors may call for the payment
shares. of such instalments respectively at such times and places
as they may determine by one or more public advertise-
ment or advertisements in one or more of the public
newspapers or by circular letters as herein provided.
interest on XXVI. Every instalment called for shall bear interest
and recovery J
of calls. from the day on which the same shall become due at the
rate of ten per cent, per annum And the amount of such
instalment with interest as aforesaid shall be recoverable
by action if the same be not paid within the time
to be appointed for that purpose and on the trial of every
such action it shall not be necessary to prove the appoint-
ment of the directors by whom such call was made nor
any other matter except that the defendant at the time
of making such call was a holder of such and so many
shares as the case may be in the capital of the Company
and that such call was in point of fact made and notice
thereof and of the time fixed by the Directors for payment
thereof given in the manner herein provided.
Forfeiture of XXVII. In case default shall be made by any of the


parties to these presents in the payment of any call that f a h u a i T t e " of °"pay’
shall be made and become payable on his shares for the ment of callg<
space of six calendar months next after the same shall have
become payable it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
to declare the shares on which such default has been
made and the deposit and calls previously paid thereon and
all benefit and advantages whatever attending the same to
be absolutely forfeited to the Company and the person or
persons making such default shall thereupon in respect of
such shares cease to be a member of the Company
Provided nevertheless that the Board of Directors may if^° a r y fei^ re dig
they think fit upon the application of the proprietor or late charge*,
proprietor discharge any such shares from forfeiture and
restore the same or any part thereof to such proprietor on
such terms as they may think fit and in the event of such
discharge the forfeiture shall be held not to have occurred
and the rights and liabilities of the proprietor making
default not to have been in anywise affected And provided
further that it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors if
they think fit instead of declaring such shares to be
forfeited to enforce payment of the calls with interest as
herein provided or to sell so many only of the shares of any
proprietor so making default as may be necessary and
sufficient to pay the amount payable upon the whole of such
proprietor’s shares and all expenses costs and charges.
DIRECTORS.
XXVIII. There shall be five Directors of the Company Constitution
duly qualified as hereinafter provided and such Directors
shall constitute the Board of Directors of the Company of DirectorB-
- any three of such Directors assembled at an ordinary
or duly convened Special Meeting of Directors shall be
competent to the transaction of all the affairs of the
Company and shall possess and exercise all the powers
herein conferred on the Board of Directors and Thomas


Holt, the younger, Thomas Ware Smart, John Bayley
Darvall, Joshua Richmond Young, and Thomas Chaplin
Breillat, Esquires, shall be the first Directors of the Com-
pany and shall subject to the provisions of this deed
respectively continue in office until their retirement as
herein mentioned and that the said Thomas Ware Smart
Esquire shall be the first Chairman of the Company and
shall remain in office until the election of another Chair-
man as herein provided.
XXIX. The Directors shall be selected from amongst
the proprietors possessed of one hundred shares at the least
in the capital of the Company but no proprietor shall be
eligible or qualified to be or act as a Director of the Com-
pany who shall be a Director or the partner of a Director
in any other Bank of issue and deposit in the colony of New
South Wales or any auditor or paid officer of any other such
Bank or who being or becoming indebted to the Company
shall fail to satisfy such debts within a time fixed by the
Board of Directors for that purpose or who shall within three
years preceding the day of election have taken the benefit of
any Act for the relief of insolvent debtors or who shall within
that time have been bankrupt or have made an assignment
of his estate for the benefit of his creditors or have made
a composition with his creditors or who shall after his
election as a Director cease to be possessed of one hun-
dred shares become bankrupt or insolvent or make any
assignment of his estate for the benefit of his creditors
or compound with his creditors or who shall be absent
from the Board for any longer period than one calendar
month without leave of the Directors Provided that the
above-mentioned disqualification on account of copartner-
ship shall not extend to those persons who are only
copartners in any Joint Stock Company consisting of not
less than ten proprietors.
Qualification
of Directors.


XXX. One of the hereinbefore named first Directors
shall go out of office at each successive general meeting
hereby directed to be held in the month of January as one
of the general half-yearly meetings until the whole of them
shall have retired and such retirement shall take place
in the following order : that is to say Thomas Chaplin
Breillat, Joshua Richmond Young, John Bayley Darvall,
Thomas Ware Smart, and Thomas Holt the younger
And thereafter at every succeeding half-yearly general
meeting to be held in the month of January the Director
who shall have been longest in office shall retire by rota-
tion and the Director so retiring shall not until the next
ensuing half-yearly meeting to be held in the month of
January thereafter be eligible for re-election as a Director
or election as an Auditor.
XXXI. The Board of Directors as soon as they shall y^°J^ ed
receive notice of the non-qualification or disqualification of directors,
any person then being a Director of the Company shall
forthwith proceed to enquire into the matter at a meeting
of Directors specially convened for that purpose and if they
shall be satisfied that such Director is not duly qualified
shall declare his office to be vacant and the same shall
thereupon become vacant and such Director shall be re-
moved from the direction of the Company and the Board
shall then take the necessary steps for filling up such
vacancy Provided always that such non-qualification or
disqualification shall not extend to render illegal or invalid
any act deed matter or thing done or executed or suffered
to be done or executed for or on account of the Company
by such person assuming to act as a Director prior to such
declaration of vacancy but every such act deed matter or
thing so done or executed or suffered to be done or exe-
cuted by such person before his actual removal from
office shall be held to be vadid binding and conclusive
upon the Company and the proprietors thereof any in-
17


validity or preceding disqualification for his office not-
withstanding.
DirectorsTnd XXXII. Any Director may at any time vacate his
Proprietors °^ ce by sending in his resignation in writing to the Board
of Directors And a general meeting of the proprietors
specially called for the purpose shall have power at any
time to remove from his office any Director for negligence
misconduct in office or any other reasonable cause Pro-
vided always that the proprietors present at any such
general meeting in person or by proxy shall be possessed
in the aggregate of not less than one-third of the actual
paid up capital of the Company.
Filling up of XXXIII. That in case of any vacancy in the office of
in § Director occasioned by the death resignation disqualifica-
tion or removal from office such vacancy shall within one
month after the same shall first happen be filled up by
election at a special general meeting to be called for the
purpose of some duly qualified propiietor to the office
unless the general half-yearly meeting shall take place
within such month when some duly qualified person shall
be elected to fill such vacancy and such person elected
shall continue in office until the expiration of the time
that such deceased disqualified removed or retiring Direc-
tor might have continued in office Provided always that
if two or more such vacanies shall happen to be filled up
together at any special general or half-yearly meeting the
person elected by the greatest number of votes shall be
allowed to elect the vacancy which he may prefer to fill.
Suspension of XXXIV. In case the conduct or position of any Director
Director. s h a p b e suc h that his continuance in office shall appear to
the Board to be prejudicial to the interests of the Company
it shall be lawful for the remaining four Directors at a
meeting of Directors specially convened for that purpose


to suspend such Director in case he should refuse to resign special Gene-
And the Board shall call a special general meeting of
proprietors who may if they think fit confirm such suspen-^ ul suspen ”
sion and remove such Director or may annul such suspen-
sion and reinstate such Director in his office.
XXXV. After the suspension of any such Director as I ? irector du-
-17 # _ ring suspen-
aforesaid he shall not be at liberty to interfere in the? ion not to
business or affairs of the Company until such suspension business or
shall be annulled and he shall forthwith deliver up to such company. th °
person as the Board of Directors shall appoint all the keys SheTsuspen-
used by him as such Director as aforesaid and all books dedto d ® liver
J up keys &c.
papers moneys property and effects of the Company in his
possession or control.
XXXVI. Every proprietor who shall become a Noticei?ycan-
candidate for the office of Director shall give notice thereof office 6 of° r i)i!
to the Board of Directors in writing to be left at the rector *
Banking House of the Company in Sydney fourteen days
at the least before the day of election and the names of
the candidates who have given such notice shall be
published in one or more Sydney newspaper or newspapers
ten days at the least before the day of the election And
no proprietor shall be eligible who shall fail to give such
notice.
XXXVII. The election of Directors and Auditors at Mode of elec-
general meetings shall be by show of hands unless two or Jors.° f Direc "
more proprietors qualified to vote shall demand a ballot
and such ballot if demanded before the Chairman shall
have pronounced the question decided shall be granted
and scrutineers shall be nominated by the majority in
number of the persons duly qualified to vote then present
and the ballot shall be under the direction of the scru-
tineers.


equality e of XXXVIII. When and so often as on the election of any
votes. Director or Auditor it shall happen that in consequence
of any two or more candidates having an equal number of
votes it cannot otherwise be determined which of those
candidates shall be the person to supply the vacancy it
shall be decided by lot amongst those candidates which
of them shall supply such vacancy and the person in whose
favour such decision shall be made shall be considered
duly elected.
election or ap- XXXIX. No irregularity informality or illegality in the
Directors* or e^ec^on an Y Director or in the appointment of any
officers not to officer of the Company shall be taken or construed to
invalidate acts _ ... ,
but upon dis- render illegal or invalid any act deed matter or thing
retire done or executed or suffered to be done or executed by
or be removed guc j l j)i rec t or or Officer in pursuance of such election
or appointment before notice in writing shall have been
given by a proprietor to the Board of Directors of the
irregularity informality or illegality of such election or ap-
pointment But upon receipt of such notice the said Board
shall unless the Director or officer shall voluntarily resign
or retire proceed to enquire into the objection to such
election or appointment at a meeting in the case of a dis-
puted election of a Director of not less than three
Directors other than the one whose election is disputed
specially convened for the purpose And if the Board of
Directors shall be of opinion that such election or appoint-
ment is void they shall declare the office vacant accordingly
and the same shall thereupon become vacant and a new
election or appointment as the case may require shall be
had or made.
Penaityonun- XL. If any person holding the office of a Director shall
rectors act- whilst unqualified or disqualified as hereinbefore provided
wrl L ntriiA r* /mttl rvrl rvn 4- L f A /I A QUIT Oof YY4 Qff DV
and having a knowledge thereof to do any act matter


or thing in the capacity of a Director except at the
instance or with the approbation of the Board of Directors
after notice of his non-qualification or disqualification he
shall forfeit and pay to the Company the sum of one
hundred pounds or such less amount as the Board of
Directors may upon his removal from office think fit to
declare as for a breach of covenant with the other pro-
prietors of the Company and the shares standing in the
name of such person shall be chargeable with the payment
of such penalty and may be sold by the order of the Board
of Directors to discharge the same.
XLI. The Directors shall elect annually at their first Election of
meeting after the general half-yearly meeting in the month airman *
of January from amongst their own body a Chairman of
the Bank and such Chairman shall be capable of being
re-elected and in case no new election shall take place
in any year or such election shall be delayed beyond the
proper time the Chairman of the previous year shall
continue in office until such new election shall take place
And the Chairman so elected or in his absence the Director
who shall be elected Chairman by the Directors present
at any meeting of the Board of Directors shall preside at
all meetings of the Board.
XLII. The yearly sum of five hundred pounds shall be Rcmune-
paid to the Directors out of the funds of the Company Jectors!° Dl
as a remuneration for their services and such remune-
ration shall be distributed amongst the Directors in such
manner as the Board of Directors shall from time to time
determine.
XLII I. The Board of Directors may from time to time Directors to
make such regulations for their own proceedings and the their
despatch of business and also such times for their ordinary a^d° ce^e| of
and special meetings as they shall think fit but any two meetin g*


Directors may at any time by writing under their hands
convene a special meeting of the Board of Directors for
the consideration of any matter relating to the business of
the Company Provided that the object of such meeting
be expressly stated in the notice convening the same and
that such notice be left at the usual places of residence or
business of the other Directors not less than twenty-four
hours before the time specified for holding such meeting.
Directors may XLIV. Every resolution order or direction made and
be rescinded, passed or given at any meeting of the Board of Directors
shall be liable to be rescinded amended or altered at any
other meetings by the same Directors by whom the same
was made and passed or given or by a majority of the
Directors at a meeting at which a larger number of the
Directors are present Provided that in the last mentioned
case notice shall either have been given to the Directors
by whom the resolution order or direction was made passed
or given of the intention to move for a rescission amend-
ment or alteration thereof or that the consideration of
such motion shall if either of the last mentioned Directors
shall so require be adjourned to a future meeting and
Provided also that no such rescission amendment or alte-
ration shall invalidate any act matter or thing in the mean
time done or submitted to under or in consequence of such
resolution order or direction.
° f to XLV. All questions coming before the Board of
decide ques- Directors for consideration shall be decided by the majority
tions but it-
chairman to of the votes of Directors present and not declining to vote
hcivo ft cast- •
ing vote. or disqualified from voting and if there shall be an equality
of votes the Chairman of the Meeting shall have a casting
vote in addition to his vote as Director But the decision
thereby made shall in certain cases be subject to the pro-
vision hereinafter contained for neutralizing the same by
the protest of the minority.


XLVI. No Director shall vote at the Board upon any where
application for the discount of bills or notes or otherwise himself or
r r _ certain rela-
where he is himself a party as principal or surety or on tions interest-
any other proposition in which it shall appear to the
Board that he has a pecuniary or personal interest other-
wise than as a proprietor And if any Director shall act
contrary to this prohibition he shall forfeit to the Company
the sum of one hundred pounds as for a breach of cove-
nant with his co-proprietors and the shares standing in
his name shall be liable for the payment of such penalty
Provided that it shall be competent to the Board of
Directors or any meeting of proprietors to remit the whole
or any part of such penalty if they shall think fit.
XLVII. Whenever on the occasion of any discount or Upon protest
n . . of two Direc-
advance of money or any cash credit involving an amount tors against
of not less than three thousand pounds being proposed at |c Y ,
any meeting of the Board of Directors two of the Directors be
present shall after deliberation thereupon not being a
minority of the whole number of the Directors present
think fit to protest against the proposed discount advance
or cash credit such discount advance or cash credit shall
be withheld notwithstanding that a majority of votes shall
be given in favour thereof Provided that such dissenting
Directors shall enter their protest with the reasons for the
same upon the minutes of the Board of Directors.
XLVIII. The Board of Directors shall cause correct Minutes to be
minutes of their proceedings to be entered in a book to be ceedingl pf at
kept for that purpose and called the Minute Book and Sfrectors. ° f
such minutes shall contain the names of the Directors
present and be signed by the person presiding at each
meeting or by such person as the said Board shall specially
appoint and such minutes shall be full and conclusive
evidence that the proceedings therein recorded took place
at a meeting of a Board of Directors regularly called and


that the person whose name is subscribed to such minutes
did sign and was duly authorised by the Board of Direc-
tors to sign the same and such minutes shall be held to be
sufficient authority for every act deed matter or thing that
may be lawfully done in pursuance thereof.
jHyw^rs^ of XLIX. The Board of Directors shall subject to the
Board of Di- regulations herein contained and to the powers herein
rectors. ° r
conferred on general meetings of the proprietors and to
the specific directions and restrictions hereby given or
imposed to and upon them have the entire control and
management of the business of the Company its revenue
and affairs and of the application investment and disposal
of its funds and capital and also of the books of the Com-
pany and shall regulate and determine the mode and terms
of carrying on the business thereof and shall and may in
all matters not specially provided for by these presents act
as to them shall appear best calculated to promote the
interests of the Company And it is hereby expressly
declared that the pdwers specially herein conferred shall
not be deemed to abridge in matters not distinctly pro-
vided for the general powers above granted.
The Directors L. At every General half-yearly Meeting the Board of
baitn?rThelt Directors shall present a balance sheet or general summary
°f mmary of the accounts of the Company up to and including the
counts of the thirty-first day of December or the thirtieth day of June
eveTy I "general next preceding such meeting and such further statement
meeting. Qr report of the then condition of the affairs of the Com-
pany as the Board shall deem expedient for the interests
of the Company to be made public and every such balance
sheet or summary shall be signed by the Chairman of the
Company for the time being and certified by the Auditors
and shall be binding and conclusive on all the proprietors
their executors administrator and assigns as an admission
of the truth and correctness of the matters therein stated


unless some error shall be discovered therein and notice
thereof given to the Board before the next general meet-
ing and in that case such error so notified shall be
corrected and set forth in the next balance sheet or
summary of the affairs of the Company.
LI. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors on Power to com -
mence and de-
behalf of the Company to commence and prosecute in the fend actions,
name of the trustees of the Company or in the name of
the Chairman or other public officer who may by any Act
of Council be empowered to sue or be made liable to be
sued on behalf of the Company or in the corporate name
of the Company if it shall be incorporated any action suit
or proceeding at law in equity or insolvency against any
persons whomsoever whether members of the Company or
not to enforce any claims due by such persons to the
Company And to defend any such action suit or
proceeding that may be instituted against the Company
And also to compromise or abandon any such action suit
or proceeding And also to submit any matter in dispute To abandon
to arbitration and abide by such reference and submission rSTo^bi-
and every award to be made pursuant thereto And also to tration *
compound any debts due to the Company and to join in any
instrument of composition or any conveyance or assignment
of the estate of any person indebted to the Company in
any letter of license granting time to such debtor for the
payment of his debts And also to take proceedings for Tocompound>
procuring the sequestration of the estate of any debtor to givetime > &c-
-the Company as insolvent or to cause him to be declared
a bankrupt or insolvent according to the laws for the time
being and to do all such matters and things in relation to
the estate of such insolvent or bankrupt and to the claim
of the Company against the same and to the proceedings
in insolvency and bankruptcy as might be done by an
ordinary creditor And also to prefer and prosecute To prosecute
charges for the stealing or embezzlement of the moneys criminall y-


or property belonging to or deposited with the Company
or for any fraud forgery crime or offence committed against
or with intent to defraud the Company and to prosecute or
Sasef to re ' a^an(^on same And also to execute and to receive
nesses. such general or other release or releases as may be neces-
sary for discharging any person produced as a witness in
any action suit or proceeding from any claim or demand
which may be necessary to be released in order to qualify
such person to give evidence as a witness in such action
suit or proceeding And for the purposes aforesaid or any
of them the said debts moneys goods effects securities or
other property shall be deemed to be the absolute pro-
perty of the said Trustees Chairman or other public officer
of the incorporated Company as the case may be.
Power of LII. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors from
rectors D t 0 time to time to make such bye-laws and regulations for
iaw 8 e bye ' their guidance in any matter not herein specially provided
for as to them shall seem meet and also from time to time
to repeal alter and vary such bye-laws and regulations and
to make others in their stead Provided always that such
bye-laws and regulations shall not be repugnant to these
presents or to any laws rules or regulations made and
passed at any general meeting of proprietors.
Power to ap- LIU. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors at
c^oundi A °and ie ex P ense of the Company to apply for and endeavour to
submit to con- obtain an Act of the Governor and Legislative Council of
dxtions. > 0
the Colony of New South Wales to incorporate the Com-
pany under the name style and title of 44 The Australian
Joint Stock Bank” and from time to time such other Act
or Acts of the Legislature of the said Colony or of the
Colony of Victoria or of any Legislature now or hereafter
to be established elsewhere in the Australasian territories
or New Zealand as the Board of Directors may consider
calculated to facilitate their legal remedies and advance


the general interests of the Company And for the pur-
pose of obtaining such Act of Incorporation or such Act
or Acts as aforesaid it shall be competent to the Board of
Directors on behalf of the Company to comply with such
conditions as may be imposed by any such Act or Acts
anything in these presents inconsistent with such condi-
tions notwithstanding and every provision herein contained
inconsistent with the provisions of such Act or Acts shall
during the continuance of the said Act or Acts be sus-
pended and shall be of no force and effect but after the
expiration of the said Act or Acts by effluxion of time
or otherwise every such provision herein contained shall
again be in full force.
LIV. It shall be competent to the Board of Directors Estabiish-
to establish any such Branch Bank or Banks at any place ches.
within the British dominions as the Board of Directors
with the previous concurrence of any general meeting of
proprietors shall determine.
LV. The Board of Directors shall have full power to Board ma x
, . A makearrange-
enter into any arrangement with one or more Bank orment for the
Banks Banker or Bankers in England Scotland or else- agency and
where for the said Bank or Banks Banker or Bankers to emkms. 6 ° P "
act as the agents of the said Company or for the said Com-
pany to act as the agents of the said Bank or Banks
Banker or Bankers and to make such arrangement and
transact such matters with the said Bank or Banks Banker
or Bankers as the Board shall in their absolute discretion
think fit with respect to letters of credit bills of exchange
and transmission of gold and all other matters and things
usually transacted between Banks or Bankers and specially
from time to time to empower any one or more of their
own number to carry on the business of exchange with
such Banks or Bankers and to bind the Company by such
contracts as it may be necessary or proper to enter into for


that purpose by signing drawing and endorsing accepting
or negociating bills of exchange promissory notes letters
of credit or other negociable instruments.
regulate^ 8 the The Board of Directors shall determine on and
form and sig- regulate the form and amount of the promissory notes of
nature of L J
bank notes, the Company payable to the bearer on demand and all
such promissory notes shall be signed by two of the
Directors and by such other person or persons as may be
authorised by the Board in that behalf.
po u e mj o , tak l LVII. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors to
or build land
or houses for purchase in fee simple or for any less estate and in such
oflicss &c l r
name or names as they shall think proper or to take upon
lease a suitable house and premises in Sydney for the
transaction of the business of the Company or to build
a suitable Banking House on land purchased for that
purpose and also to purchase or rent or build a suitable
house and premises of business for every Branch Bank that
may hereafter be established and also at any time or times
thereafter to sell let demise exchange or otherwise dispose
of such land houses and premises in such manner as they
may think most advisable and cause the same to be assured
and conveyed accordingly.
Power to take LVIIL That it shall be competent to the Board of
& c ., m pay- Directors to take and accept absolutely in satisfaction
debts. &C- ’ ° f liquidation or discharge of any debt previously due to the
Company any lands houses merchandise ships and any
other real or personal property and to cause the same to be
conveyed or assigned and delivered to such person or
persons as they may direct as Trustees for the said
Company Provided however that the Board of Directors
shall as soon as conveniently may be having reference to
the risk and cost of keeping such property and to the
prospect of realising in the then state of the market the


amount of the debts for which the same respectively were
taken or so much thereof as they may reasonably expect to
realise cause the same to be sold and disposed of for the
benefit of the Company and to be conveyed or assigned to
the purchasers thereof respectively.
LIX. It shall be competent to the Board of Directors to
take in the names of the Trustees of the Company or in £ty dtbt
the name of the Company if it shall have been incorporated
lands houses merchandise ships and any other real or per-
sonal estate in security for advances or for securing the
payment of any debts which shall have previously become
due or of any liability to become due to the Company which
shall have been permitted to be incurred in the regular and
legitimate course of banking business but which shall
afterwards appear to the Board of Directors not to be
sufficiently secured Provided nevertheless that it shall
be the duty of the Board of Directors to realise upon
such securities as soon as conveniently may be having
reference as in the last preceding clause and to cause
the same to be sold or disposed of for the benefit of the
Company and to be conveyed or assigned to the
purchasers thereof or else to forclose such security and
thereafter to sell convey or assign as herein provided.
LX. It shall be competent to the Board of Directors Power to take
to advance the moneys of the Company upon liens of wool and 8 mortga-
and upon mortgages of sheep cattle horses and stations | e c 8 on Btock
for the use of any holder of such stock within the said
colony Provided that in no case shall such lien on wool
be taken except upon the next ensuing clip and that no
such mortgage on sheep cattle horses and stations shall be
taken for a period of more than twelve months but so
nevertheless that no such mortgage shall be deemed to
expire at the end of such period of twelve months in case
the money secured thereby shall not be paid and discharged
within that period.


one or*' more LX I. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors by a
?o f r9 th power e t C o minute to be entered on their proceedings to appoint any
tkuiar 01 busi.' 0118 01 mole of tbeir number from time t 0 time to transact
ness. any particular business relating to the Company either as
to its principal establishment or in respect to its Branch
Banks or Banking agency or agencies.
Directors to LXII. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
appoint olli" /» # # #
acT’ (j lerks * * rom f ime 1° time to appoint a Manager Solicitor
gulate salaries
and such other officers clerks and servants as the business
mdiix duties. 0 f Company and 0 f Branch Banks may require and
from time to time to remove or suspend any such
Manager Solicitor and other officers clerks and servants at
their discretion And also from time to time to fix alter
and vary the duties to be performed and the amount of
remuneration to be given to each of such managers officers
clerks and servants and to pay and discharge the same out
of the funds and property of the Company And also for
and on behalf of the Company to delegate to such officers
as may be appointed such powers as the said Board of
Directors may consider necessary or expedient for the
transaction of the business of the Company and the person
from time to time appointed Manager of the Company at
at Sydney shall he entitled to a seat at the deliberations of
the Board, the Board of Directors but no vote in respect thereof
Provided that the Manager shall not be subject to removal
from his office except by the votes of four-fifths in number
of the Directors at a Meeting to be convened for the
purpose of investigation.
S ffic |ive & s°e- LXIII. Such Manager and other officers clerks and
curity. servants respectively shall in every respect abide by and
perform the orders and regulations of the Board in the
conduct of the business of the Company and shall give
such security as the Board of Directors shall from time to
time fix and determine for the due application of and


accounting for all moneys bills and other securities
received by them on behalf of the Company and for their
good and faithful conduct in their respective offices or
situations And all shares in the capital of the Company
held by any such Manager or other officer clerk or servant
may be retained by the Board of Directors as a security
for the good and faithful conduct of such Manager or
other officer clerk or servant in such respective offices or
situations.
LXIV. The Board shall cause to be provided and Pr^ r book "
L to be kept and
kept at each Banking house of the Company all balanced
_ , _ „ twice a-year,
necessary and proper books of account wherein shall
be entered in a fair regular explicit and plain method
all receipts payments transactions and dealings by or on
behalf of the Company and all profits gains and losses
arising therefrom And also an account of the dealings
and investments that shall be made with or of the capital
of the Company and of the moneys deposited with the
Company and how the same have been applied and paid
from time to time and shall during the continuance of the
Company up to and including the thirtieth day of June and
thirty-first day of December in every year in such manner
as to the Board shall seem correct and equitable cause the
said books to be settled adjusted and balanced And on
every such balancing the Board shall take and make up a
fair accurate full and explicit statement account and balance
sheet showing clearly and justly the debts credits and
liabilities of the Company and the amount and nature of
the assets thereof and the then fair value of the same and
the profits and gains and losses which shall have been
made or incurred by the Company, and in each such
balancing reference shall be had to the then value of the
assets of the Company.
LXY. The Board of Directors either voluntarily or Doubts in re-


construction 6 u P on the requisition of any ten proprietors holding in the
nui e rcguia! a gg re g ate not less than one thousand shares may call a
SnsVthe s P ec^ general meeting in manner herein appointed for
Deed of Set- the purpose of expounding and determining the true mean-
tlement to be. , , * r i _ _ &
determined mg and construction of the several clauses and provisions
general meet-
of the Deed of Settlement or of any rule or regulations of
the Company and the sense and meaning given by the
majority of the persons entitled to vote at such meeting
to any clause or provision of the Deed of Settlement or to
any rule or regulations of the Company shall be deemed
the true sense and meaning thereof.
BRANCH BANKS.
Appointment LXVI In case Branch Banks shall be established the
and power of
Branch Mana- Board of Directors shall appoint lit and proper persons to
tors. rtC ' be the Managers of such Branches and shall also associate
with such Managers respectively if they shall think lit
such and so many local Directors being proprietors as
they shall think expedient for the conduct and manage-
ment of the business of the Company at such Branch
Banks respectively and shall depute to such Manager and
Local Directors or to such Manager alone such powers as
they may think safe and expedient and shall make and
impose such regulations restrictions and checks in respect
of the extent and nature of the dealings of such Branch
Banks and the principles and mode of transacting the busi-
ness thereof as may be necessary or expedient And such
Manager and Local Directors respectively shall accordingly
have and exercise such powers as may be so deputed to
them and shall be subject to such regulations and restric-
tions and checks as may be so made and imposed and shall
be subject also to the general control and direction of the
Board of Directors and also to all the provisions herein
contained as to the Directors at Sydney or which may
hereafter be established by any rule or regulation of any
General Meeting.


LXVII. Every Manager and other officer of a Branch Branch *f a -
J o nagers to give
Bank shall before he shall enter on the duties of his office security.
give such security for the diligent and faithful discharge
of the duties of his office, as the Board of Directors may
require.
LXVIII. The Board of Directors shall from time
time fix alter and determine the amount of remuneration
to be paid to every such Branch Manager and local Direc-
tor and shall pay and discharge the same out of the funds
of the Company.
LXIX. The Board of Directors shall have full power at Removal,
any time to suspend and remove from office any Manager
of any such Branch Bank or any Local Director whenever
it shall appear to them conducive to the interests of the
Company so to do and either to appoint some other Mana-
ger or Director in his place or leave the office vacant as
they shall in their discretion think expedient.
PROP RIETO lIS.
LXX. No person shall be deemed or taken to be a Execution of
proprietor of or to have any interest in any share of the uon d prec°dent
said capital or be entitled to any rights or privileges as a^ 0^01 ’
member of the Company until he or she shall have exe-
cuted this deed or a duplicate thereof either in person or
by attorney and complied with all the provisions thereof
which may be applicable to his or her case Provided
however that this article shall not prevent the Company
from requiring payment of and receiving the deposit or
any call upon shares agreed to be taken by any person who
shall not have executed this deed or a duplicate thereof.
LXXI. Every proprietor shall have a separate and Rights and
distinct right to his or her share for the time being in the proprietors. ° f


capital of the Company and shall be entitled to and
interested in the profits and liable and subject to the losses
of the Company in proportion to the number of shares
held by him but subject nevertheless to the provisions
herein contained.
Proprietors to LXXII. Every proprietor who may be indebted to the
dfyiduaidebts Company or to the trustees or any other person on behalf
°f the Company shall upon demand pay to the person duly
requiring ac- authorised by the Board of Directors in that behalf such
count to be J
taken of the debt or such part thereof as may at the time be due and
partnership. x J
payable and shall be so demanded and shall not adopt or
institute any proceedings in a Court of Equity or other-
wise for procuring any accounts to be taken in relation to the
partnership existing by virtue of this Deed of Settlement
and in case any such proprietor shall make default in
payment of the debt which may be so due and demanded
of him then the amount of such debt may under the order
of the Board of Directors be recovered from such pro-
prietor his heirs executors or administrators as liquidated
damages And every party to these presents hereby
agrees that any debts which may be so due by him and
demanded and in payment whereof there shall be such
default shall and may be so recovered as liquidated
damages.
Debts of indi- LXXIII. In all cases wherein a proprietor either by
viduai propri- himself or jointly with any other person and whether
etors to give J J ,
a lien on their directly or indirectly shall become debtor to the
Company or to any person or persons for the use of the
Company or shall be under engagements to the Company
of any kind such debts and engagements shall be first
and paramount charges upon the shares of such proprietor
and the dividends or interest accruing thereon before all
other creditors of such proprietor and before his assigns
voluntary and legal and it shall be lawful for the Board of


Directors if they shall see fit to prohibit and restrain
the transfer of the shares of such proprietor or the
payment of the dividends accruing thereon until all
and every such debts and engagements shall have been
fully paid and satisfied And if such proprietor shall
fail within a time to be fixed by the Board of Directors
to pay and satisfy all such debts and engagements the
shares of such proprietors shall thereupon become for-
feited to the Company and it shall be lawful for the
Board of Directors without notice to such proprietor
absolutely to sell the said shares or so many thereof as
shall be necessary and sufficient for the purpose by
public auction and to apply the proceeds thereof
together with the dividends and interest due thereon in
liquidation of such debts and egagements and the
balance of the net proceeds of any such sale shall be
paid over to the late proprietor of such shares.
LXXIV. When any sharesshall be vested in two or°n° int p™-
. . . pnetors one
more persons jointly or in common or otherwise only to be re-
the one of such persons or of the survivors of certain d Por-
them whose name shall stand first in the books po3es '
of the Company as one of the owners of such
shares or the sole survivor of such two or more persons
shall be considered and deemed the proprietor of such
shares for the purpose of voting and receiving
dividends and of receiving any notice that may be
required to be given but all the parties shall be liable
jointly and severally to the Company for the fulfilment
of all the covenants herein contained And any
notice given to either of them shall be deemed good
notice to all of them Provided that in case of the
absence from the colony of the first named of such
joint proprietors the other appearing next upon the
Share Register as joint proprietor shall be allowed to
vote in respect of shares so held.


Partnership LXXV. In any and every action or suit at law or
not to be set . ... f
up as a bar to in equity wherein a proprietor shall be plaintiff and
any action or ,
suitbeingsus- the Company or any trustees or other persons acting
tamable. on behalf of the Company shall be defendants and
vice versa it shall not be competent for either of the
parties in or to such action or suit to set up the
partnership created by this deed or by or in respect of
this Association as a bar to such action or suit being
sustainable and such parlies respectively shall upon the
trial or hearing of any such action or suit and in all
or any proceedings which shall be had in or in relation
to any such action or suit be obliged to waive and
forego the objection to any such action being tried at
Jaw or to any such suit being instituted or prosecuted
in equity by reason of the plaintiffs and defendants
being partners in the Company And no objection
shall at any time be taken on the ground that all the
proprietors are not made parties to any such action or
suit And upon any trial of any such action or any
hearing in any such suit, it shall be imperative on the
Board of Directors to produce or cause to be produced
topnl- these presents or a duplicate thereof and also the
on° e triai de< of l )owers of attorney (if any) under which these presents
action. or a duplicate thereof shall have been executed by any
of the parties thereto or such of the same instruments
respectively as shall be in the custody or power of the
Board of Directors and the same respectively shall be
read and used on or in any such trial hearing action or
suit without any proof of the due execution of the
same respectively And the matters and things in this
present clause stated shall and may be used in
evidence or in the same trial hearing action or suit and
shall have the same force and effect as and by way of
Effect of the admission from the parties respectively as if the same
provisions 1 1 . .
herein con- matters and things had been reduced to writing
previously to such trial or hearing as admissions in the
cause in the usual form and had been signed by such


parties or their respective attorneys irrevocably And
either of the parties shall if required by the other of
them consent to the Court or any Judge of the Court
in which such action shall be brought or suit com-
menced making an order wherein shall be embodied
the matters and things last aforesaid as admissions
from the parties against whom such order shall be
sought to be read and used in evidence on any such
trial hearing action or suit by the party obtaining such
order And if any proprietor shall act in contraven- Forfeiture by
tion of this article and shall thereby succeed in mgYn contra'
defeating the claim of the Company against him his^2cie?° fthlG
shares in the capital of the Company shall upon such
forfeiture being declared by the Board of Directors
(which they are hereby authorized to do as to all or
any of such shares as they may think tit) be absolutely
forfeited to the Company.
LX XVI. In order to encourage dealings by Agreement to
parties with the Company in the way of the business sued^in 10 the
of such Company and to avoid the inconvenience at ‘or
law or in equity arising from the number and the „ tlustees
r, . _ . - _ and not to
fluctuation oi proprietors the proprietors shall submit P lead wantof
to be sued in the name of the Chairman or trustees 0 f partlc&
the Company as the case may require by any person
having any claim or demand against the Company
and shall not nor shall the said Chairman or
trustees or the Board of Directors set up as a defence
the non-joinder of the other proprietors or any of
them as parties to any proceeding that may be taken
in respect of any such claim or demand And any
judgment decree or order made in any such proceeding
shall be binding upon the Company and upon each
and every proprietor to the extent of the limited
liability hereby agreed upon by the proprietors
amongst themselves And this clause shall in any
such proceeding be deemed and taken to be a waiver


of any objection as to the want of parties and may be
read in court as conclusive proof of such waiver.
Evidence of LXXVII No objection shall be taken by or on
proprietors. °
behalf of the Company or by or on behalf of any
proprietor to the reception of the evidence of any
proprietor when tendered in any action or suit matter
or proceeding in any Court of Justice between the
Company and any proprietor or between any
proprietor or any other proprietor upon the ground
of interest or on any other ground arising out of such
proprietorship and this clause may be received and
read as a waiver of any such objection by the
Company or by any proprietor as the case may require.
Reimburse- LXXVIIL If any execution shall issue against any
ment to indi- . r . . i .
viduai pro- individual proprietor or former proprietor or his
spectofexecu-property and effects upon a judgment decree or order
judgment* 110 " obtained against the Company every such proprietor
agamst the or former proprietor shall be reimbursed out of the
Company. it „ ~
property and effects of the Company tor all moneys
paid and for all damages costs and expenses incurred
by reason of such execution or of the action or suit
in which the same shall have issued or in default of
such reimbursement he shall be entitled to contribution
from the other proprietors of the Company as and
subject to the limitations herein provided.
Remedy if not LXXIX. If any such proprietor or former proprie-
oSrfthe e pro- tor or his executors or administrators shall not be
Com y an f the reimbursed out of the property and effects of the
Company it shall be lawful for him his executors
or administrators to divide the amount of the
moneys to be paid with interest damages costs
and expenses or so much thereof as lie shall not have
been reimbursed into as many equal parts as there
shall then be shares in the capital of the Company


not including: shares then under forfeiture And
every proprietor for tlie time being of the Company
and the executor or administrator of every deceased
proprietor shall in proportion to the number of his
shares contribute and pay one or more of such parts on
demand to the proprietor against whom such execution
shall have issued or to his executor or administrator
And upon neglect or refusal to pay such contribution
it shall be lawful for such proprietor or former
proprietor his executor or administrator to sue for and
recover the same against the proprietor or the
executor or administrator of any proprietor who shall
so neglect or refuse as aforesaid as a debt or demand
recoverable at law and distinct from the accounts of
the partnership And if such proprietor or former
proprietor against whom such execution shall
have issued his executor or administrator shall
by reason of the bankruptcy or insolvency of any
proprietor or from any other cause but without any
neglect or wilful default on his own part be prevented
from recovering any portion of the moneys interest
costs damages and expenses which he shall have so
paid as aforesaid it shall be lawful for him or them again
to divide such proportion as shall not have been re-
ceived by him or them into as many equal parts as there
shall then be shares in the capital of the Company not
including the shares under forfeiture except the shares
in respect of which such default shall have happened
And every proprietor for the time being of the Company
except as aforesaid and the executors or administrators
of any deceased proprietor shall rateably according to Covenant to
the number of the shares of such proprietor or deceased pa> latedbly *
proprietor upon demand pay one or more of such last
mentioned parts to the proprietor or former proprietor
against whom such execution shall have issued his
executor or administrator and in default of payment
he shall have the same remedies for the recovery


thereof as are hereinbefore given in respect of the
original contributions And if any portion of such
money interest costs damages and expenses shall
still remain unpaid by reason of any such bankruptcy
insolvency or other cause as aforesaid such proprietor
or former proprietor his executor or administrator
shall have in like manner from time to time and by
way of accumulative remedy the same powers accord-
ing to the circumstances of the case of again
dividing and enforcing payment of such portion
until he or they shall in the end if a former proprietor
be fully reimbursed the whole of the said moneys
interests cost damages and expenses and if then a
proprietor the whole excepting the portion appro-
priated to the shares held by himself Provided
however that no such contribution shall be
demandable to an extent greater than a sum equalling
the original amount of the shares in respect of which
of the same shall in any case be demanded and that
Limitation
liability.
whenever any individual proprietor shall have paid
by calls to meet losses or by contribution a sum
equalling the original amount of such shares he shall
no longer be liable to pay any further amount either
by reason of any call or as contribution at the instance
of any other proprietor against whom an execution upon
a judgment against the Company shall have issued.
GENERAL MEETINGS OF PROPRIETORS.
Half-yearly LXXX. That the first half-yearly meeting of pro-
fngs er of m proi prietors shall be held in the month of July eighteen
pnetors. hundred and fifty-three to be called in the manner
herein prescribed and thereafter successive Half-
yearly General Meetings of the proprietors shall
be held at the Banking-house ol the Company
in Sydney or at some other convenient place in
Sydney to be notified in the advertisement of such
meeting in the months of January and July in each


year on such day as the Board of Directors shall see
fit to appoint for holding any such meeting Audit
shall be the duty of the Manager of the Company to
cause an advertisement of the time and place of holding
such meetings to be inserted in one or more of the
principal newspapers published in Sydney for the
space of ten days at least before the appointed time.
LXXXI. The business of every half-yearly general Business of
meeting shall be to fill up the vacancies which shall generaTmeet-
then exist or take place in the Board of Directors and mgB,
to do such other matters and things as are herein
particularly required or allowed to be done thereat
and also to consider the report of the Directors to be
then made and to consider and decide on such other
matters and things as may then be brought forward
by the Board of Directors relating to the affairs of the
Company or which may be brought forward by any
proprietor who shall have given to the Board of
Directors seven days’ previous notice at the least of
his intention to bring such matters and things forward
at such meeting.
LXXXII. The Board of Directors shall together Directors’
with the balance sheet herein mentioned cause to bereport? arly
laid before the proprietors at each half-yearly general
meeting a report on the Company’s affairs previously
approved of at a meeting of the Board of Directors
and bearing the signature of the Chairman of such
meeting and such report shall contain the recom-
mendation of the Board of Directors as to the
appropriation of the profits.
LXXXIII. In making up the balance sheet to be Bad and
submitted to every half-yearly general meeting it shall ? 0 °be tfdeduct-
be in the power of tbe Directors to charge against thehaif-° y Twiy fitB
reserve fund not only all debts due to the Company


which shall appear to the Board of Directors to be
bad debts but also all such as shall appear to them to be
of a seriously doubtful character And in case any
such debts shall afterwards be recovered the amount
thereof shall be again carried to the credit of the
Reserve Fund.
Directors’ re- LXXXIV. The reports made by the Board of Direc-
ports and ba- 1 J
lance sheets tors at any half yearly general meeting of proprietors
reports to be
and the balance sheet exhibited thereat and the half-
te(T m to niC pro. yearly accounts as certified by the auditors and also
i P euer 0 . r 8 by the minutes of proceedings at all such meetings shall
be printed and circulated amongst the proprietors as
soon as conveniently may be by letters addressed as
herein provided with respect to notice of special
general meetings.
Reduction LXXXV. If it shall appear at any one of the half.
s ycarly general meetings hereinbefore required to be
“ P ° wer held that there is no immediate or prospective employ-
ment for the full amount of the capital actually paid-up
and if a diminution of the capital shall have been
recommended in the report made by the Board of
Directors to the proprietors at such meeting it shall
be lawful for such general meeting to enter into a
resolution to diminish the capital of the Company
in such manner and to such amount as shall be
specified in such resolution And in pursuance of
such resolution the Board of Directors shall cause
the same to be paid back to the several proprietors
but the amount so paid back may again be called for
by the Board of Directors in the same manner as if
the amount had never been brought into the Capital
Stock.
Calling of spe- LXXXVI. Subject to such notice as is herein
meeim|s. neral required special general meetings of the proprietors


shall be held at such time and places as the Board ot
Directors may determine And also if* any number
(not less than ten) of proprietors holding not less than
one thousand shares in the capital of the Company
shall at any time by writing under their hands require
the Board of Directors to call a special general meet-
ing for any purpose relating to the Company it shall
be incumbent on the Board of Directors to call the
same Provided that in every such requisition the
object for which such special general meeting is
required shall be distinctly expressed And if such
requisition shall not be complied with within ten days
after the same shall have been left at the Banking-
house it shall be lawful for the proprietors signing
such requisition of their own authority to call a special
general meeting to be held at the Banking-house or
some other convenient place in Sydney for the con-
sideration of the same matters relating to the Company
as were set forth in such requisition.
LXXXVII. Except as hereinafter provided ten days’ Notice of
notice at the least shall be given of all such special meetmBB
general meetings of the proprietors either by adver-
tisement in one or more of the Sydney newspapers or
by circular letters addressed to the several proprietors
as hereinafter provided And in such notice there
shall be distinctly expressed the objects for which the
meeting is convened And the business of such special
general meetings shall be to consider and dispose of all
such matters and things relating to the business of the
Company as may then be brought forward in accord-
ance with the notice given as aforesaid and no other.
LXXXVIIL In cases of emergency and urgency in Special gene-
which it shall appear to the Directors present at any in cases of
meeting of Directors duly called essential or of much emergency ’


importance to the interests of the Company that certain
matters should be brought under the consideration of a
Meeting of proprietors with greater promptitude than
the notice hereinbefore required could admit of it shall
be competent to such Directors to convene a special
general meeting by advertisement or circular letters
to be holden within not less than five days of the
publication of such advertisement or the posting of
such notices And such meeting shall possess all the
same powers as a special general meeting held in the
ordinary course hereinbefore prescribed.
Notice by ci
cular letters
LXXXIX. When and so often as it shall appear to
the Board of Directors or to the proprietors who shall
call any special general meeting upon default of the
Directors to comply with a requisition for that purpose
to be desirable to give notice of any meeting of pro-
prietors or of any adjournment thereof or of the
object of any such meeting or to give any other notice
required by these presents or which may be required
by any future rule or regulations by circular letters
instead of public advertisement thereof it shall be
competent for the Board of Directors or for such pro-
prietors to address such circular letters and send the
same by post to the several proprietors at their
respective residences or at the last place of residence
which shall have been notified to the Manager of the
Company or to address such notice (if the Board of
Directors or the Manager shall so think fit) to any
executor or administrator of a deceased proprietor or
the committee of a lunatic proprietor or the guardian
of an infant proprietor or next of kin to an intestate
proprietor or the trustee or assignee of an insolvent
or bankrupt proprietor or to the agent of any pro-
prietor absent from the colony in case such executor
administrator committee guardian trustee or assignee


and agent respectively shall have certified their
respective titles or representative position to the
Manager of the Company and have communicated
their names and addresses And in case any pro-
prietor whatsoever shall not have communicated his
address to the manager and in respect of shares which
by death or operation of law shall have ceased to be
vested in the proprietor in whose name the shares shall
stand in the books of the Company and shall not have
become vested in any new proprietor according to the
provisions herein contained it shall be unnecessary
for any such letter to be written or addressed to any
person whatsoever but the proprietor or party entitled
shall nevertheless be bound by all the acts of any such
meeting of proprietors in the same manner as if he had
received notice thereof.
XC. The testimony of the Manager of the Company Proof of no.
that the said letters were to the best of his knowledge luiettna!™'
and belief written and addressed in conformity with
the provision hereinbefore contained and that they
were delivered out by him for the purpose of being
despatched by post according to their respective
addresses and that he verily believes that the same
were respectively put into the Post Office at or before
the times respectively herein required for the giving
of the notices conveyed by such letters shall be
conclusive evidence of the due service of the said
notice.
r.
lt shall be lawful for a general meeting of Power of
Proprietors by a majority of votes to make new lawsf n e g 8 er ti “X
regulations and provisions for the Company and
amend alter and repeal all or any of the existing laws
regulations and provisions of the Company Provided
such new amended or altered laws regulations and


provisions do not extend to amend alter or repeal all
or any part of the laws regulations and provisions
established and settled by these presents for limiting
the individual responsibility of the respective pro-
prietors of the Company as between themselves And
provided further that no such new amended or altered
laws regulations and provisions shall be in force till
confirmed at a subsequent general meeting.
5f XCII. Every general meeting shall adjourn to a
anend U ance ent^uture ten P ro P r i etors holding in the aggregate
not less than one thousand shares shall not assemble
within half an hour after the time fixed for such meeting
And unless the said number of proprietors shall be
present the meeting shall not be competent to transact
any other business than fixing the time for holding an
adjournment of such meeting which adjournment
shall not exceed fourteen days from such meeting
And no such adjourned meeting shall proceed to any
other business than fixing the time for a further ad-
journment unless the said number of proprietors shall
be present at the same.
Notification of XCIII. Every such adjournment as aforesaid shall
rn h t adjourn ' forthwith be notified to the proprietors either by cir-
cular letters or by public advertisement in one or more
of the Sydney newspapers.
Adjournment XCIV. At any general meeting or adjournment
not buS com- thereof at which ten persons qualified to vote and hold-
pieted, j n g j n aggregate not less than one thousand shares
shall be present such persons or the major part of
them in number present at such meeting may adjourn
the same to such day and hour and to such place in
the city of Sydney as they shall think proper but no
such adjournment shall take place for a longer period


than seven days and no other subject or business shall
be proposed debated or transacted at any adjourned
meeting than the subject or business for which the
original meeting was called and which was not com-
menced or was left unfinished at such original or
adjourned meeting And the persons entitled to vote
who shall be present at any adjourned meeting although
they may not have been present at the meeting whence
the adjournment took place may vote at such adjourned
meeting and every adjournment shall be deemed a
continuation of the original meeting.
XCV, That the Chairman elected by the Board
of Directors as hereinbefore provided or in his absence P r °P rietors .
, . 1 # and casting
the senior Director present shall unless he shall decline vote,
to do so preside at all half-yearly general meetings of
the proprietors Provided that until the order of
seniority shall be established by the death retirement
or removal from office of the first Directors appointed
by virtue of these presents the proprietors present at
such half-yearly general meetings shall in the absence
of the Chairman elect their own Chairman from the
Directors then present And at all special general
meetings the proprietors present shall elect their own
Chairman And on all questions submitted to any
such half-yearly or special general meeting the Chair-
man presiding shall have the votes to which he shall
be entitled as a proprietor and also a casting vote in
the case of an equality of votes except only in the case
of the election of Directors herein provided for.
XCVI. In case any of the elections directed by these incase of de-
presents to be made by the proprietors at certain meet- twns'directed
ings or within specified times shall not be made at gp e^fi “ d ade at
such meetings or within such times it shall nevertheless meetin s 8 , or
1 - , , times, elec-
De competent to the proprietors to make such elections tions ma Y be


made at sub respectively at any half-yearly or special general
sequent meet- . , , i , J *
ings. meeting held subsequently.
Minutes 0 f XCVII. Minutes of all the proceedings of every
general meeting shall be entered and kept in the
their effect. in inute book of the Company and shall be signed by
the person presiding at such meeting And such
minute shall be full and conclusive evidence that the
proceedings therein recorded took place at a general
meeting duly called and held pursuant to these
presents and that the person whose name shall be sub-
scribed thereto was the Chairman thereat and that he
signed such minutes And such minutes shall be
binding and conclusive on all the proprietors and all
other persons claiming any interest in respect of any
shares in the capital of the Company
Defective XCVII. No law resolution or proceeding passed at
validate 1 to jo an y half-yearly or special general meeting shall be
of impeached or invalidated on the ground that any
ings. person voting at any such meeting was not entitled to
vote thereat.
AUDITORS.
XCIX. There shall at all times be two Auditors of the
Company to perform the duties hereinafter mentioned
and it is agreed that George King and Frederick Ebs-
worth of Sydney in the colony aforesaid shall be the
first Auditors and shall remain in office until the half-
yearly meeting held in the month of January one
thousand eight hundred and fifty-four and no person
shall hereafter be elected as an Auditor who shall not
have been a proprietor at least three calendar months
previous to his election and no Director shall be eligi-
ble to be elected an Auditor for twelve months after
retiring or removal from the Board.
Auditors.


C. The qualification for an Auditor shall be the Qualification
, * , of Auditors.
holding of not less than 50 shares in the capital of the
Company and he shall be also subject in other respects
to all such other disqualifications as Directors are And
every Auditor who shall act as such whilst unqualified
or disqualified shall receive no remuneration for his
services and shall forfeit and pay to the Company the
penalty of one hundred pounds to be appropriated to
the use of the Company and applied to the augmen-
tation of the Reserve Fund and the shares of such
Auditor shall be chargeable with the payment of such
penalty and may be sold by the order of the Board of
Directors to discharge the same.
Cl. At every half-yearly General Meeting to be A PP° intment r
J j o and powers of
held in the month of January in each year the Auditors Auditors,
shall retire from office and two proprietors shall be
elected by the proprietors to act as Auditors during the
year thence next ensuing one of such retiring Auditors
being eligible for re-election And such Auditors shall
be fully authorised at all reasonable times to inspect
the books of the Company and to examine the
accounts and affairs of the Company generally and to
call for the production to them at the head Banking
House of the Company of all books vouchers writings
and documents concerning the same and all coin
securities and other assets of the Company and to call
in the aid of the officers clerks and servants of the
Company or any other person competent to give infor-
mation as to the Company’s affairs.
CII. In the event of the death resignation or dis- Appointment
.. ~ c . 0 of Auditors ad
qualification ot any such Auditor during such term of interim on
office it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors to don^&c!" B™’ 8 ™’
appoiiit any other duly qualified proprietor to act as


Auditor until the next ensuing special general or half-
yearly general meeting when the vacancy shall be filled
up by appointment.
Remunera- CIII. The half-yearly sum of £5O shall be paid in
tion to Audi- J r
tors. equal proportions to the Auditors as a remuneration
for their services.
Half - yearly CIV. The affairs and transactions of the Company
balance sheet! shall be brought to a just and true balance by the Board
of Directors on or before the thirtieth day of June and
the thirty-first day of December in each and every year
and the Auditors shall immediately thereafter count
the cash balance and a balance sheet shall be prepared
and signed by the chairman of the Company containing
a true statement of the affairs and transactions of the
Company and the nett profits of the bank during the
half-year immediately preceding and shall as soon as
possible thereafter together with all bills securities
vouchers accounts and documents necessary for verify-
ing the same be submitted by the Board of Directors
to the Auditors And such Auditors shall examine the
books of the Company and certify such balance sheet
in testimony of their having examined and verified the
several entries contained therein And the balance
sheet so signed shall be submitted to the half-yearly
general meeting of the proprietors.
Further audit CV. If it shall appear to such half-yearly general
tor.' c meeting desirable that the Company’s affairs should
be more fully investigated it shall be lawful for such
general meeting either to direct the said Auditors to
enquire into and report upon the affairs of the Com-
pany generally or in their discretion to appoint any
two or more proprietors as Special Auditors with the


like powers for that purpose Provided always that
the proprietors so appointed shall be duly qualified to
be elected Auditors as herein before provided.
VOTkS AND VOTING.
CVI. At all meetings of the proprietors every pro- Number of
~ 1 r J 1 votes and
prietor holding ten and under twenty-five shares in mode of voting
the capital of the Company shall have one vote Every meetings! 16 ™ 1
proprietor holding twenty-five shares and under fifty
two votes Every proprietor holding fifty shares and
under one hundred three votes Every proprietor
holding one hundred shares four votes and for every
one hundred other shares which any proprietor shall
hold beyond that number he shall be entitled to one
vote more And after the expiration of three months
from the day of the date of these presents no proprietor
shall be entitled to vote in respect of shares which he
shall not have held for the space of three calendar
months And all questions to be submitted to any
meetings of the proprietors shall be primarily decided
by the majority in number of the persons present
qualified to vote on a show of hands except in such
cases as herein otherwise provided And any two
proprietors present at any such meeting qualified to
vote shall be entitled to demand a ballot which ballot by
shall be granted if demanded before the chairman
shall have pronounced any question decided And
any proprietor absent from any such meeting may
give his or her vote or votes by proxy Provided
that the person appointed to act as proxy shall be a
proprietor.
CVII. In case any doubt or controversy shall arise Cases of doubt
at any meeting as to the number of votes which any


settled by re- proprietor may be entitled to give the same may be
“sw Re- determined by reference to the Share Register which
gister,” shall be conclusive evidence (as to the right of voting)
of the number of shares in respect of which such pro-
prietor shall be entitled to vote.
and CVIII. Every proxy shall be in writing under the
to be deposit- band of the proprietor of the shares in respect of which
such proxy shall be given or in the case of a proprietor
absent from the colony under the hand of his agent
duly authorised by power of attorney to receive divi-
dends or to make sale of his share or shares And
such proxies respectively shall before the same shall
be allowed to be acted upon at any meeting of pro-
prietors be delivered to the manager of the Company
together with the power of attorney or an attested
copy thereof in the case of a proxy by agent to be by
him deposited and kept at the principal office of the
Company in Sydney And every such proxy shall be
Form of in the form or to the effect following “ I hereby ap-
point my proxy to vote and act for
me and in my name at the general meeting
of the proprietors of the Australian Joint Stock Bank
to be held on the day of
and at every adjournment thereof and at any ballot
that may be demanded at such meeting or at any
adjournment thereof Dated this” Provided always
that in the case of proprietors not residing within
General proxy thirty miles of the city of Sydney a general proxy
—Form of may be given in the following form:— “l hereby
appoint my proxy
to vote and act for me and in my name in the event of
my own absence at any or every general meeting which
until the revocation of this appointment shall be held
of the proprietors of the “Australian Joint Stock
Bank” and at any or every adjournment of any or every


such meeting respectively and at any or every ballot
that may be demanded at any or every such meeting
or at any or every adjournment thereof. Dated this
day of
CIX. Every proprietor who shall have appointed 01
such proxy as aforesaid shall for all the purposes of
the general meeting and of every adjourned general
meeting and ballot to which such proxy shall be ap-
plicable but not for the purpose of composing the
number of proprietors whose personal presence is
requisite to prevent adjournments be considered as
present by such proxy And all the votes and acts of
the proxy in that capacity shall be as valid and effec-
tual subject to the qualifications and provisions herein
contained as the votes and acts of the proprietor
appointing him would have been if such proprietor
had been present and had personally voted at any
such general meeting or ballot.
CX. If two or more proprietors present at an y®* cl ™*™
general meeting shall object to the vote of any other Proprietors
. . u n i specially in-
propnetor and shall prove to the satisfaction of the terested in any
majority in number of proprietors then present that <luestlon *
the person whose vote has been objected to has an
interest in the question on which the vote is to be
taken beyond that which he may have therein in
common with the other proprietors then and in every
such case the proprietor whose vote has been objected
to shall not be allowed to vote on the question and
shall be incapacitated from voting on such question as
the proxy of any absent proprietor.
CXI. No proprietor who shall be a paid officer of Pr °P rietor
, i . 1 being paid
the Company other than the Directors Auditors and officer, except
Solicitors shall be qualified to vote at any general ditor, and So-


vS? r at n meeS meet * n S °f proprietors either as a proprietor or as the
in 8 8 * proxy of another proprietor
RESERVE FUND.
Payment of CXII. Out of the net profits of each half-yea
reserve fund .. . . _ , .
out of profits, a sum according to the recommendation of the Direc-
tors not less than five per cent, of the amount
according as the half-yearly meeting shall determine
shall in the first place be appropriated towards the
formation of a reserve fund to provide for occasional
losses And such reserve fund shall not be allowed to
be distributed by way of dividend or bonus until it
shall amount to more than twenty-five per cent, upon
the actual paid up capital of the Company but after it
shall at any time have reached that amount it shall be
lawful for a half-yearly general meeting in pursuance
of a recommendation of the Board of Directors out of
such reserve fund to declare a bonus to be payable to
the proprietors on and after a day to be fixed by such
general meeting Provided always that the reserve
fund shall not thereby be reduced below an amount
equal to ten per cent, upon the paid up capital of the
Company And provided further that after the
declaration of such bonus no further bonus shall be
declared until such time as the reserve fund shall
again amount to more than twenty-five per cent, upon
the actual paid up capital of the Company.
Augmenta- CXIII. All premiums on the sale of new shares and
fund? freBer,e the proceeds of all forfeited shares excepting as herein
otherwise provided and all dividends remaining
unclaimed for the period of seven years after the same
shall be declared and also all damages and penalties
which may be recovered from time to time under the
covenants articles stipulations and agreements herein
contained or under any laws or regulations which may


be hereafter established shall be applied in augmen-
tation and appropriated as part of the reserve fund.
DIVIDENDS.
CXIV. After such appropriation for the formation of 011 of
a reserve fund the balance of net profit shall be
available for the payment of a dividend at such rate as
the Board of Directors shall declare at the half-yearly
general meeting And such dividend shall become
payable to the proprietors accordingly at a time to be
then fixed And the balance of net profit remaining
if any after providing for the payment of such dividend
shall be carried forward to the profit and loss account
of the ensuing half-year for the purpose of equalizing
future dividends.
CXV. No dividend shall be paid in respect of any f 8 divi-
-1 , 1 dends upon
share upon which anv call shall be in arrear until such shares on
which. calls
call and interest shall have been duly paid and are in arrear.
satisfied or in respect of the shares of any 7 person who
shall not have executed these presents But it shall be
lawful for the Board of Directors unless they shall
declare a forfeiture of such shares to retain such
dividends on account of such call and interest until the
same shall have been paid And the proprietor
entitled thereto shall not be entitled to claim interest
on the amount of such dividends during the time they
shall have been so retained by 7 the Company And
upon a forfeiture of such shares being declared such
dividends shall be appopriated to the uses of the
Company and applied in augmentation of the reserve
fund.
CXVI. The Directors Auditors and all the officers obligation of
and clerks and trustees of the Company shall be bound Becrecy ‘
to observe secrecy except in the course and perfor-


mance of their respective duties towards the Company
or under compulsion or obligation of law with respect
to all transactions of the Company with its customers
and as to the state of the account of any individual or
the extent of his liabilities And every such Director
Auditor officer and clerk shall previously to entering
upon the duties of his office or employment sign a
declaration in a book to be kept for that purpose that
he will not reveal or make known any of the matters
affairs or concerns which may come to his knowledge
as a Director Auditor officer or clerk to any person
or persons whomsoever except in the course and
performance of his duties or under compulsion or
obligation of law or when officially required so to do
by the Board of Directors or by the Auditors for the
time being or by any general meeting of proprietors of
the Company.
TRUSTEES.
Appointment CXVII. It shall be lawful for the Board of
of Trustees . . ,
under control Directors from time to time to appoint such person or
of Directors. p ergong ag t h ey s h a p think proper to be a trustee or
trustees with and by whom and in whose name or
names any contracts engagements or dealings may be
entered into on behalf of the Company subject to such
limitations as the Board of Directors may think fit
And in whose name or names may be made and taken
all grants conveyances mortgages leases assignments
and assurances of property lor the benefit of the
Company and all other instruments and securities
which may be made or taken And to take from such
trustee or trustees a declaration of trust as to such
property as shall be so vested in him or them
respectively And to require such trustee or trustees
when the Board shall see fit to grant convey assign or
assure the said property as the Board shall direct and
appoint.


CXVIII. Such trustee or trustees may at any time Resignation
resign such trusteeship on giving notice to the Board of d trustees
of Directors and accounting for all moneys and effects e^f OT Tei
received by him or them and executing such convey- conveyance,
ance assignment or assurance as the Board of Directors
may require And the Board of Directors may at any
time remove any such trustee or trustees and shall in
the event of his or their refusing to execute such release
conveyance or assignment or assurance as the Board
of Directors may require or any power of attorney as
hereinafter required or to account for the property and
moneys received by him or them adopt all legal means
to enforce the execution of such release conveyance
assignment or assurance and to compel such trustee
or trustees to account Provided always that every
receipt which shall have been given by any trustee or
trustees for money received by him or them in respect
of any property or of any securities for money vested
in him or them either as purchase money or otherwise
shall be a good and sufficient discharge to the persons
paying the same who shall not be afterwards required
to see to the application or be answerable or account-
able for the mis-application or non-application of the
money so paid by them Provided that such persons
were not at the time of any such receipt cognizant of
any such misapplication or non-application accom-
panying such receipt or of the same being in the con-
templation of such trustee or trustees.
CXIX. The Board of Directors may require such Dire ? torBma y
J n . require powet
trustee or trustees during the continuance of his or of attorney
, . from trustees
their trusteeship to execute to such person or persons to any person
as the board may appoint such joint or joint andlLirnmei. 111
several power or powers of attorney with or with-
out a power of revocation as may be necessary for
enabling the person or persons so appointed in the


name of such trustee or trustees to execute any con-
veyance or assignment of the properties rights or
interests or any of them which may be vested in him
or them as such trustee or trustees and to sue prosecute
or defend any action or suit at law or in equity or to
petition for the sequestration of the estate of any insol-
vent debtor or to prove in any insolvent estate when
sequestrated or in any other way to enforce any claim
due to such trustee or trustees in respect of the subject
of his or their trusteeship or to defend any claim or
demand made on such trustee or trustees in respect
thereof and to discontinue abandon release or become
nonsuit in any such action suit or proceeding.
Service of no- CXX. In all cases where it may be necessary for
tice on the an y person to serve any notice writ or other pro-
Company. J J . . r
ceeding at law or in equity or otherwise upon the
Company service thereof upon the Manager for the
time being by leaving the same at the office of the
Company at Sydney or at any Branch Bank if the
same shall relate to any transaction at such Branch
Bank or if the Company shall have suspended or dis-
continued business by serving the same personally on
such Manager or Director or on some person who was
such Manager or Director at the time of such sus-
pension or discontinuance of business or by leaving
the same in such last mentioned case with some
inmate at the usual abode of such Manager or Direc-
tor or late Manager or Director shall be deemed good
service of the same on the Company.
Printedcopies CXXI. Each and every printed copy of these
ot this deed presents which shall bear the signature of the person
verified by r . ° \ ,
signature of who was Manager or the Company at the time 01 sucn
t^bee^dence!signature attesting that the same is a true and correct
copy of the original shall in all proceedings at law or in


equity between the Company and individual proprie-
tors thereof or between several proprietors and in all
proceedings by parties other than proprietors against
the said Company wherein notice to produce these
presents shall have been given and the same shall not
be produced be received as sufficient evidence of this
deed and of every clause article stipulation and agree-
ment herein.
CXXII. The Chairman Directors Trustees and 1 ™* 611111 t 0
officers in re-
other officers of the Company and each and every ofepectof their
them their and each and every of their heirs executors
and administrators lands goods and chattels shall be
indemnified and saved harmless out of the funds or
property of the Company from and against all costs
charges losses damages and expenses which they or
any or either of them or their or any or either of their
heirs executors and administrators shall or may incur
sustain expend or be put unto for or on account of the
Company in consequence of any act deed matter or
thing which they or any or either of them may do or
cause to be done in carrying into effect the objects
and purposes of the Company or in or about any in-
dictment information presentment action suit process
proceeding or arbitration to be brought commenced
carried on prosecuted defended or entered into for or
on account thereof or for or by the order or direction
of the Board of Directors or in anywise relating
thereto repectively or otherwise in or about the
execution of their respective offices or trusts except
such costs charges losses damages and expenses as
shall happen by or through the wilful neglect or
default of such Chairman Directors Trustees and other
officers respectively.
CXXIII. The Chairman Directors and Trustees for officers to be


onlymrespect time being of the Company and each and every of
?iduaT r and each and every of their heirs executors and
acts. lB and administrators shall be charged and chargeable only
for so much money as they and each and every of them
shall respectively actually receive by virtue of their
respective offices or trusts And any one or more of them
shall not be answerable or accountable for the receipts
of the others or other of them nor for the acts neglects or
defaults of the others or other of them but each of
them for his own acts receipts neglects or defaults only
nor for the insufficiency or deficiency of title to any
estate or property which may from time to time be
And not to be purchased by or by the order of the Board of Directors
lC)r or on behalf of the Company nor for the insuf-
negiectault or ficiency or deficiency of any security or securities in
or upon which the moneys of the Company shall or
may be placed out invested or secured by or by the
order of the Board of Directors nor for any other loss
misfortune or damage which may happen in the exe-
cution of their respective offices or in relation thereto
except the same shall happen by or through their own
wilful neglects or defaults respectively.
DISSOLUTION OF COMPANY.
CXXIV. It shall be lawful for a special general
solution of meeting of the proprietors specially called for the
Company. p Ur p oSe 0 f taking into consideration the propriety
of dissolving the Company to enter into a resolu-
tion to that effect but such resolution shall be of
no force or effect until confirmed by the votes of
proprietors holding not less than one-half of the paid
up capital of the bank at another special general
meeting to be held within not less than thirty days of
the previous meeting.


CXXV. Until the affairs of the Company shall beNotwith-
finally wound up and all claims and demands upon the
Company shall be fully paid and satisfied and a final powers’^ the
division shall have been made of the residue of the siTecto5 iTecto ! 8 ’ an . d
Proprietors to
moneys of the Company the several provisions herein be retained
• i i ii . .. \ _ till affairs
contained and all powers privileges rights and duties dosed,
of the Board of Directors and of the proprietors
respectively shall notwithstanding any resolution to
dissolve the Company remain and continue in full
force so far as the same may be necessary for winding
up the concerns of the Company or for enabling the
Board of Directors to get in or dispose of the funds
and property of the Company or to pay and satisfy all
claims and demands upon the Company or to make
such final division as aforesaid Provided always that
all such property and funds as shall not be disposed of
within the period of three years from the date of the
second general meeting of the proprietors hereinbefore
referred to shall be immediately thereafter sold by
public auction without reserve to the highest bidder
in such lots as the Board of Directors may approve.
CXXVI. If at any time hereafter it shall appear to Dissolution in
the Board of Directors that losses have been sustained case ° floBBeB *
equal in amount to one-fourth of the then subscribed capital
of the Company it shall be incumbent on the Board of
Directors to submit a statement of such losses as soon as
possible to a special general meeting of the proprietors
And it shall thereupon be referred to the Auditors for the
time being and such other special Auditors as such general
meeting may appoint to assess the said losses and to
examine the whole state of the Company’s affairs and to
report thereon to a subsequent general meeting to be con-
vened for the purpose of receiving and considering such
report And if at such subsequent meeting the said
Auditors shall confirm the estimate of loss previously


submitted by the Board of Directors the business of the
Company shall from and after the date of such subsequent
general meeting be confined to the winding up of its affairs
and converting into money all its funds and property and
distributing the same Provided nevertheless that it shall
be lawful for such meeting to enter into a resolution to
continue the business of the Company and to write off the
losses from the capital of the Company and thereupon such
business shall continue until the next half-yearly meeting
of proprietors and any adjournment thereof which shall
have power to confirm such resolution by the votes of
proprietors possessing not less than three-fourths of the
actual paid up capital.
Custody of CXXVII. Upon the determination or dissolution of
tiement, and the Company the Deed of Settlement and all documents
ments. d ° CU ' books and papers belonging to the Company shall be dis-
posed of in such manner as a general meeting or special
general meeting shall after the dissolution of the Company
determine.
Affairs of Com CXXVIII. From and after the expiration of two years
tirei^ r closed hi next after the declaration of the final division of capital
aforesaid and the publication thereof in the New South
upon dissoiu- Wales Government Gazette or some other public news-
paper in Sydney aforesaid no action at law or suit in equity
shall be sustainable by any proprietor against the Com-
pany or any other proprietor thereof or against the trustees
Directors or other officers of the said Company for or in
respect of the transactions and affairs of the Company or
in anywise relating thereto but the accounts of the Com-
pany shall after the expiration of such period as aforesaid
be finally and conclusively settled and shall not be re-
opened by any of the proprietors on any ground or pretence
whatsoever.


CXXIX. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors Power to take
the benefit of
if the Auditors shall report that the assets ox the the insolvent
Company are insufficient to meet its liabilities or when the
law for the
affairs of the Company shall be directed to be wound up™ n d t lng s
to take the benefit of any Act or law for the sequestra- Companies,
tion of the estate of the Company as insolvent or of any Act
or law for facilitating the winding up of Joint Stock
Companies as the case may require and to do and submit
to all matters and things on behalf of the Company which
may be required to be done or submitted to for the
above purposes.
CXXX. It shall not be lawful for any proprietor or Partnership
any number of proprietors to dissolve the Company other- solved, except
wise than is herein provided And notwithstanding the “^” eby pr °"
changes which will from time to time take place among
the proprietors by death or retirement or by the accession
of new proprietors and notwithstanding that any pro-
prietor for the time being may become bankrupt or
insolvent or may be convicted of felony or may commit
any other act by which a common partnership would be
dissolved the partnership hereby formed shall nevertheless
subsist and the covenants herein contained shall at all
times until such dissolution as aforesaid be in full force
and effect as between the proprietors for the time being.
CXXXI. In the construction of these presents the interpreta-
expressions “ Board of Directors” and “Board” shall mean tlori clause-
three Directors at least present at any meeting of Directors
to be held pursuant to the provisions herein contained
and the word “ proprietors” shall mean persons holding
shares in the capital for the time being of the Company
and the word “ shares” shall mean shares in the capital
for the time being of the Company and words in the
singular number shall be construed to include or apply to
several persons or things as well as one person or thing


and words in the plural number shall be construed to apply
to one person or thing as well as to several persons or
things and words importing males shall be construed to
include or apply to females as well as males and the word
“ person” or “ persons” shall be construed to include a
body or bodies corporate as well as an individual or indi-
viduals unless in any of the above cases it be otherwise
specially provided or there be something in the subject or
context repugnant to such meaning or construction and
wherever under any of the provisions herein contained a
certain number of days or other period is required to
elapse in order to ground or give effect to any act deed
matter or thing whatsoever or any number of days or
other period is fixed for any purpose whatsoever the
first of such days or the first day of such period shall be
reckoned exclusive and the last of such days or the last
of such period shall be reckoned inclusive in the com-
putation of the days or period required and every act
matter or thing hereby authorized or directed to be done
at one time or at any time or without reference being
made to time may with the like requisites or formalities as
are hereby required be also done at several times or from
time to time as often as occasion may require or may be
deemed expedient and in every case where in these
presents general expressions are used in connexion with
powers directions or things such general expressions
shall not be limited or controlled to or by the particular
powers directions or things with which the same are
connected and that words or expressions denoting
authority or permission shall be construed as words or ex-
pressions of authority or permission merely and shall not
be construed as words or expressions denoting direction
or compulsory trust.
Payment of CXXXII. All past and future expenses of and
eipenseT 7 attendant upon the establishing of the Company and the


preparation of every deed or instrument and Act of
Council and every meeting and transaction relating thereto
respectively shall be advanced and paid in the first
instance by the Board of Directors out of the moneys re-
ceived by way of deposit on account of the subscribed
• capital” but the sums advanced and paid for such pur-
poses shall afterwards be borne or repaid by or out of the
profits of the Company in such manner as the Board of
Directors shall think fit And this indenture further Confirmation
witnesseth that the said several persons parties hereto have
and each and every of them hath ratified and confirmed
and by these presents do and each and every of them doth
ratify and confirm all the acts matters and things
which up to the day of the date of these presents have
been made done executed and performed for the purpose
of procurin. the said Act preparing the deed of settlement
alloting shares receiving deposits and taking preliminary
measures in regard to the establishment of the Company
or in regard to the business or property thereof or in any-
wise relating thereto In Witness whereof the parties to
these presents have hereunto set their hands and seals the
day and year opposite to their respective signatures.
65


