

' -■ r~
/ 7 U n
l / S
1
K a 0 "
r“\ k v M
IflV
Jj JkjLdfcatc*,
~im ~
V'lmFidx ‘ ,
, f fitS,
m i \ >
% V *
"V v v\*
x xjjiEu.,,
fi I : ?i
ff I ■' [
v y.Vv
v v y■* - v kX
I WsSSt I I I ■■ --- i#
V
• I
I ; !
-


I


THE MARITIME GEOGRAPHY
AUSTRALIA.
CAPTAIN PHILLIP PARKER KING, R. N.
(Read %d October , 1822, before the Philosophical Society
of Australia).


t-
'
.
/ ", • ■' / r
, irvT .
r S r r~ — >"' T" C -
- - ' _ " "


THE MARITIME GEOGRAPHY,
A period of nearly three centuries has now
elapsed since the first discovery of the continent
of Australia, the Terra Australis Incognita of an-
dent geographers; and until within the last fifty
years comparatively little has been done towards
investigating its various productions, or the nature
of its interior. The records of the visits of the
early Spanish and Dutch navigators merely ac-
quaint us that " it was for the greatest part desert,
but in some places inhabited by wild, cruel, and
black savages;” and although their labours com-
prised the discovery of its northern, western, and
south-western coasts, yet it was not until the year
1770, that the productions and fertility of its
eastern and most valuable shores were made known
to Europe by the immortal Cook, whose persever-
ing and laborious examination of its reef-bound


coast, in a crazy ship, and amidst a labyrinth of
dangers, has justly placed his name in the foremost
page of the annals of Australian geography.
This coast, to which he gave the name of New
South Wales, extends chiefly in the direction of the
meridian; and, being contained between the parallels
of 10° and 39° south latitude, promises, from the
variety of its climates, to afford the productions
common to both inter and extra-tropical countries;
whence a reasonable anticipation of the future weal
of this extensive dependency of Great Britain may
be justly entertained; but hitherto little has been
effected to give a solid foundation to this specula-
tive hope. Several voyages have been made round
the continent in search of rivers, by means of which
only a knowledge of its internal resources can be
obtained; but none of important size or conse-
quence have yet been found.
It is now thirty-five years since the colony at
Port Jackson was first established; and during
this period, explorative enterprise and perseverance
have not been wanting; nor have dangers or priva-
tions deterred many zealous travellers from pro-
secuting their researches for the discovery of rivers.


These labours have been partially rewarded in the
finding of large tracts of fine country, which will ma-
terially hasten the period of agricultural prosperity,
towards which the colony is making such rapid
strides. Mr. Oxley’s Journals have already, in a
great measure, acquainted us with the general fea-
ft
tures and character of the country four hundred and
thirty miles to the westward of the colony, between
the parallels of 30° and 35° 30'; and his track in
1817 would have crossed any river of importance,
had such existed to the northward of the former
parallel, or to the southward of the latter. The
coast-line has been traced with care by Captain
Flinders and others as far as the tropic; and to
the northward of this, we did not detect in the
whole extent of coast (a distance of eight hundred
miles), any opening, rivulet, or creek, running
twenty miles in an inland direction from the sea.
The absence of a river in this vast extent of
mountainous country would appear a paradox, did
we not know that the mountain-streams of this
coast generally empty themselves into large lagoons
of water, which are formed at the back of the


beaches, and communicate with the sea by shoal
channels of from three to seven or eight feet in
depth, through which the stream of tide usually
runs out with great rapidity. Witness the lakes
between Ports Stephens and Macquarie.
The south coast of this country is barren, and
in every respect useless and unfavourable to any
purposes of colonization. The nature of the rocks
is generally calcareous; but in many parts from
the South-west Cape to Wilson’s Promontory in
Bass’s Strait, the basis of the rock is granite, which
occasionally protrudes above the surface of the
ground, and is covered with a crust of calcareous
stone, on the top of which is a shallow sandy soil *.
The two gulfs, St. Vincent and Spencer, are de-
scribed by Captain Flinders, who first discovered
and examined them. They contain salt water to
their heads. At the top of the latter is a range of
elevated hills, one of which (Mount Brown) is three
thousand feet high ; but from the summit no rivers
or lakes were seen. Captain Flinders says of the
* Flinders’s Voyage to Terra Australis, vol. i. p. 113.


view from this hill, “ In almost every direction the
eye traverses over an uninterruptedly flat, woody
country, the sole exception being the ridge of
mountains extending north and south, and the
water of the gulf to the south-westward He
further remarks of this place : “ Mr. Brown found
the stone of this ridge of craggy mountains to be ar-
gillaceous, of a reddish colour, smooth, close-grained,
and rather heavy.” Very little good soil was found.
To the eastward of this, as far as the entrance
of Bass’s Strait, the coast is very sandy, and ge-
nerally low and barren; and the country in the
vicinity of the strait is high, rocky, and sandy.
Previously to my employment by the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, to complete the
survey of the coast of this country, the south and
a part of the east coasts, as far as the latitude 22°,
had been examined with care by Captain Flinders.
That officer had also surveyed the shores of the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and the greater part of Van
Diemen’s Land, when the wreck of his ship, and
* Flinders’s Voyage to Terra Australis, vol. i. p. 159.


his extraordinary and infamous detention by Ge-
neral Decaen at the Isle of France, prevented his
completing a work so ably and indefatigably com-
menced. During the time of his being engaged
in this survey, a French expedition, under the
command of Captain Baudin, was employed on the
same service. He sailed along the outside of
the islands, which fringe a great extent of the
north-west coast, but seldom saw any part of the
main-land. The completion, therefore, of Captain
Flinders’s survey was the object of my mission;
and in this task I have been employed for the
last four years. My instructions have led me “to
examine the hitherto-unexplored coast from Arn-
hem Bay, near the western entrance of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, westward and southward, as far as the
North-west Cape, including the opening or deep
bay called Van Diemen’s Bay, and the cluster of
islands called Rosemary Islands, and the inlets
behind them ; the chief object of the survey being
to discover whether there be any river in that part
of the coast, likely to lead to an interior navigation
into this great continent.”


In my way to the northward I sailed up the
east coast, and commenced a careful examination
of its shores from the point where Captain Flinders
left it; but as this was contrary to the tenor of
my instructions, I could spare but little time to
land; and, with few exceptions, merely traced the
coast, by which means alone I could investigate
whether there were any rivers or openings between
the latitude of 22° and Torres Strait, a distance of
more than seven hundred miles. For the greater
part of this space the sea-beach was seen by me;
but nothing like a river or opening of any con-
sequence was observed. Whenever I did land, my
visit was confined to the neighbourhood of the sea-
coast, and there the soil appeared to be generally
very shallow, and the timber small and stunted.
But in some parts, particularly about the parallel
of 17° of south latitude, the country was well
wooded, and bore a verdant and pleasant appear-
ance. To the northward of Endeavour River, in
15° 27' S., all semblance of fertility ceases; and the
remainder of the coast to the North Cape, which is
about three hundred miles, is low, sandy, and barren.
At this spot also the granite rocks ceased to appear.


In latitude 14° S. is a projecting group of
islands, called Flinders Group, to the westward of
which is Princess Charlotte Bay, which Lieutenant
Jeffrey, who commanded the colonial hired armed
brig Kangaroo, describes as having a rich appear-
ance, and very like the country of Van Diemen’s
Land. I could not see it in so favourable a point
of view. The bay is deep, and gave me hopes of
finding a river; but, upon examination, I found
the bottom shoal and covered with mangroves. It
is not improbable that there is a rivulet at the bot-
tom of the bay; but even if there is, it must be of
trifling size.
Immediately to the westward of the North Cape,
which bears the name of Cape York, is the Gulf of
Carpentaria, the shores of which measure a space
of nine hundred miles, the gulf itself being four
hundred miles deep and three hundred broad.
The eastern side is low and sandy; the western
has many fine harbours, and is bordered by some
large islands; but the land in the vicinity of the
coast is low and very barren. Wellesley’s Islands,
a group at the bottom of the gulf, “ abound with
iron ore: the soil even in the best parts is far be-


hind fertility; but the small trees and bushes
which grow there, and the grass in some of the less
covered places, save the larger islands from the re-
proach of being absolutely sterile *.” The prin-
cipal rock formation in the gulf is of a close-
grained sand-stone.
At the north-west head of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria my survey commenced ; but its great distance
from Port Jackson, and the inadequacy of the ves-
sel I had to perform it with, have considerably pro-
tracted its completion. A brief sketch of the na-
ture of the soil, and productions of the coast, may
not be uninteresting to this Society; and, as the
subject has been naturally expected from me, I
have ventured a few observations upon it, which
I now submit to the candour and liberality of my
friends.
The north coast, properly so called, is of small
extent, and is comprised between Cape Van Diemen
and Torres Strait. From Cape Wessel, which is
the projection that forms the north-west head of
the Gulf of Carpentaria, and is the extremity of a
* Flinders’s Voyage, vol. ii. p. 145.


group of islands of low, rocky, and barren cha-
racter, as far as Cape Van Diemen, the coast is low,
and the shore an unvaried sandy beach, occasionally
broken by projecting rocky heads. In this place,
however, the coast is very much intersected, and is
strewed with many very fine ports and harbours.
About midway between the capes is a river, which
I called Liverpool River, and which I ascended for
forty miles, without finding the land at that distance
from the sea one atom better than that near the
coast. Fresh water, however, was met at the di-
stance of nine miles from the sea; but no hills
were seen, from which any large body might be
expected to be collected. The country was low
and flat, and bore the appearance of being, during
the rains, occasionally inundated. In an examina-
tion of this river we saw no animals excepting the
alligator, which was common. A few birds were
seen, and on the banks of the river we observed
that called the native companion (Ardea antigone,
Linn.). Here also we saw a large tribe of natives ;
but our numbers being few, I did not court an in-
terview. We passed a night near the head of the
river, and were tormented beyond description by


the incredible number of musqnitoes, which ge-
nerally abound near mangroves; and with these
trees, for the first fourteen miles from its entrance,
the banks of this river are impenetrably lined.
To the westward of this river are Goulburn
Islands, which I have visited every voyage, from
the circumstances of their forming a fixed point of
my survey, and offering a convenient place to wood
and water at. The natives here, although not nu-
merous, are very hostile; and have, on every visit,
attacked us. On one occasion Lieutenant Roe,
my assistant-surveyor, had a very narrow escape
for his life. He suddenly found himself surrounded
by them, but happily succeeded in reaching our
party in safety, although the Indians threw many
spears at him, and almost compassed the cutting
off of his retreat.
Near these islands, in April, 1818, just as I had
completed my wood and water, and was making
preparations for departure, I was surprised by the
appearance of a fleet of Malay proas, which were
running along the coast, fishing for trepang or
beche-de-mer. Two hundred of these vessels visit
this coast every year, leaving Macassar in the month


of January, and returning in June or July. The
particulars of their fishery are described by Flinders
and De Freycinet; but the limits of their fishing-
ground have not yet been clearly defined. They
certainly visit the western side of the Gulf of Car-
pentaria ; I have seen their traces as far to the west
as 125° east longitude; but there is a considerable
incurvature of the coast between Cape Van Diemen
and Cape Londonderry, into which I do not think
they penetrate. They are at constant war with
the natives, and are frequently attacked by them ;
but having fire-arms, and being generally the more
numerous, they have the decided advantage. This
hostility made me very cautious of communicating
with the natives of this savage and sterile coast,
nor, as it proved, without good reason, for we sel-
dom visited them without some misunderstanding
or rupture taking place, from which we did not
always escape harmless.
Near the western extremity of the north coast,
in the ancient charts, is a deep opening called Van
Diemen’s Bay. Some Dutch ships entered it with-
out finding its bottom, and therefore merely spe-
culated upon what it was likely to be. I found it an


extensive strait, separating two large islands from
the main-land, the north-westernmost extremity of
which bore the name of Cape Van Diemen. In this
strait is a considerable gulf, trending to the east-
ward, at the bottom of which I found some rivers,
/
meandering through a vast plain of low level land,
bearing the marks of great inundations. The soil
is alluvial, but I think generally shallow, and ap-
pears to be sprinkled over a stiff tenacious blue
clay. Here and there was a group of trees, among
which the palm-tree was occasionally seen, tower-
ing above the burnt-up foliage of the stunted gum-
tree. In the rivers alligators were very numerous;
but not so large as those which frequent the islands
of the Indian Archipelago. The largest we saw was
about fifteen feet long. The outlet of this strait
(Clarence Strait) to the south-west appeared to be
dangerous and intricate. In the centre of it is a
group of low mangrove isles. Hence the coast
trends to the south; but continues to bear the same
low and sterile character as far as Cambridge Gulf.
This is a deep and extraordinary salt-water inlet,
extending for upwards of sixty miles through a
circuitous channel, which, being narrowed in some


places to the width of half a mile, causes a rushing
tide. Here the coast assumes a new appearance:
high, bold, precipitous ranges of detached hills
suddenly rise from a level plain, which is so low as
to be covered occasionally by the high spring tides.
These waters are so quickly evaporated by the great
heat, as to leave the saline crystallizations encrusted
upon the surface of the ground, which gives it the
appearance of being covered with snow, and by re-
flecting the rays of the sun not only oppressed us
with the intense heat, but severely hurt and weak-
ened the eyes. This extraordinary gulf terminates
in many shallow, muddy, salt-water inlets, which,
in the rainy season, would doubtless furnish plenty
of fresh water; but at the time of our visit (Sep-
tember) they were as salt as the open sea. An equally
extraordinary quadrangular, fortress-like mass of
hills, Mount Cockburn, rises abruptly from a low
plain about three miles from the bank of one of these
streams; this I should have visited, had not the
great heat of the weather prevented me. It bore all
the appearance of a regular fortification, and would
be quite impregnable to any military force. West-
ward from the gulf the coast assumes altogether a


new feature, and is much intersected by numerous
fine ports, bays, and some rivers. One of the
rivers (Prince Regent’s) runs inland for upwards of
sixty miles, and terminates in a fresh-water stream.
In this part of the coast the tides are not only
rapid, but rise as much as thirty feet on the springs.
The country, however, is not a bit better than to
the eastward, but rather worse. In the vicinity of
Goulburn Islands there were in patches something
like soil, and here and there a little grass ; but in
this part the country is a'universal mass of rocks,
heaped one upon • the other, and the interstices
filled with spinifex, a prickly useless grass, of a
powerfully aromatic smell.
The geology of this part of the coast consists of
a siliceous sand-stone, of a very hard nature and
fine grain: much of it was coloured by a ferruginous
oxide, and in one part we detected a small quantity
of native iron, imbedded on the same quartzose
rock, with copper pyrites.
At the west extremity of this projecting part of
the north-west coast, in longitude about 123° east,
the high rocky land is changed to a low sandy
country, and so continues to the North-west Cape.


In many parts it is so low as not to be visible from
a greater distance than twelve or fourteen miles.
There is a considerable gulf at the western ex-
tremity of the high land, which is not yet deter-
mined ; but I rather imagine it to be a strait. I
penetrated about fifty miles up it, on the inner
side of what I suppose to be an island; but I was
obliged to leave it, for want of provisions and
other reasons. It is sufficiently interesting in ap-
pearance to cause me to expect more from it than
any other part of the coast that I have yet seen.
In some parts of it the tide ran at seven knots,
and, where no islands or land contracted its stream,
at three knots, and rose from twenty-six to thirty
feet. At this place we experienced great heat: on
board the vessel the thermometer ranged between
87° and 92° in the shade, but in the boat near the
shore the temperature was at 120°.
From the intricate nature of the entrance of
this opening, we ran considerable risk in ex-
ploring it, both going in and out. The islands
and shoals are numerous; and the channel by
which we unwillingly entered it was not more than
a hundred or a hundred and fifty yards wide, with


the stream rushing through it prodigiously strong.
A rock in the middle also increased the danger,
and gave us great cause of alarm, since the ship
became completely ungovernable; but providentially
the current carried us by, four yards clear of the
rock. The widest channel is, in some parts, not
more than two miles from shore to shore.
From hence to Depuch Island, a distance of
about three hundred miles, I have not seen any
part of the coast; but De Freycinet describes it to
be low and sandy. From longitude 117° to the
North-west Cape, in about 114°, the coast is also
low and sandy, and in some parts rocky. Dam-
pier’s Archipelago, one of the islands of which is
the Rosemary Island of that celebrated navigator,
is a group more elevated than the main land, and
among these islands there are many favourable
places for anchoring. In the rainy season they
would probably supply abundance of water, but
there is no wood. The only tree we saw was a
ficus, and that of very small size. It was here
that I had my first and most interesting com-
munication with the natives. They appeared to


be warlike and numerous; but, like the rest of
the inhabitants of this vast island, naked, black,
spare-made, large-headed, with curly hair, and
scarred about the body. Their principal weapon
appeared to be the spear. We were well received
by this tribe, but were driven away by another
not far from them. We were doubtless the first
European visitors to this part of the coast; for
Dampier landed only on the outer island, and did
not communicate with the natives hereabouts.
Between this archipelago and the North-west
Cape, is a group of low, rocky, barren isles, which
the French expedition, under Commodore Baudin,
named Montebello Islands; and these are, as I
trust I shall be able to prove by the publication of
my Journals, neither more nor less than that re-
doubtable danger in the Indian Ocean—“ The
Tryal Rocks,” which so many ships have searched
for, and of which so much has been said and
written.
Hence to the North-west Cape the coast is
fronted by a range of low sandy islets; and at the
back or east side of the Cape, it tends to the south


for upwards of forty-five miles, and forms a deep
bight (called Exmouth’s Gulf) containing little
short of absolute sterility.
Between the North-west Cape and CapeLeeuwin,
is the West Coast, which extends for nearly eight
hundred miles in the direction of the meridian. It
is fronted by a rocky shore, and inaccessible to
boats, except in a few places. The only openings
m it are Black Swan River and Shark’s Bay, both
of which are described by De Freycinet. During
the examination of this part of the coast, we ex-
perienced an almost continual gale of wind, which
rendered our approach dangerous. We saw enough
of it, however, to satisfy us of its arid and barren
nature. The coast about Shark’s Bay is high and
rocky, and of a reddish colour. At one part, where
we landed, namely in Dirk Hartog’s Road, at the
entrance of the bay, we found the rock to be a
calcareous sand-stone.
I
/


GENERAL PRODUCTIONS OF THE INTERTROPICAL
PART OF AUSTRALIA.
Fish is extremely plentiful in all parts, but not
very easily caught with hook and line. Turtle is
also abundant within the tropic, and of large size.
It is both of the green and the hawk’s-bill species;
and from the latter, great quantities of tortoise-
shell might be procured. Water-snakes were seen
in all parts near the coast; but Ido not think
they are venomous. The longest we saw did not
measure more than four feet. The manatee, that
Dampier describes, was not seen by us, unless on
one occasion, when an animal entirely different
from the turtle was seen on the surface of the
water, but disappeared so suddenly as to prevent
our forming any opinion of what it was like. Shell-
fish seemed to abound, from the large quantities
of broken shells that are thrown upon the beaches.
At Shark’s Bay, we found great numbers of various
kinds; and on the reefs of the east coast there is
also abundance, but not in any great variety. The
only land animals seen by us were kangaroos, kan-


gaioo-rats, dogs, opossums, and a large vampyre
bat. The traces of emues were met with; but
the birds themselves were not seen. There are
no edible fruits of any importance. The cabbage-
palm and the betel-nut were occasionally met with,
and the sago-palm is abundant on all parts of the
north coast. Two species of nutmeg were found,
but they are not fit for use. We saw no trees fit
foi naval purposes, excepting in the vicinity of
the tropic, on the east coast, where the Norfolk
Island pines grow, but not to large dimensions. In
appearance they seem not worth a trial, but ex-
perience has fully proved their value as masts,
provided a tree is chosen of the exact size of the
spar wanted, for it loses its strength by reducing it.
NATIVES OF NEW HOLLAND.
The coasts of this continent, in proportion to its
great extent, are very thinly peopled,—a circum-
stance that is perhaps occasioned by the enmity
and warfare that exist between the neighbouring
tribes. Each tribe speaks a different language


from the other; and in a comparative vocabulary
of the languages of four different parts of the coast
which I formed, the only one of forty words that
is similar in all is that for the eye. Not thus
dissimilar, however, are their weapons. The spear
is universal, as is also the throwing-stick; the
boomerang or woodah, —a short crescented weapon,
which the natives of Port Jackson project with
accurate aim into a rotatory motion, which gives
a precalculated bias to its forcible fall, —was also
seen at Port Bowen on the east coast, and at Goul-
burn Island on the north. Some of the natives
have been described to use the bow r and arrow;
but I have never seen any weapon like it among
them. The canoes of the several tribes differ both
in construction and material. In some parts, par-
ticularly about the colony at Port Jackson, they
are made of one piece of bark, tied up at each end.
Farther north, at the tropic, they are hollowed
out of the trunk of a soft-stemmed tree (erythrina
indica), and are so narrow as to require an out-
rigger to prevent their oversetting. On the north
coast they are made out of the bark of trees *, neatly
* So at Van Diemen’s Land is the catamaran ; and Dr.


and firmly joined by strips of the stem of the fla-
gellaria indica, a small climbing plant. Farther
to the westward, at Hanover Bay, the natives
cross the water upon a raft, made of short logs of
dead mangrove trees, which when decayed are very
buoyant. At Dampier’s Archipelago, instead of a
canoe, the natives also use the decayed mangrove,
but it is only one log, on which “ they sit astride,
and move it along by paddling with their hands,
keeping their feet upon the end of the log, by
which they probably guide its course. Such are
the shifts to which the absence of large timber has
reduced these simple savages. They show that
man is naturally a navigating animal; and this
floating log, which may be called the marine ve-
locipede, is, I should suppose, the extreme case of
the poverty of savage boat-building all over the
world*.” MS. Journal
Falconer (On Mankind, p. 287,) says, that the Canadian
savages form boats from the bark of trees, in which, however
fragile in appearance, they perform long voyages. — Editor.
* “ Their mode of fishing in the Red Sea is somewhat
strange. They throw in the water a part of the trunk of the
doomt-tree, perhaps ten or twelve feet long, at each end of
which is a piece of wood attached in a horizontal direction,
so as to prevent the tree from turning round. At one of the


All the Indians that we have seen on the coast
of New Holland have long curly hair, which they
dress in various fashions, and often daub it over
with the oil of the whale or the seal, by which
means it becomes clotted and entangled. Their
bodies are also smeared over with this oil, mixed
with a red or white pigment, which gives them not
only a hideous appearance, but a very disagreeable
smell.
The natives of King George’s Sound are the
only Indians that we have seen clothed; and these
wear a mantle of kangaroo-skin over their bodies,
leaving the right arm only bare.
The spear-thro wing-stick seems a universal
weapon, except at Van Diemen’s Land; for we
have seen it, although differently shaped, in all
parts of this continent, namely, on the south-east
ends a small pole is stuck upright to serve as a mast, on the
top of which there is a piece of wood horizontally fastened,
as that below. A woollen shawl thrown over it, and fastened
at each end, and to the piece of wood horizontally fixed below,
forms a kind of sail, and the two fishermen mount on the
lai’ge trunk, like on horseback, and by way of a cord attached
to the middle of the sail, they take the wind, more or less,
as is required.”— Belzoni's Researches in Egypt and Nubia ,
p. 327.


,
n
■
coast at Port Jackson, on the north-east coast at
Endeavour River, at Hanover and Vansittart
Bays, on the north-west coast, and on the south-
west coast at King George’s Sound*. The spears
also generally differ, and in many parts they are
very large and unwieldy. In the southern parts of
New Holland, where the grass-tree (xanthorrhoea
hastile) grows, the spears are generally made of its
flower-stem ; but where these plants are not found,
the natives make their spears of other trees, which
are hardened and straightened over a slow fire.
The savages are very careless and indifferent
about presents, excepting in those parts where
*
they are accustomed to be visited; and in some
places they have shown themselves neglectful of
knives or axes, even after the use of these instru-
ments has been explained to them; and whereas
* The natives of Pumice-stone River, Moreton Bay, with
whom, during our stay among them, we were on the most
friendly terms, and whose manners and customs we had
uncommonly favourable opportunities of observing, form (I
believe) another exception; for among them we never saw
the throwing-stick; and when shown to them by our Port
Jackson native, their attempts to use it were extremely clumsy.
Nor did they make use of any contrivance in lieu of it, but
invariably threw their spears from the hand.—J, Uniacke.


in other parts they have evinced a great desire to
possess those obvious improvements upon sharp
stones or shells*. Articles of dress they justly
despise, on account of the warmth of their climate;
but at King George’s Sound they were happy to
receive any thing which they could use as clothing.
The demand, however, at this place is only of late
date; for Captain Flinders found all his presents
to these very people thrown away, and left upon
the bushes near his tents.
These are all the observations which I have had
time to make before my departure from the colony;
but I trust that, upon the publication of my charts
and journals, I shall have an opportunity of pre-
senting the Society, on my return hither, with a
more detailed and satisfactory paper.
* Ferrum est quod amant, is the universal character of
savages ; but the natives of the Marquesas long neglected our
iron tools, and they belong to the same race as the Friendly
and Society Islands! See London Missionary Voyage, pp,
134, 135. So the natives of Navigator’s Islands would barter
with La Perouse for nothing but beads. See his Voyage,
chapters xxiii, xxiv, and xxv.— Editor.


■
*
'
-


