

TfVFp
S\O r
“ 0 Death, where i$ thy stittfl ?”
i Cor. xv, 55,
In memoriam
3-m.c.nmimaii.i.p.
1 COR. xv. 15-22.
REV. xxi.-xxii. 5.
T
. BJ . .
Rev. 01. ms Steele, m.fl.




‘O Death, where is thy
Sting ?'
O Grave, where is thy
Victory?
1 COR. XV. 55.
MELBOURNE :
M. 1,. HUTCHINSON,
305-307 Tittle Collins Street,




' O Death, where is thy sting ?
O Grave, where is thy victory?'
1 COR. XV 55.
VHEN we stand round an open
grave, as we at times are called on
to do and as so many of us did last
week when we laid aside the earthly re-
mains of our brother whose loss we mourn,
it may seem to some that the victory of
the grave is very much in evidence, yet these
are the words we read or hear read at every
Christian burial. Do Christiahs really be-
lieve that, in spite of the very apparent tri-
umph, with the grave yawning open before
our very eyes, there is no real victory ?
Yes; that is what we mean, that is what St.
Paul means.


When we enter a home where the angel
of death has .already preceded us, and stand
round the bed with Death watching there,
his work nearly but not quite complete,
while our loved one lies in weakness and
may be pain, or when we see the distress
of the bereaved, when we recognise the des-
olation of the home after our friend has
been called away, is it possible then to look
death in the face and say “O death, where
is thy sting?” Yes; that is what we say,
that is what St. Paul says.
Death and the grave are not pleasant
subjects for thought perhaps, and most
people do not dwell much upon them, but
at times we are forced to think on them,
and we direct our attention to them to-
day. We don’t think that God intends us
to think of nothing else, but certainly when
He speaks as He has just been speaking, it
would be carelessness amounting to blas-
phemous defiance if we did not listen to
Him and think on these things. St. Paul


was writing to Corinthians, to the newly-
founded church there, the members of
which were pagans five years before.
Then, to them death had a very consider-
able sting, and the victory of the grave
was painfuly pronounced. The Greeks
had some glimmering idea of immortality,
but neither they or any other people, not
even the Hebrews had even an approxima-
tion to that knowledge of immortality which
Christ gave. For dim speculation he gave
clear knowledge. In place of a blank un-
known future He lifted the veil and gave a
glimpse at least of the glory that waits us,
and made us know that the life beyond,
instead of being a feeble copy of this on a
much poorer scale, far transcends this; and
that those who are taken to begin it are
not subjects of sympathy but of congratu-
lation, if congratulation could be conveyed
to them The gaping grave, with its ugli-
ness to us as it swallows up the coffin and
its contents, is then not really triumphing


over us. We may call it the gateway to
glory. Or we may perhaps more truly say
that at the funeral we are not concerned
with our friend at all. The corpse is not the
person. It is the house he used to live in
but which he has left for another. It is
but the suit of clothes he used to wear and
which he has discarded in order to take a
better and more glorious one. The dis-
carded house, the cast off clothing, no use
to any other person now that the original
owner and occupant has done with them,
is buried away out of sight, but we are
verily assured that the burial is no triumph
over our friend. He is far away from us,
he is equally far away from the grave
where we hide away his remains. It is no
mockery, it is no idle defiance when we
exclaim “O grave, where is thy victory?”
But is the other part equally true? Can
we say with equal exultation, “O death,
where is thy sting?” It may be and must
be confesed that for the mourners left be-


hind there is a very considerable sting.
The pain of parting, the loss of the friend is
keen pain, but that is the beginning and
end of the pain so far as the Christian is
concerned. But it is not regarding the
mourners St. Paul speaks, but regarding
the departing one, and he it is that can
say “O death, where is thy sting?”
There may be pain in dying, as there is
pain to be endured at -various times through
life, but the problem of pain is something
apart from the sting of death, and we
maintain that as the Christian approaches
death he sees no sting in it. As regards
pain in general, dark though the question
is, much can be said for it, but there is no
time to say now more than this one thing.
What is the object of the human race? If
it is happiness then we cannot understand
why there is pain. But if it be perfection,
much greater than happiness, we can un-
derstand, for perfection may be brought
about by pain.


“For life is not as idle ore,
But iron dug from central gloom
And heated 1 hot in burning fears,
And dipped in baths of hissing tears,
And battered with the shocks of doom
To shape and use.”
When our brother was passing away,
he was called on during the last few days
to endure much pain, so much so that he
said to one of those about him that it
seemed as though God had deserted him,
but he clung by faith to Him still. That one
testimony was worth the price it cost. Faith
is easy when the road is clear, but faith
which can cling through such difficulty is
what we value, and now that the sufferings
are over and he has entered into rest we
can see the burning and battering were not
for naught. We remember, too, still
greater sufferings endured by One Whom we
might have thought perfect without them;
still we are assured that sufferings were
necessary for Him, for was not the “Captain


of our salvation made perfect through suf-
fering?” But it is not the problem of pain,
but the question of death, that concerns us
now. When we look calmly at the whole
thing it becomes apparent to us that death
is a necessary thing, and if necessary it can-
not be an evil. Death is, as has been said,
but the other side of life. The mineral
surrenders its existence that vegetables may
live. The vegetables surrender theirs for a
double reason, that other vegetables may
live, that there may be room for them, and
that animals may live. Animals, too, die,
that others may come, and that man may
live. Man also dies to make room for
others, and further, for a second reason,
to enter into greater, higher life. Death is
necessary for the happiness of the greatest
number. It is much better that 1000
should each enjoy a certain pleasure foi
one hour than that one should have it for
1000 hours. If there were no death then
there would soon be no room in the world


for new arrivals; there would be no young
children, all would be old, very old; there
would be nothing to look forward to but an
age-long stagnation. It might be supposed
that much the same could be said of immor-
tal life, but we know too little of it. We
are conscious of the imperfections of this
life which make the permanence neither
possible nor desirable, we know too little of
the next life to think or speak in that way.
There can be nothing undesirable where
there is nothing imperfect. But besides
this, which has been called the benignant
aspect of death merely as regards the pres-
ent life, an aspect quite sufficient to rob it
of its sting, there Is the further aspect as
a gate to immortality. Our hope for im-
mortality is as certain as our belief in a
Heavenly Father. The universal desire and
almost universal hope is assuredly God-
given and He will not give this expectation
and then disappoint His children. As an
earthly father has obligations to the child-


ren he brings into the world and must do
all he can for their perfection, so must the
Heavenly Father for His. Man, though the
highest of all creatures, is the one with the
most obvious imperfections. A lion, a swal-
low, a forest, the sea, the sun, a mountain,
a lily, a star are all perfect; man is greater
by far than any of these, and yet the most
imperfect. They have no future in which
to work out their completeness; man has.
He finishes in the life immortal what is but
begun in this. And when we remember
that our Lord Himself has told us that
eternal life is to know God, and remember,
too, how little we know God here, we see
one way in which there is infinite room for
completion,. Quite apart from all reasoning
based on hope we have the clear assurance
and promise of Christ, “To-day shalt thou
be with me in Paradise.” When we be-
lieve in Christ we need no further proof.
Paradise, Eternal Life, New Jerusalem.
These are the names given to that place


or state where our brother now has gone.
We mourn our loss in that he is taken
from us. We miss, and will miss more and
more, his friendship and help in many
ways. We sympathise deeply with those
whose home is left empty and much poorer
by his removal, but for himself we have
no tear to shed, but a heartfelt pleasure
that he has entered into immortality, that
he is where there is no more pain
nor sorrow nor crying, where there
are no imperfections, and where the
joys of existence, great as they are
here, are a thousand fold greater than
we have yet known. Being but a compara-
tive new comer I did not know Mr. McLen-
nan as well as many of those present, but I
knew him long enough and well enough
to cultivate such a regard and respect for
him as I have for but few others. Born in
the Illawarra district of N.S.W., he spent
the most of his life in various country
towns of Victoria, engaged variously in


law, teaching, and business. This varied
experience gave to a naturally keen mind
a very wide knowledge of life and of hu-
man nature, and made him what we value
too little till we Jose such a one, a very
useful member of the community. This
experience of his would have been but little
use to any one but himself had it not been
accompanied by a kindly and unselfish na-
ture which at all times gave him keen plea-
sure in doing kind actions to others, while
scarcely ever looking for kind actions in
return. To the full he experienced the
Saviour’s assurance that “it is more blessed
to give than to receive.” No trouble seemed
too great for him even to a comparative
stranger, and I certainly experienced this
when I arrived a stranger here last year.
In some respects he had a greater eye
for my own needs than I had myself. He
not only gave his experience to individuals
who needed it, but to the community whose
welfare he had at heart. Shire Council,


Police Court, Farmers’ Political League,
Cemetery Trust, Board of Advice, where-
ever the community wanted a man to do
hard work and receive no reward, J. W.
C. McLennan was the man who was sug-
gested, and he devoted hours and days of
his life to this kind of work, when it would
have been to his business interests to at-
tend to his own affairs, or to his health to
be seeking fresh air and exercise outside his
office walls. Business and health were alike
sacrificed when he could do something for
the world outside. Nor was his work done
carelessly or hurriedly. His painstaking ex-
actness in minute amounts and his careful-
ness in the most petty details were a les-
son to all who had any dealings with him.
What he would call a rough sketch would
be what another would say 'was a well-
drawn plan; or what he said was a general
statement of accounts was the kind of
thing most would put forward as a finished
balance sheet.


Here to-day we chiefly mourn his loss as
an office bearer of the church. Coming to
Cranbourne nearly 23 years ago he at once
threw in his influence with the church and
was soon appointed secretary and treasurer,
and did the work carefully and well till
within a very few weeks of his death. Till
his last illness his seat was never vacant,
and even after his illness and while in a
state of weakness he attended when even
the short walk from his residence was a
greater effort than he was justified in mak-
ing. There are very few names on our
communion roll with such an unbroken re-
cord of regular attendance as stands op-
posite his name. It is needless to say that
the same exacting care with which all his
other work was done was given to the
work of the church that was so near to his
heart. As a church to-day we record our
appreciation of his work, and we mourn our
loss while we rejoice in his gain, and we
would fain join our words to the Master’s


“Well done, good and faithful servant
thou hast been faithful over a few things,
I will make thee ruler over many things.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
Green & Fargher, Printers, Melbourne.




